1. A patients preliminary diagnosis is toxoplasmosis. What material was used for diagnostics of this disease?
a. Urine
b. Feces
*c. Blood
d. Duodenal contents
e. Sputum

2. As a result of dehelmintization a 2 m helminth came out with feces. It had segmented body, small head with four suckers and hooks. Name the type of helminth:
a. Dwarf tapeworm
b. Unarmed tapeworm
*c. Armed tapeworm
d. Echinococcus
e. Broad tapeworm

3. A scientific expedition in India was guided by a native who had never parted with his dog. What invasion diseases can be transmitted to the participants of the expedition as a result of contacts with this dog if it is known to be the source of invasion?
*a. Echinococcosis
b. Paragonimiasis
c. Fascioliasis
d. Dicroceliasis
e. Teniasis

4. After consumption some tinned meat a patient had diplopia, acute headache, deglutition disorder, hard breathing, muscle weakness. The diagnosis was botulism. What factor of pathogenicity are the clinic presentations of this disease connected with?
a. Hemolysin
b. Plasmocoagulase
c. Fibrinolysin
*d. Exotoxin
e. Endotoxin

5. Retrospective diagnostics of old bacillary dysentery required serologic examination of blood serum in order to determine blood titer to the shigells. What reaction should be applied for this purpose?
*a. Reaction of passive hemagglutination
b. Precipitation reaction
c. Bacteriolysis reaction
d. Hemolysis reaction
e. Bordet-Gengou test

6. A patient has high sunlight sensitivity of skin. During standing his urine turns dark-brown. What is the most probable cause of this condition?
*a. Porphyria
b. Albinism
c. Alkaptonuria
d. Pellagra
e. Haemolytic jaundice

7. A 62 year old patient with cerebral haemorrhage was admitted to the neurological department in grave condition. Objectively: increase of respiration depth and rate with its following reduction to apnoea, thereafter respiration cycle restores. What respiration type is it?
a. Biots
b. Kussmauls
*c. Cheyne-Stokes
d. Gasping
e. Apneustic

8. A 50-year-old male patient suffers from chronic bronchitis, complains about dyspnea during physical activity, sustained cough with sputum. After examination he was diagnosed with pulmonary emphysema. This complication is caused by:
a. Decrease in alveolar ventilation
b. Decrease in lung perfusion
c. Ventilation-perfusion disbalance
*d. Decrease in lung elasticity
e. Decrease in lung compliance

9. The contents of vesicles from the mucous tunic of a man who has smallpox variola was sent to the virusologic laboratory. What will be revealed during microscopy of smears?
*a. Paschens corpuscles
b. Guarnieris corpuscles
c. Syncytium
d. Babesh-Ernst corpuscles
e. Babesh-Negri corpuscles

10. A laboratory received a material (extract of animal matter) from the region with cases of anthrax among animals. What serological reaction should be used in order to reveal antigenes of pathogenic organism in the given material?
*a. Thermoprecipitation
b. Indirect hemagglutination
c. Precipitations in agar
d. Radio assay
e. Complement binding

11. Bacteriological laboratory has the task to sterilize nutrient mediums containing substances that convert under the temperature over 100°С (urea, carbohydrates). What method of sterilization should be used?
a. Autoclaving
b. Tindalization
c. Pasteurization
*d. Fluid steam sterilization
e. Boiling

12. A patient was taken to the hospital with complaints of headache, high temperature, frequent stool, stomach pain with tenesmus. Doctor made a clinical diagnosis dysentery and sent the material (excrements) to the bacteriological laboratory for analysis. What diagnostic method should the laboratory doctor use to confirm or to disprove the clinical diagnosis?
a. Allergic
*b. Bacteriological
c. Bacterioscopic
d. Biological
e. Serological

13. Bacteriological examination of purulent discharges from urethra revealed some bacteries that had negative Grams stain, resembled of coffee corns, decomposed glucose and maltose up to acid. They were located in leukocutes. What disease do they cause?
a. Soft chancre
b. Pseudocholera
c. Syphilis
d. Venereal lymphogranulomatosis
*e. Gonorrhea

14. A patient in the oral surgery department has got purulent complication. Bacteriological analysis of the wound material found a culture that produces cyan pigment. What microorganism is the most probable causative agent?
*a. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
b. Bacillus subtilis
c. Staphylococcus epidermidis
d. Klebsiella pneumoniae
e. Proteus vulgaris

15. Sputum smears of a patient with chronic pulmonary disease were stained by Ziehl-Neelsen method and analyzed in the bacteriological laboratory. Microscopy revealed red bacillus. What property of tuberculosis myobacteria was found?
*a. Acid resistance
b. Alcohol resistance
c. Spore-formation
d. Encapsulation
e. Alkali resistance

16. A patient who suffered form syphilis took a course of antibiotic therapy and fully recovered. Some time later he was infected again with Treponema pallidum. What form of infection is it?
*a. Reinfection
b. Secondary infection
c. Complication
d. Superinfection
e. Recurrence

17. Professional dentists belong to the risk group concerning professional infection with viral hepatitis type B. Name an effective method for active prevention of this disease among the dentists:
a. Introduction of specific immunoglobuline
b. Introduction of interferonogenes
c. Secure sterilization of medical instruments
d. Working with gum gloves on
*e. Vaccination with recombinant vaccine

18. A lot of pyoinflammatory processes in oral cavity are caused by anaerobes. What nutrient medium can be used for conrol of wound textile contamination by anaerobes?
a. Endo
b. Sabourauds
c. Ploskirevs
*d. Kitt-Tarozzi
e. Roux

19. Microscopic analysis of tissue sampling from affected area of mucous membrane of oral cavity revealed bacillus in form of accumulations that looked like a pack of cigarettes. Ziehl-Neelsen staining gives them red colour. What kind of pathogenic organism was most likely revealed in tissue sampling?
a. A.bovis
b. M.tuberculosis
*c. M.leprae
d. A.israilii
e. M.avium

20. A patient with clinical presentations of primary immunodeficiency displays disturbance of antigen-presenting function by immunocompetent cells. What cells may have structure defect?
*a. Macrophages, monocytes
b. B-lymphocytes
c. 0-lymphocytes
d. Fibroblasts
e. T-lymphocytes

21. From the purulent exudate of a patient with odontogenic phlegmon a pure culture of Gram(+) microorganisms was segregated. This culture was lecithinously active, coagulated plasma of a rabbit, decomposed mannitol under anaerobe conditions. What microorganism may have contributed to the origin of suppurative complication?
a. S.viridans
b. S.mutans
c. S.epidermidis
d. S.pyogenes
*e. S.aureus

22. A doctor examined a patient with recurrent aphthous stomatitis with concominant candidosis and decided to eliminate a possibility of HIV-infection. What examination can help to clear the situation up and make a provisional diagnosis?
a. Gel precipitation reaction
b. Reaction of hemagglutination
c. Phase-contrasr microscopy
*d. Immune-enzyme analysis
e. Reaction of hemagglutination inhibition

23. A patient has pure culture of diphtheria corynebacteria. What immunological reaction should be used in order to determine bacteria toxigenity?
a. Indirect hemagglutination
*b. Precipitation in agar
c. Complement binding
d. Agglutination
e. Inhibition of hemagglutination

24. An infectious diseases hospital admitted a veterinarian with assumed brucellosis. What serologic test can confirm this diagnosis?
a. Weigls agglutination reaction
b. Wassermann reaction of complement binding
c. Widals agglutination reaction
d. Ascolis precipitation reaction
*e. Wrights agglutination reaction

25. In case of many infectious diseases patients blood may contain antigens of causative agents. What reaction should be applied provided that the level of antigenemia is low?
a. Indirect hemagglutination test
b. Agglutination test
*c. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
d. Latex agglutination test
e. Immunoelectrophoresis

26. A pregnant woman applied to a doctor with complaints typical for toxoplasmosis. The doctor took a sample of her blood. What serological tests should be performed in this case?
a. Neutralization test
b. Precipitation test
*c. Complement binding assay
d. Widals test
e. Wassermann test

27. A doctor recorded in the medical history that a patient had hypopnoe (reduced respiration depth). It means that the following characteristic of external respiration is reduced:
a. Vital lung capacity
b. Expiration capacity
c. Respiratory minute volume
*d. Respiratory volume
e. Functional residual capacity

28. Specific prophylaxis involved application of a vaccine containing microorganisms and exotoxin detoxicated by formalin. It relates to the following type of vaccine:
a. Anatoxin
b. Genetically engineered
*c. Combined
d. Chemical
e. Live

29. After continuous treatment with antibiotics a patient got symptoms of stomatitis. Examination of specimens of oral mucous membrane revealed some oval polymorphous Gram-positive microorganisms arranged in clusters. What microorganism may be the cause of such manifestations?
*a. С.albicans
b. S.aureus
c. C.pylori
d. S.pyogenes
e. C.perfringens

30. Examination of a child revealed growth of a pharyngeal tonsil causing the obstructed air escape from nasal cavity. What openings of nasal cavity are blocked in this case?
a. Pterygopalatine
b. Maxillary sinus
c. Nostrils
d. Piriform
*e. Choanae

