1. A married couple applied to the genetic consultation in order to consult about their child with multiple abnormalities (microcephaly, idiocy etc). The woman has had an illnesses during her pregnancy but she didnt take any teratogens or mutagens. The parents and the childs karyotype is normal. Anamnesis study revealed that the family kept a cat. What gravidic disease caused the childs abnormalities?
*a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Dysentery
c. Trichomoniasis
d. Balantidiasis
e. Leishmaniasis

2. A patient who takes a blocker of membrane cytoreceptors of efferent conductor synapses of autonomic nervous system complains about dry mouth. What receptors are blocked?
a. Beta-adrenoreceptors
*b. Muscarinic cholinoreceptors
c. H2-receptors
d. Nicotinic cholinoreceptors
e. Alpha-adrenoreceptors

3. Examination of a patient revealed enlargement of some body parts (jaw, nose, ears, feet, hands), but body proportions were conserved. It might be caused by intensified secretion of the following hormone:
a. Tetraiodothyronine
b. Somatostatin
*c. Somatotropin
d. Triiodothyronine
e. Cortisol

4. A patient complains about attacks of laboured breathing, dizziness. He works at a chemical plant producing hydrocyanic acid. The described symptoms might be associated with dysfunction of the following enzyme:
a. Succinate dehydrogenase
b. Lactate dehydrogenase
*c. Cytochrome oxidase
d. Catalase
e. Pyruvate dehydrogenase

5. After sprinting untrained people feel muscular pain as a result of lactate accumulation. It may be connected with intensification of the following biochemical process:
a. Glycogenesis
*b. Glycolysis
c. Pentose-phosphate cycle
d. Glyconeogenesis
e. Lipogenesis

6. What vitamin deficiency leads to both disorder of reproductive function and distrophy of skeletal muscles?
a. Vitamin D
b. Vitamin B1
c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin K
*e. Vitamin E

7. Toxic pulmonary edema was reproduced on a laboratory rat by means of ammonium chloride solution. What is the leading pathogenetic factor of this edema?
a. Disorder of neural and humoral regulation
b. Increase of lymph outflow
c. Increase of venous outflow
d. Decrease of colloid osmotic pressure
*e. Increased permeability of capillars

8. 15 minutes after a car accident examination of a 35 year old man revealed massive injury of lower extremities without serious external loss of blood. The victim is in excited state. What component of pathogenesis of traumatic shock is basic and requires urgent correction?
*a. Pain
b. Intoxication
c. Internal loss of plasma
d. Cardiac function disorder
e. Acute renal insufficience

9. A patient has disorder of airways patency at the level of small and middle bronchs. What changes of acid-base balance may take place?
a. Respiratory akcalosis
b. Metabolic alkalosis
c. Acid-base balance wont change
*d. Respiratory acidosis
e. Metabolic acidosis

10. The body temperature of a patient with an infectious disease rises once in two days up to 39,5-40,5 degrees and stays so for about an hour and then drops to the initial level. What type of fever is it?
a. Atypical
*b. Intermittent
c. Remittent
d. Continued
e. Hectic

11. A 23 year patient was admitted to the hospital in grave condition with craniocerebral trauma. His respiration is characterized by a spasmodic long inspiration interrupted by a short expiration. What respiration type is it typical for?
a. Biots respiration
*b. Apneustic
c. Kussmauls respiration
d. Gasping
e. Cheyne-Stokes respiration

12. Two days after myocardial infarction a patient had a sudden systolic pressure decrease up to 60 mm, tachycardia up to 140/min, dyspnea; the patient lost consciousness. What mechanism is principal for the shock pathogenesis?
*a. Decrease of cardiac volume
b. Decrease of circulating blood volume
c. Anaphylactic reaction
d. Paroxysmal tachycardia
e. Intoxication

13. After a psychoemotional stress a 48 year old patient had a sudden attack of acute heart pain with irradiation to the left hand. Nitroglycerine suppressed pain in 10 minutes. What pathogenetic mechanism is principal for the pain development?
a. Increased need of myocardium in oxygen
*b. Spasm of coronary vessels
c. Coronary vessel occlusion
d. Dilatation of peripheral vessels
e. Embarrassement of coronary vessels

14. A 40 year old man who took part in disaster-management at a nuclear power plant fell sick with paradontitis. What etiological agent is the most important for the development of this pathology?
*a. Emotional stress
b. Malnutrition
c. Streptococcus
d. Increased load of dentoalveolar apparatus
e. Iron deficit

15. A woman after labor lost 20 kg of body weight, her hair and teeth fall out, she has muscle atrophy (hypophysial cachexia). Synthesis of what hypophysis hormone is disturbed?
a. Corticotrophic
b. Gonadotropic
c. Prolactin
*d. Somatotropic
e. Thyreotropic

16. Climbing the mountains at a height of 5000 m climbers started complaining of breath shortness, palpitation, vertigo, ring in the ears. What pathogenetic factor determines the development of these occurances?
a. Hypokalemia
b. Lactacidemia
c. Hypernatremia
*d. Hypoxemia
e. Decreased oxygen capacity of blood

17. Damage of one of the reactors at a nuclear power plant resulted in runout of radioactive products. People who were present in the high-radiation area got approximately 250-300 R. They were urgently taken to the hospital. What blood changes will be typical for this period?
a. Anemia
b. Leukopenia
*c. Lymphopenia
d. Thrombocytopenia
e. Neutropenia

18. A year after subtotal stomach resection on account of ulcer of lesser curvature the following blood changes were revealed: anemia, leukocytopenia and thrombocytopenia, color index - 1,3, megaloblasts and megalocytes. What factor deficiency caused the development of this pathology?
a. Mucin
b. Hydrochloride acid
*c. Castles factor
d. Pepsin
e. Gastrin

19. A 45 year old patient was taken to the hospital by an emergency team with serious cranial trauma in shock condition. Objectively: unconscious, skin is pale, body t°- 35,0°С, low muscular tonus, reflexes are absent, pulse is rapid and weak, AP- 50/30 mm Hg. What clinical shock stage is it?
a. Erectile stage
b. Inhibition stage
c. Torpid stage
*d. Terminal stage
e. Excitement stage

20. After traumatic tooth extraction a patient complains of a severe dull pain without accurate localization in his gum, body temperature rise up to 37,5 degrees С. He was diagnosed with alveolitis. What type of pain does the patient have?
a. Referred
b. Phantom
c. Epicritic
d. Visceral
*e. Protopathic

21. After poisoning with an unknown drug a 37 year old patient has stereotypical face muscle contractions that imitate blinking and squinting. What form of motor function disorder of nervous system is it?
*a. Hyperkinesia
b. Akinesia
c. -
d. Ataxy
e. Hypokinesia

22. A 12 year old boy came home from school and started complaining of headache, sickness, chill, periodical muscle pain, appetite loss, flabbiness. What period of illness are these symptoms typical for?
a. End of illness
*b. Prodromal
c. Incubative
d. Latent
e. High point of illness

23. Rabbits lived on food with addition of cholesterol. Five months later the atherosclerotic aorta changes were revealed. Name the main cause of atherogenesis in this case:
a. Overeating
b. Endogenous hypercholesterolemia
c. -
*d. Exogenous hypercholesterolemia
e. Hypodynamia

24. A patient with primary nephrotic syndrome has the following content of whole protein: 40 g/l. What factor caused hypoproteinemia?
a. Reduced protein synthesis in liver
b. Transition of protein from vessels to tissues
*c. Proteinuria
d. Increased proteolysis
e. Disturbance of intestinal protein absorption

25. A man who took part in disaster-management at a nuclear power plant had hemorrhagic syndrome at the same time with acute radiation sickness. What is the most important thing for the pathogenesis of this syndrome?
a. High activity of fibrinolysis factors
b. Destructed structure of vessel walls
*c. Thrombocytopenia
d. High activity of anticoagulative blood system
e. Low activity of anticoagulative blood system

26. Four months ago a 43 year old patient had a traumatic amputation of his lower extrimity. Now he complains of sensing the amputated extremity and having constantly grave, sometimes unbearable pain in it. What type of pain does he have?
a. Reflex
*b. Phantom
c. Neuralgia
d. Causalgia
e. Thalamic

27. In crisis period a 14 year old child ill with diphtheria has AP- 70/50 mm Hg accompanied by abrupt fall in temperature and tachycardia. What form of vascular tone disturbance is it?
*a. Acute hypotension
b. Vegetovascular dystonia
c. -
d. Essential arterial hypotension
e. Chronic hypotension

28. After a long-lasting and grave illness the blood pressure of a patient fell up to 60/40 mm; he has tachicardia, dyspnea, black-out. How can this state be defined?
a. Shock
b. Agony
*c. Preagony
d. Apparent death
e. -

29. A patient ill with jaundice has increased content of conjugated bilirubin and bile acids in blood, no stercobilinogen in urine. What jaundice are these symptomps typical for?
a. Hepatocellular
b. Hepatic
*c. Obstructive
d. Hemolytic
e. Cythemolytic

30. A newborn child ill with pylorostenosis has frequent vomiting accompanied by apathy, weakness, muscular hypertonia, sometimes convulsions. What form of acid-base balance disorder has developed?
a. Excretory acidosis
*b. Nongaseous alkalosis
c. Gaseous acidosis
d. Gaseous alkalosis
e. Metabolic acidosis

31. A 19 year old patient was diagnosed with chronic acquired hemolytic anemia. What is the leading pathogenetic mechanism of this pathologys development?
a. Toxic hemolysis
b. Hyposmolarity of plasm
c. Osmotic hemolysis
*d. Autoimmune hemolysis
e. Intracellular hemolysis

32. A 56 year old man was taken to the hospital with complaints of general weakness, pain and burning in the region of tongue, extremity numbness. In the past he had resection of cardiac part of ventricle. Blood test: Hb- 80 g/L; RBC- 2,01012/L; colour index of blood- 1,2; leukocytes - 3,5109/L. What type of anemy is it?
a. Aplastic
b. Iron-deficient
c. Hemolytic
d. Posthemorrhagic
*e. В12 folic-deficient

33. After recovering from epidemic parotiditis a patient began to lose weight, he was permanently thirsty, drank a lot of water, had frequent urination, voracious appetite. Now he has complaints of skin itch, weakness, furunculosis. His blood contains: glucose - 16 mmole/L, ketone bodies - 100 mcmole/L; glucosuria. What disease has developed?
*a. Insulin-dependent diabetes
b. Steroid diabetes
c. Malnutrition diabetes
d. Diabetes insipidus
e. Insulin-independent diabetes

34. A patient dropped into an ice hole, froze in the wind and fell ill. Body temperature rose up to 39,7oC and varied from 39,0oC to 39,8oC. Name the type of the patients temperature profile?
a. Febris recurrens
b. Febris intermittens
c. Febris remittens
*d. Febris continua
e. Febris hectica

35. A patient has the following diagnosis: renal hypertension. What is the initial pathogenetic factor of arterial hypertension development in this case?
*a. Renal ischemia
b. Hyperaldosteronism
c. Intensified angiotensin synthesis
d. Intensified renin synthesis
e. Hypernatremia

36. A diver who has been staying at the depth of 40 m for a long time fell ill with caisson disease as a result of decompression. The main pathogenetic factor is the following embolism:
a. Tissue
*b. Gaseous
c. Fat
d. Air
e. Paradoxical

37. A 65 year old patient suddenly died. She suffered from thrombophlebitis of deep veins of shin. Autopsy revealed: trunk and bifurcation of pulmonary artery contain red loose masses with dull corrugated surface. What pathological process did the morbid anatomist reveal in pulmonary artery?
*a. Thromboembolism
b. Tissue embolism
c. Fat embolism
d. Foreign body embolism
e. Thrombosis

38. Skin samples of a patient with bronchial asthma revealed allergen sensitization of poplar fuzz. What factor of immune system plays the main part in development of this immunopathological state?
a. Sensitized Т-lymphocytes
b. -
c. IgD
d. IgM
*e. IgE

39. A patient with insulin-dependent diabetes had an insulin injection. Some time later he felt weakness, irritability, excessive sweating. What is the main reason of these disorders?
*a. Carbohydrate starvation of brain
b. Intensified ketogenesis
c. Reduced glyconeogenesis
d. Intensified lypogenesis
e. Intensified glycogenolysis

40. For the purpose of disinfection of nonmetallic surgical instruments the formaldehyde solution was used. What group does this anticeptic preparation belong to according to its chemical structure?
a. Aromatics
b. Halogenated compounds
c. Detergents
*d. Aliphatics
e. Alcohols

41. A patient with an acute myocarditis has the clinic presentations of cardiogenic shock. What pathogenetic mechanism plays the main part in shock development?
a. Decrease of vascular tone
b. Increase of vascular tone
c. Depositing of blood in veins
d. Decrease of diastolic flow to the heart
*e. Disorder of pumping ability of heart

42. A patient with inflammation of trigeminal nerve has been having progressive paradontitis for some years. What factor is the most important for parodontitis development?
a. Low activity of leukocytic elastase
b. Increased tone of vagus nerve
c. Low activity of kallikrein-kinin system
*d. Neurodistrophic disorders
e. Poor formation of immunoglobulins

43. A patient with streptococcal infection of gums was prescribed a drug that contained beta-lactam ring in its structure. Which drug relates to this group?
a. Erythromycin
b. Rifampicin
*c. Benzylpenicillin
d. Streptomycin sulfate
e. Chloramphenicol

44. Potassium cyanide that is a poison came into a patients organism and caused death a few minutes after it. The most probable cause of its toxic effect was abnormal activity of:
a. NADP-H-dehydrogenase
b. Haemoglobin synthesis
c. Catalase
d. ATP-synthetase
*e. Cytochrome oxidase

45. A patient was admitted to a hospital with poisoning with unsound food. His stomach was lavaged with solution of potassium permanganate. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Disturbance of synthesis of respiratory chain enzymes
b. Destruction of bacteria membranes
c. Release of chlorine
d. Release of iodine
*e. Release of atomic oxygen

46. Hydrocyanic acid and cyanides are the most violent poisons. According to the dose the death follows after a few seconds or minutes. The death is caused by the inhibited activity of the following enzyme:
a. Catalase
b. Methemoglobin reductase
c. Acetylcholinesterase
d. ATP-synthetase
*e. Cytochrome oxidase

47. Treatment of many diseases involves use of cocarboxylase (thiamine pyrophosphate) for supplying cells with energy. What metabolic process is activated in this case?
a. Detoxication of harmful substances in liver
*b. Oxidizing decarboxylation of pyruvate
c. Amino acids decarboxylation
d. Glutamate deamination
e. Decarboxylation of biogenic amines

48. A typical symptom of cholera is great loss of water and sodium ions. What mechanism underlies development of diarrhea in this case?
a. Inhibition of vasopressin synthesis in hypothalamus
b. Increased corticotropin synthesis
c. Increased secretion of renin by the cells of renal arterioles
d. Aldosterone oxidation in adrenal cortex
*e. Activation of adenylate cyclase of enterocytes

49. A newborn has signs of dyspepsia after milk feeding. Symptoms of dyspepsia disappear when milk is substituted for glucose solution. The newborn has low activity of the following enzyme:
a. Isomaltase
*b. Lactase
c. Maltase
d. Invertase
e. Amylase

50. For the preparation of the burned skin surface of a patient a certain medication was applied. Its antiseptic properties are provided by free oxygen released in presence of organic substances. What medication is it?
a. Sodium hydrocarbonate
*b. Potassium permanganate
c. Chlorhexidine
d. Furacillin
e. Alcoholic iodine solution

51. A 30 y.o. patient is diagnosed with amebic dysentery. This diagnosis was bacteriologically confirmed. Name the preparation for its treatment:
a. Acyclovir
*b. Metronidazole
c. Itrakonazole
d. Mebendazole
e. Furacillin

52. For infection prevention a patient who underwent appendectomy was prescribed a cephalosporin antibiotic. Antimicrobial activity of these antibiotics is called forth by the disturbance of the following process:
a. Nucleic acid synthesis
b. Energy metabolism
c. Cholinesterase block
*d. Microbial wall formation
e. Ribosomal protein synthesis

53. It is required to disinfect equipment in a dental room. Choose a preparation without disagreeable odour and colouring power:
a. Formalin
*b. Chlorhexidine bigluconate
c. Chloride lime
d. Carbolic acid solution
e. Ethacrydine lactate

54. A group of researchers set an experiment and obtained anucleate mutant cells. In the first place they will have disturbed synthesis of the following compounds:
a. Transfer RNA
b. Monosaccharides
c. Polysaccharides
*d. Ribosomal RNA
e. Lipids

55. A patient consulted a dentis about a lesion of his oral mucosa. He was diagnosed with herpetic stomatitis. Which of the following drugs will have an effect on etiotropic factor?
*a. Acyclovir
b. Paracetamol
c. Furacilinum
d. Levamisole
e. Dimedrol

56. A patient consulted a dentist about itching and burning in the oral cavity; high temperature. The patient was diagnosed with trichomonal gingivostomatitis. What drug should be chosen for his treatment?
*a. Metronidazole
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
c. Nystatin
d. Gentamicin sulfate
e. Ampicillin

57. A patient is ill with herpetic stomatitis provoked by immunosuppression. What preparation introduced intravenously, internally and locally can provide antiviral and immunopotentiating effect?
a. Methisazonum
b. Amoxicillin
c. Remantadinum
d. Levamisole
*e. Acyclovir

58. A patient suffering form stomatitis was prescribed oral rinsing. Which antiseptic from the oxidant group is the most suitable for this purpose?
a. Alcoholic iodine solution
b. Boric acid
*c. Potassium permanganate
d. Ethyl alcohol
e. Chloramine

