1. A 13-year-old patient complains of general weakness, dizziness, fatiguability. Mental retardation is also observed. Examination revealed high concentration of valine, isoleucine and leucine in blood and urine. The patients urine has a specific smell. What is the likely cause of such condition?
*a. Maple syrup urine disease
b. Tyrosinosi
c. Basedows disease
d. Histidinemia
e. Addisons disease

2. A patient has increased pyruvate concentration in blood. Large amount of it is excreted with urine. What vitamin deficiency is observed?
a. E
b. B6
c. B2
*d. B1
e. B3

3. Pellagra may be caused by maize domination and low quantity of animal foodstuffs in the dietary intake. This pathology results from lack of the following amino acid:
a. Phenylalanine
b. Isoleucine
*c. Tryptophane
d. Methionine
e. Histidine

4. During the histologic examination of thyroid gland of a man who died of cardiac insufficiency together with hypothyroidism there was found the diffusive infiltration of gland by lymphocytes and plasmocytes, parenchyma atrophy and growth of connective tissue. Formulate a diagnosis:
a. Thyroid gland adenoma
b. Thyrotoxic goiter
c. -
*d. Hashimotos thyroiditis
e. Purulent thyroiditis

5. The lung hypertension and cardiac insufficiency of right ventricle with ascites and edemata developed at patient with pneumosclerosis. What is the principal pathogenetic mechanism of edemata development?
*a. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure in veins
b. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure
c. Increase of vascular permeability
d. Decrease of osmotic blood pressure
e. Increase of oncotic pressure of intercellular fluid

6. A patient with pneumosclerosis has pulmonary hypertension and cardiac insuffisiency of right ventricle with ascites and edemata. What is the main pathogenetic mechanism of edemata development?
a. Reduction of oncotic blood pressure
b. Rise of oncotic pressure of intracellular fluid
*c. Rise of hydrostatic blood pressure in veins
d. Increased permeability of vessel walls
e. -

7. Dystrophic changes of heart are accompanied by dilatation of cardiac cavities, decrease of heart beat force, increased volume of blood that remains in cardiac cavity after systole; veins are overfilled. What state is this presentation typical for?
a. Cardiac tamponade
*b. Myogenic dilatation
c. Emergency phase of myocardial hypertrophy
d. Tonogenic dilatation
e. Cardiosclerosis stage

8. A 7 year old child had an acute onset of disease. Pediatrician stated that mucous membrane of fauces is hyperemic and covered with a lot of mucus. Mucous membrane of cheeks has whitish stains. Next day the childs skin of face, neck, body was covered with coarsely-papular rash. What disease may be presumed?
a. Diphteria
b. Scarlet fever
*c. Measles
d. Meningococcemia
e. Allergic dermatitis

9. Autopsy of a woman with cerebral atherosclerosis revealed in the left cerebral hemisphere a certain focus that is presented by flabby, anhistic, greyish and yellowish tissue with indistinct edges. What pathological process is the case?
a. Focal encephalitis
b. Senile encephalopathy
c. Multifocal tumor growth with cystic degeneration
d. Multiple foci of fresh and old cerebral hemorrhage
*e. Ischemic stroke

10. A 10 -year old child lives in the region where fluorine content in water is above the mark. A dentist examined the child and found teeth damage in form of chalky and also pigmentary stains and stripes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Wedge defects
b. Median caries
*c. Fluorosis
d. Tooth erosion
e. Acidic necrosis of hard tooth tissues

11. A 53 year old patient consulted a doctor about white patch on the mucous membrane of tongue. This patch sticks out from the mucous membrane, its surface is cracked. Microscopic analysis reveals thickening of multilayer epithelium, parakeratosis and acanthosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Leukoplakia
b. Epidermoid cancer
c. Median rhomboid glossitis
d. Papilloma
e. Geographic tongue

12. The microscopic analysis of bronch biopsy revealed a tumor that consisted of circumscribed accumulations of atypical cells of multylayer plane epithelium, here and there with typical "pearls". What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Scirrhus
*b. Epidermoid cancer with keratinization
c. Solid carcinoma
d. Epidermoid cancer without keratinization
e. Mucous carcinoma

13. Histologic examination revealed a big number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in all layers of appendix; hyperemia, stases. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Gangrenous appendicitis
b. Simple appendicitis
c. Chronic appendicitis
*d. Phlegmonous appendicitis
e. Superficial appendicitis

14. A female patient suffering from secondary syphilis got foci of skin depigmentation in the upper parts of her back. What pathological process is it?
*a. Leukoderma
b. Leukoplasia
c. Parakeratosis
d. Dysplasia
e. Metaplasia

15. Opening of a patients abdominal cavity revealed for about 2,0 L of purulent fluid. Peritoneum is dull, greyish, serous tunic of intestines has grayish layers that can be easily removed. It is most likely to be:
*a. Fibrinopurulent peritonitis
b. Serous peritonitis
c. -
d. Tuberculous peritonitis
e. Hemorrhagic peritonitis

16. Microscopic analysis of brain base vessels of a patient who died of ischemic stroke revealed that intima of cerebral vessels is irregular, with moderate quantity of yellow stains and yellowish-whitish patches that narrow lumen. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Primary hypertension
*c. Atherosclerosis
d. Rheumatism
e. Nodular periarteritis

17. Autopsy of a 5 year old child revealed that pia maters of brain are extremely plethoric, nebulous, have a look of yellowish-green bonnet. Microscopic analysis: pia mater of brain is very thickened, plethoric, impregnated with purulent exudate containing fibrin. What disease is meant?
a. Influenza
b. Measles
c. Tuberculosis
d. Anthrax
*e. Meningococcosis

18. Histological examination of thyroid gland of a man who died from cardiac insufficiency accompanied by hypothyroidism revealed diffuse infiltration of the gland by lymphocytes and plasmocytes with formation of lymphoid follicles, as well as atrophy of parenchyma and growth of connective tissue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Autoimmune Hashimotos thyroiditis
b. Purulent thyroiditis
c. -
d. Thyrotoxic goiter
e. Adenoma of thyroid gland

19. Post-mortem examination of a 5 year old boy who died from acute pulmonary and cardiac insufficiency revealed the following: serohemorrhagic tracheobronchitis with some necrotic areas of mucous membrane, multiple foci of hemorrhagic pneumonia in lungs. What disease is in question?
a. Diphtheria
b. Croupous pneumonia
c. Measles
d. Scarlet fever
*e. Influenza

20. Autopsy of a 70-year-old man who died from cardiac insufficiency revealed deformed and constricted coronary arteries. The artery section shows that the intimal surface is stony hard and fragile. It is also whitish, with nodular appearance. What stage of atherosclerosis is it?
a. Lipoidosis
b. Ulceration
c. Liposclerosis
d. Atheromatosis
*e. Atherocalcinosis

21. Autopsy of an aged man who had been suffering from acute intestinal upset for the last 2 weeks revealed the following changes in the rectum and sigmoid colon: mucous membrane surface was coated with brown-green film. The intestine wall was thickened, and its cavity was extremely constricted. Microscopical examination revealed variously deep penetrating necrosis of mucous membrane; necrotic masses contained fibrin fibers and bore signs of leukocytic infiltration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ulcerative colitis
b. Catarrhal colitis
*c. Fibrinous colitis
d. Follicular collitis
e. -

22. Examination of coronary arteries revealed atherosclerotic plaques with calcification that close the lumen by 1/3. The muscle contains multiple small whitish layers of connective tissue. What process was revealed in myocardium?
a. Myocardium infarction
*b. Diffuse cardiosclerosis
c. Postinfarction cardiosclerosis
d. Tiger heart
e. Myocarditis

23. Microscopic analysis of tissue sampling from patients skin reveals granulomas that consist of epithelioid cells surrounded mostly by T-lymphocytes. Among epithelioid cells there are solitary giant multinuclear cells of Pirogov-Langhans type. In the centre of some granulomas there are areas of caseous necrosis. Blood vessels are absent. What disease are the described granulomas typical for?
a. Glanders
*b. Tuberculosis
c. Leprosy
d. Syphilis
e. Rhinoscleroma

24. Examination of a child who has recently recovered from measles revealed in the soft tissues of cheeks and perineum some inaccurate, edematic, red-and-black, slightly fluctuating areas. What complication is it?
a. Pressure sore
b. Trophic ulcer
c. Dry gangrene
d. Gas gangrene
*e. Humid gangrene

25. Autopsy of a woman who died of tumorous dissemination of mucinosous cystadenocarcinoma and before that had to stay in bed for a long time revealed big necrotic areas of skin and soft subjacent tissues in sacral region. What form of necrosis is the case?
a. Zenkers necrosis
*b. Pressure sore
c. Sequester
d. Infarction
e. Caseous necrosis

26. Examination of a patient who had been suffering from rheumatism for a long time revealed stenosis of mitral orifice, death was caused by cardiac and pulmonary insufficiency. Autopsy has shown brown induration of lungs. What type of circulation disturbance provokes such changes in lungs?
a. Acute right ventricular insufficiency
b. Portal hypertension
c. Chronic right ventricular insufficiency
d. Acute left ventricular insufficiency
*e. Chronic left ventricular insufficiency

27. During the electronical microscopic analysis of salivary gland the cell fragmets were revealed which are surrounded by a membrane and contain condensed particles of nuclear substance and solitary organelles; the inflammatory reaction around these cells is absent. What process is meant?
a. Karyopicnosis
b. Karyolysis
c. Karyorhexis
d. Coagulation necrosis
*e. Apoptosis

28. On the 5th day of illness a 12 year old child who was treated in the infectious department on account of influenza felt severe headache, sickness, dizziness, got meningeal signs. The child died 24 hours later from increasing brain edema. Dissection of cranial cavity revealed that pia maters of brain are edematic, plethoric, saturated diffusively with bright red liquid. Convolutions and sulci of brain are flattened. What influenza complication is in question?
a. Venous hyperemia of brain membranes
b. Cerebral hemorrhage
*c. Hemorrhagic meningitis
d. Suppurative leptomeningitis
e. Serous meningitis

29. Autopsy of a man who died of typhoid fever revealed ulcers along the ileum. These ulcers have even sides, clean fundus formed by muscle layer or even by serous tunic of an intestine. What stage of disease does the described presentation correspond with?
a. Stage of ulcer healing
*b. Stage of clean ulcers
c. Stage of necrosis
d. Stage of medullary swelling
e. Stage of dirty ulcers

30. Morphological examination of carious cavity floor differenciated distinctly three zones: the one of softened dentin, transparent dentin and replacing dentin. What stage of caries are these changes typical for?
a. Spot stage
b. Deep caries
c. Chronic caries
*d. Median caries
e. Superficial caries

31. A man had an acute onset of disease, he complained of chill, temperature rise up to 40С, headache, cough, dyspnea. On the fifth day of illness he died. Autopsy revealed:his lungs were enlarged, they had a look of coal-miners lungs. What illness is such postmortem diagnosis typical for?
a. Adenovirus infection
b. Respiratory syncytial infection
c. Multiple bronchiectasis
*d. Influenza
e. Croupous pneumonia

32. Mucous membrane of the right palatine tonsil has a painless ulcer with smooth lacquer fundus and accurate edges of cartlaginous consistency. Microscopically: inflammatory infiltrate that consists of lymphocytes, plasmocytes, a small number of neutrophils and epithelioid cells; endovasculistis and perivasculitis. What disease is in question?
a. Pharyngeal diphtheria
b. Necrotic (Vincents) tonsillitis
c. Actinomycosis
d. Tuberculosis
*e. Syphilis

33. A 75 year old male patient consulted a surgeon about a brown nonhealing ulcer of shin. Examination of biopsy material revealed diffuse growth of polymorphic atypic cells with brown pigment in their cytoplasm. Pearls reaction was negative. There were also a lot of pathological mitoses and foci of tissue necrosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Skin cancer
*b. Melanoma
c. Intradermal nevus
d. Local hemosiderosis
e. Trophic ulcer

34. A 22 year woman has enlarged lymphatic nodes. Histological analysis of  a node revealed lymphocytes, histiocytes, reticular cells, small and great Hodgkins cells, multinuclear Reed-Sternberg cells, solitary foci of caseous necrosis. What disease are these changes typical for?
a. Acute leukemia
b. Cancer metastasis
c. Lymphosarcoma
d. Chronic leukemia
*e. Lymphogranulematosis

35. A 57 year old patient has periodic uterine bleedings. Diagnostic endometrectomy was performed. Biopsy material contains among the blood elements some glandular complexes of different sizes and forms that consist of atypic cells with hyperchromic nuclei and multiple mitoses (including pathological ones). What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Adenocarcinoma
b. Chorioepithelioma
c. Endometritis
d. Glandular hyperplasia of endometrium
e. Fibromyoma of uterus

36. Autopsy of a man who died from ethylene glycol poisoning revealed that his kidneys are a little bit enlarged, edematic; their capsule can be easily removed. Cortical substance is broad and light-grey. Medullary substance is dark-red. What pathology had this man?
a. Acute pyelonephritis
b. Acute tubular-interstitial nephritis
c. Lipoid nephrosis
*d. Necrotic nephrosis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

37. During the histologic lung analysis of a man who died from cardiac insufficiency the inflammation focuses were revealed. Alveoles were full of light-pink fluid, here and there with pinkish fibers that formed a close-meshed reticulum with a small number of lymphocytes. What type of exudate is present in lungs?
a. Serous
b. Hemorrhagic
*c. Serofibrinous
d. Purulent
e. Fibrinous

38. A 38 year old patient died during intractable attack of bronchial asthma. Histological examination revealed mucus accumulations in bronchis lumen, a lot of mast cells (labrocytes) in bronchis wall, some of these cells are degranulated, there are also many eosinophils. Name pathogenesis of these changes in bronchi:
a. Cytotoxic, cytolytic effect of antibodies
b. Cell-mediated cytolysis
c. Granulematosis
*d. Atopy, anaphylaxis
e. Immune complex mechanism

39. A 7 year old child was taken to the infectious disease hospital with complaints of acute pain during swallowing, temperature rise up to 39°С, neck edema. Objective signs: tonsills are enlarged, their mucous membrane is plethoric and covered with a big number of whitish-yellowish films that are closely adjacent to the mucous membrane. After removal of these films the deep bleeding defect remains. What type of inflammation is it?
a. Hemorrhagic
*b. Diphteritic
c. Serous
d. Purulent
e. Crupous

40. In course of gastric endoscopy the biopsy material of mucous membrane was taken. Its histological examination revealed the following: mucous membrane is intact, thickened, edematic, hyperemic, with small droplike hemorrhages, coated with thick mucus. Name the form of acute gastritis:
a. Necrotic
*b. Catarrhal
c. Fibrinous
d. Erosive
e. Purulent

41. A 4 year old child had Mantoux test. 60 hours after tuberculin introduction a focal skin hardening and redness 15 mm in diameter appeared. It was regarded as positive test. What type of hypersensitivity reaction is this test based upon?
a. Complement-mediated cytotoxic hypersensitivity
b. Immune complex-mediated hypersensitivity
*c. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
d. Immediate hypersensitivity
e. -

42. Autopsy of an 8 year old boy who was ill with pharyngeal and tonsillar diphtheria and died one week after illness begin revealed myocardial changes in form of small-focal myocardiocyte necrosis, stroma edema with slight lymphocytic infiltration. What type of myocarditis is it:
*a. Alternative
b. Granulomatous
c. Focal-intermediate, exudative
d. Interstitional
e. Septic

43. Histologic analysis of uterus mucous membrane revealed twisting glands, serrated and spinned, they were extended by stroma growth with proliferation of its cells. Formulate a diagnosis:
a. Leiomyoma
b. Acute endometritis
*c. Glandular hyperplasia of endometrium
d. Cystic mole
e. Placental polyp

44. Medical examination of the first-year pupils included Mantoux test. 15 pupils out of 35 had negative reaction. What actions should be taken against children with negative reaction?
*a. BCG vaccination
b. Rabies vaccination
c. Examination of blood serum
d. Repeat Mantoux test
e. Antitoxin vaccination

45. Vaccination is done by means of a toxin that has been neutralized by a formaldehyde (0,4%) at a temperature 37-40C for four weeks. Ramond was the first to apply this preparation for diphtheria prophylaxis. What preparation is it?
a. Inactivated vaccine
*b. Anatoxin
c. Antitoxic serum
d. Immunoglobulin
e. Adjuvant

46. Examination of a 16 year old boy revealed enlarged submandibular and cervical lymph nodes. The boy was subjected to biopsy. Microscopic examination of lymph nodes revealed: typical structure is obliterated, cell population is heterogenous, there are big cells with multilobe nuclei, multiple big mononuclear cells, eosinophilic and neutrophilic leukocytes, lymphocytes, besides that, there are necrotic areas and foci of sclerosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Non-Hodgkins lymphoma
*b. Lymphogranulomatosis
c. Granulomatous lymphadenitis
d. Lymph node hyperplasia
e. Suppurative lymphadenitis

47. A hospital admitted a 9 y.o. boy with mental and physical retardation. Biochemical blood analysis revealed high content of phenylalanine. Such condition may be caused by blocking of the following enzyme:
*a. Phenylalanine-4-monooxigenase
b. Glutamine transaminase
c. Glutamate decarboxylase
d. Aspartate aminotransferase
e. Oxidase of homogentisic acid

48. An electronic microphotography represents a cell without nucleoli and nuclear membrane. Chromosomes are loosely scattered, centrioles migrate to the poles. What phase of cell cycle is it?
a. Metaphase
b. Anaphase
*c. Prophase
d. Telophase
e. Interphase

49. An 18 y.o. boy applied to a geneticist. The boy has asthenic constitution: narrow shoulders, broad pelvis, nearly hairless face. Evident mental deficiency. The provisional diagnosis was Klinefelters syndrome. What method of clinical genetics will enable the doctor to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Population-and-statistical
*b. Cytogenetic
c. Twin study
d. Genealogical
e. Dermatoglyphics

50. Abnormal chromosome disjunction during meiosis resulted in formation of: an ovum with 22 autosomes and polar body with 24 chromosomes. If such an ovum would be fertilized with a normal spermatozoon (22+X) the child might have the following syndrome:
a. Klinefelters syndrome
b. Downs syndrome
c. Edwards syndrome
*d. Turners syndrome
e. Trisomy X

51. According to the law of constant chromosome number, each species of most animals has a definite and constant number of chromosomes. The mechanismus providing this constancy in sexual reproduction of the organisms is called:
a. Amitosis
b. Shizogony
*c. Meiosis
d. Regeneration
e. Gemmation

52. A patient is ill with dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia. During history taking it was revealed that the main foodstuff of the patient was maize. These disturbances are caused by deficiency of the following vitamin:
*a. PP
b. B2
c. B8
d. B9
e. B1

53. A 20 y.o. patient complains of general weakness, dizziness, rapid fatigability. Examination results: Hb- 80 g/l; microscopical analysis results: erythrocytes are deformed. These symptoms might be caused by:
*a. Sickle-cell anemia
b. Acute intermittent porphyria
c. Addisons disease
d. Obturative jaundice
e. Parenchymatous jaundice

54. A pregnant woman lost for about 800 ml of blood during labour. There is also tachycardia, arterial pressure is 100/70 mm Hg, tachypnea up to 28/min. What hypoxia type is primary in such clinical situation?
a. Tissue
b. Respiratory
c. Cardiovascular
d. Mixed
*e. Blood

55. Enzymatic jaundices are characterized by disbalanced activity of UDP-glucuronyl transferase. What compound is accumulated in the blood serum in case of these pathologies?
a. Biliverdin
b. Direct bilirubin
*c. Indirect bilirubin
d. Mesobilirubin
e. Verdoglobin

56. A patient with apparent icteritiousness of skin, sclera and mucous membranes was admitted to the hospital. The patients urine was of brown ale colour, analysis revealed presence of direct bilirubin. Feces had low concentration of bile pigments. What type of jaundice is it?
*a. Obturative
b. Haemolytic
c. Absorbtion
d. Conjugated
e. Parenchymatous

57. Microscopic examination during autopsy of a 70 y.o. man who had been ill with atherosclerosis for a long time and died from cardiovascular insufficiency revealed in the abdominal area of aorta some dense oval fibrous plaques with lime deposition in form of dense brittle plates. What stage of atherosclerosis morphogenesis is it?
a. Atheromatosis
b. Liposclerosis
*c. Atherocalcinosis
d. Ulceration
e. Lipoidosis

58. During examination a dentist revealed cervical caries of right inferior incisors as well as enlargement of a certain group of lymph nodes. What lymph nodes are enlarged?
a. Facial
*b. Submental
c. Superficial cervical
d. Occipital
e. Deep cervical

59. Various cells of the oral mucous membrane and antimicrobial substances synthesized by these cells play an important part in the local immunity of the oral cavity. Specify the key factors for the local immunity:
*a. Secretory IgA
b. IgG
c. Eosinophils
d. Macrophages
e. B-lymphocytes

60. A 35-year-old patient with chronic periodontitis underwent excision of a cyst 3 cm in diameter found at a root of the 15th tooth. Histological examination revealed that it had thin wall formed by mature connective tissue infiltrated by lymphocytes and plasmatic cells. Its internal surface was lined with multilayer pavement epithelium with no signs of keratinization; the cavity contained serous exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Follicular cyst
b. Cherubism
c. Follicular ameloblastoma
*d. Radicular cyst
e. Primordial cyst

61. What preventive medications should be injected to a patient with open maxillofacial trauma provided that he has never got prophylactic vaccination before?
*a. Antitetanus immunoglobulin and anatoxin
b. Antitetanus serum and antibiotics
c. Tetanus anatoxin and antibiotics
d. Diphtheria, tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine and antibiotics
e. Anticonvulsive drugs and anatoxin

