1. A woman with ischemic disease has been taking an antianginal medication that has the following properties: dilates coronary arteries, peripheral vessels (arterial and venous), reduces the need of myocardium in oxygen, improves endocardial blood circulation. Name this preparation:
a. Dibasol
b. Aminophylline
c. Validol
d. Papaverine
*e. Nitroglycerin

2. A patient has been taking glucocorticoids for a long time. Drug with drowal caused acute attack of his disease, blood pressure reduction, weakness. What are these occurences connected with?
*a. Adrenal glands insufficiency
b. Sensibilisation
c. Cumulation
d. Hyperproduction of corticotroph hormone
e. Drug habituation

3. A teenager had his tooth extracted under novocain anaesthesia. 10 minutes later he presented with skin pallor, dyspnea, hypotension. When this reaction is developed and the allergen achieves tissue basophils, it reacts with:
a. IgА
b. ІgМ
c. T-lymphocytes
*d. IgE
e. IgD

4. 48 hours after tuberculine test (Mantoux test) a child had a papule up to 10 mm in diameter on the spot of tuberculine introduction. What hypersensitivity mechanism underlies the mentioned changes?
a. Immunocomplex cytotoxicity
b. Granulomatosis
c. Anaphylaxis
d. Antibody-dependent cytotoxicity
*e. Cellular cytotoxicity

5. A 25 year old patient had in the dentists room a sudden attack of bronchial asthma. The doctor gave him salbutamol in the form of inhalation. What is the mechanism of action of this preparation?
a. Stimulates alpha-adrenoreceptors
b. Blocks phosphodiesterase
c. Blocks М-cholinergic receptors
*d. Stimulates beta-2-adrenoreceptors
e. Blocks Н1-histamine receptors

6. A patient has myocardial infarction with thrombosis of the left coronary artery. What pharmocological preparation group should be used to reestablish blood flow?
*a. Fibrinolysis activators
b. Beta–adrenergic blockers
c. Glucocorticoids
d. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
e. Narcotic analgesics

7. During the ether narcosis a patient had evident bradycardia with threat of cardiac arrest. What medication should be used to accelerate heartbeat under condition of narcosis that shouldnt be interrupted?
*a. Atropine
b. Adrenaline
c. Isadrine
d. Camphor
e. Caffeine

8. A patient with stomatitis was prescribed a medication of sulfonamide group. What is the mechanism of its antibacterial effect?
a. Synthesis disturbance of cell membrane proteins
b. Inhibition of sulfhydric groups of thiol enzymes
c. Protein coagulation
*d. Competitive antagonism with para-aminobenzoic acid
e. Decrease of membrane permeability

9. A patient with gingivitis was prescribed a gargle with a certain preparation. Its antiseptic properties are determined by atomic oxygene that slivers in presence of organic substances. It has also deodorant, adstringent (anti-inflammatory), and in big concentrations - cauterizing effect. Water solutions are used for bathing of wounds, mouth gargling and in higher concentrations - for burn treatment. It is also used for gastric lavage in case of poisoning. Name this preparation:
a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Sodium bicarbonate
c. Chlorhexidine bigluconate
d. Hydrogen peroxide
*e. Potassium permanganate

10. The preparation comlex for periodontitis treatment includes the medicine from the group of water soluble vitamins, bioflavonide derivative, which is prescribed together with ascorbic acid. This preparation has anti-oxidative properties, decreases gingival hemorrhage. What preparation is meant?
a. Calcium pantothenate
b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Folic acid
*d. Rutin
e. Calcium panganate

11. An unconscious patient was admitted to the hospital. Objectively: cold skin, miotic pupils, heavy breathing, Chaine-Stokes periodicity, low arterial pressure, overfull urinary bladder. What caused the poisoning?
a. Muscarinic receptor blockers
b. -
c. Tranquilizers
d. Nonnarcotic analgetics
*e. Narcotic analgetics

12. A 30 year old patient consulted a doctor about having diarrhea and stomach aches for 5 days, temperature rise up to 37,5°С with chills. The day before the patient was in a forest and drank some water from an open pond. He was diagnosed with amebic dysentery that was bacteriologically confirmed. Name the medication for treatment of this disease:
a. Emethine hydrochloride
*b. Metronidazole
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Furasolidone
e. Phthalazole

13. In course of combined therapy a patient with chronic cardiac insufficiency was taking digitoxin and furocemid. A a result he had extreme muscular weakness. What electrolyte imbalances may be revealed in his blood?
a. Hypercalcemia
b. -
c. Hyperkaliemia
d. Hypocalcemia
*e. Hypokaliemia

14. A patient with complaints of dizziness, worsening of vision acuity, sickness, salivation and spasmodic stomachaches was taken to the admission department. The diagnosis was poisoning with organophosphorous compounds. What preparations should be included into complex therapy?
a. Glucose and Bemegride
*b. Atropine sulfate and Dipiroxim
c. Tetacin-calcium and Unitiol
d. Sodium thiosulfate and Bemegride
e. Nalorphine hydrochloride and Bemegide

15. A surgeon cleansed his hands with 70% solution of ethyl alcochol before an operation. What is the main mechanism of antiseptic effect of preparations upon microorganisms?
a. Oxidation of organic protoplasm components
b. Blockade of sulfhydric groups of enzyme systems
*c. Dehydratation of protoplasm proteins
d. Interaction with aminogroups of protoplasm proteins
e. Interaction with hydroxyl enzyme groups

16. A patient who has been ill with tuberculosis for a long time has an intracellular mycobacteria disposition. What preparation must be included into the complex therapy of tuberculosis?
a. Ethambutol
*b. Isoniazid
c. Ethionamide
d. Rifampicin
e. Sodium para-aminosalicylate

17. A patient started bleeding after tooth extraction. What action is necessary in this case?
*a. Adrenalin locally
b. Fibrinogen injection
c. Neodicumarine orally
d. Vicasol orally
e. Thrombin injection

18. After tooth extraction the blood pressure of a patient fell dramatically, the patient lost consciousness. Collaptoid state was diagnosed. What drug should be used?
a. Nitroglycerine
*b. Cordiamin
c. Isadrin
d. Strophanthine
e. Sustac

19. A patient who takes tetracyclin was recommended not to consume dairy products. Why did the doctor give him such recommendation?
a. They increase risk of dysbacteriosis
b. Dairy products dont assimilate
*c. They inhibit antibiotic absorption
d. Antibiotic toxicity increases
e. Gastrointestinal digestion may be disturbed

20. A stomatologists examined first-grade pupils and revealed that one of children had yellowish brown teeth, two of them were split. Therefore the pupil was treated with "some pills" on account of pneumonia. What medication could have  such a negative effect upon teeth?
*a. Doxycycline
b. Erythromycin
c. Biseptol
d. Ampicillin
e. Oxacillin

21. A 50 year old patient with ischemic disease was prescribed an antiaggregant preparation. The patient was taking overdoses of this preparation. It resulted in nausea, vomiting, stomach pain during fasting. What preparation was the patient prescribed?
a. Dipiridamol
b. Pentoxyphilline
c. Parmidine
d. Ticlide
*e. Acetylsalicylic acid

22. Name the drug group that can reduce need of myocardium for oxygene, decrease force of heartbeat and inhibit lipolysis:
a. alpha-adrenoceptor blockers
b. Selective beta-adrenoceptor agonists
c. alpha-adrenoceptor agonists
*d. Blockers of beta-adrenoceptor
e. Sympatholytics

23. A patient was attacked by bees. He was taken to the hospital with Quinckes edema. What antihistaminic medication without sedative effect sholuld be prescribed the patient?
a. Suprastine
b. Tavegil
c. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
*d. Diasoline
e. Phencarol

24. A patient with thyreotoxicosis was prescribed a medication that inhibits enzyme systems taking part in synthesis of thyroid gland hormones. What medication is it?
a. Potassium iodide
b. Diiodotyrosine
*c. Mercazolile
d. Thyreoidine
e. Radioactive iodine

25. A purulent wound was treated with a solution that had antiseptic effect and contributed to the mechanical wound cleansing. What solution was used?
*a. Hydrogen peroxide
b. Alcoholic iodine
c. Brilliant green
d. Ethacrydine lactate
e. Potassium permanganate

26. A patient with tuberculosis was prescribed a certain medication as a part of complex therapy - derivative of isonicotinic acid hydrazide. Name this preparation:
a. Rifampicin
b. Kanamycin
c. Streptomycin sulfate
d. Cephaloridine
*e. Isoniazide

27. A patient with essential hypertension takes enalapril. What mechanism of action has this hypotensive medication?
a. Inhibitor of cyclooxygenase
b. Сa++ channel-blocking agent
c. Antagonist of angiotensine ІІ
d. Inhibitor of phosphodiesterase
*e. Inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme

28. After a surgical procedure a patient felt ill with enteroparesis. What medication from the group of anticholinesterase drugs should be prescribed?
a. Aceclydine
b. Carbacholine
*c. Proserin
d. Pilocarpine
e. Acetylcholine

29. A patient with chronic alcoholism has symptoms of polyneuritis and cardiac insufficiensy. What vitamin preparation should be prescribed to this patient?
a. Retinol
b. Ergocalciferol
*c. Thiamine
d. Rutin
e. Phylloquinone

30. A patient has a slowly healing fracture. What medcine can be used to accelerate formation of connective tissue matrix?
a. Methotrexate
b. Cyclosporine
c. Prednisolone
d. Cyclophosphan
*e. Methyluracil

31. Removal of a foreign body from patients eye involves local anesthesia with lidocaine. What is the action mechanism of this medication?
a. It inhibits cytochrome oxidase activity
b. It blocks passing of nitric oxide
*c. It disturbs passing of Na+ through the membrane
d. It reduces dehydrogenase activity
e. It reduces passage of neuromediators

32. A patient with myocardium infarction was prescribed an analgetic in order to stop pain syndrome. The patient felt better but overdose caused weakness, myosis, respiratory depression. What medication was prescribed?
a. Ibuprofen
b. Paracetamol
c. Baralgine
d. Sedalgine
*e. Morphine

33. For treatment of skin diseases with apparent inflammation in the maxillofacial area the topical glucocorticoids are applied. What preparation has the minimal resorptive effect?
a. Hydrocortisone
b. Prednisolone
*c. Flumethasoni pivalas
d. Triamcinolone
e. Dexamethasone

34. A patient complains of painful cracks in mouth angles. What sulfanilamide can be recommended for local treatment of angular stomatitis?
a. Prednisolone ointment
b. Synthomycine liniment
*c. Streptocide liniment
d. Butadione ointment
e. Tetracycline ointment

35. What antihelmintic medication is used for stimulation of immune system in case of chronic generalized periodontitis?
a. Pumpkin seeds
b. Piperidine adipinate
*c. Levamisole
d. Pyranthel
e. Chloxil

36. Leukoses are treated with antimetabolite methotrexate. What vitamin is its antagonist?
a. Rutin
*b. Folic acid
c. Phyllochinone
d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Piridoxine

37. Mother of a two year old child consulted a dentist. In the period of pregnancy she was non-systematically taking antibiotics to treat an infectious disease. The childs examination revealed incisor destruction, yellow enamel, brown limbus of dental cervix. What preparation was mother taking during her pregnancy?
a. Octadine
*b. Doxycycline
c. Ampiox
d. Furosemide
e. Xanthinol nicotinate

38. A 36 year old man with craniocerebral trauma has diminished breath sounds, thready pulse, reflexes are absent. What route of pyracetam introduction is the most suitable in this case?
a. Rectal
b. Oral
c. Inhaling
*d. Intravenous
e. Subcutaneous

39. A patient is being operated under inhalation narcosis with nitrous oxide. It is known that it has evident lipophilic properties. What mechanism is responsible for transporting this preparation through biological membranes?
a. Filtration
b. Pinocytosis
c. Active transport
d. Facilitated diffusion
*e. Passive diffusion

40. A patient was operated on account of abdominal injury with application of tubocurarin. At the end of operation, after the respiration had been restored, the patient got injection of gentamicin. It caused a sudden respiratory standstill and relaxation of skeletal muscles. What effect underlies this phenomenon?
*a. Potentiation
b. Antagonism
c. Sensitization
d. Habituation
e. Cumulation

41. A child suspected for tuberculosis underwent Mantoux test. 24 hours after allergen injection there appeared a swelling, hyperaemia and tenderness. What are the main components in the development of this reaction?
*a. Mononuclears, T-lymphocytes and lymphokines
b. Plasmatic cells, T-lymphocytes and lymphokines
c. Macrophages, B-lymphocytes and monocytes
d. B-lymphocytes, IgM
e. Granulocytes, T-lymphocytes and IgG

42. A surgeon used novocaine as an anaesthetic during surgical manipulations. 10 minutes after it the patient became pale, he got dyspnea and hypotension. What type of allergic reaction is it?
a. Cell-mediated
*b. Anaphylactic
c. Immune complex
d. Cytotoxic
e. Stimulating

43. A 70 year old patient suffering from cardiac insufficiency has been uncontrolledly taking digoxin that resulted in extrasystole, vomiting, vision impairment, anxiety, sleep disturbance, reduction of diuresis. Application of drugs relating to the following group will be pathogenetically reasonable in this case:
a. Angiotensin II receptor blockers
b. Stimulants of beta1-adrenoreceptors
*c. Donators of sulfhydric groups
d. Potassium channel blockers
e. Donators of nitrogen oxide

44. A patient was admitted to a surgical department for an operation. He has to undergo neuroleptanalgesia. To achieve neuroleptanalgesia it would be rational to combine fentanyl with the following medicine:
a. Fraxiparine
*b. Droperidol
c. Salbutamol
d. Cholosasum
e. Pilocarpine

45. To prevent possible negative effect upon the gastric mucosa a patient with rheumatoid arthritis was administered a nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drug - a COX-2 selective inhibitor. Specify this drug:
a. Ibuprofen
*b. Celecoxib
c. Acetylsalicinic acid
d. Analgine
e. Butadion

46. A patient suffering from chronic bronchitis takes a synthetic mucolytic drug that stimulates sputum liquefaction. What drug is it?
*a. Acetylcysteine
b. Heparin
c. Enalapril
d. Furosemide
e. Diazepam

47. A 30 year old woman has been continuously using lipstick with a fluorescent substance that led to development of a limited erythema on the prolabium, slight peeling, and later small transversal sulci and fissures. Microscopical examination of the affected zone revealed in the connective tissue sensibilized lymphocytes and macrophages, effects of cytolysis. What type of immunological hypersensitivity has developed on the lip?
*a. IV type (cellular cytotoxicity)
b. II type (antibody cytotoxicity)
c. Granulomatosis
d. III type (immune complex cytotoxicity)
e. I type (reagin type)

48. What contraction of upper extremity muscles will be observed during holding (but not moving) a load in a certain position?
a. Isotonic
b. Concentric
c. Excentric
*d. Isometric
e. Auxotonic

49. A 5 y.o. child enamel and dentin are striated with yellowish-brown stripes, the child has also dentin exposure, multiple caries. It is known that the childs mother had been taking antibiotics during her pregnancy. What medication might have caused such by-effect?
a. Lincomycin
b. Nystatin
c. Ampicillin
*d. Tetracycline
e. Streptocid

50. A patient who has been traeted in a neurological clinic with sedatives for a long time has the following complications: cough, rhinitis, lacrimation. What preparation might have caused such disorders?
a. Phenazepam
b. Reserpine
c. Diazepam
d. Valerian
*e. Sodium bromide

51. During anaesthetization of the oral cavity mucous tunic a patient developed anaphylactic shock (generalized vasodilatation, increase in vascular permeability along with escape of liquid to the tissues). What type of hypersensitivity has the patient developed?
a. II type (antibody-dependent)
b. IV type (cellular cytotoxicity)
c. V type (granulomatosis)
*d. I type (anaphylactic)
e. III type (immune complex)

52. Hemotransfusion stimulated development of intravascular erythrocyte hemolysis. The patient has the following type of hypersensitivity:
a. IV type hypersensitivity (cellular cytotoxicity)
b. V type hypersensitivity (granulomatosis)
c. I type hypersensitivity (anaphylactic)
d. III type hypersensitivity (immune complex)
*e. II type hypersensitivity (antibody-dependent)

53. A patient suffering form tuberculosis was treated with rifampicin, which caused drug resistance of mycobacteria tuberculosis. In order to reduce mycobacteria resistance, rifampicin should be combined with the following drug:
a. Intraconazole
b. Acyclovir
*c. Isoniazid
d. Metronidazole
e. Amoxicillin

