1. A 3-year-old child with elevated body temperature has taken aspirin and developed increased hemolysis of erythrocytes. In this case hemolytic anemia can be caused by congenital deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Glycogen phosphorylase
b. Glucose 6-phosphatase
*c. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
d. Glycerol-phosphate dehydrogenase
e. Gamma-glutamyl transferase

2. Collagenosis patients typically present with the processes of connective tissue destruction. The presence of these processes can be confirmed by the increase in:
a. LDH-isoenzyme activity in the blood
b. Blood creatine and creatinine
*c. Blood oxyproline and oxylysine
d. Transaminase activity in the blood
e. Blood urates

3. During diabetes mellitus and starvation, the number of acetone bodies in blood increases. These bodies are used as a source of energy and are synthesized from the following substance:
a. Malate
b. Ketoglutarate
c. Succinyl-CoA
d. Citrate
*e. Acetyl-CoA

4. Blood test of the patient revealed albumine content of 20 g/L and increased activity of lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme 5 (LDH5). These results indicate disorder of the following organ:
a. Heart
b. Kidneys
*c. Liver
d. Lungs
e. Spleen

5. A patient presents with an acute attack of cholelithiasis. Laboratory examination of the patient’s feces will show the following in this case:
*a. Negative reaction to stercobilin
b. Connective tissue
c. Starch granules
d. Partially digested cellulose
e. Positive reaction to stercobilin

6. A patient with diabetes mellitus after an insulin injection lost his consciousness and developed convulsions. What will be the result of a biochemical test for blood glucose level in this case?
a. 8.0 mmol/L
b. 3.3 mmol/L
*c. 2.5 mmol/L
d. 10 mmol/L
e. 5.5 mmol/L

7. A 27-year-old patient presents with pathologic changes in the liver and brain. Blood plasma exhibits acute decrease in copper levels, while urine copper levels are elevated. The patient is diagnosed with Wilson disease. To confirm this diagnosis it is necessary to measure activity of the following enzyme in the patient’s blood serum:
a. Xanthine oxidase
b. Carbonic anhydrase
*c. Ceruloplasmin
d. Leucine aminopeptidase
e. Alcohol dehydrogenase

8. The Gerontology Institute recommends older people to take vitamin complexes that contain vitamin E. What is the main function of this vitamin?
a. Antineuritic
b. Antidermatitic
c. Antihemorrhagic
d. Antiscorbutic
*e. Antioxidant

9. Ammonia is extremely toxic for human CNS. What is the main way of ammonia neutralization in the nervous tissue?
a. Ammonium salts synthesis
b. Transamination
c. Formation of paired compounds
*d. Glutamine synthesis
e. Urea synthesis

10. People, who for a long time remained in hypodynamic state, develop intense pain in the muscles after a physical exertion. What is the most likely cause of this pain?
*a. Accumulation of lactic acid in muscles
b. Accumulation of creatinine in muscles
c. Increased content of ADP in muscles
d. Decreased content of lipids in muscles
e. Intensive breakdown of muscle proteins

11. Human genetic apparatus consists of approximately 30 thousand of genes, while the number of antibody variants can be as high as millions. What mechanism leads to formation of new genes that ensure the synthesis of such a number of antibodies?
a. DNA replication
b. Gene amplification
*c. Genetic recombination
d. DNA repair
e. Formation of Okazaki fragments

12. Chronic overdose of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia in a patient. Name the process of carbohydrate metabolism that results in elevated blood glucose levels:
a. Glycogenolysis
b. Pentose-phosphate pathway
c. Glycogenesis
*d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Aerobic glycolysis

13. A patient for a long time was on an imbalanced diet low in proteins, which resulted in hepatic fatty infiltration. This condition is likely to develop if a certain substance is absent in a person’s diet. Name this substance:
a. Cholesterol
b. Alanine
*c. Methionine
d. Acetic acid
e. Biotin

14. A patient, who has been subsisting exclusively on polished rice, has developed polyneuritis due to thiamine deficiency. What substance is an indicator of such avitaminosis, when it is excreted with urine?
a. Phenyl pyruvate
*b. Pyruvic acid
c. Methylmalonic acid
d. Malate
e. Uric acid

15. A 40-year-old man with pulmonary tuberculosis was prescribed isoniazid. Prolonged taking of this drug can result in development of the following vitamin deficiency:
a. Biotin
b. Folic acid
c. Thiamine
d. Cobalamin
*e. Pyridoxine

16. Disturbed activity of trypsin and chymotrypsin leads to disturbed protein breakup in the small intestine. Activity of these enzymes depends on the presence of the following factor:
*a. Enterokinase
b. Bile acids
c. N a+ salts
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Pepsin

17. A newborn presents with weak suckling, frequent vomiting, and hypotonia. Blood and urine citrulline are very high. What metabolic process is disturbed?
a. Glycolysis
b. Tricarboxylic acid cycle
*c. Ornithine cycle
d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Cori cycle

18. Patients with ischemic heart disease are usually prescribed small doses of aspirin. This drug inhibits synthesis of platelet aggregation activator, thromboxane A2. What substance is this activator synthesized from?
*a. Arachidonic acid
b. Acetic acid
c. Glutamic acid
d. Homogentisic acid
e. Malonic acid

19. A patient with myocardial infarction in the acute phase has been hospitalized into the cardiology unit. To induce platelet lysis in the patient’s coronary vessels during the early hours of infarction, the following enzyme should be used:
*a. Streptokinase
b. Trypsin
c. Lysozyme
d. Chymotrypsin
e. Hyaluronidase

20. In the hematology unit a patient with leukemia was prescribed 5-Fluorouracil. This drug:
a. Inhibits transcription
b. Catalyzes replication
c. Stimulates DNase
d. Inhibits translation
*e. Inhibits DNA synthesis

21. A 7-year-old boy is diagnosed with anemia. Laboratory analysis detects pyruvate kinase deficiency in his erythrocytes. What process is disturbed in this boy, playing the main role in anemia development in this case?
a. Decarboxylation of amino acids
b. Deaminization of amino acids
*c. Anaerobic glycolysis
d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Anaerobic glycogenolysis

22. Examination of a patient shows decreased leukocyte and erythrocyte count and low hemoglobin levels in peripheric blood, as well as appearance of large cells (megaloblasts). What vitamin deficiency can cause these clinical presentations?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Niacin
*c. Folic acid
d. Riboflavin
e. Biotin

23. Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome often develops in chronic alcoholics, who have a low-vitamin diet. Decreased transketolase activity can be observed in the course of this disease. What vitamin deficiency causes this development?
a. Retinol
b. Cobalamin
c. Riboflavin
*d. Thiamine
e. Niacin

