1. A young man has come to the genetic consultation. He complains of abnormalities in his physical and reproductive development. Microscopy of his oral mucosa cells shows one Barr body. What karyotype is the most likely in this young man?
a. 47, XY, +18
b. 47, ХYY
c. 45, Х0
d. 47, XY, +21
*e. 47, ХХY

2. The mother’s karyotype has 45 chromosomes. It was determined that translocation of chromosome 21 to chromosome 14 had occurred. What disorder is likely to be observed in the child of this woman if the father’s karyotype is normal?
a. Klinefelter syndrome
b. Edwards syndrome
c. Morris syndrome (androgen insensitivity)
*d. Down syndrome
e. Patau syndrome

3. During regular examination of schoolchildren, a scrape from the perianal folds of a 10-year-old girl shows asymmetrical oval eggs with larvae inside. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Trichuriasis
b. Ancylostomiasis
c. Ascariasis
d. Amebiasis
*e. Enterobiasis

4. A young woman, a foreign student from Tehran, has made an appointment with the urologist. She complains of the sensation of heaviness in her lower abdomen and a small amount of blood being excreted with urine at the end of each urination. Microscopy of urine detects the presence of parasite eggs, approximately 140х70 micron in size, with a terminal spike. What diagnosis can be made by the infectious diseases specialist?
a. Opisthorchiasis
b. Paragonimiasis
c. Fascioliasis
*d. Schistosomiasis
e. Dicroceliasis

5. Cells of a person working in the Chornobyl Exclusion Zone have undergone a mutation in DNA molecule. However, with time the damaged interval of DNA molecule restored ist initial structure with a specific enzyme. In this case the following occurred:
a. Translation
*b. Repair
c. Transcription
d. Replication
e. Reverse transcription

6. A man is a carrier of HIV that is an RNA virus. The cells of this patient synthesize viral DNA. This process is based on:
a. Transcription
b. Replication
*c. Reverse transcription
d. Repair
e. Translation

7. The parents with normal hearing have two daughters and a son, who are congenitally deaf. Their other 5 children are healthy. What is the pattern of deafness inheritance in this case?
a. Y-linked
*b. Autosomal recessive
c. X-linked recessive
d. Autosomal dominant
e. X-linked dominant

8. Ingestion of plants and mushrooms that grow along highways is dangerous due to risk of lead poisoning. What is the main source of environmental pollution with this chemical element?
a. Herbicides
b. Chemical fertilizers
c. Sewage
d. Acid rains
*e. Exhaust fumes

9. Long-term taking of medicines can affect cells of the liver. Particularly, it can cause marked hypertrophy of agranular endoplasmic reticulum due to the following function of this organelle:
a. Formation of maturation spindle
b. Intracellular digestion
c. Nucleic acid synthesis
d. Protein synthesis
*e. Detoxication of harmful substances

10. Dwellers of a village located in the taiga make a living by harvesting berries. Lately the occurrence of alveococcosis in the village population has increased. What is the source of invasion in this case?
*a. Foxes
b. Sick people
c. Rodents
d. Birds
e. Fish

