1. To test donor blood for hepatitis B antigens, it is necessary to use highly sensitive detection methods. What test should be used for this purpose?
a. Complement binding
b. Indirect immunofluorescence
c. Immunoelectrophoresis
d. Indirect hemagglutination
*e. Solid-phase enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay

2. The bacteriological laboratory has received for analysis a sample of dried fish from a focus of food poisoning outbreak. The bacteriologist inoculated the sample into a Kitt-Tarozzi medium, where growth of tennis racquetshaped microorganisms could be observed. These microorganisms are likely to be the causative agents of:
a. Dysentery
b. Salmonellosis
*c. Botulism
d. Staphylococcal toxicoinfection
e. Typhoid fever

3. To determine toxigenicity of diphtheria causative agents obtained from patients, the cultures were inoculated in a Petri dish with nutrient agar, bilaterally to a strip of filter paper spotted with antidiphtheric antitoxic serum and situated in the center of the Petri dish. After incubation of the inoculated cultures in the agar, strip-like areas of medium turbidity formed between some of the cultures and the filter paper. What immunological test was conducted?
a. Opsonization test
*b. Agar gel precipitation test
c. Agglutination test
d. Coombs test
e. Ring precipitin test

4. The bacteriological laboratory needs to prepare for analysis of materials that are suspected to be contaminated with spores of anthrax causative agent. What diagnostic preparation allows for quick detection of these spores?
a. Monoclonal antibodies to anthrax causative agent
*b. Anti-anthrax fluorescent serum
c. Standard anthrax antigen
d. Anti-anthrax immunoglobulin
e. Enzyme-tagged immunoglobulin

5. A family has two children. The younger child is under a year. The child has developed spastic cough attacks. Similar clinical presentation was observed in the elder preschool child one month ago. The doctor suspects pertussis infection. What method enables retrospective diagnostics of this disease?
a. Molecular biological
*b. Serological
c. Biological
d. Bacteriological
e. Microscopy

6. To test donor blood for hepatitis B antigens, it is necessary to use highly sensitive detection methods. What test should be used for this purpose?
a. Indirect immunofluorescence
*b. Solid-phase enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
c. Indirect hemagglutination
d. Immunoelectrophoresis
e. Complement binding

7. The bacteriological laboratory has received for analysis a sample of dried fish from a focus of food poisoning outbreak. The bacteriologist inoculated the sample into a Kitt-Tarozzi medium, where growth of tennis racquetshaped microorganisms could be observed. These microorganisms are likely to be the causative agents of:
a. Salmonellosis
b. Staphylococcal toxicoinfection
c. Typhoid fever
*d. Botulism
e. Dysentery

8. To determine toxigenicity of diphtheria causative agents obtained from patients, the cultures were inoculated in a Petri dish with nutrient agar, bilaterally to a strip of filter paper spotted with antidiphtheric antitoxic serum and situated in the center of the Petri dish. After incubation of the inoculated cultures in the agar, strip-like areas of medium turbidity formed between some of the cultures and the filter paper. What immunological test was conducted?
*a. Agar gel precipitation test
b. Agglutination test
c. Opsonization test
d. Ring precipitin test
e. Coombs test

9. The bacteriological laboratory needs to prepare for analysis of materials that are suspected to be contaminated with spores of anthrax causative agent. What diagnostic preparation allows for quick detection of these spores?
a. Anti-anthrax immunoglobulin
b. Enzyme-tagged immunoglobulin
c. Monoclonal antibodies to anthrax causative agent
*d. Anti-anthrax fluorescent serum
e. Standard anthrax antigen

10. A family has two children. The younger child is under a year. The child has developed spastic cough attacks. Similar clinical presentation was observed in the elder preschool child one month ago. The doctor suspects pertussis infection. What method enables retrospective diagnostics of this disease?
a. Molecular biological
*b. Serological
c. Biological
d. Bacteriological
e. Microscopy

