1. A patient with severe poisoning was brought into the intensive care unit. In the course of complex treatment the subclavian vein needs to be catheterized for medicine administration. This vein is located in the following topographic structure:
*a. Spatium antescalenum
b. Spatium retrosternocleidomastoideus
c. Trigonum omotrapezoideum
d. Spatium interaрoneuroticum suprasternale
e. Spatium interscalenum

2. A 52-year-old woman came to the neurologist with complaints of loss of skin sensitivity on the right half of her face in the area of the lower eyelid, nasal arch, and upper lip. What branch of what nerve is damaged in this patient?
a. Ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve
b. Greater petrosal nerve branching from the facial nerve
*c. Maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve
d. Mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve
e. Chorda tympani branching from the facial nerve

3. A patient with periodontitis of the lower molar came to the doctor. It was determined that the inflammatory process spread to the lymph nodes. What lymph nodes were the first to be affected by the inflammatory process?
a. Submental
b. Facial
c. Lateral cervical
d. Anterior cervical
*e. Submandibular

4. After an X-ray examination of the tuberculosis clinic patient, he was diagnosed with tumor of the right lung. During operation the surgeon removed the middle lobe of the patient’s right lung. This lobe includes:
*a. Segmentum laterale et segmentum mediale
b. Segmentum anterius et segmentum apicale
c. Segmentum apicale (superius) et segmentum basale mediale
d. Segmentum lingualare superius et inferius
e. Segmentum basale anterius et posterius

5. A 30-year-old man with an incised wound on the plantar surface of the left foot was brought to the traumatology department. Lifting of the lateral side of the foot is limited. What muscle is likely to be functionally disturbed?
a. Triceps muscle of calf
b. Soleus muscle
c. Anterior tibial muscle
d. Flexor hallucis longus muscle
*e. Peroneus longus muscle

6. An ovarian tumor was detected in a woman. She is prescribed a surgery. What ligament should be severed by the surgeon to separate the patient’s ovary from the uterus?
a. Broad ligament of the uterus
b. Suspensory ligament of the ovary
c. Round ligament of the uterus
*d. Proper ovarian ligament
e. Lateral umbilical ligament

7. A 45-year-old woman presents with breast cancer. Metastases can spread in this case to the following regional lymph nodes:
a. Aortic, bronchomediastinal
*b. Axillary, parasternal
c. Cervical, parasternal
d. Abdominal, cervical
e. Parasternal, bronchomediastinal

8. A 35-year-old man with a hand injury came to the traumatology department. Examination revealed an incised wound on the palmar surface of the left hand; middle phalanges of digits II-IV cannot be flexed. What muscles are damaged?
a. Dorsal interossei
*b. Flexor digitorum superficialis
c. Lumbrical muscles
d. Flexor digitorum profundus
e. Palmar interossei

9. Clinical course of urolithiasis was complicated by the passage of a renal calculus. Where in the ureter is it most likely to stop?
*a. At the border between the abdominal and pelvic segments
b. In the middle of the abdominal segment
c. 5 cm above the pelvic segment
d. 2 cm above the entrance to the urinary bladder
e. In the renal pelvis

10. The surgeon noticed aggregated lymphoid nodules (Peyer’s patches) on the intestinal mucosa. What portion of the intestine is it?
*a. Ileum
b. Cecum
c. Rectum
d. Duodenum
e. Jejunum

11. An oncology patient is to undergo a surgery on the descending colon. Name the main source of blood supply to this organ:
a. Celiac trunk
b. Superior mesenteric artery
*c. Inferior mesenteric artery
d. Middle colic artery
e. Splenic artery

12. A patient presents with an inner ear inflammation. On examination the doctor states that the 1st neurons of the auditory analyzer are affected. Where are these neurons located?
a. G. trigeminale
b. G. ciliare
c. G. vestibulare
d. G. geniculi
*e. G. spirale

13. A victim has received a deep incised stab wound to the upper posterior surface of the shoulder. Extension of elbow, hand, and digits is impaired; skin sensitivity of the posterior surface of the shoulder and forearm is lost. What nerve is damaged in this case?
a. N. cutaneus brachii medialis
b. N. ulnaris
*c. N. radialis
d. N. medianus
e. N. musculocutaneus

14. During an invasive operation the surgeon needs to access the omental bursa of the peritoneal cavity via the omental foramen (foramen of Winslow). What anatomical structure makes up the anterior border of this foramen?
a. Greater omentum
*b. Hepatoduodenal ligament
c. Visceral surface of liver
d. Hepatorenal ligament
e. Superior part of duodenum

