1. A 40-year-old woman on examination presents with intensified basal metabolic rate. What hormone present in excess leads to such condition?
a. Aldosterone
b. Somatostatin
c. Thyrocalcitonin
d. Glucagon
*e. Triiodothyronine

2. Toxic damage to hepatic cells resulted in disruption of the patient’s liver function and the patient developed edemas. What changes of blood plasma are the main cause of edema development?
a. Decrease of fibrinogen content
b. Increase of globulin content
*c. Decrease of albumin content
d. Increase of albumin content
e. Decrease of globulin content

3. An isolated heart was used to study excitation conduction velocity in different areas of the heart. What area had the lowest velocity of excitation conduction?
a. Purkinje fibers
b. His bundle
*c. Atrioventricular node
d. Atrial myocardium
e. Ventricular myocardium

4. A 40-year-old person developed elevated blood pressure after an emotional excitement. What is the likely cause of this effect?
a. Arteriolar dilation
b. Hyperpolarization of cardiomyocytes
c. Increased parasympathetic nervous system tone
*d. Increased sympathetic nervous system tone
e. Decreased cardiac contraction frequency

5. A patient has elevated blood pressure due to increased vascular tone. To lower the blood pressure in this case it is necessary to prescribe the blockers of:
a. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
b. Histamine H1 receptors
c. β-adrenoceptors
d. ?- and β-adrenoceptors
*e. ?-adrenoceptors

6. ABO blood group is being determined. Erythrocyte agglutination occurred when standard sera of group I and group II were introduced into the blood being analyzed, while group III serum caused no agglutination. What agglutinogens do these erythrocytes have?
a. C
b. D and C
c. A
d. A and B
*e. B

7. What changes can be expected to occur in the isolated heart of a toad, if excessive amount of calcium chloride is introduced into its perfusate?
a. Diastolic cardiac arrest
*b. Increased cardiac contraction force and frequency
c. Increased cardiac contraction frequency
d. Decreased cardiac contraction force
e. Increased cardiac contraction force

8. After hyperventilation an athlete developed a brief respiratory arrest. It occurred due to the following changes in the blood:
a. Decrease of O2 pressure
b. Increase of CO2 and O2 pressure
c. Decrease of pH
d. Increase of CO2 pressure
*e. Decrease of CO2 pressure

9. A person has increased pulmonary ventilation due to physical exertion. What indicator of external respiration will be significantly increased compared to the resting state?
a. Vital lung capacity
b. Expiratory reserve volume
c. Total lung capacity
*d. Respiratory volume
e. Inspiratory reserve volume

10. A patient developed punctate hemorrhages after a tourniquet had been applied. It occurred due to functional disturbance of the following blood corpuscles:
*a. Platelets
b. Monocytes
c. Neutrophils
d. Lymphocytes
e. Eosinophils

11. The dorsal root of the spinal nerve of a test animal was severed. What changes will occur in the innervation area?
*a. Loss of sensitivity
b. Decreased muscle tone
c. Loss of sensitivity and motor function
d. Increased muscle tone
e. Loss of motor function

12. After a certain CNS structure had been destroyed in a test animal, this animal lost its orienting reflexes. What structure had been destroyed?
a. Medial reticular nuclei
*b. Corpora quadrigemina
c. Lateral vestibular nuclei
d. Red nuclei
e. Substantia nigra

13. On examination the patient was determined to have a strong, balanced, inert type of higher nervous activity according to Pavlov’s classification. What temperament according to Hippocrates is it?
*a. Phlegmatic
b. Choleric
c. -
d. Melancholic
e. Sanguine

14. A 45-year-old woman presents with insufficient secretion of enterokinase enzyme. Enterokinase deficiency can cause disturbance of the following digestive function:
a. Lipid absorption
*b. Protein hydrolysis
c. Lipid hydrolysis
d. Carbohydrate hydrolysis
e. Vitamin absorption

15. Systemic blood pressure of a person equals 120/65 mm Hg. Blood ejection into aorta occurs when left ventricular pressure exceeds:
a. 120 mm Hg
*b. 65 mm Hg
c. 90 mm Hg
d. 10 mm Hg
e. 100 mm Hg

16. Prolonged vomiting resulted in dehydration of the patient’s body. Under these conditons, water retention in the body is ensured primarily due to increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Calcitonin
*b. Vasopressin
c. Natriuretic hormone
d. Aldosterone
e. Adrenaline

17. KCl concentration in a solution that surrounds an isolated cell was increased. How will resting membrane potential (RMP) and cell excitability change in this case?
a. RMP and excitability remain unchanged
*b. RMP decreases, excitability increases
c. RMP increases, excitability decreases
d. RMP increases, excitability increases
e. RMP decreases, excitability remains unchanged

18. Human brain produces endogenous peptides that are similar to morphine and can reduce pain perception. Name these peptides:
a. Liberins
b. Oxytocin
c. Statins
*d. Endorphins
e. Vasopressin

19. I.M. Siechenov has proven that a tired limb restores its working capacity faster if during its period of rest another limb works. It became a basis for the concept of:
a. Pessimum
b. Parabiosis
*c. Active rest
d. Optimum
e. Fatigue

20. Domestic accident has resulted in a significant blood loss in the patient, which was accompanied by a drop in blood pressure. What hormones ensure quick restoration of the blood pressure caused by a blood loss?
a. Aldosterone
*b. Adrenaline, vasopressin
c. Reproductive hormones
d. Cortisol
e. Oxytocin

21. An experiment was conducted to measure the skin sensitivity threshold. What patches of skin have the highest sensitivity threshold?
a. Shin
*b. Back
c. Shoulder
d. Dorsal surface of the hand
e. Face

22. A student, whose educational achievements throughout the semester were poor, feels emotionally tense during the final test. What is the primary cause that induced the leading mechanism of emotional tension in this case?
a. Lack of time and energy
b. Lack of time
*c. Lack of information
d. Lack of energy
e. Lack of energy and information

23. After a trauma the patient has developed right-sided paralyses and disturbed pain sensitivity. On the left side no paralyses are observed, but pain and thermal sensitivity is disturbed. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Brainstem injury
b. Midbrain injury
*c. Unilateral right-side spinal cord injuiry
d. Cerebellar injury
e. Motor cortex injury

