1. A patient was hospitalized in a comatose state. The patient has a 5-yearlong history of diabetes mellitus type 2. Objectively respiration is noisy, deep, with acetone breath odor. Blood glucose is 15.2 mmol/L, ketone bodies - 100 micromol/L. These signs are characteristic of the following diabetes complication:
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Hepatic coma
*c. Ketoacidotic coma
d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Hyperosmolar coma

2. A 63-year-old man suffers from esophageal carcinoma, presents with metastases into the mediastinal lymph nodes and cancerous cachexia. What pathogenetic stage of neoplastic process is observed in the patient?
a. Promotion
b. Initiation
c. -
*d. Progression
e. Transformation

3. After a prolonged attack of severe headache the patient lost mobility in his left arm and leg. Muscle tone is decreased in the affected limbs, the muscles are spasmed, spinal tendon reflexes are acutely intensified, reflex zones are increased. What nervous system disorder can be observed in this patient?
a. Flaccid paralysis
b. Reflex paralysis
c. Peripheral paralysis
d. Extrapyramidal paralysis
*e. Central paralysis

4. Hematologic study shows the following pattern: erythrocytes - 2, 8 · 1012/L, Нb - 80 g/L, color index - 0.85, reticulocytes - 0,1%, platelets - 160 thousand per microliter, leukocytes - 60 · 109/L. Basocytes - 2%, eosinophils - 8%, promyelocytes - 5%, myelocytes - 5%, juvenile - 16%, stab neutrophils - 20%, segmented neutrophils - 34%, lymphocytes - 5%, monocytes - 5%. This clinical presentation indicates the following blood pathology:
a. Hypoplastic anemia
b. Acute myeloleukemia
*c. Chronic myeloleukemia
d. Undifferentiated leukemia
e. Hemolytic anemia

5. Antileukocytic antibodies are detected in the blood of a patient with leukopenia. What type of Coombs-Gell hypersensitivity reaction developed in this case?
a. Immune complex-mediated
*b. Cytotoxic
c. Anaphylactic
d. Stimulating
e. Delayed-type hypersensitivity

6. A patient with obliterating endarteritis has undergone a ganglionic sympathectomy. Positive therapeutic effect of this surgery is associated with development of arterial hyperemia of the lower limbs, which can be described as:
a. Neurotonic
b. Reactive
c. Working
*d. Neuroparalytic
e. Metabolic

7. In an experiment a laboratory rat was subjected to a stress factor (electric current), which resulted in muscular hypotonia, arterial hypotension, hypothermia, and hypoglycemia in the animal. What period of general adaptation syndrome is it?
a. -
*b. Shock phase
c. Resistance stage
d. Antishock phase
e. Exhaustion stage

8. A 14-year-old adolescent has diphtheria. During the peak of the disease against the background of acute drop in body temperature and tachycardia the blood pressure is 70/50 mm Hg. What type of vascular tone disturbance is it?
a. -
b. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
c. Essential hypotension
*d. Acute hypotension
e. Chronic hypotension

9. 24 hours after an appendectomy the patient’s blood test shows neutrophilic leukocytosis with a regenerative shift. What is the most likely mechanism of absolute leukocytosis development in the patient’s peripheral blood?
a. Leukocyte redistribution
b. Deceleration of leukocyte migration to the tissues
c. Immunity activation
*d. Intensification of leukopoiesis
e. Decreased leukocyte disintegration

10. A 59-year-old man, a business manager, developed intense burning retrosternal pain that irradiates to the left arm. The pain occurred in the evening after the tax audit. 15 minutes later the patient’s condition normalized. What mechanism of angina pectoris development is leading in this patient? Патологiчна фiзiологiя 11
*a. Increased level of blood catecholamines
b. Intravascular aggregation of blood cells
c. Functional cardiac overload
d. Coronary artery thrombosis
e. Coronary atherosclerosis

11. A 30-year-old person has been stung by a bee. The stung area exhibits edema, hyperemia, and elevated temperature. What is the initial pathogenetic factor of inflammatory edema in this case?
a. Increase of capillary blood pressure
b. Disturbed lymphatic efflux
c. Increase of osmotic pressure in the inflammation focus
d. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure
*e. Increase of microvascular permeability

12. A 30-year-old woman developed facial edemas. Examination detected proteinuria (5.87 g/L), hypoproteinemia, dysproteinemia, and hyperlipidemia. Such combination of signs is characteristic of:
a. Acute kidney failure
b. Chronic kidney failure
c. Nephritic syndrome
d. Chronic pyelonephritis
*e. Nephrotic syndrome

13. An uconscious young man in the state of morphine intoxication has been brought into an admission room. The patient’s respiration is slow and shallow due to suppression of the respiratory center. What kind of respiratory failure occurred in this case?
a. Ventilatory obstruction
b. Perfusion
c. Diffusion
*d. Ventilatory disregulation
e. Ventilatory restriction

14. A man has been working for a long time in oil processing. What type of carcinogens does he encounter at his workplace?
a. Amino-azo compounds
b. Biological carcinogens
c. Amines
*d. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
e. Nitrosamines

15. A patient has been suffering from bronchial asthma for 15 years. What changes in the patient’s leukogram can be expected in this case?
*a. Eosinophilia
b. Leukocytosis
c. Left shift
d. Leukopenia
e. Basophilia

16. A married couple came for a genetic counseling. The husband suffers from insulinindependent diabetes mellitus, while the wife is healthy. What is the probability of their child developing insulin-independent diabetes mellitus?
*a. Higher than in the population
b. Lower than in the population
c. 50%
d. 100%
e. The same as in the population

17. A laboratory rat with chronic kidney failure presents with osteoporosis, pathologic calcification of the internal organs, and arterial hypertension. These disturbances are associated with increased activity of the following hormone:
*a. Parathyroid hormone
b. Triiodothyronine
c. Adrenaline
d. Calcitonin
e. Thyroxin

18. A patient is diagnosed with severe B12- deficiency anemia resulting in disturbed hematopoiesis and appearance of atypical erythrocytes in the blood. The patient has a history of total gastric resection. This diagnosis can be confirmed if the following cells are present in the peripheral blood:
*a. Megalocytes
b. Elliptocytes
c. Anulocytes
d. Normocytes
e. Microcytes

19. A patient with asphyxia after a brief respiratory arrest developed single infrequent respirations with passive expiration, after which he stopped breathing completely. What type of respiration was observed in this case?
a. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
b. Biot respiration
c. Apneustic respiration
d. Kussmaul respiration
*e. Gasping respiration

20. A 3-year-old child has been brought by ambulance to the intensive care unit of the infectious diseases hospital. On examination the child is in severe condition, skin and mucosa are dry, tissue turgor is reduced. The patient’s history states that profuse diarrhea and recurrent vomiting were observed throughout the previous day after the child had eaten food products of poor quality. What type of salt and water imbalance is likely to have developed in the patient?
a. Isoosmolar dehydration
b. Isoosmolar hyperhydration
c. Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
*d. Hypoosmolar dehydration
e. Hyperosmolar hyperhydration

21. A 48-year-old man is unconscious. He has a history of several syncopal episodes with convulsions. ECG shows deformed QRS complexes unconnected with P waves, atrial contractions are approximately 70/min., ventricular contractions - 25-30/min. Name the type of arrhythmia in this case:
*a. Complete atrioventricular block
b. Second-degree atrioventricular block
c. Intraventricular block
d. Intraatrial block
e. First-degree atrioventricular block

22. A 40-year-old man with impaired venous patency in the lower limbs developed edemas. What mechanism plays the main role in the development of this disturbance?
a. Decreased gradient of osmotic pressure between blood and tissue
b. Positive fluid balance
*c. Elevated filtration pressure
d. Disturbed humoral regulation of watermineral balance
e. Hypoproteinemia

