1. Autopsy of a 60-year-old woman, who for a long time had been suffering from essential hypertension, shows significantly diminished kidneys (weight of both kidneys is 80 g) with finely granular surface. Uniform renal cortical thinning can be observed on section. Name the described changes in the kidneys:
*a. Primary contracted kidney
b. Secondary contracted kidney
c. Diabetic nephrosclerosis
d. Amyloid contracted kidney
e. Pyelonephritic contracted kidney

2. Autopsy of a 3-year-old child shows a tumor in the cerebellum. The tumor has no clear margins separating it from the surrounding tissues. Histologically it is made of small atypical cells with hyperchromic nuclei. This tumor is most likely a:
a. Medullary sarcoma
b. Sarcoma metastasis
c. Glioblastoma
*d. Medulloblastoma
e. Cancer metastasis

3. Autopsy revealed a large wedge-shaped patch of a dense dark red tissue with clear margins in the upper lobe of the right lung. Histological examination detected there necrosis of the alveolar walls; the alveolar lumen is tightly packed with erythrocytes. What process occurred in the lungs?
a. Carneous degeneration
b. Hemorrhage
c. Atelectasis
*d. Hemorrhagic infarction
e. Gangrene

4. Regional lymph nodes surrounding an infected wound are enlarged. Histological examination shows increased number of macrophages, lymphocytes, and lymphatic follicles in the cortical layer of the lymph nodes, as well as a large amount of plasma cells. What process in the lymph nodes is indicated by these histological changes?
a. Congenital deficiency of lymphoid tissue
b. Acquired deficiency of lymphoid tissue
*c. Antigen stimulation
d. Neoplastic aberration
e. Transplant rejection

5. A patient has gradually developed a skin plaque on his face. In the center of this plaque there are necrotic patch and an ulcer. Histopathological analysis of the biopsy material reveals proliferation of atypical epithelial cells with large number of pathologic mitoses. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Fibroma
c. Sarcoma
d. Papilloma
*e. Skin cancer

6. Histological analysis of a biopsy skin sample obtained from a 24-year-old patient detects caseous necrosis surrounded with cellular infiltrate consisting of lymphocytes, among which there are single giant cells; proliferation of connective tissue and endovasculites are observed. Characterize this pathologic process:
*a. Proliferative granulomatous inflammation
b. Abscess
c. Ichorous inflammation
d. Catarrhal inflammation
e. Proliferative interstitial inflammation

7. Autopsy of a man, who had been suffering from mitral stenosis, reveals dense brown lungs. What pathologic process had occurred in the lungs?
*a. Hemosiderosis
b. Jaundice
c. Lipofuscinosis
d. Hemomelanosis
e. Hemochromatosis

8. A 63-year-old man, who has been suffering from chronic diffuse obstructive pulmonary emphysema for 15 years, died of progressive heart failure. Autopsy shows nutmeg liver cirrhosis, cyanotic induration of kidneys and spleen, ascites, and edemas of the lower limbs. What type of heart failure can be characterized by such changes in the internal organs?
a. Acute global heart failure
*b. Chronic heart failure
c. Chronic atrial failure
d. Acute right ventricular failure
e. Acute left ventricular failure

9. A 6-year-old girl presents with acute onset of a disease. She developed sore throat and high temperature that were later accompanied by a punctate skin rash. Oral examination reveals acute pharyngeal hyperemia, raspberry tongue, and enlarged bright red tonsils with dull gray and yellow foci that spread to the peritonsillar tissues. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. What disease are these changes characteristic of?
a. Measles
b. Laryngeal diphtheria
c. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
*d. Scarlet fever
e. Pharyngeal diphtheria

10. Autopsy of a man, who served on a nuclear submarine, revealed the following pathologies: bone marrow atrophy (panmyelophthisis), anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, lymphocytic disintegration in the lymph nodes, spleen, gastrointestinal lymphatic system, and hemorrhages into the adrenal glands. What disease had developed in this case?
a. Acute leukemia
b. Decompression sickness
*c. Acute radiation sickness
d. Acute anemia
e. Vibration disease

11. A 9-month-old child presents with delayed tooth eruption, improper sequence of tooth eruption, and horizontal maxillary configuration (high-arched palate). Microscopically enamel mineralization pattern is irregular, enamel columns are wrinkled, some of them are vacuolated, predentin zones are widened, single denticles can be observed. What disease is it?
a. Late rickets
b. Gout
c. Hypervitaminosis D
*d. Early rickets
e. Osteomalacia

12. Autopsy of a 58-year-old man, who for a long time has been drinking alcohol in large amounts and died at home, is being conducted. Macroscopically the right lung is dense and enlarged, its tissue is gray and homogeneous on section, its pleura is covered with grayish membranous deposits. Microscopically the alveolar cavities contain fibrin threads, neutrophils, and hemolysed erythrocytes. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Croupous pneumonia
b. Interstitial pneumonia
c. Caseous pneumonia
d. Primary pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Focal pneumonia

13. Autopsy of a 49-year-old woman who died of chronic kidney failure shows small dense striated kidneys with areas of hemorrhages. Microscopically nuclei of epithelial channels contain hematoxylin bodies; glomerular capillaries resemble wire loops, have thickened basement membranes, and in places contain hyaline thrombi and foci of fibrinoid necrosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatism
b. Amyloidosis
c. Atherosclerotic nephrosclerosis
*d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Arteriolosclerotic nephrosclerosis

14. A 34-year-old man died in a comatose state. According to his family after a business trip to an African country he developed periodical jaundice attacks. Autopsy shows the following: dense enlarged spleen with slate-black pulp; enlarged plethoric liver, gray-black on section; cerebral gray matter is brown-gray; cerebral white matter contains numerous small hemorrhages. What infectious disease can be suspected?
a. Meningococcemia
b. Generalized herpetic infection
c. Generalized cryptococcosis
*d. Malaria
e. Prion infection

15. A 27-year-old woman has undergone a sector resection of mammary gland tissue. Macroscopy detects a dense white node, 4 cm in diameter, with clear margins in the excised tissue. Immediate histological analysis shows the tumor to consist of a large amount of fibrous stroma with stromal proliferation around the small canaliculi. Canalicular epithelium overlays the basement membrane and retains its polarity. Make the diagnosis:
a. Adenocarcinoma
b. Dyshormonal disorders
c. Cancer
*d. Pericanalicular fibroadenoma
e. Sarcoma

16. In the course of an urgent surgery, the vermiform appendix of the patient was excised. The appendix was acutely distended and gray-black throughout its whole length. In the distal segment a defect of the appendix wall was detected, through which a foul-smelling gray-brown substance was being discharged from the appendix lumen. Histological analysis shows necrotization of the appendix wall with hemorrhagic foci; lumen of the mesenteric artery is filled with a trombus. What type of appendicitis is it?
a. Acute simple
b. Acute phlegmonous
*c. Acute gangrenous
d. Acute superficial
e. Chronic

17. A 39-year-old man underwent a surgery for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. He died 7 days after the surgery. On autopsy the peritoneal layers are plethoric, dull, and covered with massive yellow-green membranous deposits. The peritoneal cavity contains approximately 300 mL of thick yellow-green fluid. What pathologic process was detected in the peritoneal cavity?
a. Serous peritonitis
b. Peritoneal commissures
c. Fibrinohemorrhagic peritonitis
*d. Fibrinopurulent peritonitis
e. Serofibrinous peritonitis

