1. A patient with peptic ulcer disease was prescribed famotidine. As a result his gastric juice acidity significantly decreased. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
*a. Histamine H2 receptor blockade
b. Muscarinic M1 receptor blockade
c. Blockade of histamine receptors in the sympathetic ganglia
d. Inhibition of H+, K+-ATPase activity
e. Histamine H1 receptor blockade

2. A 33-year-old woman, who for a long time has been treated for chronic polyarthritis, complains of elevated blood pressure, changes in adipose tissue distribution, and disturbed menstrual cycle. What drug does this patient take?
a. Indometacin
b. Synaflan (Fluocinolone acetonide)
c. Beclometasone
*d. Prednisolone
e. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)

3. The first-aid center has received a victim of a traffic accident diagnosed with closed displaced fracture of the middle third of the thigh. For repositioning of the bone fragments the patient received 10 mL of 2% dithylinum solution intravenously, which resulted in the prolonged period of apnoea and muscle relaxation. What enzyme is deficient, resulting in such pharmacogenetic enzymopathy?
a. Methemoglobin reductase
b. N-acetyltransferase
c. Uridine diphosphate glucuronyltransferase
d. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
*e. Pseudocholinesterase

4. A patient with diabetes mellitus and allergic dermatitis was prescribed a certain fluorinated hormone drug in the ointment dosage form. When the patient asked, how this drug was better than the hydrocortisone ointment, the doctor explained that the prescribed medicine:
a. Was cheaper
*b. Had practically no resorptive effect
c. Had short-term action
d. Increased insulin synthesis
e. Was less potent

5. A 45-year-old woman has an attack of cardiac fibrillation. She suffers from stage II essential hypertension. What is the drug of choice for stopping this attack?
a. Lidocaine
*b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
c. Potassium chloride
d. Sustac forte (Nitroglycerin)
e. Strophanthin

6. A patient with inoperable lung cancer accompanied by unbearable pain was prescribed an analgesic. Against the background of analgesic therapy the patient developed signs of intestinal obstruction. What analgesic could have caused this complication?
a. Omnopon (Papaveretum)
b. Promedol (Trimeperidine)
*c. Morphine
d. Fentanyl
e. Analgin (Metamizole)

7. A patient has been taking bisacodyl for a long time to treat chronic constipation. However, several weeks later the aperient effect of the drug diminished. What is the possible cause of this?
a. Functional cumulation
b. Sensitization
c. Drug dependence
d. Material cumulation
*e. Acquired tolerance

8. A 39-year-old man presents with hyperkeratosis, disturbed twilight vision, and high risk of infectious processes. What vitamin preparation should he be prescribed?
a. Riboflavin
b. Pyridoxine hydrochloride
*c. Retinol acetate
d. Ergocalciferol
e. Tocopherol acetate

9. The neurological department received a patient complaining of memory deterioration and loss of mental work capacity that developed after a head trauma. Recommend him a medicine for improvement in cerebral metabolism:
a. Caffeine
b. Analgin (Metamizole)
c. Meridil (Methylphenidate)
d. Sydnocarb (Mesocarb)
*e. Piracetam (Nootropil)

10. A woman with polyarticular rheumatoid arthritis was prescribed a non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug - diclofenac sodium. After the patient has been taking it for some time, her concomitant disease exacerbated, which forced the doctor to cancel the prescription of this drug. What concomitant disease could necessitate cancellation of this drug prescription?
*a. Ulcer disease
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Essential hypertension
e. Ischemic heart disease

11. A patient with streptococcal infection of the gingiva was prescribed a drug with β-lactam ring in its structure. What drug of those listed below belongs to this pharmacological group?
a. Rifampicin
b. Streptomycin sulfate
c. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
*d. Benzylpenicillin
e. Erythromycin

12. A patient was administered a certain drug for relief of cardiac rhythm disturbance. This drug can be used as a local anesthetic as well. Name this drug:
a. Cocaine hydrochloride
b. Anaesthesin (Benzocaine)
c. Dicain (Tetracaine)
d. Diphenine (Phenytoin)
*e. Lidocaine hydrochloride

13. A patient with arrhythmia was hospitalized into the cardiology unit. What antiarrhythmic drug should be prescribed?
a. Diclofenac sodium
*b. Amiodarone
c. Drotaverine hydrochloride
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Furacilin (Nitrofural)

14. A woman with allergic neurodermatitis was prescribed a second-generation antihistamine without depressing effect on the CNS. Name this drug:
a. Ketotifen
*b. Loratadine
c. Tavegyl (Clemastine)
d. Diazolin (Mebhydrolin)
e. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)

15. During gastric resection the patient received mixed anesthesia with tubocurarin chloride muscle relaxant; to restore spontaneous respiration the patient received proserin. What pharmacological group does this drug belong to?
*a. Cholinesterase inhibitors
b. Calcium channel blockers
c. Muscarinic agonists
d. Muscarinic antagonists
e. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors

16. To treat the burns, a patient was prescribed a drug with antiseptic properties that are based on formation of atomic oxygen in the presence of organic substances. This drug has also an astringent (antiinflammatory) effect due to formation of albuminates. Name this drug:
a. Chlorhexidine digluconate
*b. Potassium permanganate
c. Sodium bicarbonate
d. Ethyl alcohol
e. Hydrogen peroxide

17. Before a surgery the patient was prescribed a synthetic antiprotozoal drug for prevention of wound infection. The prescribed drug is highly effective against Helicobacter pylori. Name this drug:
a. Chingamin (Chloroquine)
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
*c. Metronidazole
d. Aciclovir
e. Isoniazid

18. A patient with essential hypertension was prescribed a drug that inhibits angiotensinconverting enzyme (ACE). What drug is it?
a. Colestyramine
b. Carvedilol
c. Losartan
d. Nifedipine
*e. Lisinopril

