1. A girl who was provisionally diagnosed with Turners syndrome came to a genetic consultation. The diagnosis can be specified by means of the following genetic method:
a. Biochemical
b. Dermatoglyphics
c. Genealogical
d. Hybridological
*e. Sex chromatin test

2. A patient has mental retardation, small height, brachydactyly, mongoloid slant. Analysys of his karyotype revealed trisomy 21. What chromosomal anomaly is it?
a. Klinefelters syndrome
b. Trisomy X
c. Specific fetopathy
*d. Downs disease
e. Turners syndrome

3. Microscopical examination of discharges from the gums of a patient ill with paradontosis revealed some protozoan pear-shaped organisms 6-13 micrometer long. The parasite has one nucleus and undulating membrane, there are four flagella at the front of its body. What protozoan were found?
a. Leishmania
b. Balantidia
c. Lamblia
*d. Trichomonads
e. Amoebae

4. A female patient has symptoms of inflammation of urogenital tracts. A smear from the vaginal mucous membrane contained big unicellular pyriform organisms with a sharp spike on the back end of their bodies; big nucleus and undulating membrane. What protozoa were revealed in the smear?
a. Trichomonas hominis
b. Trypanosoma gambiense
c. Lamblia intestinalis
*d. Trichomonas vaginalis
e. Trichomonas buccalis

5. Among public catering workers examined by doctors of sanitary-and-epidemiologic station often occur asymptomatic parasite carriers. This means that a healthy person carries cysts that infect other people. Such parasitizing is impossible for the following causative agent:
*a. Dysenteric amoeba
b. Intestinal trichomonad
c. Viscerotropic leishmania
d. Dermatotropic leishmania
e. Malarial plasmodium

6. Two weeks after hemotransfusion a patient developed fever. What protozoal disease can be suspected?
a. Trypanosomiasis
*b. Malaria
c. Leishmaniasis
d. Toxoplasmosis
e. Amebiasis

7. Helminthological examination of patients feces revealed oval brown eggs with tuberous external membrane. Name the type of helminth:
a. Whipworm
b. Pinworm
*c. Ascarid
d. Dwarf tapeworm
e. Broad tapeworm

8. A blood smear of a patient who has recently recovered from flu contains 10% of roundish cells 4,5-7 micrometer large with a big round nucleus and basophilically stained cytoplasm in form of a narrow border around the nucleus. What blood status are they typical for?
a. Thrombopenia
b. Lymphocytosis
c. Monocytopenia
*d. Lymphocytopenia
e. Leukopenia

9. A child has abnormal formation of tooth enamel and dentin as a result of low concentration of calcium ions in blood. Such abnormalities might be caused by deficiency of the following hormone:
a. Thyroxin
b. Thyrocalcitonin
*c. Parathormone
d. Somatotropic hormone
e. Triiodothyronine

10. A patient has the sudden decrease of Са2+ content in blood. What hormone secretion will increase?
a. Aldosterone
b. Thyrocalcitonin
*c. Parathormone
d. Vasopressin
e. Somatotropin

11. Hepatic disfunctions accompanied by insufficient inflow of bile to the bowels result in coagulation failure. This phenomenon can be explained by:
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Iron deficiency
*c. Vitamin K deficiency
d. Erythropenia
e. Leukopenia

12. A patient with high rate of obesity was advised to use carnitine as a food additive in order to enhance fat burning. What is the role of carnitine in the process of fat oxidation?
a. It takes part in one of reactions of FFA beta-oxidation
b. Transport of FFA from fat depots to the tissues
*c. Transport of FFA (free fatty acids) from cytosol to the mitochondria
d. FFA activation
e. Activation of intracellular lipolysis

13. Examination of a child who hasnt got fresh fruit and vegetables during winter revealed numerous subcutaneous hemorrhages, gingivitis, carious cavities in teeth. What vitamin combination should be prescribed in this case?
a. Calciferol and ascorbic acid
*b. Ascorbic acid and rutin
c. Folic acid and cobalamin
d. Thiamine and pyridoxine
e. Riboflavin and nicotinamide

14. A patient has increased permeability of blood-vessel walls, increased gingival hemorrhage, small punctate hematomas on his skin, falling of teeth. What disturbance of vitamin metabolism can account for these symptoms?
a. Hypervitaminosis D
b. Hypovitaminosis D
c. Hypovitaminosis A
*d. Hypovitaminosis C
e. Hypervitaminosis C

15. A one year old child has enlarged head and belly, retarded cutting of teeth, destruction of enamel structure. What hypovitaminosis causes these changes?
a. Hypovitaminosis В2
*b. Hypovitaminosis D
c. Hypovitaminosis А
d. Hypovitaminosis С
e. Hypovitaminosis В1

16. Oral mucosa of a patient was treated with hydrogen peroxide. Instead of foaming, the blood turned brown. That is possible in case of reduced concentration of the following enzyme:
a. Acetyltransferase
b. Methemoglobin reductase
c. Pseudocholinesterase
d. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
*e. Catalase

17. Electrophoretic study of blood serum of a patient with pneumonia revealed an increase in one of the protein fractions. What fraction is it?
*a. Gamma-globulins
b. Alpha1-globulins
c. Beta-globulins
d. Alpha2-globulins
e. Albumins

18. To what total ATP quantity is the full glucose oxidation and its linking with phosphorylation equivalent?
a. 58
*b. 38
c. 12
d. 8
e. 52

19. A man is in the state of rest. He has been forcing himself to breath deeply and frequently for 3-4 minutes. What effect will it have upon acid-bace balance of the organism?
*a. Respiratory alkalosis
b. Metabolic alkalosis
c. There will be no change in acid-base balance
d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Respiratory acidosis

20. A patient with diabetes mellitus had an insuline injection. It caused loss of consciousness and convulsions. What was the result of biochemic blood analysis on glucose content?
a. 10 mmоle/l
b. 5,5 mmоle/l
c. 3,3 mmоle/l
d. 8,0 mmоle/l
*e. 2,5 mmоle/l

21. A patient with chronic hypoglycemia had adrenaline introduction. After introduction blood test hasnt changed essentially. Doctor assumed liver pathology. What liver function may have been changed?
*a. Function of glycogen depositing
b. Ketogenic function
c. Excretory function
d. Glycolytic function
e. Function of cholesterin production

22. For assessment of the neutralizing function of liver a patient with chronic hepatitis went through a test with natrium benzoate load. The excretion of what acid with urine will characterize the neutrolizing function of liver?
a. Valeric acid
b. Oxalic acid
c. Phenylacetic acid
d. Citric acid
*e. Hippuric acid

23. A patient with high obesity was recommended to take carnitine as a food additive for better fat burning. What function is fulfilled by carnitine in the process of fat oxidation?
*a. Transport of fatty acids from the cytosol to the mitochondria
b. Participation in one of the reactions of beta-oxidation of fatty acids
c. Intracellular lipolysis activation
d. Fatty acid activation
e. Transport of fatty acids from the fat depots to the tissues

24. Examination of urine in a newborn revealed presence of citrulline and high ammonia concentration. This baby is most likely to have the disorder of the following substance production:
a. Ammonia
b. Uric acid
*c. Urea
d. Creatinine
e. Creatine

25. A 57 year old patient with diabetes mellitus was developed ketoacedosis. Biochemical base of this condition is smaller extent of acetyl-CoA utilization. What cell compound deficit causes this effect?
a. Succinate
*b. Oxaloacetate
c. Glutamate
d. 2-oxoglutarate
e. Aspartate

26. Examination of a 6 days old infant revealed phenyl pyruvate and phenyl acetate excess in his urine. What amino acid metabolism is disturbed in the childs organism?
a. Tryptophan
b. Histidine
c. Arginine
*d. Phenylalanine
e. Methionine

27. When a wound heals, a scar takes its place. What substance is the main component of its connective tissue?
a. Keratan sulfate
b. Elastin
*c. Collagen
d. Chondroitin sulfate
e. Hyaluronic acid

28. A patient has painfulness along big nerve trunks and excessive content of pyruvate in blood. What vitamin deficit may cause such changes?
a. В2
b. Pantothenic acid
c. Biotin
*d. В1
e. РР

29. Certain infections caused by bacteria are treated with sulphanilamides that block the synthesis of bacterial growth factor. What is the mechanism of these drugs action?
a. They are allosteric enzyme inhibitors
b. They inhibit the folic acid absorption
*c. They are antivitamins of p-aminobenzoic acid
d. They are involved in redox processes
e. They are allosteric enzymes

30. A patient who is ill with scurvy displays disturbed processes of connective tissue formation that leads to loosening and falling of teeth. Disturbed activity of what enzyme causes these symptomps?
a. Elastase
b. Glycosiltransferase
*c. Lisilhydroxylase
d. Procollagenpeptidase of N-terminal peptide
e. Procollagenpeptidase of C-terminal peptide

31. Decreased ratio of adenylic nucleotides ATP/ADP results in intensified glycolysis in parodentium tissues under hypoxia conditions. What reaction is activated in this case?
a. Lactate dehydrogenase
*b. Phosphofructokinase
c. Triosophosphate isomerase
d. Aldolase
e. Enolase

32. A sportsman was recommended to take a preparation with carnitine in order to improve his achievements. What process is activated by carnitine to the most extent?
a. Tissue respiration
*b. Transporting of fatty acids to the mitochondrions
c. Synthesis of ketone bodies
d. Synthesis of steroid hormones
e. Lypide synthesis

33. A patient has liver cirrhosis. Analysis of what substance excreted with urine may characterize the state of antitoxic liver function?
a. Uric acid
b. Amino acids
c. Ammonian salts
d. Creatinine
*e. Hippuric acid

34. Cyanide poisoning causes immediate death. What is the mechanism of cyanide effect at the molecular level?
a. They bind substrates of tricarboxylic acid cycle
b. They inactivate oxygene
c. They inhibit cytochrome B
*d. They inhibit cytochromoxidase
e. They block succinate dehydrogenase

35. A patient has the folowing changes: disorder of twilight vision, drying out of conjunctiva and cornea. Such disorders may be caused by deficiency of vitamin:
a. Vitamin C
b. Vitamin B
*c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin D
e. Vitamin B12

36. A patient was taken to the hospital with preliminary diagnosis progressive muscle distrophy. What substance will be excessively contained in urine and confirm this diagnosis?
a. Pyruvate
b. Troponine
c. Hydroxiproline
*d. Creatine
e. Carnosine

37. A child has disturbed enamel and dentine formation as a result of decreased content of calcium ions in his blood. What hormone deficiency may cause such changes?
a. Thyroxin
b. Somatotropin
*c. Thyreocalcitonin
d. Parathormone
e. Triiodothyronine

38. A child was diagnosed with acute renal failure. What biochemic saliva indices can confirm this diagnosis?
*a. Increased level of rest nitrogen
b. Reduction of alkaline phosphatase
c. Decreased level of phosphate
d. Increase of alpha amylase
e. Increase of immunoglobuline A

39. Cationic glycoproteins are the major components of parotid saliva. What amino acids are responsible for their positive charge?
a. Aspartate, glutamate, glycine
b. Glutamate, valine, leucine
c. Cysteine, glycine, proline
*d. Lysine, arginine, histidine
e. Aspartate, arginine, glutamate

40. A child has disturbed processes of ossification and punctate enamel. What micro-element metabolism is disturbed?
*a. Fluorine
b. Zinc
c. Copper
d. Chromium
e. Iron

41. Periodontitis is accompanied by activation of proteolysis in the periodontium tissues. The evidence of proteolysis activation is increase of the following component of oral liquid:
a. Cholesterol
*b. Amino acids
c. Glucose
d. Organic acids
e. Biogenic amines

42. Examination of an ill childs blood revealed inherited hyperlipoproteinemia. Genetic defect of what enzyme synthesis causes this phenomenon?
*a. Lipoprotein lipase
b. Proteinase
c. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
d. Hemsynthetase
e. Glycosidase

43. A 28 year old pregnant woman had the enzymes in the cells of amniotic fluid analyzed. The analysis revealed insufficient activity of beta-glucuronidase. What pathological process is it?
a. Glycogenosis
b. Collagenosis
c. Lipidosis
*d. Mucopolysaccharidosis
e. Aglycogenosis

44. A 42 year old woman diagnosed with diabetes mellitus was admitted th the endocrinological department with complaints of thirst, excessive appetite. What pathological components are revealed in course of laboratory examination of the patients urine?
a. Protein, aminoacids
b. Bilirubin, urobilin
c. Blood
*d. Glucose, ketone bodies
e. Protein, creatine

45. After implantation of a cardiac valve a young man constantly takes indirect anticoagulants. His state was complicated by hemorrhage. What substance content has decreased in blood?
a. Creatin
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Haptoglobin
d. Heparin
*e. Prothrombin

46. After severe viral hepatitis a 4-year-old boy presents with vomiting, occasional loss of consciousness, convulsions. Blood test revealed hyperammoniemia. Such condition is caused by a disorder of the following biochemical hepatic process:
a. Activation of amino acid decarboxylation
b. Inhibition of transamination enzymes
c. Disorder of biogenic amines neutralization
d. Protein synthesis inhibition
*e. Disorder of ammonia neutralization

47. A patient has increased content of uric acid in his blood that is clinically presented by pain syndrome as a result of urate deposition in the joints. What process does this acid result from?
a. Heme catabolism
b. Lysis of pyrimidine nucleotides
*c. Lysis of purine nucleotides
d. Proteolysis
e. Reutilization of purine bases

48. A non trained man has usually muscular hypoxy after a sprint. What metabolite accumulates in the muscles as a result of it?
a. Glucose 6-phosphate
b. Ketone bodies
*c. Lactate
d. Oxaloacetate
e. -

49. Myocyte cytoplasm contains a big number of dissolved metabolites of glucose oxidation. Name one of them that turns directly into lactate:
a. Glycerophosphate
b. Oxaloacetate
*c. Pyruvate
d. Glucose 6-phosphate
e. Fructose 6-phosphate

50. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
a. Glycogenesis
*b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Aerobic glycolisis
d. Glycogenolysis
e. Pentose-phosphate cycle

51. Patient with pigmentary xeroderma are characterized by anamalously high sensivity to ultraviolet rays that causes skin cancer as a result of enzyme systems incapability to restore damages of hereditary apparatus of cells. What process abnormality is this pathology connected with?
a. Genetic complementation
b. DNA reduplication
c. Genetic conversion
d. DNA recombination
*e. DNA reparation

52. In compliance with the clinical presentations a man was prescribed pyridoxalphosphate. What processes are corrected by this preparation?
*a. Transamination and decarboxylation of amino acids
b. Desamination of purine nucleotides
c. Protein synthesis
d. Synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases
e. Oxidative decarboxilation of keto acids

53. A 2 year old child suffers from intestinal dysbacteriosis that lead to the development hemorrhagic syndrome. The most probable cause of hemorrhage is:
a. Activation of tissue thromboplastin
b. Fibrinogen deficiency
c. Hypocalcemia
*d. Vitamin K deficiency
e. Hypovitaminosis PP

54. Examination of a 30-year-old mans mandible revealed in the region of his molar a dense tumour-like formation that significantly deformed the mandible. Here and there the formation wasnt fully detached from the bone tissue. Microscopical examination of a tissue sampling revealed that stroma had some cords and follicles with odontogenous cylindric epithelial cells in peripheria and stellate cells resembling of the enamel oragan pulp in the centre. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Ameloblastoma
b. Primary intraosteal cancer
c. Osteoclastoma
d. Adenocarcinoma
e. Adenomatoid tumour

55. A patient has deformation of jaw bones. Histological examination revealed there growth of fibrocellular tumour-like ill-defined tissue with primitive osteogenesis. What disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Parathyroid osteodystrophy
*b. Fibrous dysplasia
c. Osteosarcoma
d. Ameloblastoma
e. Eosinophilic granuloma

56. The first grade pupils went through a medical examination aimed at selection of children needing tuberculosis revaccination. What test was applied?
*a. Mantoux test
b. Supracutaneous tularin test
c. Anthracene test
d. Burne test
e. Schick test

57. A 10 year old child underwent Mantoux test (with tuberculin). 48 hours later there apperaed a papule up to 8 mm in diameter on the site of tuberculin injection. Tuberculin injection caused the following hypersensitivity reaction:
a. Arthus reaction
b. Atopic reaction
c. II type hypersensitivity reaction
*d. IV type hypersensitivity reaction
e. Seroreaction

58. The activity of parotides reduces with age. Activity of what enzyme in saliva will be reducing?
a. Hexokinase
b. Maltase
c. Lysozime
d. Phosphatase
*e. Amylase

59. While the examination of patients oral cavity the dentist found xerostomia, numerous erosions. What vitamin deficit caused this effect?
a. Vitamin K
b. Vitamin H
c. Vitamin PP
*d. Vitamin A
e. Vitamin P

60. A patient with focal tuberculosis of superior lobe of his right lung takes isoniazid as a part of combined therapy. After a time he started complaining of muscular weakness, decrease of skin sensitivity, sight and movement coordination disorder. What vitamin preparation will be right for elimination of these occurances?
a. Vitamin В12
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin А
d. Vitamin D
*e. Vitamin В6

61. Up to 50% of world population aged above thirty is affected by paradontosis. The leading part in pathogenesis of this disease is played by:
*a. Neurodystrophic factor
b. Parodontium damaged by active cells
c. Immune damage of tissues
d. Dental calculus caused by microflora
e. Parodontium tissues damaged by kallikrein

62. Products of some proteins hydrolysis and modification are the biologically active substances called hormones. Lipotropin, corticotropin, melanotropin and endorphins are synthesized in the hypophysis of the following protein:
*a. Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
b. Neurostromin
c. Thyreoglobulin
d. Neuroglobulin
e. Neuroalbumin

63. In patients with the biliary tract obstruction the blood coagulation is inhibited; the patients have frequent haemorrhages caused by the subnormal assimilation of the following vitamin:
a. C
*b. K
c. D
d. A
e. E

64. While examining a blood smear taken form a patient and stained by Romanovskys method a doctor revealed some protozoa and diagnozed the patient with Chagas disease. What protozoan is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Trypanosoma brucei
*b. Trypanosoma cruzi
c. Leishmania donovani
d. Toxoplasma gondii
e. Leishmania tropica

65. A 50-year-old woman with myocardial infarction has been delivered to the intensive care unit. Which enzymes activity will be most increased during the first two days?
a. LDH5
*b. Aspartate aminotransferase
c. Alanine aminopeptidase
d. Alanine aminotransferase
e. LDH4

66. A 38 year old patient takes aspirin and sulfanilamides. After their intake intensified erythrocyte haemolysis is observed which is caused by deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. This pathology is caused by failure of the following coenzyme:
a. FMN-H2
b. Ubiquinone
c. FAD-H2
d. Pyridoxal phosphate
*e. NADP-H

67. In the mountains some clinically healthy people present with anaemia symptoms. Blood test can reveal sickle cells. What is the genotype of such people?
a. аа
b. ХсХс
c. ХСХс
*d. Aa
e. АА

68. Active physical work induces rise of concentration of carbonic acid in blood. This causes deepening and acceleration of respiration thus reducing concentration of carbonic acid and hydrogen ions in blood. This maintains the following process:
*a. Homeostasis
b. Ontogenesis
c. Anabiosis
d. Orthobiosis
e. Immunity

69. During examination of an 11-month-old infant a pediatrician revealed osteoectasia of the lower extremities and delayed mineralization of cranial bones. Such pathology is usually provoked by the deficit of the following vitamin:
*a. Cholecalciferol
b. Pantothenic acid
c. Riboflavin
d. Bioflavonoids
e. Thiamin

70. Examination of a patient suffering from chronic hepatitis revealed a significant decrease in the synthesis and secretion of bile acids. What process will be mainly disturbed in the patients bowels?
a. Protein digestion
b. Glycerin absorption
c. Amino acid absorption
*d. Fat emulsification
e. Carbohydrate digestion

71. After a sprint an untrained person develops muscle hypoxia. This leads to the accumulation of the following metabolite in muscles:
*a. Lactate
b. Acetyl CoA
c. Oxaloacetate
d. Glucose 6-phosphate
e. Ketone bodies

72. During physical exercise people are less sensitive to pain. The reason for it is the activation of:
a. Nociceptive system
b. Sympathoadrenal system
c. Adrenal gland functions
*d. Antinociceptive system
e. Thyroid gland functions

73. Depressions and emotional disorders result from noradrenaline, serotonin and other biogenic amines deficiency in brain. Concentration of these compounds in synapses can be increased by means of antidepressants that inhibit the activity of the following enzyme:
a. Diamine oxidase
b. D-amino acid oxidase
c. Phenylalanine-4-monooxigenase
*d. Monoamine oxidase
e. L-amino acid oxidase

74. A patient was diagnosed with seborrheic dermatitis associated with vitamin H (biotin) deficiency. The patient has disturbed activity of the following enzyme:
*a. Acetyl-CoA-carboxylase
b. Alcohol dehydrogenase
c. Carbomoyl phosphate synthetase
d. Amino transferase
e. Pyruvate decarboxylase

75. Coprological examination of a patients feces revealed small operculate eggs. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient often consumes fish. What fluke parasitizes in the patients organism?
*a. Cat liver fluke
b. Lung fluke
c. Lancet fluke
d. Liver fluke
e. Blood fluke

76. While on holiday in the countryside a boy found a spider with the following morphological peculiarities: body length at the rate of 2 cm, round black abdomen with two rows of red dots on its dorsal surface, four pairs of segmented extremities covered with tiny black hairs. Identify this arthropod:
a. Scorpion
b. Mite
c. Tarantula
*d. Steppe spider (Latrodectus tredecimguttatus)
e. Solifugae

77. A patient applied to a doctor complaining about dizziness, memory impairment, periodical convulsions. It was found out that such changes were caused by a product of glutamic acid decarboxylation. What product is meant?
a. Pyridoxalphosphate
b. ATP
c. Tetrahydrofolate
*d. GABA
e. Thymidine diphosphate

78. During starvation normal rate of glucose is maintained by means of gluconeogenesis activation. What substance can be used as a substrate for this process?
*a. Alanine
b. Adenine
c. Guanine
d. Urea
e. Ammonia

79. A hospital admitted a patient with complaints about abdominal swelling, diarrhea, meteorism after consumption of food rich in proteins. It is indicative of disturbed protein digestion and their intensified decaying. What substance is the product of this process in the bowels?
*a. Indole
b. Cadaverine
c. Putrescine
d. Agmatine
e. Bilirubin

80. A 60-year-old man with a history of chronic intestinal obstruction has excessive protein putrefaction in the colon. What is the indicator of this process?
a. Hyperuricuria
b. Bilirubinuria
*c. Indicanuria
d. Creatinuria
e. Glycosuria

81. A sportsman needs to improve his sporting results. He was recommended a drug containing carnitine. What process is activated by this compound in the first place?
*a. Transport of fatty acids
b. Transport of calcium ions
c. Transport of vitamin K
d. Transport of glucose
e. Transport of amino acids

82. Laboratory examination of a child revealed high content of leucine, valine, isoleucine and their ketoderivates in blood and urine. Urine had the typical smell of maple syrup. This disease was caused by deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Glucose-6-phosphatase
b. Aminotransferase
*c. Dehydrogenase of branched amino acids
d. Phosphofructokinase
e. Phosphofructomutase

83. A patient suffering from hepatocerebral degeneration has low concentration of ceruloplasmin in blood serum. What element accumulation will be observed in liver, cerebrum and kidneys of the patient?
a. Potassium
b. Ferrum
c. Calcium
d. Sodium
*e. Cuprum

84. In order to speed up healing of the thermal injury it is required to prescribe a drug that facilitates epithelization of skin and mucous membranes. What drug is it?
a. Nicotinic acid
b. Tocopherol acetate
*c. Retinol acetate
d. Ergocalciferol
e. Ascorbic acid

85. Researches of the latest decades established that immediate "executors" of cell apoptosis are special enzymes called caspases. Generation of one of them proceeds with participation of cytochrome C. What is its function in a normal cell?
*a. Enzyme of respiratory chain of electron transport
b. Enzyme of beta-oxidation of fatty acids
c. Component of pyruvate-dehydrogenase system
d. Component of H+ATP system
e. Enzyme of tricarboxylic acid cycle

86. A 28 year old woman consulted a doctor about sterility. Examination revealed underdeveloped ovaries and uterus, irregular menstrual cycle. Study of sex chromatin revealed 2 Barrs bodies in most somatic cells. What chromosome disease is the most probable in this case?
a. Pataus syndrome
b. Edwards syndrome
*c. Triplo-X syndrome
d. Klinefelters syndrome
e. Turners syndrome

87. Medical ambulance delivered a 2 year old girl to the childrens department. Objectively: the child is inert, apathetic. Liver is enlarged, study of biopsy material revealed glycogen excess. Blood glucose rate is below normal. The most probable cause of hypoglycemia is:
a. Low activity of glucose 6-phosphatase
b. High activity of glucokinase
*c. Low activity of glycogen phosphorylase
d. Low activity of glucose 1-phosphate uridine transferase
e. Low activity of glycogen synthase

88. Clinical examination enabled to make a provisional diagnosis: stomach cancer. Gastric juice contained lactic acid. What type of glucose catabolism turns up in the cancerous cells?
a. Glucose-alanine cycle
*b. Anaerobic glycolysis
c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Pentose-phosphate cycle
e. Aerobic glycolysis

89. A 22 year old woman has been taking sulfanilamides for a long time that led to symptoms of hemolytic anaemia caused by hereditary disturbance of synthesis of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. This enzyme of pentose-phosphate cycle is responsible for generation of:
a. NAD
b. FMN
c. ATP
*d. NADP-H2
e. FAD

90. Dehelmintization of a patient revealed some long fragments of a helminth with segmented structure. Mature segments were rectangular, 30x12 mm large, closed-type matrix was in form of a stem with 17-35 lateral branches. Specify this helminth:
*a. Hookless tapeworm
b. Echinococcus
c. Armed tapeworm
d. Dwarf tapeworm
e. Alveococcus

91. A man got poisoned with mushrooms. They contain muscarine that stimulates muscarinic cholinoreceptors. What symptom is typical for poisoning with inedible mushrooms?
a. Arterial pressure rise
*b. Miosis
c. Bronchi dilation
d. Mydriasis
e. Heart rate rise

92. A patient suffering from syphilis was prescribed a drug the action of which based upon disturbed generation of murein leading to death of the causative agent. What drug is it?
a. Ciprofloxacin
b. Bijochinol
*c. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
d. Azithromycin
e. Doxycycline hydrochloride

93. Examination of a 10 y.o. child revealed on the alveolar submandibular process a fixed tumourous mass 1,5 cm in diameter closing premolar crown on the vestibular side. Mucous membrane of its surface is reddish-brown, it bleeds as a reaction to a slight mechanical intervention. Biopsy results: the mass consists of small size vessels separated by thin layers of connective tissue and infiltrated by plasmocytes, mucous membrane is here and there ulcered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Giant cell form of epulis
b. Gingival fibromatosis
*c. Angiomatous form of epulis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Fibrous form of epulis

94. A 40-year-old male patient had a tumour-like formation 8x7 cm large on his neck. A surgeon removed it only partially because of close connection with large vessels. Microscopical examination revealed marked cellular and tissue atypism, lipoblast-type cells in different stages of maturity, with polymorphism and nuclear hyperchromia, pathological mitoses, necrosis foci. Specify the histological form of the tumour:
a. Fibrosarcoma
b. Hibernoma
c. Lipoma
d. Fibroma
*e. Liposarcoma

95. A patient has roundish ulcers on his face, inflammation and enlargement of lymph nodes. These symptoms turned up as a result of mosquito bites. Laboratory examination of discharge from the ulcers revealed unicellular aflagellar organisms. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Scabies
b. Toxoplasmosis
*c. Dermatotropic leishmaniasis
d. Trypanosomiasis
e. Myasis

96. A dentist was examining oral cavity of a 9 year old child in the buccal surface of gingiva in the area of the lower canine he revealed a red, soft, node-like formation 1 cm in diameter that started immediately bleeding when touched. Microscopical examination revealed that this formation consisted of many small vessels like venules and capillaries separated by thin layers of connective tissue, with focal infiltration by lymphoid and plasmatic cells. Such changes are typical for:
a. Radicular granuloma
b. Capillary hemangioma
*c. Angiomatous epulis
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Papilloma

97. During examination of a 36-year-old woman a dentist revealed a formation in form of a nodule up to 0,8 cm in diameter, of dark brown-red colour, soft, on a wide base. The formation was found on the buccal surface of gum in the region of the 2nd molar. Histological examination revealed that the formation had plenty of sinusoid vessels and a lot of roundish mononuclear and big multinuclear cells; in some parts accumulations of hemosiderin granules could be found. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mandibular osteoclastoma
*b. Giant-cell epulis
c. Angiomatous epulis
d. Root granuloma
e. Ameloblastoma

98. Osteolathyrism is characterized by a loss of tensile strength of collagen, which is induced by a significant decrease in the formation of cross-links in collagen fibrils. The cause for it is the reduced activity of:
a. Monoamine oxidase
b. Lysyl hydroxylase
c. Collagenase
*d. Lysyl oxidase
e. Prolyl hydroxylase

99. Roentgenological examination of mandible of a 27 year old man revealed a focus of osseous tissue destruction. Histological examination revealed a tumour consisting of odontogenous epithelium cords, immature connective tissue and dysplastic dentin rests. What tumour is it?
a. Odontogenous fibroma
b. Complex odontoma
c. Ameloblastic fibro-odontoma
d. Odontoameloblastoma
*e. Dentinoma

100. Depressions and emotional insanities result from the deficit of noradrenalin, serotonin and other biogenic amines in the brain. Their concentration in the synapses can be increased by means of the antidepressants that inhibit the following enzyme:
a. Phenylalanine-4-monooxygenase
*b. Monoamine oxidase
c. L-amino-acid oxidase
d. Diamine oxidase
e. D-amino-acid oxidase

101. Analysis of urine from a 24-year-old man revealed the following changes: daily diuresis - 10 l, relative density - 1,001, qualitative alterations are absent. A patient complains of excessive thirst, frequent urination. What is the most likely cause of this disease?
*a. Vasopressin hyposecretion
b. Vasopressin hypersecretion
c. Aldosteron hypersecretion
d. Relative insulin insufficiency
e. Glucocorticoid hypersecretion

102. A sample taken from the pharynx of a patient with angina was inoculated on the blood-tellurite agar. This resulted in growth of grey, radially striated (in form of rosettes) colonies up to 4-5 mm in diameter. Microscopically there can be seen gram-positive rods with club-shaped ends arranged in form of spread fingers. What microorganisms are these?
a. Diphtheroids
b. Clostridium botulinum
*c. Corynebacteria diphtheriae
d. Streptococci
e. Streptobacilli

103. Cytogenetic examination of a patient with dysfunction of the reproductive system revealed normal karyotype 46,ХУ in some cells, but most cells have Klinefelters syndrome karyotype - 47,ХХУ. Such phenomenon of cell inhomogeneity is called:
a. Duplication
b. Heterogeneity
c. Inversion
d. Transposition
*e. Mosaicism

104. A 15 year old girl was delivered to the hospital with inflammation of vermiform appendix. Blood analysis revealed signs of anaemia. Her feces contained lemon-shaped helminthic eggs (50x30 micrometer) with "plugs" on the poles. What type of helminth is it?
a. Hymenolepis nana
*b. Trichuris
c. Hookworm
d. Pinworm
e. Echinococcus

105. Histological examination of a microspecimen presenting a malignant lung tumour revealed that the tumor consisted of lymphocyte-like cells forming any structures. Stroma is mildely marked, there are a lot of mitoses and necroses. What tumour is it?
a. Squamous cell nonkeratinous carcinoma
b. Fibroma
*c. Small cell carcinoma
d. Squamous cell keratinous carcinoma
e. Adenocarcinoma

106. Microscopical examination of a surgical specimen (an ulcered part of a lip) revealed in the connective tissue of mucous membrane near the borders and under the floor of the ulcer some epithelial complexes consisting of atypic multistratal epithelium with accumulations of bright pink concentric formations. What pathology is it?
a. Transitional cell carcinoma
b. Squamous cell nonkeratinous carcinoma
*c. Squamous cell keratinous carcinoma
d. Basal cell carcinoma
e. Papilloma

107. The 16th tooth of a patient is missing. X-ray picture shows in the depth of alveolar process rarefaction of bone and a well-defined cavity that contained the underdeveloped tooth crown. Microscopical examination revealed that the cavity wall was lined with stratified squamous epithelium and enclosed within a fibrous capsule. Make a diagnosis:
a. Cyst of the incisive canal
b. Radicular gnathic cyst
*c. Follicular gnathic cyst
d. Cystic ameloblastoma of jaw
e. Primordial gnathic cyst

108. Roentgenological examination of a patient revealed a cyst enclosing a tooth in its cavity in the area of the premolar. Microscopical examination revealed that the cyst wall consisted of connective tissue and was lined with multilayer squamous epithelium. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Follicular cyst
b. Primordial cyst
c. Epulis
d. Eosinophilic granuloma
e. Radicular cyst

109. Laboratory of extremely dangerous infections received a sample taken from a patient with assumed cholera. What express-diagnostics method can confirm this diagnosis?
a. Complement binding reaction
b. Precipitation reaction
c. Hemagglutination reaction
*d. Immunofluorescence test
e. Agglutination test

110. Steatosis is caused by accumulation of triacylglycerols in hepatocytes. One of the mechanisms of this disease is to reduce the utilization of neutral fat VLDL. What lipotropic substances prevent the steatosis development?
a. Alanine, B1, PP
b. Arginine, B2, B3
*c. Methionine, B6, B12
d. Valine, B3, B2
e. Isoleucine, B1, B2

111. A patient has symptoms of atherosclerosis. What plasma lipid transport forms should have an increased concentration?
*a. LDL
b. IDL
c. Chylomicrons
d. VLDL
e. HDL

112. In clinical practice tuberculosis is treated with izoniazid preparation - that is an antivitamin able to penetrate into the tuberculosis bacillus. Tuberculostatic effect is induced by the interference with replication processes and oxidation-reduction reactions due to the buildup of pseudo-coenzyme:
a. TDP
b. CoQ
c. FAD
d. FMN
*e. NAD

113. A newborn child was found to have reduced intensity of sucking, frequent vomiting, hypotonia. Urine and blood exhibit increased concentration of citrulline. What metabolic process is disturbed?
a. Cori cycle
*b. Ornithinic cycle
c. Glycolysis
d. Tricarboxylic acid cycle
e. Glyconeogenesis

114. Some proteins of saliva have a protective function. Which of them protects the oral mucosa from the mechanical damage?
a. Renin
*b. Mucin
c. Catalase
d. Lysozyme
e. Peroxidase

115. A 49-year-old driver complains about unbearable constricting pain behind the breastbone irradiating to the neck. The pain arose 2 hours ago. Objectively: the patients condition is grave, he is pale, heart tones are decreased. Laboratory studies revealed high activity of creatine kinase and LDH1. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Stenocardia
c. Diabetes mellitus
d. Cholelithiasis
e. Acute pancreatitis

