1. Microscopic analysis of human heart cells revealed some oval oganellas, their tunic being formed by two membranes: the external one is smooth, and the internal one forms crista. Biochemical analysis determined the presence of ATP-synthetase enzyme. What organellas were analysed?
a. Centrosomes
*b. Mitochondrions
c. Ribosomes
d. Lysosomes
e. Endoplasmic reticulum

2. As a result of iodine deficiency in foodstuffs Transcarpathian people often have endemic goiter. This disease is caused by the following type of variability:
*a. Modification
b. Combinatorial
c. Correlative
d. Ontogenetic
e. Mutational

3. Enamel hypoplasia is caused by a dominant gene localized in the X chromosome. Mother has a normal enamel, and father has enamel hypoplasia. Which of children will have this anomaly?
a. All the children
b. Half of the daughters
c. Half of the sons
*d. Only the daughters
e. Only the sons

4. In the perianal folds of a 5-year-old girl mother found white worms causing itch and anxiety, and took them to the laboratory. The study revealed white filament-like helminths 0,5-1 cm long, with pointed, sometimes twisted, ends. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Teniasis
b. Difilobotrioz
*c. Diphyllobothriasis
d. Ascariasis
e. Opisthorchiasis

5. During the examination of a two month boy a pediatrician noticed that the childs cry sounds like cats mewing; he revealed also microcephalia and valvular defect. By means of cytogenetic method he determined the childs karyotype - 46 ХY, 5р-. At what stage of mitosis was the patients karyotype analyzed?
a. Prometaphase
b. Anaphase
c. Telophase
*d. Metaphase
e. Prophase

6. A man suffering from a hereditary disease married a healthy woman. They got 5 children, three girls and two boys. All the girls inherited their father’s disease. What is the type of the disease inheritance?
a. Asutosomal dominant
b. Autosomal recessive
*c. Dominant, X-linked
d. Y-linked
e. Recessive, X-linked

7. In the vermiform appendix there was found a white helminth, 40 mm long with thin filiform forward end. Ecscrements contained oval eggs with plugs at the poles. Determine the kind of helminth:
a. Seatworm
b. Hookworm
c. Threadworm
*d. Whipworm
e. Ascarid

8. Medical examination of some youths revealed in their axillary regions grey insects 1,0-1,5 mm large, with short broad body covered with hair. What insects were revealed?
a. Itch mite
*b. Pubic louse
c. Head louse
d. Flea
e. Bed bug

9. Examination of a man revealed a protozoan disease that affected brain and caused vision loss. Blood analysis revealed unicellular half-moon-shaped organisms with pointed end. The causative agent of this disease is:
a. Lamblia
b. Leishmania
*c. Toxoplasma
d. Amoeba
e. Trichmonad

10. Excessive hairiness of auricles (hypertrichosis) is determined by a gene which is localized in Y-chromosome. Father has this feature. What is the probability of the fact that the boy will be born with such anomaly?
a. 25%
b. 0%
*c. 100%
d. 35%
e. 75%

11. There are trisome, translocational and mosaic forms of Downs Syndrome. What method of human genetics can be applied to differentiate the said forms of Downs syndrome?
*a. Cytogenetical
b. Genealogical
c. Population-statistical
d. Biochemical
e. Gemellary

12. Very big teeth is an Y-linked sign. Mothers teeth are of normal size, and her sons teeth are very big. Probability of fathers having very large teeth is:
a. 50%
b. 75%
*c. 100%
d. 25%
e. 12,5%

13. An 8 month old child has non-closed palate, a number of eye defects, microcephaly, disorder of cardiovascular system. Cytogenetic analysis revealed 47 chromosomes with an additional 13th chromosome. What diagnosis can be made on the basis of clinical observations and cytogenetic examinations?
a. Cat cry syndrome
b. Downs syndrome
c. Klinefelters syndrome
*d. Pataus syndrome
e. Edwards syndrome

14. A patient with suspected liver abscess was admitted to the surgical department. The patient had been staying for a long time on business in one of african countries and fell repeatedly ill with acute gastrointestinal disorders. What protozoal disease may the patient be now ill with?
a. Trypanosomosis
b. Malaria
c. Toxoplasmosis
*d. Amebiasis
e. Leishmaniasis

15. Examination of a 7 year old child revealed the following symptoms: small height, broad roundish face, closely placed eyes with narrow palpebral fissures, half-open mouth. Valvular defect has been also diagnosed. These clinical presentations are most likely typical for Downs syndrome. Name the cause of such pathology:
a. Partial monosomy
b. Nondisjunction of sexual chromosomes
c. Trisomy of the 13 chromosome
d. X-chromosome trisonomy
*e. Trisomy of the 21 chromosome

16. A child complains of having an itch in occipital and temporal region of head. After examination his mother found superficial ulcers as a result of scratching and white nits in the hair. Name the pathogenic organism:
*a. Head louse
b. Human flea
c. Pubic louse
d. Screwworm fly
e. Body louse

17. The students studied pecularities of genetic code and found out that there are aminoacids corresponded by 6 codons, 5 aminoacids - 4 different codons. Other aminoacids are codified by three or two codons and only two aminoacids are codified by one codon. What pecularity of genetic code did the students find out?
a. Versatility
b. Unidirectionality
c. Triplety
*d. Redundancy
e. Collinearity

18. A group of students has representatives of different races. One of the students has straight black hair and overhanging skin fold of superior eyelid - epicanthus. What race does this student most probably represent?
a. Ethiopian
*b. Mongoloid
c. Europeoid
d. Negroid
e. Australoid

19. Tetracycline taking in the first half of pregnancy causes abnormalities of fetus organs and systems, including tooth hypoplasia and alteration of their colour. What type of variability is the childs disease related to?
a. Hereditary
b. Recombinant
c. Combinative
d. Mutational
*e. Modification

20. Examination of a pregnant woman who has been taking alcohol revealed diturbed anlage of ectoderma during the fetal life. What derivatives of this leaf have defects?
*a. Neural tube
b. Bowels epithelium
c. Sexual glands
d. Liver
e. Kidneys

21. In a genetical laboratory in course of work with DNA molecules of white rats of Wistars line a nucleotide was substituted for another one. At that only one aminoacid was substituded in the peptide. This result is caused by the following mutation:
a. Deletion
b. Displacement of reading frame
c. Translocation
*d. Transversion
e. Duplication

22. A 1,5 year old child was taken to the hospital. The examination revealed dementia, disorder of motor functions regulation, hypopigmentation of skin, high rate of phenylalanine in blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Downs syndrome
b. Mucoviscidosis
c. Galactosemia
d. Tyrosinosis
*e. Phenylketonuria

23. A wide cleft between incisors of both mother and father is the dominant feature. They are both homozygous. What genetic regularity will their children have?
*a. Uniformity of first generation hybrids
b. Independent inheritance of feature
c. Linked inheritance
d. Non-linked inheritance
e. Hybrid segregation by phenotype

24. Father bought some pork at the market. What disease may catch members of his family provided that this meat didnt pass the veterinary control?
a. Hymenolepiasis
b. Beef tapeworm infection
*c. Pork tapeworm infection
d. Echinococcosis
e. Liver fluke infection

25. Examination of a patient with hepatolenticular degeneration revealed that synthesis of ceruloplasmin protein has a defect. What organelles is this defect connected with?
a. Lysosomes
*b. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
c. Mitochondrions
d. Agranular endoplasmic reticulum
e. Golgi complex

26. It is known that the gene responsible for the development of the MN blood groups has two allelic states. If the gene M is considered as the initial gene, the allelic gene N appeared due to:
a. DNA replication
b. Crossing over
c. Gene combinations
d. DNA repair
*e. Mutations

27. During the postsynthetic period of mitotic cycle the synthesis of tubulin proteins was disturbed. These proteins take part in construction of division spindle. It can lead to the disturbance of:
*a. Chromosomes disjunction
b. Cytokinesis
c. Mitosis duration
d. Despiralization of chromosomes
e. Spiralization of chromosomes

28. A newborn child has microcephalia. Doctors consider that this is the result of mothers taking actinomycin D during the pregnancy. What embryonal leaf was influenced by this teratogen?
a. All leaves
b. Mesoderma
c. Entoderma and mesoderma
*d. Ectoderma
e. Entoderma

29. Pigmentation intensity of human skin is controlled by a few independent dominant genes. It is known that pigmentation is the more intensive, the bigger quantity of these genes. What is the type of interaction between these genes?
*a. Polymery
b. Epistasis
c. Complementarity
d. Codominancy
e. Pleiotropy

30. A 35 y.o. patient diagnosed with sterility came to gynaecological department for diagnostic biopsy of endometrium. Microscopic examination revealed that mucous membrane is edematous, uterine glands are convoluted and filled with thick secreta. Such changes in the endometrium are caused by excess of the following hormon:
a. Testosterone
b. Estrogen
*c. Progesterone
d. Somatotropin
e. ACTH

31. A chemical burn of esophagus caused its local constriction as a result of scar formation. What cells of loose connective tissue take part in scar formation?
a. Fibrocytes
b. Immature nonspecialized fibroblasts
*c. Mature specialized fibroblasts
d. Miofibroblasts
e. Fibroclasts

32. During postembryonal haemopoiesis in the red bone marrow the cells of one of the cellular differons demonstrate a gradual decrease in cytoplasmic basophilia as well as an increase in oxyphilia, the nucleus is being forced out. Such morphological changes are typical for the following haemopoiesis type:
a. Neutrophil cytopoiesis
b. Lymphopoiesis
*c. Erythropoiesis
d. Eosinophil cytopoiesis
e. Basophil cytopoiesis

33. Examination of uterine cavity revealed an embryonated ovum that wasnt attached to the endometrium. The embryo is in the following stage of development:
a. Zygote
b. Gastrula
c. Neurula
*d. Blastocyst
e. Morula

34. During embryogenesis trophoblast develops into an organ rudiment that has endocrinal function. What rudiment is it?
a. Umbillical cord
*b. Villous chorion
c. Yolk sac
d. Amnion
e. Allantois

35. A 30-year-old woman has subnormal concentration of enzymes in the pancreatic juice. This might be caused by the hyposecretion of the following gastrointestinal hormone:
a. Gastro-inhibiting peptide
b. Vaso-intestinal peptide
c. Somatostatin
d. Secretin
*e. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin

36. A female patient consulted a physician about digestive disorder, extended abdominal pain. Examination revealed drastic decrease in hemoglobin concentration. It is known from the anamnesis that while living in the Far East the patient used to eat freshly-salted caviar. Some relatives living with her had the similar condition. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Teniasis
b. Echinococcosis
*c. Diphyllobothriasis
d. Trichiniasis
e. Ascaridiasis

37. It is known that people who permanently live in highland have an increased concentration of erythrocytes per each blood volume unit. Owing to this fact blood can optimally fulfil the following function:
*a. Gas transport
b. Haemostasis participation
c. Maintenance of ionic equilibrium
d. Maintenance of acid-base balance
e. Amino acid transport

38. A mountain climber spent a long time in the mountains. Erythrocyte number has risen from 5,0x1012/l up to 6,0x1012/l. What factor stimulated erythropoiesis?
a. Increase of O2 in the cells
*b. Decrease of O2 in the arterial blood
c. Decrease of O2 in the venous blood
d. Increase of O2 in the arterial blood
e. Increase of O2 in the venous blood

39. While exercising on a bicycle ergometer a sportsman was trying to choose such a load that would allow him to achieve the maximal performance of his muscles. What load intensity is required in this case?
a. Minimal
b. Maximal
*c. Middle
d. Alternating minimal and maximal
e. Continuous minimal

40. Examination of a patient who has recently had a hepatic disease revealed low concentration of prothrombin in blood. First of all this will cause disturbance of:
a. Fibrinolysis
b. Anticoagulative blood properties
c. First phase of coagulation haemostasis
d. Vasculothrombocytic haemostasis
*e. Second phase of coagulation haemostasis

41. Researchers studied speed of excitement conduction in different areas of an isolated heart. Which area demonstrated the lowest speed?
a. Ventricular myocardium
*b. Atrioventricular node
c. Purkinjes fibers
d. His bundle
e. Atrial myocardium

42. A 20 y.o. patient complains about morbid thirst and profuse urination (up to 10 l a day). Glucose concentration in blood is normal, urine contains no glucose. Such condition may be caused by deficiency of the following hormone:
a. Triiodothyronine
b. Cortisol
c. Oxytocin
d. Insulin
*e. Vasopressin

43. Dentists widely apply local anaesthesia adding adrenalin to an anaesthetic solution. What is the purpose of this method?
a. Lowering of arterial pressure
b. Local vasodilatation
*c. Local vasoconstriction
d. Local reduction of vascular resistance
e. Microcirculation improvement

44. A patient had a cranial trauma that resulted in sight loss. What area of cerebral cortex was damaged?
*a. Occipital
b. Parietal
c. Parietal and temporal
d. Temporal
e. Frontal

45. A patient has disturbed digestion of proteins, fats and carbohydrates. It is most likely to be caused by reduced secretion of the following digestive juice:
a. Gastric
b. Saliva
*c. Pancreatic
d. Bile
e. Intestinal

46. Deglutition of a patient is disturbed as a result of a trauma. The most probable cause of this disturbance is affection of the following part of CNS:
a. Mesencephalon
b. Hypothalamus
c. Spinal cord , Th II-IV
d. Spinal cord, С V-VІ
*e. Medulla oblongata

47. A patient has hyperkaliemia and hyponatremia. Such changes might be caused by hyposecretion of the following hormone:
a. Vasopressin
b. Parathormone
c. Natriuretic
*d. Aldosterone
e. Cortisol

48. A patient ill with chronic glomerulonephritis has a disturbed incretory function of kidneys. It will result in the deficit of the following blood corpuscles:
a. Leukocytes and thrombocytes
b. Erythrocytes and leukocytes
c. Leukocytes
d. Thrombocytes
*e. Erythrocytes

49. In the perianal folds of a 5-year-old girl her mother has found some white "worms" that caused itch and anxiety in the child. The "worms" were sent to the laboratory. During examination the physician saw white filiform helminths 0,5-1 cm long, with pointed ends, some helminths had twisted ends. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diphyllobothriasis
b. Ascaridiasis
c. Opisthorchiasis
*d. Enterobiasis
e. Teniasis

50. Analysis of a patients saliva revealed high concentration of lactate. This is most probably caused by activation of the following process:
a. Glycogen breakdown
b. Aerobic glucose breakdown
*c. Anaerobic glucose breakdown
d. Carbohydrate hydrolysis
e. Glucose-lactate cycle

51. A patient consulted a doctor about the intensive skin itch, especially between fingers, in axillary creases, in the inferior part of belly. During the skin examination there were found twisting whitish tracts with speckles at the end of them. What disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
a. Miasis
*b. Scabies
c. Dermatotropic leishmaniosis
d. Pediculosis
e. Demodicosis

52. Blood of a child and putative father was referred to forensic medical examination for affiliation. What chemical components should be identified in the blood under study?
*a. DNA
b. Ribosomal RNA
c. SnRNA
d. Messenger RNA
e. Transfer RNA

53. What substance makes the saliva viscous and mucous and performs protective function, including protection from mechanical injury of mouth mucous membrane?
a. Amylase
b. Lysozyme
c. Glucose
d. Kallikrein
*e. Mucin

54. A patient has been diagnosed with alkaptonuria. This pathology is caused by deficiency of the following enzyme:
*a. Oxidase of homogentisic acid
b. Glutamate dehydrogenase
c. DOPA decarboxylase
d. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
e. Phenylalanine hydroxylase

55. Medical examination at the military registration and enlistment office revealed that a 15-year-old boy was high, with eunuchoid body proportions, gynecomastia, female pattern of pubic hair distribution. The boy had also fat deposits on the thighs, no facial hair, high voice, subnormal intelligence quotient. Which karyotype corresponds with this disease?
a. 46, XY
b. 47, XXX
c. 45, XO
d. 46, XX
*e. 47, XXY

56. At an altitude of 14000 m an aircraft experienced a sudden loss of cabin pressure. The pilot must have developed the following type of embolism:
a. Foreign body embolism
b. Air embolism
c. Fat embolism
*d. Gaseous
e. Thromboembolism

57. Examination of puncture biopsy material of liver revealed dystrophy of hepatocytes, their necrosis and sclerosis along with disturbance of beam and lobulous structure and formation of pseudolobules of regeneration nodes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic hepatosis
b. Progressing massive liver necrosis
c. Acute hepatitis
*d. Liver cirrhosis
e. Chronic hepatitis

58. A 58 year old female patient had to be prepared to cholecystectomy. Complex of premedication drugs included benzohexonium. What is the function of this drug in anaesthesia?
*a. Functional block of visceral reflexes
b. Relaxation of smooth muscles
c. Intensification of retrograde amnesia
d. Reduction of excitement phase
e. Relaxation of skeletal muscles

59. A 65-year-old patient with chronic heart failure has been taking digitoxin in self-administered dosages for a long time. She was admitted to the hospital for general health aggravation, arrhythmia, nausea, reduced diuresis, insomnia. What is the primary action to be taken?
*a. To withhold digitoxin
b. To administer strophanthine intravenously
c. To give an intravenous injection of calcium gluconate solution
d. To administer digoxin
e. To reduce digitoxin dosage

60. In a surgical department of a stomatological polyclinic a patient is being prepared for tooth extraction. What drug should be added to the solution of a local anaesthetic in order to prolong its action?
a. Isadrine
b. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
*c. Adrenalin hydrochloride
d. Salbutamol
e. Octadine

61. A patient had an attack of bronchial asthma in the dentists office. The attack was arrested by salbutamol. This drug relates to the following group of therapeutic agents:
a. alpha-adrenomimetics
b. Sympatholytics
c. alpha-beta-adrenomimetics
*d. beta2-adrenomimetics
e. beta1-beta2-adrenomimetics

62. All nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can be harmful for stomach mucous membrane. In order to find substances that dont cause such complication it is necessary to know factors it is connected with. What molecular substrate should be less affected in order to reduce intensity of this complication?
*a. Cyclooxygenase 1
b. Kallikrein
c. Adenylate cyclase
d. Lysosomal enzymes
e. Cyclooxygenase 2

63. In a cell the mutation of the first exon of structural gene took place. The number of nucleotide pairs has decreased - 250 pairs instead of 290. Determine the type of mutation:
a. Nonsense-mutation
*b. Deletion
c. Duplication
d. Inversion
e. Translocation

64. A patient with acute duodenal ulcer was admitted to the hospital. Analysis of gastric juice revealed hyperfunction of secretion and acid-forming in stomach. Choose a drug that can reduce secretory function of stomach due to inhibition of H2-receptors:
a. Extract of dry belladonna
b. Methacin
c. Platyphyllin
*d. Ranitidine
e. Atropine

65. A patient complains about shin pain which is getting worse during walking. Objectively: there is an edema and reddening along the vein. A doctor administered a direct anticoagulant to be applied topically. What drug can be applied for this purpose?
a. Butadion ointment
b. Thrombin
c. Salicylic ointment
d. Troxevasin ointment
*e. Heparin ointment

66. A patient was administered clonidine to be taken parenterally in case of abrupt rise of arterial pressure. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Block of nicotinic cholinoreceptors of ganglia
b. Block of alpha-1-adrenoreceptors
c. Stimulation of central imidazole-1-receptors
*d. Stimulation of central alpha-2-adrenoreceptors
e. Block of alpha-1- and alpha-2-adrenoreceptors

67. A patient who attempted suicide in a state of serious depression was delivered to a hospital by an ambulance. What drugs should be administered?
*a. Antidepressants
b. Neuroleptics
c. Lithium salts
d. Tranquillizers
e. Sedative

68. A patient has acute cardiac insufficiency resulting from essential hypertension. What drug is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Cordiamin
*b. Corglycon
c. Cardiovalene
d. Digoxin
e. Caffeine

69. A patient was prescribed a drug with apparent lipophilic properties. What is the main mechanism of its absorption?
a. Binding with transport proteins
*b. Passive diffusion
c. Active transport
d. Filtration
e. Pinocytosis

70. A patient noticed symptoms of approaching attack of bronchial asthma and took several tablets one by one at short intervals out of the doctors control. Short-term improvement of his condition came only after taking the first two tablets. Next intakes of a drug didnt improve his condition. Reduction of the drug effectiveness was caused by:
a. Idiosyncrasy
*b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Addiction
d. Cumulation
e. Dependence

71. A patient consulted a dentist about the temporomandibular joint arthritis. The dentist administered an ointment containing diclofenac sodium. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Opiate receptor activation
b. Phospholipase inhibition
*c. Cyclooxigenase inhibition
d. Opiate receptor block
e. Cyclooxigenase activation

72. It was necessary to determine absolute gustation thresholds of a healthy man for different substances. The lowest threshold will be observed for the following substance:
a. Citric acid
*b. Quinine
c. Glucose
d. Sodium chloride
e. Saccharose

73. While being at the dentists a patient had an attack of bronchial asthma. The dentist applied a beta-adrenomimetic drug in form of inhalations. What drug was applied?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Ephedrine hydrochloride
c. Aminophylline
d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*e. Salbutamol

74. It was revealed that T-lymphocytes were affected by HIV. Virus enzyme - reverse transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) - catalyzes the synthesis of:
*a. DNA on the matrix of virus mRNA
b. DNA on virus ribosomal RNA
c. mRNA on the matrix of virus protein
d. Viral DNA on DNA matrix
e. Virus informational RNA on the matrix of DNA

75. The air in a room has increased concentration of carbonic acid. What respiratory changes (depth and rate) will be observed in a person after entering this room?
*a. Increase in depth and rate
b. Increase in depth
c. Increase in rate
d. Decrease in rate
e. Decrease in depth

76. An electronic microphotography represents a cell of neural origin that is a component of mucous membrane epithelium. Distal part of its peripheral process has a clavate thickening with 10-12 cilia sprouting from it. What cell is it?
a. Bipolar neuron of spinal ganglion
b. Rod cell of retina
c. Cone cell
*d. Olfactory
e. Sensory epithelial cells of a gustatory organ

77. Rheography of an 18 year old student during exercise showed redistribution of blood flow between organs. The peak blood flow will be observed in the following vessels:
a. Kidneys
b. Gastrointestinal tract
c. Liver
d. Cerebrum
*e. Skeletal muscles

78. A woman delivered a dead child with multiple developmental defects. What protozoan disease might have caused the intrauterine death?
*a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Malaria
c. Lambliasis
d. Amebiasis
e. Leishmaniasis

79. Examination of a 35-year-old patient included histological analysis of the red bone marrow punctate that revealed a significant increase in the megakaryocyte number. This will cause the following alterations in the peripheral blood:
*a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Thrombocytosis
c. Leukopenia
d. Agranulocytosis
e. Leukocytosis

80. While under barbituric anaesthesia a 65-year-old male patient developed respiratory inhibition. Anesthesiologist made him a 10 ml intravenous injection of 0,5% bemegride solution. The patients condition got better, the pulmonary ventilation volume increased. What phenomenon underlies the interaction of these medications?
a. Direct synergism
b. Indirect synergism
c. Indirect antagonism
d. Unilateral antagonism
*e. Direct antagonism

81. A patient suffers from bradyarrhythmia caused by hypertension. What drug should be administered?
a. Reserpine
b. Methyldopa
c. Clonidine
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Platyphyllin hydrotartate

82. You are studying functioning of a bacteria operon. The operator gene has been released from the repressor gene. Immediately after this the following process will start in the cell:
a. Replication
b. Translation
*c. Transcription
d. Processing
e. Repression

83. A patient consulted an urologist about pain during urination. Analysis of his urine taken in the daytime revealed eggs with a characteristic sharp point. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient has recently returned from Australia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dicroceliasis
*b. Urogenital schistosomiasis
c. Japanese schistosomiasis
d. Intestinal schistosomiasis
e. Opisthorchiasis

84. A female patient suffering from acute bronchitis complains about respiratory obstruction and cough with thick viscous sputum. She was prescribed a mucolytic agent that stimulates surfactant synthesis. What mucolytic agent was prescribed?
a. Glaucin
b. Theophylline
c. Sodium hydrocarbonate
d. Morphine hydrochloride
*e. Ambroxolum

85. A 60-year-old patient consulted a doctor about retrosternal pain arising immediately after physical exercise. He was prescribed nitroglycerin. The medication relieved retrosternal pain but the patient got acute headache. What is the likely mechanism of this side effect?
a. Phosphodiesterase block
b. Alpha-adrenoreceptor block
*c. Intracranial pressure rise
d. Reduced accumulation of calcium ions
e. Inhibited formation of mediators in brain

86. A patient with toxic paralysis of respiratory centre was given several cordiamin injections intended to stimulate the respiratory centre. What side effect may arise?
a. Arrhythmia
b. Tonic convulsions
*c. Clonic convulsions
d. Collapse
e. Bronchiospasm

87. In the armpits of a patient the small (1-1,5 mm), dorsoventrally flattened, wingless, blood-sucking insects. Their larvae developed in the armpits too. What disease is caused by these insects?
*a. Phthiriasis
b. Chagas disease
c. Relapsing fever
d. Plague
e. Sleeping sickness

88. A mans heart rate was measured according to his pulse. It equaled 120 bpm. What is the duration of cardiac cycle?
a. 0,8 s
b. 0,7 s
*c. 0,5 s
d. 0,9 s
e. 1,0 s

89. After parenteral introduction of a medication a patient fell into a coma. He had Cheyne-Stokes respiration, apparently miotic pupils. The patellar reflex was preserved. What medication might have caused the intoxication?
a. Analgine
b. Phenobarbital
c. Aminazine
d. Diazepam
*e. Morphine hydrochloride

90. Microscopic study of an endocrine gland revealed that its parenchyma consisted of follicular structures. Their wall was formed by monolayer cubic epithelium, and their cavity was filled up with oxyphilic substance. What hormon is secreted by this gland?
a. Oxytocin
*b. Thyroxin
c. Cortisol
d. Aldosterone
e. Parathyrin

91. What chnges will be observed in an isolated heart after introduction of adrenaline into the perfusion solution?
a. Decrease of heart force
b. Diastolic arrest
c. Increase of heart rate
*d. Increase of heart rate and force
e. Increase of heart force

92. An embryon has signs of disturbed process of dorsal mesoderm segmentation and somite generation. What part of skin is most likely to have developmental abnormalities?
a. Sudoriferous glands
*b. Derma
c. Sebaceous glands
d. Hair
e. Epidermis

93. A patient has coronary heart disease. For its treatment he was prescribed an antianginal drug that activates guanylate cyclase and accumulates cyclic guanosine monophosphate in the miocardium cells. What drug is it?
a. Panangine
b. Dipiridamol
*c. Isosorbide mononitrate
d. Validol
e. Verapamil

94. A patient with ventricular arrhythmia was admitted to the cardiological department. What drug should be administered?
a. Aminazine
b. Proserin
c. Amlodipine
d. Drotaverine
*e. Amiodarone

95. A patient with essential hypertension was admitted to the cardiological department. In order to lower arterial pressure a doctor prescribed a drug that blocks beta-1 and beta-2-adrenoreceptors. What drug is it?
*a. Propranolol
b. Celecoxib
c. Indometacin
d. Prednisolone
e. Proserin

96. A patient with myocardium infarction was delivered to the resuscitation department. What drug should be injected to the patient for prophylaxis of pain shock?
a. Analgin
b. Celecoxib
c. Naloxone
*d. Promedol
e. Paracetamol

97. A patient with myocardium infarction was admitted to the resuscitation department. What drug should be injected to the patient in order to prevent thrombosis?
a. Biseptol-480
b. Dimedrol
c. Chingamin
d. Thyroxine
*e. Heparin

98. A patient suffers from chronic left-ventricular insufficiency. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Pyracetam
*b. Digoxin
c. Etimizol
d. Bemegride
e. Vinpocetine

99. A patient suffering from non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus was prescribed glibenclamid internally. What is the mechanism of its hypoglycemic action?
*a. It stimulates generation of endogenous insulin by beta cells
b. It intensifies utilization of glucose by peripheral tissues
c. It inhibits alpha glucosidase and polysaccharide breakdown
d. It inhibits glucose absorption in the bowels
e. It inhibits gluconeogenesis in liver

100. A patient with gastric ulcer underwent a course of treatment, which led to digestion normalization, pain relief, better mood. However in a few weeks the epigastric pain as well as heartburn and sour eructation recurred. Such course of the disease can be characterized as:
a. Complication
b. Remission period
*c. Relapse
d. Prodromal period
e. Latent period

101. A man has an accelerated heart rate, mydriatic pupils, dry mouth. It is caused by activation of the following function regulating system:
a. Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal
*b. Sympathetic
c. Metasympathetic
d. Parasympathetic
e. Vagoinsular

102. After mouth opening the mouth closed reflectory. What receptors initiate this reflex?
a. Gustatory receptors
b. Proprioceptors of depressor muscles of mandible
*c. Proprioceptors of elevator muscles of mandible
d. Periodontium receptors
e. Mechanoreceptors of oral mucous membrane

103. After mouth closing and teeth clenching the mouth opens reflectory. What receptots initiate this reflex?
a. Proprioceptors of depressor muscles of lower jaw
b. Gustatory receptors
c. Mechanoreceptors of oral mucous membrane
*d. Receptors of periodontium
e. Proprioceptors of elevator muscles of lower jaw

104. Cystinuria in humans shows itself in form of cystine stones in kidneys (homozygotes) or else an increased rate of cystine in urine (heterozygotes). Cystinuria is a monogenic disease. Specify the type of interaction between cystinuria genes and normal rate of cystine in urine:
a. Epistasis
b. Complementarity
c. Codomination
*d. Semidominance
e. Complete dominance

105. A child has physical and mental retardation, serious abnormalities in connective tissue of internal organs; urine contains keratan sulfates. This is caused by metabolic disorder of the following substance:
a. Fibronectin
b. Hyaluronic acid
c. Collagen
d. Elastin
*e. Glycosaminoglycan

106. An electrical cardiostimulator was implanted to a 75 y.o. man with heart rate of 40 bpm. After that heart rate rose up to 70 bpm. Cardiostumulator assumed the function of the following heart part:
*a. Sinoatrial node
b. His bundle branches
c. Purkinjes fibers
d. His bundle fibers
e. Atrioventricular node

107. A 60-year-old female patient presents with hypoactivity of the principal digestive enzyme of saliva. This is usually accompanied by disturbed primary hydrolysis of:
a. Proteins
b. Fats
*c. Carbohydrates
d. Cellulose
e. Lactose

108. A patient who has been taking a certain drug for a long time cannot discontinue the use of it because this causes psychic and somatic disfunctions. The syndrome occuring at refraining from the use of a drug is called:
a. Cumulation
*b. Abstinence
c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Sensitization
e. Tachyphylaxis

109. A 49-year-old woman spent a lot of time standing. As a result of it she got leg edema. What is the most likely cause of the edema?
a. Increase in oncotic pressure of blood plasma
b. Increase in systemic arterial pressure
c. Decrease in hydrostatic pressure of blood in veins
d. Decrease in hydrostatic pressure of blood in arteries
*e. Increase in hydrostatic pressure of blood in veins

110. A man who has been staying in a stuffy room for a long time lost consciousness. He regained consciousnes after inhalation of ammonia spirit vapour. This substances effect is connected with direct influence upon the following structures:
a. Respiratory centre
b. Vasculomotor centre
*c. Receptors of upper airways
d. Resistive vessels
e. Capacitive vessels

111. A 40 y.o. patient had a maxillofacial trauma that resulted in disturbed function of sublingual and submaxillary glands on the left - the glands began to produce some viscous saliva. What nerves function is disturbed?
a. Vagus
*b. Facial
c. Glossopharyngeal
d. Sublingual
e. Trifacial

112. A patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 5 years. As a result of not keeping to a diet the patient passed into a comatose state. Emergency doctor injected him glucose. The patients state got better. What is the most probable type of coma in this case?
a. Acidotic
b. Hepatic
c. Hypothyreoid
*d. Hypoglycemic
e. Hyperglycemic

113. Being at a dentist a patient had an attack of stenocardia. What drug from the nitrate group should be applied in this case?
*a. Nitroglycerine
b. Talinolole
c. Validol
d. Erinit
e. Menthol

114. A patient with fracture of femoral bone in the area of surgical neck got symptoms of acute dextroventricular insufficiency as a result of pulmonary embolism. What type of embolism is it?
a. Tissue
*b. Fat
c. Gas
d. Metastatic
e. Air

115. A newborn child gains weight very slowly, his urine contains too much orotic acid that is indicative of disturbed synthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides. What metabolite should be used in order to normalize metabolism?
*a. Uridine
b. Guanosine
c. Histidine
d. Thymidine
e. Adenosine

116. During embryogenesis the epithelial band also known as vestibular plate gives rise to development of vestibule of mouth. What biological mechanism of the programmed death of cells provides growth of buccolabial sulcus from epithelial plate?
a. Amitosis
*b. Apoptosis
c. Meiosis
d. Necrosis
e. Paranecrosis

117. A child with renal insufficiency exhibits delayed teeth eruption. This is most likely caused by the abnormal formation of the following substance:
a. alpha-ketoglutarate
b. Hydroxylysine
c. Glycocyamine
d. Glutamate
*e. 1,25 (OH)2D3

118. A patient has allergic rhinitis with profuse mucous discharges, itching, frequent sneezing. What drug should be chosen if you know that it selectively blocks histamine receptors?
a. Naphthizin
b. Prednisolone
c. Mesatonum
d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*e. Loratadine

119. A patient with myocardium infarction was admitted to the cardiological department. In order to relieve his pain it was decided to potentiate action of fentanyl by a certain neuroleptic. What is the most suitable neuroleptic for neuroleptanalgesia?
a. Aminazine
b. Haloperidol
c. Sulpiride
*d. Droperidol
e. Triftazine

120. Epithelium regeneration of mucous membrane of oral cavity (cell reproduction) was accompanied by semiconservative DNA replication (selfreproduction). Nucleotides of a new DNA chain are complementary to:
a. RNA-polymerase enzyme
*b. Maternal chain
c. DNA-polymerase enzyme
d. Sense codons
e. Introns

121. A young woman has entered a production unit where strongly smelled of paints and varnishes and had bronchospasm. This reflex was provoked by irritation of the following receptors:
a. Peripheral chemoreceptors
*b. Irritant
c. Pleural receptors
d. Juxtaglomerular
e. Central chemoreceptors

122. Hurtnups disease is caused by point mutation of only one gene. This results in abnormal absorption of tryptophane in the intestine as well as its abnormal reabsorption in renal tubules. This causes synchronous disorders in digestive and urinary excretion systems. What genetic phenomenon is observed in this case?
a. Complementary interaction
b. Codominance
c. Semidominance
*d. Pleiotropy
e. Polymery

123. A 60-year-old patient presents with intestinal hypoperistalsis. Which of the following foodstuffs will stimulate peristalsis most of all?
a. Meat
b. White bread
*c. Brown bred
d. Lard
e. Tea

124. A patient was delivered to the admission ward with poisoning with an insecticide of anticholinesterase action. What drug able to block muscarinic cholinoreceptors should be prescribed?
*a. Atropine sulfate
b. Dithylinum
c. Mesatonum
d. Benzohexonium
e. Pilocarpine hydrochloride

125. A student has been staying in a badly ventilated room for a long time that resulted in acceleration of respiratory rate. What receptors were the first to react to the increased concentration of carbonic acid in the air?
*a. Central chemoreceptors
b. Irritant receptors
c. Olfactory receptors
d. Juxtaglomerular receptors
e. Vascular chemoreceptors

126. An isolated muscle fiber is under experiment. It was ascertained that excitement threshold of a cell was significantly lowered. What might have caused this phenomenon?
a. Blockade of energy production in the cell
*b. Activation of membrane sodium channels
c. Inactivation of membrane sodium channels
d. Activation of membrane potassium channels
e. Inactivation of membrane potassium channels

127. During an experiment it is required to estimate the rate of cell excitability. For this purpose it would be rational to determine:
a. Duration of action potential
*b. Depolarization threshold
c. Critical level of depolarization
d. Rest potential
e. Amplitude of action potential

128. A patient in a cardiological department has arrhythmia. A doctor administered him amyodaron. What is the main mechanism of amyodarons antiarrhythmic action?
*a. It blocks mostly potassium channels
b. It stimulates histamine receptors
c. It alters myocardium susceptibility to the acetylcholine
d. It activates serotonin receptors
e. It inhibits cholinoreceptors

129. As a result of expression of some genome components the embryo cells acquire typical morphological, biochemical and functional properties. Name this process:
a. Determination
b. Induction
c. Capacitation
d. Reception
*e. Differentiation

130. A patient with acute poisoning with morphine was delivered to the hospital ward. What specific antagonist of narcotic analgesics is to be applied in this case?
a. Digoxin
b. Unithiol
c. Paracetamol
d. Methacin
*e. Naloxone

131. A patient with edemata was prescribed a K+-retaining diuretic - aldosterone antagonist. What drug is it?
a. Digoxin
b. Clonidine
c. Alopurinole
*d. Spironolactone
e. Procainamide hydrochloride

132. Patients with erythropoietic porphyria (Gunthers disease) are known to have photoesthetic skin, red urine. In the ultraviolet light their teeth exhibit bright red fluorescence. This disease is associated with deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase
b. Ferrochelatase
c. Uroporphyrinogen-I-synthase
d. Delta-aminolevulinate synthase
*e. Uroporphyrinogen-III-cosynthase

133. To subdue the fever and relieve tooth ache a patient was prescribed paracetamol. What is the action mechanism of this medication?
*a. Cycloxygenase blocking
b. Lipoxygenase blocking
c. Phosphodiesterase blocking
d. Cholinesterase blocking
e. Monoamine oxidase blocking

134. A dentist was examining a patient and noticed excessive salivation. The dentist applied a medication inducing dryness of oral cavity. What medication is it?
a. Proserin
b. Galantamine
c. Phentolamine
d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
*e. Atropine sulfate

135. A man has worked in an African country for 3 years. A month after his return to Ukraine he consulted an ophthalmologist and complained about eye ache, eyelid edema, lacrimation and temporary visual impairment. Underneath the eye conjunctiva the doctor revealed helminths 30-50 mm long with elongated filiform body. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Ascaridiasis
b. Diphyllobothriasis
*c. Filariasis
d. Enterobiasis
e. Trichocephaliasis

136. A woman got infected with rubella during pregnancy. The child was born with malformations, namely cleft lip and palate. The childs genotype is normal. These malformations are a manifestation of:
a. Aneuploidies
*b. Modification variability
c. Combinatory variability
d. Polyploidies
e. Chromosomal mutations

137. A 28-year-old female patient consulted a gynecologist about sterility. Examination revealed underdeveloped ovaries and uterus, irregular menstrual cycle. Analysis of the sex chromatin revealed 2 Barr’s bodies in most somatic cells. What chromosome disease is most likely?
a. Edwards syndrome
b. Klinefelters syndrome
c. Turners syndrome
*d. Triple X syndrome
e. Pataus syndrome

138. After a thorough examination the patient who had returned from Central Asia to Ukraine was diagnosed with spring-summer encephalitis. Its pathogen might have entered the body through the bite of the following arthropod:
a. Taiga tick
b. Itch mite
c. Mosquito
*d. Dog-louse
e. Argasid tick (ornithodorus papillipes)

139. A patient has been preliminarily diagnosed with paragonimiasis. This disease is caused by lung flukes. The causative agent entered into the patients body through:
a. Drinking raw water from open reservoirs
*b. Eating half-cooked lobsters and crabs
c. Contact with an infected cat
d. Eating unwashed vegetables
e. Eating half-cooked or dried fish

140. Following exposure to radiation a lot of mutant cells appeared in a patient. Some time later most of them were detected and destroyed by the following cells of the immune system:
a. Plasmoblasts
b. B-lymphocyte
c. Stem cells
*d. T-lymphocytes-killers
e. T-lymphocytes-supressors

141. A gynaecologist was examining a patient and revealed symptoms of genital tract inflammation. A smear from vagina contains pyriform protozoa with a spine, flagella at their front; there is also an undulating membrane. What disease can be suspected?
a. Lambliasis
b. Toxoplasmosis
c. Balantidiasis
*d. Urogenital trichomoniasis
e. Intestinal trichomoniasis

142. Ionizing radiation or vitamin E deficiency may increase the permeability of lysosome membranes. What consequences may arise from this pathology?
a. Formation of cleavage spindle
*b. Partial or complete cell disintegration
c. Intense energy synthesis
d. Intensive protein synthesis
e. Restoration of the cytoplasmic membrane

143. As a result of prophylactic medical examination a 7 year old boy was diagnosed with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (only boys fall ill with it). The boys parents are healthy but his grandfather by his mothers side suffers from the same disease. What type of disease inheritance is it?
*a. Recessive, sex-linked
b. Autosomal recessive
c. Semidominance
d. Autosomal dominant
e. Dominant, sex-linked

144. Treatment of a patient with hereditary form of immunodeficiency involved gene therapy: the enzyme gene was introduced into the cells of the patient by means of a retrovirus. What property of the genetic code allows to use retroviruses as vectors of functional genes?
a. Collinearity
b. Specificity
*c. Universality
d. Continuity
e. Redundancy

