1. A patients preliminary diagnosis is toxoplasmosis. What material was used for diagnostics of this disease?
*a. Blood
b. Urine
c. Sputum
d. Duodenal contents
e. Feces

2. As a result of dehelmintization a 2 m helminth came out with feces. It had segmented body, small head with four suckers and hooks. Name the type of helminth:
a. Broad tapeworm
*b. Armed tapeworm
c. Dwarf tapeworm
d. Unarmed tapeworm
e. Echinococcus

3. Quite often the cause of secondary immunodeficiency is an infection involvement, when the causative agents propagate directly in the cells of immune system and destroy it. The following diseases are characterized by:
a. Q-febris, epidemic typhus
*b. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS
c. Poliomyelitis, type A hepatitis
d. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis
e. Dysentery, cholera

4. A scientific expedition in India was guided by a native who had never parted with his dog. What invasion diseases can be transmitted to the participants of the expedition as a result of contacts with this dog if it is known to be the source of invasion?
a. Paragonimiasis
b. Teniasis
*c. Echinococcosis
d. Dicroceliasis
e. Fascioliasis

5. While studying a microslide obtained from the punctuate of a regional lymph node and stained by Romanovsky-Giemsa method a physician revealed some light-pink thin microorganisms with 12-14 regular spiral coils and pointed ends, up to 10-13 micrometer long. This might be the causative agent of the following disease:
a. Trypanosomiasis
b. Relapsing fever
c. Leishmaniasis
*d. Syphilis
e. Leptospirosis

6. Sanitary bacteriological research on water by the membrane filter method revealed two red colonies on a membrane filter (Endo agar) through which 500 ml of analyzed water were passed. Calculate the coli index and coli titer of the analyzed water:
a. 500 and 2
b. 250 and 2
c. 2 and 500
d. 250 and 4
*e. 4 and 250

7. While examining a patient an otolaryngologist noticed hyperaemia and significantly edematous tonsils with a grayish film upon them. Microscopical examination of this film revealed some gram-positive bacilli placed at an angle with each other. What disease might be suspected?
a. Angina
b. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
*d. Diphtheria
e. Scarlet fever

8. After consumption some tinned meat a patient had diplopia, acute headache, deglutition disorder, hard breathing, muscle weakness. The diagnosis was botulism. What factor of pathogenicity are the clinic presentations of this disease connected with?
a. Fibrinolysin
*b. Exotoxin
c. Endotoxin
d. Hemolysin
e. Plasmocoagulase

9. Bacteriological examination of purulent discharges from the urethra revealed gram-negative bacteria looking like coffee beans. They were localized in the leukocytes and could decompose glucose and maltose to acid. These are the causative agents of the following disease:
*a. Gonorrhoea
b. Veneral lymphogranulomatosis
c. Melioidosis
d. Soft chancre
e. Syphilis

10. Retrospective diagnostics of old bacillary dysentery required serologic examination of blood serum in order to determine blood titer to the shigells. What reaction should be applied for this purpose?
a. Hemolysis reaction
b. Bacteriolysis reaction
c. Bordet-Gengou test
d. Precipitation reaction
*e. Reaction of passive hemagglutination

11. Study of bacteriological sputum specimens stained by the Ziel-Neelsen method revealed some bright-red acid-resistant bacilli that were found in groups or singularly. When inoculated onto the nutrient media, the signs of their growth show up on the 10-15 day. These bacteria relate to the following family:
a. Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
b. Klebsiella rhinoscleromatis
c. Coxiella burnettii
*d. Micobacterium tuberculosis
e. Histoplasma dubrosii

12. In a 2-year-old child with catarrhal presentations and skin rash a pediatrician suspected scarlet fever. The child was given intracutaneously a small dose of serum antibody to the streptococcal erythrogenic toxin; on the site of injection the rash disappeared. What do the reaction results mean?
a. The child has hypersensitivity to the erythrogenic toxin
b. The whole serum dose may be injected intravenously
c. The child has very weak immune system
*d. The clinical diagnosis was confirmed
e. The disease wasnt caused by haemolytic streptococcus

13. A patient has high sunlight sensitivity of skin. During standing his urine turns dark-brown. What is the most probable cause of this condition?
a. Alkaptonuria
*b. Porphyria
c. Albinism
d. Haemolytic jaundice
e. Pellagra

14. A 62 year old patient with cerebral haemorrhage was admitted to the neurological department in grave condition. Objectively: increase of respiration depth and rate with its following reduction to apnoea, thereafter respiration cycle restores. What respiration type is it?
*a. Cheyne-Stokes
b. Biots
c. Apneustic
d. Gasping
e. Kussmauls

15. A man died from an acute infectious disease accompanied by fever, jaundice, haemorrhagic rash on the skin and mucous membranes as well as by acute renal insufficiency. Histological examination of renal tissue (stained by Romanovsky-Giemsa method) revealed some convoluted bacteria looking like C und S letters. What bacteria were revealed?
*a. Leptospira
b. Spirilla
c. Campilobacteria
d. Borrelia
e. Treponema

16. A 50-year-old male patient suffers from chronic bronchitis, complains about dyspnea during physical activity, sustained cough with sputum. After examination he was diagnosed with pulmonary emphysema. This complication is caused by:
*a. Decrease in lung elasticity
b. Decrease in lung compliance
c. Ventilation-perfusion disbalance
d. Decrease in lung perfusion
e. Decrease in alveolar ventilation

17. Blood serum of a newborn contains antibodies to measles virus. What kind of immunity is this indicative of?
a. Natural active
b. Artificial active
c. Heredoimmunity
*d. Natural passive
e. Artificial passive

18. The contents of vesicles from the mucous tunic of a man who has smallpox variola was sent to the virusologic laboratory. What will be revealed during microscopy of smears?
a. Syncytium
*b. Paschens corpuscles
c. Guarnieris corpuscles
d. Babesh-Negri corpuscles
e. Babesh-Ernst corpuscles

19. When examining a child the dentist found the deposit on both tonsils and suspected atypical form of diphtheria. A smear was taken, and after the nutrient media inoculation the toxicity of the isolated pure culture was determined. What reaction was used to determine the toxigenicity of the isolated strain of diphtheria bacillus?
*a. Gel precipitation reaction
b. Complement binding reaction
c. Ring precipitation reaction
d. Hemolysis reaction
e. Agglutination reaction on a glass slide

20. A laboratory received a material (extract of animal matter) from the region with cases of anthrax among animals. What serological reaction should be used in order to reveal antigenes of pathogenic organism in the given material?
*a. Thermoprecipitation
b. Indirect hemagglutination
c. Precipitations in agar
d. Radio assay
e. Complement binding

21. Bacteriological laboratory has the task to sterilize nutrient mediums containing substances that convert under the temperature over 100oС (urea, carbohydrates). What method of sterilization should be used?
a. Autoclaving
b. Tindalization
c. Pasteurization
*d. Fluid steam sterilization
e. Boiling

22. A patient was taken to the hospital with complaints of headache, high temperature, frequent stool, stomach pain with tenesmus. Doctor made a clinical diagnosis dysentery and sent the material (excrements) to the bacteriological laboratory for analysis. What diagnostic method should the laboratory doctor use to confirm or to disprove the clinical diagnosis?
a. Allergic
*b. Bacteriological
c. Bacterioscopic
d. Biological
e. Serological

23. Bacteriological examination of purulent discharges from urethra revealed some bacteries that had negative Grams stain, resembled of coffee corns, decomposed glucose and maltose up to acid. They were located in leukocutes. What disease do they cause?
a. Soft chancre
b. Pseudocholera
c. Syphilis
d. Venereal lymphogranulomatosis
*e. Gonorrhea

24. From the fecal sample of a patient Shigella sonnei were isolated. What additional studies are required to identify the source of infection?
a. Neutralization reaction
*b. Phage-typing of the isolated pure culture
c. Precipitation reaction
d. Antibiogram
e. Complement-fixation reaction

25. Microscopy of a smear obtained from a patient with acute purulent periostitis revealed gram-positive bacteria arranged in clusters resembling bunch of grapes. What microorganisms is this morphology typical for?
a. Tetracocci
b. Sarcina
*c. Staphylococci
d. Candida fungi
e. Streptococci

26. A patient in the oral surgery department has got purulent complication. Bacteriological analysis of the wound material found a culture that produces cyan pigment. What microorganism is the most probable causative agent?
a. Bacillus subtilis
b. Proteus vulgaris
*c. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
d. Klebsiella pneumoniae
e. Staphylococcus epidermidis

27. Sputum smears of a patient with chronic pulmonary disease were stained by Ziehl-Neelsen method and analyzed in the bacteriological laboratory. Microscopy revealed red bacillus. What property of tuberculosis myobacteria was found?
a. Encapsulation
b. Spore-formation
c. Alkali resistance
d. Alcohol resistance
*e. Acid resistance

28. A patient who suffered form syphilis took a course of antibiotic therapy and fully recovered. Some time later he was infected again with Treponema pallidum. What form of infection is it?
*a. Reinfection
b. Secondary infection
c. Complication
d. Superinfection
e. Recurrence

29. A female woman has been clinically diagnosed with gonorrhea. Which of the following studies can be used to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Hemagglutination reaction
b. Immobilization reaction
c. Disinfection of laboratory animals
d. Bacteriophage test
*e. Microscopy of the pathological material

30. Professional dentists belong to the risk group concerning professional infection with viral hepatitis type B. Name an effective method for active prevention of this disease among the dentists:
a. Secure sterilization of medical instruments
b. Introduction of specific immunoglobuline
c. Introduction of interferonogenes
*d. Vaccination with recombinant vaccine
e. Working with gum gloves on

31. A lot of pyoinflammatory processes in oral cavity are caused by anaerobes. What nutrient medium can be used for conrol of wound textile contamination by anaerobes?
a. Endo
b. Sabourauds
c. Ploskirevs
*d. Kitt-Tarozzi
e. Roux

32. Microscopic analysis of tissue sampling from affected area of mucous membrane of oral cavity revealed bacillus in form of accumulations that looked like a pack of cigarettes. Ziehl-Neelsen staining gives them red colour. What kind of pathogenic organism was most likely revealed in tissue sampling?
a. A.israilii
b. M.avium
c. M.tuberculosis
d. A.bovis
*e. M.leprae

33. A patient with clinical presentations of primary immunodeficiency displays disturbance of antigen-presenting function by immunocompetent cells. What cells may have structure defect?
a. 0-lymphocytes
*b. Macrophages, monocytes
c. B-lymphocytes
d. T-lymphocytes
e. Fibroblasts

34. From the purulent exudate of a patient with odontogenic phlegmon a pure culture of Gram(+) microorganisms was segregated. This culture was lecithinously active, coagulated plasma of a rabbit, decomposed mannitol under anaerobe conditions. What microorganism may have contributed to the origin of suppurative complication?
*a. S.aureus
b. S.pyogenes
c. S.mutans
d. S.viridans
e. S.epidermidis

35. A doctor examined a patient with recurrent aphthous stomatitis with concominant candidosis and decided to eliminate a possibility of HIV-infection. What examination can help to clear the situation up and make a provisional diagnosis?
a. Gel precipitation reaction
b. Reaction of hemagglutination
c. Phase-contrasr microscopy
*d. Immune-enzyme analysis
e. Reaction of hemagglutination inhibition

36. A patient has pure culture of diphtheria corynebacteria. What immunological reaction should be used in order to determine bacteria toxigenity?
a. Indirect hemagglutination
*b. Precipitation in agar
c. Complement binding
d. Agglutination
e. Inhibition of hemagglutination

37. An infectious diseases hospital admitted a veterinarian with assumed brucellosis. What serologic test can confirm this diagnosis?
a. Weigls agglutination reaction
b. Wassermann reaction of complement binding
c. Widals agglutination reaction
d. Ascolis precipitation reaction
*e. Wrights agglutination reaction

38. In case of many infectious diseases patients blood may contain antigens of causative agents. What reaction should be applied provided that the level of antigenemia is low?
a. Agglutination test
b. Latex agglutination test
c. Immunoelectrophoresis
*d. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
e. Indirect hemagglutination test

39. A pregnant woman applied to a doctor with complaints typical for toxoplasmosis. The doctor took a sample of her blood. What serological tests should be performed in this case?
a. Wassermann test
*b. Complement binding assay
c. Neutralization test
d. Precipitation test
e. Widals test

40. A 10-year-old child had the mantoux tuberculin test administered. 48 hours later a papule up to 8 mm in diameter appeared on the site of the injection. What type of hypersensitivity reaction developed after the tuberculin injection?
a. Type II hypersensitivity reaction
*b. Type IV hypersensitivity reaction
c. Seroreaction
d. Arthus phenomenon
e. Atopic reaction

41. A doctor recorded in the medical history that a patient had hypopnoe (reduced respiration depth). It means that the following characteristic of external respiration is reduced:
a. Functional residual capacity
b. Vital lung capacity
*c. Respiratory volume
d. Expiration capacity
e. Respiratory minute volume

42. Specific prophylaxis involved application of a vaccine containing microorganisms and exotoxin detoxicated by formalin. It relates to the following type of vaccine:
*a. Combined
b. Anatoxin
c. Live
d. Chemical
e. Genetically engineered

43. After continuous treatment with antibiotics a patient got symptoms of stomatitis. Examination of specimens of oral mucous membrane revealed some oval polymorphous Gram-positive microorganisms arranged in clusters. What microorganism may be the cause of such manifestations?
a. S.pyogenes
b. C.pylori
c. C.perfringens
d. S.aureus
*e. C.albicans

44. Examination of a child revealed growth of a pharyngeal tonsil causing the obstructed air escape from nasal cavity. What openings of nasal cavity are blocked in this case?
*a. Choanae
b. Piriform
c. Maxillary sinus
d. Pterygopalatine
e. Nostrils

45. Microscopy of a smear taken from the film that appeared on the peptone water 6 hours after seeding and culturing of a fecal sample in a thermostat revealed mobile gram-negative bacteria curved in form of a comma that didnt make spores or capsules. What microorganisms were revealed?
a. Corynebacteria
b. Spirilla
c. Spirochetes
d. Clostridia
*e. Vibrios

46. In order to eliminate occupational risks dental workers underwent vaccination. The vaccine should protect them from a viral infection, whose pathogen may be found in blood of dental patients who had had this infection or who are its chronic carriers. What vaccine was used?
a. Live measles vaccine
b. Inactivated hepatitis A vaccine
*c. Genetically engineered HBs antigen
d. Subunit influenza vaccine
e. Anti-rabies vaccine

47. A patient complains of frequent bowel movements and stool with blood admixtures ("raspberry jelly" stool). Microscopic examination revealed large mononuclear cells with absorbed red blood cells. What protozoon is this morphological structure typical for?
*a. Entamoeba histolytica
b. Campylobacter jejuni
c. Balantidium coli
d. Toxoplasma gondii
e. Giardia lamblia

48. A 65-year-old man has purulent abscess on his neck. Analyses revealed a culture of gram-positive cocci with plasmocoagulase activity. This culture relates most likely to:
a. Streptococcus pyogenes
b. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
c. -
*d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Staphylococcus epidermidis

