1. In process of the secretory cycle secretion granules come and go in the apical part of cytoplasm of pancreas cells. These granules relate to the following structure elements:
a. Microfilaments
b. Exocytic vacuoles
c. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
*d. Inclusions
e. Lysosomes

2. A woman has hyperemic ovary, increased permeability of hematofollicular barrier with the following development of edema, infiltration of follicle wall by segmentonuclear leukocytes. The follicle volume is large, its wall is thinned. What period of sexual cycle do these presentations correspond with?
a. Period of relative rest
*b. Preovulatory stage
c. Menstrual period
d. Ovulation
e. Postmenstrual period

3. While a 24 year old woman was waiting for tooth extraction, tonus of sympathetic part of autonomic nervous system rose. What reaction will the patient display?
a. Miotic pupils
*b. Increased frequency of heartbeat
c. Hypersecretion of digestive juices
d. Hyperperistalsis
e. Bronchus constriction

4. A man has been holding his breath for 60 seconds. After that the respiratory minute volume has increased up to 12 L. What blood change is the main reason for the increase of respiratory minute volume?
*a. Increase of p СО2
b. Increase of p О2
c. Increase of pH
d. Decrease of p СО2
e. Decrease of p О2

5. An experimentator wants a dog to develop conditioned salivary reflex. What conditioned stimulus will be appropriate to use?
a. Electric current
b. Very loud sound
c. Zwieback
d. Meat
*e. Moderately loud sound

6. A man has trauma of greater pectoral muscle. What index decrease will it cause?
a. Residual volume
b. Functional residual lung capacity
c. Expiratory reserve volume
d. Respiratory volume
*e. Inspiratory reserve volume

7. A patient with diminished excretory function of kidneys has bad breath. What substance which is excessively excreted by salivary glands is the main cause of this occurence?
*a. Urea
b. Lysozyme
c. Mucin
d. Phosphatase
e. Alpha-amylase

8. A patient with kidney disease has high blood pressure, especially the diastolic one. Hypersecretion of what biologically active substance causes blood pressure rise?
a. Noradrenaline
b. Adrenaline
*c. Renin
d. Vasopressin
e. Catecholamines

9. A lightly dressed man is standing in a room; air temperature is +14 degrees. Windows and doors are closed. In what way does he loose heat most of all?
*a. Heat radiation
b. Convection
c. Perspiration
d. Evaporation
e. Heat conduction

10. ECG of a patient shows that T-waves in the second standard extremity lead are positive, their amplitude and duration are normal. It would be true that the following process is taking its normal course in the cardiac ventricles:
a. Contraction
b. Relaxation
c. Depolarization
d. Excitement
*e. Repolarization

11. A month after surgical constriction of rabbits renal artery the considerable increase of systematic arterial pressure was observed. What of the following regulation mechanisms caused the animals pressure change?
a. Serotonin
*b. Angiotensin-II
c. Adrenaline
d. Vasopressin
e. Noradrenaline

12. In course of an experiment chorda tympani of an animal was being stimulated by electric current, as a result the parotid duct excreted:
a. A small quantity of fluid saliva
b. A small quantity of viscous saliva
c. A lot of viscous saliva
*d. A lot of fluid saliva
e. Saliva was not excreted

13. In the experiment, an animal had its brain stem cut, which caused a rapid increase of extensor muscle tone (decerebrate rigidity). This condition arose because the muscles were no more under the control of the following brain structure:
a. Black substance
b. Blue spot
*c. Red nucleus
d. Striatum
e. Gray tuber

14. A student has dry mouth during exam passing. It is caused by realization of the following reflexes:
*a. Sympathetic conditioned
b. Parasympathetic conditioned
c. Sympathetic and parasympathetic unconditioned
d. Parasympathetic unconditioned
e. Sympathetic conditioned and unconditioned

15. A student has dry mouth during an exam. This is caused by realization of the following reflexes:
a. Unconditioned parasympathetic
b. Unconditioned sympathetic and parasympathetic
c. Conditioned and unconditioned sympathetic
d. Conditioned parasympathetic
*e. Conditioned sympathetic

16. ECG of a patient showed that RR interval equaled 1,5 s, heart rate equaled 40 bpm. What is the cardiac pacemaker?
a. His bundle
b. Sinus node
*c. Atrioventricular node
d. Left branch of His bundle
e. Right branch of His bundle

17. A man permanently lives high in the mountains. What changes of blood characteristics can be found in his organism?
a. Erythroblasts in blood
b. Decrease of hemoglobin content
*c. Increase of erythrocytes number
d. Decrease of reticulocytes number
e. Decrease of colour index of blood

18. A sportsman was examined after an intensive physical activity. The examination revealed disorder of movement coordination but the force of muscle contractions remained the same. It can be explained by retarded speed of excitement conduction through:
a. Neuromuscular synapses
b. Afferent nerves
c. Conduction tracts
*d. Central synapses
e. Efferent nerves

19. A patient has a transverse laceration of spinal cord below the VІ thoracal segment. How will it change the character of breathing?
a. It will become more deep
b. It will become more frequent
c. It will stop
d. It will become more rare
*e. It wont change esentially

20. Cerebral hemorrhage caused serious disturbance of taste sensibility. What brain structure is most likely to be damged?
a. Substantia nigra
b. Amygdaloid body
c. Hippocampus
d. Hypothalamus
*e. Postcentral gyrus

21. A man consumes dry food. What salivary glands secret most of all?
a. Sublingual
b. Palatine
c. Buccal
d. Submandibular
*e. Parotides

22. During the preparation of a patient for a heart operation the doctors measured blood pressure in heart chambers. In one of them the pressure was changing from 0 to 120 mm during one cardiac cycle. Name the heart chamber:
a. Right atrium
b. Right ventricle
*c. Left ventricle
d. Left atrium
e. -

23. A man lost consciousness in a car with running engine where he had been waiting for a friend for a long time. What hemoglobin compaund can be found in the blood of the patient?
a. Methemoglobin
b. Oxyhemoglobin
c. Deoxyhemoglobin
d. Carbhemoglobin
*e. Carboxyhemoglobin

24. After a hemorrhage into the brainstem a patient has lost reflex of myosis as a reaction to increase of illumination. What structure was damaged?
a. Lateral reticular nuclei
b. Red nuclei
c. Black substance
*d. Vegetative nuclei of oculomotor nerve
e. Medial reticular nuclei

25. It is required to set an experiment on an isolated excitable cell and to achieve increase of membrane rest potential (hyperpolarization). What ion channels should be activated to achieve such a result?
a. Calcium
b. Sodium and calcium
c. Sodium
d. Potassium and sodium
*e. Potassium

26. During phonocardiogram registration it was ascertained that the duration of the first heart sound twice exceeds the norm. It is most likely that patient has the following organ affected:
a. Semilunar valves
b. Cardiomyocytes of ventricles
c. Cardiomyocytes of atriums
*d. Atrioventricular valves
e. Cardiomyocytes of heart atriums

27. Glucose concentration in a patients blood is 15 millimole/l (reabsorption threshold is 10	millimole/l). What effect can be expected?
*a. Glucosuria
b. Reduced glucose reabsorption
c. Reduced aldosterone secretion
d. Reduced vasopressin secretion
e. Diuresis reduction

28. In course of an experiment a nerve is being stimulated by electric impulses. As a result of it sublingual and submaxillary glands discharge some dense viscous saliva. What nerve is being stimulated?
a. N. vagus
*b. N. sympathicus
c. N. facialis
d. N. glossopharyngeus
e. N. trigeminus

29. Human body cools in water much more faster than in the air. Due to what way of heat emission does it happen?
a. -
*b. Thermal conduction
c. Heat radiation
d. Convection
e. Sweat evaporation

30. Tissue is being stimulated by electric cathodic impulse with amplitude of 70% of threshold. What changes of membrane potential will be observed?
a. Action potential
b. Hyperpolarization
*c. Partial depolarization
d. No changes
e. -

31. A mans energy consumption is measured on an empty stomach, in lying position, under conditions of physical psychical rest, at comfortable temperature. At what time will the energy consuption be the lowest?
a. At 5-6 oclock p.m
*b. At 3-4 oclock a.m
c. At 10-12 oclock a.m
d. At 7-8 oclock a.m
e. At 2-4 oclock p.m

32. Following the estimation of a persons energy expenditures it was established that the respiratory quotient was equal to 1,0. This means that the compound that is mainly oxidized in the cells is:
a. Proteins and carbohydrates
b. Carbohydrates and fats
c. Proteins
d. Fats
*e. Carbohydrates

33. A man has a diosorder of absorption of fat hydrolysates. What components deficit in the cavity of small intestine may cause this effect?
*a. Bile acids
b. Lipolytic enzymes
c. Liposoluble vitamins
d. Sodium ions
e. Bile pigments

34. A man left a conditioned premise and went outside. The outside temperature was +40 degrees, the air moisture - 60%.What way of heat emission will be mostly involved in this case?
a. Convection
b. Conduction
c. -
*d. Sweat evaporation
e. Radiation

35. In course of an experiment posterior roots of spinal cord of an animal were cut. What changes will take place in the innervation zone?
a. Raise of muscle tone
b. Loss of sensation and motor functions
c. Loss of motor functions
d. Decline of muscle tone
*e. Loss of sensation

36. A patient complains of rapid fatigability. Objectively: he staggers and overbalances in the upright position with closed eyes. Skeleton muscular tonus is decreased. What brain structure is most likely to be damaged?
a. Basal ganglions
*b. Cerebellum
c. Hypothalamus
d. Thalamus
e. Precentral gyrus of cerebrum cortex

37. In course of an experiment the peripheral segment of vagus nerve of an animal was stimulated. The following changes of heart activity were observed:
a. Increase of frequency and force of heartbeat
b. Increased conduction of excitement through myocardium
c. Icreased force of heartbeat
*d. Reduced heart rate
e. Increased excitability of myocardium

38. A patient has hypocalcemia. What hormone deficiency may be its cause?
a. Thyrocalcitonin
b. Corticotropin
c. Corticoliberin
*d. Parathormone
e. Aldosterone

39. A patient with disorder of cerebral circulation has problems with deglutition. What part of cerebrum was damaged?
a. Interbrain
b. Midbrain
c. Servical part of spinal cord
d. Forebrain
*e. Brainstem

40. ESR of a patient with pneumonia is 48 mm/h. What caused such changes?
a. Hypoproteinemia
b. Erythrocytosis
c. Hyperalbuminemia
d. Hypogammaglobulinemia
*e. Hypergammaglobulinemia

41. A patient with systemic scleroderma has an intensified collagen destruction. Collagen destruction will be reflected by intensified urinary excretion of the following amino acid:
*a. Oxyproline
b. Tryptophane
c. Phenylalanine
d. Serine
e. Alanine

42. Poisoning with corrosive sublimate caused acute renal insufficiency. Its progress included four stages: 1) initial, 2) oligoanuria, 4) recovery. Name the third stage of acute renal insufficiency:
a. Hemodynamic
b. Metabolic
*c. Polyuric
d. Ischemic
e. Pathochemical

43. After honey consumption a teenager had urticaria accompanied by leukocytosis. What type of leukocytosis is it in this case?
*a. Eosinophilic leukocytosis
b. Monocytosis
c. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
d. Basophylic leukocytosis
e. Lymphocytosis

44. Introduction of a local anesthetic to a patient resulted in the development of anaphylactic shock. What is the leading mechanism of blood circulation disturbance?
a. Hypervolemia
b. Activation of sympathoadrenal system
c. Reduction of contractile myocardium function
*d. Decrease of vascular tone
e. Pain

45. A 48 year old male patient was admitted to the hospital with acute attack of chronic glomerulonephritis. Examination revealed chronic renal failure. What is the cause of hyperazotemia by chronic renal failure?
a. Disorder of protein metabolism
b. Disorder of water-electrolytic metabolism
c. Reduction of tubular reabsorption
d. Reduction of tubular excreation
*e. Reduction of glomerular filtration

46. A chemical industry worker complains about enamel wear. Objectively: generalized destruction of dental crowns along with replacing dentin formation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Median caries
*b. Necrosis of hard tooth tissues
c. Wedge-shaped defects
d. Dental erosion
e. Fluorosis

47. During morphological examination of pulp floor three zones can be clearly differentiated: the one of softened dentin, sclerotic dentin, replacing dentin. What stage of caries are these changes typical for?
a. Chronic caries
*b. Median caries
c. Superficial caries
d. White spot stage
e. Deep caries

48. A 55 year old man had been suffering from chronic glomerulonephritis. He died from chronic renal failure. Macroscopical examination revealed on the surface of epicardium and pericardium some greyish-white villous depositions. After their removal dilated and plethoric vessels were uncovered. What process took place in the pericardium?
a. Arterial hyperemia
*b. Fibrinous inflammation
c. Proliferative inflammation
d. Organization
e. Haemorrhagic inflammation

49. In an excitable cell the ion channells were blocked. It hasnt changed essentially the value of rest potential, but the cell lost its ability to generate AP (action potential). What channels were blocked?
*a. Natrium
b. Natrium and potassium
c. Calcium
d. Chloric
e. Potassium

50. In course of an experiment the peripheral fragment of a cut vagus nerve on the dogs neck was being stimulated. There was the following change of cardiac activity:
*a. Decrease of beat frequency
b. Increase of myocardium excitability
c. Increase of beat force
d. Increased speed of excitement conduction through myocardium
e. Increase of beat frequency and force

51. In a healthy adult speed of the excitement conduction through the atrioventricular node is 0,02-0,05 m/sec. Atrioventricular delay enables:
a. Sufficient force of atrial contractions
b. Sufficient force of ventricular contractions
c. Simultaneity of both atria contractions
d. Simultaneity of both ventricles contractions
*e. Sequence of atrial and ventricular contractions

52. Lung ventilation in a person is increased as a result of physical activity. Which of the following indices of the external respiration is much higher than in a state of rest?
a. Vital capacity of lungs
b. Expiratory reserve volume
c. Total lung capacity
*d. Respiratory volume
e. Inspiratory reserve volume

53. As a result of continuous starvation the glomerular filtration rate has increased by 20%. The most probable cause of the glomerular filtration alteration under the mentioned conditions is:
a. Increase in the permeability of the renal filter
b. Increase in the systemic arterial pressure
*c. Decrease in the oncotic pressure of blood plasma
d. Increase of the filtartion quotient
e. Increase of the renal blood flow

54. The total number of leukocytes in patients blood is 90*10^9/l. Leukogram: eosinophils - 0%, basophils - 0%, juvenile - 0%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmentonuclear cells - 20%, lymphoblasts - 1%, prolymphocytes - 2%, lymphocytes - 70%, monocytes - 5%, Botkin-Gumprecht cells. Clinical examination revealed enlarged cervical and submandibular lymph nodes. Such clinical presentations are typical for the following pathology:
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Chronic myeloleukosis
c. Acute lympholeukosis
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
*e. Chronic lympholeukosis

55. A 50 years old man abruptly felt palpitation, heart ache, strong weakness, rise of arterial pressure. His pulse is irregular and deficient. ECG shows no P wave and different R-R intervals. What cardiac rate abnormality is it?
a. Sinus extrasystole
*b. Ciliary arrhythmia
c. Paroxysmal tachycardia
d. Respiratory arrhythmia
e. Atrioventricular heart block

56. Microscopical examination of exudate obtained from a rat with aseptic peritonitis and mixed with birds erythrocytes revealed macrophages surrounded by foreign erythrocytes. What stage of phagocytosis is it?
a. Intracellular digestion
*b. Adherence
c. Approaching
d. Uncomplete phagocytosis
e. Immersion

57. On the 2nd day after myocardium infarction the patients systolic arterial pressure abruptly dropped down to 60 mm Hg. This was accompanied by tachycardia up to 140 bpm, dyspnea, loss of consciousness. What is the leading mechanism in the pathogenesis of this shock?
a. Paroxysmal tachycardia
b. Anaphylactic reaction to myocardial proteins
c. Intoxication by the products of necrotic degeneration
d. Decrease of circulating blood volume
*e. Decrease of stroke volume

58. A 42 y.o. patient complains of pain in the epigastral area, vomiting; vomit masses have the colour of "coffee-grounds", the patient has also melena. Anamnesis records gastric ulcer. Blood formula: erythrocytes - 2,8x1012/l, leukocytes – 8x109/l, Hb- 90 g/l. What complication is it?
a. Pyloric stenosis
*b. Haemorrhage
c. Perforation
d. Penetration
e. Canceration

59. A female patient suffering from chronic hepatitis complains about an increased susceptibility to barbiturates, which previously induced no syptoms of intoxication. This may be explained through the folllowing liver dysfunction:
a. Cholepoietic
b. Hemopoietic
c. Phagocytal
*d. Metabolic
e. Hemodynamic

60. After a surgery a 36-year-old woman was given an intravenous injection of concentrated albumin solution. This has induced intensified water movement in the following direction:
*a. From the intercellular fluid to the capillaries
b. From the cells to the intercellular fluid
c. No changes of water movement will be observed
d. From the capillaries to the intercellular fluid
e. From the intercellular fluid to the cells

61. Microscopical examination of coronary artery of a 53 year old dead man revealed luminal narrowing of the vessel because of fibrous plaque mixed with lipides. The most probable form of atherosclerosis is:
*a. Liposclerosis
b. Atheromatosis
c. -
d. Ulceration
e. Lipoidosis

62. A blood sample of a pregnant woman was typed. Erythrocyte-agglutination reaction was present with standard sera 0?, ?(I), B?(III), reaction was absent with the serum A?(II). The blood under examination relates to the following group:
a. -
*b. A?(II)
c. 0?, ?(I)
d. B?(III)
e. AB(IV)

63. As a result of a trauma apatient has developed traumatic shock. The patient is fussy, talkative, pale. AP- 140/90 mm Hg, Ps- 120 bpm. This condition is consistent with the following shock phase:
a. Terminal
b. Latent
*c. Erectile
d. Torpid
e. -

64. During a neuro-surgical operation the occipital areas of cerebral cortex are stimulated. What sensations will the patient have?
*a. Visual
b. Auditory
c. Gustatory
d. Olfactory
e. Tactile

65. A patient who has been treated for viral hepatitis B developed symptoms of hepatic insufficiency. What changes indicating disorder in protein metabolism are likely to be observed in this case?
a. Absolute hyperfibrinogenemia
b. Absolute hyperalbuminemia
*c. Absolute hypoalbuminemia
d. Protein rate in blood will stay unchanged
e. Absolute hyperglobulinemia

66. Before an operation a 30-year-old male patient had his blood typed. It turned out to be Rh-positive. Erythrocytes were not agglutinated by standard sera of 0(I), А(II), В(III) groups. According to the AB0 blood group system this blood is of the following type:
*a. 0(I)
b. В(III)
c. -
d. АВ(IV)
e. А(II)

67. A patient consulted a doctor about acute pain in the right subcostal area. During examination the doctor noticed yellowed sclera of the patient. Laboratory analyses revealed high activity of alanine-aminotransferase and negative reaction to stercobilin in feces. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Chronic gastritis
*b. Cholelithiasis
c. Hepatitis
d. Haemolytic jaundice
e. Chronic colitis

68. Curarelike substances (dithylinum) make it impossible for skeletal muscles to contract because they block:
a. Central synapses
b. Membrane conduction of excitement
c. Proprioceptors
*d. Neuromuscular synapses
e. Ganglionic synapses

69. It was established that the conduction velocity in the nerve fibers was equal to 120 m/sec. Specify these fibers:
a. Postganglionic parasympathetic
*b. Motoneuron axons
c. Preganglionic parasympathetic
d. Preganglionic sympathetic
e. Postganglionic sympathetic

70. A scheme shows an exocrinous gland with an unbranched excretory duct into which only one terminal part in form of a saccule opens. In compliance with the morphological classification of exocrinous glands, such gland is called as follows:
a. Complex unbranched alveolar-tubular
*b. Simple unbranched alveolar
c. Simple branched tubular
d. Complex branched alveolar
e. Complex unbranched alveolar

71. Examination of a patient revealed overgrowth of facial bones and soft tissues, tongue enlargement, wide interdental spaces in the enlarged dental arch. What changes of the hormonal secretion are the most likely?
a. Hypersecretion of insulin
b. Hyposecretion of the somatotropic hormone
*c. Hypersecretion of the somatotropic hormone
d. Hyposecretion of thyroxin
e. Hyposecretion of insulin

72. During the preventive examination of a miner a doctor revealed changes in cardiovascular fitness being evidence of cardiac insuffisiency at a stage of compensation. What is the main evidence of compensation of cardiac activity?
a. Dyspnea
b. Cyanosis
c. Tachycardia
d. Rise of arterial pressure
*e. Myocardium hypertrophy

73. A 37-year-old patient has has lost 5 kg in weight over the past three months, he complains of hand tremor, excessive sweating, exophthalmos, tachycardia. These changes might have been caused by the increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Insulin
b. Cortisol
*c. Thyroxine
d. Glucagon
e. Thyrocalcitonin

74. After a person had drunk 1,5 liters of water, the amount of urine increased significantly, and its relative density decreased to 1,001. These changes are a result of decreased water reabsorption in the distal nephron portion due to reduced secretion of:
*a. Vasopressin
b. Angiotensin II
c. Prostaglandins
d. Renin
e. Aldosterone

75. A 32-year-old patient consulted a doctor about the absence of lactation after parturition. Such disorder might be explained by the deficit of the following hormone:
*a. Prolactin
b. Vasopressin
c. Glucagon
d. Thyrocalcitonin
e. Somatotropin

76. Examination of a female patient revealed low activity of lipoprotein lipase which hydrolyzes chylomicron triglycerides on the surface of endothelium of adipose tissue capillaries. What biochemical disorders should be expected?
a. Type III hyperlipoproteinemia
b. Type II A hyperlipoproteinemia
*c. Type I hyperlipoproteinemia
d. Type IV hyperlipoproteinemia
e. Type II B hyperlipoproteinemia

77. A patient suffering from essential arterial hypertension got hypertensic crisis that caused an attack of cardiac asthma. What is the leading mechanism of cardiac insufficiency in this case?
a. Disturbed blood inflow to the heart
*b. Cardiac overload due to increased resistance
c. Absolute coronary insufficiency
d. Cardiac overload due to increased blood volume
e. Myocardium damage

78. A 43 year old female patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of pain in the right subcostal area, skin itch. Examination revealed hypalgesia and hematolysis, skin icteritiousness, bradycardia, hypotonia. What is the most probable cause of these symptoms?
*a. Cholemia
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Hepatocellular jaundice
d. Parenchymatous jaundice
e. Intensification of erythrocyte haemolysis

79. Examination of a patient with chronic renal insufficiency revealed an increase in residual nitrogen concentration in blood up to 35 millimole/l, more than half of which is urea. What type of hyperazotemia is it?
*a. Retentional
b. Productional
c. Combined
d. Residual
e. Hepatic

80. A patient has been prescribed the salt-free diet. What changes to the salt taste sensitivity threshold should be expected?
a. Increase
b. Increase followed by a decrease
c. No changes
d. Little change
*e. Decrease

81. Blood analysis of a patient suffering from jaundice revealed increase of total bilirubin by its indirect fraction. Urine and feces have intense colouring. What is the most probable mechanism of these abnormalities?
*a. Increased haemolysis of erythrocytes
b. Damage of liver parenchyma
c. Impaired transformation of urobilinogen in the liver
d. Impaired generation of direct bilirubin
e. Obstruction of bile outflow from the liver

82. A patient consulted a doctor about loss of taste at the root of tongue. The doctor established that this was due to a nerve damage. What nerve was damaged?
*a. Glossopharyngeal
b. Facial
c. Trigeminal
d. Superlaryngeal
e. Vagus

83. A male patient has stenosis of the mitral orifice. What is the leading mechanism of cardiac failure?
a. Volume overload
b. Myocardial damage
c. -
*d. Resistance-induced overload
e. Tension-induced overload

84. A patient consulted a doctor about difficulties with urinary excretion. Examination revealed hypertrophy of an organ that encloses proximal part of urethra. What organ is it?
*a. Prostate
b. Bulb of penis
c. Seminal vesicles
d. Epididymis
e. Bulbourethral gland

85. Examination of a tissue sample of enlarged cervical lymph nodes taken from a young woman revealed proliferation of lymphocytes, reticular cells, macrophages, big and small Hodgkins cells, multinuclear Sternberg-Reed cells. There were also multiple eosinophils, single foci of caseous necrosis of the node tissue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymphosarcoma
b. Metastasis of lung cancer
c. Tuberculosis
d. Acute leukosis
*e. Lymphogranulomatosis

86. A 40 year old male patient died from cerebral edema. In anamnesis the face carbuncle was registered. Autopsy revealed hyperemia and edema of cerebral tissue. White matter of the left hemisphere had two cavities 6 to 5,5 and 5 to 4,5 cm large filled with yellowish-green cream-like fluid. Walls of the cavities were built up by nerve tissue with irregular rands. What complication of carbuncle was it?
a. Chronic abscesses
b. Colliquative necroses
c. Cysts
*d. Acute abscesses
e. Empyema

87. A patient who had been suffering from a renal disease for many years died from uremia. Autopsy revealed that the kidneys were abnormally small, dense, fine-grained, light grey. What are the kidneys with such changes called?
a. -
*b. Arteriolosclerotic
c. Mottled
d. Contracted
e. Sebaceous

88. Liver puncture biopsy in a patient with hepatocellular insufficiency revealed vacuolar, balooning degeneration of hepatocytes, necrosis of single cells, Councilmans bodies, infiltartion of portal and lobular stroma mainly by lymphocytes and macrophages with a small number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute viral hepatitis
b. Chronic active hepatitis
c. Alcoholic hepatitis
d. Autoimmune hepatitis
e. Chronic persisting hepatitis

89. In course of an experiment thalamocortical tracts of an experimental animal were cut through. The animal didnt lose the following sensations:
a. Auditory
b. Visual
c. Nociceptive
*d. Olfactory
e. Exteroceptive

90. Examination of a tooth revealed a large cavity in its crown. The floor of this cavity is formed by a thin layer of softened dentin that separates this cavity from the pulp. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Median caries
b. Pulpitis
c. Periodontitis
*d. Deep caries
e. Superficial caries

91. During an experiment the myotatic reflex has been studied in frogs. After extension in a skeletal muscle its reflectory contraction was absent. The reason for it might be a dysfunction of the following receptors:
a. Tactile
*b. Muscle spindles
c. Articular
d. Nociceptors
e. Golgi tendon organs

92. Analysis of a dentists urine obtained at the end of his working day revealed protein concentration at the rate of 0,7 g/l. His morning urine hadnt such changes. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Organic proteinuria
b. Extrarenal proteinuria
c. Hematuria
*d. Functional proteinuria
e. Nonselective proteinuria

93. Microscopical examination of an infiltrate removed from the submandibular skin area of a 30 y.o. man revealed foci of purulent fluxing surrounded by maturing granulations and mature connective tissue, the pus contains druses consisting of multiple short rod-like elements with one end attached to the homogenous centre. What disease is it?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Candidosis
c. -
*d. Actinomycosis
e. Syphilis

94. Microscopic examination of periodontium revealed plethoric vessels, edema of connective tissue along with infiltration by single neutrophils. What type of exudative inflammation in the periodontium is it?
a. Fibrinous
b. Catarrhal
c. Purulent
d. Putrid
*e. Serous

95. Autopsy of a 35 y.o. woman revealed not only enlargement of many lymph nodes but also enlarged spleen weighting 600,0. Its incision showed that it was heterogeneous, dark red, dense with greyish-yellow necrotic areas up to 1 cm in diameter (porphyritic spleen). What disease can be assumed?
a. Cancer metastases
b. Lymphosarcoma
c. Chronic lymphoid leukosis
d. Chronic myeloid leukosis
*e. Lymphogranulomatosis

96. A 9 y.o. child has been taking antibiotics on account of bronchopneumonia for a long time. There appeared pain and burning in the area of mucous mebrane of his lips and tongue. Objectively: mucous membrane of lips and tongue has caseous and grey plaques that can be easily removed by a spatula leaving hyperemia foci on their spot. Microscopical examination of the plaques revealed mycelium. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Leukoplakia
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
*c. Candidous cheilitis
d. Contactant allergic cheilitis
e. Manganottis cheilitis

97. In response to a change in body position from horizontal to vertical blood circulation system develops reflectory pressor reaction. Which of the following is its compulsory component?
a. Weakening of the pumbing ability of heart
*b. Systemic constriction of the venous vessels
c. Decrease in the circulating blood volume
d. Systemic dilatation of the arterial resistive vessels
e. Increase in the heart rate

98. In a hot weather, the microclimate in hot rooms is often normalized by fans. At the same time heat radiation from the human body increases through:
*a. Convection
b. Conduction
c. Evaporation
d. Radiation
e. Heat conduction

99. After examining the patient the doctor recommended him to eliminate rich meat and vegetable broth, spices, smoked products from the diet, since the patient was found to have:
a. Biliary dyskinesia
*b. Increased secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach glands
c. Reduced motility of the gastrointestinal tract
d. Reduced secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach glands
e. Reduced salivation

100. A 60-year-old patient presents with weakened peristaltic activity of the bowels. Which of the following foodstuffs would stimulate peristalsis most of all?
*a. Brown bread
b. Meat
c. Tea
d. Lard
e. White bread

101. In the dental practice, the vitality of tooth tissues is estimated by electric pulp test. What parameter is assessed?
a. Accommodation
b. Lability
c. Chronaxie
d. Productive time
*e. Threshold stimulus intensity

102. Before an exam a student complained of acute dental pain which grew less during the exam. What inhibition caused the pain abatement?
a. Declining
b. Protective
*c. External
d. Differentiating
e. Delayed

