1. 6 months after treatment a patient with coronary heart disease developed tolerance to the prolonged-action nitrates. What drug with nitrate-similar effect should be recommended in this case?
a. Prazosin
b. Nifedipine
*c. Molsidomine
d. Verapamil
e. Metoprolol

2. Which of the below-listed drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
a. Рhenylinum
b. Heparinum
*c. Streptokinase
d. Ticlopidine
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

3. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
a. Protamine sulfate
b. Atropinum
c. Penicillamine
*d. Deferoxamium
e. Bemegridum

4. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. What antibacterial drug may be prescribed?
*a. Cefotaxime
b. Tetracycline hydrochloride
c. Co-trimoxazolum
d. Ofloxacinum
e. Gentamycin sulphate

5. One of the major indicator of drug elimination from the human body is:
*a. Effective halfbeak
b. Bioavailability
c. Highest concentration in blood
d. Bioequivalence
e. Volume of distribution

6. Mother of a 2-month-old child came to a pharmacy and asked for a febrifuge. What drug should be recommended for the child?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Nimesulide
*c. Paracetamolum
d. Indometacinum
e. Diclofenac sodium

7. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia was prescribed an antibiotic. After the treatment the child became deaf. Which antibiotic group might have caused this complication?
*a. Aminoglycosides
b. Macrolides
c. Semisynthetic penicillin
d. Natural penicillin
e. Cephalosporins

8. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
a. 500 mg
b. 200 mg
c. 50 mg
*d. 100 mg
e. 1000 mg

9. Choose an optimal antibacterial drug for the mycoplasmal pneumonia treatment:
a. Amoksiklav
*b. Rovamycine
c. Penicillin
d. Gentamycinum
e. Ampicillin

10. Which of the listed preparations should be used as antidote and included into the first-aid kit required at factories where acute intoxications with arsenic, mercury, chrome and bismuth compounds are possible?
a. Droperidolum
*b. Unithiolum
c. Аtropinum
d. Аdrenalinum
e. Morphinum

11. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent presentations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Drotaverine
b. Оmерrаzоlе
c. Acidin pepsinum
*d. Раncreatinum
e. Dе-Nоl

12. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
*a. Immediate allergy
b. Local irritation
c. Abstinence syndrome
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Delayed allergy

13. Examination of a patient who has been treated for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time revealed hyperglycemia. What drug might have caused it?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Chloroquine
c. Levamisole
*d. Dexamethasone
e. Ibuprofen

14. A 54-year-old patient who has been suffering from hyperacidic gastritis for several years was prescribed almagel. What pharmacotherapeutical complications on the part of digestive organs may be expected in the first place?
*a. Constipation
b. Anorexia
c. Diarrhea
d. Emesis
e. Nausea

15. A 26-year-old patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia provoked by mycoplasma. Choose the appropriate antimicrobial preparation for the patient treatment:
*a. Rovamycine
b. Gentamycinum
c. Amoksiklav
d. Веnzylpenicillinum
e. Amoxicillin

16. A 60-year-old patient has essential hypertension stage II, coronary disease, bronchial asthma. After pharmacotherapy correction the patient exhibited a bronchospastic attack, intensified dyspnea. What drug provoked this complication?
a. Nifedipinе
b. Мucaltinum
c. Salbutamolum
*d. Propranolol
e. Еuphyllinum

17. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Еnаlаpril
b. Diltiazem
c. Losartan
*d. Doxazosin
e. Propranolol

18. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of such side effect?
a. Ethambutol
b. Isoniazid
*c. Streptomycin
d. Rifampicin
e. Ethionamidum

19. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should not be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
*a. Co-trimoxazolum
b. Gentamycinum
c. Doxycycline
d. Benzylpenicillinum
e. Midecamycin

20. Which of the listed pharmacolgical groups of antihypertensive drugs is contra-indicated the patients with bronchial asthma?
*a. Beta-adrenergic blocking agent
b. Calcium channel blockers
c. Diuretics
d. Angiotensin receptors blockers
e. ACE inhibitor

21. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
a. Trimetazidine
b. Furosemide
*c. Verapamil
d. Panangin
e. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages

22. A patient with cholelithiasis was prescribed the following drug for the purpose of cholesterol gallstone dissolution:
a. Mefenamic acid
*b. Ursodeoxycholic acid
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Gamma-amino-butyric acid
e. Citric acid

23. A 68-year-old female patient has been continuously taking furosemide for heart failure treatment. What drug should be used to prevent hypokalemia in patients taking furosemide?
a. Trimetazidine
b. Sustac forte
c. Atp-long
d. Mildronatum
*e. Panangin

24. A 52-year-old patient complains of having increased arterial pressure for a month. She has a 5-year history of bronchial asthma. What group of hypotensive drugs should NOT be recommended this patient?
a. Diuretics
*b. ?-adrenoreceptor blockers
c. Tranquilizers
d. Calcium channel blockers
e. Angiotensin receptor blockers

25. An 18-year-old patient was diagnosed with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug will provide etiotropic pharmacotherapy?
a. Trimethoprim
b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
*c. Isoniazid
d. Lincomycin
e. Metronidazole

26. A patient suffering from arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Body temperature remained unchanged. It is known that the patient takes captopril. These symptoms can be explained by increased generation of:
*a. Bradyquinine
b. Renin
c. Natriuretic peptide
d. Aldosterone
e. Angiotensin-1

27. Which preparation from the group of laxative agents IS NOT to be administered in case of intoxication with CNS-inhibiting substances?
a. Bisacodyl
b. Guttalax
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Vaseline oil
*e. Magnesium sulfate

28. A 46-year-old patient suffering from chronic bronchitis came to a pharmacy. What expectorative drug may be recommended?
*a. Ambroxol
b. Libexin
c. Salbutamol
d. Glauvent
e. Falimint

29. A 26-year-old pregnant woman (III trimester of pregnancy) complains about body temperature rise up to 39oC. What febrifuge may be recommended in this case?
a. Aspirin
b. Analgin
c. Indometacin
*d. Paracetamol
e. Diclofenac

30. A 25-year-old patient has been taking antibiotics for 7 days. Antibiotic therapy has caused a complication in form of bowel dysbacteriosis. This complication should be treated with drugs of the following pharmacological group:
a. Cholagogic
b. Spasmolytics
*c. Probiotics
d. Antacids
e. Adaptogens

31. A 57-year-old female patient was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis; she has also a history of stomach ulcer. What drug from the group of nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs may be recommended this patient?
a. Diclofenac
b. Indometacin
c. Mefenamic acid
*d. Celecoxib
e. Aspirin

32. A patient fell ill with severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day connected with the fact that the drug:
a. Accumulates in the lungs
b. Poorly absorbed from the injection site
c. Has bactericidal effect
d. Pluripotential
*e. Slowly eliminated from the body

33. An internship doctor prescribed his patient nifuroxazid from the group of nitrofurans for treatment of urinary tracts infection. The doctor made a mistake because:
a. It has bacteriostatic effect
b. It is excreted from the orghanism very slowly
c. It is excreted with urine in the inactive state
d. It has nephrotoxic effect
*e. It cannot be absorbed from the digestive tract

34. Which of the following is the drug of choice for bronchial asthma attacks prevention?
a. Ambroxol
*b. Cromolyn sodium
c. Drotaverine
d. Salbutamol
e. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride

35. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed an antiulcer drug that also reduces secretion of hydrochloric acid and inhibits Chelicobacter pylori. What drug is it?
a. Gastrocepine
b. Famotidine
c. Almagel
*d. Omeprazole
e. Maalox

36. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering for diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
a. Dibazol
b. Dichlothiazide
c. Propranolol
d. Clonidine
*e. Enalapril

37. A patient with arterial hypertension was administered a non-prescription drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis. What pharmaceutical form should be recommended the patient in order to reduce as much as possible the likelihood of development of undesirable systemic vasoconstriction?
a. Drops
b. Gel
*c. Ointment
d. Aerosol
e. Tablets

38. A 56-year-old patient suffering from essential hypertension was prescribed an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and a potassium-sparing diuretic. Such combination is:
a. Reasonable because it decreases risk of hyperkaliemia development
b. Unreasonable because it reduces hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
c. Unreasonable because it increases risk of orthostatic collapse development
*d. Unreasonable because it increases risk of hyperkaliemia development
e. Reasonable because it potentiates hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor

39. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic DOES NOT NEED to be combined with potassium preparations?
a. Furosemide
b. Ethacrynic acid
c. Clopamide
d. Dichlothiazide
*e. Triamteren

40. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
*a. Orthostatic hypotension
b. Central nervous system depression effect
c. Diarrhea
d. Taste violation
e. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome

41. A 67-year-old patient who undergoes treatment for bronchial asthma presents with limb tremor, headache, insomnia, extrasystole. What drug might have caused such symptoms?
*a. Theophylline
b. Tavegyl
c. Acetylcysteine
d. Intal
e. Prednisolone

