1. A pharmaceutical enterprise widely applies technical and technological media of information use in order to increase efficiency of managing productive and administrative activity of an organization, to enhance labour productivity, to improve methods of planning and regulating management processes. All this is realized by means of:
a. Automation equipped working place
b. Information-management system
c. Automated data retrieval system
*d. Automated management system
e. Automated instruction and control system

2. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers’ recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
*a. Maturity
b. Growth
c. Development
d. Decrease
e. Market penetration

3. Marketing research of certain pharmaceutical groups involves collection and analysis of primary information. This is the following type of marketing research:
a. Research of drug consumers
b. Research of marketing network of pharmaceutical market
c. Armchair research
d. Research of drug market
*e. Field research

4. The market is characterized by the following conditions: a big number of salespersons and customers who dont make any influence upon the level of current prices; availability of uniform and interchangeable competing products; lack of price restrictions. What type of market is it?
a. Oligopolistic market
b. Market of monopolistic competition
*c. Market of pure competition
d. Market of pure monopoly
e. -

5. A pharmaceutist and a pharmacy manager were involved into the labour dispute about carry over of vacation time. The pharmaceutist applied to the council of conciliation. The council should consider his application within the following period:
*a. 10 days
b. 3 days
c. 1 month
d. 1 week
e. 5 days

6. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
a. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
b. -
c. Dealer
d. Seasonal
*e. Bonus

7. Development of advertising strategy for promotion of nonprescription drugs includes identification of the target audience. The highest selectivity of consumer audience can be achieved by means of the following advertisment type:
a. On transport
b. On the radio
*c. At sales outlet
d. In the printed publication
e. On TV

8. Theory of management currently marks out four the most important approaches to the management. Choose the approach that is NOT applied in the theory of management:
a. Systemic
b. Process approach
*c. Structured
d. Situational
e. Different schools dedication approach

9. On the initiative of the manufacturing company some amendments to a drug information leaflet are to be made for the restriction of the drug use. What type of marketing is applied in this case?
a. Remarketing
b. Conversion
*c. Opposed
d. Synchromarketing
e. Incentive

10. At the initial stage of establishing a pharmaceutical enterprise the internal disciplinary regulations should be adopted. One of the primary matters is the duration of the lunch break for the employees. According to the Labour Code of Ukraine, the break duration must be as follows:
a. Up to 1 hour
b. 2,5 hours
c. -
*d. Up to 2 hours
e. Not less than 3 hours

11. A large and well-known company has granted a small independent firm the right to use its trademark and technology so that it could take advantage of authority and customer trust to the well-known brand. Such concept is called:
a. Use of manufacturers brand
*b. Franchising
c. Use of dealers brand
d. Merchandising
e. Use of trademark

12. Management of a pharmaceutical company involves American and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
a. Slow career development
b. Heightened attention to the human factor
c. Group forms of control
d. Corporate liability
*e. Quick evaluation and career development

13. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own marketing departments, affiliated marketing companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Four-level
*b. Zero level
c. Two-level
d. One-level
e. Three-level

14. A pharmacy makes wholesale purchases of health and hygiene products. An agent works under the contract with the manufacturer and makes deals at the manufacturers cost. The agent may be entitled to exclusive distribution in some regions. What kind of agent is it?
a. Consignee
b. Broker
c. Dealer
*d. Wholesale agent
e. Commission agent

15. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Oligopolistic market
b. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market
c. Pure competition market
d. Monopolistic competitive market
*e. Pure monopoly market

16. A pharmaceutical company "Adonis" promotes its new products by means of advertisement that informs the customers about the product, highlights its advantages, typical features and properties. What kind of advertisment is it?
a. Aggressive
b. Indirect
c. Direct
*d. Informational
e. Supporting

17. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
a. Limited
b. Without preliminary licencing or registration
c. Normative
d. Free
*e. Licence-based

18. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Financial loss
*b. Business risk
c. Labour loss
d. Loss of property
e. Loss of time

19. As a pharmaceutist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient didnt apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the recipient:
a. Stereotype mentation
*b. Semantic barriers
c. Nonverbal barriers
d. Neglect of facts
e. Failure to understand the importance of information

20. A pharmaceutist has applied for a job of a stockkeeper at a wholesale pharmaceutical enterprise. What trial period doesnt require agreement with the trade-union committee?
a. Up to six monthes
*b. Up to three monthes
c. Up to two monthes
d. Up to one month
e. Up to four monthes

21. A pharmacy analyst is going to take a part of his holiday in spring and a part in summer. Holiday dividing is allowed provided that its main part will be no less than:
a. 12 days
b. 10 days
*c. 14 days
d. 16 days
e. 18 days

22. Marketing manager at a pharmaceutical factory is planning its communication policy. Which component of the marketing communication systems has the highest value for one contact?
a. Periodical advertising
b. Sales promotion
c. Public relations
d. TV advertising
*e. Personal sale

23. TV periodically conducts campaigns for young people aimed at popularization of mechanical contraceptives (not indicating concrete trademarks). Such actions are a kind of the following marketing communication:
a. Personal sale
b. Advertising
*c. Publicity
d. Sale promotion
e. Sponsorship

24. A joint-stock company involved into production and selling of drug preparations has developed a structure for working with various consuming organizations. Such organizational structure is called:
a. Departmentalization
b. Functional structure
*c. Divisional structure
d. Array (matrix) structure
e. Bureaucratic structure

25. What management style is characterized by managers particular compliance, when manager initiates goals formation by his subordinate and is ready to accept it without reservations?
a. Combined style
*b. Laissez-faire management style
c. Bureaucratic style
d. Democratic management style
e. Collective style

26. Public health services attach great importance to the drug quality, for this reason a pharmaceutic enterprise has concentrated its efforts upon the improvement of qualitative characteristics of its products. What concept of marketing management is applied in this company?
a. Modern marketing
b. Production improvement
*c. Product improvement
d. All answers are correct
e. There is no correct answer

27. When a graduate becomes employed on a certain position he should be first familiarized with his rights and duties. What document regulates rights and duties of pharmacy employees?
a. Internal employment policies and procedures
b. All the answers are correct
c. All the answers are false
*d. Job description
e. Labour code

28. Product assortment is the whole set of product assortment groups offered by an enterprise. The index representing number of positions in each product assortment group is called:
a. Assortment comparability
*b. Product assortment depth
c. Product assortment saturation
d. Product assortment width
e. Product assortment

29. Functioning of a pharmacy is realized on different levels of management. Function of direct control of employees fulfilling concrete tasks relates to the following level of management:
a. Bureaucratic
*b. Technical
c. Managerial
d. Institutional
e. Administrative

