1. According to the supply contract with joint-stock company "Darnitsa", a pharmacy warehouse accepted some inventory items. Which department of the warehouse is directly responsible for the goods acceptance?
a. Expedition division
b. Stores division
c. Operations division
*d. Reception division
e. Configuration division

2. In order to fill a burrette a pharmaceutist prepared 2 l of 10% benzoate solution. This operation should be recorded in the following register:
a. Commodity report
b. Packaging
*c. Laboratory
d. Prescription
e. Spot (cash)

3. A pharmacy supplies the population with drugs for cash. Specify the VAT on drugs:
a. 10%
b. 20%
c. 30%
*d. 0%
e. 15%

4. A pharmacy produces compounded drugs. What kinds of internal control of drugs production are required?
*a. Written, organoleptic, sell control
b. Written, qualitative and quantitative analysis
c. Written and sell control
d. Written, physics and chemical
e. Written, interrogatory, sell control

5. Balance is a part of financial accounting of pharmacies. What index is reflected in the assets of the balance sheet?
a. Wholesale turnover
b. Retail turnover
*c. Residual value of fixed assets
d. Proceeds of a pharmacy
e. Salary costs

6. A pharmacy manager is working out a schedule for a pharmaceutist who is responsible for prescription reception and drug serving out. What is the weekly working time for one employee?
a. 40 hours
b. 38 hours
*c. 36 hours
d. 30 hours
e. Irregular working week

7. An advance holder (accountant) was given some money from the cash fund of an enterprise for purchase of office accessories. After the cash advance the advance holder must submit the complete application of funds statement no later than:
a. Ten working days
b. Five working days
*c. Third banking day
d. One week
e. Such term isnt established

8. Ukraine has a valid list of drugs whose price is subject to the governmental regulation. What is the way of retail price formation for Corvalol 25,0 (produced by "Pharmac") providing that this drug is included in the above-mentioned list?
a. Setting common consumer price
*b. Setting a 35% markup on the manufacturers price
c. Setting a 35% markup on the mediators price
d. Setting a 35% markup on the customs price
e. Setting a 40% mark up on the wholesale price

9. All the medications require special storage conditions according to their physical and physicochemical properties. Ampouled solution of sodium adenosine triphosphate (ATP) should be stored under the following temperature:
*a. 3-5oC
b. 7-10oC
c. 12-15oC
d. 10oC
e. 0-2oC

10. A pharmacy manager is writing the monthly "Inventory report". What business transactions should be represented in the expenditure item of the report?
a. Amortization charged to operation
b. Extra-evaluation of laboratory-packaging works
c. Medicinal plant raw material purchasing
d. Payroll payment
*e. Drugs realization

11. Therapeutic department of a municipal hospital purchases medical products in a pharmacy. The wares will be dispensed from the stores department on presentation of the following document:
a. Register of laboratory packing works
*b. Delivery order
c. Prescription register
d. Cash book
e. Inventory report

12. During inventory of a pharmacy the surplus of inventory holdings was revealed. What actions concerning the surplus should be taken by the inventory comission?
a. Immediate realization
b. Writing-off
c. Confiscation by superior organization
d. Abolishment
*e. Take on charge

13. In Ukraine the out-patients are supplied with narcotic and psychotropic drugs only by prescription. Medicoprophylactic institutions receive prescription blanks (Form 3) from the following source:
a. Citys health department
b. Typography
c. Pharmaceutical corporation
*d. Pharmacy storehouse
e. Wholesale companies

14. The central district pharmacy functions in a district centre and supplies local population with drugs and medical products. What pharmaceutical institutions are allowed to settle accounts with the customers without a cash register by way of check issuing?
a. Pharmaceutical outlet at a hospital
b. Central district pharmacy
*c. Pharmacies, pharmaceutical outlets and kiosks
d. Pharmaceutical kiosk at a market
e. Pharmaceutical kiosk at a railway station

15. Two pharmaceutical enterprises simultaneously applied to a bank for establishing a running account. The bank refused the application to one of the enterprises. The reason for the refusal is that the enterprise:
a. Has not provided the report on financial results
*b. Has not registrated a statute
c. Has no stamp
d. Is located in another administrative area
e. Has not provided the balance

16. In order to get registered in state authorities pharmacies as legal persons must possess authorized capital stock. What amount is identified as the authorized capital stock?
*a. The amount recorded in constituent documents
b. The amount of fund formation sources
c. The amount of debts of an enterprise
d. Total assets
e. The amount of noncurrent assets

17. Accounting of pharmaceutical institutions includes control accounts of nine classes. What accounting units are represented in the accounts of the 4-6 classes?
a. Incomings and business results
*b. Liability
c. Element costs
d. Pharmacy assets
e. Material costs

18. At the end of each month a pharmacy manager writes an Inventory report. This document relates to the following type of accounting:
a. Financial
b. Accountancy
*c. Intraeconomic
d. Statistical
e. Taxation

19. When filling the "Inventory report", a pharmacy manager represented a number of business transactions in the receipts section of report. Such transactions include:
a. Total of realized trade mark-up
b. Total of sale
c. Markdown on account of laboratory packing works
*d. Purchase of drugs and pharmaceutical merchandise
e. Products consumption for business needs

20. A pharmacy received some medicines from the warehouse. What medicine is subject to the stocktaking in the pharmaceutical institutions?
*a. Codeine
b. Corvalolum
c. Butadionum
d. Analginum
e. Aminalonum

21. A pharmaceutist with over 8 years of service got a medical certificate in accordance with the established procedure. What is the size of temporary disability allowance the pharmaceutist is entitled to?
a. 90% of average salary
b. 60% of average salary
c. 50% of average salary
*d. 100% of average salary
e. 80% of average salary

22. A pharmacy functions on the base of collective financial liability. The financial liability agreement may be re-executed in the following case:
a. Dismissal of one staff member
b. Dismissal of 10% of staff
c. Employment of new employees
*d. Dismissal of over 50% of staff
e. Dismissal of 5% of staff

23. A pharmacy sells drugs by retail. Omnopon relates to the following group of controlled drugs:
a. Potent
b. General sale list
c. Psychtropic
d. Toxic
*e. Narcotic

24. At the end of each month accountant of a pharmacy calculates amount of realized price markup. Which index is not used for such calculation?
a. Total sales proceeds
*b. Total of cash in vault
c. In-stock balance at the beginning of month in retail prices
d. Total value of received goods in retail and wholesale prices
e. In-stock balance at the beginning of month in wholesale prices

25. Financial accountability of pharmacies consists of separate account forms. Which form presents accounts payable for the goods purchased?
*a. Balance sheet, form 1
b. Financial performance report, form 2m
c. Balance assets, form 1
d. Net worth statement, form 3
e. Financial performance report, form 2

26. In Ukraine natural persons as small business entities are allowed to use the simplified tax system. What limit on the number of employees is established for such enterprises?
a. No more than 40 persons
b. No more than 50 persons
c. No more than 20 persons
d. No more than 30 persons
*e. No more than 10 persons

27. For the natural persons being small business subjects the simplified tax system is effective. But there is a limit of annual proceeds upon sale. What is the boundary amount of proceeds?
a. Up to 100 thousand UAH
b. Up to 750 thousand UAH
*c. Up to 500 thousand UAH
d. Up to 1 million UAH
e. Up to 5 million UAH

28. Simplified tax system implies replacement of several taxes by a single one. What limit on the number of employees is established for the legal persons to implement the simplified tax system?
a. 10 persons
b. 100 persons
c. 75 persons
*d. 50 persons
e. 25 persons

29. A pharmacy as a legal person being the small enterprise plans to move to a simplified taxation system from 1 January. What is the limitation of the amount of sales revenue for such companies?
a. Up to 500 thousand UAH
b. Up to 750 thousand UAH
c. Up to 100 thousand UAH
*d. Up to 1 million UAH
e. Up to 250 thousand UAH

30. Medications in the storing rooms of a medicoprophylactic institution should be placed on the shelves, in the cases, refrigerators or on the pallets or rickers. Toxic medications should be kept in:
a. In a wooden case
b. In a safe
*c. In a locked metal case
d. In a refrigerator
e. In the internal safe partition

31. An accountant is calculating financial performance of a pharmacy. What item will be represented in the liabilities of the accounting report 791 called "Operational result"?
*a. Net profit (sales proceeds)
b. Administration expenses
c. Profits tax
d. Sales expenses
e. Cost of goods sold

32. The equity capital of a pharmacy is 7500 UAH, the liabilities make 2500 UAH. According to the formula of balance calculation given in the Statement of Standard Accounting Practice 2 the amount of pharmacy assets will be as follows:
a. 12 000 UAH
*b. 10 000 UAH
c. 7 500 UAH
d. 4 000 UAH
e. 2 500 UAH

33. The total of business transaction records of assets and liabilities in the accounting statement for a certain period is called:
a. Credit
b. Balance
c. Amount of balance
d. Debit
*e. Turnover

34. Water for injections is derived from the drinking or distilled water. It can be either used freshly made or stored under the required temperature conditions. Water for injections is produced in the following premises:
*a. In a separate room of aseptic department
b. In the washing room
c. In the sales area
d. In the prescription department
e. In the assistant room

35. Incoming control is conducted in the course of wholesale and retail trade, such control is carried out during receipt of goods by visual inspection or analysis of drug. Incoming control is carried out by authorized person, which is assigned by:
a. The order of head of territorial inspection
*b. Managers order
c. Head of regional structure
d. State inspection of drugs quality control
e. Proprietor of an enterprise

36. When a pharmacy records goods as received, it normally specifies the amount of the markup intended for expenditure coverage and profit gaining. Give the definition for the markup:
a. The difference between the sales price and the customs price
b. The difference between the sales price and markup
*c. The difference between the sale price and purchase price of goods
d. The amount of goods sold
e. Rummage (goods remains) at the end of the month

37. Department of finished drug products of the pharmacy №1 got a prescription for nasal drops "Farmazolin" intended for a 2,8-year-old child. This drug will be dispensed at the following price:
a. 70% of price
*b. At no cost
c. Full price
d. 50% of price
e. 30% of price

38. An accountant is recording business transactions of a pharmacy. Which transaction is to be entered on the credit side of the cash-account?
a. Money receipt for salaries
b. Accountable person repayment
c. Pharmacies revenue
d. Small retail network revenue
*e. Payroll

39. Compulsory financial reporting of pharmacies includes the balance sheet. Changes in value, composition and structure of the capital stock are estimated on the base of:
a. I section of liabilities + ІV section of liabilities
*b. І section of assets
c. ІI section of assets + III section of assets
d. І section of liabilities
e. ІV section of liabilities

40. One of the accounting documents of a pharmacy is the balance sheet (Form 1) consisting of assets and liabilities. Name the elements of the asset of a pharmacy:
a. Owned and borrowed assets
b. Non-current and borrowed assets
c. Circulating and borrowed assets
*d. Circulating assets and non-current assets
e. Circulating assets and owned capital

41. Prescriptions for drugs being subject to the stocktaking and supplied on favourable terms or free of charge except for narcotic (psychotropic) drugs and tramadol are written out:
a. On the pink form
b. On the form F-1
c. On the forms F-3 and F-1
*d. In 2 copies of form F-1
e. On the form F-3

42. Activity of pharmaceutical institutions is subject to licensing. What is the duration of license for drugs and healthcare products sale?
a. Three years
*b. Five years
c. Two years
d. One year
e. Four years

43. In case of loss of license a pharmaceutist should address an application for a duplicate to a licensing authority. The licensing authority is obliged to issue the duplicate to the applicant no later than:
a. The duplicate isnt issued
*b. Three working days from the date of application receipt
c. Two monthes from the date of application receipt
d. One month from the date of application receipt
e. Three monthes from the date of application receipt

44. A business entity carrying on the wholesale trade of drugs must be keeping documents concerning purchase and sale for a certain period. Specify this period:
*a. No less than three years
b. No less than two years
c. No less than ten years
d. No less than five years
e. No less than one year

45. According to the applicable legislation of Ukraine, prices for some drugs and medical products are subject to governmental regulation. What is the maximal trade markup established for the drugs that are purchased by public and municipal institutions using budgetary funds?
a. 15% of manufacturers wholesale price
b. 35% of manufacturers wholesale price
c. 25% of manufacturers wholesale price
*d. 10% of manufacturers wholesale price
e. 30% of manufacturers wholesale price

46. A pharmacy sells drugs. What is the rate of value-added tax for drugs sold by a pharmacy?
a. 10%
b. 30%
c. 25%
*d. 0%
e. 20%

47. Inventory in a pharmacy revealed a shortage within the range of natural loss. This shortage will be rated as expenses at the following price:
a. Consumer prices
b. Quota purchase prices
c. Negotiated price
*d. Wholesale prices
e. Сontractual prices

48. On the wage of pharmacy employees the personal income tax is levied. What pays are not  included into the total monthly income being subject to this kind of taxation?
a. The amount of assistance for the care of patients
b. The amount of in-kind benefit
c. The amount of leaf of invalidity
d. Dividends
*e. The amount of maternity support

49. Pharmacy №5 cleared its indebtedness to a supplier in the amount of 3000 uah by drawing this sum from its current account. What changes in the sum total of the balance will be observed?
a. Total assets decreased, while liabilities increased by 3000 UAH
b. Total assets increase, while liabilities decreased by 3000 UAH
c. Total assets and liabilities will not change
d. Total assets and liabilities will increase by 3000 UAH
*e. Total assets and liabilities will decrease by 3000 UAH

50. A pharmacy store was supplied with 100 packs of a product listed as Nitroglycerine. With regard to its physicochemical properties this preparation should be rated among the following drug group?
a. Combustible substances
b. Volatile substances
c. Explosion hazardous substances
d. Highly inflammable substances
*e. Explosive substances

51. For accounting business transactions carried out in a pharmacy the synthetic accounts are used. Their list is given in the Chart of Accounts. Balances of the I, II and III account classes are used for completion of the following document:
*a. Assets
b. Liabilities
c. Fourth section of the liabilities balance sheet
d. First section of the liabilities balance sheet
e. Profit and Loss Account

