1. A pharmaceutist made a tincture of althaea root. What is the proportion of herbal crude drug and extractant?
a. 1:100
b. 1:400
c. 1:10
d. 1:30
*e. 1:20

2. A pharmaceutist revealed incompatibility in the formulation. Rp.: Sol. Collargoli 1% - 10 ml Sol. Adrenalini hydrochloridi 0,1% - 1 ml M.D.S. Nasal drops. What chemical process underlies this incompatibility?
a. Absorption
*b. Oxidization
c. Precipitation
d. Neutralization
e. Hydrolysis

3. A pharmaceutist prepared solution of ethacrydine lactate. What is the peculiarity of this substance dissolving?
a. Grinding in a mortar with water
b. Dissolving in potassium iodide solution
c. Dissolving in freshly distilled water
d. Dissolving in cold water
*e. Dissolving in hot water

4. A pharmaceutist prepared an oil emulsion containing zinc oxide. Specify the rational method of substance incorporation:
a. Dissolution in the finished emulsion
*b. Suspension-type icorporation into the prepared emulsion
c. Grinding with water for dilution of the primary emulsion
d. Dissolution in oil
e. Dissolution in water for preparation of the primary emulsion

5. A pharmaceutist made a tincture of Adonis herb. A peculiarity of its preparation is that the active substances are derived in:
a. In the subacid medium
b. In the acid medium
c. In the alkalescent medium
d. In the alkaline medium
*e. In the neutral medium

6. A pharmaceutist is preparing fat-based suppositories by method of pouring. What base is to be used for this purpose?
*a. Butirol
b. Cocoa butter
c. Spermaceti
d. Wax
e. Vaseline (petrolatum)

7. A pharmacist-technologist received an ointment formulation. Rp.:Unguentum Resorcini 1,5% - 10,0 Da. Signa. To be applied on the affected skin areas. The pharmaceutist incorporated dry medical substance into the ointment by the following way:
a. Triturated with a part of vaseline
*b. Triturated with a few vaseline oil drops
c. Triturated with a few water drops
d. Triturated with a few ethanol drops
e. Added to molten vaseline

8. A pharmacy got an order for eye drops containing 1% solution of pilocarpine hydrochloride. What substance was used in order to ensure isotonicity?
a. Sodium sulfate
*b. Sodium chloride
c. Glucose
d. Boric acid
e. Sodium nitrate

9. A pharmaceutist prepared some powders whose composition includes camphor. What capsules are required for their packaging?
a. Waxed
b. Paper
*c. Parchment
d. Paraffin
e. Cellophane

10. Ophthalmic drops are produced on the base of concentrated riboflavin solution (1:5000). How much solution should be taken if the formulation says "0,001 of riboflavin"?
a. 4 ml
b. 1 ml
c. 2 ml
d. 3 ml
*e. 5 ml

11. A doctor prescribed a patient 100 ml of tincture made out of 0,25 of Herba Thermopsidis. How much dried concentrated extract of Herba Thermopsidis should be weighed by a pharmaceutist?
a. 0,2 g
b. 0,1 g
c. 0,5 g
d. 0,3 g
*e. 0,25 g

12. A patient has ordered 50 g of zinc ointment. How much zinc and Vaseline should be weighed by a pharmaceutist?
a. 2,5 g and 47,5 g
b. 10,0 g and 40,0 g
*c. 5,0 g and 45,0 g
d. 1,0 g and 49,0 g
e. 0,5 g and 49,5 g

13. A doctor prescribed an olive oil emulsion whose composition includes anesthesin. In order that anesthesin can be incorpotated into the emulsion it should be dissolved:
a. In the alcohol and add to the primary emulsion
*b. In the oil before emulsifying
c. In the treated water
d. In the mature emulsion
e. In the primary emulsion

14. 100 ml of 0,9% sodium chloride solution were prepared according to the doctor’s prescription. What sterilization schedule is required for this solution?
a. 120oC - 15 minutes
b. 120oC - 12 minutes
*c. 120oC - 8 minutes
d. 180oC - 30 minutes
e. 100oC - 15 minutes

15. A pharmaceutist-technologist has to prepare a medication with the following formulation: Rp.:Mentholi 0,1 Glycerini 10,0 M.D.S. Nasal drops. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Adsorption of the medicinal agent
b. Separation of the mixture
*c. Insolubility of ingredients
d. Eutectic alloy formation
e. Coagulation of colloidal system

16. A pharmacy got an order for a mixture containing manzanita decoction and belladonna extract. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Redox (oxidation-reduction) processes
b. Hydrolysis
*c. Sedimentation
d. Liberation of gaseous substances
e. Coagulation of colloidal systems

17. A pharmaceutist prepared eyedrops with boric acid. What sterilization method was applied?
a. Sterilization by dry heat
b. Tyndallization
*c. Sterilization by saturation vapor pressure
d. Sterilization by gases
e. By high-frequency current

18. A pharmaceutist refused preparation of nasal drops to a patient because of incompatibility between collargol and dimedrol written in the prescription. What is the reason for incompatibility between these ingredients?
*a. Coagulation
b. Adsorption
c. Eutectic formation
d. Dissection
e. Immiscibility

19. Preparation of multicomponent powders with phenyl salicylate and camphor is accompanied by generation of some fluid. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
*a. Eutectic alloy formation
b. Crystallization water exudation
c. Gases separation
d. Hygroscopic components
e. Adsorption

20. A pharmaceutist was preparing an ointment with ricin oil and Vaseline but failed to get homogenous system. What is the most likely cause of incompatibility between these components?
a. Adsorption
*b. Component immiscibility
c. Release of water of crystallization
d. Restricted solubility
e. Coagulation

21. A pharmaceutist revealed incompatibility in a prescription for powders with ascorbic acid and hexamethylenetetramine. What process takes place when these components are combined?
a. Crystallization water exudation
*b. Mixture dampening
c. Immiscibility
d. Eutectic formation
e. Substances adsorption

22. A pharmaceutist revealed physical incompatibility caused by coagulation. This process takes place in a solution if the combination of the following substances is present:
*a. Dimedrol and collargol
b. Dimedrol and sodium chloride
c. Dimedrol and glucose
d. Dimedrol and diazoline
e. Dimedrol and novocaine

23. A pharmaceutist made a medicinal preparation according to the following formulation: Rp.:Chloroformii Olei Helianthi Methylii salicylatis ana 10,0 M.D.S. For infriction. Specify the kind of disperse system:
*a. Liniment - solution
b. Liniment - emulsion
c. Liniment - extractional
d. Liniment suspension
e. Liniment - combined

24. A pharmaceutist revealed physical incompatibility in a recipe. Specify the combination of drug substances demonstrating eutectic when blended:
*a. Camphor and menthol
b. Streptocid and antipyrine
c. Basic bismuth nitrate and magnesium oxide
d. Ascorbic acid and hydrocarbonate sodium
e. Glucose and phenyl salicylate

25. A pharmaceutist prepared a surface action ointment. What ointment base was used?
*a. Vaseline (petrolatum)
b. Kutumovas basis
c. Polyethylene oxide basis
d. Gelatin-glycerol base
e. Lanoline

26. A pharmacy received a prescription for preparation of dermatological ointment with benzylpenicillin. Specify the type of ointment that necessary to prepare:
a. Combined
*b. Suspension ointment
c. Hydrophilic ointment
d. Liquid ointment
e. Alloy ointment

27. During production of powders in a pharmacy physiochemical properties of certain ingredients should be taken into consideration. What pharmaceutical substance can be incorporated into the powder mass without additional grinding?
a. Salicylic acid
b. Streptocid
c. Camphor
d. Menthol
*e. Starch

28. Suspensions as heterogenous systems can be characterized by kinetic and sedimentary instability. What substance is used for increasing suspension stability with hydrophobic substances?
a. Glucose
*b. Gelatose
c. Boric acid
d. Sodium chloride
e. Sodium sulfate

29. Liquid dosage forms are prepared with concentrated solutions of pharmacetical substances or under consideration of volume increase factor during substance dissolution when the following substance is used as a solvent:
a. Polyethylene glycol-400
*b. Treated water
c. Glycerol
d. Aromatic water
e. Ethanol (ethyl alcohol)

30. While preparing decoctions in volume from 1000 to 3000 ml time of processing in boiling water bath should be:
a. 45 minutes
b. 15 minutes
c. 25 minutes
d. 30 minutes
*e. 40 minutes

31. Dispersion degree of drug substances is of great importance for the preparation of ophtalmic ointments. What drug substance should be thoroughly triturated with sterile vaseline oil before incorporating it into the pharmacopoeia-recommended ointment base?
a. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
b. Resorcin
*c. Mercuric oxide yellow
d. Zinc sulfate
e. Ethyl morphine hydrochloride

32. A pharmaceutist has prepared an ointment intended for application on the open wound surface. Such kind of ointment should meet the following additional requirement:
a. Prolonged action
*b. Sterility
c. Isoviscosity
d. Isotonicity
e. Isoionicity

33. Powders make up an important group among the extemporal medicinal preparations. Which of the following components can be incorporated into a powder without being preliminarily ground?
*a. Basic Bismuth nitrate
b. Camphor
c. Calcium gluconate
d. Xeroform
e. Ascorbic acid

34. A pharmaceutist is preparing powders according to the following formulation: Rp.:Scopolamini hydrobromidi 0,0003 Ephedrini hydrochlorodi 0,05 Sachari 0,15 M.f. pulvis D.t.d. № 10 S. 1 powder thrice a day. Calculate the mass of 1 powder providing that the trituration (1:100) is used:
a. 0,203
*b. 0,20
c. 0,23
d. 0,15
e. 0,17

35. A pharmaceutist is preparing powders by the way of triturating one of the components with ethyl alcohol. Such technology of preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Starch
b. Zinc oxide
c. Bolus alba
*d. Streptocid
e. Talc

36. A pharmaceutist prepared a suspension. It must contain the following amount of fluid in order to comply with Deriagins rule:
a. 0,1-1,0 millilitre for 1,0 substance
*b. 0,4-0,6 millilitre for 1,0 substance
c. 1,5-0,7 millilitre for 1,0 substance
d. 1-0,8 millilitre of 1,0 substance
e. 0,9-2 millilitres for 1,0 substance

37. A pharmacy got an order for powders containing ascorbic acid and sodium hydrocarbonate. What process takes place between the ingredients?
a. Sedimentation
b. Stratification
c. Oxidization
d. Absorption
*e. Dampening

38. A pharmacy got the following recipe: Rp.:Mucilaginis Amyli 50,0 Da. Signa. For the enema purposes. How much starch and distilled water did the pharmaceutist use in order to make this preparation?
a. 5,0 g of starch; 45 ml of distilled water
b. 10,0 g of starch; 40 ml of distilled water
c. 1,0 g of starch; 50 ml of distilled water
d. 2,0 g of starch; 48 ml of distilled water
*e. 1,0 g of starch; 49 ml of distilled water

39. A pharmacy produces some injection solutions that have to be apyrogenic. Solution of the following substance can be depyrogenized by method of adsorption with activated carbon?
a. Scopolamine hydrobromide
b. Platyphyllini hydrotartras
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Glucose

40. Powders that quickly enter into a reaction in presence of water and emit carbon dioxide relate to the following group:
a. Powders for external use
*b. Effervescent powder
c. Powders for oral use
d. Soluble powder
e. Nasal powders

41. Calculate the quantity of dried belladonna extract (1:2) required for preparing the following drug formulation: Extraсti Belladоnnae 0,015 Magnesii oxydi 0,5 Natrii hydrocarbonatis 0,2 Misce ut fiat pulvis Da tales doses №10 Signa. 1 powder thrice a day
a. 0,15
b. 0,6
c. 0,015
*d. 0,3
e. 0,4

42. A pharmaceutist is preparing rectal suppositories based on cocoa butter and containing dimedrol with mass concentartion less than 5%. For rational incorporation of dimedrol into the base it should be solved:
a. In the melted cocoa butter
b. In olive oil
*c. In the minimum amount of treated water
d. In vaseline oil
e. In alcohol

43. A pharmaceutist needs to sterilize 250 ml of glucose solution for injections. How many minutes should the solution undergo sterilization in the autoclave under the temperature of 120oC?
a. 25
b. 30
c. 8
d. 15
*e. 12

44. A pharmaceutist is preparing an ointment under aseptic conditions on the sterile ointment base - composition of vaseline and lanoline at a ratio 6:4. The drug substance is incorporated by suspension type. Such technology of ointment preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
b. Sodium sulfate
c. Sodium chloride
d. Thiamine chloride
*e. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt

45. This substance is of blue colour but unlike the colouring substances it doesn’t leave any stain. The powders prepared out of it are made according to the general rules. What substance is it?
a. Furacilin
*b. Copper sulfate
c. Riboflavin
d. Ethacridine lactate
e. Acrichine

46. A pharmaceutist brews an aqueous extract out of medicinal raw material in the tightly closed infusion vessel for 15 minutes and stirs it without opening the lid. Such technology of infusion preparation is typical for the following medicinal raw material:
a. Cowberry leaves
*b. Mint leaves
c. Senna leaves
d. Bilberry leaves
e. Manzanita leaves

47. A pharmaceutist made 10 powders containing atropine sulfate at a rate of 0,00005 pro dose. What trituration did he use?
*a. 1:100
b. 1:1000
c. 1:20
d. 1:50
e. 1:10

48. A pharmacy got an order for manzanita decoction and hexamethylenetetramine. A pharmacist cancelled it with a stamp "Invalid prescription". What is the reason for the incompatibility?
a. Insolubility
*b. Deposition
c. Oxidization
d. Eutectic
e. Moisture-repellant

49. A pharmaceutist prepares internal drops with the following formulation: 5 ml of adoniside, 10 ml of valerian and lily-of-the-valley tincture each, 0,1 g of menthol, 2,0 g of potassium bromide. It will be efficient to dissolve potassium bromide in the following substance:
a. Potassium bromide should be added into the selling vial last of all
*b. In the adoniside
c. In the valerian tincture
d. In the lily-of-the-valley tincture
e. In the mixture of tinctures

50. A pharmacist technologist revealed incompatibility in the following prescription: Rp.:Mentholi 0,5 Natrii hydrocarbonatis Natrii tetraboratis aa 1,5 Aquae purificatae 100 ml M.D.S. 1 tablespoon twice a day. In order to prepare this drug form the pharmacist should apply the following techniques:
a. Apply fractional dissolution
b. Change one of the component
c. Change dosage form
*d. Add stabilizer
e. Apply another solvent

51. A pharmaceutist is preparing vaginal suppositories by method of pouring. Which hydrophilic base can he use for this purpose?
a. Cocoa butter
b. Hard fat
c. Butyrol
*d. Polyethylene oxide
e. Vitepsol

52. An edema can be relieved by means of hypertonic solutions. What phenomenon takes place in the blood cells after injection of such solution?
a. Hydrolysis
b. Lipolysis
c. Electrolysis
*d. Plasmolysis
e. Hemolysis

