1. During local anaesthetization novocaine solution is usually compounded with solution of adrenaline hydrochloride. What is the purpose of this action?
*a. Vasoconstriction
b. Increase in smooth muscle tone
c. Algesthesia reduction
d. Decrease in smooth muscle tone
e. Vasodilatation

2. A 32-year-old patient takes antituberculous drugs. Some time later he has noticed that his urine turned orange. What preparation is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Pyrazinamide
b. Isoniazid
*c. Rifampicin
d. Ethambutol
e. Streptomycin sulfate

3. On the 4th day of treatment with indometacin a 55-year-old patient developed gastrorrhagia as a result of gastric mucosa ulcer. Ulcerogenic effect of this drug is explained by the lowered activity of the following enzyme:
a. Thromboxanetin sintetaza
b. Prostacyclin sintetaza
c. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX -2)
d. Lipoxygenase (LOG)
*e. Cyclooxygenase-1 (COX -1)

4. A patient suffering from peptic ulcer was administered ranitidine. Gastric juice acidity has reduced considerably. What mechanism underlies the action of this drug?
a. H,K-ATPase activity inhibition
b. Autonomic ganglion H-cholinergic receptors blockade
c. N1-histamine receptors blockade
d. M-cholinergic receptors blockade
*e. N2-histamine receptors blockade

5. A 52-year-old patient was diagnosed with systemic amebiasis accompanied by bowels, liver and lungs affection. What preparation should be administered?
a. Phthalazol
*b. Metronidazole
c. Tetracycline
d. Chiniofon
e. Chingamin

6. A 33-year-old woman who has been treated for chronic polyarthritis for a long time complains about arterial pressure rise, change of adipose tissue distribution, menstrual cycle disorder. What preparation has she taken?
a. Synaflan
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Indometacin
d. Butadion
*e. Prednisolone

7. A gravida in her 20th week of gestation fell ill with pneumonia. What chemotherapeutical drug may be administered with no risk for the fetus development?
*a. Веnzylpenicillinum
b. Sulfalenum
c. Ofloxacinum
d. Laevomycetinum
e. Gentamycin

8. During a surgical operation the muscle relaxant tubocurarine chloride was used. What antagonist drug should be injected in order to allow the patient to bref independently?
a. Cytitonum
b. Dithylinum
*c. Proserinum
d. Aethimizolum
e. Веnzohexonium

9. A child has accidentally drunk a solution that was used by his grandmother for glaucoma treatment. The solution turned out to be pilocarpine hydrochloride. What drug can be used as an antidote?
a. Реntaminum
*b. Аtropinum
c. Aceclidinum
d. Carbacholinum
e. Веnzohexonium

10. Choose an antiseptic from the group of halogen containing drugs that can be included into the first-aid kit for a child going to a summer camp:
a. Brilliant green solution
b. Methylene blue solution
c. Formaldehyde solution
*d. Alcoholic iodine solution
e. Copper sulfate solution

11. A pharmacy received a new-generation nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drug "meloxicam" that mainly blocks cyclooxygenase-2. What advantages does this preparation have in comparison with other nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs?
a. Minimal side effect on hematogenesis
b. Significant inhibition of protease activity
c. Evident myospasmolytic action
d. Interferonogenic properties
*e. Minimal side effect on alimentary tract

12. When fenoterolum for inhalations is not available in a pharmacy, it can be substituted by the following drug from the group of bronchoselective beta-2-adrenomimetics:
a. Metacinum
b. Isadrinum
*c. Salbutamolum
d. Ephedrinum
e. Еuphyllinum

13. A patient consulted an ophthalmologist about scotopic vision impairment, cornea dryness. What drug was prescribed?
a. Тосоpherol
b. Pyridoxine
*c. Retinolum
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Сосаrboxylasum

14. A patient suffering from essential hypertension has increased concentration of renin in blood plasma. Which pharmacological group should be preferred for this patient treatment?
a. Diuretics
b. ?-adrenoblockers
*c. ACE inhibitors
d. Blockers of calcium channels
e. Sympatholytics

15. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed almagel. Which of its pharmacological properties is intended for treatment of this pathology?
*a. HCl neutralization
b. Blocking the H2-histamine receptors
c. Anti-inflammatory action
d. Blocking the muscarinic cholinoreceptors
e. Local anaesthetization

16. A patient suffering from hypertension consulted a doctor about dry cough that was presumably provoked by antihypertensive therapy. What antihypertensive drug had she been taking?
a. Nifedipinе
b. Аtеnоlоl
*c. Lisinopril
d. Furosemidum
e. Hydrochlorthiazide

17. A patient suffering from ulcer disease was prescribed famotidine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Inhibition of adenosine triphosphatase activity
b. Block of cholinoreceptors of sympathetic ganglions
c. Block of Н1-histamine receptors
d. Block of muscarinic cholinoreceptors
*e. Block of Н2-histamine receptors

18. Which antiseptic preparation has bactericidal effect due to the formation of atomic oxygen?
a. Aethonium
b. Silver nitrate
c. Chloraminum
d. Furacilinum
*e. Potassium permanganate

19. During digitoxin therapy for chronic cardiac insufficiency, a patient developed signs of intoxication with this preparation. The patient was prescribed unithiol. What is the mechanism of unithiol action in case of intoxication with cardiac glycosides?
*a. Reduction of К+-Na+-adenosine triphosphatase
b. Increase of sodium concentration in the cardiomyocytes
c. Binding of glycoside into the complex compound
d. Increased potassium permeability in the cardiomyocytes
e. Binding of calcium ions

20. A 67-year-old patient with chronic heart failure takes digoxin. In order to reduce its side effects the patients doctor recommended to combine it with the followig drug:
a. Calcium gluconate
b. Hydrochlorthiazide
c. Calcium chloride
*d. Раnangin
e. Еuphyllinum

21. A patient suffering from neurosis accompanied by anxiety and fear development was prescribed diazepam. What pharmacological effect makes it possible to apply the drug for this disease treatment?
a. Antianginal
*b. Anxiolytic
c. Anti-inflammatory
d. Antiarrhythmic
e. Hypotensive

22. After a craniocerebral trauma a patient was administered pyracetam. This drug relates to the following pharmacological group:
a. Anesthetic agent
b. Neuroleptic
c. Nonnarcotic (nonopioid) analgetic
d. Tranquilizers
*e. Nootropic agent

23. In order to arrest stenocardia attacks a patient takes nitroglycerin capsules. What is the rational way of the drug introduction?
a. Rectal
b. Peroral
*c. Sublingual
d. Inhalation
e. Hypodermic

24. A hospital admitted a child with signs of poisoning with belladonna alkaloids. What drug should be applied as an antidote?
a. Sodium caffeine benzoate
b. Magnesium sulfate
*c. Proserin
d. Paracetamol
e. Sodium valproate

25. You are employed in a pharmaceutical storehouse. When adding newly received preparations to the computerized database, specify the pharmacological group of paracetamol:
*a. Nonnarcotic analgetic
b. Diuretic
c. Antianginal drug
d. Hypotensive drug
e. Hypnotic

26. A patient after bees stings has angioedema (Quinckes edema). Which drug should be immediately inject to eliminate this condition?
a. Аnарrilinum
*b. Epinephrine hydrochloride
c. Platyphyllini hydrotartras
d. Sodium chloride
e. Atropine sulfate

27. A patient with hypertension was administered metoprolol for the arterial pressure reduction. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Antispasmodic
b. Angiotensinic receptors blockade
c. Alpha adrenoceptor blockade
d. Indirect adrenomimetic action
*e. Beta adrenoreceptor blockade

28. A 34-year-old patient suffering from bronchitis was prescribed an antitussive drug of central action. What drug is it?
a. Enalapril
b. Corglycon
*c. Glaucine
d. Furosemide
e. Fercoven

29. Continuous taking of a drug results in reduction of its efficiency. This phenomenon is called:
a. Tachyphylaxis
*b. Habituation
c. Cumulation
d. Sensibilization
e. Dependence

30. A patient was warned that taking the prescribed preparation might cause cough. What drug is it?
a. Phenihidine
b. Clonidine
*c. Lisinopril
d. Dichlothiazide
e. Metoprolol

31. A patient with acute cardiac insufficiency and cardiac glycoside intolerance got an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Stimulation of alpha1-adrenoreceptors
b. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase activity
c. Stimulation of muscarinic cholinoreceptors
*d. Stimulation of beta1-adrenoreceptors
e. Block of K+-, Na+-adenosine triphosphatase

32. For thrombosis treatment a patient was prescribed a drug from the group of direct anticoagulants. What drug is it?
a. Syncumar
b. Fenilin (phenylinum)
*c. Heparin
d. Neodicumarin
e. Vikasol

33. A patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency was prescribed a cardiac glycoside from the foxglove (Digitalis) group. What drug is it?
a. Corvalol
b. Strophanthine
*c. Digoxin
d. Corglycon
e. Cordiamin

34. In course of pharmacotherapy of bronchitis a patient was found to have dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis, liver dysfunction. Which of the prescribed drugs might have caused these manifestations?
a. Codeine phosphate
*b. Doxycyсlin
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Paracetamolum
e. Асеtуlсуsteinum

35. A patient who has been suffering from gastric diseases for a long time is found to have hyperchromic anemia. Which of the following drugs is applied for this pathology treatment?
a. Охуferriscorbone
*b. Сyanocobalamine
c. Unitiol
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Ferrum Lek

36. A 25-year-old woman presenting with acute morphine intoxication was given an injection of naloxone that caused rapid improvement of her condition. The mechanism of action of this preparation is based on the block of the following receptors:
a. Dopamine
b. Benzodiazepine receptors
c. GABA-receptors
d. Serotonin receptors
*e. Opioid receptors

37. A man came to a pharmacy and asked to recommend him a drug for treatment of allergic rhinitis that occurs in the period of linden flowering. What drug may be applied?
a. Adrenaline
b. Ambroxol
c. Losartan
*d. Loratadine
e. Anapriline

38. It is necessary to prescribe non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug for patient with rheumatoid arthritis and concomitant duodenal ulcer. Which drug is the drug of choice in this case?
*a. Celecoxib
b. Paracetamol
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Analgin
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

39. During the sensitifity test for benzylpenicillin a patient developed anaphylactic shock. The following preparation must be injected around the spot of antibiotic injection:
a. Ceftriaxon
*b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
e. Propranolol

40. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed salbutamol that has led to relief of bronchospasm symptoms. This is associated with stimulation of:
a. Alpha-1-adrenoreceptors
b. Acetylcholine synthesis
c. Beta-1-adrenoreceptors
*d. Beta-2-adrenoreceptors
e. Muscarinic cholinoreceptors

41. Benzylpenicillin sodium is not used per os, because this drug:
a. Reduces formation of gastric HCl
b. Is destroyed by penicillinase
c. Poorly absorbed in the intestine
d. Irritates gastric mucosa
*e. Destroys gastric HCl

42. A 48-year-old patient was given an intravenous injection of prednisolone in order to arrest a severe attack of bronchial asthma. Prednisolone relates to the following group of hormonal drugs:
a. Mineral corticoids
b. Anabolic steroids
c. Gestagenic drugs
d. Estrogens
*e. Glucocorticoids

43. A patient who has been taking phenazepam for a month came to a pharmacy. He insisted on buying another two packs of this drug. According to the patient, he feels unwell without phenazepam. What is the mechanism of the developed side effect?
*a. Drug dependence
b. Aftereffect syndrome
c. Addiction
d. Cumulation
e. Idiosyncrasy

44. A patient suffering from allergic rhinitis was prescribed ephedrine in form of nasal drops. The patient has significantly benefited from nasal instillation, and this stimulated him to use the drug every 2 hours. But under these conditions the drug appeared to be ineffective. What is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
*a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Idiosyncrasy
c. Cumulation
d. Allergy
e. Drug dependence

45. Which anaesthetic, anti-inflammatory, the least harmful for the stomach preparation can be recommended to a patient with exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Ibuprofenum
c. Indometacinum
*d. Celecoxib
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

46. A patient suffering from epilepsy has taken Phenobarbital for a long time and developed drug tolerance. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon development?
a. Substances accumulation in the body
*b. Acceleration of biotransformation
c. Receptors sensitivity enhancement
d. Absorption process reduction
e. Inhibition of biotransformation

47. Absorption of tetracycline preparations will be reduced when they are administered simultaneously with antacids. This is an example for:
a. Drugs synergism
b. Functional drugs antagonism
c. Pharmaceutical incompatibility
d. Pharmacodynamic incompatibility
*e. Pharmacokinetic incompatibility

48. A patient being treated in the infectious disease ward for dysentery is administered phthalazol. What is the reason for phthalazol being used only for treatment of enteric infections?
a. Rapidly excreted in unchanged form
*b. The drug is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
c. Slowly eliminated from the body
d. The high degree of reabsorption in the kidneys
e. Rapidly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract

49. During an operation a dentist needs to reduce salivation in a patient. The dentist has to use a drug of the following pharmacological group:
*a. Muscarinic receptor blockers
b. Adrenomimetics
c. Muscarinic and nicotinic cholinomimetics
d. Adrenoceptor blocker
e. Muscarinic cholinomimetics

50. A consulting pharmacist informed a patient about possible side effect of metronidazole that is normally provoked by alcohol intake. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
*a. Enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase blocking
b. Enzyme acetylcholinesterase blocking
c. Enzyme glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase activation
d. Enzyme acetylcholinesterase activation
e. Enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase activation

51. A 40-year-old patient suffers from bronchial asthma and cardiac rhythm disturbance in form of bradyarrhythmia. Drugs of which pharmacological group should be administered for bronchospasm suppression?
*a. M-cholinergic antagonists
b. M-cholinomimetics
c. Muscle relaxant
d. Cholinesterase inhibitors
e. Beta-blockers

52. An interhospital pharmacy got an order from a surgical department for a depolarizing muscle relaxant for surgical interventions. What drug was ordered?
a. Methacin
b. Hygronium
c. Nicotine
d. Atropine sulfate
*e. Dithylinum

53. A patient who has taken phenobarbital for a long time was prescribed diclofenac sodium. However the anti-inflammatory effect of diclofenac appeared to be less than expected due to the pharmacokinetic interaction of these drugs. Such interaction might be the result of the following processes:
a. Increased drug dosage
*b. Accelerated drug metabolism in liver
c. Reduced protein concentration in plasma
d. Decelerated drug metabolism in liver
e. Change of receptor sensibility

