1. A pharmacy analyst supervises the state of a refractometer. For its calibration he needs some distilled water. The distilled water must have the following value of the refractive index:
*a. 1,3330
b. 1,3220
c. 1,3550
d. 1,3440
e. 1,3110

2. In order to identify a polyatomic glycerin alcohol a pharmacy analyst carries out dehydration reaction with potassium hydrosulfate. The generated hereat product has a strong characteristic smell and gives blue colour to the filter paper moistened with 1% solution of sodium nitroprusside and with piperidine. What product is it?
a. Acetic acid
b. Diethyl ethe
*c. Acrolein
d. Ethanol
e. Chloroform

3. A pharmacy analyst analizes distilled water. For this purpose he brings some amount of the sample material to the boiling point, adds 0,02 M solution of potassium permanganate and diluted sulfuric acid. After 5 minutes of boiling the pink colour of the produced solution should not change. The pharmacy analyst tries to detect the following admixture:
*a. Chemical reducing agent
b. Nitrates
c. Heavy metals
d. Sulfates
e. Carbon dioxide

4. An analytical laboratory carries out quantitative analysis of sodium citrate by method of ion-exchanging chromatography on a cationite. What titrated solution is to be used for the following titration of generated citric acid?
a. Trilon B
*b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Potassium iodate
d. Iodine
e. Hydrochloric acid

5. A pharmacy analyst can verify presence of iron cation (II) in a drug formulation by means of the following solution:
a. Sodium phosphate
*b. Ammonium sulfide
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Potassium bromide

6. When the glucose is heated with the copper-tartrate reagent (Fehlings reagent) the brick-red precipitate settles down. It indicates presence of the following group:
a. Etherific
b. Amide
c. Ketonic
d. Carboxyl
*e. Aldehyde

7. An analyst of a pharmaceutical storehouse received the substance of hydrogen peroxide for analysis. Quantitative determination of this drug should be performed by permanganatometric method. According to the analytical normative document, titration should be carried out till the solution turns:
a. Colourless
*b. Pink
c. Yellow
d. Green
e. Dark blue

8. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a pharmacy analyst is measuring iron admixture in a preparation by means of citric and thioglycolic acids. What staining indicates presence of this admixture?
a. Black
*b. Pink
c. Yellow
d. Green
e. Blue

9. An analytical laboratory received substance of citric acid for the analysis. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, citric acid can be determined by method of:
a. Bromatometry
b. Iodochlorometry
c. Iodometry
d. Acidimetry
*e. Alkalimetry

10. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, the amount of calcium gluconate can be determined by the chelatometric method. What solution should be used as a titrant?
a. Potassium permanganate
b. Argentum nitrate
c. Hydrochloric acid
*d. Sodium edetate
e. Iodine monochloride

11. Codeine can be derived for medical purposes out of a plant alkaloid by means of semisynthetic method. Name this alkaloid:
a. Protopine
b. Chelidonine
c. Papaverine
d. Berberine
*e. Morphine

12. During the analysis of diethyl ether (Aether medicinales) you can determine presence of aldehydes as a specific admixture. Which of the following reragents can be used for determining presence of aldehyde admixture?
*a. Potassium tetraiodomercurate alkaline
b. Iron (III) cloride
c. Potassium sulfate
d. Acetic acid
e. Phenolphtalein

13. Quantitative analysis of drugs containing primary aromatic amine can be performed by means of nitritometric method. Which of the following preparations can be determined by the nitritometric method without preliminary acid hydrolysis?
a. Soluble streptocid
*b. Sulfadimine
c. Phthazin
d. Phthalazol
e. Paracetamol

14. An analyst of the National drug quality control inspection identifies "Sulfametoxazol" by adding the solutions of hydrochloric acid, sodium nitrite and beta-naphthol to the preparation. Thereat intense red colour is observed. What functional group is identified by this reaction?
a. Sulpho group
b. Secondary aromatic amino
*c. Primary aromatic amino
d. Carboxyl group
e. Aldehyde group

15. In order to detect an admixture of potassium in medical preparations a pharmacy analyst should carry out a reaction with:
*a. Sodium tetraphenylborate
b. Boric acid
c. Salicylic acid
d. Sulfuric acid
e. Sodium tetraborate

16. An analyst of the National drug quality control inspection carries out quantitative analysis of "Resorcin" substance by method of bromatometry (back titration). What indicator is used by doing so?
a. Phenolphtalein
b. Sodium eozinat
c. Ammonium iron (III) sulfate
d. Potassium chromate
*e. Starch

17. An expert of an analytical laboratory is determining Nitrofural. What quantitative titrimetric method can be applied?
a. Nitritometry
*b. Iodometry
c. Alkalimetry
d. Permanganatometry
e. Argentometry

18. A pharmacy analyst is determining one of the following drugs by the nintritometric method. What drug is it?
a. Ftivazide
b. Ammonium chloride
c. Atropine sulfate
*d. Norsulfazole
e. Analgin

19. Specify the reaction to the ester-type drugs that is tolerated by the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia:
a. Formation of tayleohin
*b. Formation of iron hydroxamates
c. Formation of indophenol
d. Formation of azo dye
e. Formation of 3-bromphenol

20. A pharmacist-analyst is measuring the quantity of an adrenaline tartrate substance by method of acid-base titration in nonaqueous solvents. Which indicator is to be used in this case according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia?
*a. Crystal violet
b. Phenolphtalein
c. Eriochrome black
d. Thymolphthalein
e. Methyl orange

21. Which of the following drugs a pharmacist-analys can quantify by ceriometry method?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Phenyl salycylate
c. Phenobarbital
*d. Vicasolum
e. Sodium benzoate

22. A pharmacist-analyst is measuring the quantity of a drug by method of indirect bromatometry. Which of the following titrated solutions is to be used?
a. Sodium edetate
b. Calcium bromate
*c. Sodium thiosulfate
d. Sodium nitrite
e. Argentum nitricum (silver nitrate)

23. An expert of an analytical laboratory is determining Ca2+ in the substance of calcium pantothenate. Specify the method of analysis:
a. Iodometry
*b. Chelatometry
c. Argentometry
d. Nitritometry
e. Permanganatometry

24. A pharmacist-analyst carries out quantitative analysis of procaine hydrochloride. Which of the following solutions is to be used?
a. Sodium edetate
b. Sodium thiosulfate
*c. Sodium nitrite
d. Potassium bromate
e. Argentum nitricum

25. A pharmacy analyst carries out purity test of the drug substance "Sodium thiosulfate". Violet colour, that comes from reaction with sodium nitroprusside, indicates the presence of the following admixture:
a. Sulphates admixture
b. Sodium chloride admixture
c. Iodides admixture
*d. Specific sulfides admixture
e. Sulfur admixture

26. An analytical laboratory received "Adrenalini tartras" substance for analysis. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, quantitative analysis of this substance can be carried out by method of:
a. Nitritometry
b. Bromatometry
c. Acidimetry in aqueous medium
d. Iodometry
*e. Acidimetry in non-aqueous medium

27. The basic structure of steroid hormones is hydrocarbon skeleton - cyclopentane perhydrophenanthrene. What natural compound is used for testosterone propionate production?
*a. Cholesterol
b. Naphthalene
c. Anthracene
d. Phenanthrene
e. Indole

28. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a pharmacy analyst is determining procaine hydrochloride by nitritometric method. What indicator should be used for this purpose?
a. Acid chrome blue
*b. Neutral red
c. Crystal violet
d. Methyl red
e. Xylenol orange

29. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a pharmacy analyst is determining fluorouracil by method of nonaqueous titration. What titrated solution is to be used?
a. Sodium nitrite
b. Ammonium thiocyanate
c. Sodium edetate
*d. Tetrabutyl ammonium hydroxide
e. Potassium bromate

30. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a pharmacy analyst is determining calcium gluconate quantity by method of complexometric titration. What indicator is to be used?
a. Tropeoline 00
*b. Calconcarboxylic acid
c. Crystal violet
d. Methyl red
e. Thymolphthalein

31. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a certain drug is being measured by method of chelatometric titration. What drug is it?
a. Sodium benzoate
b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Potassium citrate
d. Potassium chloride
*e. Calcium chloride

32. An analytical laboratory carries out an analysis of ferrum sulphate heptohydrate according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia. The test portion of the substance should be titrated with the following solution:
a. Sodium edetate
b. Potassium bromate
c. Argentum nitrate
d. Ammonium thiocyanate
*e. Ammonium cerium sulfate

33. A pharmacy analyst identifies sodium hydrocarbonate. What indicator can confirm the presence of alkalescent medium reaction in the sodium hydrocarbonate solution?
a. Starch
b. Ferroin
c. Naphtholbenzein
*d. Phenolphtalein
e. Tropeolin 00

34. An analyst is measuring sodium benzoate in the anhydrous medium by the acidimetric method according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia. What reagent had to be used as a solvent?
a. Water
b. Pyridine
*c. Anhydrous acetic acid
d. Dimethyl formamide
e. Methanol

35. A pharmacy analyst is measuring mercury dichloride by method of indirect chelatometry. Excess of titrated solution of sodium edetate can be titrated by means of the following titrated solution:
a. Sodium thiosulfate
b. Sodium hydroxide
*c. Zinc sulfate
d. Potassium bromate
e. Sodium methylate

36. Calcium lactate can be quantitatively determined by chelatometric method. According to the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, the following substance should be used as indicator:
a. Tropeolin 00
*b. Calconcarbon acid
c. Naphthol benzein
d. Diphenylcarbazone
e. Phenolphthalein

37. A pharmacy analyst of an analytical laboratory is studying procaine hydrochloride according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia. What method is recommended by the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia for the quantitative analysis of this preparation?
a. Acidimetry
b. Bromatometry
*c. Nitritometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Chelatometry

38. As main reagent in test for phosphates admixtures the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia recommends to use:
a. Acetylacetone
b. Hypophosphite
c. Cupric tartrate
d. Thioacetamide
*e. Sulfomolybdenum

39. Salicylates are widely applied in medical practice as anti-inflammatory drugs. For quantitative analysis of salicylic acid the following method is applied:
a. Argentometry
b. Nitritometry
*c. Alkalimetry
d. Permanganatometry
e. Chelatometry

40. Theobromine and theophylline can be determined by alkalimetric method according to the substituent. What acid is to be titrated with sodium hydroxide?
a. Acetic
b. Phosphoric
c. Chydrochloric
d. Sulfuric
*e. Nitric

41. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia (Supplement 1), a pharmacy analyst has to carry out quantitative analysis of potassium iodide by means of the following method:
*a. Iodatometry
b. Acidimetry
c. Nitritometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Complexonometry

42. A pharmacy has sulfonamide biseptol on sale. What chemical compounds are the main components of this drug?
a. Urosulfan, sulfapiridazin
*b. Sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim
c. Sulgin, norsulfazol
d. Sulfazin, salazodimethoxinum
e. Phthalazolum, sulfadimezin

43. In course of isoniazid identification a pharmacy analyst boiled thoroughly the substance with 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene. The substance turned yellow, after adding alkaline solution it turned first violet and then brownish-red. As a result of this reaction the following aldehyde derivative is produced:
*a. Glutakon
b. Glutamic
c. Hexanic
d. Glyoxylic
e. Gluconic

44. In order to verify identity of tropan derivatives, Vitali’s reaction is applied. For that purpose the medications should be first decomposed with nitric acid and then treated with alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide and acetone. What effect will be observed?
a. Setting of white precipitate
*b. The solution will turn purple
c. Emission of gas bubbles
d. The solution will turn green
e. Setting of black precipitate

45. Which of the mentioned below drugs has the following chemical name: n-aminobenzoic acid diethylaminoethyl ester hydrochloride:
a. Dimedrol
b. Tetracaine
c. Streptomycin
*d. Novocaine
e. Streptocid

46. Quantitative determination of nitrofural (furacilin) can be done by method of spectrophotometry. A pharmacy analyst can calculate quantity by measuring:
a. Rotation angle
b. Refractive index
*c. Optical density
d. pH of solution
e. Fusion temperature

47. Analgin substance was sent for analysis. What method allows to evaluate quantitative content of analgin?
a. Permanganatometry
*b. Iodometry
c. Alkalimetry
d. Acidimetry
e. Chelatometry

48. A pharmacy analyst is studying substance of calcium lactate. In presence of ammonium chloride calcium cation forms white crystalline precipitation with the following reagent:
a. Sodium cobaltnitrite
*b. Potassium ferrocyanide
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Sodium tetraborate

49. Analytical laboratories oten use 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol solution, which is normally blue and can be decolourized by the reducing agents. What drug can be identified by means of 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol solution?
*a. Ascorbic acid
b. Nicotinic acid
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Benzoic acid
e. Salicylic acid

50. A pharmacy analyst of the laboratory at the National drug quality control inspection is conducting quantitative determination of caffeine by method of acid-base titration in the anhydrous solvents according to the requirements of National Pharmacopeia of Ukraine. What titrated solution is to be used?
a. Potassium bromate
*b. Perchloric acid
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Sodium methylate
e. Sodium edetate

51. Pharmaceutical chemistry studies methods of drug synthesis. Interaction of anesthesin with beta-diethylaminoethanol in presence of sodium alcoholate with following acidation with hydrochloric acid results in origination of:
*a. Procaine hydrochloride
b. Tetracaine hydrochloride
c. Trimecaine hydrochloride
d. Xycain
e. Procainamide hydrochloride

52. After a sulfamide preparation was heated with salicylic acid in presence of concentrated sulfuric acid, it turned crimson. What drug is analyzed?
a. Streptocid
b. Ethazol
c. Phtalazol
*d. Soluble streptocid
e. Sulfaguine

53. Which of the following reagents should be added to the isoniazid to achieve blue colour and precipitation that turns light-green and emits gases when heated?
a. Alkaline solution
b. Silver nitrate solution
*c. Copper sulfate solution
d. Hydrochloric acid solution
e. Iron (III) chloride solution

