1. A patient with heart failure induced by a long-term coronary vessel disorder can be administered a drug produced out of the following herbal raw material:
a. Ginseng roots
b. Calendula flowers
*c. Hawthorn
d. Aralia roots
e. Berberis roots

2. A patient came to a drugstore and ordered cowberry leaves. Which of the available herbal raw materials can be offered as a substitute?
*a. Folium Uvae ursi
b. Rizoma et radix Sanquisorbae officinalis
c. Radix Taraxaci officinalis
d. Herba Achilleae millefolii
e. Rizoma Calami

3. Preparations on the basis of dandelion roots are recommended for better digestion and as a choleretic because this herbal raw material contains:
*a. Bitters
b. Balsams
c. Flavonoids
d. Saponins
e. Essential oil

4. Preparations made of ginseng roots have tonic and adaptogenic properties, improve mental and physical performance. If the ginseng tincture cannot be found in a pharmacy, it can be substituted by the analogous preparations made of the following raw material:
*a. Radices Eleutherococci
b. Radices Inulae
c. Radices Rhei
d. Radices Ononidis
e. Radices Valerianae

5. Coltsfoot preparations are used for upper airways treatment. During procurement of this herbal raw material the following admixture may appear:
a. Common plantain (Plantago major)
b. Marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis)
c. Pot marjoram (Origanum vulgare)
*d. Great bur (Arctium lappa)
e. Spring adonis (Adonis vernalis)

6. If the internal surface of buckthorn rind is moistened with 5% alkaline solution, it becomes cherry-red colouring. This is the evidence of presence of the following substance:
a. Tannins
*b. Anthracene derivatives
c. Saponins
d. Alkaloids
e. Flavonoids

7. Leaves of belladonna, henbane and datura containing tropane alkaloids must be stored according to the following list requirements:
a. List of substances equivalent to narcotics
*b. B list (these drug substances require caution in handling, storage or use)
c. General sales list
d. A list (poisonous drug substances)
e. Essential oil materials list

8. One of the ways to derive essential oil is enfleurage, or maceration. Essential oil can be derived by enfleurage from the following herbal raw material:
a. Coriander fruits
b. Lemon skin
*c. Petals of Damascus rose
d. Mint leaves
e. Camomile flowers

9. Tannins have astringent effect and are used for treatment of colitis, enterocolitis, diarrhea. What herbal raw material contains a lot of tannins?
a. Fructus Rhamni catharticae
b. Fructus Frangulae
c. Fructus Sambucci nigri
d. Fructus Ribes nigri
*e. Fructus Myrtilli

10. Emodin, an anthracene derivative, haspurgative effect. Large quantities of anthracene-derived groups of emodin are contained in the fruits of the following plant:
a. Elder (Sambucus)
b. Blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus)
c. Alder buckthorn (Frangula alnus)
*d. Buckthorn
e. Blackcurrant

11. Cardioglycosides of Adonis vernalis are used for heart failure treatment. This plant raw material should be stored:
a. Protected from CO2
b. In metal containers
c. According to the list A
d. Under normal conditions
*e. According to the list B

12. In order to determine the purity a drop of lavender essential oil was applied on a strip of filter paper and warmed up in the stream of warm air. Some time later the stain increased in diameter. What impurity substance was found in the lavender oil?
a. Acetone
b. Diethyl ether
c. Phenol
d. Ethanol
*e. Fatty or mineral oil

13. Styles of maize with stigmata containing fatty acids, vitamins, essential oils, saponins and other substances are used as:
a. Sedative and anticonvulsant
b. Expectorant and antibechic
c. Bactericidal and astringent
*d. Diuretic and choleretic
e. Cardiotonic and antiarrhythmic

14. Yellow gentian contains bitter glycosides. Raw material of this plant is reccomended for production of drugs with the following effect:
a. Tonic
b. Hepatoprotective
c. Venotonic
*d. Stimulates appetite
e. Diuretic

15. Preparations of common valerian are used in medical practice as sedative drugs. The main feature that allows to distinguish valerian from the admixtures is:
a. Specific taste
b. No specific odor
*c. Specific odor
d. Specific color of raw materials
e. Stems remains

16. One of the methods of quantitative analysis of active substances in the raw material is the biological standardization. It can be applied with the following group of biologically active substances:
a. Tannins
b. Mucilages
c. Alkaloids
d. Fatty oils
*e. Cardiac gliycosides

17. A phytopreparation "Flacarbinum" has spasmolytic, anti-inflammatory and antiulcer effect. This preparation is produced out of the following plant:
a. Mountain angelica (Aralia mandshurica)
b. Pot marigold (Calendula officinalis)
c. Jacobs ladder blue (Polemonium caeruleum)
d. Buckeye (Aesculus)
*e. Licorice (Glycyrrhiza)

18. Styles of maize with stigmata containing fatty acids, vitamins, essential oils, saponins and other substances are used as:
a. Sedative and anticonvulsive drug
b. Cardiotonic and antiarrhythmic drug
c. Expectorant and antitussive drug
d. Bactericidal and astringent drug
*e. Diuretic and choleretic drug

19. Fatty oil containing unsaturated fatty acids are used for atherosclerosis prevention. What herbal raw material contains such fatty oil?
*a. Cucurbit seeds
b. Chestnut (Castanea) seeds
c. Scurfy pea (Psoralea) fruitages
d. Parsnip fruitages
e. Buckhorn plantain (Plantago lanceolata) seeds

20. Fatty oil containing saturated fatty acids is used for atherosclerosis prevention. Specify the medicinal plant that is used for oil production:
a. Hawthorn fruits
*b. Flax seeds
c. Dill seeds
d. Fennelflower seeds
e. Black chokeberry fruits

21. A storehouse received a batch of althaea roots. For its verification a drop of ammonia solution was applied upon the root section; the spot of section turned yellow. This is the evidence of presence of the following substance:
*a. Mucilages
b. Gum
c. Vitamin C
d. Pectins
e. Tannins

22. Upper airways diseases can be treated by means of herbal raw materials containing mucilages. The plant source of this compound class is:
a. Radix Belladonnae
*b. Radix Althaeae
c. Radix Ipecacuanhae
d. Radix Inulae
e. Radix Rhodiolae

23. Preparations containing cardiosteroids are produced out of the following herbal raw material:
a. Cortex Quercus
b. Folia Ficusi Caricae
c. Folia Sennae
*d. Herba Convallariae
e. Radix Taraxaci

24. A laboratory received some herbal raw material for analysis. It is a composition of ovoid-pointed leaves up to 25 cm long and 20 cm wide; the leaf base is cuneate, the leaf edge is emarginate, The cutting is long and cylindric. The leaf venation is pinnatisect; the midrib and the first-order veins project significantly on the inferior surface of the leaf. The superior leaf surface is dark green, the inferior surface is light green. The plant has a weak narcotic smell. The taste cannot be determined. The plant is poisonous! The described herbal raw material relates to the following plant:
a. Chelidonium majus
b. Passiflora incarnata
*c. Datura stramonium
d. Vinca minor
e. -

25. Tanning agents of silverweed roots and rhizomes are used as an astringent. What species of silverweed is pharmacopoeial?
a. Potentilla anserina
*b. Potentilla erecta
c. Potentilla pilosa
d. Potentilla argentea
e. Potentilla impolita

26. Some domestic and foreign hepatoprotective activity preparation are made of holy thistle bearing. Purity of this material is determined by the content of:
a. Coumarins
b. Vitamins
c. Terpenoids
*d. Flavolignan
e. Alkaloids

27. Preparations made out of eleutherococcus roots and rhizomes are administered as a tonic and adaptogenic drug. If these preparations cannot be found in a pharmacy, they can be substituted by the analogous preparations made of the following raw material:
a. Elecampane roots
b. Polemonium roots
c. Acorus calamus roots
*d. Ginseng roots
e. Rhizomes and roots of valerian

28. A biennial or perennial plant from the Apiaceae family has a blue-grey stem branching in its lower part. Its leaves are also blue-grey, finely dissected, with the ultimate filiform segments. The flowers are yellow, in compound umbels. Its fruit is used for production of "dill water". What plant is it?
a. Conium maculatum
*b. Foeniculum vulgare
c. Petroselium crispum
d. Carum carvi
e. Coriandrum sativum

29. On the base of licorice root different drug dosage forms are produced, notably tablets, powders, syrups, teas. The only unused form is injection solution. Licorice roots exhibit haemolytic properties typical for the following active substances:
a. Essential oils
b. Alkaloids
*c. Saponins
d. Iridoids
e. Polysaccharides

30. Tincture of what medicinal plant can be applied as a tonic?
a. Robinia pseudacacia
*b. Rhodiola rosea
c. Orthosiphon stamineus
d. Achillea millefolium
e. Digitalis purpurea

31. Restharrow (Ononis) root is used for production of a tincture applied for treatment of haemorrhoidal haemorrhages. Isoflavonoids can be identified in the raw material by means of:
a. Cyanidin test
b. Biological standardization
c. Foam number
*d. Chromatographic method
e. Hemolytic index

32. Hawthorn flowers are used for production of cardiotonic drugs. During procurement of this crude drug the flowers of the following plant can appear in it:
a. Brier
b. Elder
c. Buckthorn
d. Bird-cherry
*e. Blackthorn

33. Common juniper is applied as a diuretic, anti-inflammatory and cholagogic agent. This plant gives the following medicinal raw material:
a. Sprouts
b. Roots
c. Seeds
*d. Fruits
e. Leaves

34. A pharmacy procured common origanum. What drying conditions should be applied for producing high quality crude drug?
*a. 35-40oC
b. 60-70oC
c. 70-80oC
d. 50-60oC
e. 80-90oC

