1. A tablet production unit produces press-coated tablets. What equipment is used for this purpose?
a. Eccentric tabletting machine
b. Triturating machine
c. Dragee pan
d. Marmerizer
*e. Double pressing tabletting machine

2. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces a dense extract with 0,25% ammonia solution used as an extractant. This dense extract is:
a. Motherwort (Leonurus)
*b. Licorice
c. Valerian
d. Sagebrush (Artemisia)
e. Male fern

3. Aerosol production involves application of different groups of propellents. What propellents relate to the group of compressed gases?
a. Propane, butane, isobutane
b. Freon
*c. Nitrogen, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide
d. Vinyl chloride, methyl chloride
e. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride

4. For granule drying different types of dryers are used. The dryer SP-30 relates to the following type:
a. Sublimation
b. With silica gel column
c. With a forced air circulation
*d. With fluidized bed
e. Infrared

5. Quality control of tablets produced at a pharmaceutical enterprise involves quantitative determination of such subsidiary substances as talc and aerosil. What method is applied for such determination?
a. Chromatographic
*b. Gravimetric
c. Photocolorimetric
d. Titrimetric
e. Spectrophotometric

6. While producing phytopreparations and organotherapeutic preparations different kinds of dryers are used. What dryer would be the most effective for drying thermolabile compounds?
a. Roller dryer
b. Drying oven
c. Drum dryer
*d. Freeze-dryer
e. Band dryer

7. Injection solutions of salts derived from weak acids and strong bases require stabilization. What stabilizers are used for these solutions?
a. Buthylhydroxytoluene (BHT)
*b. 0,1 M sodium hydroxide solution
c. Trilon B
d. 0,1 M acid chloride solution
e. Ascorbic acid

8. One of the tablet coatings is enterosoluble capsule. They get solved in:
a. -
*b. Bowels
c. Oral cavity
d. Stomach
e. Rectum

9. Aerosol composition includes active substances, solvents and propellents. Which of the following substances is used as propellent?
*a. Freon-11, carbon oxide, propane-butane
b. Propylen glycol monostearate, argon, helium
c. Hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen, triethanolamine
d. Linethol, myristic acid, benzocaine
e. Isopropyl myristate, neon, sulfur oxide

10. Efficiency of aerosol therapy is to a considerable extent determined by the size of disperse particles. What factor determines the size of aerosol particles during dispersion of an aerosol?
a. Fractional composition, containers filling method
*b. Exit port diameter, propellent vapour pressure
c. System homogeneity, dispersion velocity
d. Reduction range, container quantity
e. Percentage of phase, filling temperature

11. A department producing sterile pharmaceutical forms needs a method of eye drops sterilization applicable for drugs derived from thermolabile substances. What is the optimal method of sterilization?
a. Use of polymeric packings
*b. Sterile filtration
c. Addition of ascorbic acid
d. Thermal sterilization
e. Filling in the inert gas medium

12. In the production of injection solutions the activated carbon is used as:
a. Antioxidant properties increasing
b. Buffer system creation
*c. Purification
d. Chemical resistance of ampoules glass increasing
e. Ampoules residual stress relaxation

13. Lipophilic bases for suppositories include:
a. Glycerol soap base
*b. Mixtures of hydrogenatedd fats
c. Gelatin-glycerol base
d. Polyethylene oxide base
e. Collagen base

14. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces nitroglycerine tablets. What is the method of their production?
*a. Extrusion
b. Direct pressing with addition of adjuvants
c. Pressing with preliminary dry granulation
d. Pressing with preliminary wet granulation
e. Direct pressing, without adjuvants

15. Quality of injection solutions supplied in ampoules can be assessed according to different indices. How many ampoules should be checked while determining quality of sealing (leaktightness of an ampoule)?
a. 50%
*b. 100%
c. 80%
d. 97%
e. 75%

16. A chemical department produces alcohol solution of boric acid. What filters are used for filtration of this solution?
a. Membrane filter
*b. Pressure filters
c. Nutsch filter
d. Paper filter
e. Bag filter

17. An ampule production unit produces glucose solution. If the special sort of glucose "for injections" is not available, then the glucose should be separated from the following admixtures:
a. Sulfates and iron (Fe)
b. Pyretogenetic and proteic substances
c. Proteic substances and dyes
*d. Pyretogenetic and dyes
e. Manganese and iron (Fe)

18. A department of a pharmaceutical plant produces injection solutions. Ascorbic acid solution for injections relates to the following group of solutions:
a. Solutions of salts derived from strong bases and weak acids
b. Solutions of substances requiring special rectification
c. Solutions of substances that should be subjected to thermal sterilization
d. Solutions of salts derived from weak bases and strong acids
*e. Easily oxidized solutions

19. A phytochemical production unit produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the biogenic stimulators of organo-mineral origin:
a. Extractum Aloes fluidum, Linimentum Aloes, Рlasmolum
b. Peloidinum, Humisolum, Torfotum, Рlasmolum, Solcoseryl
c. Extractum Aloes fluidum, Linimentum Aloes, Succus Aloes, Biosedum
d. Vitreous body, Placenta injection, Рlasmolum, Solcoseryl
*e. Peloidinum, Humisolum, Torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus

20. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the plant-derived biogenic stimulators:
*a. Liquid extract of aloe, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biosedum
b. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
c. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmol, solcoseryl
d. Vitreous body, Suspesio Рlacetae prо injectionibus, aloe juice, biosedum
e. Liquid extract of aloe, peloidinum, biosedum juice

21. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces water solutions. The solution of the following substance is produced by method of chemical interaction and electrochemically:
*a. Aluminum hydroxide acetate
b. Calcium gluconate
c. Potassium arsenite
d. Polyvinyl alcohol
e. Plumbum hydroxide acetate

22. According to the pharmacopoeia requirements of liquid extract production, the extractant and the raw material should be taken in the following proportion:
*a. 1:1
b. 1:5
c. 1:4
d. 1:10
e. 1:3

23. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces neogalenic preparations. Which preparation is produced by the use of Soxhlet circulation apparatus?
a. Corglyconum
b. Digoxin
*c. Аdonisidum
d. Lantosidum
e. Сеlanidum

24. Aerosol production involves usage of propellents relating to different groups. Choose the propellants that relate to the group of volatile organic solvents:
a. Freons
b. Vinyl chloride and methyl chloride
c. Carbon dioxide
*d. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride
e. Propane, butane, isobutane

25. Which of the following drug forms is produced in granules?
a. Rеvitum
b. Lincomycin hydrochloride
c. Diazolinum
d. Мucaltinum
*e. Plantaglucide

26. A pharmaceutical factory produces camphor oil for topical application. What oil is to be used as a solvent?
*a. Sunflower seed
b. Vaseline
c. Plum
d. Olive
e. Peach

27. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces ointments. What base is applied for production of sulfur ointment simple?
a. Polyethylene glycol
*b. Emulsion
c. Base for ophthalmic ointments
d. Vaseline
e. Lanolin

28. Adjuvant substances in the production of tablets give the tableted mass all necessary technological properties, ensure dosage precision, mechanical strength and stability of tablets during their storage. What adjuvant substances facilitate disintegration or solution of the tablets in the organism?
a. Filling agents
b. Flavors
c. Antifriction agents
d. Lubricants
*e. Disintegrants

29. Aerosol department of a pharmaceutical factory uses condensed gases in the capacity of propellents. Which of the following substances relates to the group of condensed gases?
a. Methylene chloride
b. Ethylene chloride
c. Nitrogen
d. Nitrous oxide
*e. Freon

30. A pharmaceutical factory produces herbal juice out of fresh raw material. What operation should be performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Adsorption
b. Sedimentation
*c. Heating followed by quick cooling
d. Filtration
e. Crystallization

31. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces valerian tincture of fresh material. Technological peculiarity of its production is that it should be produced on the base of:
a. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:5
b. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
*c. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:5
d. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
e. 95% ethanol with the ratio 1:10

