1. For isolation of alkaloids from biological material by Kramarenkos method extract is cleaned. For what operation ammonium sulphate is added to extract?
a. Chloroform extraction
*b. Salting-out
c. Centrifugation
d. Infusion
e. Ether extraction

2. Analysis of an extract by chromatographic method revealed presence of phenyl prapanolamine. It is the metabolite of the following alkaloid:
a. Reserpine
*b. Ephedrine
c. Aconitine
d. Pyrocatechin
e. Securinin

3. It is necessary to make rapid analysis of opiates in urine. Which of the following methods is the most sensitive?
a. Extraction photometric
*b. Immunoenzyme
c. Photometric
d. Chromatographic
e. Spectrochemical in the UV region

4. TLC-screening is used for omnidirectional investigation of "acid" chloroform extract. For detection of barbiturates following developers are used:
*a. Diphenylcarbazide and mercury sulfate
b. Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate
c. Isopropylamine
d. Ditizone
e. Diphenylamine

5. О-methylation is an important method of organic substances biotransformation in the body, compounds that are subject to such method contain:
*a. Phenolic groups
b. Tthiol groups
c. Carboxyl groups
d. Nitro groups
e. Amides

6. Method of gas-liquid chromatography is often applied for identification and quantitative determination of toxicologically meaningful substances. Substances can be placed into the chromatograph dispenser in the following aggregate states:
a. Liquid
b. Gaseous
c. Liquid and solid
d. Gaseous and solid
*e. Liquid and gaseous

7. It is necessary to analyse incrustation of reducing tube after Marsh test for arsenicum to exclude in biological materials compounds of:
a. Waist
b. Argentum
*c. Stibiy
d. Cadmium
e. Zinc

8. Substances that enter the body subject to various transformations under enzymes influence. What is the direction of mono- and polyatomic alcohol metabolism has the largest toxicological value?
a. Hydroxylation
b. Conjugation
c. -
*d. Oxidization
e. Dealkylation

9. A chemotoxicological laboratory received a biological material. A toxicologist carries out uncontrollable analysis aimed at detection of the following group of toxic substances:
a. Mineral acids, alkali, inorganic salts
*b. Volatile toxins
c. Metal toxins
d. Medical use toxins
e. Pesticides

10. A patient has accidentally taken a barium-containing salt. All of the following salts have toxic effect upon the human organism EXCEPT for:
a. Barium nitrate
b. Barium carbonate
*c. Barium sulfate
d. Barium acetate
e. Barium chloride

11. A mineralizate under examination contains precipitates of barium sulfate and plumbum sulfate. These salts can be separated by means of:
a. Solution of sodium acetate
b. Solution of ammonium nitrate
c. Sulfuric acid
d. Acetic acid
*e. Solution of ammonium acetate

12. Toxic substances can be isolated from the objects of biological origin by different methods. In case of poisoning with pesticides - derivatives of phosphoric acids - the following method is applied:
a. Distillation with water steam from the alkaline medium
b. Infusion with water acidified with chloric acid
c. Dialysis aout of alkalized solutions
*d. Infusion with organic solvents
e. Infusion with alkalized water

13. Reaction with KI solution which is called "Golden Rain Reaction" helps to detect presence of the followingg toxic metal:
a. Cu
b. Ba
*c. Pb
d. Ag
e. Mn

14. Presence of ethanol in a biological sample can be demonstrated by the following reaction:
a. With sodium nitroprusside
b. Libermans reaction
c. With iron (III) chloride
*d. Iodoform test
e. With Fredes reagent

15. Novocaine metabolism in the organism results in generation of p-amino-benzoic acid. What metabolic process underlies this conversion?
a. Dealkylation
b. Rehabilitation
c. Conjugation
*d. Hydrolysis
e. Oxidization

16. A patient got poisoned with nitrites. Nitrite detection by means of azo dye reaction involves using such acid:
a. Salicylic
*b. Sulfanilic
c. Phosphoric
d. Sulfuric
e. Hydrochloric

17. When heroin comes into an an organism, it metabolizes chiefly to:
a. 3-acetylmorphine and morphine
*b. Morphine and 6-monoacetylmorphine
c. Morphine
d. Codeine
e. 6-acetylmorphine

18. Forensic toxicological analysis is often done for the metabolism products of toxic substances. Amino benzophenones are generated during biotrasformation of:
*a. 1,4-benzodiazepines
b. Barbiturates
c. Opiates
d. Butyrophenones
e. Phenothiazines

19. Determination of pH of a biological material by means of indicator paper is applied for the preliminary conclusion about substances that might have caused intoxication. The indicator paper moistened with plumbum acetate solution was exposed to the evaporations of the material under examination and turned black. This indicates that the material under examination contains:
a. Carbon monoxide
b. Carbonic gas
c. Ammonia
d. Methane
*e. Hydrogen sulfide

20. Lapkina-Lazarenko method of ethylene glycol separation enables to isolate it effectively from the objects of chemotoxicological analysis. What is the selective transporter of ethylene glycol from the objects to the distillate?
a. Water
b. Chloroform
c. Acetone
*d. Benzol
e. Ethanol

21. What substance will impede reaction of iodoform test aimed at detection of ethyl alcohol in the biological material?
a. Formaldehyde
*b. Acetone
c. Isoamyl alcohol
d. Methanol
e. Phenol

22. Ions of some metal make it difficult to detect zinc ions in the mineralizate. For this reason zinc is separated from mineralizate by converting it into:
a. Hexacyanoferrate (II)
b. Dithizone
*c. Diethyldithiocarbamate
d. Sulfide
e. Tetrarodanomerkuroat

