1. During a regular home visit to a 3-week-old breastfed infant a nurse noticed I degree intertrigos, moderate crusting on the scalp. There were no other changes. What nursing diagnosis should be made?
a. Neuroarthritic diathesis
b. Alimentary allergy
c. Exudative catarrhal diathesis
*d. I degree intertrigos, gneiss
e. Lymphohypoplastic diathesis

2. Before an operation a patient was administered a cleansing enema. In what position should the patient be placed for this procedure?
a. On the right side
b. In prone position
c. In standing position
*d. On the left side
e. In supine position

3. A 42-year-old patient was admitted to the infectious diseases hospital with diagnosis of "typhoid fever". What is the most likely source of the infection?
a. Infected pigs
b. Infected rats and mice
*c. An infected person or bacteria carrier
d. Infected water
e. Infected meat

4. A patient with apparent dyspnea, cyanosis and shin edemata has been delivered to the admission ward. A nurse should transport him to the department by the following way:
a. On a stretcher
b. Slowly, escorted by two aid-women
c. On a wheel stretcher
d. Slowly, escorted by a single nurse
*e. On a wheelchair

5. A patient has chronic circulatory failure of II B grade. During studying his fluid balance it was established that the patient had consumed 1,5 1 of fluid within a day and his daily diuresis was 800 ml. This phenomenon is called:
*a. Negative diuresis
b. Positive diuresis
c. Polyuria
d. Anuria
e. Dysuria

6. A 6-year-old child suffering from bronchitis suddenly got worse at night: he presented with dyspnea with long wheezing expiration, skin pallor with cyanotic shade, strain of neck muscles. What condition are these presentations typical for?
a. Hyperthermic
b. Comatose
*c. Asthmatic
d. Laryngospasm
e. Convulsive

7. Among the 7th-grade pupils of a comprehensive school the cases of virus A hepatitis were registered. Children who had contacts with the affected were given an injection of:
a. Vitamin C
b. Vaccine
c. Anatoxin
*d. Immunoglobulin
e. Serum

8. In case of climacteric haemorrhage the emergency aid should be started with:
a. Antianemic therapy
b. Administration of uterine-contracting and haemostatic drugs
*c. Curretage of uterine cavity
d. Hormonal haemostasis
e. Anti-shock actions

9. A gravida in her 6-7 week of gestation has been registered at the antenatal clinic. She complains of nausea. What would be the first-priority issue of discussion with this patient?
a. Genital hygiene
*b. Importance of regular check-ups at the antenatal clinic
c. Importance of examination
d. Mammary glands care
e. Rational diet

10. A patient with edemata of cardiac origin suffering from constipations was administered a cleansing enema for hypertension reduction. What solution should be applied for this kind of enema?
a. Furacillin solution 1:5000
*b. 10% solution of sodium chloride
c. 10% solution of calcium chloride
d. 2% solution of sodium hydrocarbonate
e. 0,9/

11. A patient has a serum cholesterol of 250 with a low HDL and high triglycerides. What is the patients coronary heart disease risk?
*a. High
b. Not enough information to determine
c. 
d. Borderline
e. Low

12. A patient was diagnosed with acute rhinitis. He was administered UHF therapy. The nurse should place the electrodes within the following distance from the patients body:
a. 4cm
b. 6 cm
*c. 0,5 cm
d. 2cm
e. 10 cm

13. Caregivers may be excited about the family relocating to another city so they can have better jobs and a bigger home. After the move, however, the children will most likely:
a. Reflect the excitement modelled by the aregivers and suffer little emotional upset
b. Appreciate the better surroundings and seek new friendships in the neighborhood
c. Do better emotionally than the caregivers, as the children will acclimate to their new surroundings with greater ease
d. -
*e. Grieve for the loss of comfortable and familiar people, surroundings, and things left behind

14. External electronic fetal monitoring will be used for a woman just admitted to the labour unit in active labor. A guideline the nurse should follow when implementing this form of monitoring would be:
a. -
*b. Apply contact gel to the ultrasound transducer prior to application over the point of maximum intensity
c. Reposition the ultrasound transducer every hour and massage the site
d. Apply a spiral electrode if nonreassuring FHR signs are noted
e. Use Leopold maneuvers to determine correct placement of the tocotransducer

15. A 33-year-old patient complains about pain in the right subcostal space, skin icteritiousness, dark urine, light-coloured feces, rapid fatiguability, body temperature rise. Objectively: the abdomen is soft, moderately painful in the right subcostal space. It is known that 5 months ago the patient underwent tooth extraction. The described clinical presentations afford ground to suspect:
a. Chronic pancreatitis
*b. Hepatitis B virus
c. Liver abscess
d. Acute cholecystitis
e. Liver cirrhosis

16. The patient who has just had a mastectomy for breast cancer is crying as the nurse enters the room. When asked why she is crying, the patient responds "I know I shouldnt cry because this surgery may well save my life, but I was so pleased with my figure before and I know that things will not be the same."What is the nurses best response?
a. -
b. "How have you coped with difficult situations in the past?"
c. "Would you like to talk to someone who also has had a mastectomy?"
d. "Youre right. It is silly to carry on like this when a prosthesis is available."
*e. "It is all right to cry. Mourning this loss is important in getting past this point."

17. A 9-month-old child with rickets has been given Videin-3 for 6 months. The child presents with vomiting, appetite loss, tonoclonic spasms. What condition has developed in this child?
a. Infectious toxic shock
b. Neurotoxicosis
c. Hypocalcemia syndrome
*d. Hypervitaminosis D
e. Toxicosis together with exicosis

18. A 45-year-old patient with abdomen and upper limbs burns undergoes treatment in a burns department. What anatomic region should be chosen for the subcutaneous injection?
a. Sural regions
b. Popliteal regions
c. Interscapular region
d. Superoexternal quadrant of buttocks
*e. Anteroexternal surface of thighs

19. A 32-year-old primagravida in her 32 week of gestation complains of headache, vision impairment, black spots floating before the eyes, epigastric pain. AP-180/110 mm Hg. The described presentations are typical for the following state:
a. Pyelonephritis gravidarum
b. Essential hypertension
c. Eclampsia
*d. Severe preeclampsia
e. Late gestosis

20. You are a nurse working in a pediatric clinic. Your goal is to have accurate, up-to-date immunization records on all the children who come to the clinic. Which of the following record-keeping efforts would best help you meet your goal?
a. -
b. Assume that immunizations are not up-to-date and begin the process at the beginning
c. Have the caregivers document all the immunizations and dates of immunizations for each child
d. Have the caregiver document all past immunizations with a note that this is caregiver recall and then chart new immunizations
*e. Have caregivers list all those who gave immunizations to their children and sign consent forms for release of information; then combine the records into one

21. A nurse is caring for a patient with chronic atrial fibrillation who is at risk for systemic embolism. Which drug should the nurse expect to administer to prevent this complication?
a. Lidocaine
b. Atropine
c. Sotalol
d. All above mentioned
*e. Heparin

22. A patient complains about weakness, dizziness, black stool. He has a history of stomach ulcer. After physical stress everything went dark before his eyes; the patient presented with cold sweat and considerable weakness. Objectively: the patient is pale, Ps- 90 bpm, AP-100/60 mm Hg. What independent nursing intervention is required in this case?
a. A nurse should inject dicynone solution
b. A nurse should inject vicasol solution
c. A nurse should put a hot-water bottle on the epigastrium
*d. A nurse should put an ice pack on the epigastrium
e. A nurse should inject adrenaline solution

23. A child who had an intracranial birth injury presents with convulsions. What drug should a nurse apply first of all in order to eliminate the convulsions?
a. Dimedrol
b. Analgin
c. Paracetamol
d. Spasmalgon
*e. Seduxen

24. A 35-year-old patient has got a shin injury. The wound is 3x2 cm large, moderately bleeding. What is the optimal term for the initial surgical d-bridement with suturing?
a. Up to 36 hours
b. Up to 54 hours
c. Up to 42 hours
*d. Up to 12 hours
e. Up to 24 hours

25. While visiting a patient being under dispensary observation for chronic glomerulonephritis a district nurse payed attention to the following problems: skin dryness nad itch, appetite loss, nausea, epigastric pain. The patients skin was pale and had signs of scratching; there was also the smell of ammonia from the mouth. What complication is likely to have developed?
*a. Chronic renal failure
b. Acute renal failure
c. Chronic pyelonephritis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

26. The physician is about to perform carotid sinus massage on a patient with supraventricular tachycardia. What equipment or supplies should the nurse have ready for possible complications associated with this procedure?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Emesis basin
c. All above mentioned
*d. Resuscitation cart
e. Padded tongue blade

27. A single, young adult woman received instructions from the nurse regarding the use of an oral contraceptive. The woman would demonstrate a need for further instruction if she:
*a. Stops asking her sexual partners to use condoms with spermicide
b. Takes a pill every morning
c. Uses a barrier method of birth control if she misses two or more pills
d. -
e. Enrolls in a smoking cessation program

28. A 7-month-old child has suddenly presented with convulsions. He undergoes treatment in the infectious diseases hospital for meningococcal infection. What is the first-priority action to be taken by a nurse during the emergency aid?
a. To apply an ice pack to the head
b. To stimulate the root of tongue
*c. To prevent tongue-swallowing
d. To perform ALV, external cardiac massage
e. To warm the child with hot-water bottles

29. A 30-year-old patient has an over 10-year history of a disease. This disease exacerbates in autumn and winter. Objectively: the scalp skin and extensor surface of limbs have pinkish red, slightly inflamed nodules and plaques covered with dry silver squamae. Subjectively: the patient feels a slight itch. What disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Lichen ruber planus
*c. Psoriasis
d. Seborrhea sicca
e. Neurodermitis

30. During a subcutaneous injection of camphor in oil solution a patient suddenly got cardiac pain, asphyxia, cough, upper chest and face cyanosis. What complication was caused by the injection?
a. Allergic reaction
*b. Fat embolism
c. Air embolism
d. Pyrogenic reaction
e. Collapse

31. What precautions/instructions should the nurse provide to the patient initiating chronic digoxin therapy?
a. Do not take this medication within 1 hour of taking an antacid
b. Increase your fluid intake to at least 3000 mL daily
c. All above mentioned
*d. Do not take this medication if your pulse rate is below 80 beats/min
e. Avoid taking aspirin or aspirin-containing products

32. A nulliparous woman is in the active phase of labor and her cervix has progressed to 6 cm dilatation. The nurse caring for this woman evaluates the external monitor tracing and notes the following: decrease in FHR shortly after onset of several uterine contractions returning to baseline rate by the end of the contraction; shape is uniform. Based on these findings the nurse should:
a. Perform a vaginal examination to check for cord prolapse
b. Change the womans position to her left side
c. -
*d. Document the finding on the womans chart
e. Notify the physician

33. A patient was diagnosed with an acute attack of chronic pancreatitis. A doctor ordered him absolute starvation. How long should a nurse check the patient for observation of this regulation?
a. 12 hours
b. 5-6 days
c. 24 hours
*d. 2-3 days
e. 6 hours

34. In reviewing the laboratory report of white blood cell count with differential for a patient receiving chemotherapy for cancer, all of the following results are listed. Which laboratory finding should alert the nurse to the possibility of sepsis?
a. The monocyte count is 1800/mm3
b. The lymphocytes outnumber the basophils
*c. The "bands"outnumber the "segs."
d. The total white blood cell count is 9000/mm3
e. -

35. A 23-year-old man got an electrical injury. He got spasmatic muscle contraction and lost consciousness. The emergency aid should be started with:
a. External cardiac massage
b. ALV
*c. Deliverance of the victim from the current source
d. Calling the emergency brigade
e. Estimation of the victims general condition

36. A 25-year-old gravida has come to the antenatl clinic for registration. The external pelvic measurements are 26-28-31-20What type of pelvis is it?
a. Android
b. Simple flat
c. Flat rachitic
d. Pelvis justo minor
*e. Normal

37. Which pre-existing patient problem or characteristic would preclude the use of radiation therapy for breast cancer treatment?
a. The patient is over 75 years of age
*b. The patient has severe arthritis and cannot assume the position needed for radiation therapy
c. The patient is a Jehovahs Witness
d. 
e. The patient underwent a lumpectomy for the breast cancer one month ago

38. While communicating with a patient a nurse has noticed that he is very concerned about his health, groundlessly considers himself to have various diseases, is anxious about all the results of laboratory analyses. Specify the psychological type of this patient:
a. Demonstrative
b. Anxious
c. Aggressive
d. Depressive
*e. Hypochondriacal

39. A gynaecological department admitted a woman with complaints of acute pain in the right iliac region irradiating to the rectum and sacrum. The last menstrual period ended 2 weeks ago. The patient was diagnosed with ovarian apoplexy. A nurse noticed the aggravation of the patients condition. What is the first-priority action to be taken?
a. Haemostatic drug injection
b. Spasmolytic drug injection
*c. Calling a doctor
d. Uterine-contracting drug injection
e. Application of cold to the lower abdomen

40. Fetal heartbeats can be auscultated above the navel on the left. Specify the presentation:
a. Transverse
b. Cephalic
*c. Pelvic
d. Vertex
e. Shoulder

41. In which situation is the nurse performing the role of patients advocate during the preoperative period?
a. Ensuring that the patients impaired hearing problem is clearly communicated to the entire surgical team
b. Serving as a witness to the informed consent procedure
c. Assuring the patient whose religion does not permit blood transfusions that his or her wishes will be followed
d. –
*e. Teaching the patient how to perform coughing and deep breathing exercises

42. Fifty percent of the drugs original dose is in the blood 4 hours after administration. What is the half-life of the drug?
a. 1 hour
b. -
c. 8 hours
d. 2 hours
*e. 4 hours

43. Condition of a patient with myocardial infarction suddenly got worse: the patient grew pale, broke into a cold clammy sweat, lost consciousness. Ps- 95 bpm. What complication has developed?
a. -
b. Lung edema
*c. Cardiogenic shock
d. Cardiac asthma
e. Syncope

44. A 25-year-old patient complains of acute pain in the lower abdomen, dizziness. The latest menstruation came duly 2 weeks ago and had no peculiarities. Test for pregnancy showed negative result. Such clinical presentations are typical for the following pathology:
*a. Ovarian apoplexy
b. Ovarian carcinoma
c. Extrauterine pregnancy
d. Chronic adnexitis
e. Appendicitis

45. A nurse is attempting to administer medications to a preschool-aged child. Which of the following statements made by the nurse would be most appropriate given the childs developmental stage?
a. 
b. "If you take your medication, I will give you a sticker that you can wear on your shirt."
c. "We cant play until youve taken your medication."
d. "Would you like to play with the pills before you take them?"
*e. "Would you like to take your red pill or the pink pill first?"

46. A 25-year-old patient has a radial bone fracture. A plaster splint has been applied in a typical region. On the second day the patient complains of acute pain in the limb, finger numbness. The fingers look pale and feel cold. The patient consulted a nurse about these presentations. What actions should she take apart from refer the patient to a doctor?
a. Fix the splint with additional bandaging
*b. Part the edges of the splint
c. Remove the splint
d. Perform the massage
e. Change the splint

47. During a regular home visit to a 5-day-old infant a nurse noticed a slight acrocyanosis of lips and limbs that was getting more evident during sucking. The childs mother was diagnosed with toxoplasmosis during the first months of gestation. What pathology is likely to be found in this child?
*a. Congenital, heart disease
b. Pneumonia
c. Rickets
d. Asphyxia
e. Spasmophilia

48. After the viral hepatitis the patient hasnt been keeping to a diet. Now he presents with pain in the right subcostal space, nausea, vomiting. Objectively: the liver is enlarged, painful; scleras are icteric. What disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
a. Cholelithiasis
*b. Chronic hepatitis
c. Chronic cholecystitis
d. Stomach ulcer
e. Chronic pancreatitis

49. A female patient complains of pain and reddening in the region of her left limb, body temperature rise up to 39, 2°C. Objectively: the left shin is slightly edematous and has a well-demarcated hyperaemia zone in form of flame tips; there is local temperature rise. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon
b. Erysipelas
*c. Acute thrombophlebitis
d. Furunculosis
e. Lymphangitis

50. Lower-limb amputation surgery is scheduled for 11 oclock a.m. What nursing intervention should be carried out 30-40 minuted before the surgery?
a. Shaving of the surgical site
b. Giving of the hypotensive drugs
*c. Premedication on doctors orders
d. Cleansing enema
e. Gastric lavage

51. For which type of foreign object in the ear canal is irrigation contraindicated?
a. All above mentioned
b. Live insect
c. Pencil eraser
*d. Dried beans
e. Cerumen

52. A man has been stung by a bee. A few minutes later he developed skin itch, weakness, nausea, abdominal pain, paleness, anxiety. What drug should he be given in the first place?
a. Papaverine
b. Analgin
c. Furosemide
d. Cordiamin
*e. Prednisolone

53. During a regular home visit to a 14-day-old child a nurse revealed that the umbilical wound was moist with serous discharges. What disease can be suspected?
*a. Catarrhal omphalitis
b. Vesiculopustules
c. Sepsis
d. Impetigo neonatorum
e. Phlegmonous omphalitis

54. A person was exposed to an illness and 2 weeks later developed the symptoms. Which stage of infection was the person in two weeks prior to developing the illness?
a. Convalescence
b. Illness
c. Prodromal
d. -
*e. Incubation

55. A patient has chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia. Which agent should the nurse be prepared to administer?
a. Sargramostim (Prokine)
b. Epoetin alfa (Procrit)
c. Filgrastim (Neupogen)
*d. Oprelvekin (Neumega)
e. -

56. A 5-year-old girl was found to have body temperature rise up to 38°C, pale skin, positive Pasternatskys symptom, leukocyturia, bacteriuria. What disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
*b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
d. Influenza
e. Diabetes mellitus

57. A patient came to the admission ward and complained of chest pain and labored respiration. According to his words, he got a trauma after a fall. Objectively: a local edema, painfulness and crepitation of fragments at the level of the VII rib on the right. Chest compression causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Rib fracture
b. Lung contusion
c. Closed pneumothorax
d. Thoracic contusion
e. Breastbone fracture

58. At what age the development of secondary sexual characters is considered to be premature?
a. Before 11-12 years
*b. Before 8 years
c. Before 10 years
d. Before 9 years
e. Before 13-14 years

59. A 5-year-old boy presents with periodical acetonemic vomiting, night terrors, emotional instability. Objectively: the child is undernourished, asthenic. The boys intellect is well-developed, he can read and explain life situations in an adult-like manner. In the urine: urates +++. These clinical presentations are typical for the following diathesis:
a. Lymphohypoplastic
b. Atopic
c. Exudative catarrhal
*d. Neuroarthritic
e. Allergic

60. A female patient complains about spasmodic pain in the lumbar region on the left that irradiate to the genitals; frequent urination. Objectively: the patient is anxious, often changes body position due to the unbearable pain. What symptom would be the most informative for the diagnosis specification?
a. Blumbergs sign
b. Voskresenskys symptom
*c. Pasternatskys symptom
d. Rovsings symptom
e. Sitkovskys symptom

61. A 42-year-old patient with suspected hernia of intervertebral disk of the lumbar spine as administered MRT. What preparation is required?
*a. Cleansing enema
b. Bladder irrigation
c. 
d. Laxative agents
e. Gastric lavage the day before

62. A victim has a knife wound of chest. Within the fourth intercostal space on the right there is a cut wound 2x1 cm large with foamy blood effusing from it. During respiration a whizzing sound can be heard from the wound. What is the first-priority nursing intervention?
a. Wound tamponade
*b. Occlusive dressing application
c. Injection of a haemostatic
d. Injection of an analgetic
e. Aseptic dressing application

63. When a clean-voided specimen is ordered, the nurse should instruct the patient to:
*a. Clean the area as directed, start to void into the toilet, collect the urine in the sterile cup after a good flow of urine has been established
b. Clean the area as directed, start to void and collect three samples at different times during the voiding
c. -
d. Clean the area as directed and collect the initial urine voided
e. Clean the area as directed and collect all the urine voided

64. On doctors orders a nurse gave a 40-year-old patient a subcutaneous injection of camphor in oil solution. The solution wasnt preliminary warmed. What complication is likely to arise?
a. Abscess
*b. Infiltration
c. Haematoma
d. Oil embolism
e. Haemorrhage

65. A 30-year-old female patient has been administered vaginal baths with chamomile infusion. A nurse has to follow doctors orders and prepare the infusion. What temperature of the infusion is required?
a. 30 - 31°C
*b. 37 - 38°C
c. 18 - 20°C
d. 45 - 46°C
e. 20 - 22°C

66. A 25-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, general weakness, body temperature rise. He associates the disease with unsound food he consumed 3 hours ago. After examination the patient was diagnosed with acute gastritis. What is the first-priority nursing intervention?
a. Injection of papaverine solution
b. Hot-water bottle over stomach
c. Administration of warm tea with lemon
*d. Gastric lavage
e. Cold to the abdominal region

67. Which patient is most at risk of developing left-sided heart failure?
a. All above mentioned
b. 48-year-old female who smokes two packs of cigarettes daily
c. 60-year-old male with pulmonary hypertension
*d. 52-year-old female with mitral valve disease
e. 72-year-old male who has had a right ventricular myocardial infarction

68. A nurse registered critical temperature drop in a patient in his III fever period. Complications may occur primarily in the following system:
a. Central nervous
b. Locomotive
c. Digestive
d. Respiratory
*e. Cardiovascular

69. While examining a patient in the hematological department a nurse revealed the following symptoms: skin dryness, nail brittleness, hair loss, angular cheilitis, dysgeusia (the patient was willing to eat lime, chalk). What anemia are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Iron-deficient
b. Posthaemorrhagic
c. Aplastic
d. _B12-dencient
e. Haemolytic

70. A patient has intense pain in the right subcostal area irradiating to the right shoulder; nausea, vomiting that doesnt give relief; flatulence, stool retention. What condition are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Hepatic colic
b. Duodenal ulcer
c. Renal colic
d. Acute gastritis
e. Hepatic cirrhosis

71. A patient with heart failure has been ordered to receive a daily nitroglycerin transdermal patch. What action taken by the nurse would help avoid tolerance to the vasodilating effects of this medication?
a. Place an occlusive dressing over the patch
*b. Remove the patch overnight
c. Rotate the skin site of nitroglycerin administration
d. Administer a larger loading dose before the initiation of therapy
e. All above mentioned

72. Which health problem in a woman who had radiation therapy 10 years ago for cancer in the right breast is most likely to be a consequence of the therapy?
a. -
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Chronic esophagitis with gastroesophageal reflux
d. Asthma
*e. Pathologic fracture of two ribs on the right chest

73. A 19-year-old patient diagnosed with new-onset diabetes mellitus asked a nurse to inform her about the course and likely complications of this disease. The nurse should draw her attention to the following signals of hypoglycemic coma:
*a. Hunger, palpitation, hand tremor
b. Nausea, vision impairment, sleepiness
c. Headache, dizziness, dry skin
d. Thirst, abdominal pain, excitation
e. Appatite loss, vomiting, hyperhidrosis

74. First-degree heart block in a stable patient requires no intervention. The nurse must establish whether the patient is hemodynamically stable. Measuring blood pressure can establish that the patient is stable. Which manipulation should be carried out by the nurse to confirm the patients stability?
a. Perform pulse oximetry testing in the upper and lower extremities
b. Measure blood pressure in the lying and sitting positions
c. Measure blood pressure in each arm separately
*d. Measure apical and radial pulses for a full minute
e. All above mentioned

75. When evaluating the hydration status, the nurse observes tenting of the skin on the back of the 87-year-old patients hand when testing the skin turgor. What is the nurses best action?
*a. Assess turgor on the patients forehead
b. Notify the physician
c. Examine dependent body areas
d. Document the finding as the only action
e. -

76. A patient with chronic cardiac failure in the stage of decompensation was found to have 140/min heart rate and 66 bpm pulse rate. What is the medical term for this pathology?
a. Tachycardia
b. Extrasystole
c. Cardiac fibrillation
*d. Deficient pulse
e. Bradycardia

77. A patient has an elevated AST. Which condition is the patient most likely to have?
*a. Hepatitis
b. Prostate cancer
c. Diabetes
d. -
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

78. A patient with prostate cancer is taking estrogen daily to control tumor growth. He reports that his left calf is swollen and painful. What is the nurses best first action?
a. Document this expected response to hormonal manipulation
*b. Measure the calf circumference and assess for Homans sign
c. -
d. Instruct the patient to keep the leg elevated for two days
e. Apply ice to the calf after massaging it for at least 5 minutes

79. A 30-year-old patient complains of itching genitals, purulent foamy discharges with foul smell. What disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Chlamydia
b. Gonorrhoea
c. Candidiasis
*d. Trichomoniasis
e. Mycoplasmosis

80. What type of protection should the nurse use in addition to standard precautions when caring for a patient who has meningococcal meningitis?
a. Droplet precautions
b. Sharps precautions
c. -
d. Contact precautions
*e. Airborne precautions

81. A patient has been admitted to the acute care unit for an exacerbation of heart failure. Which of the following nursing actions should be performed first?
a. All above mentioned
b. Administration of intravenous fluids
c. Monitoring of serum electrolyte levels
d. Insertion of a Foley catheter
*e. Assessment of respiratory and oxygenation status

82. A patients ECG tracing shows normal sinus rhythm followed by a complex of three PVCs, with a return to normal sinus rhythm. What is the nurses interpretation of this finding?
a. Trigeminy
b. Atrial flutter
c. Ventricular escape rhythm
*d. Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia
e. All above mentioned

83. The school nurse is working with teenaged parents and their babies in a high school program designed to keep these parents in school and to teach them how to care for their children. The nurse teaches the mothers to change diapers on:
a. Upholstered furniture that can be wiped off
b. A soft towel that can be washed as needed
*c. A changing station with a cushioned cover
d. -
e. A washable surface that is disinfected after each use

84. You are the nurse preparing to give an injection to a child who is combative. Which of the following approaches would be best on your part?
a. -
*b. Gently but firmly restrain the child using sufficient adults to do so and quickly give the injection
c. Do not administer the injection
d. Wait until the child is asleep, and then give the injection before he wakes up
e. Talk to the child until he calms down and then give the injection

85. What is the purpose of subcutaneous injection of proserine (0,1%) in the postoperative period?
a. Elimination of cardiac malfunctions
*b. Elimination of bowels paresis
c. Acceleration of tissue regeneration
d. Elimination of pain syndrome
e. Pneumonia prevention

86. In case of a cervical spine injury the patency of airways can be restored only via:
a. Sideward rotation of the head
b. Throwing back the head
c. Bolster under the back
*d. Jaw-thrust maneuver
e. Bolster under the neck

87. A patient has edematic face with fat lips and narrow palpebral fissures; his skin feels dry and cold. These signs are indicative of the following disease:
a. Obesity
b. Thyrotoxicosis
c. Glomerulonephritis
*d. Hypothyroidism
e. Quinckes edema

88. A patient has to undergo Nechiporenko urine analysis on doctors order. A nurse should instruct the patient and explain him that he has to collect:
a. Daily urine
*b. Midstream urine
c. First void urine
d. Initial urine
e. 24-hour urine

89. The physician writes an order for medication to be given every 4 hours p.r.n. How should the nurse administer this drug?
*a. Every 4 hours if the patients condition indicates a need for it
b. Every 4 hours if the patient asks for it
c. As many as four times a day
d. -
e. Every 4 hours around the clock

90. The nursing home resident with recurrent otitis media complains of new pain behind the ear. The area is red and swollen. What is the nurses priority?
a. All above mentioned
b. Test the patients hearing acuity using the Rinne tuning fork test
*c. Notify the physician
d. Document the referred pain
e. Apply a heating pad on a low setting to the area

91. Which of the following would not be a source of data for measuring the adequacy of the health care facility to meet the needs of patients?
a. -
b. Policy and procedure manuals
*c. Patient interviews
d. Written care plans
e. Staffing patterns

92. What physical assessment findings would be expected in a patient with atrial flutter with a rapid ventricular response?
a. The presence of a split SI and rhonchi
b. Halo vision, anorexia, and nausea and vomiting
c. Diaphoresis, hypertension, and mental status changes
*d. Palpitations, shortness of breath, and anxiety
e. All above mentioned

93. Which clinical manifestation should alert the nurse to the possibility of impending pulmonary edema in a 75 year-old patient with heart failure?
a. All above mentioned
b. Sacral edema
*c. Confusion
d. Irregular heart rate
e. Dysphagia

94. The patient returning to the clinic for a follow-up visit 3 weeks after abdominal surgery is concerned because she can feel small, uneven lumps under the suture line of the incision. What is the nurses best response?
a. "Those are the deep stitches the surgeon placed, and they will eventually be absorbed and disappear."
*b. "What you are feeling is growth of new tissue proceeding at different rates in the incision."
c. "Avoid touching those areas because you may dislodge the blood clots that keep your incision from bleeding."
d. "Keep the incision covered for as long as those lumps can be felt."
e. -

95. A patient consulted a nurse about attacks of morning cough with lots of sputum, often with a foul smell. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Pulmonary tuberculosis
b. Pneumonia
c. Cancer of lungs
*d. Multiple bronchiectasis
e. Chronic bronchitis

96. Which property of cardiac cells is the ability to generate electrical impulses spontaneously?
*a. Automaticity
b. All above mentioned
c. Conductivity
d. Excitability
e. Contractility

97. A 63-year-old patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency is in the cardiological department. A nurse determined the fluid balance: amount of consumed fluid was 1000 ml, amount of daily dieresis was 500 ml. Such diuresis is called:
a. Positive
b. Normal
c. Doubtful
d. Satisfactory
*e. Negative

98. A patient is experiencing sinus bradycardia with hypotension and dizziness. Which of the following drugs/agents should the nurse be prepared to administer?
a. All above mentioned
b. Lidocaine
*c. Atropine
d. Digoxin
e. Metoprolol

99. Examination of a newborn girl revealed a haematoma on her head within the limits of a single bone. The haematoma doesnt throb or hurt. What pathology is it?
a. Intracranial trauma
b. Impetigo neonatorum
c. Labour tumour
d. Septicopyemia
*e. Cephalohematoma

100. The postoperative patients arterial blood gas values are pH- 7,22, HCO3- 21 mEq/L, PCO2- 65 mm Hg, and PO2- 58 mm Hg. What is the nurses best first action?
a. Notify the physician
b. -
*c. Assess the patients airway
d. Increase the oxygen flow rate
e. Document the finding as the only action

101. During transfusion of erythrocyte mass a patient developed lumbar pain, sensation of chest compression, face redness, death anxiety, dyspnea. Objectively: the patient is anxious, Ps- 110 bpm., AP- 110/80 mm Hg. What complication has developed?
*a. Haemotransfusion shock
b. Citrate shock
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Air embolism

102. A child has recently received the diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DTaP) immunization. Which of the following would represent a reaction that would be considered a contraindication to receiving the immunization again?
a. Otitis media
*b. Encephalopathy
c. -
d. Emesis and diarrhea
e. Upper respiratory infection

103. Placing no limits on the ages or numbers of visitors and providing sleeping facilities for the caregivers in a childs room in a health care facility will most likely bring which of the following results?
a. -
b. The child will be more dependent on the family
c. Family-centered care will be enhanced
d. Nurses will find procedures less difficult to carry out
*e. There will be loss of rest by the child

104. In which of the following age groups is the concept of death most likely to be considered reversible and temporary?
a. 7 to 11 years
b. 0 to 2 years
*c. 2 to 3 years
d. 5 to 6 years
e. -

105. What is the expected effect when capillary pores increase in size?
a. Increased filtration, increased plasma volume
b. Decreased filtration, increased plasma volume
c. Decreased filtration, decreased plasma volume
*d. Increased filtration, decreased plasma volume
e.

106. A patient has just undergone a balloon valvuloplasty. What complication of this procedure should the nurse monitor this patient for?
a. Short-term memory loss
*b. Bleeding
c. All above mentioned
d. Pulmonary hypertension
e. Acute tubular necrosis

107. A nurse puts the bedridden patients extremities through range of motion when giving the bath. This is an example of which type of nursing intervention?
a. Interdependent
b. Consultation
*c. Independent
d. Dependent
e. -

108. What is the priority nursing diagnosis for the patient receiving interleukin-2 (IL-2) therapy for cancer?
a. Deficient fluid volume related to persistent diarrhea
b. -
*c. Impaired comfort related to drug side effect
d. Risk for infection related to drug-induced neutropenia
e. Risk for injury related to excessive bleeding

109. A 24-year-old student consulted a nurse about acute pain in her lower abdomen on the left, considerable weakness, dizziness. The last menstrual period ended 2 weeks ago. What is the first-priority action to be taken by a nurse?
a. Spasmolytic drug injection
b. Further observation
c. Cardiac drug injection
d. Analgetic drug injection
*e. Immediate hospitalization

110. An adult patient has a hematocrit of 64%. With what condition is this most consistent?
*a. Dehydration
b. Leukemia
c. -
d. Haemorrhage
e. Anemia

111. If the radiation absorbed dose from an external source is 270 rad, 1 m from the source, what is the expected absorbed dose at 3 m from the source?
a. 140 rad
b. 270 rad
c. -
*d. 30 rad
e. 68,5 rad

112. Which function or assessment finding in a patient being admitted to the postanesthesia care unit after surgery is the best indication that the patients respiratory status does not require immediate attention?
*a. The patients oxygen saturation is 90%
b. The patients chest rises and falls rhythmically during respiration
c. 
d. The patient is alert and oriented
e. The patient is able to talk

113. A school nurse will educate teachers of children diagnosed with sickle cell anemia that when these children have deterioration in school performance or a severe headache, this can be followed by which of the problems?
*a. Cerebral vascular accident (CVA)
b. Loss of consciousness
c. Petit mal seizure
d. Migraine or cluster headaches
e. -

114. Specify the amount of 0,1% histamine solution that is to be applied as a parenteral stimulus for the patient with body weight at the rate of 60 kg:
a. 0,65 ml
b. 0,32 ml
c. 0,1 ml
*d. 0,48 ml
e. 0,5 ml

115. Upon entering the room of a 74-year-old patient receiving brachytherapy for cervical cancer, the nurse finds that the radiation implant and the position-holding devices are in the patients bed. What is the nurses first best action?
*a. Use tongs to place the implant into the radiation container
b. Assess the patients mental status
c. Notify the physician and move the patient to a different room
d. Put on gloves and attempt to reposition the implant and position-holding device
e. -

116. Which of the following clinical manifestations in a patient being treated for heart failure who is undergoing progressive increase in activity indicates activity intolerance?
a. Respiratory rate of 26 breaths/min
b. Heart rate increase from 86 to 110 beats/min
c. All above mentioned
*d. Systolic blood pressure change from 136 to 96 mm Hg
e. Oxygen saturation of 95%

117. A womans last menstrual period (LMP) began on November 9, 2009, and it ended on November 14, 2009Using Nageles rule, the estimated date" of birth would be:
a. February 2, 2010
*b. August 16, 2010
c. July 6,2010
d. August 21, 2010
e. -

118. A 70-year-old patient was undergoing stream transfusion of 750 ml of stored blood of the same group. At the end of haemotransfusion the patient developed laboured breathing, heaviness in chest, heart pain, cyanosis. Arterial pressure started to drop dramatically, the pulse became arrhythmic. What complication was developed?
a. Haemotransfusion shock
b. Pyrogenic reaction
c. Haemorrhagic shock
d. Anaphylactic reaction
*e. Acute cardiectasis

119. A 38-year-old patient underwent an operation for nodular goiter in the morning. In the evening a nurse on duty noticed that the bandage on the patients neck got profusely soaked with blood. What are the first-priority actions?
*a. To dress the wound, put an ice pack on it
b. To put an ice pack on the wound and call a doctor
c. To dress the wound and call a laboratory assistant
d. To call a doctor
e. To dress the wound, measure arterial pressure and pulse

120. A patient admitted with heart failure who is taking a thiazide diuretic has been ordered to receive furosemide (Lasix). What side effect of these medications should the nurse be alert for?
a. Headache
b. Bradycardia
*c. Hypokaliemia
d. All above mentioned
e. Cough

121. What problem is likely to occur when a patients fluid intake is so low that his or her urine output is less than 400 ml/day?
*a. Reduced excretion of body wastes, especially nitrogen
b. Expansion of the interstitial volume, with reduced plasma volume
c. -
d. Cellular swelling and subsequent edema
e. Dilution of serum sodium levels to the extent that excitable membranes can no longer depolarize

122. The patient tells the nurse during the preoperative history that he is a three-pack a day cigarette smoker. This information alerts the nurse to which potential complication during the intraoperative and postoperative periods?
a. An increased risk for excessive scar tissue formation
b. 
c. A decreased tolerance to pain
d. A decreased clotting ability
*e. An increased risk for atelectasis and hypoxia

123. A surgical department admitted a 32-year-old patient diagnosed with obliterating endarteritis of the right lower limb. What factors provoke the development of this disease?
a. Diseases the patient had during childhood
*b. Supercooling, smoking
c. Diseases the patient had during youth
d. Heredity
e. Social and living conditions

124. A child is 5 years old. He presents with pale skin, appetite loss, fatiguability. In blood: Hb- 90 g/1, RBCs- 3,4-1012/1, colour index - 0.6What drugs should be administered in this case?
a. Vitamin A
b. Allocholum
c. Calcium gluconate
d. Vitamin D
*e. Iron preparations

125. The frequency of chest compressions during external cardiac massage in an adult should be as follows:
a. 100-120/min
*b. 60-80/min
c. 10-15/min
d. 40-50/min
e. 5-10/min

126. When providing a woman, recovering from primary herpes, with information regarding the recurrence of herpes infection of the genital tract, the nurse would tell her:
a. Fever and flu-like symptoms will precede a recurrent infection
b. Little can be done to control the recurrence of infection
c. -
d. Transmission of the virus is only possible when lesions are open and draining
*e. Itching and tingling often occur prior to the appearance of vesicles

127. A patient who is receiving intravenous chemotherapy (into a peripheral line) with an agent that is an irritant says that her arm burns terribly at and around the IV site. What is the nurses best first action?
a. Slow the rate of infusion
b. -
c. Check for a blood return
*d. Discontinue the infusion
e. Apply a cold compress to the site

128. A patient with mitral stenosis suddenly got worse at night - he developed quickly progressing dyspnea, bubbling breathing, cough with pink foamy sputum. What are the first-priority actions to be taken by a nurse?
a. ECG recording
b. Arterial pressure measurement
*c. Defoaming agent inhalations
d. Hot footbaths
e. Application of a mustard plaster upon heart region

129. A full-term 2,5-month-old child born by vaginal birth weighs 3200 g. He has to receive mixed feeding. Which of the following is the first-priority problem that a nurse has to resolve?
a. Problem of feeding formula preparation
b. Problem of feeding formula application
c. -
d. Problem of feeding formula choice
*e. Problem of breast milk deficiency

130. A 50-year-old patient undergoes treatment in a surgical department for gastrointestinal haemorrhage. A patient has been diagnosed with acute vascular insufficiency. Such condition is called:
a. Pulmonary edema
b. Cardiac asthma
*c. Collapse
d. Vertigo
e. Hypotension

131. A 5-year-old child got poisoned with mushrooms. He has been forced to vomit before the hospitalization. A nurse at a hospital has to carry out gastric lavage on doctors orders. How much liquid is required for this manipulation?
a. 1-2 liters
b. 1 liter
c. 5-8 liters
*d. 3-5 liters
e. 0,5 liter

132. A 3-year-old child complains of headache, apparent general weakness. Objectively: mucous nasal discharges, conjunctiva hyperaemia, skin hyperaemia. Body temperature - 39°C. What can be used to reduce the body temperature?
*a. Cool enema
b. Warm-water bottle
c. Water besprinkling
d. Oxygenotherapy
e. Hot drink

133. A 15-year-old boy with suspected chronic gastritis was admitted to the childrens hospital for a complex examination. In the IV satge of nursing process a nurse should prepare him for the following procedure:
a. Collection of a stool sample for coprogram stool test
*b. Gastrofibroscopy with biopsy
c. Duodenal intubation
d. Collection of a stool sample for helminth eggs detection
e. Gastric intubation

134. A 52-year-old patient complains about strong persistent pain behind the breastbone. The pain irradiates to the left arm, left scapula and shoulder. Objectively: the patient is excited, frightened; he is moaning. The pain arose 2 hours ago at his workplace after a nervous overstress. Repeated ingestion of nitroglycerine didnt arrest the pain. What disease might be suspected in this patient?
*a. Myocardial infarction
b. Stenocardia
c. Valvular defect
d. Rheumatism
e. Essential hypertension

135. What is the purpose of sodium bicarbonate infusion during resuscitation actions?
a. Increase of survival time of brain under hypoxia
*b. Metabolic acidosis correction
c. Hypoxia liquidation
d. Metabolic alkalosis therapy
e. Respiratory acidosis prevention

136. A woman has been delivered to the resuscitation unit with signs of carbon monoxide intoxication. What is the first-priority action to be taken?
a. Haemosorption
*b. Hyperbaric oxygenation
c. Plasmapheresis
d. Forced diuresis
e. Entersorption

137. A patient is to have a glucose tolerance test performed. The nurse should instruct the patient to:
a. -
*b. Have nothing to eat or drink before the test
c. Have only clear liquids before the test
d. Eat a large meal before the test
e. Expect to eat a large meal during the test

138. A patient has been diagnosed with aortic stenosis. What alteration in the patients vital signs would the nurse expect to find upon assessment?
a. A bounding arterial pulse
b. Elevated systolic and diastolic pressures
c. All above mentioned
*d. A narrowed pulse pressure
e. A slow, faint arterial pulse

139. During auscultation of the heart of a patient with left ventricular failure, the nurse notes the presence of a third heart sound (S3) gallop. What can the nurse infer from this finding?
*a. Left ventricular pressure is increased
b. There is a decrease in ventricular compliance
c. The client has been noncompliant with the medication regimen
d. The client should be prepared for transfer to the intensive care unit
e. All above mentioned

140. In the first labour stage a parturient woman complained of a headache, vision impairment. AP- 170/100 mm Hg, proteinuria. During the vaginal examination the patient had an attack of convulsions. What is the most likely cause of convulsions?
a. Vegetative-vascular dysfunction
b. Essential hypertension
c. Preeclampsia
*d. Eclampsia
e. Migraine

141. A doctor administered the patient to put drops into the ear. What measures should be taken before the procedure in case of purulent discharges from the ear?
a. The doctors order shouldnt be fulfilled
b. Lavage of acoustic meatus
*c. Toilet of acoustic meatus by means of 3% solution of hydrogen peroxide
d. Drying of acoustic meatus with gauze turunda
e. Introduction of administered drops on doctors orders

142. A labouring womans uterine contractions are being internally monitored. When evaluating the monitor tracing, which of the following findings would be a source of concern and require further assessment?
*a. Average resting pressure of 20 to 25 mm Hg
b. -
c. Duration of 80 to 85 seconds
d. Frequency every V-h to 3 minutes
e. Intensity during a uterine contraction of 85 to 90 mm Hg

143. A patient with myocardial ischemia is having frequent PVCs. What medications should the nurse be prepared to administer?
*a. Lidocaine
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Dobutamine
d. All above mentioned
e. Lanoxin

144. A newborn child doesnt cry, has cyanotic skin, decreased reflexes and muscle tone. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation has been started immediately. What factor is indicative of cardiopulmonary resuscitation effectiveness?
a. Mydriatic pupils
*b. Pulse absence on the carotid arteries
c. Bradycardia
d. Respirogenesis
e. Areflexia

145. A patient complains of morning stiffness of minor hand articulations, inability to carry out daily living activities, general weakness. Objectively: the patient has flipper-like deformity of hands. What is the first-priority problem?
a. Articulation deformity
b. Morning stiffness of articulations
c. General weakness
*d. Inability to carry out daily living activities
e. -

146. On assessment of the patient with otitis media, the nurse notes that the tympanic membrane is retracted and the landmarks visible. Which of the following is the priority nursing diagnosis for the patient at this stage?
a. Risk for imbalanced fluid volume related to potential nausea and vomiting
b. Risk for infection related to presence of bacteria in the middle ear
c. Impaired verbal communication related to diminished hearing in affected ear
d. All above mentioned
*e. Acute pain related to increased middle ear pressure

147. A 50-year-old patient has been hit by a car. The witnesses report that he has stayed unconscious for about 10 minutes. The patient complains of headache, dizziness, nausea. There was a single vomiting. Objectively: the face is pale, Ps- 90 bpm, respiratory rate - 16/min, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cerebral concussion
b. Cerebral contusion
c. Skull cup fracture
d. Basal skull fructure
e. Cerebral compression

148. What bandage would you apply at a pre-hospital stage in case of a penetrating eye injury?
a. Monocular
b. Bandage with protective net
*c. Binocular
d. Sling
e. Adhesive plaster

149. A mother asks a nurse why her child needs a polio vaccination when polio has been eliminated in the United States and eradicated in most of the world. The nurses best answer would be:
a. "Polio virus still exists in parts of the world, which means this virus could be introduced accidentally into this country again and we could have an epidemic of polio."
*b. "Only one of many strains of polio has been eradicated. We believe that new strains are being formed."
c. -
d. "Some children suddenly lose their immunity, and we have no explanation for why this happens."
e. "You might have to travel to a foreign country, and then you might be exposed to the polio virus."

150. A child presents with intoxication symptoms, his tonsills are enlarged and covered with grey films that can be hardly removed with a spatula. These symptoms are indicative of the following disease:
a. Laryngeal stenosis
b. Catarrhal laryngitis
c. Scarlet fever
*d. Tonsillar diphtheria
e. Angina

