1. Which client is at greatest risk for the development of a pulmonary embolism?
a. 30-year-old athlete who lifts weights and was diagnosed with a pneumothorax yesterday
b. 50-year-old woman who has fragile capillaries and bruises very easily
c. -
*d. 40-year-old woman who has used oral contraceptives for the past 15 years and who had abdominal surgery yesterday for cancer
e. 60-year-old man who caught his right hand in a piece of machinery and has five broken fingers, with extensive soft tissue damage

2. Which diagnostic test most specifically confirms the presence of a pulmonary embolism?
a. -
*b. Pulmonary angiography
c. Arterial blood gases
d. Ventilation-perfusion lung scan
e. Chest x-ray

3. Which statement made by a client's spouse indicates the need for more teaching about prevention of a pulmonary embolism at home after major abdominal surgery?
a. While he is awake, I will make sure he gets up and walks for at least 5 minutes every 2 hours.
b. -
c. I will check his breathing rate and level twice a day.
d. He is prone to constipation, so I will increase the amount of fiber in his meals every day.
*e. I will massage his feet and legs twice a day to help blood return.

4. Which set of arterial blood gases would the nurse expect to find in a client who developed a pulmonary embolism 15 minutes ago?
a. pH 7.30, HCO3? 28 mEq/L, PCO2 65 mm Hg, PO2 75 mm Hg
b. pH 7.30, HCO3? 22 mEq/L, PCO2 60 mm Hg, PO2 66 mm Hg
c. -
*d. pH 7.47, HCO3? 23 mEq/L, PCO2 25 mm Hg, PO2 82 mm Hg
e. pH 7.38, HCO3? 22 mEq/L, PCO2 45 mm Hg, PO2 96 mm Hg

5. Which set of arterial blood gases would the nurse expect to find in a client who developed a pulmonary embolism 6 hours ago?
a. pH 7.47, HCO3? 23 mEq/L, PCO2 25 mm Hg, PO2 82 mm Hg
b. -
c. pH 7.30, HCO3? 28 mEq/L, PCO2 65 mm Hg, PO2 75 mm Hg
d. pH 7.38, HCO3? 22 mEq/L, PCO2 45 mm Hg, PO2 96 mm Hg
*e. pH 7.30, HCO3? 22 mEq/L, PCO2 60 mm Hg, PO2 66 mm Hg

6. A nurse discovers that a physician has prescribed that the client with a pulmonary embolism be started on oral warfarin while still receiving intravenous heparin. What is the nurse's best action?
a. Remind the physician that two anticoagulants should not be administered concurrently.
b. Monitor the client for clinical manifestations of internal or external bleeding at least every 2 hours.
*c. Administer the medications as prescribed
d. Hold the dose of warfarin until the client's partial thromboplastin time is the same as the control value.
e. -

7. Which statement, made by the client who is taking warfarin (Coumadin) daily to prevent blood clots from forming in deep veins, indicates a need for further discussion regarding this therapy?
a. I have two pairs of antiembolic stockings so that one pair can be washed each day.
b. On hot days, I make sure I drink at least two quarts of water.
*c. I have been eating more salads and other green, leafy vegetables to prevent constipation.
d. Instead of a safety razor, I have been using an electric shaver to shave.
e. -

8. Which client is at greatest risk for ARDS?
a. The 78-year-old with chronic congestive heart failure and pulmonary edema
b. The 62-year-old with COPD who has pneumonia
*c. The 22-year-old who received 10 units of blood after a motor vehicle crash
d. The 24-year-old with asthma who has not taken any of her asthma medications for 2 weeks
e. -

9. The client at risk for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) has become cyanotic and is diaphoretic. What assessment technique should the nurse perform next?
a. Measure the blood pressure in both arms.
b. -
c. Compare current ECG tracing with baseline measurement.
d. Auscultate breath sounds bilaterally.
*e. Measure pulse oximetry.

10. What is the most important intervention for the client with ARDS?
*a. Oxygen therapy
b. Bronchodilators
c. -
d. Antibiotic therapy
e. Diuretic therapy

11. The client with respiratory difficulty has a V/Q ratio of 0.5. What is the significance of this value?
a. The ratio is low; ventilation is exceeding perfusion.
b. The ratio is high; perfusion is exceeding ventilation.
c. -
*d. The ratio is low; perfusion is exceeding ventilation.
e. The ratio is high; ventilation is exceeding perfusion.

12. Which of the following clients could be expected to require mechanical ventilation longterm?
a. -
*b. 24-year-old with muscular dystrophy
c. 45-year-old with morphine overdose
d. 65-year-old with bilateral bacterial pneumonia
e. 27-year-old with status asthmaticus

13. What is the main purpose of a negative-pressure ventilator?
a. Delivering an individualized preset tidal volume to the lower respiratory tract
b. Healing diseased lung tissue
c. -
*d. Assisting ventilation to healthy lungs by mimicking normal chest pressures
e. Relieving hypoxemia by opening obstructed airways

14. A nurse is starting a new shift and assessing the client who has an oral endotracheal tube in place. Which finding requires immediate intervention?
a. -
*b. The endotracheal tube is taped to the lower jaw.
c. The endotracheal tube is midline in the mouth.
d. The client has hydrocolloid membrane on the skin of the cheeks
e. The client has been intubated for four days.

15. The pilot balloon on the endotracheal tube of a client being mechanically ventilated is completely deflated. What is the consequence of this situation?
a. -
*b. The client's lungs may not be receiving the set tidal volume.
c. The client has no airway and must be reintubated.
d. The client's residual volume is too low.
e. The endotracheal tube is too small for the client.

16. Which intervention promotes a more normal V/Q match for a client receiving mechanical ventilation?
a. Auscultating the lungs bilaterally every 4 hours for the presence of crackles, wheezes, and other abnormal breath sounds
b. Ensuring that the pilot balloon on the endotracheal tube cuff is inflated to its maximal pressure
c. -
*d. Positioning the client so that the healthier lung is dependent to the more diseased lung
e. Administering the prescribed muscle-paralyzing agents

17. Which assessment finding alerts the nurse to the possibility that the intrathoracic pressure in a mechanically ventilated client is too high?
a. Low-pressure alarm sounds on the ventilator
b. Increased diaphragmatic excursion
*c. Hypotension
d. Pulse oximetry value of 96%
e. -

18. The client being mechanically ventilated has become more restless over the course of the shift. What is the nurse's best action?
a. Administer a dose of pain medication or sedative.
b. Darken the room and ask visitors to leave.
c. -
*d. Check the client's oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry.
e. Document the observation as the only action.

19. The pressure reading on the ventilator of a client receiving mechanical ventilation is fluctuating widely. What is the correct action to take for this problem?
a. -
*b. Assess the client's oxygen saturation to determine the adequacy of oxygenation.
c. Increase the tidal volume by at least 100 mL or by the client's weight in kg.
d. Disconnect the ventilator from the client and use a manual resuscitation bag until the machine has been checked.
e. Determine whether there is an air leak in the client's endotracheal tube cuff.

