1. Based on genetic testing of a newborn, a diagnosis of dwarfism was made. The parents ask the nurse if this could happen to future children. Because this is an example of autosomal dominant inheritance, the nurse would tell the parents:
*a. "For each pregnancy, there is a 50/50 chance the child will be affected by dwarfism."
b. "For each pregnancy there is a 25% chance the child will be a carrier of the defective gene but unaffected by the disorder."
c. -
d. "Because you already have had an affected child there is a decreased chance for this to happen in future pregnancies."
e. "This will not happen again because the dwarfism was caused by the harmful genetic effects of the infection you had during pregnancy."

2. A female carries the gene for hemophilia on one of her X chromosomes. Now that she is pregnant she asks the nurse how this might affect her baby. The nurse should tell her:
*a. Hemophilia is always expressed if a male inherits the defective gene.
b. A male baby can be a carrier or have hemophilia.
c. -
d. Female babies are never affected by this disorder
e. A female baby has a 50% chance of also being a carrier.

3. When palpating the small breasts of a young slender woman, the nurse should:
a. -
*b. Follow a systematic, overlapping pattern
c. Lift hands when moving from one segment of the breast to another
d. Wear sterile gloves
e. Use both hands

4. A nurse instructed a female client regarding self-examination of the external genitalia. Which of the statements made by the client will require further instruction? I will:
a. Become familiar with how my genitalia look and feel so that I will be able to detect changes
b. Perform this examination at least once a month especially if I change sexual partners or am sexually active
*c. Use the examination to determine when I should get medications at the pharmacy for yeast infections
d. Wash my hands thoroughly before and after I examine myself
e. -

5. A women's health nurse practitioner is going to perform a pelvic examination on a female client. Which of the following nursing actions would be least effective in enhancing the client's comfort and relaxation during the examination?
a. Encourage the client to ask questions and express feelings and concerns before and after the examination
b. Instruct the client to place her hands over her diaphragm and take deep, slow breaths
c. -
*d. Ask the client questions as the examination is performed
e. Allow the client to keep her shoes and socks on when placing her feet in the stirrups

6. When assessing women, it is important for the nurse to keep in mind the possibility that they are victims of violence. The nurse should:
a. -
*b. Use an abuse assessment screen during the assessment of every woman
c. Assess a woman's legs and back as the most commonly injured areas
d. Recognize that abuse rarely occurs during pregnancy
e. Notify the police immediately if abuse is suspected

7. A 50-year-old woman asks the nurse practitioner about how often she should be assessed for the common health problems women of her age could experience. The nurse would recommend:
*a. A fecal occult blood test annually
b. A mammogram every other year
c. -
d. Bone mineral density testing annually
e. An endometrial biopsy every 3 to 4 years

8. Which of the following statements is most accurate regarding persons who should participate in preconception counseling?
a. Women with chronic illnesses such as diabetes who are planning to get pregnant
b. -
c. All women during their childbearing years
d. Sexually active women who do not use birth control
*e. All women and their partners as they make decisions about their reproductive future including becoming parents

9. Which of the following women is at greatest risk for developing hypogonadotropic amenorrhea?
*a. 13-year-old figure skater
b. 18-year-old softball player
c. -
d. 30-year-old breastfeeding woman
e. 48-year-old woman experiencing perimenopausal changes

10. Pharmacologic preparations can be used to treat primary dysmenorrhea. Choose the preparation that would be least effective in relieving the symptoms of primary dysmenorrhea.
a. Ibuprofen (Motrin)
b. Naproxen sodium (Anaprox)
c. -
*d. Acetaminophen (Tylenol)
e. Oral contraceptive pill (OCP)

11. Women experiencing primary dysmenorrhea should be advised to avoid what food?
a. Asparagus
b. Whole-grain cereals
c. -
*d. Red meats
e. Cranberry juice

12. The nurse counseling a 30-year-old woman regarding effective measures to use to relieve symptoms associated with premenstrual syndrome (PMS) could suggest:
a. Reduce exercise during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle when symptoms are at their peak
b. Decrease intake of fruits especially peaches and watermelon
*c. Avoid tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine
d. Maintain a salt intake of 6 g/day or less
e. -

13. A 28-year-old woman has been diagnosed with endometriosis. She has been placed on a course of treatment with danazol (Danocrine). The woman exhibits understanding of this treatment when she says:
*a. "I can experience a decrease in my breast size, oily skin, and hair growth on my face as a result of taking this medication."
b. "I will need to take this medication until 1 reach menopause."
c. -
d. "I will need to spray this medication into my nose twice a day."
e. "Since this medication stops ovulation I do not need to use birth control."

14. A female client, age 26, describes scant bleeding between her menstrual periods. The nurse would record this finding as
a. -
b. Hypomenorrhea
c. -
*d. Metrorrhagia
e. Menorrhagia

15. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB) is most likely to occur when women:
a. Are less than their expected body weight
b. Experience ovulatory cycles
*c. Are experiencing signs of the onset of perimenopause
d. Secrete high levels of prostaglandin
e. -

16. A 55-year-old woman tells the nurse that she has started to experience pain when she and her husband have intercourse. The nurse would record that this woman is experiencing:
a. Dyspnea
b. -
c. Dysmenorrhea
d. Dysuria
*e. Dyspareunia

17. Infections of the female mid-reproductive tract such as chlamydia are dangerous primarily because these infections:
a. -
*b. Are asymptomatic
c. Lead to pelvic inflammatory disease
d. Cause infertility
e. Are difficult to treat effectively

18. A finding associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection would include which of the following?
*a. Soft papillary swelling occurring singly or in clusters
b. Vesicles progressing to pustules and then to ulcers
c. -
d. Yellow to green frothy malodorous discharge
e. White, curd-like, adherent

19. A recommended medication effective in the treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis would be
a. Penicillin
b. Metronidazole
*c. Clotrimazole
d. Acyclovir
e. -

20. A woman is determined to be group B streptococcus (GBS) positive at the onset of her labor. The nurse should prepare this woman for
a. Application of acyclovir to her labial lesions
b. -
c. Cesarean birth
d. Isolation of her newborn after birth
*e. Intravenous administration of penicillin during labor

21. When providing a woman, recovering from primary herpes, with information regarding the recurrence of herpes infection of the genital tract, the nurse would tell her:
a. Fever and flu-like symptoms will precede a recurrent infection
b. Transmission of the virus is only possible when lesions are open and draining
c. -
*d. Itching and tingling often occur prior to the appearance of vesicles
e. Little can be done to control the recurrence of infection

22. A single, young adult woman received instructions from the nurse regarding the use of an oral contraceptive. The woman would demonstrate a need for further instruction if she:
a. Takes a pill every morning
b. Enrolls in a smoking cessation program
*c. Stops asking her sexual partners to use condoms with spermicide
d. Uses a barrier method of birth control if she misses two or more pills
e. -

23. The most common, and for some women the most distressing side effect of Norplant, is
a. Headache
b. Nausea
c. -
*d. Irregular menstrual bleeding
e. Nervousness

24. A woman with an IUD should confirm its placement by checking the IUD's string:
a. Before each menstrual period
b. During menstrual bleeding
c. -
*d. At the time of ovulation
e. After intercourse

25. When teaching women about the effective use of chemical barriers, the nurse should tell them to:
a. Douche immediately after last intercourse
b. -
c. Insert foams at least 1 hour prior to coitus
d. Insert suppositories just prior to penile contact with the vagina
*e. Reapply before each act of coitus

26. A woman must assess herself for signs that ovulation is occurring. Which of the following is a sign associated with ovulation?
*a. Spinnbarkeit
b. Increase in amount and thickness of cervical mucus
c. -
d. Decrease in amount and thickness of cervical mucus
e. Drop in basal body temperature (BBT) following ovulation

27. A couple is to undergo a postcoital test. The nurse should tell the couple that:
a. -
*b. Intercourse should occur daily for 3 days prior to the test
c. The test will be scheduled for the day after menstruation ceases
d. The test will be used to determine how sperm penetrate and survive in cervical mucus
e. The examination of cervical mucus must be performed within 30 minutes of intercourse

28. Lifestyle and sexual practices can affect fertility. Which of the following practices could enhance a couple's ability to conceive?
*a. Couple only uses water-soluble lubricants if needed during intercourse
b. Female assumes a supine position with hips elevated for 1 hour after intercourse
c. -
d. Male relaxes in a hot tub every day after work
e. Male wears boxer shorts instead of briefs

29. A woman taking human menopausal gonadotropin (Pergonal) for infertility should understand that:
a. She should take the medication orally, once a day after breakfast
b. Clomiphene (Clomid) should be taken daily, along with the Pergonal, until ovulation occurs
c. -
*d. She must report for ultrasound testing as scheduled to monitor follicular development
e. The medication stimulates the pituitary gland to produce follicle stimulating (FSH) and luteinizing (LH) hormones

30. An infertile woman may be given danazol (Danocrine) in order to:
a. Help her to relax prior to intercourse
b. -
c. Stimulate her pituitary gland
d. Induce ovulation
*e. Treat endometriosis

31. When teaching women about breast cancer the nurse should emphasize that:
a. Most women diagnosed with breast cancer exhibited clear and identifiable risk factors
b. -
c. The incidence of breast cancer is highest among African-American women
d. Breast cancer is most prevalent among women in their thirties and forties
*e. Early menarche and late menopause may increase the risk for breast cancer

32. The physician of a 46-year-old premenopausal woman with breast cancer has prescribed tamoxifen beginning in the postoperative period following lumpectomy. The nurse should understand that this medication:
a. Must be taken for a lifetime
b. -
c. Relieves postoperative discomfort
d. Is usually taken in an oral dose of 100 mg four times a day
*e. Can cause hot flashes and menstrual irregularities

33. When providing discharge instructions to a woman who had a modified right radical mastectomy, the nurse should emphasize the importance of:
*a. Telling health care providers not to take a blood pressure or draw blood from her right arm
b. Learning how to use her left arm to write and accomplish the activities of daily living such as combing her hair
c. -
d. Wearing clothing that snugly supports her right arm
e. Reporting any tingling or numbness in her incisional site or right arm immediately

34. A 26-year-old woman has just been diagnosed with fibrocystic change in her breasts. Nonproliferative lesions have been noted in both breasts. Which of the following nursing diagnoses would be a priority for this woman?
a. -
*b. Acute pain related to cyclical enlargement of breast cysts or lumps
c. Anxiety related to anticipated surgery to remove the cysts in her breasts
d. Risk for infection related to altered integrity of the areola associated with leakage from the nipples
e. Fear related to high risk for breast cancer

35. When assessing a woman with a diagnosis of fibroadenoma, a characteristic the nurse would expect to find would be:
*a. Small, well-delineated lump in the upper outer quadrant of one breast
b. Milky discharge from one or both nipples
c. -
d. Soft and nonmovable lumps
e. Bilateral tender lumps behind the nipple

36. When teaching a class of pregnant women about fetal development, the nurse would include:
a. The baby's heart begins to pump blood during the 10th week of pregnancy.
b. The sex of your baby is determined by the 9th week of pregnancy.
*c. You should be able to feel your baby move by week 16 to 20 of pregnancy.
d. The baby's heart beat will be audible using a special ultrasound stethoscope as early as the 18th week of pregnancy.
e. -

37. The results of an amniocentesis indicates that the pregnant woman's L/S ratio is 2:1. This result indicates that:
a. The fetus has most likely developed a renal problem.
b. The woman is in her 2nd trimester of pregnancy.
*c. The newborn should be able to maintain effective respiration after birth.
d. An open neural tube defect is present.
e. -

38. When caring for pregnant women, the nurse would recognize that a woman with which of the following disorders has the greatest risk for giving birth to a macrosomic newborn?
a. Hypertension
b. -
c. Anemia
d. Hyperthyroidism
*e. Diabetes

39. A pregnant woman at 10 weeks' gestation exhibits the following signs of pregnancy during a routine prenatal check-up. Which one would be categorized as a probable sign of pregnancy?
*a. Human chorionic gonadotropin in the urine
b. Morning sickness
c. -
d. Fetal heart sounds
e. Breast tenderness

40. A pregnant woman with four children reports the following obstetric history: a stillbirth at 32 weeks' gestation, triplets (2 sons and a daughter) born via cesarean section at 30 weeks' gestation, a spontaneous abortion at 8 weeks' gestation, and daughter born vaginally at 39 weeks' gestation. Which of the following accurately expresses this woman's current obstetric history using the 5-digit system?
a. 5-2-2-0-3
b. -
c. 5-1-4-1-4
d. 4-1-3-1-4
*e. 5-1-2-1-4

41. An essential component of prenatal health assessment of pregnant women is the determination of vital signs. An expected change in vital signs findings as a result of pregnancy would be:
a. Gradual decrease in baseline pulse rate of approximately 20 beats per minute
b. -
c. Increase in systolic blood pressure by 30 mm Hg or more after assuming a supine position
d. Increase in diastolic BP by 5-10 mm Hg beginning in the first trimester
*e. Increased awareness of the need to breathe as pregnancy progresses

42. A woman exhibits understanding of instructions for performing a home pregnancy test to maximize accuracy if she:
*a. Records the day of her last normal menstrual period and her usual cycle length
b. Avoids using Tylenol or aspirin for a headache for about 1 week prior to performing the test
c. -
d. Performs the test on the day after she misses her first menstrual period
e. Uses urine collected at the end of the day, just before going to bed

43. During an examination of a pregnant woman the nurse notes that her cervix is soft on its tip. The nurse would document this finding as
a. Friability
b. Hegar sign
c. -
*d. Goodell sign
e. Chadwick sign

44. A nurse teaching a pregnant woman about the importance of iron in her diet would tell her to avoid consuming which of the following foods at the same time as her iron supplement because it will decrease iron absorption?
*a. Eggs
b. Strawberries
c. -
d. Meat
e. Tomatoes

45. A 25-year-old pregnant woman is at 10 weeks' gestation. Her BMI is calculated to be 24. Which one of the following is recommended in terms of weight gain during pregnancy?
a. Weight gain of 3.0 kg per month during the second and third trimester
b. -
c. Total weight gain of 18 kg
d. Weight gain of 0.4 kg each week for 40 weeks
*e. First trimester weight gain of 1 to 2.5 kg

46. A pregnant woman at 6 weeks' gestation tells her nurse-midwife that she has been experiencing nausea with occasional vomiting every day. The nurse could recommend which of the following as an effective relief measure?
*a. Alter eating patterns to small meals every 2 to 3 hours
b. Avoid eating before going to bed at night
c. -
d. Skip a meal if nausea is experienced
e. Eat starchy foods such as buttered popcorn or peanut butter with crackers in the morning before getting out of bed

47. A woman demonstrates an understanding of the importance of increasing her intake of foods high in folic acid when she includes which of the following foods in her diet?
*a. Legumes
b. Corn
c. -
d. Cheese
e. Seafood

48. A 30-year-old woman at 16 weeks' gestation comes for a routine prenatal visit. Her 24-hour dietary recall is evaluated by the nurse. Which of the following entries would indicate that this woman needs further instructions regarding nutrient needs during pregnancy?
a. Daily iron supplement taken at bedtime with a glass of orange juice
b. Total kcal intake is 300 kcal above her calculated prepregnancy needs
*c. Servings up to 10 ounces total from the meat, poultry, fish, dry beans, eggs, and nuts group
d. Four servings from the milk, yogurt, cheese group
e. -

49. A woman's last menstrual period (LMP) began on November 9, 2003, and it ended on November 14, 2010. Using Nagele's rule, the estimated date of birth would be:
a. February 2, 2011
b. August 21, 2011
c. -
*d. August 16, 2011
e. July 6, 2011

50. A woman at 30 weeks' gestation assumes a supine position for a fundal measurement and Leopold maneuvers. She begins to complain about feeling dizzy and nauseous. Her skin feels damp and cool. The nurse's first action would be to:
a. -
*b. Turn the woman on her side
c. Provide the woman with an emesis basin
d. Assess the woman's respiratory rate and effort
e. Elevate the woman's legs 20 degrees from her hips

51. During an early bird prenatal class a nurse teaches a group of newly diagnosed pregnant women about their emotional reactions during pregnancy. Which of the following should the nurse discuss with the women?
*a. A quiet period of introspection is often experienced around the time a woman feels her baby move for the first time
b. A referral for counseling should be sought if a woman experiences conflicting feelings about her pregnancy especially in the first trimester
c. -
d. The need to seek safe passage and prepare for birth begins early in the second trimester
e. Sexual desire (libido) is decreased throughout pregnancy

52. The nurse evaluates a pregnant woman's knowledge about prevention of urinary tract infections at the visit following a class on infection prevention that the woman attended. The nurse would recognize that the woman needs further instruction when she tells the nurse about which one of the following measures that she now uses to prevent urinary tract infections:
a. -
*b. "I drink about one quart of fluid a day."
c. "I have started wearing panty hose and underpants with a cotton crotch."
d. "I have stopped using bubble baths and bath oils."
e. "I drink cranberry juice instead of orange juice and have yogurt for lunch."

53. Doulas are becoming important members of a laboring woman's health care team. Which of the following activities should be expected as part of the doula's role responsibilities?
a. Interpret electronic fetal monitoring tracings to determine the well-being of the maternal-fetal unit
b. Monitor hydration of laboring woman including adjusting IV flow rates
*c. Provide continuous support throughout labor and birth including explanations of labor progress
d. Eliminate the need for the husband/partner to be present during labor and birth
e. -

54. Changes occur as a woman progresses through labor. Which of the following maternal adaptations would be expected during labor?
a. Decrease in white blood cell count
b. Increase in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure during uterine contractions in the first stage of labor.
*c. Slight increase in temperature, pulse, and respiration findings
d. Increase in gastric motility leading to vomiting especially during the latent and active phases of the first stage of labor.
e. -

55. In her birth plan, a woman requests that she be allowed to use the new whirlpool bath during labor. When implementing this woman's request the nurse would:
a. Limit her to no longer than 1 hour in the tub
b. -
c. Assist the woman to maintain a reclining position when in the tub
d. Tell the woman she will need to leave the tub as soon as her membranes rupture
*e. Cool the water or have the woman step out of the tub if the fetal heart rate or maternal temperature increases

56. The use of ataractics can potentiate the action of analgesics. An ataractic the nurse could expect to give to a laboring woman would be:
a. butorphanol tartrate (Stadol)
b. naloxone (Narcan)
c. -
*d. hydroxyzine (Vistaril)
e. fentanyl ( Sublimaze)

57. The doctor has ordered meperidine (Demerol) 25 mg IV q 2-3 h prn for pain associated with. In fulfilling this order the nurse should know that:
*a. The newborn should be observed for respiratory depression if birth occurs within 4 hours of the dose
b. The dosage of the analgesic is too high for IV administration, necessitating a new order
c. -
d. Respiratory depression of the woman or fetus is not a concern with this analgesic
e. The onset of this analgesic's effect after IV administration would be approximately 10 minutes

58. Following administration of fentanyl (Sublimaze) IV for labor pain, a woman's labor progresses more rapidly than expected. The physician orders that a stat dose of naloxone (Narcan) 0.1 mg be administered intravenously to the woman to reverse respiratory depression in the newborn after its birth. In fulfilling this order the nurse would:
a. Observe maternal pulse for tachycardia
*b. Assess the woman's level of pain since it will return abruptly
c. Recognize that the dose is too low
d. Observe maternal pulse for bradycardia
e. Recognize that the dose is too high

59. An anesthesiologist is preparing to begin a continuous epidural block using a combination local Anesthe tic and opioid agonist analgesic as a pain relief measure for a laboring woman. Nursing measures related to this type of nerve block would be:
*a. Assist the woman into a modified Sims position or upright position with back curved
b. Assess the woman for headaches especially after birth
c. -
d. Assist the woman to urinate every 4 hours to prevent bladder distention
e. Keep the woman in a semirecumbent position after administration to ensure equal distribution of the pharmacologic agents

60. A laboring woman's uterine contractions are being internally monitored. When evaluating the monitor tracing, which of the following findings would be a source of concern and require further assessment?
*a. Average resting pressure of 20 to 25 mm Hg
b. Duration of 80 to 85 seconds
c. -
d. Intensity during a uterine contraction of 85 to 90 mm Hg
e. Frequency every V-h to 3 minutes

61. External electronic fetal monitoring will be used for a woman just admitted to the labor unit in active labor. A guideline the nurse should follow when implementing this form of monitoring would be:
a. Reposition the ultrasound transducer every hour and massage the site
b. Use Leopold maneuvers to determine correct placement of the tocotransducer
c. -
*d. Apply contact gel to the ultrasound transducer prior to application over the point of maximum intensity
e. Apply a spiral electrode if nonreassuring FHR signs are noted

62. The nurse caring for women in labor should be aware of signs characterizing reassuring FHR patterns. A reassuring sign would be:
a. Average baseline FHR of 90 to 110 BPM
b. Late deceleration patterns approximately every three or four contractions
c. -
*d. Moderate baseline variability
e. Transient episodic deceleration with movement

63. A laboring woman's temperature is elevated as a result of an upper respiratory infection. The FHR pattern that reflects maternal fever would be:
a. Early decelerations
b. Variable decelerations
c. -
*d. Tachycardia
e. Diminished variability

64. A nulliparous woman is in the active phase of labor and her cervix has progressed to 6 cm dilatation. The nurse caring for this woman evaluates the external monitor tracing and notes the following: decrease in FHR shortly after onset of several uterine contractions returning to baseline rate by the end of the contraction; shape is uniform. Based on these findings the nurse should:
a. Perform a vaginal examination to check for cord prolapse
b. Notify the physician
*c. Document the finding on the woman's chart
d. Change the woman's position to her left side
e. -

65. A primigravida calls the hospital and tells a nurse on the labor unit that she knows that she is in labor. The nurse's initial response would be:
a. -
*b. "Tell me why you know that you are in labor."
c. "How far along are you in your pregnancy?"
d. "How far do you live from the hospital?"
e. "Have your membranes ruptured?"

66. A woman's amniotic membranes have apparently ruptured. The nurse assesses the fluid to determine its characteristics and confirm membrane rupture. An expected assessment finding would be:
a. Strong odor
b. pH 5.5
c. -
*d. Pale straw colored fluid with white flecks
e. Absence of ferning

67. A vaginal examination is performed on a multiparous woman who is in labor. The results of the examination were documented as: 4 cm, 75%, +2, LOT. An accurate interpretation of this data would be:
a. Lie is transverse
b. Station is 2 cm above the ischial spines
c. -
*d. Presentation is vertex
e. Woman is in the latent phase of the first stage of labor

68. A nulliparous woman is in active labor. She is considered to be at low risk for complications. Which of the following is a standard recommendation for assessment during this phase of labor?
a. Vaginal examination to determine progress of dilatation and effacement?every hour
b. Temperature?twice per shift once membranes rupture
*c. FHR?every 15 to 30 minutes
d. Maternal blood pressure, pulse, respirations?every hour
e. -

69. A physical care measure for a laboring woman that has been identified as unlikely to be beneficial and may even be harmful would be:
a. Ambulating periodically throughout labor as tolerated
b. Allowing the laboring woman to drink fluids and eat light solids as tolerated
c. -
*d. Administering a Fleet enema at admission
e. Using a whirlpool bath once active labor is established

70. A nurse has assessed a woman who gave birth vaginally 12 hours ago. Which of the following findings would require further assessment?
*a. Fundus firm at level of umbilicus and to the right of midline
b. Midline episiotomy?approximated, moderate edema, slight erythema, absence of ecchymosis
c. -
d. Protrusion of abdomen with sight separation of abdominal wall muscles
e. Bright to dark red uterine discharge?% of pad saturated in 2 to 3 hours

71. The nurse is assessing the laboratory report of a 40-week gestation client. Which of the following values would the nurse expect to find elevated above prepregnancy levels?
a. Bilirubin.
b. -
c. Glucose.
d. Hematocrit.
*e. Fibrinogen.

72. When analyzing the need for health teaching of a prenatal multigravida, the nurse should ask which of the following questions?
a. What are the ages of your children?
b. Do you have any allergies?
c. -
*d. Do you ever drink alcohol?
e. What is your marital status?

73. Because nausea and vomiting are such common complaints of pregnant women, the nurse provides anticipatory guidance to a 6-week gestation client by telling her to do which of the following?
a. Eat 3 large meals plus a bedtime snack.
b. -
c. Drink orange juice before rising.
d. Drink 2 glasses of water with each meal.
*e. Avoid eating greasy foods.

74. A client enters the prenatal clinic. She states that she missed her period yesterday and used a home pregnancy test this morning. She states that the results were negative, but I still think I am pregnant. Which of the following statements would be appropriate for the nurse to make at this time?
*a. We could do a blood test to check.
b. Home pregnancy test results are very accurate.
c. -
d. My recommendation would be to repeat the test in one week.
e. Your period is probably just irregular.

75. A gravida, G1 P0000, is having her first prenatal physical examination. Which of the following assessments should the nurse inform the client that she will have that day?
a. -
*b. Pap smear.
c. Glucose challenge test.
d. Mammogram.
e. Biophysical profile.

76. A 10-week gravid client is being seen in the prenatal clinic. For the nurse caring for this patient, providing anticipatory guidance for which of the following should be a priority?
a. Characteristics of the newborn.
b. -
c. Pain management during labor.
d. Breastfeeding positions.
*e. Methods to relieve backaches.

77. A client asks the nurse what was meant when the physician told her she had a positive Chadwick's sign. Which of the following information about the finding would be appropriate for the nurse to convey at this time?
a. It means the doctor heard abnormal sounds when you breathed in.
b. -
c. It is a purplish stretch mark on your abdomen.
d. It means that you are having heart palpitations.
*e. It is a bluish coloration of your cervix and vagina.

78. A client enters the prenatal clinic. She states that she believes she is pregnant. Which of the following hormone elevations will indicate a high probability that the client is pregnant?
a. Oxytocin.
b. Luteinizing hormone.
c. -
*d. Chorionic gonadotropin.
e. Prolactin.

