1. An 8 year old child has low-grade fever, arthritis, colicky abdominal pain and a purpuric rash llocalized on the lower extremities. laboratory studies reveal a guaiac-positive stool, urinalysis with red blood cell (RBC) casts and mild proteinuria, and a normal platelet count. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Henoch-Schonleins vasculitis
b. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
c. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
d. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

2. A young man has painful indurations in the peripapillary regions of both mammary glands. The most reasonable action will be:
a. To administer steroids locally
*b. To leave these indurations untouched
c. To cut and drain them
d. To remove them
e. To take an aspirate for bacterial inoculation and cytology

3. A 9 year old girl with a history of intermittent wheezing for several years is brought to the pediatrician. The child has been taking no medications for some time. Physical examination reveals agitation and perioral cyanosis. Intercostal and suprasternal retractions are present. The breath sounds are quiet, and wheezing is audible bilaterally. The child is admitted to the hospital. Appropriate interventions might include all of the following textbfEXCEPT:
a. Administer supplemental oxygen
b. Prescribe intravenous aminophylline
*c. Prescribe nebulized cromolyn sodium
d. Prescribe intravenous corticosteroids
e. Prescribe nebulized metaproterenol

4. Routine examination of a child with a history of bronchial asthma reveals AP of 140/90 mm Hg. The most likely cause of the hypertension is:
a. Chronic lung disease
b. Theophylline overdose
*c. Renal disease
d. Coarctation of the aorta
e. Obesity

5. Patient with thyreotoxicosis is in the 2 beds hospital ward of therapeutic department. The area of the ward is 18 m2, height 3 m, ventilation rate 2,5/hr. Air temperature - 20°C, relative humidity - 45%, air movement velocity - 0,3 m/s, light coefficient - 1/5, noise level - 30 dB. Do hygienic evaluation of the conditions meet the standards?
a. All conditions meet the requirements
*b. Discomfortable microclimate
c. Poor lighting
d. Non-effective ventilation
e. High level of noise

6. The child is 11 m.o. He suffers from nervous-arthritic diathesis. The increased synthesis of what acid is pathogenic at nervous-arthritic diathesis?
a. Acetic acid
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sulfuric acid
*d. Uric acid
e. Phosphoric acid

7. A 10-year-old child complains of fever (temperature is 39OC), frequent painful urination [pollakiuria]. Urine test: proteinuria [0,066 g/L], leukocytouria [entirely within eyeshot], bacteriuria [105 colony forming units/mL]. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute cystitis
b. Urolithiasis
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
*e. Acute pyelonephritis

8. A 8-year-old boy has suffered from tonsilitis. In 2 weeks he started complaining of migratory joint pain, edema of joints, restriction of movements, fever. On examination, an acute rheumatic heart disease, activity of the III-rd degree, primary rheumocarditis, polyarthritis; acute course of disease, cardiovascular failure IIA. What medication is to be prescribed?
a. Diprazinum
b. Erythromycin
c. Cefazolin
d. Delagil
*e. Prednisone

9. The 10 y.o. boy has complains on headache, weakness, fever 40°C, vomiting, expressed dyspnea, pale skin with flush on right cheek, lag of right hemithorax respiratory movement, dullness on percussion over low lobe of right lung, weakness of vesicular respiration in this zone. The abdomen is painless and soft at palpation. Which disease lead to these symptoms and signs?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Flu
c. Intestinal infection
d. Acute appendicitis
*e. Pneumonia croupousa

10. A patient with acute respiratory viral infection (3rd day of disease) complains of pain in lumbar region, nausea, dysuria, oliguria. Urinalysis - hematuria (100-200 RBC in eyeshot spot), specific gravity - 1002. The blood creatinin level is 0,18 millimole/l, potassium level - 6,4 millimole/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute renal failure
b. Acute cystitis
c. Acute renal colic
*d. Acute interstitial nephritis
e. Acute glomerylonephritis

11. A baby boy was born in time, it was his mothers 1st pregnancy. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it progressed. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were presented. The indirect bilirubin level was 275 mcmol/L, the direct bilirubin level - 5 mcmol/L, Hb- 150 g/L. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. Make a diagnosis
a. Hemolytic disease of newborn (Rh - incompatibility)
*b. Hemolytic disease of newborn (АВО incompatibility), icteric type
c. Hepatitis
d. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder
e. Physiological jaundice

12. A neonate was born from the 1st gestation on term. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it became more acute. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were observed. Indirect bilirubin level was 275mumol/L, direct bilirubin level - 5mumol/L, Hb- 150 g/l. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hepatitis
b. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder
*c. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (АВ0 incompatibility), icteric type
d. Physiological jaundice
e. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (Rh - incompatibility)

13. A 3 month old infant suffering from acute segmental pneumonia has dyspnea (respiration rate - 80 per minute), paradoxical breathing, tachycardia, total cyanosis. Respiration and pulse - ratio is 1:2. The heart dullness under normal size. Such signs characterise:
*a. Respiratory failure of III degree
b. Respiratory failure of II degree
c. Congenital heart malformation
d. Myocarditis
e. Respiratory failure of I degree

14. The 7 m.o. infant is suffering from acute pneumonia which was complicated by cardiovascular insufficiency and respiratory failure of II degree. The accompanied diagnosis is malnutrition of II degree. Choose the best variant of therapy:
a. Ampiox and Polymixin
*b. Ampiox and Amicacin
c. Penicillin and Ampiox
d. Macropen and Penicillin
e. Gentamycin and Macropen

15. A 3 year old child has been suffering from fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis for 4 days. He has been taking sulfadimethoxine. Today it has fever up to 39°C and maculopapular rash on its face. Except of rash the childs skin has no changes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Allergic rash
b. Scarlet fever
c. Pseudotuberculosis
*d. Measles
e. Rubella

16. A 2 year old girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Scarlet fever
*c. Rubella
d. Adenoviral infection
e. Pseudotuberculosis

17. A 3 year old boy fell ill abruptly: fever up to 39°C, weakness, vomitng. Haemorrhagic rash of various size appeared on his lower limbs within 5 hours. Meningococcemia with infective - toxic shock of the 1 degree was diagnosed. What medications should be administered?
*a. Chloramphenicol succinate and prednisone
b. Penicillin and immunoglobulin
c. Ampicillin and immunoglobulin
d. Chloramphenicol succinate and interferon
e. Penicillin and prednisone

18. A 7 year old girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
a. Neurotoxic syndrome
*b. Encephalitis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Meningitis
e. Myelitis

19. A 7 y.o. girl fell ill abruptly: fever, headache, severe sore throat, vomiting. Minute bright red rash appear in her reddened skin in 3 hours. It is more intensive in axillae and groin. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is hyperemic. Greyish patches is on the tonsills. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. What is your diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Pseudotuberculosis
c. Enteroviral infection
*d. Scarlet fever
e. Rubella

20. An 8-year-old boy fell ill acutely: he presents with fever, weakness, headache, abdominal pain, recurrent vomiting, then diarrhea and tenesmus. Stools occur 12 times daily, are scanty, contain a lot of mucus, pus, streaks of blood. His sigmoid gut is tender and hardened. What is your diagnosis?
a. Escherichiosis
*b. Dysentery
c. Cholera
d. Salmonellosis
e. Staphylococcal gastroenteritis

21. The child has complains of the "night" and "hungry" abdominal pains. At fibroscopy in area a bulbus ofa duodenum the ulcerrative defect of 4 mms diameter is found, the floor is obtected with a fibrin, (H.p +). Administer the optimum schemes of treatment:
a. Trichopolum
*b. Omeprasole - Trichopolum - Claritromicin
c. Maalox - Ranitidin
d. De-nol
e. Vicalinum - Ranitidin

22. A woman delivered a child. It was her fifth pregnancy but the first delivery. Mothers blood group is A(II)Rh-, newborns - A(II)Rh+. The level of indirect bilirubin in umbilical blood was 58 micromole/l, haemoglobin - 140 g/l, RBC- 3,8×1012/l. In 2 hours the level of indirect bilirubin turned 82 micromole/l. The hemolytic disease of newborn (icteric-anemic type, Rh-incompatibility) was diagnosed. Choose the therapeutic tactics:
a. Antibiotics
*b. Replacement blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
c. Blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
d. Conservative therapy
e. Symptomatic therapy

23. A mother with an infant visited the pediatrician for expertise advice. Her baby was born with body weight 3,2 kg and body length 50 cm. He is 1 year old now. How many teeth the baby should have?
*a. 8
b. 12
c. 6
d. 20
e. 10

24. A mother consulted a pediatrician about her son. Her son was born with body mass of 3 kg and length of 48 cm. Hes 1 year old now. What is the required normal mass?
a. 12,0 kg
b. 15,0 kg
c. 9,0 kg
d. 11,0 kg
*e. 10,5 kg

25. 6 m.o. infant was born with bodys mass 3 kg and length 50 cm. He is given natural feeding. How many times per day the infant should be fed?
a. 6
b. 7
*c. 5
d. 8
e. 4

26. Infant is 6,5 months now and is given natural feeding since birth. Body mass was 3,5 kg, with length 52 cm at birth. How many times per day the supplement (up feeding) should be given?
a. 3
b. 0
c. 4
*d. 2
e. 1

27. A 2 month old healthy infant with good appetite is given artificial feeding since he turned 1 month old. When is it recommended to start the corrective feeding (fruit juice)?
a. 3,0 months
b. 1,0 months
c. 1,5 months
d. 2,0 months
*e. 4,0 months

28. An infant was born with body mass 3 kg and body length 50 cm. Now he is 3 years old. His brother is 7 years old, suffers from rheumatic fever. Mother asked the doctor for a cardiac check up of the 3-year-old son. Where is the left relative heart border located?
a. 1 cm right from the left medioclavicular line
b. 1 cm left from he left parasternal line
c. 1 cm right from the left parasternal line
*d. 1 cm left from the left medioclavicular line
e. Along the left medioclavicular line

29. A boy of 7 y.o. had an attack of asthma and distant whistling rales after playing with a dog. In the medical hystory: atopic dermatitis caused by eating eggs, chicken, beef. What group of allergens is the reason of the development of bronchial astma attacks?
a. Dust
b. Itch mite
c. Chemical
*d. Epidermal
e. Pollen

30. A 14-year-old boy has rheumatism. Over the last 2 years he has had 3 rheumatic attacks. What course of rheumatism does the patient have?
*a. Prolonged
b. Subacute
c. Persistent-reccurent
d. Latent
e. Acute

31. The patient with aquired heart failure has diastolic pressure of 0 mm Hg. What heart failure does the child have?
*a. Aortal insufficiency
b. Aortal stenosis
c. Rheumatism
d. Mitral insufficiency
e. Mitral stenosis

32. A 12 year old child has the ulcer disease of stomach. What is the etiology of this disease?
*a. Intestinal bacillus
b. Salmonella
c. Influenza
d. Lambliosis
e. Helicobacter pylory

33. A nine year old child is at a hospital with acute glomerulonephritis. Clinical and laboratory examinations show acute condition. What nutrients must not be limited during the acute period of glomerulonephritis?
a. Fats
*b. Carbohydrates
c. Liquid
d. Salt
e. Proteins

34. An 18-month-old child was taken to a hospital on the 4-th day of the disease. The disease began acutely with temperature 39, weakness, cough, breathlessness. He is pale, cyanotic, has had febrile temperature for over 3 days. There are crepitative fine bubbling rales on auscultation. Percussion sound is shortened in the right infrascapular region. X-ray picture shows non-homogeneous segment infiltration 8-10 mm on the right, the intensification of lung pattern. Your diagnosis:
a. Grippe
b. Bronchiolitis
c. Interstitial pneumonia
*d. Segmentary pneumonia
e. Bronchitis

35. A 9-year-old girl has attacks of abdominal pain after fried food. No fever. She has pain in Cera point. The liver is not enlarged. Portion B [duodenal probe] - 50 ml. What is your diagnosis?
a. Acute colitis
b. Hepatocirrhosis
*c. Biliary tracts dyskinesia, hypotonic type
d. Chronic duodenum
e. Peptic ulcer

36. A baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation. Delivery was normal, by natural way. The baby has a large cephalohematoma. The results of blood count are: Hb- 120g/l, Er- 3,5×1012/l, total serum bilirubin - 123 mmol/l, direct bilirubin - 11 mmol/l, indirect - 112 mmol/l. What are causes of hyperbilirubinemia in this case?
a. Mechanical obstruction of the bile outflow
*b. Erythrocyte hemolysis
c. Disturbance of the conjugative function of liver
d. Intravascular hemolysis
e. Bile condensing

37. A 4-month-old girl with blond hair and blue eyes has "mousy" odor of sweat and urine, delayed psychomotoric development. The most typical laboratory data for this disorder is:
a. High concentration of chlorides in sweat
b. Low level of thyroid gland hormones in blood
c. High level of oxyproline in urine
d. High level of glycosaminoglycanes in urine
*e. Positive urine ferric chloride test

38. A neonate is 5 days old. What vaccination dose of BCG vaccine (in mg) is necessary for vaccination of this child?
a. 0,2 mg
*b. 0,05 mg
c. 0,075 mg
d. 0,025 mg
e. 0,1 mg

39. 7 y.o. boy with chronic sinusitis and rercurent pulmonary infections has chest X-ray demonstrating a right-sided cardiac silhouette. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. alpha-antitrypsin deficiency
*b. Kartagener syndrome
c. Bronchiolitis obliterans
d. Cystic fibrosis (mucoviscidosis)
e. Laryngotracheomalacia

40. A 2,9-kg term male infant is born to a mother who developed polyhydramnios at 34 weeks gestation. At birth, the Apgar scores were 9 and 9. The infant develops choking and cyanosis with the first feed. In addition, is unable to place a nasogastric tube. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tracheal atresia
b. Respiratory distress syndrome
c. Choanal atresia
d. Laryngomalacia
*e. Esophageal atresia

41. Full term newborn has developed jaundice at 10 hours of age. Hemolytic disease of newborn due to Rh-incompatibility was diagnosed. 2 hours later the infant has indirect serum bilirubin level increasing up to 14 mmol/L. What is most appropriate for treatment of hyperbilirubinemia in this infant?
a. Phototherapy
b. Intestinal sorbents
c. Infusion therapy
*d. Exchange blood transfusion
e. Phenobarbital

42. A 4 year old girl was playing with her toys and suddenly she got an attack of cough, dyspnea. Objectively: respiration rate - 45/min, heart rate - 130/min. Percussion revealed dullness of percutory sound on the right in the lower parts. Auscultation revealed diminished breath sounds with bronchial resonance on the right. X-ray pictue showed shadowing of the lower part of lungs on the right. Blood analysis revealed no signs of inflammation. The child was diagnosed with foreign body in the right bronchus. What complication caused such clinical presentations?
a. Bronchitis
b. Pneumonia
c. Emphysema
d. Pneumothorax
*e. Atelectasis

43. A man, 42 years old, died in a road accident after the hemorrhage on the spot, because of acute hemorrhagic anemia. What minimum percent of the whole blood volume could result in death by acute hemorrhage?
a. 10-14%
b. 6-9%
*c. 25-30%
d. 15-20%
e. 35-50%

44. A 6 week old child is admitted because of tachypnea. Birth had been uneventful, although conjunctivitis developed on the third day of life and lasted for about 2 weeks. Physical examination reveals tachypnea, bilateral inspiratory crackles and single expiratory wheezing. Bilateral pneumonia is evident on chest X-ray. The child is afebrile and has no history of fever. White blood cell count is 15cdot109/l, with 28% of eosinophils. The most likely cause of this childs symptoms is:
a. Visceral larva migrans
b. Varicella
c. Pneumocystis carinii
d. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
*e. Clamydia trachomanis

45. A 6 y.o. asthmatic child was taken to the emergency hospital because of severe coughing and wheezing for the last 24 hours. Physical examination reveals that the child is excitable, has intercostal and suprasternal retractions, expiratory wheezing throughout all lung fields, RR- 60/min. Initial treatment may include the prescription of:
a. N-acetyl cysteine and cromolyn by inhalation
b. Parenteral gentamicyn
c. Parenteral phenobarbital
d. Intravenous fluids in the first 2 h to compensate water deficiency
*e. Subcutaneous epinephrine

46. A full term infant was born after a normal pregnancy, delivery, however, was complicated by marginal placental detachment. At 12 hours of age the child, although appearing to be in good health, passes a bloody meconium stool. For determining the cause of the bleeding, which of the following diagnostic procedures should be performed first?
a. Platelet count, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time
*b. Barium enema
c. Gastric lavage with normal saline
d. An Apt test
e. An upper gastrointestinal series

47. In the 43rd week of gestation a long, thin infant was delivered. He is apneic, limp, pale, and covered with "pea soup" amniotic fluid. The first step in the resuscitation of this infant at delivery should be:
*a. Suction of the trachea under direct vision
b. Artificial ventilation with endotracheal tube
c. Catheterization of the umbilical vein
d. Administration of 100% oxygen by mask
e. Artificial ventilation with bag and mask

48. A newborn infant has mild cyanosis, diaphoresis, poor peripheral pule, hepatomegaly and cardiomegaly. Respiratory rate is 60 breaths per minute, and heart rate is 230 beats per minute. The child most likely has congestive heart failure caused by:
a. A ventricular septal defect and transposition of the great vessels
b. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
c. A large atrial septal defect and valvular pulmonary stenosis
*d. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
e. Atrial flutter and partial atrioventricular block

49. A 6-year-old boy was brought to the emergency room with a 3-hour history of fever up to 39,5°C and sore throat. The child looks alert, anxious and has a mild inspiratory stridor. You should immediately:
a. Admit the child and place him in a mist tent
*b. Prepare to establish an airway
c. Order a chest x-ray and lateral view of the neck
d. Obtain an arterial blood gas and start an IV line
e. Examine the throat and obtain a culture

50. A 7 d.o. boy is admitted to the hospital for evaluation of vomiting and dehydration. Physical examination is otherwise normal except for minimal hyperpigmentation of the nipples. Serum sodium and potassium concentrations are 120 meq/L and 9 meq/L respectively. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
b. Secondary hypothyroidism
c. Hyperaldosteronism
d. Panhypopituitarism
e. Pyloric stenosis

51. A 7 y.o. boy has crampy abdominal pain and a rash on the back of his legs and buttocks as well as on the extensor surfaces of his forearms. Laboratory analysis reveals proteinuria and microhematuria. He is most likely to be affected by:
a. Dermatomyositis
*b. Anaphylactoid purpura
c. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Polyarteritis nodosa

52. A 5-year-old boy was progressively getting worse compared to the previous 2 months. A chest x-ray has shown right middle lobe collapse. A tuberculin skin test was strongly positive. What is the most characteristic finding in primary tuberculosis?
a. Miliary tuberculosis
b. Hematogenous dissemination leading to extrapulmonary tuberculosis
c. Atelectasis with obstructive pneumonia
d. Cavity formation
*e. Hilar or paratracheal lymph node enlargement

53. A girl is 12-year-old. Yesterday she was overcooled. Now she is complaining on pain in suprapubic area, frequent painful urination by small portions, temperature is 37,8°C. Pasternatsky symptom is negative. Urine analysis: protein - 0,033 g/L, WBC- 20-25 in f/vis, RBC- 1-2 in f/vis. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Acute pyelonephritis
b. Urolithiasis
c. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
*e. Acute cystitis

54. The girl of 11 y.o. She is ill for 1 month. She has "butterfly"-type rash on face (spots and papules), pain and swelling of small joints on arms and legs, signs of stomatitis (small-sized ulcers in mouth). CBC: Нb– 80 g/L, RBC– 2,91012/L, WBC– 15109/L, ESR- 40 mm/hour. Urinalysis: protein– 0,33 g/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Periarteriitis nodosa
c. Dermatomyositis
d. Acute rheumatic fever
e. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, systemic type

55. An infant aged 1 year on the third day of common cold at night developed inspiratory stridor, hoarse voice and barking cough. Physical examination revealed suprasternal and intercostal chest retractions. There is a bluish skin discoloration moistly seen over the upper lip. The respiratory rate is 52 per min and pulse- 122 bpm. The body temperature is 37,50C. What disease does the infant have?
*a. Acute infectious croup due to viral laryngotracheitis
b. Bronchopneumonia without complications
c. Acute epiglottitis
d. Acute bronchiolitis with respiratory distress
e. Acute laryngitis

56. A newborn aged 3 days with hyperbilirubinemia (428 mkmol/L) developed following disorders. From beginning there were severe jaundice with poor suckling, hypotomia and hypodynamia. Little bit later periodical excitation, neonatal convulsions and neonatal primitive reflexes loss are noted. Now physical examination reveals convergent squint, rotatory nystagmus and setting sun eye sign. How to explain this condition?
a. Skull injury
b. Hydrocephalus
c. Spastic cerebral palsy
*d. Encephalopathy due to hyperbilirubinemia
e. Brain tumour

57. A child is 2 years old. The child complains of hoarse voice, dyspnea with obstructed inspiration. The disease started 3 days ago from dry cough and nose stuffiness. Objectively: general condition is unbalanced, stridor is present. The childs skin is pale. Body temperature is 37,7°C. The palatine arches are hyperemic. There is no deposit. Heart sounds are rhythmic. Auscultation of lungs reveals rough breathing sounds, crepitation is absent. Parainfluenza virus has been detected in nasopharynx lavage. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Laryngospasm
*b. Acute laryngotracheitis
c. Foreign body
d. Epiglottitis
e. Diphtheria

58. A 3-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital because of ostealgia and body temperature rise up to 39°C. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, unable to stand for ostealgia, there is apparent intoxication, lymph nodesare enlarged up to 1,5 cm. Liver can be palpated 3 cm below the costal margin, spleen - 2 cm below the costal margin. In blood: RBCs - 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, colour index - 0,9, thrombocytes - 190cdot109/l, WBCs - 3,2cdot109/l, eosinophils - 1, stab neutrophils - 1, segmented neutrophils - 0, lymphocytes - 87, monocytes - 2, ESR - 36 mm/h. What examination should be conducted in order to specify the diagnosis?
a. Lymph node puncture
b. Ultrasound
*c. Sternal puncture
d. Lymph node biopsy
e. Computer tomography

59. Apgar test done on a newborn girl at 1st and 5th minute after birth gave the result of 7-8 scores. During the delivery there was a short-term difficulty with extraction of shoulder girdle. After birth the child had the proximal extremity dysfunction and the arm couldnt be raised from the side. The shoulder was turned inwards, the elbow was flexed, there was also forearm pronation, obstetric palsy of brachial plexus. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Trauma of right hand soft tissues
*b. Duchenne-Erb palsy
c. Right hand osteomyelitis
d. Trauma of thoracic spine
e. Intracranial haemorrhage

60. Examination of a 9-month-old girl revealed skin pallor, cyanosis during excitement. Percussion revealed transverse dilatation of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed continuous systolic murmur to the left of the breastbone in the 3-4 intercostal space. This murmur is conducted above the whole cardiac region to the back. What congenital cardiac pathology can be suspected?
*a. Defect of interventricular septum
b. Coarctation of aorta
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
d. Fallots tetrad
e. Defect of interatrial septum

61. A worker was temporarily off work because of illness for 16 days, was under out-patient treatment. The doctor in charge issued a sick-list first for 5 days, then prolonged it for 10 days. Who can further prolong the sick-list of this patient?
a. The head of department
*b. The doctor in charge of the case together with the head of department
c. The doctor in charge of the case with the permission of the head of department
d. Working ability expertise committee
e. Deputy head physician on the working ability expertise

62. A 13 y.o. patient was treated in dermatological hospital for atopic dermatitis exacerbation. He was discharged in the condition of clinical remission. What recommendations should the doctor give to prevent exacerbations?
a. Systematic use of local corticosteroids
b. Frequent skin washing with detergents
*c. Use of neutral creams to protect skin
d. Systematic skin disinfection
e. Avoidance of skin insolation

63. On the 21 day after appearance of vesiculous chickenpox rash a 7-year-old child developed ataxia, nystagmus, intention tremor, muscle hypotonia. Liquor analysis shows a low-grade lymphocytic pleocytosis, slightly increased protein rate. What complication is it?
a. Postherpetic neuralgia
*b. Encephalitis
c. Pneumonitis
d. Purulent meningitis
e. Acute nephritis

64. An 8-year-old boy suffering from haemophilia was undergoing transfusion of packed red cells. Suddenly he felt pain behind the breastbone and in the lumbar area, dyspnea, cold sweat. Objectively: pale skin, heart rate - 100/min, AP - 60/40 mm Hg; oliguria, brown urine. For the treatment of this complication the following drug should be administered:
a. Aminophylline
b. Analgine
c. Lasix
d. Adrenaline
*e. Prednisolone

65. A 3-year-old child has been diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus, hyperosmolar coma. The laboratory confirmed the diagnosis. Which laboratory findings are characteristic for such condition?
a. Hyperglycemia and ketonuria
b. Hyperglycemia and high indicators of acid-base balance
c. Hyperglycemia and ketonemia
d. Hyperglycemia and glucosuria
*e. High hyperglycemia without ketonemia

66. A 3-year-old child was playing in a playpen when he suddenly developed paroxysmal cough and shortness of breath. Objectively: dry cough, mixed dyspnea. Lung auscultation revealed some wheezes. Breathing sounds on the right are diminished. The child doesnt mix with other children. Immunization is age-appropriate. What pathological condition can be suspected?
a. Pertussis
b. Bronchial asthma
c. Pneumonia
d. Acute respiratory viral infection
*e. Foreign body in the respiratory tracts

67. A 10-year-old child has been folowed-up for the dilated cardiomyopathy. The child presents with dyspnea, cardialgia. There are dense, nonmobile edemata on the lower extremities and sacrum. Ps- 120/min. The cardiac borders are extended transversely. Heart sounds are muffled, there is blowing systolic murmur at the apex and over the xiphoid process. Liver is 3 cm enlarged, urine output is reduced. The blood total protein - 58.6 g/l. In urine: protein - 0,025 g/l, WBCs - 2-4 in the field of vision, RBCs - 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the main mechanism of edema syndrome development:
a. Hypoproteinemia
*b. Venous congestion of greater circulation
c. Peripheral circulation disorder
d. Venous congestion of lesser circulation
e. Secondary nephropathy development

68. After objective clinical examination a 12 year old child was diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse. What complementary instrumental method of examination should be applied for the diagnosis confirmation?
*a. Echocardiography
b. Phonocardiography
c. Veloergometry
d. ECG
e. Roentgenography of chest

69. A full-term child survived antenatal and intranatal hypoxia, it was born in asphyxia (2-5 points on Apgar score). After birth the child has progressing excitability, there are also vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, strabismus, spontaneous Moros and Babinskys reflexes. What localization of intracranial hemorrhage is the most probable?
a. Small cerebral tissue hemorrhages
b. Periventricular hemorrhages
c. Hemorrhages into the brain ventricles
*d. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
e. Subdural hemorrhage

70. A 15 y.o. boy was twice attacked by bees, as a result he had severe anaphylactic shock. What is the most effective prophylaxis method?
a. Limitation of outside staying during summer months
b. Protective clothing
c. Prescription of corticosteroids for summer
d. Long-term prophylactic treatment with antihistamines
*e. Desensibilisation by means of bee venom extract

71. A 9-year-old boy has been suffering from bronchoectasis since he was 3. Exacerbations occur quite often, 3-4 times a year. Conservative therapy results in short periods of remission. The disease is progressing, the child has physical retardation. The childs skin is pale, acrocyanotic, he has "watch glass" nail deformation. Bronchography revealed saccular bronchiectases of the lower lobe of his right lung. What is the further treatment tactics?
*a. Surgical treatment
b. Physiotherapeutic treatment
c. Tempering of the childs organism
d. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
e. Further conservative therapy

72. A child with tetralogy of Fallot is most likely to exhibit:
a. Increased pulse pressure
b. Increased pulmonary blood flow
*c. Increased pressure in the right ventricle
d. Normal pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve
e. Normal oxygen tension (PaO_2) in the left ventricle

73. A 2-months-old child after preventive vaccination had a prolonged hemorrhage from the vaccination place and due to those an intramuscular hematoma. During examination of the child a considerable rise of prothrombin consumption and a significant prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastic time were found. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Henoch-Schoenlein disease
b. Werlhofs disease
*c. Hemophilia
d. Hemorrhagic disease of the neonate
e. Inborn afibrinogenemia

74. A 10 y.o. boy with hemophilia has signs of acute respiratory viral infection with fever. What of the mentioned antifebrile medications are contraindicated to this patient?
a. Pipolphen
b. Analgin
*c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Paracetamol
e. Panadol extra

75. A 7-year-old child is sick for 2 weeks with running nose, was taking nasal drops. The boy suffers with alimentary allergy. He applied to doctor due to suppurative and bloody discharges from nose, maceration of ala nasi and upper lip. Rhinoscopy results: there are whitish-greyish areas at nasal septum. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is not changed. What is the most probable disease?
a. Sinusitis (maxillar sinus))
*b. Diphtheria of the nose
c. Rhinovirus
d. Adenovirus
e. Allergic rhinitis

76. A 10-year-old boy underwent treatment in cardiological department for rheumatism, I acute attack of rheumatic fever, active phase, II degree. The patient was discharged in satisfactory condition. Which drug should be chosen for prevention of rheumatism recurrence?
*a. Bicillinum-5
b. Erythromycin
c. Oxacillin
d. Ampicillin
e. Bicillinum-1

77. A child is 4 years old, has been ill for 5 days. There are complaints of cough, skin rash, to- 38,2°C, face puffiness, photophobia, conjunctivitis. Objectively: there is bright, maculo-papulous, in some areas confluent rash on the face, neck, upper chest. The pharynx is hyperemic. There are seropurulent discharges from the nose. Auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Measles
b. Scarlet fever
c. Enterovirus exanthema
d. Rubella
e. Adenoviral infection

78. A 10 month old boy has been ill for 5 days after consumption of unboiled milk. Body temperature is 38-39°C, there is vomiting, liquid stool. The child is pale and inert. His tongue is covered with white deposition. Heart sounds are muffled. Abdomen is swollen, there is borborygmus in the region of ubbilicus, liver is enlarged by 3 cm. Stool is liquid, dark-green, with admixtures of mucus, 5 times a day. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Salmonellosis
b. Escherichiosis
c. Rotaviral infection
d. Acute shigellosis
e. Staphylococcal enteric infection

79. A 3 year old child with weight deficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 millimol/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
b. Recurrent bronchitis
c. Pulmonary hypoplasia
d. Bronchiectasis
e. Bronchial asthma

80. A 12 y.o. child with acute glomerulonephritis presented with hypertensive syndrom during first days of the disease. What is the role of angiotesin II in the pathogenesis?
a. Increases heart output
b. Increases erythropoetin production
c. Increases renine level
*d. Intensifies production and secretion of aldosterone
e. Infibits deppresive action of prostaglandins

81. A full-term infant is 3 days old. On the different parts of skin there are erythemas, erosive spots, cracks, areas of epidermis peeling. The infant has scalded skin syndrome. Nikolskys symptom is positive. General condition of the infant is grave. Anxiety, hyperesthesia, febrile temperature are evident. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Fingers pseudofurunculosis
b. Phlegmon of newborn
*c. Exfoliative dermatitis
d. Impetigo neonatorum
e. Mycotic erythema

82. District pediatrician examines a healthy carried 1-month-old child. The child is breast-fed. Prophylaxis of what disease will the doctor recommend to do first?
a. Anemia
b. Spasmophilia
c. Parathropy
*d. Rachitis
e. Hypotrophia

83. A 7-year-old boy has been managed for a month. Immediately after hospitalization there were apparent edemata, proteinuria - 7,1 g/l, daily urine protein - 4,2 g. Biochemical blood test shows persistent hypoproteinemia (43,2 g/l), hypercholesterolemia (9,2 millimole/l). The patient is most likely have the following type of glomerulonephritis:
*a. Nephrotic
b. Isolated urinary
c. Combined
d. Hematuric
e. Nephritic

84. A 3 y.o. girl has had a temperature rise up to 38°C, rhinitis, dry superficial cough, flabbiness, appetite loss. Palpation didnt reveal any changes over her lungs. Percussion sound has a wooden resonance, auscultation revealed puerile breathing, no rales. In blood: leukopenia, lymphocytosis, increased ESR. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute simple bronchitis
b. Bilateral microfocal pneumonia
c. Acute obstructive bronchitis
d. Recurrent bronchitis, acute condition
*e. Acute simple tracheitis

85. A 5-year-old girl with the transitory immunodeficiency according to T-system has a clinical picture of a right-sided pneumonia during 2 months. How pneumonia progress can be described?
a. Recidivating
b. Wavelike
c. Acute
*d. Delaying
e. Chronic

86. A 12 y.o. girl took 2 pills of aspirine and 4 hours later her body temperature raised up to 39-40°C. She complains of general indisposition, dizziness, sudden rash in form of red spots and blisters. Objectively: skin lesions resemble of second-degree burns, here and there with erosive surface or epidermis peeling. Nikolskys symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute epidermal necrolisis
b. Polymorphous exudative erythema
c. Duhrings disease
d. Bullous dermatitis
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

87. A 5-year-old child had an attack of palpitation with nausea, dizziness, generalized fatigue. On ECG: tachycardia with heartbeat rate of 220/min. Ventricle complexes are deformed and widened. P wave is absent. What medication is to be prescribed to provide first aid?
a. Novocainamides
b. Strophantin
c. Isoptin
d. Seduxen
*e. Lydocain

88. Examination of a 4 month old child revealed some lemon-yellow squamae with fatty crusts on the scalp. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Strophulus
b. Milk crust
*c. Gneiss
d. Pseudofurunculosis
e. Infantile eczema

89. A neonate from gestation with severe gestosis of the second half was born on the 41st week with 2400 g birth weight and 50cm long. On physical examination: skin is flaccid, subcutaneous fatty cellular tissue is thin, muscle hypotonia, new-born period reflexes are decreased. Internal organs are without pathological changes. How would you estimate this child?
a. Postmature infant
b. Term infant with normal body weight
c. Premature infant
d. Immature infant
*e. Term infant with pre-natal growth retardation

90. A child was taken to a hospital with focal changes in the skin folds. The child was anxious during examination, examination revealed dry skin with solitary papulous elements and ill-defined lichenification zones. Skin eruption was accompanied by strong itch. The child usually feels better in summer, his condition is getting worse in winter. The child has been artificially fed since he was 2 months old. He has a history of exudative diathesis. Grandmother by his mothers side has bronchial asthma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atopic dermatitis
b. Seborrheal eczema
c. Urticaria
d. Strophulus
e. Contact dermatitis

91. A boy, aged 9, was examined: height - 127 cm (-0,36), weight - 28,2 kg (+0,96), chest circumference - 64,9 cm (+0,66), lung vital capacity - 1520 ml (-0,16). What is the complex assessment of the childs physical development?
a. Disharmonious
b. Excessive
c. Below the average
*d. Harmonious
e. Apparently disharmonious

92. A child is 7 months old. Birth weight was 3450, the child is breastfed. Supplemental feeding was introduced on time. Determine the daily protein requirements for the child:
a. 2,5 g/kg
b. 2,0 g/kg
*c. 3,0 g/kg
d. 3,5 g/kg
e. 4,0 g/kg

93. 2 weeks after recovering from angina an 8-year-old boy developed edemata of face and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Urine is of dark brown colour. Oliguria is present. On urine analysis: relative density - 1,015, protein - 1,2 g/l, RBCs are leached and cover the whole vision field, granular casts - 1-2 in the vision field, salts are represented by urates (big number). What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephritic syndrome
b. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome, hematuria and hypertension
c. Nephrolithiasis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis with isolated urinary syndrome
e. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome

94. A 14 year old child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for attack reduction?
a. Amysyl
b. No-shpa
*c. Obsidan
d. Aminophylline
e. Corglicone

95. A child is 9 months old. The patients body temperature is 36,7°C, the skin is pale, humid, there is pain in leg muscles. There is no extremities mobility, sensitivity is present. The child has been diagnosed with poliomyelitis. The causative agent of this disease relates to the following family:
a. Adenovirus
b. Rotavirus
c. Paramyxovirus
d. Tohovirus
*e. Picornavirus

96. A 4 month old child fell seriously ill: body temperature rose up to 38,5°C, the child became inert and had a single vomiting. 10 hours later there appeared rash over the buttocks and lower limbs in form of petechiae, spots and papules. Some haemorrhagic elements have necrosis in the centre. What is the most probable disease?
a. Scarlet fever
*b. Meningococcemia
c. Influenza
d. Rubella
e. Haemorrhagic vasculitis

97. A 5-year-old child had strong headache, vomiting, ataxy, dormancy, discoordination of movements, tremor of the extremities on the 8th day of the disease. It was followed by rise in body temperature, vesiculosis rash mainly on the skin of the body and the hairy part of the head. At the second wave of the fever a diagnosis of encephalitis was given. What disease complicated encephalitis in this case?
a. Herpetic infection
*b. Chicken pox
c. German measles
d. Measles
e. Enterovirus ifection

98. A 13 year old girl was admitted to the cardiological department because of pain in the muscles and joints. Examination of her face revealed an edematic erythema in form of butterfly in the region of nose bridge and cheeks. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Periarteritis nodosa
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Rheumatism

99. A 4 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with complaints of dyspnea, rapid fatigability. His anamnesis registers frequent respiratory diseases. On percussion: heart borders are dilatated to the left and upwards. On auscultation: amplification of the SII above pulmonary artery, a harsh systolodyastolic "machine" murmur is auscultated between the II and the III rib to the left of breast bone, this murmur is conducted to all other points including back. AP is 100/20 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Isolated stenosis of pulmonary arterial orifice
b. Interventricular septal defect
*c. Opened arterial duct
d. Interatrial septal defect
e. Valvar aortic stenosis

100. A 12 year old girl complains about abrupt weakness, nausea, dizziness, vision impairment. The day before she ate home-made stockfish, beef. Examination revealed skin pallor, a scratch on the left knee, dryness of mucous membranes of oral pharynx, bilateral ptosis, mydriatic pupils. The girl is unable to read a simple text (mist over the eyes). What therapy would be the most adequate in this case?
a. Parenteral introduction of antibiotics
b. Parenteral disintoxication
*c. Parenteral introduction of polyvalent antibotulinic serum
d. Gastric lavage
e. Parenteral introduction of antitetanus serum

101. A child from the first non-complicated pregnancy but complicated labor had cephalhematoma. On the second day there developed jaundice. On the 3th day appeared changes of neurologic status: nystagmus, Graefes sign. Urea is yellow, feces- golden-yellow. Mothers blood group is А(II)Rh-, child- А(II)Rh+. On the third day childs Hb- 200 g/L, RBC- 6,1*10^12/L, bilirubin in blood - 58 mk mol/L due to unconjugated bilirubin, Ht- 0,57. What is the childs jaundice explanation?
a. Fetal hepatitis
*b. Brain delivery trauma
c. Hemolytic disease of newborn
d. Physiologic jaundice
e. Bile ducts atresia

102. A full-term baby (the 1st uncomplicated pregnancy, difficult labour) had a cephalogematoma. On the 2nd day there was jaundice, on the third the following changes in neurological status appeared: nystagmus, Graefe syndrome. Urine was yellow, feces were of golden-yellow colour. Mothers blood group is A (II) Rh-, the babys one - A (II) Rh+. On the third day the childs Hb was 200g/l, RBCs - 6,1×1012/l, blood bilirubin - 58 micromole/l at the expense of unbound fraction. What caused the jaundice in the child?
a. Physiological jaundice
b. Biliary atresia
c. Fetal hepatitis
*d. Craniocerebral birth trauma
e. Neonatal anaemia

103. After birth a child was pale and had arrhythmical breathing. Oxygen therapy didnt have any effect. Pulse was weak and rapid. It was difficult to measure arterial pressure accurately. There were no edemata. What is the most likely reason for these symptoms?
*a. Asphyxia
b. Intracranial haematoma
c. Congenital pneumonia
d. Intrauterine sepsis
e. Congestive heart failure

104. A child was delivered severely premature. After the birth the child has RI symptoms, anasarca, fine bubbling moist rales over the lower lobe of the right lung. Multiple skin extravasations, bloody foam from the mouth have occured after the 2 day. On chest X-ray: atelectasis of the lower lobe of the right lung. In blood: Hb-100 g/L, Ht- 0,45. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary edema
b. Disseminated intravascular clotting syndrome
*c. Edematous-hemorrhagic syndrome
d. Hyaline membrane disease
e. Congenital pneumonia

105. An infant is 2 d.o. It was full-term born with signs of intrauterine infection, thats why it was prescribed antibiotics. Specify, why the gap between antibiotic introductions to the new-born children is longer and dosage is smaller compared to the older children and adults?
a. The newborns have bigger hematocrit
*b. The newborns have a lower level of glomerular filtration
c. The newborns have reduced activity of glucuronil transferase
d. The newborns have lower concentration of protein and albumins in blood
e. The newborns have diminished blood pH

106. A 10-year-old child is sick with chronic viral hepatitis B with marked activity of the process. Total bilirubin - 70mumol/L, direct - 26mumol/L, indirect - 44mumol/L. АSТ - 6,2 mmol/L, АLТ - 4,8 mmol/L. What mechanism underlies the transaminase level increase of this patient?
a. Failure of bilirubin conjugation
*b. Cytolysis of hepatocytes
c. Hypersplenism
d. Failure of the synthetical function of the liver
e. Intrahepatic cholestasis

107. A 12-year-old girl applied to doctor with complaints of swelling on the front part of the neck. The doctor diagnosed hyperplasia of the thyroid gland of the second degree, euthyroidism. Ultrasound suspected autoimmune thyroiditis. Blood was taken for titre of antibodies to thyroglobulin. What titre of antibodies will be diagnostically important?
a. 1:200
b. 1:250
c. 1:50
d. 1:150
*e. 1:100

108. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl didnt undergo any treatment. The girls irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl got puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin became of a waxen hue. What disease may be suspected?
a. Diffuse toxic goiter
b. Subacute thyroiditis
c. Juvenile basophilism
*d. Autoimmune thyroiditis
e. Thyroid carcinoma

109. In the anamnesis of a 2-year-old girl there are recurrent pneumonias with signs of obstruction. There are heterogeneous moist and dry rales, respiration is weakened. Dense, viscous secretion is difficult to hawk. There are "drumsticks", physical retardation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Recidivating bronchitis
b. Congenital pulmonary polycystosis
c. Pulmonary tuberculosis
*d. Mucoviscidosis, pulmonary form
e. Bronchial asthma

110. On the 3rd day of life a baby presented with haemorrhagic rash, bloody vomit, black stool. Examination revealed anaemia, extended coagulation time, hypoprothrombinemia, normal thrombocyte rate. What is the optimal therapeutic tactics?
a. Calcium gluconate
*b. Vitamin K
c. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
d. Sodium ethamsylate
e. Fibrinogen

111. A 2 month old full-term child was born with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
a. 150 g less than necessary
b. Hypotrophy of the II grade
c. Paratrophy of the I grade
*d. Corresponding to the age
e. Hypotrophy of the I grade

112. A 2 m.o. breast-fed child suffers from cheek skin hyperemia, sporadic papulous elements on the skin of the chest and back following the apple juice introduction. The child is restless. What is the initial pediatritians tactics?
*a. Clarify mothers diet and exlude obligate allergens
b. Administer general ultraviolet irradiation
c. Apply ointment with corticosteroids to affected skin areas
d. Treat with claritine
e. Refer to prescribe dermathologist

113. A 5 month old boy was born prematurely, he didnt suffer from any disease at the infant age and later on. Examination at an outpatients hospital revealed paleness of skin, sleepiness. Blood count: Hb - 95 g/l, erythrocytes - 3,5×1012/l, reticulocytes - 90/_00, colour index - 0,7, osmotic stability of erythrocytes - 0,44-0,33%, serum iron - 4,9 micromole/l. What is the most probable cause of anemia?
a. Erythrocyte hemolysis
b. B12 deficit
c. Hemogenesis immaturity
d. Infectious process
*e. Iron deficit

114. A 7 y.o. child had elevation of temperature tol 400C in anamnesis. For the last 3 months he presents fusiform swelling of fingers, ankle joints and knee joint, pain in the upper part of the sternum and cervical part of the spinal column. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Juvenile rheumatic arthritis
b. Toxic synovitis
c. Osteoarthrits
d. Septic arthritis
e. Rheumatism

115. An 8 year old girl complains about joint pain, temperature rise up to 38°C, dyspnea. Objectively: the left cardiac border is deviated by 2,5 cm to the left, tachycardia, systolic murmur on the apex and in the V point are present. Blood count: leukocytes - 20,0cdot109/l, ESR - 18 mm/h. What sign gives the most substantial proof for rheumatism diagnosis?
*a. Carditis
b. Leukocytosis
c. Accelerated ESR
d. Fever
e. Arthralgia

116. A 5 y.o. child with stigmas of dysembryogenesis (small chin, thick lips, opened mouth, hyperthelorismus) has systolic murmur in the second intercostal to the right of the sternum. The murmur passes to the neck and along the sternum left edge. The pulse on the left brachial artery is weakened. BP on the right arm is 110/60 mm Hg, on the left - 100/60 mm Hg. ECG results: hypertrophy of the right ventricle. What defect is the most probable?
a. Open aortic duct
*b. Aortic stenosis
c. Defect of interatrial septum
d. Defect of interventricular septum
e. Coarctation of the aorta

117. A 1,5-year-old child fell ill acutely with high temperature 38°C, headache, fatigue. The temperature declined on the fifth day, muscular pain in the right leg occured in the morning, there were no movements and tendon reflexes, sensitivity was reserved. What is the initial diagnosis?
a. Polyartropathy
b. Viral encephilitis
*c. Polyomyelitis
d. Osteomyelitis
e. Hip joint arthritis

118. A 3-year-old child has been delivered to a hospital in soporose state with considerable amyotonia, inhibition of tendon and periosteal reflexes. Miosis and asthenocoria are also present. Corneal reflexes are preserved. Pulse is rapid and weak. AP- 80/50 mm Hg. The parents suspect the child of accidental taking some tablets. Such clinical presentations are typical for intoxication with the following tableted drugs:
a. Barbiturates
b. Beta-2-adrenoceptor agonists
c. Antropine drugs
d. Antihypertensive drugs
*e. Tranquilizers

119. A 2 m.o. child with birth weight 5100 g has jaundice, hoarse cry, umbilical hernia, physical development lag. Liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not enlarged. In anamnesis: delayed falling-away of umbilical cord rest. In blood: Hb- 120 g/L, erythrocytes - 4,5x1012/L, ESR- 3 mm/h. Whole serum bilirubin is 28 mcmole/L, indirect - 20 mcmole/L, direct - 8 mcmole/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Congenital hypothyreosis
b. Hemolitic anemia
c. Cytomegalovirus infection
d. Conjugated jaundice
e. Congenital hepatitis

120. A 5-year-old child developed an acute disease starting from body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, running nose, cough and conjunctivitis. On the 4th day the child presented with maculo-papular rash on face. Body temparature rose again up to 39,2°C. Over the next few days the rash spread over the whole body and extremities. Mucous membrane of palate was hyperemic, there was whitish deposition on cheek mucous membrane next to molars. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Yersinia
b. Acute viral respiratory infection
*c. Measles
d. Enterovirus diseases
e. Rubella

121. A 3 year old child fell acutely ill, body temperature rose up to 39,5°C, the child became inert, there appeared recurrent vomiting, headache. Examination revealed positive meningeal symptoms, after this lumbal puncture was performed. Spinal fluid is turbid, runs out under pressure, protein concentration is 1,8 g/l; Pandy reaction is +++, sugar concentration is 2,2 millimole/l, chloride concentration - 123 millimole/l, cytosis is 2,35cdot109 (80% of neutrophils, 20% of lymphocytes). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Serous viral meningitis
b. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
c. Brain tumour
*d. Purulent meningitis
e. Serous tuberculous meningitis

122. A 13 y.o. girl complains of having temperature rises up to febrile figures for a month, joint ache, periodical skin rash. Examination revealed steady enhancing of ESR, LE-cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphoblast leukosis
b. Rheumatics
c. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
d. Systematic scleroderma
*e. Systematic lupus erythematosus

123. A child is 1 year old. Ater the recent introduction of complementary feeding the child has presented with loss of appetite, diarrhea with large amounts of feces and occasional vomiting, body temperature is normal. Objectively: body weight is 7 kg, the child is very pale, there are edemata of both legs, abdomen is significantly enlarged. Coprogram shows many fatty acids and soaps. The child has been diagnosed with celiac disease and administered the gluten-free diet. What is to be excluded from the ration?
*a. Cereals - wheat and oats
b. Fruit
c. High digestible carbohydrates
d. Animal protein
e. Milk and dairy products

124. A 7-year-old child was brought to a doctor for a check. The child has a 4-year history of bronchial asthma, asthma attacks occur mainly in spring and summer. Allergy tests revealed hypersensitivity to poplar seed tufts, field herbs. What recommendation should be given?
a. Phytotherapy
b. Needle reflexotherapy
c. Physiotherapy
d. Treatment at a health resort
*e. Specific hyposensitization

125. A 9-month-old child presents with fever, cough, dyspnea. The symptoms appeared 5 days ago after a contact with a person having ARVI. Objectively: the child is in grave condition. Temperature of 38°C, cyanosis of nasolabial triangle is present. RR- 54/min, nasal flaring while breathing. There was percussion dullness on the right below the scapula angle, and tympanic sound over the rest of lungs. Auscultation revealed bilateral fine moist rales predominating on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute laryngotracheitis
b. ARVI
*c. Acute pneumonia
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Acute bronchiolitis

126. An 8 y.o. boy complains of constant cough along with discharge of greenish sputum, dyspnea during physical activities. At the age of 1 year and 8 months he fell ill for the first time with bilateral pneumonia that had protracted course. Later on there were recurrences of the disease 5-6 times a year, during the remission periods there was constant productive cough. What examination results will be the most important for making a final diagnosis?
a. Roentgenography of thorax organs
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Spirography
*d. Bronchography
e. Bacterial inoculation of sputum

127. A mother of a 5 y.o. girl consulted a doctor about doughters involuntary urination at night, nightmares, sleep disorders, slow gaining of body weight. Objectively: malnutrition, intellectual development is good, the girl can read and explains common situations quite adultly. Her skin is very pale, liver is enlarged in size. Her mother suffers from holetithiasis. What type of diathesis is the most probable in the childs case?
a. Allergic diathesis
b. Lymphohypoplastic diathesis
c. Urine acid diathesis
d. Exudative diathesis
*e. Gouty diathesis

128. A 10 year old girl complains about abdominal pain that is arising and getting worse after eating rough or spicy food. She complains also about sour eructation, heartburn, frequent constipations, headache, irritability. She has been suffering from this for 12 months. Objectively: the girls diet is adequate. Tongue is moist with white deposit at the root. Abdomen is soft, painful in its epigastric part. What study method will help to make a diagnosis?
a. Contrast roentgenoscopy
b. Biochemical blood analysis
c. Intragastral pH-metry
d. Fractional examination of gastric juice
*e. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy

129. A 40 h.o. child age has hyperosthesia, CNS depression, dyspepsia. Sepsis is suspected. What should the differential diagnosis be made with?
a. Hypocalcemia
b. Hyperkaliemia
c. Hypomagnesemia
*d. Hypoglycemia
e. Hyperbilirubinemia

130. A 1,5 y.o. child fell seriously ill: chill, body temperature rise up to 40,1°C, then rapid dropping to 36,2°C, skin is covered with voluminous hemorrhagic rash and purple cyanotic spots. Extremities are cold, face features are sharpened. Diagnosis: meningococcosis, fulminant form, infection-toxic shock. What antibiotic must be used at the pre-admission stage?
a. Penicillin
b. Gentamycin
c. Sulfamonometoxin
*d. Soluble Levomycetine succinate
e. Lincomycin

131. A 10 year old boy suffers from chronic viral hepatitis type B with maximal activity. What laboratory test can give the most precise characteristic of cytolysis degree?
*a. Transaminase test
b. Takata-Ara test
c. Test for whole protein
d. Prothrombin test
e. Weltmans coagulation test

132. A 6 y.o child complains of thirst, polyuria, increased appetite for 2 months with weight loss for 3 kg. There has been nocturnal enuresis during last week. On examination: hyperglycemia 14 mol/L. The diagnosis is diabetis mellitus I type. What is the genesis of this disease?
a. Virus-bacterial
*b. Autoimmune
c. Bacterial
d. Viral
e. Neurogenic

133. A 10 y.o. child who is at oligoanuretic stage of acute renal insufficiency has got sensations of pricking in the mucous membrane of oral cavity and tongue, extremities numbness, reduced reflexes, respiratory disturbance, arrhythmia. What are these symptoms caused by?
*a. Hyperkaliemia
b. Hyperazotemia
c. Alkalosis
d. Acidosis
e. Hyponatremia

134. Examination of a 12 year old child revealed diffuse thyroid enlargement of the II degree. Heart auscultation revealed dullness of heart sounds, heart rate was 64/min. The child has frequent constipations, anemia. Concentration of thyreoglobulin antibodies is increased. What disease might have caused such symptoms?
*a. Autoimmune thyroiditis
b. Thyroid carcinoma
c. Endemic goiter
d. Thyroid hyperplasia
e. Diffuse toxic goiter

135. An 8-year-old girl has been admitted to the cardiology department. Objectively: there is a skin lesion over the extensor surfaces of joints with atrophic cicatrices, depigmentation, symmetrical affection of skeletal muscles (weakness, edema, hypotrophy). What disease are these changes most typical for?
a. Reiters disease
*b. Dermatomyositis
c. Nodular periarteritis
d. Systemic scleroderma
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

136. A 13 y.o. teenager who suffers from hemophilia A was taken to the hospital after a fight at school. His diagnosis is right-sided hemarthros of knee joint, retroperitoneal hematoma. What should be primarily prescribed?
a. Placental albumin
b. Dry plasma
c. Aminocapronic acid
d. Washed thrombocytes
*e. Fresh frozen plasma

137. A 3 m.o. child fell seriously ill, body temperature rised up to 37,80C, there is semicough. On the 3-rd day the cough grew worse, dyspnea appeared. On percussion: tympanic sound above lungs, on auscultation: a lot of fine moist and wheezing rales during expiration. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchopneumonia
b. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis with asthmatic component
c. Acute respiratory viral infection, focal pneumonia
*d. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchiolitis
e. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis

138. On the 1st day of life a full-term girl (2nd labour) weighing 3500g, with Apgar score of 8 points, presented with jaundice. Indirect bilirubin of blood - was 80 micromole/l, 6 hours later - 160 micromole/l. What is the optimal method of treatment?
a. Infusion therapy
b. Phototherapy
*c. Exchange blood transfusion
d. Phenobarbital treatment
e. Enterosorbents

139. A child was born at a gestational age of 34 weeks in grave condition. The leading symptoms were respiratory distress symptoms, namely sonorous and prolonged expiration, involving additional muscles into respiratory process. The Silverman score at birth was 0 points, in 3 hours it was 3 points with clinical findings. Which diagnostic study will allow to diagnose the form of pneumopathy?
a. Clinical blood test
b. Proteinogram
c. Immunoassay
*d. X-ray of chest
e. Determination of blood gas composition

140. A 10-year-old girl consulted a doctor about thirst, frequent urination, weight loss. She has been observing these symptoms for about a month. Objectively: no pathology of internal organs was revealed. What laboratory analysis should be carried out in the first place?
a. Glucosuric profile
*b. Blood glucose analysis on an empty stomach
c. Acetone in urine test
d. Glucose in urine test on the base of daily diuresis
e. Glucose tolerance test

141. A 6-year-old child complains of frequent liquid stool and vomiting. On the 2nd day of desease the child presented with inertness, temperature rise up to 38,2°C, Ps- 150 bpm, scaphoid abdomen, palpatory painful sigmoid colon, defecation 10 times a day with liquid, scarce stool with mucus and streaks of green. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Intestinal amebiasis
c. Yersiniosis
*d. Shigellosis
e. Escherichiosis

142. After a 10-year-old child had been bitten by a bee, he was delivered to a hospital. There were lip, face and neck edemata. The patient felt hot and short of breath. Objectively: breathing was laboured and noisy. There were foamy discharges from the mouth, cough. The skin was pale and cold. There was bradypnoea. Heart sounds were muffled and arrhythmic. Thready pulse was present. What diagnosis was made by the expert in resuscitation?
a. Quinckes edema
b. Acute cardiovascular collapse
c. Cerebral coma
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Bronchial asthma

143. A 13-year-old girl complains of fever up to 37,4°C during the last 2 months after recovering from ARVI. Objectively: malnutrition, diffuse grade II enlargement of the thyroid gland feeling dense on palpation, exophthalmos, tachycardia. What kind of pathological syndrome is it?
a. Thymomegaly
*b. Thyrotoxicosis
c. Hypoparathyroidism
d. Hypothyroidism
e. Hyperparathyroidism

144. A 3-year-old girl presents with pertussis-like cough with thick sputum. There have been persistent changes in lungs since the age of 6 months when she was first diagnosed with acute pneumonia. Chloride concentration in the perspiration is 112 mEq/l. The child has been diagnosed with mucoviscidosis. What is the basis for autosomal recessive disease - mucoviscidosis?
a. Pulmonary artery hypoplasia
*b. Inadequate transport of sodium and chloride ions
c. Deposition of calcium triphosphates and carbotates in the alveoles
d. alpha_1-antitrypsin deficiency
e. Pulmonary cysts

145. From urine of a 14-year-old boy with the exacerbation of secondary obstructive pyelonephritis Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated with a titer of 1000000 microbes per 1 ml. Which antibiotic is most advisable to be administered in this case?
a. Cefazolinum
b. Ampicillin
*c. Ciprofloxacin
d. Azithromycin
e. Chloramphenicol

146. A 14-year-old boy with a history of chronic tonsillitis and sinusitis has developed a feeling of heart irregularities and additional pulse. HR- 83/min. ECG results: regular impulses with no visible P wave that occur every two sinus contractions, QRS complex is dramatically deformed and prolonged to over 0,11 s, T wave is discordant followed by a complete compensatory pause. Specify the arrhythmia type:
a. Bigeminal extrasystole
b. Complete AV-block
c. Left bundle branch block
*d. Trigeminal extrasystole
e. Partial AV-blockade

147. An 8-year-old girl periodically has sudden short-term heart pain, sensation of chest compression, epigastric pain, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: the patient is pale, respiratory rate - 40/min, jugular pulse is present. Ps- 185 bpm, of poor volume. AP- 75/40 mm Hg. ECG taken during an attack shows ectopic P waves, QRS wave is not deformed. At the end of an attack a compensatory pause is observed. The most likely cause of the attack is:
a. Sinus tachycardia
b. Complete AV-block
c. Atrial fibrillation
*d. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
e. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia

148. A 1-month-old child became restless and presented with an increase in head sweating. Its known from the history that the child has been fed with cows milk since birth (September 5). Examination revealed craniotabes. A doctor administered a course of UV radiation. Decide, if the child needs ergocalciferol:
a. Immediately after the UVR withdrowal
b. A month after the UVR withdrowal
c. Does not need
d. In combination with UVR
*e. 2-2,5 months after the UVR withdrowal

149. 15 minutes after the second vaccination with DTP vaccine a 4-month-old boy exhibited the symptoms of Quinckes edema. What medication should be given for emergency aid?
a. Adrenalin
b. Heparin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Furosemide
e. Seduxen

150. A baby is 3 months old. The mother consulted a pediatrician about lack of breast milk. After several test weighings it was found that the child had to receive supplementary feeding. What is the optimal milk formula for this child?
a. Malutka
*b. Malysh
c. Milk formula № 3
d. Milk formula № 2
e. Whole cows milk

151. Examination of a newborn revealed skin redness that appeared immediately after birth and reached the maximum intensity on the second day of life. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Simple erythema
b. Transient erythema
c. Annular erythema
d. Erythema nodosum
e. Toxic erythema

152. A child is 2 days old. He was born with a weight of 2900 kg, body length of 50 cm. On examination the skin is intensely red, elastic, with preserved turgor. Puerile respiration is present. Respiration rate - 40/min, cardiac sounds are rhythmic, sonorous. HR- 138/min. The abdomen is soft. The liver extends 2 cm below the costal margin. Diuresis is sufficient. Stool is in form of meconium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neonatal phlegmon
b. Toxic erythema of the newborn
*c. Physiological erythema of the newborn
d. Erysipelas
e. Exfoliative Ritters dermatitis

153. A full-term baby was born with body weight of 3200 g, body length of 50 cm, Apgar score - 8-10 points. What is the optimum time for the first breast-feeding?
a. After 48 hours
*b. First 30 minutes
c. First 24 hours
d. First 6 hours
e. First 48 hours

154. A 3-year-old child has been taken to a pediatrician. He has no recent history of any diseases. Objective examination revealed no pathology of the internal organs. The child needs the routine immunization against the following disease:
a. Diphtheria and tetanus
b. Pertussis
c. Type B hepatitis
*d. Poliomyelitis
e. Measles, rubella, parotitis

155. A 6-year-old child has duodenal ulcer. What antibacterial drug should be co-administered together with metronidazole and De-Nol in order to eradicate Helicobacter pylori infection?
a. Sulfadimethoxinum
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Oleandomycin
d. Tetracycline
e. Biseptol

156. A baby born after fast labour has palsy of hand muscles. Grasp reflex is absent, as well as hand-to-mouth reflex. Hand sensitivity is absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Duchenne-Erbs palsy
b. Muscle paresis
c. Bernard-Horner syndrome
*d. Dejerine-Klumpke palsy
e. Total lesion of the brachial plexus

157. A child is 12 years old. He complains of a dull aching pain in the epigastrium and right hypochondrium, that is getting worse after taking fatty or fried food, headache, weakness, nausea, low-grade fever. Abdominal palpation reveals a marked resistance of muscles in the right hypochondrium, positive Kerrs, Ortners, Murphys symptoms. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute pancreatitis
*b. Chronic cholecystitis
c. Viral hepatitis
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Acute gastritis

158. A 3-month-old girl presents with rhinitis, dyspnea, dry cough. These manifestations has been observed for two days. Objectively: the child has pale skin, acrocyanosis, shallow respiration at the rate of 80/min. Percussion reveals handbox resonance over the whole surface of lungs, massive fine rales. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute bronchiolitis
b. Mucoviscidosis
c. Acute bronchitis
d. Foreign body of the airway
e. Pneumonia

159. A newborn (mothers I pregnancy) weighing 3500 g presents with jaundice, lethargy, reduced reflexes. Objectively: second grade jaundice of skin with saffron tint, liver - +2cm, spleen - +1 cm. Urine and feces are yellow. Blood count: Hb- 100 g/l, RBCs - 3,2*10^12/l, WBCs - 18,7*10^9/l, mothers blood type - 0(I) Rh(+), babys blood type - А(II) Rh(-), bilirubin - 170 mmol/l, indirect fraction. ALT, AST rates are normal. What disease is the child most likely to have?
*a. Hemolytic disease of newborn, AB0-conflict
b. Hemolytic disease of newborn, Rh-conflict
c. Physiologic jaundice
d. Biliary atresia
e. Perinatal hepatitis

160. A 10-year-old girl was admitted to a hospital with carditis presentations. It is known from the anamnesis that two weeks ago she had exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. What is the most likely etiological factor in this case?
*a. Streptococcus
b. Pneumococcus
c. Proteus
d. Klebsiella
e. Staphylococcus

161. All the joints on the left elbow of a newborn are extended, the whole arm hangs vertically along the trunk with the forearm pronated. Active movements in the elbow joint are absent but present in the shoulder joint. The hand is flattened, atrophied, cold to the touch, hangs passively. Grasp reflex and hand-mouth reflex on the affected side are missing. Haemogram values are normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Complete obstetrical paralysis
b. Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
c. Osteomyelitis
d. Proximal obstetrical paralysis
*e. Inferior distal obstetrical paralysis

162. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in respect of its volume and composition. Muscle tonus is within norm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Craniostenosis
*b. Pylorospasm
c. Pylorostenosis
d. Meningitis
e. Microcephaly

163. On the second day after preventive vaccination a 2-year-old boy presented with abdominal pain without clear localization, body temperature rose up to 38°C. On the third day the child got red papular haemorrhagic eruption on the extensor surfaces of limbs and around the joints. Knee joints were edematic and slightly painful. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
b. Meningococcemia
c. DIC syndrome
d. Urticaria
e. Thrombocytopenic purpura

164. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
a. Impetigo neonatorum
b. Impetigo
c. Epidermolysis bullosa
*d. Vesiculopustulosis
e. Miliaria

165. A patient is 14 years old. Cytochemical study of punctate revealed 40% of blasts, there was negative reaction to peroxidase and with Sudan black, positive reaction to glycogen. Specify the form of acute leukemia:
a. Monoblastic
b. Myeloblastic
*c. Lymphoblastic
d. Promyelocytic
e. Undifferentiated

166. Six months ago, a 5-year-old child was operated for CHD. For the last 3 weeks he has complained of fever, heart pain, aching muscles and bones. Examination results: "white-coffee" skin colour, auscultation revealed systolic murmur in the region of heart along with a noise in the III-IV intercostal space. Examination of fingertips revealed Janeway lesions. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute rheumatic fever
b. Typhoid fever
c. Sepsis
d. Nonrheumatic carditis
*e. Infectious endocarditis

167. The condition of a 3-year-old child with acute non-rheumatic myocarditis has suddenly deteriorated: he presents with anxiety, acrocyanosis, peripheral edemata, dyspnea. Auscultation of lungs reveals fine moist rales on both sides mainly in the lower parts. AP- 65/40 mm Hg. HR- 150/min, heart sounds are muffled, arrhythmic (extrasystole). Liver is +4 cm. Oliguria is present. The child has been diagnosed with acute heart failure. Which method of examination is most informative for assessing the childs status dynamics?
a. 24-hour monitoring of heart rhythm
*b. Echocardiography
c. Diuresis monitoring
d. ECG
e. Monitoring of K+, Na+ concentration in blood

168. A hospital admitted an 11-year-old boy diagnosed with medium-severe asthma, exacerbation period. In order to arrest the attacks the boy was administered broncholytic nebulizer therapy. During the day the childs condition stabilized. What is the most appropriate method for further monitoring of respiratory function in this patient?
a. Bronchodilatation tests
b. Veloergometry
c. Spirometry
d. Pneumotachometry
*e. Peak flowmetry

169. A full-term newborn was born with body weight of 4000 g, body length of 57 cm. Reaction to the postnatal check was absent. There was diffuse cyanosis, heart rate of 80/min. What resuscitation measures should be taken?
a. Start tactile stimulation
b. Give an injection of naloxone
c. Give 100% oxygen
d. Intubate the child and start ALV
*e. Start ALV with a mask

170. A 2-year-old child in a satisfactory condition periodically presents with moderate proteinuria, microhematuria. USI results: the left kidney is undetectable, the right one is enlarged, there are signs of double pyelocaliceal system. What study is required to specify the diagnosis?
a. Micturating cystography
b. Doppler study of renal vessels
c. Radioisotope renal scan
*d. Excretory urography
e. Retrograde urography

171. An 8-year-old boy has a 2-year history of blotchy itchy rash appearing after eating citrus fruit. The first eruption occurred at the age of 6 months after the introduction of juices to the babys diet. Father has a history of bronchial asthma, mother - that of allergic rhinitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atopic dermatitis
b. Pityriasis Rosea
c. Quinckes edema
d. Urticaria
e. Psoriasis

172. A 3-year-old child with ARVI had been administered biseptol, paracetamol, nazoferon. On the third day of treatment the babys condition deteriorated: he developed sore throat, stomatitis, conjunctivitis, hypersalivation, painful dark red spots on the neck, face, chest and legs, then the spots were replaced with vesicles. Examination revealed lesions of mucous membranes around the mouth and anus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chickenpox
b. Atopic dermatitis
*c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Serum sickness
e. Bullous dermatitis

173. A 12-year-old child had three attacks of acute rheumatic fever accompanied by carditis. Examination revealed the symptoms of chronic tonsillitis, mitral insufficiency, carious teeth. What is the optimal method of secondary prophylaxis?
*a. Year-round bicillin prophylaxis till the age of 25
b. Year-round bicillin prophylaxis for 3 years
c. Oral cavity sanitation
d. Tonsillectomy
e. Course of cardiotrophic drugs twice a year

174. A 7-year-old female child has developed an acute condition. She complains of a headache, two onsets of vomiting. Objectively: deferred reactions, body temperature - 39,3°C, pronounced hyperesthesia, nuchal rigidity, positive superior and inferior Brudzinskis signs, symmetric Kernigs sign. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Craniocerebral trauma
b. Food toxicoinfection
*c. Meningitis
d. Toxic encephalopathy
e. Encephalitis

