1. A 45-year-old female patient complains about pain caused by thermal srtimuli and spontaneous pain in the 26 toothA week ago this tooth was treated for pulpitis. Objectively: the 26 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, thermal stimulus causes slowly intensifying longlasting pain. X-ray picture shows that the palatine canal is filled by 2/3, buccal canals contain no filling material. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Trauma of periodontium tissue
*b. Incomplete pulp extirpation
c. Infection
d. Inadequate canal filling
e. Inflammation in the periodontium

2. Preventive examination of a 7-yearold schoolboy revealed unremovable grey-and-white layerings on the mucous membrane of cheek along the line of teeth joining. Mucous membrane is slightly hyperaemic, painless on palpation. The boy is emotionally unbalanced, bites his cheeks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Multiform exudative erythema
c. Chronic recurrernt aphthous stomatitis
d. Chronic candidous stomatitis
*e. Mild leukoplakia

3. A 48-year-old patient complains about itching gums. Objectively: gums are dense, of normal colour; cold water causes short-term toothache. X-ray picture shows osteosclerosis of interalveolar septa (fine granular bone texture), height of interalveolar septa and integrity of compact substance on their tops is unchanged. Which diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Initial periodontitis
b. Atrophic gingivitis
*c. Initial parodontosis
d. I degree periodontitis
e. I degree parodontosis

4. A 26-year-old patient needs an inlay for	a class V cavity of the 35 tooth. During the cavity preparation a prosthodontist has accidentally opened the pulp. What might be the most probable cause of this complication?
*a. Forming a flat floor
b. Forming convergent walls
c. Absence of an additional cavity
d. Forming a bevel
e. Forming divergent walls

5. Parents of a 9-year-old boy complain about permanently open mouth of the child. External examination revealed elongation of the lower face part, nonclosure of lips. Examination of the oral cavity revealed early mixed dentition. Relationship of the first permanent molars is neutral, vertical space is 5 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mesial occlusion
b. Distal occlusion
*c. Open bite
d. Deep overbite
e. Cross bite

6. After removal of dental deposit an 18- year-old patient underwent preventive examination. It revealed painless chalky spots in the precervical area on the vestibular surface of the 22 and 41 teeth. Result of enamel resistance test is 7. What morphological changes are typical for this disease?
a. Degeneratic changes of odontoblasts
*b. Subsurface enamel demineralization
c. Damage of dentinoenamel junction
d. Changes in the mantle dentine
e. Superficial enamel demineralization

7. A 32-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhages during eating and tooth brushing. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 weeks ago the patient got a cast metal crown. Objectively: the 27 tooth has a castmetal crown going beyond the gingival edge by 1-1,5 mm, touching causes haemorrhage. Percussion is slightly painful.What tactics is the most appropriate in this case?
*a. To remove the crown and fabricate a splint
b. To open the crown through the masticatory surface
c. To remove the crown and administer	treatment for marginal periodontitis
d. To give the patient time to get used to	the prosthesis
e. To administer gargling with Rotocan

8. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth.What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Jackson clasp
b. Roach clasp
*c. Acker clasp
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Bent wire clasp

9. A 25-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the 23 tooth is pulpless. The filling restores vestibular-approximal surface of the tooth crown by 1/3, it is stable, closely fits within cavity walls, its colour doesn’t match the colour of the tooth. The tooth itself has changed its colour, its percussion is painless. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for this patient?
a. Metal swaged crown
b. Elastic crown
*c. Metal-ceramic crown
d. Portion crown
e. Inlay

10. A 12-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage and tooth mobility. He has been suffering from this since the age of 4. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic and edematic, bleed during instrumental examination. Tooth roots are exposed by 1/3 and covered with whitish deposit. II degree tooth mobility is present. Dentogingival pouches are 4-5 mm deep. External examination revealed dryness and thickening of superficial skin layer on the hands and feet, there are also some cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Localized periodontitis
d. Letterer-Siwe disease
e. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease

11. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
a. Inverse method of compression molding
b. Direct method of compression molding
*c. Method of transfer molding
d. Combined method of compression	molding
e. In water under pressure

12. A 20-year-old patient complains about feeling spontaneous undurable localised pain in the 26 tooth for one day. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a deep Black’s class I carious cavity. Dentine of its walls and floor is unpigmented, softened, carious cavity is not communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain focused at a single point, cold test induces longlasting pain. What method of treatment is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Vital amputation
*c. Biological method
d. Devital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

13. A 42-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) that irradiates to the ear; headache, general indisposition, impossible mastication and limited mouth opening. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric due to the edema in the region of the left temporomandibular joint. The skin in this region is hyperemic. The pain is made worse by the smallest movements of mandible. Palpation of the joint causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited down to 15-20 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
b. Mandible subluxation
c. Myogenous osteoarthrosis
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
e. Acute purulent parotitis

14. A 42-year-old patient complains about pain in the submandibular and sublingual region that is getting worse during eating; body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C. The patient has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: along the right sublingual plica there is infiltration, hyperaemia, edema of soft tisues, acute pain on palpation. The duct of the right submandibular salivary gland discharges turbid saliva with pus admixtures.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenophlegmon of submandibular	region
b. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of	submandibular region
*c. Exacerbation of urolithiasis
d. Abscess of alveololingual groove
e. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary	gland

15. A 4-year-old girl presents with body temperature rise, aggravation of general condition. The symptoms has been observed for 3 days. Objectively: general condition is grave, body temperature is 38,6°C, the girl is anxious and pale. She presents also with halitosis, hyperaemia and edema of gingival mucous membrane in the region of the 83, 84, 85 teeth on both sides from the alveolar process. The mentioned teeth are mobile, their percussion causes acute pain; the 84 tooth is filled.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenous mandibular	osteomyelitis beginning from the 84 tooth
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of	the 84 tooth
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis beginning from the 84 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radiculodental	mandibular cyst beginning from the 84	tooth
e. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular	salivary gland

16. A 38-year-old female patient came to a hospital and complained about a wound on her left cheek. She got this trauma 16-18 hours ago, didn’t loose consciousness. Objectively: a 3 cm long injury of skin, subcutaneous fat and muscle. The wound is bleeding. What kind of initial surgical d-bridement should be performed?
a. -
*b. Early surgical d-bridement
c. Secondary surgical d-bridement
d. Delayed surgical d-bridement
e. Initial surgical d-bridement along with	plasty

17. A 47-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dental cervix exposure on both jaws. Objectively: the dentitions are intact, the dental cervixes are exposed. Untimely teeth contacts are present. It is planned to perform selective grinding. What controlling method should be chosen?
a. Roentgenography
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Masticatiography
d. Chewing test
*e. Occlusiography

18. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Close-beaked forceps
b. Broad-beaked forceps
*c. Left angled elevator
d. Right angled elevator
e. Straight elevator

19. A 31-year-old patient consulted a dentist about teeth sanitation. Objectively: in the precervical region of the 13 and 23 teeth there are irregularly-shaped defects of hard tissues within deep layers of enamel. The floor of the defects is rough, their edges are chalky.What tactics should be chosen as to these defects?
*a. Preparation and filling
b. Remineralizing therapy
c. Silvering of the defects
d. Grinding of the defects
e. Filling with composite material without	preparation

20. A 51-year-old female patient complains about food sticking in a right inferior tooth. Objectively: distal masticatory surface of the 45 tooth has a deep carious cavity filled with dense pigmented dentin that doesn’t communicate with the tooth cavity. The patient was diagnosed with chronic deep caries. What method of examination allowed the dentist to eliminate chronic periodontitis?
*a. Electro-odontometry
b. Palpation of projection of root apex
c. Cold test
d. Percussion
e. Probing

21. An 18-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise, weakness, pain induced by eating and deglutition. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is erythematic with multiple petechia. Pharynx is hyperaemic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, painless. In blood: leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypic mononuclears, ESR is 30 mm/h. What is the leading factor of disease development?
a. Bacterial infection
b. Immediate allergy
c. Delayed allergy
*d. Viral infection
e. Autoimmune disorders

22. A female patient consulted a stomatologist about inability to close her mouth, speech difficulty. Objectively: the oral cavity is half-open, there is drooling, central line deviates to the right. There is a depression in front of the tragus, and above the malar arch the mandibular condyle bulges inward the infratemporal fossa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Unilateral posterior dislocation of	mandible on the right
b. Bilateral anterior dislocation
c. Unilateral anterior dislocation of	mandible on the right
d. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the left
*e. Unilateral anterior dislocation of	mandible on the left

23. Analysis of a 10-year-old boy’s jaw models revealed that occlusal plane of the frontal maxillary teeth was of concave form, its lateral parts were convex. Form of the alveolar process also represents deformation of dental arches. The upper jaw is of saddle-like form with abrupt narrowing in the region of premolar teeth. What type of bite is it?
a. Deep
b. Distal
*c. Open
d. Mesial
e. Cross

24. A 50-year-old patient complains about increased sensibility of the exposed tooth cervixes, displacement of teeth, gum itch, pain in the region of the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth caused by chemical and thermal stimuli. Objectively: the gums are dense and anemic. X-ray picture shows atrophy of the alveolar bone reaching 2/3 of interalveolar septa height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atrophic gingivitis
*b. III degree parodontosis
c. Chronic generalized III degree parodontosis
d. II degree parodontosis
e. Chronic generalized II degree parodontosis

25. A 32-year-old patient complains of a fistula in the submandibular region. Objectively: cheek is swollen in the region of mandible on the left, palpation revealed induration of soft tissues. In projection of the 35, 36 teeth there is a fistula containing pus and granulations. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone, sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sarcoma
b. Osteoma
c. Actinomycosis
d. Syphilis
*e. Chronic osteomyelitis

26. A 23-year-old patient complains about a small ulcer on the red border of her lower lip that has been irresponsive to self-treatment for two weeks. Objectively: unchanged red border of lower lip has a circular ulcer of 2 mm in diameter with raised regular edges, its floor is of meatlike colour, dense, shiny, with "stearic film", with cartilaginoid infiltration, painless on palpation. Regional lymph node is enlarged, of tight elastic consistency, painless, mobile. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Decubital ulcer
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Tuberculous ulcer
*d. Primary syphilis
e. Cancerous ulcer

27. X-ray picture depicts a circular welldefined area of bone tissue destruction 0,7х0,7 cm large in the projection of root apex.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cystogranuloma
b. Granuloma
c. Osteoma
d. Odontoma
e. Cyst

28. A 29-year-old patient complains about acute attack-like pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left, as well as in the region of his left maxillary sinus, eye and temple. The pain is long-lasting (2-3 hours), it is getting worse at night. The patient has a history of recent acute respiratory disease. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity, floor probing is painful, thermal stimuli cause long-lasting pain, percussion causes slight pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute apical periodontitis
d. Acute focal pulpitis
e. Inflammation of maxillary sinus

29. A 45-year-old patient complains about pain in his mandible that arose after extraction of the 36 tooth. Objectively: alveolar socket is covered with bloody clot. X-ray picture shows unextracted root of the 36 tooth. What tools are necessary for extraction of this root?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Angled elevator curved left
d. Straight elevator
*e. Angled elevator curved right

30. A patient complains of pain and swelling in the right submandibular area. She has been treating the 45 tooth for a week. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. There is a painful tense infiltration in the right submandibular region. The skin doesn’t make a fold, its hyperemic and glossy. The mouth can be opened by 3 cm. Deglutition is painless. These clinical findings correspond with the following disease:
*a. Odontogenous phlegmon of the right submandibular region
b. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular region
c. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
d. Acute odontogenous sialoadenitis
e. Abscess of the right alveololingual groove

31. A 5-year-old boy presents with body temperature rise up to 39, 2°C, sore throat, headache, nausea. Objectively: mucous membrane of soft palate and palatine arches is evidently hyperemic, there is distinct border between it and surrounding tissues. The child’s tongue is dry, edematic, its lateral surfaces are red and free of fur, fungiform papillae are evidently enlarged. Face skin is covered with spotty rash, hyperemic except for pale nasolabial triangle. Submandibular lymph nodes are painful on palpation. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Loffler’s bacillus
*b. Haemolytic streptococcus
c. Herpes virus
d. Coxsackie virus
e. Bordet-Gengou bacillus

32. Preventive examination of a 4,5-yearold child revealed untimely missing of all the upper molars. The lower incisors contact with mucous membrane of palate. What is the tactics of choice?
*a. Fabrication of a removable lamellar prosthesis
b. Annual examination till cutting of the permanent teeth
c. Medical intervention is not required
d. Half-yearly examination till cutting of the permanent teeth
e. Fabrication of an orthodontic appliance for deep overbite correction

33. A 20-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in an upper right tooth. Objectively: the 16 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity, probing at the opening point is painless, percussion of the 16 causes mild pain. There is a fistula on the gingiva in the region of root apex projection of the 16 tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
*d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

34. A 16-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in form of white spots in the region of the upper frontal teeth. The defect was revealed long ago and doesn’t change with time. Objectively: white spots on the vestibular surfaces of the 11, 12, 21,22 teeth close to the cutting edge and on the vestibular surfaces of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth close to the masticatory surface. On probing the spot surface was smooth, painless; cold stimulus produced no pain. The spots couldn’t be stained with 2%solution of methylene blue.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
b. Acute initial caries
c. Erosion of dental solid tissues
d. Fluorosis in form of spots
e. Local enamel hypoplasia

35. A 35-year-old patient complains about a cavity in a lower jaw tooth on the left, and the pain caused by sweet, sour and solid food. Examination of the 36 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity filled with light softened dentine. Probing of the carious cavity floor is painful, reaction to the cold stimulus is painful, undurable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute focal pulpitis
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic deep caries

36. A 31-year-old male patient complains of dryness and burning of tongue back that appeared for about a week ago and get worse when he eats irritating food. The patient has a history of recent pneumonia. He had been treated in the in-patient hospital for 2 weeks, the treatment program included antibiotics. Now he doesn’t take any drugs. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is hyperemic, dry, glossy. Tongue back and palate have greyish-white plicae that can be easily removed. Threads of saliva trail behind the spatula.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic atrophic candidiasis
*b. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
c. Acute atrophic candidiasis
d. Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis
e. Medicamental stomatitis

37. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
a. Crown cap splint
b. Fixed crown splint
*c. Inlay splint
d. Equator crown splint
e. Intradental splint

38. A 28-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 13 tooth is decayed by 2/3 of its height, the stump sticks out above the gumline by 2 mm. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled up to the top. What construction should be fabricated for the patient?
*a. Pivot tooth
b. Inlay
c. The crown should be restored with photopolymer
d. Equator crown
e. Crown

39. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
a. On the saddle
b. On the base
c. On the clasps
*d. On the arch
e. On the artificial teeth

40. A 10-year-old boy consulted a dentist about pain in the palate during eating. Objectively: the lower third of his face is shortened, mouth opening is not limited. By joining the teeth the cutting edge of inferior incisors contacts with the mucous membrane of palate. Mucous membrane in the contact point is hyperemic, slightly edematic. Lateral teeth exhibit Angle’s class I malocclusion. What is the most appropriate plan of treatment of the lower jaw?
*a. To impact frontal part
b. To widen the lower jaw
c. To protract lateral parts
d. To protract frontal part
e. To impact lateral parts

41. A patient consulted an oral surgeon about pain in the region of his left upper jaw that appeared 3 days ago. After examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 17 tooth. It is indicated to extract the 17 tooth. What nerves should be blocked for painless extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Anterior alveolar nerves and incisor nerve
b. Greater palatine nerve
*c. Posterior alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
d. Median alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
e. Nasopalatine nerve

42. A 40-year-old patient complains about frequent falling out of a filling. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious (Black’s class II) cavity. It is planned to restore the anatomic form of the tooth by means of a metal inlay. What is the peculiarity of the cavity preparation for the inlay in this case?
*a. Forming a bevel
b. Cavity floor widening
c. Cavity deepening
d. Preparation for parapulpar posts
e. Forming an additional shoulder

43. A 10-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous spasmodic pain in an upper jaw tooth on the left. Objectively: distal contact surface of the 26 tooth exhibits a carious cavity filled with light softened dentine and localized within parapulpar dentine. Probing of the cavity floor causes acute pain, percussion is painless. Cold stimuli cause a long-standing pain attack. The child has a history of lidocaine allergy. Choose an optimal paste to be used during the first visit:
a. Formocresol
b. Zinc oxide eugenol
c. Iodoform
d. Thymol
*e. Paraformaldehyde

44. A 35-year-old patient complains about itch, burning and edema of lips. He has been suffering from this for a week. Objectively: reddening of red border and skin, especially in the region of mouth corners, there are also vesicles, crusts, small cracks along with erythematous affection of red border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Multiform exudative erythema
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
c. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis
*d. Acute eczematous cheilitis
e. Acute herpetic cheilitis

45. Preventive examination of an 8-yearold boy revealed some lusterless chalklike spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth, which are localised in the precervical region. Subjective complaints are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Chronic initial caries
c. White-spotted fluorosis
d. Local enamel hypoplasia
*e. Acute initial caries

46. A 27- year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the 34 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Roentgenographical survey revealed an ill-defined zone of bone tissue destruction in the periapical region of root of the 34 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Exacarbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis complicated by periodontitis

47. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed fullcast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. Visually by means of models in the articulator
b. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
c. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
*d. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials
e. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper

48. An 18-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 21 tooth is pulpless, of dark-grey colour. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. It is planned to crown the tooth with a plastic crown. Choose the plastic mass for its fabrication:
a. Ethacryl
b. Ftorax
c. Bakril
*d. Sinma
e. Acrel

49. A 47-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the 27 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patient’s face is symmetric, skin is of normal colouring, the mouth can be fully opened, mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic and hyperemic at a level of the 27 tooth. The 27 tooth has a deep carious cavity interconnecting with pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic left-sided odontogenous highmoritis
*b. Exacerbated chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
c. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
d. Chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw beginning from the 27 tooth

50. A 64-year-old female patient was waiting for her turn at the dentist’s. Suddenly she fell down, her respiration became hoarse, she got convulsive twitching in her upper and lower limbs, face and neck turned cyanotic, eye pupils became mydriatic, reaction of eye to light was absent. Arterial pressure and pulse couldn’t be measured. Heart sounds couldn’t be auscultated. Involuntary urination was noted. What condition is characterized by such symptoms?
a. Shock
b. Epilepsy
*c. Clinical death
d. Coma
e. Collapse

51. A 3-year-old child complains of a cavity in a lower jaw tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 84 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within mantle dentine. Dentine is softened, probing of the cavity walls is painful, percussion is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic deep caries
*d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

52. A 43-year-old patient complains about a neoplasm in the right submandibular region that appeared a month ago after angina. Body temperature is up to 37, 0 ? 37, 2°C. The patient underwent anti-inflammatory therapy but it led to no reduction of the neoplasm. Objectively: in the right submandibular region palpation reveals a slightly painful, spherical, freely movable, well-defined neoplasm of dense and elastic consistency. The duct of submandibular salivary gland discharges transparent saliva. The sublingual plica is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sialolithiasis
b. Chronic sialoadenitis
*c. Chronic lymphadenitis
d. Adenoma of salivary gland
e. Atheroma

53. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
*a. Gelin
b. Stomalgin
c. Dentafol
d. Orthocor
e. Stomatoplast

54. A 35-year-old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37th tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the peculiarity of tooth preparation?
*a. Forming a bevel
b. Forming flat floor
c. Widening of cavity floor
d. Forming additional cavity
e. Forming an additional shoulder

55. A 64-year-old patient complains about a slightly painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue that appeared over 2 months ago. Objectively: lateral surface of tongue has an ulcer with raised edges, tissues around it are infiltrated. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, adhering to each other and surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Ulcero-necrotic lesion associated with blood disorders
*b. Lingual cancer
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Syphilis (hard chancre)
e. Decubital ulcer

56. A 56-year-old patient complains about missing lateral teeth on both sides of mandible. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. Make a diagnosis:
a. Kennedy II denttion defect
b. Kennedy IV denttion defect
*c. Kennedy I denttion defect
d. Kennedy III denttion defect
e. Betel’man II denttion defect

57. A 4-year-old child got a face trauma 2 hours agoA stomatologist on duty made a diagnosis: intrusive luxation of the 61 tooth. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Splinting of the 61 tooth
b. Removal of pulp of the 61 tooth
c. Observation
d. Reposition of the 61 tooth
*e. Extraction of the 61 tooth

58. An 18-year-old student complains of roughness and dryness of mucous membrane of the oral cavity. He always bites uncontrolledly off mucous membrane along the line of teeth joining. The patient suffers from chronic cholecystitis, he is smoker. Hygiene index is 2,3. Objectively: mucous membrane along the line of teeth joining is quaggy, edematic, whitish. What is the leading factor of this disease development?
a. Unsatisfactory level of oral cavity hygiene
b. Xerostomia
c. Smoking
*d. Habitual biting of mucous membrane of the oral cavity
e. Somatic pathology

59. A 57-year-old patient complains about dryness and burning of the lateral surface of her tongue. These sensations disappear during eating. She noted such sensations three months ago. She has a history of gastritis with reduced secretory function. Objectively: mucous membrane of tongue and oral cavity has no peculiarities. The back of tongue has thin white coating. Regional lymph nodes are unpalpable. Oral cavity is sanitized. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hunter-Moeller glossitis
*b. Glossodynia
c. Candidiasis
d. Lingual nerve neuritis
e. Desquamative glossitis

60. A 23-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 15 tooth that he noted a year ago. Examination revealed that approximal surface had a deep carious cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity and filled with dense pigmented dentine. Probing, cold test, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 10 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

61. A 7-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in the upper right molars. Both medial contact and masticatory surfaces of the 55 tooth have a carious cavitiy filled with clear softened dentin and localized within parapulpar dentin. Floor probing causes acute pain, tooth percussion is slightly painful. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process in the root projection of the 55 is intact, examination of this region revealed no roentgenological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Deep acute caries
*b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

62. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaw. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic.What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
b. Fabricate occlusal rims
c. Locate and fix central occlusion
d. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity
*e. Adjust individual trays

63. A 33-year-old patient complains about pain, gingival haemorrhage, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37, 8°C. Objectively: gums are apparently hyperaemic, edematic, bleed easily, parodontal pouches are 3- 4 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar process, resorption of interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis

64. An 8-year-old boy complains about acute short-term pain in the 11 tooth caused by cold and sweet stimuli. Objectively: medial contact surface of the 11 tooth has a carious cavity within dentinoenamel junction filled with softened moist dentine that can be easily removed. Enamel edges are white, undermined, friable. Superficial probing is painless, thermal test is positive, percussion is negative. What is the filling material of choice?
a. Silicate cement
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Composite material
d. Silicophosphate cement
e. Silver amalgam

65. A 40-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 38°C, and of a roundish infiltration on his upper lip. Objectively: there is a roundish infiltration on the upper lip on the left, the skin above it is wine red, the infiltration adheres to the surrounding tissues and has a seapus necroticus in the middle. The upper lip is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst
b. Acute periostitis of the upper lip
*c. Upper lip furuncle
d. Acute lymphadenitis
e. Upper lip carbuncle

66. .A female patient complains about pain in the 11 tooth caused by sour and sweet food. Objectively: enamel changes in form of chalky appearance, a defect with light bottom within dentinoenamel junction on the vestibular surface in the precervical area of the 11 tooth. Probing was painless, percussion and cold stimulus caused no pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Acute initial caries
*c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel hypoplasia
e. Fluorosis

67. A 69-year-old patient needs extraction of the 12, 11 teeth. He is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis, the 12 and 11 teeth exhibit II degree mobility. Choose a proper instrument for extraction:
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
*d. Straight forceps
e. S-shaped forceps curved right

68. An 8-year-old child presents with an edema of the submandibular region, the mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm, further opening is difficult, body temperature is 37, 6°C, mucogingival fold is vestibularly flattened, hyperaemic and swollen. The 84 and 85 teeth have fillings, their percussion is painless. The 84 tooth exhibits I degree mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Acute odontogenic periostitis
e. Chronic odontogenic periostitis

69. A 25-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible without evident displacement of fragments. All the teeth are intact. What kind of wire splint is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Pomerantseva-Urbanskaya’s splint
*b. Smooth splint
c. Splint with hooks
d. Smooth splint with a spreading curve
e. Splint with guide plane

70. A 19-year-old patient complains about pain in the submental part of mandible. The day before he got a trauma. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of tissues in the mental area. The mouth can be opened widely enough. All the teeth are intact. Mucous membrane is edematic in the region of central incisors, it bleeds slightly. In this region mobility of mandible fragments is present. Occlusion is undisturbed. What splint should be chosen by the dentist?
*a. Smooth brace
b. Splint with guide plane
c. Ivy loops for 31 32, 42 41
d. Anchor splint with intermandibular fixation
e. Splint with spreading curve

71. A 25-year-old man complains of itching and reddening of skin in the buccal	area, general weakness, inertness. He associates origin of the disease with a skin injury he got during shaving. Objectively: body temperature is 39, 0°CA welldefined section of skin in the buccal area is hyperemic, it slightly protrudes above the surface. Hyperemic surface has some vesicles containing serous fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
*b. Erysipelatous inflammation of skin
c. Furuncle
d. Phlegmon of buccal area
e. Anthrax

72. A 30-year-old saxophonist complains about wearing of the occlusal surface of his frontal teeth along with separation between the upper and lower teeth (apertognathia). Height of the lower third of the patient’s face remains unchanged. What method should be applied for elimination of this deformity?
a. Shortening of teeth
b. Increase of the interalveolar height
*c. Protetic
d. Orthodontic
e. Instrumental-and-surgical

73. A 32-year-old patient complains about mouth soreness, body temperature rise up to 38, 5°C, indisposition. Such condition has been occurring periodically for several years after the patient had had a cold. Objectively: lips are covered with haemorrhagic crusts, hyperaemic mucous membrane of lips and cheeks has erosions covered with fibrinous films. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpes recidivicus
b. Pemphigus vulgaris
*c. Multiform exudative erythema
d. Herpetiform Duhring’s dermatitis
e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

74. Examination of a patient revealed a roundish neoplasm in the submental area. Skin above it is unchanged, makes a fold easily. Puncture sample contains strowyellow liquid with cholesterol admixture. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Congenital median cyst
b. Lymphadenitis
c. Dermoid cyst
d. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
e. Lipoma

75. A 13-year-old girl complains about frequent falling out of a filling in the 21 tooth. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 years ago she underwent treatment on account of a dental trauma. Objectively: a transverse defect of 1/3 of the crown in the 21 tooth. Percussion is painless. Tooth colour is unchanged. X-ray picture shows that root canal is filled by 1 mm from the apex, filling material closely fits the walls of root canal. What stomatological tactics should be chosen?
a. The tooth should be extracted
b. The tooth should be crowned with an artificial crown
c. The root canal should be refilled
d. The root apex should be resected
*e. The defect should be restored with photopolymer

76. A 35-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronicmedian caries of the 36 tooth. There is a Black’s class II cavity affecting masticatory surface.Whatmaterial should be chosen for the tooth filling?
*a. Light-cure microhybride composite
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Light-cure microfilled composite
d. Light-cure fluid composite
e. Glass ionomer cement

77. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
*a. Dentures with elastic lining
b. Dentures with metal bases
c. Implant-supported dentures
d. Dentures with shortened borders
e. Dentures with extended borders

78. A 48-year-old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervixes of the 42, 41, 31, 32 are exposed by 2/3, there is pathological III degree mobility. It is indicated to extract the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be used for the direct prosthetics?
*a. Removable partial lamellar denture
b. Adhesive
c. Swaged-and-soldered bridge-like denture
d. Metal-ceramic bridge-like denture
e. Clasp denture

79. Examination of a 13-year-old patient allowed to make a final diagnosis: vestibular position of the 13 and 23 teeth with the total space deficit, narrowing of maxillary dental arch, torsion of the 12 and 22 tooth. To eliminate this pathology it was suggested to widen the dental arch and to extract some teeth. What teeth have orthodontic indication for their extraction?
a. Canines
b. Second premolars
c. First molars
*d. First premolars
e. Second incisors

80. Parents of a 2-year-old girl complain about fistulas with purulent discharge in the region of the upper frontal teeth. Objectively: crowns of the 51, 52, 61, 62 teeth are significantly decayed, probing of root canal orifices is slightly painful, it causes significant haemorrhage. Percussion is painless. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is pastose and cyantotic, there are cicatrices and fistulas in this region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis

81. A month after cementing the metalceramic crown on the 23 tooth a patient complained of its decementing. Examination revealed that the tooth stump was of sufficient height, stump walls were convergent to the vertical tooth axis at an angle of approximately 30 degrees. What angle of convergence had to be formed?
a. 22-25 degrees
b. 10-12 degrees
c. 12-15 degrees
d. 15-18 degrees
*e. Up to 8 degrees

82. During lateral movements of mandible the frontal teeth are displaced sidewards. Deviation of incisor point from the central position is measured by an angle of 100 ? 110o.What is characterized by such a value of incisor point deviation?
a. Lateral joint path
b. Sagittal joint path
c. Bennett’s angle
*d. Lateral incisor path
e. Sagittal incisor path

83. Parents of a 1,5-year-old child complain about the child’s tongue enlargement and ingestion disorder. The child has been suffering from this since birthday. Objectively: general condition has no peculiarities. The tongue is enlarged (macroglossia). Its mucous membrane exhibits granular vesicular outgrowths. The tongue is dense, painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemangioma of tongue
b. Cyst of tongue
c. Cancer of tongue
*d. Lymphangioma of tongue
e. Fibroma of tongue

84. A 52-year-old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: in the lateral parts of mandible teeth are worn down to the gums, in the frontal parts teeth are worn by 1/3. Treatment includes two stages. What prosthetic construction should be applied for bite disjoining and myotatic reflex change?
a. Elastic plastic splint
*b. Periodontal splint for the lateral parts
c. Plastic splint for the frontal part
d. Plastic splint for the whole dentition
e. Crown splint for the lateral parts

85. A girl is 18 months old. Vestibular surfaces of the 52, 51, 61, 62 teeth have wide carious cavities within enamel. Probing is slightly painful, percussion of the 52, 51, 61, 62 is painless.What is the treatment of choice?
a. Filling with amalgam
b. Fluorine laquer coating
c. Filling with phosphate cement
*d. Silver impregnation
e. Remineralizing therapy

86. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 13 and 24 teeth remain as well as all the teeth on the lower jaw. The lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, crowns of the 13, 24 teeth are worn off by 2/3. What constructional element will provide optimal fixation of the partial removable prosthesis on the upper jaw?
a. Retaining clasps
b. Compound clasps
*c. Telescopic crowns
d. Bars
e. Dentoalveolar clasps

87. Parents of a 6-year-old child applied to a pedodontist for preventive examination of their child. The oral cavity is sanitized. According to the parents, the child has recently cut the 36 and the 46 tooth. What method of caries prevention should be applied within 1,5-2 years after cutting of the mentioned teeth?
*a. Fissure hermetization
b. Coating the teeth with fluorine lacquer Ftorlak
c. Gargling with sodium fluoride
d. Remodentum solution applications
e. Fissure silvering

88. Examination of a 6-year-old girl revealed a deep carious cavity in the 85 tooth. Percussion and probing are painless. After removal of the softened dentine communication with the tooth cavity showed up. Deep probing is painless. Xray picture of the 85 tooth shows the focus of destruction of bone tissue in the region of bifurcation; cortical plate of the 35 has no pathological changes. It ismost expedient to use the following material for the root filling:
a. Calcium-containing paste
*b. Zinc oxide eugenol cement
c. Glass ionomer cement
d. Resorcin-formalin paste
e. Phosphate cement

89. A 48-year-old patient got a pustule on his chin that quickly developed into a dense and acutely painful infiltration 3x5 cm large. The skin above it is of blue-red colour. In the centre one can see three zones of necrosis around the hair follicles. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged and painful.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chin carbuncle
b. Dermal actinomycosis of chin
c. Chin furuncle
d. Suppurated atheroma
e. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin

90. A patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about pain and edema in the right infraorbital region and right zygomatic region, skin numbness in the area of the right half of his upper lip; nasal haemorrhage. These symptoms turned up after a trauma.What disease should be suspected?
*a. Fracture of zygomatic bone
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Fracture of nose bones
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
e. Le Fort I maxillary fracture

91. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
a. Erythroplasia
*b. Abrasive precancerous Manganotti’s cheilitis
c. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border
d. Verrucous precancer of red border
e. Bowen’s disease

92. A 12-year-old child complains about bleeding from the tooth socket during eating and tooth brushing. The tooth has hurt him before. Objectively: the 36 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity and filled with red excrescences. Probing causes pain and slight haemorrhage; percussion is painless, thermal stimuli cause mild pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic simple pulpitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic papillitis
d. Chronic granulating pulpitis
e. Gingival polyp

93. A 23-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating solid food. Objectively: gingiva of the frontal part of mandible is hyperaemic, edematic, it bleeds on palpation. Mucous membrane of the oral cavity as well as gingiva in other regions present no changes. The patient has deep overbite. Teeth are stable except for the 41 and 31 (I degree of mobility). X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 1/3 of root length in the region of the 42, 41, 32, 31 teeth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. I degree parodontosis
*b. Localised periodontitis
c. Generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Initial generalized periodontitis
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

94. A 13-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic and edematic, PMA index (papillary marginal alveolary index) is 46%, Greene-Vermillion hygiene index is 2,5. Provisional diagnosis: exacerbation of chronic generalized catarrhal gingivitis. This patient should be recommended to use a toothpaste with the following active component:
a. Calcium glycerophosphate
b. Vitamins A, D, E
c. Microelement complex
*d. Chlorhexidine
e. Monofluorophosphate

95. A 30-year-old patient has got an edema and hyperemia of nose wing skin spreading to the skin of his upper lip and cheek. Examination revealed a fissure along the infra-external edge of the left nostril. The skin is tense, dense, red and cyanotic, skin line pattern is smoothed; rise of local temperature is present. The zone of affection is well-defined and irregularly shaped. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermal actinomycosis
b. Dermal cancer
c. Thrombophlebitis of the facial vein
*d. Erysipelatous inflammation
e. Dermal tuberculosis

96. On the second day after tooth extraction a 35-year-old woman applied to a facial surgeon and complained about pain in the parotid-masticatory region and sensation of lacking contact between the upper and lower jaw teeth on the right. Examination revealed chin deviation to the left, halfopenmouth, closed lips, disturbed occlusion. There is also limitation of lateral mandible movements. In front of the right ear tragus soft tissues sink down. What examination is expected to be the most informative in this case?
a. Bimanual TMJ investigation
b. -
c. TMJ ultrasound
d. Mandible roentgenography
*e. TMJ roentgenography

97. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm.What type of implant should be applied?
*a. Threaded
b. Plate-form
c. Conical
d. Subperiosteal
e. Endodontic-endoosseous

98. A10-year-old child undergoes sanitation of the oral cavity. The girl was found to have chalky spots on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical region of the 21 and 12 teeth. Enamel surface is dull, smooth. Pain reaction to the temperature stimuli is absent. What additional method of examination is expected to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Intraoral roentgenography
b. Orthopantomography
*c. Vital staining
d. Electroodontodiagnostics
e. Ultraviolet stomatoscopy

99. A 20-year-old patient complains about pain and haemorrhages in the region of the 36 tooth occuring during eating solid food. Objectively: medial masticatory surface of the 36 tooth has a large carious cavity occupied by a carneous tumour-like formation, probing induces haemorrhage and pain in the region of connection of the carious cavity with the pulp chamber. Percussion is painless. Electroodontodiagnosis is 40 microampere. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Hypertrophic papillitis
d. Epulis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

100. An infant was born full-term with body weight at a rate of 3200 g and body length at a rate of 53 cm. It was the first physiological delivery. What position of child’s mandible is usually observed after birth?
a. Physiological progenia
b. Deep overbite
c. Open bite
*d. Physiological retrogenia
e. Direct relation

101. A 14-year-old child has orthodontic indication for extraction of the 14 tooth. What forceps should be applied for extraction of the 14 tooth?
*a. S-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Curved on flat forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps
e. Straight forceps

102. A 14-year-old child was undergoing extraction of the 16 tooth on account of chronic periodontitis. During the tooth extraction it came to perforation of maxillary sinus along with penetration of the distal buccal root into the maxillary sinus. What is the further dentist’s tactics?
a. The dentist should form a clottage without informing the patient
b. The dentist himself should try to extract the root
*c. The patient should be directed to the hospital for a surgical procedure
d. The dentist should close the perforation with mucoperiosteal graft
e. The dentist should perform maxillary sinusotomy in the outpatient setting

103. .A2-month-old child is anxious, sleeps badly, refuses food, has subfebrile body temperature. Objectively: hyperaemic mucous membrane of the child’s tongue, lips, cheeks and palate has a caseous coating that can be easily removed with a tampon. Regional lymph nodes are slightly enlarged and painful on palpation. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Measles-associated stomatitis
*b. Acute pseudomembranous candidous stomatitis
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Chronic atrophic candidous stomatitis
e. Diphtheria

104. A 35-year-old patient complains about progressing throbbing pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity filled with softened dentine, tooth cavity is closed, probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain. There is I degree tooth mobility. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

105. A patient complains of burning, itch and lower lip enlargement. He has been suffering from this for a long time. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric due to the flattening of nasolabial fold. His lower lip is edematic, of normal colour, painless on palpation. The patient has plicated tongue. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
b. Lymphangioma
c. Granulomatous Miescher’s cheilitis
d. Hemangioma
e. Quincke’s edema

106. A 30-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect and slight pain in the 44 tooth during tooth brushing. Objectively: there is a Black’s class V carious cavity within mantle dentine. Probing of the cavity walls causes slight pain, thermal probe is positive. What filling material is to be chosen for restoration of this cavity?
a. Metal ceramics
*b. Compomer restorative material
c. Amalgam
d. Chemical-cure composite
e. Polycarboxylate cement

107. An 18-year-old patient complains of short-term pain in the 37 tooth caused by sweet and cold stimuli. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity within mantle dentine. The cavity is filled with softened dentine. Probing of the cavity walls induces pain in the region of dentinoenamel junction, electroodontodiagnosis is 6 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulp hyperaemia
*b. Acute median caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

108. A 24-year-old soldier was injured by a shell splinter. He was diagnosed with a mandibular fracture with a bone defect in the mental region over 2 cm long. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Direct osteosynthesis
*b. Fragments fixation by means of Rudko’s apparatus
c. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
d. Tigerstedt’s splints
e. Gunning-Port’s splint

109. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the area of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flattened, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the regiob of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
*a. Fibrous
b. Giant-cell
c. -
d. Pregnancy epulis
e. Angiomatous

110. A 49-year-old patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about permanent intense dull pain in the region of the right upper jaw. It is known from the anamnesis that the 17 tooth has been repeatedly treated for exacerbation of chronic periodontitis but the treatment appeared to be ineffective. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Torus
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Tuberal, incisor and palatinal
d. Tuberal and incisor
e. Incisor and paltinal

111. Stomatological examination of a child revealed abnormal form of the central incisors: they are barrel-shaped, there is a semilunar groove on the cutting edge. It is known from the anamnesis that the child’s mother had syphilis during pregnancy. Besides the dental abnormality the child presents also with deafness and parenchymatous keratitis. This abnormality of tooth development is called:
a. Wedge-shaped defect
b. Pfluger teeth
*c. Hutchinson’s teeth
d. Fluorosis (destructive form)
e. Erosion of hard tissues

112. A patient ordered partial removable lamellar dentures for the upper and lower jaw. An orthodontist made elastic alginate impressions of both jaws. What is his next step?
a. To invite a dental mechanic for joint analysis of the impressions
b. To let the impressions dry out in the open air
*c. To send the impressions for disinfection
d. To send the impressions immediately to the laboratory
e. To put the impressions into the microten bag for 90 minutes

113. A 12-year-old patient complains about an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, upper frontal teeth overbite the lower teeth by 3/3 of height, exhibit oral inclination, lateral parts all along exhibit cusp-tocusp relationship between the antagonists; Angle’s class II malocclusion (joining of the upper permanent molars) is also present. Malocclusion is observed in the following planes:
a. In transversal and vertical
b. In transversal
*c. In sagittal and vertical
d. In vertical
e. In sagittal

114. A 65-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about fabrication of an external prosthesis of orbit that was lost as a result of a trauma. What is the fixing element of the orbit prosthesis?
a. Magnets
*b. Spectacle frame
c. Swivel devices
d. Watch spring
e. Clamps

115. A 56-year-old patient needs a partial removable lamellar denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 25, 26, 27, 28 teeth on the upper jaw are missing. In order to provide transversal line of clasps the clasp arms should be placed upon the following teeth:
a. 24 and 18
b. 13 and 18
*c. 13 and 24
d. 24, 13 and 18
e. -

116. A 56-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain underneath the bar of her clasp prosthesis. It is known from the anamnesis that the clasp was placed in another city a week ago. Examination revealed a mechanic injury of mucous membrane of the palatine vault caused by the bar of the clasp prosthesis. What distance should exist between the palate and the bar of the clasp prosthesis in order to prevent this complication?
a. 5-6 mm
*b. 0,5 mm
c. 0,2-0,3 mm
d. 2-3 mm
e. 1,5-2,0 mm

117. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patient’s face is symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painless. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ
b. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ
*c. Arthrosis of the right TMJ
d. Fracure of the right condyle of mandible
e. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible

118. A 50-year-old patient complains about problems with mastication, tooth mobility, halitosis, gingival haemorrhages. Objectively: gums are hyperemic with cyanotic colouring, there is dental calculus. Parodontal pouches of the superior molars are 8 mm deep, the pouches of other teeth are 6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of bone tissue by 2/3-1/2 of root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized periodontitis of III	degree
b. Chronic generalized periodontitis of I degree
c. Acute generalized periodontitis of II	degree
d. Acute generalized periodontitis of III degree
e. Chronic generalized periodontitis of II degree

119. An 18-year-old patient complains about gingival enlargement, pain and haemorrhage when eating solid food. Objectively: hyperaemia, gingival edema, hypertrophy of gingival edge up to 1/2 of crown height by the 12, 13, 14 teeth. Formalin test is painless.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Ulcero-necrotic gingivitis
e. Generalized II degree periodontitis, chronic course

120. A 34-year-old patient got a trauma (fall) that resulted in mobility of alveolar process and all the upper jaw teeth, occlusion was also changed. X-ray picture depicts the fracture line that runs in both directions from the piriform opening along the floor of maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Unilateral maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
e. Partial fracture of the alveolar process

121. A boy is 1 month old. At the medial edge of the inferior eyelid on the right there is a wound with purulent discharge. The boy fell ill suddenly, body temperature rose up to 40°C. The general condition is grave. On the second day of disease there appeared an infiltration at the internal edge of eye socket and right cheek. The skin above it is hyperemic, fluctuation cannot be determined. Palpebral fissure is narrowed. The right nasal meatus discharges pus. There is an infiltration on the vestibular surface of alveolar process and on the right palate. Mucous membrane above it is hyperemic along the mucogingival fold, fluctuation can be determined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute dacryocystitis
b. Acute right-sided highmoritis
c. Acute serous periostitis
*d. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
e. Phlegmon of the right eye socket

122. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patient’s chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth aremissing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get specialmedical aid?
*a. Specialized army surgical hospital
b. Regimental aid station
c. Separate medical battalion
d. Separate medical detachment
e. Battalion aid station

123. A 45-year-old patient complains about a rapidly growing formation on his lower lip. Examination of the red border of lips revealed a greyish-red nodule with a hollow in the centre which is filled with corneous masses that can be easily removed. The nodule is painless, mobile. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Nodulous verrucous precancer of red border
b. Papilloma
*c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Basal cell carcinoma
e. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border

124. A 60-year-old patient underwents sanitation of the oral cavity before an operation on account of cataract. After examination the patient was diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 22 tooth (Black’s class V). What filling material should not be used in this patient?
*a. Light-cure microhybrid material
b. Chemical-cure glass ionomer cement
c. Chemical-cure macrofilled composite
d. Silicate cement
e. Chemical-cure microhybrid material

125. A 23-year-old patient complains about periodical pain in the region of the 11 tooth, protrusion of the alveolar process. The patient got a trauma 4 years ago. Objectively: crown of the 11 tooth is dark, percussion is painless. X-ray picture shows roundish well-defined area of bone tissue rarefication by the root apex of the 11 tooth. The area is 2,0 cm in diameter. Puncture results: yellow fluid with cholesterol crystals. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Maxillary radicular cyst
b. Maxillary ameloblastoma
c. Maxillary osteoclastoma
d. Soft maxillary odontoma
e. Chronic maxillary osteomyelitis

126. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a freeend edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements	should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
a. Dentoalveolar clasps
*b. Attachments and bar system
c. Ney clasps
d. Telescopic crowns
e. Jackson clasps

127. A 34-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain and clicking in the final stage of mouth opening. The patient has a history of a dislocation. Amplitude of maximal mouth opening is 58 mm. Mouth opening should be limited down to the following amplitude:
a. Up to 10-15 mm
b. Up to 90-100 mm
c. Up to 25-30 mm
d. Up to 50-60 mm
*e. Up to 40-50 mm

128. A 12-year-old patient presents with abnormal position of the upper jaw canine. The 13 tooth is in the vestibular position, above the occlusal plane. Space between the 14 and the 12 tooth is 6,5mm. Choose a rational treatment method:
a. Surgical and physiotherapeutic
b. Surgical and instrumental
*c. Instrumental
d. Instrumental and myogymnastics
e. Surgical and myogymnastics

129. Unused stomatological instruments were left on a sterile table at the end of the working day. What measures should be taken in order to provide sterility of these instruments?
a. Disinfection, sterilization
b. Presterilization treatment, sterilization
c. Disinfection only
*d. Sterilization without preliminary processing
e. Disinfection, presterilization treatment, sterilization

130. A 42-year-old patient complains about gingival pain, progressing gingival haemorrhage, increasing tooth mobility, halitosis. Objectively: gums are evidently hyperaemic, extremely edematic, they bleed easily on palpation. Tooth roots are exposed, parodontal pouches are 4-6 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate, there is also supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. II-III grade tooth mobility is present. Orthopantomogram shows	resorption of interdental septa down to 1/2 of their height.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized III degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

131. A 60-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication due to the mandible displacement that resulted from an untreated fracture. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38, 45, 46 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with the upper lateral teeth, and exhibit oral deviation up to 1 cm. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for the manible?
a. Whole-piece bridge
b. Adhesive prosthesis
c. Vankevich splint
*d. Prosthesis with double dentition
e. Arch bar prosthesis

132. Apatient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed by 80%, the root is stable, the canal is filled up to the top. After examination it was decided to restore the decayed tooth with a cast stump inlay. The root canal of the 23 tooth should be broadened by:
*a. 2/3 of canal length
b. 1/3 of canal length
c. By the total canal length
d. 1/4 of canal length
e. 1/2 of canal length

133. Regimental Aid Station (RAS) admitted a soldier with an injury in the maxillofacial region. Dosimetric control revealed radiation affection in this patient. The injured should be referred to the following functional unit of RAS:
*a. Decontamination station
b. Evacuation pavilion
c. Admission and sorting pavilion
d. Isolator
e. Dressing pavilion

134. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain in the left parotidmasticatory region, disorder of mandible movements. Objectively: skin over the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is reddened, the surrounding tissues are edematic. Disfunction of the left temporomandibular joint is present.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of TMJ
b. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
c. Ankylosis of the left TMJ
*d. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of TMJ
e. Arthrosis of the left TMJ

135. A patient complains about limited mouth opening. She has a history of intra-articular disorders in the left temporomandibular joint. Roentgenological examination revealed subchondral sclerosis of articular plates, regular narrowing of articular cavity, limited excursion of condylar process of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
d. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Deforming arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint

136. A 46-year-old patient complains of difficult opening of her mouth, body temperature rise, tissue edema around both temporomandibular joints (TMJ). It is known from the anamnesis that the patient had short-term non-intense bilateral pain in the parotid-masticatory region, limited mouth opening, tension and discomfort in the region of both temporomandibular joints that had been observed for a couple of days.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibrous ankylosis
b. Deforming atrhrosis
c. Infectional arthritis
d. Arthrosis
*e. Rheumatic arthritis

137. A boy is 10 years old. His face is symmetric and proportional. He presents with mouth breath. Examination of the oral cavity revealed saddle-like form of dental arches and high arched palate. Upper first molar relationship (Angle’s key to occlusion) remains intact. What is	the most likely diagnosis?
a. Widening of dental arches
b. Elongation of dental arches
c. Distal occlusion
d. Mesial occlusion
*e. Narrowing of dental arches

138. A 56-year-old patient complains about a painless neoplasm on the alveolar crest of the right upper jaw. Objectively: there is a bright-red wide-based tumour in the region of premolars. It is localized on both sides from the alveolar crest. The tumour is dense and elastic, painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Peripheral osteoclastoma
b. Gingival fibromatosis
c. Papilloma
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Central osteoclastoma

139. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and "hurt"her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and doesn’t make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible
b. Cheek phlegmon
c. Acute lymphadenitis
*d. Suppurated cheek haematoma
e. Cheek haematoma

140. A 40-year-old patient suffers from chronic generalized periodontitis. Objectively: both dentitions are intact, the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit I degree mobility. What splint would be aesthetically acceptable for this group of teeth?
a. Guard splint
b. Cap splint
c. Ring splint
*d. Glass Span and photopolymer splinting
e. Splint of soldered combined crowns

141. Renovation of a dental room involves installation of luminous tube lamps. Specify the required illuminance level in lux:
a. 300 lux
b. 400 lux
*c. 500 lux
d. 200 lux
e. 100 lux

142. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Examination revealed that the 21 tooth was missing, the crowns of the 11 and the 22 tooth are intact, high, relatively parallel. The patient refused teeth preparation as well as implantation or fabrication of a removable denture. What orthopedic construction should be fabricated?
a. Lamellar denture
b. Clasp denture
*c. Adhesive denture
d. Immediate denture
e. Polypropylene denture

143. A 47-year-old patient consulted a doctor about an itching tumour in the right buccal area that has significantly enlarged lately. Examination revealed an irregularly shaped tumour up to 1,5 cm large, the tumour is black and glossy.What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Dermal cancer
b. Cutaneous horn
c. Pigmented nevus
d. Dermal basalioma
*e. Dermal melanoma

144. A 38-year-old patient consulted an orthopedist about metal taste, dry mouth and tongue burning. Objectively: defects of the lower dental arch were replaced with soldered stainless steel bridges. What examination method would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Masticatiography
b. Myography
c. Electroodontometry
*d. Galvanometry
e. Occlusiography

145. A 5-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute serous pulpitis
e. Acute periodontitis

146. A 28-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw. Objectively: the crown part of the 11 tooth is decayed below the gum level. The root is stable, percussion is painless. It is planned to restore the tooth with a stump inlay and cover it with a metal-ceramic crown. What additional method of diagnostics should be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Electromyography
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Electroodontodiagnostics
*d. X-ray diagnostics
e. Masticatiography

147. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the child’s submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37, 5°C. Objectively: the child’s face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Submandibular adenophlegmon
*b. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
d. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

148. A patient complains about paroxysmal upper jaw toothache on the left that is getting worse at night. Toothache intensifies also under stimulation and irradiates to the left eye and temple. Similar attacks were noted three months ago, the patient didn’t undergo any treatment. Objectively: the 25 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain at the point of communication, vertical percussion is slightly painful, horizontal one is painless. Mucous membrane in the projection of root apex of the 25 tooth is unchanged, its palpation is painless. Thermal probe causes acute pain, the pain attack is longlasting. Electroodontodiagnosis is 60 microampere. X-ray picture shows slight widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 25 tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute generalized pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

149. A 23-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing, intensive formation of dental plaque despite thorough dental care. Objectively: gingival papillae are slightly edematic, congestively hyperemic, bleed when touched. Hygiene index according to Fedorov and Volodkina is 3,5. What toothpaste would you recommend this patient as a part of complex therapy?
*a. Salt-containing toothpaste
b. Fluorine-containing toothpaste
c. Toothpaste with antifungal agents
d. Gel toothpaste with microelements
e. Toothpaste containing mineralizing components

150. A pregnant 24-year-old woman complains about emergence of several new carious cavities, falling out of old fillings. Objective examination revealed: index of decayed, missing and filled teeth (DMF) = 16, Feodorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 3,3. Choose the optimal material for carious cavity filling in this case:
a. Silicophosphate cement
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Chemical-cure composite
d. Silver amalgam
e. Light-cure composite

151. A group of specialists conducts an epidemiological survey of certain age groups of population aimed at evaluation of periodontal disease prevalence and treatment needs. These rates are studied by means of the following index:
a. PI (Russel index)
b. PMA (Parma)
c. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion index)
d. PDI (Ramfjord index)
*e. CPITN (WHO index)

152. After the unproblematic extraction of the 37 tooth a 60-year-old patient presents with profuse haemorrhage from the tooth socket. The patient has a 6-year history of essential hypertension. Now his AP is 180/110 mm Hg. What emergency aid should be rendered?
a. Pack of the tooth socket with iodoform tampon
b. Pack of the tooth socket with haemostatic sponge
*c. Injection of hypotensive drugs and tight pack of the tooth socket
d. Suture ligature of the tooth socket
e. Injection of haemostatic drugs

153. A 48-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the region of the 38 tooth. She has been suffering from this for 3 days. Crown of the 28 tooth is completely decayed. What forceps should be applied for extraction of roots of the 28 tooth?
a. S-shaped broad-beak forceps
*b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Straight root forceps
d. S-shaped forceps curved left
e. S-shaped close-beak forceps

154. During military operations the head of the Army Medical Department gave the order to deploy a stomatological aid unit on the territory of the Army Hospital BaseA patient with missile wound of face was admitted to the unit. What kind of aid can be rendered in the stomatological unit?
*a. Specialized (secondary) aid
b. Consultation aid
c. Prosthodontic aid
d. Stomatological aid
e. Qualified aid

155. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinstein’s pivot point
*b. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilow’s pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxman’s pivot point

156. A 68-year-old patient complains about pain in the palate that occurs during wearing a complete removable denture the patient got 3 months ago. Objectively: palatine torus is strongly marked, mucous membrane around it is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
*a. Torus wasn’t isolated
b. Functional impression was taken by means of a rigid individual tray
c. Prosthesis base is made of acrylic plastic
d. It was made anatomic teeth arrangement
e. Previous impression was made in plaster

157. A 27-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the region of her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the patient’s face is slightly asymmetric due to thickening of mandibular body on the right. Adjacent soft tissues are of unchanged colour and normal consistency. Mouth opening is not limited. Mucous membrane of oral cavity presents no changes. In the right lower dentition the 45 tooth is missing. X-ray picture of the right half of the mandible in its lateral view shows an oval well-defined 2x3 cm large radiolucency in the bone tissue. The coronal portion of the retinated horizontally positioned 45 tooth is turned inward the radiolucent area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Follicular cyst of mandible
b. Sarcoma of mandible
c. Osteoclastoma of mandible
d. Odontoma of mandible
e. Adamantinoma of mandible

158. A 52-year-old patient complains about a nonhealing ulcer on his lower lip. The patient is smoker. He hasn’t ever consulted a doctor about it. In the region of red border of the lower lip a roundish ulcer is present. It is up to 2,0 cm in diameter. The ulcer edges are thickened and a little bit raised in form of a whitish swelling. In the left submandibular region palpation revealed enlarged, painless, dense lymph nodes with limited mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Erosive verrucous leukoplakia
*c. Cancer of the lower lip
d. Fibroma of the lower lip
e. Syphilitic ulcer

159. A 25-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the mouth, headache, articular pain, body temperature rise up to 38, 6°C. Red border of lips is covered with haemorrhagic crusts, mucous membrane of the oral cavity has big erosions and ulcers coated with greyish incrustation. Hand skin exhibits erythematous spots 1-1,5 cm in diameter with a vesicle in the middle.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lyell’s syndrome
b. Behcet’s syndrome
*c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Multiform exudative erythema
e. Medicamentous stomatitis

160. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous spasmodic pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute focal pulpitis
*e. Acute purulent pulpitis

161. A 3-month-old child has an inborn tissue defect in the oral cavity. Objectively: the lip is intact, the oral cavity exhibits a cleft defect of soft palate and median part of hard palate. The child was diagnosed with complete schistasis of soft palate and partial schistasis of hard palate. Specify the dispensary group according to
a. Fourth
*b. Kolesov:
c. Second
d. First
e. Third

162. A dentist treats a 22-year-old patient on account of acute deep caries of the 26 tooth. As lining material the dentist chose calcium salicylate cement "Life". What material should be chosen for insulation of the lining?
a. Zinc oxide eugenol cement
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Adhesive composite system
d. Insulating varnish
e. Zinc phosphate cement

163. A 62-year-old patient complains of a painless formation on his tongue that appeared several months ago. Objectively: the patient has a lot of carious and completely decayed teeth, lateral surface of tongue exhibits a painless whitish formation 10x5 mm large with irregular surface in form of verrucae. Histological examination revealed thickening of corneal epithelial layer of intermittent keratinization type. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Keratoacanthoma
*b. Verrucous form of leukoplakia
c. Hyperplastic form of candidiasis
d. Verrucous precancer
e. Hyperkeratotic form of lichen ruber planus

164. A 35-year-old man has a medium deep carious cavity in the 37 tooth (Black’s class II). For its filling a dentist chose technique of layer-by-layer restoration. What composite should be coating the floor and walls of the carious cavity in order to form superadaptive initial layer?
a. Microfilled
*b. Flowable
c. Macrofilled
d. Condensable
e. Microhybrid

165. A 9-year-old boy presents with face asymmetry due to the chin deviation to the left. When the third Il’ina- Marcosian diagnostic test is performed face asymmetry disappears. What is the most likely clinical form of this occlusal anomaly?
a. Unilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch
*b. Habitual deviation of mandible
c. Unilateral hypoplasia of mandible
d. Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Bilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch

166. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 12 cm
b. 18 cm
c. 5 cm
d. 7 cm
*e. 9 cm

167. A 40-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about upper jaw teeth mobility that turned up after therapeutic treatment. Objectively: the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless, exhibit II degree mobility, unchanged colour. What prosthetic construction should be applied?
a. Cast bar splint
b. Wire-band splint
c. Crown soldered splint
d. Elastic crown splint
*e. Mamlock splint

168. A 5-year-old child was bitten by a dog 2 days ago. The child is diagnosed with a bite wound of cheek. The parent’s didn’t appear for medical aid in proper time. The wound exhibits pyoinflammatory process. What kind of surgical d-bridement should be performed?
*a. Secondary
b. Initial delayed
c. Surgical procedure is not required
d. Initial late
e. Initial early

169. A 16-year-old teenager complains about halitosis, general weakness, body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C. These symptoms turned up 2 days ago, the boy has a history of recent angina. Objectively: oral cavity hygiene is unsatisfactory, teeth are covered with soft white deposit. Gums are hyperaemic, gingival papillae are covered with greyish coating. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Desquamative gingivitis
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Hypertrohic gingivitis
*e. Ulcero-necrotic gingivitis

170. A patient being at a dentist presented suddenly with tachycardia, sweating, trembling, nausea, hunger. The patient is conscious. He suffers from diabetes mellitus. What aid should be rendered by the dentist?
a. The dentist should make intramuscular injection of adrenaline (0,5-1,0 mg)
b. The dentist should make intravenous injection of corticosteroids
c. The dentist should lay the patient down on a flat surface, lower cephalic pole, open the windows
d. The dentist should give the patient nitroglycerine in form of spray or sublingually
*e. The dentist should break the procedure off and give the patient sugar in any form

171. Tooth replacement with complete removable dentures involves adjustment of occlusal relations by different movements of the lower jaw. Transversal movements of the lower jaw are initiated by the following muscle:
*a. External (lateral) pterygoid muscle
b. Temporal muscle
c. Digastric muscle
d. Mastication muscle
e. Internal (medial) pterygoid muscle

172. A 50-year-old patient complains about pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mouth opening. Dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44. While opening the mouth the lower jaw moves in a zigzag manner towards the affected joint. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Chronic arthritis of TMJ
b. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
c. Habitual TMJ dislocation
d. Sclerosing arthrosis of TMJ
*e. Musculoarticular dysfunction

173. A 35-year-old patient is at a dentist. He is anxious, complains of being afraid of the dentist, is unwilling to let the dentist examine him. Drugs of which group should be given the patient before stomatological manipulations?
a. Analgetics
b. Cardiac glycosides
c. Desensitizing
*d. Sedative
e. Hypotensive

174. A 76-year-old patient has a roundish ulcer in the area of the right nasolabial sulcus. The ulcer has dense, rough floor covered with yellowish-grey crusts, and resembles of a cone. The ulcer edges are dense, crater-like; the ulcer grows both sidewards and deepwards. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Syphilitic ulcer
b. Squamous cell carcinoma of skin
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Actinomycotic ulcer
*e. Basalioma

175. A 40-year-old patient complains about a long-existing fissure in the central part of red border of his lower lip. He has been smoking from the age of 16. Objectively: there is a deep 1,0 cm long fissure along the median line of red border of the lower lip, the fissure edges are bulgingl. Characteristic quality of the fissure is its spontaneous healing, but after epithelization the fissure recurs. The patient was diagnosed with chronic fissure of the lower lip. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Choose the most appropriate treatment method in this situation:
*a. Excision within evidently healthy tissues
b. Diathermo-coagulation
c. Close-focus roentgenotherapy
d. Excision 0,5 cm off the neoplasm limits
e. Cryodestruction

176. It is planned to lance an abscess of hard palate (it is localized close to the 23, 24, 25 teeth) and to extract the causative 24 tooth that had caused abscess development. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Tuberal and palatinal
*b. Infraorbital, palatinal and incisor
c. Tuberal, infraorbital and palatinal
d. Tuberal, infraorbital and incisor
e. Tuberal and incisor

177. A 36-year-old patient consulted a dentist about permanent acute pain in the upper jaw teeth, body temperature rise. The dentist found out that the 26 tooth had been repeatedly treated, the rest of teeth were intact. After roentgenological examination the patient was diagnosed with acute highmoritis. What is the most effective way of treatment?
*a. Extraction of the causative tooth and medicamentous therapy
b. Puncture of the maxillary sinus and medicamentous therapy
c. Medicamentous and physiotherapeutic treatment
d. Medicamentous therapy
e. Caldwell-Luc maxillary sinusotomy

178. A 44-year-old patient complains about the astringent sensation in the upper jaw incisors, which appeared 1,5 years ago. Objectively: the most convex part of the vestibular surfaces of the 12, 11, 21, 22 crowns has roundish defects with smooth, shiny, dense surface, that reach dentine in depth. The depth of defects is gradually decreasing from the centre to the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Wedge-shaped defect
b. Chronic median caries
c. Destructive fluorosis
*d. Enamel erosion
e. Systemic hypoplasia

179. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boy’s mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
c. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
d. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation
e. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation

180. A 32-year-old patient complains about pain and swelling in the region of his mandible and left cheek. He has been suffering from this for 2 days. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 37, 5°C. There is an edema of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes are bilaterally enlarged, painful on palpation. Crown of the 37 tooth is partially decayed, the tooth is immobile, percussion is slightly painful. Mucogingival fold in the region of the 37 tooth is edematic, hyperaemic, flattened, its palpation causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
b. Abscess of alveololingual groove on the left
c. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
d. Chronic productive periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
*e. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth

181. A 12-year-old girl complains about swelling, reddening and itching of lips. She has a history of bronchial asthma. Such condition has been observed in the child for 3 years in winter period. Objectively: red border of lips and adjacent skin exhibit a well-defined erythema and edema, small cracks. There are signs of lip lichenification. There are also marks of scratches on the skin of lips, cheeks and forehead in form of abrasions and crusts. Mucous membrane exhibits no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Microbal cheilitis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis
e. Contact allergic cheilitis

182. Parents of a 5-year-old child noted irregular colour of the child’s back of tongue and consulted a pedodontist about this. Objectively: the oral cavity is sanitized, DF index = 4, dorsal and lateral surfaces of tongue have area of desquamating epithelium bordering upon areas of hypertrophy and increased cornification of filiform papillae. The child has a history of being allergic to some foodstuffs. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Herpetic tongue lesion
b. Acute catarrhal glossitis
c. Tuberculous glossitis
d. Candidous glossitis
*e. Desquamative glossitis

183. A 4-year-old girl was bitten by a dog in her upper lip. Which of the following solutions should be primarily used for the wound d-bridement?
a. 1%solution of hydrogen oxide
b. 0,002% solution of chlorhexidine
*c. 10%solution of laundry soap
d. 1 : 5000 solution of potassium permanganate
e. 3%soda solution

184. A 12-year-old boy complains about permanent intense throbbing toothache that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric because of a collateral edema of soft tissues, submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. The 26 tooth has a deep cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity. Thermal test is positive, probing is painless, percussion causes acute pain, the tooth is mobile. X-ray picture of the 26 tooth shows no changes in the periodontium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

185. A 6-year-old girl was brought to the dentist for completing the treatment of the 75 tooth for chronic granulating periodontitis. The patient has no complaints. Objectively: occlusive dressing on the 75 tooth remains intact, percussion is painless, mucous membrane in the region of the 75 tooth exhibits no pathological changes, is painless on palpation. What material is the most appropriate for the root canal filling in this case?
a. Sealer with gutta-percha point
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Iodoform paste
*d. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
e. Calcium-containing paste

186. A 4-year-old child presents with headache, nausea, pain when swallowing. Body temperature is 39°C. Examination of the oral cavity revealed extremely hyperaemic mucous membrane and tonsils. On the first day of disease the child’s tongue was furred with greyish coating, on the second day the tongue was found to be self-purified. On the third day the tongue was smooth, of crimson colour, with hyperaemic fungiform papillae.What is presumptive diagnosis?
a. Diphtheria
b. Herpangina
c. Varicella
d. Measles
*e. Scarlet fever

187. A 15-year-old child presents with puffiness in the region of the mandible branch; enlarged, dense and painless lymph nodes adhering to the surrounding tissues. X-ray picture of mandible branch shows a well-defined bone resorption area containing small sequestra. After Mantoux test a 12 mm papule was noted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible branch
b. Mandibular actinomycosis
*c. Tuberculosis of mandible branch
d. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Ewing’s sarcoma

188. An 11-year-old child complains about missing crown of the 12 tooth as a result of a trauma. The tooth root is well treated. What prosthetic construction is indicated for elimination of this defect?
a. Bridge-like prosthesis supported by the 13 and 11 teeth
b. Partial removable replacing prosthesis
c. Cantilever prosthesis supported by the 11 tooth
d. Cantilever prosthesis supported by the 13 tooth
*e. Il’ina-Marcosian’s pivot tooth

189. A 34-year-old patient has indication for extraction of the 38 tooth because of chronic fibrous periodontitis. Oral surgeon performed torus anaesthesia. This anaesthesia blocked transmission of pain information from the following nerves:
a. Lingual, buccal, mental
*b. Infraalveolar, lingual, buccal
c. Infraalveolar, buccal
d. Lingual, buccal
e. Infraalveolar, lingual

190. A patient got a trauma that resulted in limited mouth opening, nasal haemorrhage, numbness of inferior eyelid as well as skin in the infraorbital area. Objectively: there is face deformation caused by depression of soft tissues in the malar region on the left; there is also a step-off deformity in the median part of the infraorbital rim and in the region of zygomatico-alveolar crest. What method of examination will be the most effective for the diagnostics?
*a. X-ray study of facial skull in the axial projection
b. X-ray study of facial skull in the lateral projection
c. Orthopantomogram
d. X-ray study of facial skull and paranasal sinuses
e. X-ray study of facial skull in the frontal projection

191. A 22-year-old patient is afraid of pain from conduction anaesthesiaA dentist decided that this anaesthesia should be preceded by applicational anaesthesia of mucous membrane on the spot of injection. What drug should be used for this purpose?
a. 5% oxacillin ointment
b. 1%synthomycin ointment
*c. 5% lidocaine ointment
d. 3% sinaflan ointment
e. 3% doxycyclin ointment

192. A 12-year-old girl complains about intense pain in the region of the 46 tooth socket that was extracted 3 days ago. The pain is irradiating along the branches of trigeminus. Objectively: lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation, tissues around the tooth socket are edematic and hyperaemic. The socket walls are covered with grey-and-green deposition with putrid smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ostitis
b. Pericoronaritis
*c. Alveolitis
d. Periostitis
e. Osteomyelitis

193. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about intense lancinating paroxysmal pain accompanied by a sensation of current passage in the region of her upper lip on the right. Pain attacks occur spontaneously and last 3- 5 minutes. The patient usually has 2-3 attacks a day. The patient is unable to establish the cause of this disease. Examination of her oral cavity revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
b. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
*c. Peripheral neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
d. Central neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
e. Right-sided upper jaw pulpitis

194. A 23-year-old patient was delivered to a traumatology centre with a dirty cut wound of her right footA doctor performed initial surgical dbridement and made an injection of antitetanus serum. Some time later the patient’s condition got abruptly worse: she developed extreme weakness, dizziness, palpitation. Objectively: the skin is pale, the patient has cold sweat, frequent pulse 2009 28 of poor volume at a rate of 100 bpm, AP is 90/40 mm Hg. What is the cause of such aggravation?
a. Haemorrhagic shock
b. Infectious-toxic shock
c. Drug disease (seroreaction)
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Pain shock

195. A man was found in a street in unconscious state and delivered to the sanitary inspection room. At small intervals the man presents with recurrent attacks of tonic and clonic convulsions of the upper and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, his pupils are mydriatic, don’t react to light. The tongue has teeth indentations. Involuntary urination was noted. Examination revealed no symptoms of focal cerebral lesion. AP is 140/90 mm Hg. The patients head can be freely brought to the chest. Specify the most probable pathology:
a. Tetanus
b. Acute meningoencephalitis
c. Parenchymatous hemorrhage
d. Cerebral infraction
*e. Epilepsy, status epilepticus

196. A patient was found unconscious in her flat heated with firewood. The stove pipe damper was closed, it smelt of smoke in the room. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, her skin and mucous membranes are of cherry red colour. Pupils exhibit no reaction to light, corneal and tendinous reflexes are absent, muscle tone is decreased. Ps is 96 bpm, of poor volume. Heart sounds are muffled, there are solitary extrasystoles, AP is 90/60 mm Hg. In the lower lungs solitary small bubbling rales are present, respiratory rate is 28/min.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute intoxication with carbon oxide
b. Acute intoxication with sulfur dioxide gas
c. Acute benzol intoxication
d. Acute methane intoxication
e. Acute chlorine intoxication

197. During transportation of a 60-year old patient an emergency doctor noted aggravation of his general condition, pulselessness, mydriatic pupils, absence of respiratory movements. It will take 5 minutes to get to the admission ward. What actions should the doctor take in the first place?
a. Deliver the patient to the hospital as soon as possible
b. Facilitate oxygen inhalation
c. Make an intravenous injection of polyglucinum
*d. Start cardiopulmonary resuscitation
e. Make an intracardiac injection of adrenaline

198. An 18-year-old woman has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 5 years. She receives 36 units of insulin per day. During pneumonia her condition got abruptly worse: the patient presented with increased thirst, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and sleepiness. In the evening the patient refused to eat and didn’t get her regular insulin dose; in the morning she lost consciousness. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, the skin is dry, turgor is decreased. The tongue is also dry. Respiration is deep and noisy, there is sharp smell of acetone from the mouth. Body temperature is 36, 6°C, Ps is 100 bpm, small; AP is 90/50 mm Hg. Urine exhibits extremely positive reaction to acetone. Blood glucose is 33 millimole/l. What is your diagnosis?
a. Hyperosmolar coma
b. Hepatic coma
c. Cerebral coma
*d. Ketoacidotic coma
e. Lactacidemic coma

199. A 28-year-old man attended a glasshouse in a botanic garden. After he had smelt at an orchid he turned pale and lost consciousness. Objectively: heart rate is 115/min, arterial pressure is 50/0 mm Hg. What drug should be injected to the patient in the first place?
*a. Prednisolone
b. Strophanthine
c. Dimedrol
d. Mesaton
e. Cordiamin

200. A68-year-old patient has been taking diclofenac because of pain in the knee joints for about a year. In the evening after substantial meal the patient presented with liquid black stool, drastic weakness, single vomiting after which the patient lost consciousness. Emergency team delivered him to the hospital. Objectively: the patient is conscious, with slightly deferred reaction, pale. Heart rate is 20 breaths/min, Ps is 102 bpm, AP is 110/70 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, painful in the epigastrium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of mesenterial arteries
*b. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
c. Myocardium infarction
d. Food poisoning
e. Apoplectic attack

