1. A 42-year-old patient complains about general weakness. Body temperature is 41°C, he presents with sickness, emesis, dyspnea. There is evident well-defined skin redness in form of flame tips on her face. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus
b. Anthrax
c. Streptococcal impetigo
d. Phlebitis of facial vein
*e. Erysipelas

2. A victim got a perforating wound of the left cheek contaminated with radioactive materials on the battlefield. The wound was dressed with aseptic bandage from the individual first-aid pack and processed with anaesthetic and antibacterial medicaments. The dressing should be changed at the following station of medical evacuation:
a. At the regimental aid station
b. At the battalion aid station
*c. At each station of evacuation
d. At the station of the separate medical battalion
e. Only when the dressing is unsatisfactory

3. Mother of a 6,5-year-old child consulted a dentist about checking fissure hermetizatioon of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth. They were treated six month ago. Sealant in the 36, 46 teeth is preserved, but sealant in the 16 and 26 teeth is absent. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Coating the teeth with fluorine lacquer Ftorlak
b. Electrophoresis with 1% sodium fluoride solution
c. Preventive filling
d. Applications with remodentum solution
*e. To repeat fissure hermetization

4. A 12-year-old boy complains about short-term pain in a lower jaw tooth on the right caused by cold stimuli. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within the circumpulpar dentine which has no intercommunication with the dental cavity. The cavity floor and walls are coated with light softened dentine. Cold test causes short-standing pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute localized pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

5. A 12-year-old child complains about sore throat, headache, body temperature rise up to 38, 5°C, rhinitis, cough in summer period. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is hyperemic, edematic. There are 10-15 erosions up to 0,5 mm large on the palate and palatine arches, that aren’t covered with deposit and have red floor. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*c. Herpetic angina
d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

6. .A43-year-old man complains about painful swallowing, limited mouth opening. Destroyed 37 tooth caused pain 3 days ago. Painful swallowing appeared the next day. Limited mouth opening was present a day later. Objectively: there is a small soft swelling in the left submaxillary area. An enlarged lymph node is palpated. The mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm. Edema of left palatine arch and pharynx lateral wall is present. The 37 tooth is destroyed. Mucous membrane around the tooth is edematic. Percussion is slightly painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Peritonsillar abscess
b. Acute submaxillary lymphadenitis
c. Odontogenic pterygomandibular phlegmon
d. Odontogenic submaxillary phlegmon
*e. Odontogenic peripharyngeal phlegmon

7. A 34-year-old male patient consults a dentist about an ulcer on the hard palate. It appeared about a month ago. He has treated it by rinsing with herbal water, but the ulcer is gradually "creeping". Objectively: there is a shallow erethistic ulcer with uneven and undermined edges of soft consistency within the mucous membrane of hard palate. Granulations of the ulcer floor are also present. Yellowish granules are visible on the ulcer periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis? 2010 2
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Syphilitic ulcer
c. Actinomycosis
*d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Cancerous ulcer

8. A 27-year-old male patient underwent extraction of the medial root of the 36 tooth, but the distal tooth root was broken in its middle third. What tools should be applied for root extraction?
a. Broad-beaked forceps
b. Close-beaked forceps
c. Right angled elevator
d. Straight elevator
*e. Left angled elevator

9. A 55-year-old woman complains about liquid pouring through her nose during eating of fluid food. Objectively: there is a perforating defect of alveolar process 3x2,8 cm deep in the lateral part of the upper jaw at level with the extracted 16 tooth. The patient refused operative intervention. What construction should be offered?
*a. Minor saddle prosthesis with clasp fixation
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
c. Celluloid mouth protector
d. Fixed dental bridge
e. Clasp dental prosthesis with obturating element made of elastic plastic

10. A 53-year-old patient was diagnosed with leucoplakia nicotinica Tappeiner. What pathohistological process predominates in histologic pattern of this disease?
a. Acanthosis
b. Parakeratosis
c. Papillomatosis
*d. Hyperkeratosis
e. Dyskeratosis

11. A 24-year-old female patient complains about hard tissues defect of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/3 along the cutting edge, it is changed in color. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled to the top. It was decided to fabricate a plastic crown. Where should the crown edge be situated against the marginal gingiva?
*a. At a level with gingiva
b. 1,0 mm away of gingiva
c. 1,0 mm below the gingiva
d. 0,5 mm below the gingiva
e. 0,5 mm away of gingiva

12. A 70-year-old male patient ordered complete removable dentures for both jaws. In the clinical stage he came for "identification of central relationship". For verification of interalveolar height the patient underwent speaking test. The patient was asked to pronounce the sounds "O", "E", "M". What distance should be between the occlusal rims for correct identification of interalveolar height?
a. 7-8 mm
*b. 5-6 mm
c. 3-4 mm
d. 9-10 mm
e. 1-2 mm

13. A 16-year-old male patient complains about pain in the oral cavity, ulceration, body temperatureup to 38°C, headache. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is hyperemic and edematic. There are a lot of confluent erosions of polycyclic shape, covered with grey and white deposit, located on hard palate, gums, lips. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Allergic stomatitis
*b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Pemphigus vulgaris
d. Erythema multiforme
e. Aphthous fever

14. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with granulating periodontitis of the 55 tooth. The crown is completely destroyed. X-ray picture shows separated tooth roots. Choose an optimal tool for operative intervention:
*a. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
b. Root beak-shaped forceps
c. Crown S-shaped forceps
d. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
e. Root straight forceps

15. An 8-year-old boy was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 21 tooth. It was treated by extirpation method. Choose the material for root filling:
*a. Calcium-containing material
b. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
c. Phosphate cement
d. Resorcin-formalin paste
e. Glass-ionomer cement

16. A 12-year-old female patient was diagnosed with open bite and dentoalveolar elongation of lateral part of mandible. What construction of apparatus is required?
a. Angle’s sliding face bow
b. Extraoral face bow
*c. Upper jaw appliance with occlusal rest seats
d. Herbst appliance
e. Upper jaw appliance with a face bow

17. An 18-year-old patient complains about an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the lower teeth are set forward and overlap the upper antagonists. This symptom is typical for the following bite abnormality:
a. Distal bite
b. Open bite
c. Cross bite
*d. Mesial bite
e. Deep bite

18. A 70-year-old male patient complains about total teeth missing on both jaws. It is planned to fabricate a complete removable lower jaw prosthesis. Objectively: alveolar process of the lower jaw is atrophied only in the frontal aspect. Identify the type of lower jaw atrophy according to Keller’s classification:
a. II
b. III
c. -
*d. IV
e. I

19. A18-year-old female patient ordered a metal-ceramic crown for the 24 tooth. It is necessary to choose an optimal impression material for combined impression of the upper jaw. What material should be used for a preliminary impression?
a. Dentafol
b. Wax
c. Protacryl
*d. Stens
e. Orthocar

20. A patient consulted a dentist about constant dull pain in the 38 tooth. Mouth opening is limited down to 1 cm. It is necessary to extract the 38 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for operation?
a. Torus
b. Mandibular
*c. Bercher-Dubov
d. Extraoral mandibular technique
e. Tuberal

21. One minute after perfoming torus anaesthesia with 2% novocaine solution (4ml) during extraction of the 17 tooth the patient complained about respiration obstruction. Objectively: upper and lower lips are edematic, mucous membrane of larynx and oral cavity is edematic and extremely hyperemic. What complication turned up in this patient?
a. Anesthetic intoxication
b. Collapse
c. Acute pulmonary insufficiency
*d. Quincke’s edema
e. Anaphylactic shock

22. A 37-year-old male patient complains about pain of the 46 tooth during food intake, especially hot food, offensive breath when he sucks his tooth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, masticatory surface of the 48 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 46 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

23. A17-year-old girl complains about painfulness and gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing and food intake. She has been suffering from it for 1,5 year. She consulted a dentist. There was no considerable effect from treatment. Objectively: gingival papillae are flabby and cyanotic in the region of frontal teeth on both jaws, they overlay teeth crowns by 1/3-1/2 of their height, they bleed on touch. Therapeutic effect can be achieved by means of electrophoresis with:
a. Aloe
b. Tripsin
c. Sodium fluoride
*d. Heparin
e. Vitamin B1

24. A 38-year-old female patient complains about pain in projection of the external acoustic meatus, clicking during mouth opening, ear stuffiness. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth is opened in staright path. There is Kennedy I type dentition defect, the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. What anatomical formation carries the maximum load?
a. Glenoid fossa floor of temporal bone
b. Joint capsule
c. Articular head
d. Distal clivus of medial articular tubercle
*e. Articular disk (meniscus)

25. Physical examination of a patient revealed a hard tissues defect of the 24 tooth. Index of occlusal surface destruction was 0,8. The defect was restored by filling that doesn’t meet the requirements. The tooth is of rose colouring. X-ray picture shows no patological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
a. Equator crown
*b. Pivot crown
c. Inlay
d. Artificial crown
e. Portion crown

26. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a dental surgeon about an enlarging "mother’s mark", itch and desquamation. According to patient, changed in color and size skin area appeared a year ago after a shaving trauma. Objectively: there is an intensely pigmented brown spot up to 2 cm large with small oval protruding nodules on its surface in the infraorbital region on the left. Desquamation factors are present. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are matted together with skin and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Melanoma
b. Verrucous nevus
c. Papillomatosis
d. Epidermoid cancer
e. Pigmented nevus

27. Asoldier was delivered to the regiment medical station with dislocation asphyxia caused by a gunshot wound. What actions should be taken for asphyxia suppression?
a. Intubation of trachea
b. Artificial airway
c. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
*d. Pul the tongue forwards and sew it through
e. Tracheostoma establishment

28. A 58-year-old male patient has considerable microstomia as a result of a face trauma and burn. The patient has indication for fabrication of a partial removable prosthesis. What construction of prosthesis should be used in this case?
a. Pivot-point removable prosthesis
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
c. Clasp dental prosthesis
d. Clasp dental prosthesis with attachments
*e. Collapsible prosthesis

29. X-ray picture depicts a circular welldefined area of bone tissue destruction 0,7х0,7 cm large in the projection of root apex.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Granuloma
b. Cyst
*c. Cystogranuloma
d. Odontoma
e. Osteoma

30. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect caused by partial teeth missing. Objectively: the 15, 14, 24, 25 teeth are missing, the central group of upper jaw teeth is in protrusion and presents with diasthemas. What orthodontic appliance should be used to prepare the oral cavity for prosthetics?
a. Schwarz’ guard
b. Brueckl’s appliance
c. Expansion plate for the upper jaw with orthodontic lock
*d. Palatine plate with vestibular bow
e. Palatine plate with oblique plane and vestibular bow

31. A 35-year-old patient has teeth mobility of I degree, the teeth have apparent dental cusps. The dentist recommends to do occlusive teeth grinding. What method is the most objective for determining the grinding topography?
a. Roentgenography
b. Masticatiography
*c. Occlusiography
d. Gnathodynamometry
e. Rubinov’s masticatory test

32. A 3-year-old girl complains about pain and tumescence in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37, 5 ? 37, 9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a tumescence in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II degree of the 51, 52 teeth is also present.What is themost likely diagnosis?
a. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
c. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
d. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis

33. A 6-year-old boy hit his forehead one day agoA few hours later a swelling appeared in the right superciliary region. Objectively: there is a considerable edema of forehead tissues spreading to eyelids of the right eye, the skin over the swelling is cyanotic, the swelling is of soft consistency. Fluctuation is also present. General condition of the boy is normal. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Postraumatic edema of tissues of the right superciliary region
b. Hematic abscess of the right superciliary region
c. Inflammatory infiltration of tissues of the right superciliary region
*d. Hematoma of the right superciliary region
e. Fracture of frontal bone

34. A 45-year-old patient complains about pain in his mandible that arose after extraction of the 36 tooth. Objectively: alveolar socket is covered with bloody clot. X-ray picture shows unextracted root of the 36 tooth. What tools are necessary for extraction of this root?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Angled elevator curved left
d. Straight elevator
*e. Angled elevator curved right

35. A 70-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the central upper jaw incisors with III degree mobility. What tools should be applied?
a. Bayonet-shaped forceps
b. S-shaped forceps
c. Straight elevator
d. Beak-shaped forceps
*e. Straight forceps

36. Apatient complains of pain and swelling in the right submandibular area. She has been treating the 45 tooth for a week. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. There is a painful tense infiltration in the right submandibular region. The skin doesn’t make a fold, its hyperemic and glossy. The mouth can be opened by 3 cm. Deglutition is painless. These clinical findings correspond with the following disease:
*a. Odontogenous phlegmon of the right submandibular region
b. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular region
c. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
d. Acute odontogenous sialoadenitis
e. Abscess of the right alveololingual groove

37. Preventive examination of tongue back of a 6-year-old child revealed areas of epithelium desquamation in form of red oval spots located close to the zones of hyperkeratinization of filiform papillae. Clavate papillae are hypertrophic. There are no complaints. The child has a history of intestinal dysbacteriosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetic affection of tongue
*b. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
c. Acute catarrhal glossitis
d. Candidal glossitis
e. Rhomboid glossitis

38. During endodontic treatment of periodontitis a tool was broken in the middle third of the medial root. Choose the treatment method:
*a. Medial root hemisection
b. Crown radicular separation
c. Tooth extraction
d. Resection of medial root apex
e. Medial root amputation

39. A 14-year-old child complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal teeth region. Objectively: enamel of the 11, 12, 21, 22, 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth is thin in the region of cutting edge, there is a sulcate enamel pit 1,5 mm wide which encircles the tooth and is parallel to the cutting edge. The cusps of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth are underdeveloped and have conical form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Stainton-Capdepont dysplasia
c. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
d. Enamel dysplasia
*e. Systemic hypoplasia

40. Examination of a 9-year-old child revealed protrudent chin, the lower lip overlapping the upper lip. There are diastemas and tremas beetwen the lower incisors, the lower incisors overlap the upper ones by 2/3 of crown height. Sagittal fissure is 3 mm. Specify the treatment tactics:
a. Schwartz’ quard
b. Bynin’s guard
*c. Brueckl’s appliance
d. Angle’s sliding appliance
e. Myogymnastics complex

41. It is planned to organize a dental room with three universal dental sets. The total area of the room must be:
a. No less than 42 square metres
b. No less than 18 square metres
c. No less than 21 square metres
d. No less than 30 square metres
*e. No less than 28 square metres

42. During pulpitis treatment of the 25 tooth a 30-year-old patient received an injection of 2% lidocaine as anaestheticA few minutes after the injection th patient presented with numb tongue, asphyxia, dry cough, cyanosis, anxiety, convulsions. Arterial pressure fell down to 90/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Syncope
c. Epilepsy
d. Quincke’s edema
e. Acute heart failure

43. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect 1 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Oxman’s bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilow’s pivot point
c. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxman’s pivot point
e. Clasp denture

44. A 60-year-old male patient has an extensive defect of nose caused by an injury. The patient temporarily refused operative intervention, it was suggested to fabricate an external nasal prosthesis fixed by eyeglass frame. What impression material should be used?
a. Gypseous impression
*b. Gypseous impression of the whole face
c. Impression of the defect with elastic material
d. Impression of the whole face with thermoplastic material
e. Impression of the defect with thermoplastic mass

45. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
a. Crown cap splint
b. Fixed crown splint
*c. Inlay splint
d. Equator crown splint
e. Intradental splint

46. A 35-year-old woman was admitetd to the oral surgery department two hours after a road accident. Objectively: cutaneous integuments are pale, there are beads of sweat on her face. Respiration is heavy and obstructed. Pulse rate is 120 bmp, AP is 70/60 mm Hg. There is wound penetrating to the oral cavity on the left cheek. During transportation the woman was in supine position with her head thrown backwards.What kind of asphyxia is likely to develop in this patient?
a. Dislocational
*b. Aspirating
c. Stenotic
d. Valvular
e. Obturative

47. Parents of a 4-year-old child complain about speech defect, namely lallation. Examination shows limited tongue movements, when the tongue is moved forward it turns down, the lower edge of tongue frenulum is positioned in front of the submandibular salivary ducts. The frenulum is thin and transparent. Specify the terms of operative intervention:
a. After formation of permanent occlusion
b. After eruption of permanent molars
c. After complete development of maxillofacial bones
d. After eruption of permanent incisors
*e. After making the diagnosis

48. A 43-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, as well as significant cervixes exposure. Objectively: gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale with cyanotic tint. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth present with I-II degree mobility. The 42, 41, 31, 31 teeth are overcrowded. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have cervix exposure by 1/2 and the 43, 33 teeth have cervix exposure by 1/4. What orthopaedic construction should be used in this situation?
a. Cast bar Kurliandsky splint
b. Portion crown splint
c. -
*d. One-piece guard
e. Cap splint

49. Preventive examination of an 8-yearold boy revealed some lusterless chalklike spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth, which are localised in the precervical region. Subjective complaints are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. White-spotted fluorosis
b. Acute superficial caries
c. Chronic initial caries
*d. Acute initial caries
e. Local enamel hypoplasia

50. A 66-year-old male patient suffers from coronary heart disease (CHD) and atherosclerosis. During stomatological treatment the patient complained about acute retrosternal pain with irradiation to the left scapula, that was accompanied by stupor of the left hand. Objectively: the skin was pale, the sweat stood out on his forehead. The arterial pressure was 140/90 mm Hg, pulse was rhythmic 75 bpm. The pain wasn’t relieved by Validol but it started to abate after nitroglycerin intake. What disease provoked the attack in this patient?
*a. Stenocardia
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Paroxysmal tachycardia
d. Tachycardia
e. Myocardial infarction

51. A patient complains about intensive throbbing toothache in his lower jaw on the left. He can’t show the aching tooth. It hurts all the time, the pain goes down sometimes, but it becomes stronger as affected by stimuli. Within the last hours the pain provoked by cold stimuli has somewhat reduced. Objectively: the 17 tooth has a carious cavity, probing causes no pain, the pulp chamber is closed. What method of treatment is indicated?
a. Devital amputation
b. Devital extirpation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Biological method
e. Vital amputation

52. months after the immediate prosthetics a patient complained about the prosthesis balancing. Objectively: there is a gap between the prosthesis edge and vestibular surface of alveolar process. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Correction of prosthesis edges
b. Dentition buildup with quick-setting plastic
c. Correction of dentitions
*d. Fabrication of a new prosthesis
e. Prosthesis relocation with quick-setting plastic

53. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed fullcast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
b. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
c. Visually by means of models in the articulator
d. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper
*e. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials

54. A 19-year-old girl complains about having crusts, lip tenderness, especially at lip joining. Objectively: there are yellow-brown crusts on the lip red border from Klein zone to it’s middle, after their removal bright red smooth surface without erosions appears. Mucous membrane in Klein zone is slightly hyperemic and edematic.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exudative form of cheilitis exfoliativa
b. Epidermolysis bullosa
c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Exudative form of cheilitis actinica

55. A 43-year-old patient complains about constant pain in the upper jaw region on the right, that irradiate to the temple. The pain was noted one month ago. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of the swollen right cheek. Mucous membrane has no changes. The breathing through the right nasal meatus is obstructed, there are foul-smelling saniopurulent discharges. Plan X-ray film of facial skeleton in the semi-axial projection shows intensive opacity of the right maxillary sinus and violated intactness of its interior and superior walls. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Upper jaw osteoma
*b. Upper jaw cancer
c. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
e. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus

56. A 44-year-old patient consulted a surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain was noted 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unlimited. The crown fof the 26 tooth is half-destroyed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperemic on the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth was treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
c. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
d. Acute purulent periostitis of upper jaw of the 26 tooth on the left
e. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth

57. Parents of a 6-year-old child consulted a dentist about oral cavity sanitation. Objectively: the 85 tooth has a carious cavity on the distal surface within the mantle dentine. Floor and walls are dense and pigmented. Probing is painless. Cold stimuli and percussion cause no pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic periodontitis
e. Acute median caries

58. A patient complains about acute constant pain that is getting worse when biting down on food, sensation of a recently erupted tooth on the right upper jaw. Examination of the 15 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Tooth percussion causes acute pain. Probing is painless. Mucous membrane in projection of the root apex is hyperemic, painful on palpation. X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute albuminous periostitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

59. A 48-year-old male patient has been wearing partial removable dentures for 3 months. According to the patient, results of physical examination and additional methods of testing, the patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis provoked by dyes of the acrylic resin of his prosthesis. Allergic effects of dyes can be eliminated in the following way:
a. Fabrication of cast metal prosthetic bases
b. Fabrication of swaged metal bases
c. Fabrication of bilayer bases
d. Moulding of plastic by method of casting
*e. Fabrication of a denture out of colorless plastic

60. A 43-year-old patient complains about a neoplasm in the right submandibular region that appeared a month ago after angina. The patient underwent antiinflammatory therapy but it led to no reduction of the neoplasm. Objectively: body temperature is up to 37, 2°C. Palpation reveals a slightly painful, spherical, freely movable, well-defined neoplasm of dense and elastic consistency in the right submandibular region. The duct of submandibular salivary gland discharges transparent saliva. The sublingual plica is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenoma of salivary gland
b. Atheroma
c. Chronic sialoadenitis
d. Sialolithiasis
*e. Chronic lymphadenitis

61. A patient ordered soldered stainlesssteel bridge prostheses. Their fabrication involves calibration of crown sleeves. Which device is used for this purpose?
a. Cope’s
b. Bromshtrom
c. Parker’s
d. Larin’s
*e. Samson

62. A 20-year-old patient complains about unaesthetic look of the 24 tooth from the moment of its eruption. Objectively: enamel of the 24 tooth is partly absent, the dentine is yellow. The 64 tooth was treated more than once when she was a child, but because of frequent exacerbations, edemas and gingival fistula the 64 tooth was extracted when she was 9 years old. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Initial caries
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Enamel aplasia
*d. Localised hypoplasia
e. Fluorosis

63. A 50-year-old female patient complains about sensation of tightness of buccal mucosa and roughness of the lateral surface of tongue. The patient undergoes regular check-up at a dispensary department for compensated form of diabetes mellitus. Objectively: there are white and grey areas in form of lacy pattern on the buccal mucosa on the right and on the lateral surface of tongue. The surface of affected region cannot be scraped off. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leukoplakia
*b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Pseudomembranous candidiasis

64. A 45-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 13 tooth. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. Straight elevator
b. S-shaped forceps
c. S-shaped forceps curved right
d. Bayonet-shaped forceps
*e. Straight forceps

65. According to the mother, a 5-yearold child complains about pain during swallowing, weakness, body temperature rise upt to 39, 5°C, swelling of submental lymph nodes. Objectively: the child’s condition is grave, body temperature is 38, 8°C. Mucous membrane of oral cavity is brightly hyperemic and edematic with haemorrhages and ulcerations. Pharynx is brightly hyperemic, lacunae are enlarged and have necrosis areas. Regional, cervical, occipital lymph nodes are painful, enlarged and dense. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetic angina
b. Lacunar tonsillitis
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivostomatitis
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

66. A 28-year-old patient suffers from a disease without prodromal manifestations that declares itself through oral mucosa lesion consisting of 1-2 roundish elements 5-8 mm large which are circumscribed by a hyperemic rim and covered with yellowgrey coating. The disaese recurrence is observed quite regularly 3-4 times a year. These presentations are typical for the following disease:
a. Erythema multiforme
b. Papular syphilis
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Chronic herpes recidivicus
*e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

67. A 48-year-old female patient complains about some discomfort induced by wearing an upper jaw clasp denture with elastic attachments. The patient notes the denture mobility during mastication and articulation. The patient asks to fabricate a new denture with consideration of the indicated defects. Clinical crowns of abutment teeth are low. What fixation should be the most efficient in this case?
*a. Telescopic
b. Locking
c. Clasp
d. Saddle-type
e. Arch-bar

68. A 75-year-old patient ordered a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. While adjusting the individual tray by Herbst’s method the orthodontist revealed that the tray could be thrown off when the patient rounded his lips. What part of the tray requires correction?
a. Behind the maxillary tuber
*b. Vestibular part between the canines
c. In the region of buccal cords
d. Distal part along the A line
e. Along the whole vestibular edge

69. A 36-year-old woman complains about experiencing lip dryness and desquamation for a month. Application of indifferent ointments is ineffective. Objectively: red border of lower lip is of rich red color, it is moderately infiltrated, covered with closely adhering greyish scales, it bleeds and hurts in the attempt to remove them. Opacification of epithelium in form of white stripes is present in the nidus periphery, there is also an area of depression in the centre. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Cheilitis exfoliativa
d. Leukoplakia
e. Commissural cheilitis

70. A 30-year-old patient complains about pain in the upper jaw tooth caused by sweet and cold food, that was first registered one month ago. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity within mantle dentine. Dentine of its walls is softened. Probing along the enamel-dentine junction is painful. Percussion is painless. Thermodiagnosis causes pain, that quickly abtes after elimination of stimulus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulp hyperaemia
b. Acute initial caries
*c. Acute median caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

71. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaws. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic.What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
b. Fabricate occlusal rims
c. Locate and fix central occlusion
d. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity
*e. Adjust individual trays

72. A 47-year-old patient complains about a sensation of foreign body on his tongue, discomfort during talking, oral cavity dryness. Objectively: there are dark filiform papillae up to 5 mm long on the back of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Median rhomboid glossitis
b. Fissured tongue
c. Acute glossitis
*d. Glossophytia
e. Benign migratory glossitis

73. A patient complains about destroyed crown of the 27 tooth. The patient was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the indicated tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 27 tooth is destroyed completely. It is necessary to extract this tooth. What field block anesthesia should be applied for operation?
a. Tuberal and incisor
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Tuberal
d. Infraorbital
e. Infraorbital and tuberal

74. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Objectively: the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are destroyed by caries by 2/3 of their height. The occlusion is orthognathic. X-ray picture shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no patological changes in periapical tissues. What construction should be the most efficient in this situation?
a. Artificial metal swaged crowns
b. Fabrication of plastic inlays
c. Richmond’s pivot crowns
*d. Stump inlays and metal-ceramic crowns
e. Restoration of tooth crowns with composite materials

75. A25-year-old male patient came to the traumatology. He complains about pain in the right half of his face, limited mouth opening. Objectively: there is a moderate edema and haematoma in the region of the right malar arch. Palpation shows a slightly painful impaction of bone tissue in the region of the right malar arch. The bite isn’t disturbed. Amplitude of mouth opening is 1,5 cm. At making an attempt to open the mouth wider the patient feels a mechanical obstacle and pain intensification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
b. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
*d. Fracture of the right malar arch
e. Traumatic arthritis of TMJ

76. The patient is 75 years old. The inspection of construction of complete removable dentures revealed that only lateral artificial teeth were in contact, there was a gap between frontal teeth. In the lateral part on one side cusp-to -cusp contact was present, on the other side there was a horizontal gap; the central line was deviated.What mistake was made?
*a. The patient was thought to have lateral occlusion
b. The patient was thought to have anterior occlusion
c. Wax moulds were deformed while determining central occlusion
d. Interalveolar height was increased
e. Occlusal rims were irregularly softened

77. A 5-year-old child sustained a dental injury. Objectively: the crowns of the 51, 61 teeth are shorter than neighbouring teeth by 1/2. Mucous membrane is edematic and hyperemic in theregion of the 51, 61 teeth. X-ray picture shows that there is no periodontal fissure in the apical parts of roots of the 51, 61 teeth, apexes of the 51, 61 teeth are imbedded into the spongy substance of body of maxilla. What treatment tactics would be the most efficient?
a. Ligature splinting of the 51, 61 teeth
b. Reimplantation
c. Regular medical check-up
d. Reposition of the 51, 61 teeth
*e. Extraction of the 51, 61 teeth

78. A 5-year-old child had to undergo an operated for ankyloglossya. There were no external symptoms of preoperative anxiety. Aafter injection of 1,5 ml of 0,5% novocaine solution the child presented with motor anxiety, vomiturition, stomachache. Objectively: the child is conscious, face and neck skin is hyperemic, tachypnoe is present, pulse is rapid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pain shock
b. Giddiness
c. Overdosage of anesthetics
*d. Allergic reaction to novocaine
e. Cardiovascular collapse

79. A 19-year-old patient complains about pain in the submental part of mandible. The day before he got a trauma. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of tissues in the mental area. The mouth can be opened widely enough. All the teeth are intact. Mucous membrane is edematic in the region of central incisors, it bleeds slightly. In this region mobility of mandible fragments is present. Occlusion is undisturbed. What splint should be chosen by the dentist?
a. Ivy loops for 31, 32, 42, 41
*b. Smooth brace
c. Splint with guide plane
d. Splint with spacer bar
e. Anchor splint with intermandibular fixation

80. A 27-year-old woman has been treated for pulpitis by method of devital extirpation. Arsenic paste was left in the 15 tooth. The patient came to see a dentist for the second time only on the fourth day after her previous visit. She was diagnosed with toxic periodontitis. What is the most optimal agent for treatment of root canal in this case?
a. Cresophene
b. Eugenol
c. Hydrocortisone emulsion
*d. Unithiol
e. Tripsin

81. A 37-year-old female patient complains about pain, gingival haemorrhage, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37, 2°C. Objectively: gums are apparently hyperaemic, edematic, bleed easily, parodontal pouches are 3- 4 mm deep and contain purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar process, resorption of interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Exerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

82. A 24-year-old woman complains about severe pain in the mouth, body temperature up to 38°C, indisposition. The same condition occurs periodically for several years after catching a cold. Objectively: the lips are covered with bloody crusts, there are opened bladders and erosions, covered with fibrinogenous deposit on mucous membrane of lips and cheeks that is apparently hyperemic and edematic. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic herpes recidivicus
*b. Erythema multiforme
c. Dermatitits multiformis, Duhring’s disease
d. Pemphigus vulgaris
e. Nonacantholytic pemphigus

83. A 30-year-old patient complains	about a carious cavity. Objectively: the 16 tooth is discoloured and has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 100 microampere. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

84. A 65-year-old patient complains about unsatisfactory fixation of complete removable lamellar denture of his upper jaw. The denture was fabricated 6 years ago. Objectively: balancing and poor fixation of complete removable denture is present. What is the reason of such condition?
a. Bad hygiene of removable denture
b. Wear of artificial teeth
*c. Atrophy of osseous base of the prosthetic bed tissues
d. Discoloration of basic plastic
e. Loss of certain antagonists

85. A 10-year-old boy complains about missing teeth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, disproportional because of shortening of the lower third. In the oral cavity: the 12, 14, 15, 17, 22, 24, 25, 27, 34, 35, 37, 44, 45, 47 teeth are missing. X-ray picture shows partial adentia and absence of some tooth germs. Choose the most efficient prosthetic device:
a. Bridge prostheses
b. Cantilever dental bridges
c. The defect should be restored by implants
*d. Partial removable lamelalr prosthesis for both jaws
e. Clasp dental prostheses

86. A child was born with body weight at a rate of 3200 g and body length at a rate of 53 cm, 9 points on Apgar score. It was the first physiological delivery. What position of child’s mandible is usually observed after birth?
a. Posterior occlusion
*b. Physiological retrogenia
c. Central occlusion
d. Physiological progenia
e. Direct relation

87. A 3-month-old child has been in disease state for two days. The child is anxious, refuses food, has normal body temperature. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is edematic and hyperemic. There is white caseous coating on the back of tongue and buccal mucosa. After the coating removal one can see extremely hyperemic surface with petechial haemorrhages.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Mild leukoplakia
*c. Acute candidal stomatitis
d. Herpetic angina
e. Lichen ruber planus

88. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 14 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis following ineffective therapeutic treatment. What tools should be applied for extraction?
*a. S-shaped forceps
b. S-shaped forceps curved right
c. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
d. Straight forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

89. The 12, 22 teeth of an 8-year-old child are missing. There is not enough space in dentition for them. X-ray picture shows no tooth germs. The 12 tooth of the child’s father is missing and the 22 tooth is conoid. What is the reason for such pathological changes?
*a. Hereditary adentia
b. Extraction of teeth
c. Rachitis
d. Trauma
e. Caries

90. A 35-year-old patient complains about constant dull pain in the 25 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 25 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. The purulent discharges from the canal followed the probing. What method of diagnostics should be applied to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. X-ray examination
b. Thermal test
c. Deep probing
d. Bacteriological examination
e. Electric pulp test

91. After complex extraction of the 37 tooth a patient experienced anaesthesia of the left half of his lower lip and chin. Electroodontodiagnos showed reduction of lower jaw teeth electroexcitability on the left.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpes Zoster n.Trigemini
b. Acute osteomyelitis of mandible body
c. Neuralgia of the left inferior alveolar nerve
d. Alveolitis in the region of socket of the 37 tooth
*e. Neuritis of the left inferior alveolar nerve

92. A female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of lower and upper jaw teeth is missing, the crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn off by 2/3 of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented. The alveolar process isn’t hypertrophied. Interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological tooth wear in this patient:
a. Vertical, compensated, III grade severity
b. Combined, noncompensated, III grade severity
c. Horizontal, compensated, II grade severity
d. Vertical, noncompensated, III grade severity
*e. Horizontal, noncompensated, III grade severity

93. A 25-year-old man consulted a dentist about extraction of the 18 tooth, it’s crown is destroyed by 1/2. The tooth was treated more than once. During tooth extraction the maxillary tuber was accidentally torn off. What actions should be taken?
a. To remove the fragment
b. To remove the fragment and tampon the wound
c. To try to restore the fragment to its place
d. To restore the fragment to its place and fix it there
*e. To remove the fragment and stitch up the wound

94. Preventive examination of a 4-yearold child revealed a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 54 tooth. The cavity has no intercommunication with the tooth cavity and is filled with dense dentine. Probing, percussion, thermal test of the 54 tooth provoke no pain. The decay/filled index is 1, hygiene index is 1,9. What filling material is the most suitable for permanent filling of the 54 tooth?
a. Silicate cement
b. Chemical composite
c. Photopolymer composite
*d. Glass-ionomer cement
e. Silicophosphate cement

95. A 34-year-old male patient complains about acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is getting worse as affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he didn’t consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

96. A 69-year-old patient underwent an operation for complete removal of his lower jaw. They took impressions of both jaws and fabricated a lower jaw replacement prosthesis before operation. What elements will provide fixation of this prosthesis in the oral cavity?
a. Magnets
b. Attachments
c. Wire loops
d. Clasps
*e. Foshar’s spiral springs

97. Parents of a 7-year-old boy complain about missing of the 11 tooth. Objectively: there is enlargement of alveolar process in projection of the 11, 12 teeth. X-ray picture shows multiple shades of different size. They have dentate shape and look like hard tooth tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Follicular cyst of maxilla starting from the 11 tooth
b. Adamantinoma of maxilla
c. Odontogenic fibroma of maxilla
*d. Odontoma of maxilla
e. Cementoma of maxilla

98. A 47-year-old patient complains about discolouration of the 11, 12 teeth. Objectively: the 12, 12 are changed in colour, canals are filled to the top. It was decided to make metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of approximal surfaces of abutment teeth?
a. 15-20 degrees
b. 20-25 degrees
c. 30-35 degrees
*d. 5-8 degrees
e. 10-15 degrees

99. After preventive examination a 10-year-old child was diagnosed with osteoporosis circumscripta of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. The patient was administered electrophoresis with remineralizing solutions. What preparations and in what order are to be applied in this case?
a. Phosphorus preparations only
b. Fluorine preparations only
c. Fluorine preparations with the following application of calcium and phosphorus preparations
d. Calcium preparations only
*e. Calcium and posphorus preparations with the following application of fluorine praparation

100. A 12-year-old male patient consulted an orthodontist about odontoloxia. Objectively: the face is symmetric and proportional. In the oral cavity: permanent occlusion, occlusal relationship is orthognathic in the lateral parts, the 13 tooth is located off dentition on the palate, biometric measurements show that the width of the 13 tooth is 11,4 mm, the distance between the 12 and 14 teeth is 4,6 mm, the width of the 14 tooth is 7,6 mm. Suggest the treatment plan:
a. No treatment is required
b. Extraction of the 14 tooth
c. Open the bite and move the 13 tooth into its due place
d. Move the 13 tooth into its due place without bite opening
*e. Extract the 14 tooth and move the 13 tooth into it’s place

101. Parents of an 8-year-old child complain about a painful formation in the child’s oral cavity that obstructs food intake. The same complaints were registered two years ago. Mucous membrane of lateral tongue surface is hyperemic and edematic. There is an oval erosion over 0,7 cm large covered with yellow greyish deposit. Erosion edges are hyperemic and painful on palpation. The child has a history of chronic cholecystocholangitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Behcet’s syndrome
b. Erythema multiforme
*c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
e. Traumatic erosion

102. A 50-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the upper frontal teeth. After meticulous examination the patient was diagnosed with wedgeshaped defect of the 11, 12, 13, 21, 22, 23 teeth.What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
a. Chemical-cure composite
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Silicate cement
d. Glass-ionomer cement
*e. Compomer restorative material

103. A 12-year-old child complains about bleeding and pain in the 46 tooth during eating. He has a history of acute pain some time before. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity (Black’s class II) communicating with the dental cavity, partially filled with overgrown pulp. Pulp tissue is bleeding, painful on touch. There is soft white dental deposit. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic simple pulpitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic papillitis

104. Examination of a 6-year-old girl revealed a deep carious cavity in the 85 tooth. Percussion and probing are painless. After removal of the softened dentine, communication with the tooth cavity showed up. Deep probing is painless. Xray picture of the 85 tooth shows the focus of destruction of bone tissue in the region of bifurcation; cortical plate of the 35 has no pathological changes. It ismost expedient to use the following material for the root filling:
*a. Zinc oxide eugenol cement
b. Glass-ionomer cement
c. Calcium-containing paste
d. Phosphate cement
e. Resorcin-formalin paste

105. A 33-year-old male patient complains about tongue pain that is getting worse during eating and talking. Objectively: there is a painful ulcer 0,6 cm large on the lateral surface of tongue. The floor is covered with grey deposit. The crown of the 47 tooth is destroyed.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cancerous ulcer
*b. Decubital ulcer
c. Hard chancre
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

106. A 27-year-old patient complains about pain of the 35 tooth caused by cold stimuli, that quickly abates after elimination of stimulus. Objective examination of the 35 tooth revealed a defect of hard tooth tissue within enamel. Defect edges are fragile and white. Electroodontodiagnosis is 5 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
*c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Enamel erosion

107. A 13-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic and edematic, PMA index (papillary marginal alveolary index) is 46%, Greene-Vermillion hygiene index is 2,5. Provisional diagnosis: exacerbation of chronic generalized catarrhal gingivitis. This patient should be recommended to use a toothpaste with the following active component:
a. Calcium glycerophosphate
b. Vitamins A, D, E
c. Microelement complex
*d. Chlorhexidine
e. Monofluorophosphate

108. Examination of a male patient revealed that a tumour occupied the major part of his tongue; tongue mobility was limited, there were solitary regional nodes in the region of affection. After the cytological analysis the patient was diagnosed with cancer of tongue T2N1MWhat treatment should be chosen for this patient?
a. Radiation therapy
b. Chemotherapy
c. Removal of lymph nodes
*d. Combined method
e. Surgical removal of tumor

109. A 22-year-old patient complains about short-lasting spasmodic pain in the 26 tooth with long periods of pain absence. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity in the masticatory surface, dental cavity is not opened. Probing causes pain in the pulp horn projection. Thermal stimuli cause sharp pain, percussion is painless. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

110. A 27-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival edge is hyperaemic, edematic, painful on touch. Periodontal pouches are absent. X-ray picture shows resorption of cortical plate, osteoporosis of interdental septa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Initial generalized periodontitis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Periodontitis

111. A 25-year-old male patient got bilateral fracture of the lower jawA fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Weber’s appliance
b. Shur’s appliance
c. One-jaw bite-guard splint
d. Kurlyandsky’s appliance with levers
*e. Post’s appliance

112. A 9-year-old child complains about pain caused by sweet and sour food in an upper tooth on the left. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within the enamel limits. What is the optimal material to fill the 26 tooth?
a. Silicophosphate cement
b. Glass ionomer
*c. Сomposite
d. Silicate cement
e. Zinc phosphate cement

113. A 57-year-old patient complains about dental hypersensitivity to chemical stimuli, gum itch. Objectively: roots are exposed down to 1/3 of their length, gums are dense and pale rose. Wedge-shaped defects in the area of the 14, 13, 24, 25, 26, 34 teeth are within the dentine. Probing of dental cervixes and wedge-shaped defects is painfull. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Localised periodontitis
*b. I degree parodontosis
c. II degree periodontitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Atrophic gingivitis

114. A 7-year-old child was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 64, 85 teeth. The child suffers from hemophilia.Specify the treatment tactics:
*a. Extraction of teeth is contra-indicated because of high risk of haemorrhage
b. Extraction of teeth is possible in both in-patient and out-patient hospitals
c. Extraction of teeth can be performed in the oral surgery department
d. Extraction of teeth can be performed in an out-patient hospital with the following socket tamponade by means of haemostatic sponge
e. Extraction of teeth in hematological department after due pretreatment

115. Preventive examination of a 6-yearold child revealed temporary teeth bite. Upper and lower dental arches are trapeziformed. Upper incisors overlap lower incisors more than by 2/3. Incisors and second molars are in the same relation. There is no space between frontal teeth. Upper dental arch is bigger than lower dental arch by the cheek tubercle size. Bite abnormality is observed in the following planes:
*a. Sagittal and vertical
b. Sagittal and occlusal
c. Sagittal and frankfurt
d. Sagittal and nasal
e. Sagittal and lateral

116. Preventive examination of a 9- year-old girl revealed broad bridge of nose, narrow nasal passages, halfopened mouth, problems with lip joining, elongated lower third of face. The child presents with transitional occlusion. There is vertical gap 4-5 mm large from the 53 to the 64 tooth in the frontal region. Relationship of the first permanent molars complies with Angle’s class I. The child pronounces hissing sounds indistinctly. Specify the most likely factor of occlusion deformation:
a. Tongue sucking
b. Tongue parafunction
*c. Nasal respiration disorder
d. Infantile swallowing
e. There is no correct answer

117. A 40-year-old patient is hospitalized with Le Fort II maxillary fracture. The teeth are intact. Choose the most appropriate apparatus for this patient:
a. Gunning-Port’s splint
*b. Standard Zbarzh construction
c. Rudko’s apparatus
d. Yadrova’s apparatus
e. Yermolaev-Kulagov’s apparatus

118. A 57-year-old patient complains about a slowly growing swelling in the sublingual region. She noted it 3 months ago. Objectively: there is an elastic swelling in the sublingual region. The swelling is painless, mucous membrane over it is with tints of blue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Ranula
b. Dermoid cyst of oral cavity floor
c. Hemangioma of sublingual area
d. Lipoma of sublingual area
e. Salivolithiasis

119. A 38-year-old patient consulted dental surgery about extraction of the 36 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction?
a. Infiltration
b. Voino-Yasenetsky truncal
c. Mandibular
d. Tuberal
*e. Torus

120. A patient ordered partial removable lamellar dentures for the upper and lower jaw. An orthodontist took elastic alginate impressions of both jaws. What is his next step?
a. To let the impressions dry out in the open air
b. To send the impressions immediately to the laboratory
c. To put the impressions into the microten bag for 90 minutes
*d. To send the impressions for disinfection
e. To invite a dental mechanic for joint analysis of the impressions

121. A 42-year-old woman came to prosthetic dentistry to make dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 18 . . . . 13 12 11 21 22 23 . . . . 28 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Partial removable lamelalr prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps
b. Clasp denture
c. Dental bridges
d. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
*e. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base

122. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
*a. Fixed Oxman’s prosthesis with pivot point
b. Gavrilow’s prosthesis with pivot point
c. Oxman’s double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
d. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp
e. Oxman’s single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point

123. A 39-year-old patient complains about experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the anamnesis that the indicated tooth was treated for carious. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metalceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is sharply painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to take off the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anesthesia should be applied?
*a. Field block anesthesia
b. Intraligamentous anesthesia
c. Intraosseous anesthesia
d. Application anesthesia
e. Infiltration anesthesia

124. A 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with dental cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed some months ago and wasn’t treated. What treatment method is efficient in this case?
*a. Devital amputation
b. Vital extirpation
c. Devital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Biological method

125. A patient consults a prosthodontist about a dentition defect of the 14, 15, 16 teetht. It is necessary to prepare teth for crowning. Before the preparation the handpiece must be processed with:
a. With furacilin solution
*b. With 3% solution of chloramine (two times with 15 minute interval)
c. With 3%solution of chloramine once
d. With 3% solution of hydrogen oxide
e. With solution of potassium permanganate

126. A 36-year-old female patient complains about acute pain, clicking in the right temporomandibular joint, burning pain in the region of the right external acoustic meatus. Movements of lower jaw are step-like with short-standing disabling moments and acute pain in the joint. Objectively: the face is symmetric. Occlusion is orthognathic. Palpation of lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the right. Tomogram shows that bone structure circuits of joints are smooth and slick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute posttraumatic arthritis of TMJ
b. Rheumatic arthritis of TMJ
*c. Dysfunction of TMJ
d. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
e. Ankylosis of TMJ

127. A 45-year-old teacher consulted a prosthodontist about choosing efficient prosthetic tactics. Objectively: the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth present with III degree mobility.	What orthopaedic care is the most efficient?
*a. Immediate prosthetics
b. Fixed prosthesis
c. Clasp denture
d. Delayed prosthetics
e. Early prosthetics

128. A 62-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about orthopaedic treatment of the 12, 21, 22 teeth. The arterial pressure was 165/110 mm Hg before prosthetic procedure. Because of emotional stress arterial pressure rose up to 220/130mm Hg.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute heart failure
b. Acute respiratory failure
*c. Hypertensive crisis
d. Syncope
e. Collapse

129. A 16-year-old patient complains about experiencing gingival enlargement, pain and haemorrhage throughout a year. Objectively: gingival papillae are enlarged and overlap tooth crowns by 1/2 of their height. Gums exhibit bright red granulations and are painful on palpation. There are considerable calculus deposits. Xray picture shows no changes of alveolar process.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ulcerous gingivitis
b. Localised periodontitis
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

130. Examination of a 25-year-old male patient revealed maximal number of occlusional contacts of opposing teeth during denture joining. X-ray picture shows that the articular head of the lower jaw is near the base of the slope of articular tubercle. What type of occlusion is present?
*a. Central occlusion
b. Right lateral occlusion
c. Posterior occlusion
d. Left lateral occlusion
e. Anterior occlusion

131. A49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to 1/3 of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Kopeinin
*b. Novotny
c. Treuman
d. Mamlock
e. Kogan

132. For fabrication of an external prosthesis a 62-year-old male patient needs "Hippocratic facies". What impression material should be applied?
a. Stens
b. Dentafol
*c. Gypsum
d. Stomaflex
e. Repin

133. A 67-year-old patient was diagnosed with cemental caries of the 35 tooth.What filling material should be chosen?
a. Chemical-cure composite material
b. Silver amalgam
*c. Glass-ionomer cement
d. Silidont
e. Silicin

134. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patient’s face is	symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painful.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ
b. Fracture of the right condyle of mandible
c. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible
*d. Arthrosis of the right TMJ
e. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ

135. A 10,5-year-old child complains about painful skin rash on his lips. Objectively: red border is edematic and hyperemic, covered with cracks and multiple bloody crusts. There are small vesicles with serous contents on the upper lip skin that merge together in certain areas. Maceration andmadescence of skin is also present, especially in the mouth corners. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meteorological cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
*d. Eczematous cheilitis
e. Atopic cheilitis

136. An injured man was hospitalized to the oral surgery department with rupture of soft tissues of palate and pharynx. In process of respiration the dangling flap from the wound partially or completely blocks the larynx aperture. What kind of asphyxia may develop in this patient?
a. Stenotic
*b. Valvular
c. Obturative
d. Aspirating
e. Dislocational

137. A 27-year-old female patient is pregnant, duration of gestation is 21 weeks. She has indication for extraction of the 28 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis after ineffective therapeutic treatment. What kind of anaesthesia should be used for tooth extraction?
a. Mandibular
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Infraorbital and palatinal
d. Tuberal and incisor
e. Torus

138. A 50-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication, teeth mobility, offensive breath, gingival hemorrhage. Objectively: the gum is hyperemic and cyanotic, dental calculus is present. Parodontal pouches are 8 mm deep within upper jaw molars. The pouches of other teeth are 6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of bone tissue by 2/3-1/2 of tooth roots. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Acute generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Acute generalized III degree periodontitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

139. A 20-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 44 tooth. Objectively: the 44 tooth has a deep carious cavity in the masticatory surface, the dentine is dense and pigmented. Probing, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 12 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*e. Chronic deep caries

140. A 32-year-old female patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 14, 25 teeth. It is planned to make metal-ceramic crowns. What impression material should be used for making these crowns?
a. Wax
b. Hardening
*c. Silicone
d. Alginate
e. Zinc oxide eugenol

141. A 25-year-old patient complains about a light brown spot in the upper foretooth. Objectively: the 23 tooth has a single light brown spot in the cervical region. Probing shows smooth surface. The tooth is nonresponsive to cold and probing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute initial caries
e. Fluorosis

142. A 60-year-old patient underwents sanitation of the oral cavity before an operation on account of cataract. After examination the patient was diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 22 tooth (Black’s class V). What filling material should NOT be used in this patient?
a. Chemical-cure macrofilled composite
*b. Light-cure microhybrid material
c. Chemical-cure glass-ionomer cement
d. Chemical-cure microhybrid material
e. Silicate cement

143. A 33-year-old patient complains about an ulcer of oral cavity floor, that is located under his tongue on a level between the 43 to the 33 tooth. Examination reveales that ulcer edges are undermined and scalloped. Its greyyellow floor is shallow and it is covered with small, easily bleeding granulations. There is no ulcer infiltration. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Migratory granuloma of oral cavity floor
*b. Tubercular ulcer of oral cavity floor
c. Cancerous ulcer of oral cavity floor
d. Decubital ulcer of oral cavity floor
e. Gummatous ulcer of oral cavity floor

144. A steeplejack with a long record of service consults a dentist about dryness, burning and insignificant lip edema. The same symptoms were noted one year ago in autumn. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Meteorogical cheilitis
b. Cheilitis glandularis
c. Cheilitis exfoliativa
d. Manganotti’s cheilitis
e. Contact cheilitis

145. A 42-year-old patient complains about gingival pain, progressing gingival haemorrhage, increasing tooth mobility, halitosis. Objectively: gums are evidently hyperaemic, extremely edematic, they bleed easily on palpation. Tooth roots are exposed, parodontal pouches are 4-6 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate, there is also supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. II-III grade tooth mobility is present. Orthopantomogram shows resorption of interdental septa down to 1/2 of their height.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
c. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of generalized III degree periodontitis

146. A female patient applied to the oral surgery department and underwent radical maxillary sinusotomy with plastic repair of fistula through the alveolar socket of the extrated 27 tooth. Infiltration and all the peripheral block anaesthesias of the left upper jaw were performed with 6,0 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. 3 minutes later the patient registered double vision in her left eye, inability to close it. Which of the performed anaesthesias is the reason for the above-mentioned presentations?
*a. Infraorbital
b. Palatinal
c. Infiltration
d. Incisor
e. Tuberal

147. . On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region
*b. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis
c. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
d. Acute epidemic parotiditis
e. Parenchymatous parotiditis

148. A 28-year-old patient complains about constant localised pain that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the carious cavity causes no pain, percussion is painful, X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

149. A 23-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 16 tooth. Objectively: the 16 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing, percussion cause no pain. There is a fistula on the gingiva in the region of root apex projection of the 16 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

150. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a swelling in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of upper lip edema, nasolabial fold is smoothed. Mucogingival fold of the upper jaw vestibular surface in the region of the 11, 12, 21 teeth is smoothed, hyperemic. Palpation is painful. Fluctuation is present. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw satrting from the 21 tooth. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of the 12, 21, 22 teeth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
*b. Preservation of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, ant-inflammatory therapy
d. Preservation of the 21 tooth, antiinflammatory therapy
e. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy

151. A 33-year-old officer delivered from a battlefield has shoot off mental part o fmandible, drooling, insignificant haemorrhage from the oral cavity, asphyxia that occurs periodically because of head repositioning. What actions should be taken to prevent the asphyxia development?
a. Fixation of jaws with a mental sling
b. Thacheostome construction
*c. Fixation of tongue, transportation in prone position
d. Surgical d-bridement, tracheostome construction
e. Transportation in prone position

152. During extraction of the 14 tooth a 64-year-old patient complained about retrosternal pain irradiating to his back. There is paleness of membrane and skin integument as well as pulse assymetry on the carotid arteries. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory failure
b. Hypertensic crisis
*c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Angioneurotic Quincke’s edema
e. Collapse

153. Renovation of a dental office involves installation of luminous tube lamps. Specify the required illuminance level in lux:
a. 300 lx
b. 400 lx
*c. 500 lx
d. 200 lx
e. 100 lx

154. A 42-year-old builder complains about a condyloma on his lower lip. It appeared 1,5 month ago. It has been significantly growing throughout the last week. Objectively: the red border of the lower lip is cyanotic and infiltrated, it has some isolated closly adhering squamae. There is a well-defined hemispherical formation 8 mm in diameter and 4 mm high in the centre. The formation is of grey-and-blue-and-red colour, it has rough surface formed by thin, closely adhering and thick-based squamae. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, dense and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Verruciform precancer
b. Keratoacanthoma
c. Viral wart
*d. Lower lip cancer
e. Pyogenic granuloma

155. During the removal of dermoid cyst of the nose bridge a 14-year-old boy complained about giddiness, sickness, weakness. Objectively: the skin is pale, covered with cold sweat. Tachypnoe is present. The pulse is weak, the arterial pressure is low (80/60 mm Hg), hands feel cold. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Syncope
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Toxic shock
d. Collapse
e. Traumatic shock

156. Apatient complains about pain in the oral cavity, burning and dryness. Exami	nation revealed fiery-red dry mucous membrane. The tongue is crimson, dry, glossy, filiform papillae are atrophied. There is some deposit in tongue folds that is hard to be removed. The patient undergoes treatment for pneumonia, she takes antibiotics. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. B2 hypovitaminosis
b. Benign migratory glossitis
c. Fastened erythema
d. Pellagrous glossitis
*e. Acute atrophic candidiasis

157. A dentist applied to the regional sanitation center for a permission to open a private dental office with two universal dental sets. Planned area of the reception room is 26m2 (square meters). According to existing norms, the dental office with two universal dental sets must have the following area:
a. 20m2 for each set and 12m2 in addition
*b. 14m2 for each set and 10m2 in addition
c. 10m2 for each set and 7m2 in addition
d. 10m2 for each set and 10m2 in addition
e. 7m2 for each set and 7m2 in addition

158. A 40-year-old patient underwent selective grinding of teeth on account of TMJ disease provoked by functional occlusal disorder. 3 days later the patient consulted the orthopaedist about injuring buccal mucosa because of its getting in between dentitions on the right. What mistake was made during teeth grinding?
a. Upper teeth tubercles were ground off
*b. Tops of the support palatal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
c. Lingual tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
d. Tops of the buccal tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
e. Buccal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off

159. A 20-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic deep caries of the 12 tooth. Objectively: the 12 tooth has a deep carious cavity on the aproximal-distal surface. Distal crown angle of the 12 tooth is also affected with caries. Choose the material for correction of the indicated defect:
a. Polycarboxylate cement
b. Silica-alumina cement
c. Chemical-cure glass ionomer cement
d. Light-cure glass-ionomer cement
*e. Light-cure composite material

160. A 9-year-old child complains about dull pain that is getting worse while pressing the tooth. The tooth was treated for pulpitis one mounth ago. Objectively: the 36 tooth is filled. Percussion causes acute pain. Mucous membrane is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

161. A 24-year-old victim consulted a doctor about a face burn. He was injured by the open flame. He complains about pain and burning of face skin. Objectively: hyperemia of face skin; in the region of chin, nose, forehead, eyebrows, cheekbones there are burn blisters containing transparent liquid. These presentations correspond with the following degree of burn severity:
a. II-III A degree
b. III B-IV degree
c. II-IV degree
*d. I-II degree
e. II-III B degree

162. A 20-year-old patient complains about inability to move with his lower jaw, speech difficulty and problems during eating. He associates his condition with a trauma he got when biting on apple. Examination revealed half-open mouth, open bite due to the solitary contacts of distal tubercles of the last molars, salivation, indistinct speech. Articular heads of mandible can be felt anterior to both tragi. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute anterior bilateral mandible luxation
b. Exacerbation of osteoarthritis of temporomandibular joint
c. Fracture of articular processes of mandible
d. Traumatic bilateral fracture of articular processes of mandible
e. Fibrous ankylosis of temporomandibular joint

163. A 6,5-year-old child has a gap 2,5-3 mm large between frontal teeth from canine to canine. Relationship of the first permanent molars complies with Angle’s class I. Specify the severity degree of bite deformation:
a. II degree
b. IV degree
c. V degree
*d. I degree
e. III degree

164. A 5-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis
b. Acute serous pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

165. A 13-year-old boy complains about pain in the upper jaw caused by warm and hot stimuli, offensive breath when he sucks his tooth. Objectively: the 24 tooth is changed in color, there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Deep probing is painful. Percussion causes no pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

166. A 30-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39, 0°C, a roundish infiltrate on his upper lip, general weakness. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 days. Objectively: a roundish infiltrate in the region of the upper lip 2,5 cm in diameter, the skin over the infiltrate is red with a necrotic core in the centre. The upper lip is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute periostitis of the upper jaw
b. Acute glandular abscess
c. Carbuncle of the upper lip
d. Retention cyst of the upper lip
*e. Furuncle of the upper lip

167. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the child’s submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37, 5°C. Objectively: the child’s face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Submandibular adenophlegmon
d. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

168. A 48-year-old woman complains about aching dull pain in the region of the left TJM, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. Xray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ
b. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
c. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
d. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
*e. Arthrosis of the TMJ

169. A 30-year-old patient was diagnosed with posttraumatic osteomyelitis of mandible in the region of mandible body on the right. The patient got the trauma 1,5 month ago. X-ray picture shows the fracture line and the shadow of osseous sequestre along the fracture line. There is a fistula with purulent discharge on skin. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Sequestrectomy
b. Physiotherapy
*c. Fistulectomy, sequestrectomy
d. Fistulectomy
e. Fistulectomy, antibacterial therapy

170. A dentist fills a Black class II carious cavity in the 36 tooth of a 35-year-old man by sandwich method in one office visit. What glass-ionomer cement should be chosen as basic liner in this case? 2010 24
a. Reinforced
*b. Hybrid
c. Classical
d. Water-hardening
e. Condensable

171. A 54-year-old male patient complains about progressing pain in the area of upper jaw on the left that first arose 3 days ago. Body temperature is up to 37, 2°C. Objectively: gingival mucous membrane is edematic, hyperemic, it bleeds slightly. Parodontal pouches are 6-7 mm deep and contain a small amount of purulent exudateA painful infiltrate is palpated in the region of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth has III degree mobility, the rest of teeth have I-II degree mobility. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 2/3 of root length. What is the most appropriate treatment method of the 26 tooth?
a. Lancing of abscess via parodontal pouch
*b. Extraction of the 26 tooth
c. Curettage of parodontal pouche
d. Temporal splintage, conservative therapy
e. Lancing of abscess via gum

172. A 27-year-old victim was delivered to to the facial surgery department with a cut wound of right cheek. The trauma is civilian, the patient got it in a fight. The deadline for early surgical d-bridement without preliminary antibiotic injection is no more than:
a. 48 hours
b. 12 hours
c. 1 hour
*d. 24 hours
e. 72 hours

173. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilow’s pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinstein’s pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxman’s pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point

174. After supercooling a 42-year-old patient presented with headache in the left frontal region and left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetric, breathing through the left nasal meatus is obstructed, seropurulent discharges are present. Palpation is slightly painful in the infraorbital region as well as along the mucogingival fold in projection of the 24, 25 teeth. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. Mucuous membrane of alveolar process has no visible changes. X-ray picture shows reduced pneumatization of the left upper jaw sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left upper jaw
*b. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth
d. Acute periodontitis of the 24 tooth
e. Acute rhinogenous maxillitis

175. An 8,5-year-old child is apparently healthy. The child complains about pain in an upper tooth on the left caused by traumatic injury sustained three hours ago. Objectively: the crown part of the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/2, the pulp is red and significantly exposed, probing causes acute pain and bleeding. Percussion of the 21 tooth is extremely painful. Choose the most efficient treatment method of the 21 tooth:
*a. Vital amputation
b. Devital amputation
c. Bioassay technique
d. Devital extirpation
e. Vital extirpation

176. A 36-year-old female patient complains about an aesthetic defect of upper frontal teeth. In past history: she undergoes regular check-up in the endocrinological department on account of thyrotoxicosis. Enamel defects appeared several years ago and since that have been gradually expanding. Examination revealed that the 12, 11, 21, 22 2010 25 teeth had transverse oval enamel defects on the vestibular surfaces. Probing and cold test is painless. Floor of the defects is smooth, glossy and hard.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Necrosis of hard tissues
*b. Erosion of hard tissies
c. Wedge-shaped defects
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Systemic hypoplasia

177. A 23-year-old patient complains about root exposition, gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing, gum itch. Objectively: there is supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. Gums are hyperaemic, edematic, pouches are 3,5 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 1/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
*c. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
e. II degree periodontitis

178. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

179. A child’s mother had acute purulent mastitis. Now the 2-month-old child experiences an edema of his left infraorbital and malar regions, dermahemia of the left face side, temperature rise up to 39-40°C, purulent discharges from the nose. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Phlegmon of infraorbital region
d. Acute maxillary sinusitis
*e. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis

180. According to the parents of a 7-year-old child, the child complains about weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, toothache in the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: condition is grave, the child is pale and adynamic, the face is asymmetric because of infiltration of the upper jaw on the left. The 64 tooth has a carious cavity. Percussion is painful, I degree of teeth mobility is also present. There are purulent discharges from the subgingival edge of the 64 tooth. Mucogingival fold of the 63, 64, 65 teeth is smoothed. Vestibular and palatine mucous membrane is edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis starting from the 64 tooth
b. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis starting from the 64 tooth
c. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Suppurative radicular cyst of maxilla
e. Acute albuminous maxillary periostitis

181. A 35-year-old man has a medium deep carious cavity in the 37 tooth (Black’s class II). For its filling a dentist chose technique of layer-by-layer restoration. What composite should be coating the floor and walls of the carious cavity in order to form superadaptive initial layer?
a. Microhybrid
b. Microfilled
c. Condensable
d. Macrofilled
*e. Flowable

182. A 32-year-old male patient was delivered to traumatology. He complains about nosebleed, severe cephalalgia, giddiness, face deformation, heavy breathing, mastication inability. He sustained an injury in the mine over three hours ago. He was conscious. Objectively: the middle third of his face is elongated, there are considerable hematomas and there is an edema in the region of nose root and eyelids of both eyes. The upper jaw is displaced downwards, it is mobile together with nasal bones, cheek bones and eyeballs. Palpation reveals deformation, pain and pathological mobility in the region of the nose bridge, external socket	edges, pterygoid processes of basilar bone. Nosebleed is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (lower)
*c. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
d. Fracture of zygomatic bone
e. Fracture of nasal bone

183. A 9-year-old boy presents with face asymmetry due to the chin deviation to the left. When the third Il’ina- Marcosian diagnostic test is performed face asymmetry disappears. What is the most likely clinical form of this occlusal abnormality?
a. Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
b. Bilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch
c. Unilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch
*d. Habitual deviation of mandible
e. Unilateral hypoplasia of mandible

184. A 13-year-old girl has been experiencing gingival hemorrhages and frontal teeth mobility throughout the last month. Objectively: gingival mucous membrane in the region of lower incisors and canines is edematic, hyperemic, it bleeds on touch. These teeth present with I degree mobility, parodontal pouches are 3 mm deep. Orthopantomogram shows reduction of bone tissue of interalveolar septa by 1/3 of their height. Frontal teeth of the lower jaw are overcrowded. Hygiene index is 4,2.What local treatment should be provided in the first place?
a. Anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Physical therapy
c. Antibacterial therapy
*d. Professional hygiene
e. Orthodontic care

185. A 16-year-old teenager complains about halitosis, general weakness, body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C. These symptoms turned up two days ago, the boy had a history of recent angina. Objectively: oral hygiene is unsatisfactory, the teeth are coated with soft dental deposit. Gums are hyperemic, gingival papillae are covered with greyish deposit. Specify the causative agent of this disease:
a. Herpes viruses
b. Streptococci
*c. Fusobacteria, spirochetes
d. Staphylococci
e. Yeast fungi

186. A 65-year-old male patient complains about crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, angular fissures and cracks are also present. Palpation reveals crepitatnt rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular arthritis
b. Temporomandibular dislocation
c. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
*d. Costen’s syndrome
e. Temporomandibular arthrosis

187. A 40-year-old patient complains about a long-existing fissure in the central part of red border of his lower lip. He has been smoking since he was 16. Objectively: there is a deep 1,0 cm long fissure along the median line of red border of the lower lip, the fissure edges are bulging. Characteristic quality of the fissure is its spontaneous healing, but after epithelization the fissure recurs. The patient was diagnosed with chronic fissure of the lower lip. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Choose the most appropriate treatment method in this situation:
a. Close-focus roentgenotherapy
*b. Excision within evidently healthy tissues
c. Diathermo-coagulation
d. Cryodestruction
e. Excision 0,5 cm off the neoplasm limits

188. A 52-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. There is gingival edema, parodontal pouches are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by 1/2 of root length. Adentist made a diagnosis: generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic	construction is the most efficient in this situation?
a. Temporary Novotny splint
*b. Elbrecht splint
c. Murray’s splint
d. Plastic mouthguard
e. Mamlock splint

189. Avictimgot a face and temporal region traumaA doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
a. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
*b. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
c. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone
d. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
e. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone

190. A 28-year-old patient had to undergo extraction of the 46 tooth underWeisbrem’s apodactylic mandibular anaesthesia. What is the target site of the anaesthetic solution injection?
a. Retromolar fossa
b. A segment of maxillary tuber
*c. A segment of mandibular torus
d. A segment of temporal crest of mandible
e. Retromandibular fossa

191. A 7-year-old child sustained a sport injury. He complains about pain in the region of mandible, inability to join his teeth. Pressing against the chin causes intensification of pain in the region of mandible on the right. The child is diagnosed with a fracture of mandible body without fragment displacement. What therapeutic tactics should be chosen in order to prevent the displacement of bone fragments in the transitional dentition?
a. Application of sling bandage
b. Administration of anti-inflammatory therapy
*c. Fragment immobilization by means of an intraoral splint
d. Fixation by means of Tigerstedt splints
e. Osteosynthesis

192. A 44-year-old patient complains about the astringent sensation in the upper jaw incisors, which appeared 1,5 years ago. Objectively: the most convex part of the vestibular surfaces of the 12, 11, 21, 22 crowns has roundish defects with smooth, shiny, dense surface, that reach dentine in depth. The depth of defects is gradually decreasing from the centre to the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Destructive fluorosis
c. Wedge-shaped defect
d. Systemic hypoplasia
*e. Enamel erosion

193. During the planned oral cavity sanitation an 11,5-year-old girl complained about periodic spontaneous chilalgia during food intake. Objectively: mucous membrane of lips is hyperemic, edematic and dry. During talking one can observe small drops of mucous secretion. Make the provisionaldiagnosis:
*a. Cheilitis glandularis
b. Eczematous cheilitis
c. Cheilitis exfoliativa
d. Contact allergic cheilitis
e. Angular cheilitis

194. A 38-year-old patient consulted a dentist about aching pain in the region of the 48 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C and aggravation of general condition is present. Objectively: insignificant swelling of retromolar region as well as hyperaemia of mucous membrane. The 48 tooth is covered with occlusal pad. It is painful on palpation. Purulent discharges are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aphthous stomatitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Acute pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis of the 48 tooth
*e. Acute purulent pericoronitis

195. A patient ordered metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. Block anaesthesia was performed before preparation. In a few minutes the patient felt anxiety, tinnitus, abdominal pain, giddiness. Breathing is hurried, pulse is rapid, AP is 60/40 mm Hg. What aid should be rendered to the patient in the first place?
a. To soak a cotton web with some liquid ammonia and give it for the patient to inhale
b. Promedol, suprastin
*c. Intravenous introduction of 0,5 ml of 0,1%adrenaline solution, prednisolone
d. To bring the patient into horizontal position
e. Make an injection of aminophylline

196. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lower jaw subluxation
b. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
c. Meniscus tresis
d. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
e. Lower jaw dislocation

197. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Keller’s classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
*a. First
b. Fifth
c. Fourth
d. Second
e. Third

198. An 18-year-old patient complains about ulceration in the oral cavity, spontaneous bleeding of mucous membrane, pain during food intake and talking, nosebleeds. He has a history of: aggravation of general condition, weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, headache, joint pain. What method of diagnostics should be applied to confirm the diagnosis?
a. HIV test
b. Allergy test
c. Blood sugar test
d. Immunogram
*e. Clinical blood analysis

199. A14-year-old girl complains about an aesthetic defect in form of white spots on her teeth. Fluorine concentration in the drinking water in the area of her residence is 2 mg/l. Objectively: vestibular surfaces of all teeth are covered with ill-defined white spots. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Fluorosis
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
d. Multiple caries
e. Local hypoplasia

200. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about intense lancinating paroxysmal pain accompanied by a sensation of current passage in the region of her upper lip on the right. Pain attacks occur spontaneously and last 3- 5 minutes. The patient usually has 2-3 attacks a day. The patient is unable to establish the cause of this disease. Examination of her oral cavity revealed no pathological changes. Oral cavity is sanitated. Test orthopantomogram shows an impacted supernumerary 13 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Peripheral neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
b. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
c. Right-sided upper jaw pulpitis
d. Central neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
e. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis

