1. A 5-year-old child presents with chronic deep caries within the contact and masticatory surfaces of the 75, 74, 84, 85 teeth. Which filling material should be used?
a. Evicrol
b. Silicin
*c. Silver amalgam
d. Silidont
e. Infantid

2. A 26-year-old patient consulted a dentist about the 24 tooth extraction because of chronic periodontitis exacerbation. The crown of the 24 tooth is intact. Choose the right tool for the tooth exraction:
*a. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
b. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
c. Straight elevator
d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

3. A 57-year-old patient complains of a tumor in the left parotid region, which appeared 3 years ago. Over the past six months, the tumor has increased significantly. Objectively: there is a non-mobile lobulated tumour in the left parotid region, palpation causes minor pain reaction. The skin over the tumour plicates easily, its upper part has well-defined margins, the bottom part grows into the depth of gland. The tumour is 3x2,5 cm large. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic parotitis
b. Cyst
c. Fibroma
d. Parotid gland carcinoma
*e. Pleomorphic adenoma

4. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boy’s mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
c. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation
d. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
e. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation

5. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous spasmodic pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute focal pulpitis
e. Acute periodontitis

6. After a fall a 28-year-old patient visited the clinic of maxillofacial surgery and complained of restricted mouth opening, skin numbness in the left infraorbital region, upper lip, wing of the nose, pain in the left zygomatic region that gets worse when he opens his mouth. Palpation revealed step deformity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort I (top type)
b. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone
c. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone without a displacement
d. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort II (medium type)
*e. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone with a displacement

7. A 22-year-old patient undergoes treatment for acute deep caries of the 26th tooth. The pulp-capping material of choice is Ca(OH)2/salicylate cement "Life", the constant filling material is ligh-cure condensable composite "Solitaire-2". The pulp cap should be covered with:
a. Phosphate cement
*b. Glass-ionomer cement
c. Zinc-eugenol cement
d. Adhesive composite system
e. Insulating varnish

8. On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
b. Parenchymatous parotiditis
c. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region
d. Acute epidemic parotiditis
*e. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis

9. A 35-year-old patient complains about progressing throbbing pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity filled with softened dentine, tooth cavity is closed, probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain. There is I degree tooth mobility. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
*b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

10. At the end of the reception hours a dental surgeon has to fill in the stomatological forms. Name the form of everyday reporting on children dental reception:
a. Form 49
b. Form 9
*c. Form 39
d. Form 29
e. Form 19

11. Rising from a chair after a dental procedure, a 60-year-old patient felt retrosternal pain radiating to the left arm, nausea, weakness. Objectively: the patient is pale, his face is sweaty. AP is 90/60 mm Hg, pulse is arrhythmic, of poor volume, 100/min. Heart sounds are muffled, vesicular breathing is present. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Stenocardia
*b. An attack of coronary artery disease
c. Hypertensic crisis
d. Pulmonary artery thrombosis
e. Myocardial infarction

12. A 38-year-old male patient complains of a carious cavity. He had experienced spontaneous dull pain in the tooth in question before. Objectively: the distal masticatory surface of the 37 tooth presents a deep cavity made of soft pigmented dentin. Percussion is painless. After removing the decay from the cavity, cold water has caused pain lasting for about a minute. X-ray picture shows the deformation of the periodontal gap in the region of the 37 root apices. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

13. A 20-year-old patient complains about unaesthetic look of the 24 tooth from the moment of its eruption. Objectively: enamel of the 24 tooth is partly absent, the dentine is yellow. The 64 tooth was treated more than once when she was a child, but because of frequent exacerbations, edemas and gingival fistula the 64 tooth was extracted when she was 9 years old. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Initial caries
*b. Localised hypoplasia
c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Enamel aplasia
e. Fluorosis

14. A 47-year-old patient complains of pain in the lateral part of mandible to the left of the toungue edge, which is caused by tongue movements. Two days ago the patient was provided with claspps fixation a partial removable clasp denture for the 47, 42, 33 teeth. Retroalveolar region of the mucous membraneis exhibits a localized hyperemic area matching the edge of the denture. Which muscle contractions demarcate the boundary in this region?
*a. Mandibulohyoid
b. Hyoglossal
c. Medial wing muscle
d. Masticatory
e. Geniohyoid

15. A 27-year-old patient has been referred for endodontic treatment on the 45 tooth. Objectively: the tooth crown is decayed, the lateral surface of tongue and cheek mucosa being in direct contact with the 45 tooth are covered with grayish plaques of macerated epithelium that are somewhat raised above the surface of the mucous membrane. Uvula and palatine arches are of dark red colour, and the hard palate has papules with a red rim and covered with grayish epithelium. Submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. White sponge nevus
c. Lupus erythematosus, plaque stage
*d. Secondary syphilis
e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

16. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Broad-beaked forceps
b. Right angled elevator
c. Straight elevator
*d. Left angled elevator
e. Close-beaked forceps

17. A 32-year-old patient presented to a clinic for takingof an upper jaw impression. During this procedure she choked with a piece of impression material, there was risk of asphyxia. What are the first-priority actions within emergency care?
*a. Abrupt push-like compressions of the lower thorax
b. Plaster removal from the airways
c. Tracheotomy
d. Artificial ventilation of lungs
e. Closed-chest cardiac massage

18. A 30-year-old patient has a carious cavity in the 11 tooth within parapulpar dentin. The tooth corner and its cutting edge are affected. What filling material is best for restoration of the anatomic tooth form?
a. Light-cure glass-ionomer cement
b. Chemical-cure paste-paste composite
c. Silicate cement
*d. Light-cure composite
e. Chemical-cure powder-liquid composite

19. A 53-year-old patient with generalized periodontitis presented to a prosthodontics clinic for fabrication of fixed splints for his both jaws intended to stabilize the dentitions along the entire dental arch. Which of the upper jaw buttresses will be functionally significant for the distribution of masticatory pressure?
a. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine
b. Frontonasal, zygomatic, palatine
c. Zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
d. Frontonasal, pterygopalatine, palatine
*e. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine

20. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth. What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
*a. Acker clasp
b. Jackson clasp
c. Telescopic fixation
d. Bent wire clasp
e. Roach clasp

21. A 36-year-old patient requires a full coverage swaged metal crown for the 37 tooth. The patient presented to a clinic for the crown adjustment. During the adjustment it was revealed that the crown was to loose to fit the tooth cervix properly. How to eliminate this defect?
a. To bend in the crown edges by using clamp forceps
b. To bend in the crown edges by using beak-shaped forceps
*c. To get an impression and swage the crown anew
d. To swage a new crown using the same matrix
e. To anneal the crown

22. A 50-year-old patient complains of a traumatic break-off in the front teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 12, 21 teeth are broken off by 3/4, X-ray picture shows that the channels of the 11, 21 teeth are properly filled, the other teeth are intact. What actions should the dentist take?
*a. Fabricate fullcast metal stumps with a post and restorative metal-ceramic crowns
b. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a partial removable lamellar denture for the upper jaw
c. Fabricate restorative swaged metal crowns for the 11 and 21 teeth
d. Fabricate a dentogingival plastic splint
e. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 12 and 22 teeth

23. A 37-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage, offensive breath, tooth mobility, difficult mastication. Objectively: the gums are of cyanotic-red colour, periodontal pockets are 6 mm deep and contain serous exudate, there is II class tooth mobility, moderate amount of subgingival and supragingival tartar; hygiene index is 3 points, there is traumatic occlusion along the entire length of the dental arches. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Histiocytosis-X
c. Acute generalized II grade periodontitis
d. Acute generalized grade I periodontitis
*e. Chronic generalized grade II periodontitis

24. A 43-year-old patient complains of increased tooth sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli, gum itch. Objectively: the roots of the teeth are exposed to ⅓ of their length, the gums are dense, pale pink. Thre is a small amount of dental plaque. In the region of the 15, 14, 24, 25, 44, 34 teeth there are wedge-shaped defects within the dentin. Probing of exposed cervices and wedge-shaped defects causes pain reaction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Localized periodontitis
b. Gingival recession
c. Atrophic gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
*e. Parodontosis

25. A 48-year-old patient complains of pain in the 32, 38 teeth which arose 3 months after installing a dental bridge upon them. Objectively: the gums around the abutment teeth are hyperemic, edematous, mobile in the vestibular-oral direction. What is the most likely cause of this complication?
a. The form of the intermediate denture part
b. Solid food consumption
c. Improper preparation of abutment teeth
d. Contact of the denture with opposing teeth
*e. Functional overload of abutment teeth paradontium

26. A 32-year-old 3-month pregnant patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic for the prosthetics. Objectively: the 16 tooth is missing. It is planned to fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 15 and 17 teeth. The patient was given an anaesthetic of articaine group Ultracain DS. The orthopaedist chose this anaesthetic because:
a. It is low-toxic
b. It reduces the volume of uteroplacental circulation
c. It is most commonly used in the stomatological practice
d. It doesnt contain sulphites
*e. It is low-toxic, is not capable of crossing the hemato-placental barrier

27. An 18-year-old patient presented to the orthopedic department with complaint of a large diastema. Objectively: bodily lateral movement of central incisors induced by the missing 12, 22 teeth. What is the optimal appliance for moving the central incisors together?
*a. Korkhaus apparatus
b. Kalvelis apparatus
c. Vasilenko apparatus
d. Cotton ligature
e. Begg appliance

28. A victim got a face and temporal region trauma. A doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
*a. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
b. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
c. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
d. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone
e. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone

29. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
b. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
c. Straight forceps
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight elevator

30. A 53-year-old patient presented to a dental clinic for the orthopaedic treatment of the 27 tooth. During preparation for local anesthesia, the patient felt sick (weakness, pallor, hyperperspiration), and lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Syncope
b. Collapse
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Cardiogenic shock
e. Traumatic shock

31. Parents of a 12-year-old child complain about white patches on the upper front teeth, which appeared six months ago. Objectively: chalk-like patches on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. Their enamel is dull, pliable and rough on probing. There is a history of short-term pain caused by chemical stimuli. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Dental fluorosis
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
*d. Acute initial caries
e. Acute superficial caries

32. A 33-year-old patient complains about an ulcer of oral cavity floor, that is located under his tongue on a level between the 43 to the 33 tooth. Examination reveales that ulcer edges are undermined and scalloped. Its grey-yellow floor is shallow and it is covered with small, easily bleeding granulations. There is no ulcer infiltration. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Cancerous ulcer of oral cavity floor
b. Gummatous ulcer of oral cavity floor
c. Migratory granuloma of oral cavity floor
d. Decubital ulcer of oral cavity floor
*e. Tubercular ulcer of oral cavity floor

33. Before extraction of a left upper tooth a 49-year-old patient had been given plexus anaesthesia with Ultracaine Forte. After the operation the socket didnt get filled with a blod clot. What is the way to prevent alveolitis development in this patient?
*a. To fill the socket with a loose iodoform tampon
b. To rinse the socket with microcide solution
c. To fill the socket with antibiotic powder
d. To rinse the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution
e. To fill the socket with a hemostatic sponge

34. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a free-end edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
*a. Attachments and bar system
b. Ney clasps
c. Jackson clasps
d. Dentoalveolar clasps
e. Telescopic crowns

35. A 49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to ⅓ of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Kogan
b. Treuman
c. Mamlock
d. Kopeinin
*e. Novotny

36. A 6,5-year-old child has a gap 2,5-3 mm large between frontal teeth from canine to canine. Relationship of the first permanent molars complies with Angles class I. Specify the severity degree of bite deformation:
a. III degree
b. V degree
c. IV degree
d. II degree
*e. I degree

37. A 10-year-old girl complains of an aesthetic defect. She has a history of sucking her right thumb till the age of 7. Objectively: the height of the lower third of face is somewhat reduced. There is a 9 mm gap in sagittal direction between the upper and lower incisors, Engles class 2. As a result of Eschler-Bittner test the girls face appears at first better, then worse. What clinical form of occlusal anomaly is most likely?
a. Maxillary macrognathia
*b. Maxillary macrognathia and mandibular micrognathia
c. Mandibular retrognathia
d. Mandibular micrognathia
e. Maxillary prognathism with lateral compression

38. Following the upper jaw examination (according to Schroeder) a 65-year-old patient was found to have atrophied maxillary tubers, alveolar processes covered with atrophic, thin and pale mucous membrane. What kind of functional impression technique should be applied?
a. Dosated
b. Differentiated
*c. Decompressive
d. Pressure-free
e. Compressive

39. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the roots of the 36 tooth. The tooth decayed long ago. Objectively: the crown of the 36 is destroyed by ⅔, percussion is painless, mucosa around the 36 tooth exhibits no evident pathological changes. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows a roundish well-defined radiolucency near the apex of the medial root. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

40. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumor-like formation in the region of his lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: there is a round tumour-like formation up to 1cm in diameter on the red border of the lower lip on the right. Roll-like edges of the formation protrude above the level of the red border. In the centre of the formation a brown crust is visible. After its removal a crateriform hole can be seen. There is no bleeding or pain. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lower lip papilloma
b. Lower lip carcinoma
*c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Lower lip fibroma
e. Verrucous carcinoma

41. A 16-year-old girl consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect on her front teeth, namely some dark spots and dentin defects. The spots were detected immediately after teeth eruption, the defects developed with the lapse of time. The patient was diagnosed with erosive form of dental fluorosis of the 16, 11, 12, 22, 26, 31, 32, 36, 41, 42, 46 teeth. Select a method of treatment:
*a. Restoration
b. Surgical treatment
c. Regular surveillance
d. Prosthetics
e. Remineralization

42. A 60-year-old patient presented to a clinic for checking her complete removable denture. During the teeth placement on the wax bases a gap between the front teeth and cuspal interference of the lateral teeth was revealed. What mistake was made?
a. The patient was found to have posterior occlusion instead of centric one
b. During establishing the centric occlusion, the occlusal rims were overpressed
c. The patient was found to have lateral occlusion instead of centric one
d. The models were improperly plastered in the occludator
*e. The patient was found to have anterior occlusion instead of centric one

43. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patients chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth are missing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get special medical aid?
*a. Specialized army surgical hospital
b. Battalion aid station
c. Separate medical detachment
d. Separate medical battalion
e. Regimental aid station

44. A 31-year-old patient complains of experiencing recurrent pain in the 48 tooth for 4 years. Objectively: right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. Mucous membrane around the partialy erupted 48 tooth is hyperemic. On probing the subgingival pocket of the 48 tooth exudes pus mixed with blood. What additional study will be most informative for diagnosing this pathology?
a. Blood count
b. Blood and urine tests
*c. Radiography
d. Electroodontometry
e. Contrast radiography

45. A 7-year-old child presents withf facial asymmetry, severe pain in the lower jaw on the left, body temperature rise up to 39,0°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the massive swelling of soft tissues in the mandibular region on the left. The skin over the infiltration is hyperemic and cannot be plicated. Mouth opening is limited, painful. The crown of the 75 tooth is destroyed by ⅔, the tooth exhibits the grade II mobility. Percussion of the 36 tooth is painful, the 75 tooth - painless. Edema and fluctuation of soft tissues on the buccal and lingual sides of these teeth are present. What measures are to be taken in the first place?
a. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
b. To lance the inflammation focus in the submandibular region
c. To lance the inflammation focus on the lingual and buccal sides
d. To extract the 75, 36 teeth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
*e. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on both sides

46. A 28-year-old male patient presented to a clinic on the 2nd day after the face trauma and complained of bilateral mandibular pain, difficult swallowing and obstructed breathing. Objectively: there was a slight swelling in the region of the molars on both sides, the teeth were intact but the jaw fragment with the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth deviated downward and backward. Manual reposition didnt produce any positive result. Which appliance should be used for treatment?
a. One-jaw Katz appliance
*b. Posts appliance
c. Brun appliance
d. One-jaw Kurliandsky appliance
e. Betelman appliance

47. A 42-year-old woman came to prosthetic dentistry to make dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 8 . . . . 13 12 11&21 22 23 . . . . 28/48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41&31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
*b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base
c. Dental bridges
d. Clasp denture
e. Partial removable lamelalr prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps

48. A 42-year-old patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of generalized grade II periodontitis accompanied by abscess formation. What method of general treatment should be administered in the first place?
a. Detoxification therapy
b. Vitamin therapy
*c. Antibiotic therapy
d. Stimulating therapy
e. Hyposensitization therapy

49. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joint. The dentures were fabricated a month ago. Objectively: face configuration is abnormal, the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can only be closed with difficulty, the speech is indistinct. When smiling, the base of the complete removable denture is exposed. What mistakes were made during the fabrication of complete removable dentures for the upper jaw?
a. Misplacement of maxillary teeth
*b. The vertical occlusal dimension was overrated
c. The vertical occlusal dimension was underrated
d. Misidentified posterior occlusion
e. Misidentified anterior occlusion

50. A 14-year-old teen complains of gingival haemorrhages during tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival mucosa is hyperemic, pastous, bleeds when touched. Schiller-Pisarev test is positive. PMA index - 70%. Hygienic index - 3,0. X-ray picture of the frontal area depicts no evident changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Chronic periodontitis
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

51. A 32-year-old patient complains of experiencing dryness and burning of tongue back for a week. The burning intensifies during taking irritating foods. Some time ago he had pneumonia and was treated with antibiotics. Objectively: skin and oral mucosa are pale. The lingual mucosa is hyperemic and edematous, the folds at the back of tongue are covered with the crumbling gray-white plaque, desquamation of the lateral surface of tongue is also present. Saliva is thick and attaches to a spatula. Choose the most effective drug complex for the local treatment:
a. Furacilin + solcoseryl
*b. Methylene blue + pimafucin
c. Hydrocortizone ointment + solcoseryl
d. Decamin + hydrocortizone ointment
e. Furacilin + methylene blue

52. An 11-year-old child complains of a carious cavity in the left upper molar, which appeared six months ago. Objectively: the medial contact surface of the 26 tooth exhibits a carious cavity located within the mantle dentin. The cavity floor and walls are dense, pigmented, with no pain upon probing. The response to thermal stimuli is absent. Percussion of the tooth causes no pain. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic periodontitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Acute deep caries

53. An orthodontist monitors a 4-year-old child with mouth breath. The child has a history of adenotomy. Objectively: primary dentition occlusion; the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by ⅓; distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are situated in the same vertical plane. What preventive device will help the child to give up the habit of mouth breath?
*a. Standard Schonherrs vestibular screen
b. Rudolphs appliance
c. Vesibular and oral Kraus screen
d. Andresen-Haupl activator
e. Frankels function regulator

54. A 13 year-old girl has presented with gingival haemorrhage and mobility of the front teeth over the last month. Objectively: gingival mucosa around the lower incisors and canines is edematous, hyperemic, bleeds on touch. There is grade l tooth mobility, periodontal pockets are 3 mm deep. Orthopantomogram shows the resorption of interalveolar septa by ⅓ of their height. There is crowding of the lower front teeth. Hygiene index is 4,2. The patient has to consult the following specialist:
a. Endocrinologist
b. Gastroenterologist
*c. Orthodontist
d. Haematologist
e. Neuropathologist

55. A child was born with schistasis of alveolar process, hard and soft palate. The optimal way to feed the child before the surgery will be through:
*a. Obturator
b. Spoon
c. Baby bottle nipple
d. Enteric feeding tube
e. -

56. A group of specialists conducts an epidemiological survey of certain age groups of population aimed at evaluation of periodontal disease prevalence and treatment needs. These rates are studied by means of the following index:
*a. CPITN (WHO index)
b. PI (Russel index)
c. PDI (Ramfjord index)
d. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion index)
e. PMA (Parma)

57. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
a. Bowens disease
b. Verrucous precancer of red border
c. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border
*d. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
e. Erythroplasia

58. An 8,5-year-old child is apparently healthy. The child complains about pain in an upper tooth on the left caused by traumatic injury sustained three hours ago. Objectively: the crown part of the 21 tooth is destroyed by ½, the pulp is red and significantly exposed, probing causes acute pain and bleeding. Percussion of the 21 tooth is extremely painful. Choose the most efficient treatment method of the 21 tooth:
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Vital amputation
c. Devital amputation
d. Bioassay technique
e. Vital extirpation

59. A 50-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing. The state of the abutment teeth is satisfactory. What type of fixation will provide the best conditions for the stabilization of a removable denture?
a. Linear
b. Point
*c. Planar
d. Sagittal
e. Transversal

60. After a preventive orthodontic examination a 9-year-old child was diagnosed with mesial occlusion. The treatment of this pathology involves application of an apparatus with mechanic action. What working element is to be applied in the apparatus intended for the correction of this pathology?
a. Occlusal applications
*b. Screw or spring
c. Inclined plane
d. Elastics and buccal shields
e. Screw and bite plate

61. A 57-year-old patient complains of mobility of all mandibular teeth. Objectively: the 34, 35, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth are missing. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows resorption of the alveolar process within ⅓ of interdental septa height. What construction should be offered to the patient?
*a. Clasp denture with splinting appliances
b. Cap splint
c. Van-Thiel splint
d. Bridge dentures in the region of masticatory teeth
e. Partial removable lamellar denture

62. A 15-year-old girl consulted a dental surgeon about a moderate swelling of the parotid-masticatory region on the left. Objectively: on palpation, the left parotid gland is nodular, dense, painless. The duct exudes somewhat turbid saliva. The duct mouth is dilated, the surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, pasty, with imprints of teeth. Make a diagnosis:
a. Pleomorphic adenoma
b. Chronic interstitial sialoadenitis
c. Sialolithiasis
d. Cyst
*e. Chronic parenchymatous sialoadenitis

63. A 38-year-old patient complains of tension and enlargement of her lower lip and eyelids occuring after taking aspirin for headache. The edema resolves soon after taking antihistaminic drugs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas of lips
*b. Quinckes edema
c. Lymphadenic macrocheilitis
d. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
e. Meige trophedema

64. A 4,5-year-old child presents with eruptions on skin and in the mouth which appeared on the previous day. Objectively: the child is in medium severe condition, body temperature is 38,3°C. Scalp, trunk skin and extremities are covered with multiple vesicles with transparent content. Mucous membrane of cheeks, tongue, hard and soft palate exhibits roundish erosion covered with fibrinous film. Gums remain unchanged. Submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged. What diagnosis can be assumed?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*b. Chicken pox-induced stomatitis
c. Scarlet fever-induced stomatitis
d. Exudative erythema multiforme
e. Measles-induced stomatitis

65. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 5 cm
b. 18 cm
c. 7 cm
*d. 9 cm
e. 12 cm

66. During the examination of a soldered dental bridge supported by the 35 and 38 teeth the following flaws were revealed: the pores in the soldered joints between the intermediate part and supporting crowns, strongly expressed masticatory tubercles, early contact with the opposing teeth, the intermediate part is tightly adjacent to the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What is the way to eliminate these defects?
a. To correct the intermediate part
b. To correct the masticatory surface and polish the joints
c. To remove the tubercles of opposing teeth
*d. To remake the dental bridge
e. To correct the masticatory surface and increase the height of the intermediate saddle part up to 2 mm

67. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. Anamnesis: the tooth hasnt been treated before, decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is destroyed by over ⅔, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. Crown bayonet forceps
b. Straight elevator
c. S-shaped forceps (right)
*d. Bayonet root forceps
e. S-shaped closed-beak forceps

68. A patient complains about paroxysmal upper jaw toothache on the left that is getting worse at night. Toothache intensifies also under stimulation and irradiates to the left eye and temple. Similar attacks were noted three months ago, the patient didnt undergo any treatment. Objectively: the 25 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain at the point of communication, vertical percussion is slightly painful, horizontal one is painless. Mucous membrane in the projection of root apex of the 25 tooth is unchanged, its palpation is painless. Thermal probe causes acute pain, the pain attack is long-lasting. Electroodontodiagnosis is 60 microampere. X-ray picture shows slight widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 25 tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Acute generalized pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

69. A patient has orthopaedic indications for the 37 tooth extraction. What kind of anaesthesia should be given to this patient before the extraction?
a. Mental + buccal anaesthesia
b. Mandibular
*c. Mandibular torus anaesthesia
d. Tuberal + buccal anaesthesia
e. Infraorbital + buccal anaesthesia

70. A 17-year-old patient consulted an orthodontist about improper position of an upper canine. Objectively: permanent occlusion, class I Angles relationship of the first molars, the 13 tooth has vestibular position above the occlusal line, there is a 6,5 mm gap between the 14 and 12 teeth. What period of orthodontic treatment will reduce the time of lidase phonophoresis therapy?
a. Preparatory period
b. -
c. Retention period
*d. Active period
e. Passive period

71. A 50-year-old patient needs a splint for the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43 teeth present I-II class mobility and are devitalized. Which splint would be the most appropriate in this case?
*a. Mamlok-type splint
b. Kurliandsky splint
c. Murrays splint
d. Van Thiel splint
e. Elbrechts splint

72. A 25-year-old patient has a face trauma. Objectively: there is a significant soft tissue swelling of the left half face, haemorrhage into the left eye sclera, crepitation in the region of nose bones. Palpation reveals the mobility of the upper jaw, its percussion reveals tympanitis. X-ray picture shows the fracture line running through the lower margin of the orbit on both sides of the sphenozygomatic suture and reaching behind the maxillary tuber. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
c. Fracture of the left articular bone
d. Fracture of nose bones
e. Le Fort I maxillary fracture

73. A 32-year-old patient complains about mouth soreness, body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, indisposition. Such condition has been occurring periodically for several years after the patient had had a cold. Objectively: lips are covered with haemorrhagic crusts, hyperaemic mucous membrane of lips and cheeks has erosions covered with fibrinous films. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatitis
b. Herpes recidivicus
*c. Multiform exudative erythema
d. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

74. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
a. Oxmans single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
b. Oxmans double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
*c. Fixed Oxmans prosthesis with pivot point
d. Gavrilows prosthesis with pivot point
e. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp

75. A patient complains about mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth, periodic pain, sensation of heaviness in the corresponding half of the upper jaw, haemorrhagic discharges from the left side of nose. These presentations have been observed for 4 months, within the last month the pain has become worse, the patient presents now with general weakness. Examination of the oral cavity reveals the grade II mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth. On palpation of the maxillary tuber, the bone wall was found to be absent. X-ray picture shows a homogeneous shadowing of maxillary sinus; bone structures have unclear contours. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
b. Upper jaw osteoclastoma
*c. Upper jaw cancer
d. Upper jaw adamantinoma
e. Upper jaw sarcoma

76. A 43-year-old female patient complains of mobility of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. The 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit grade II mobility, the mucous membrane around them is swollen and cyanotic. What splinting construction is optimal for this patient?
a. Clasp denture with multilink clasp and claw-like processes
b. Clasp denture with antithrowers
*c. Composite splint reinforced with fiberglass
d. Partial removable denture with a vestibular bar
e. Clasp denture-splint in the frontal part

77. A 5-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute serous pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

78. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the child’s submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. Objectively: the child’s face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Submandibular adenophlegmon
*c. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
d. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

79. A 67-year-old patient needs a complete removable denture for his lower jaw. The adjustment of custom tray is done by method of Herbst. It is required to specify the boundary of tray for the sublingual region, 1 cm away from the midline. What Herbst test should be applied for this purpose?
*a. Alternate touching the cheeks with the tongue
b. Active movements of mimic muscled
c. Touching the red border of the upper lip with the toungue
d. Slow mouth opening
e. Swallowing

80. A 68-year-old patient had a stroke, after which she now often experiences urges to vomit causing unilateral TMJ dislocations. The dislocations could only be reduced under anesthesia. The 21-28, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36, 37, 44, 46, 47 teeth are missing. What denture construction is optimal for this patient for the treatment period?
a. Petrosovs appliance with a stopper
b. Schroeder appliance with sliding pivot
c. Khodorovich-Burgonskaya appliance with a stopper
*d. Removable lamellar denture with a mouth opening stopper
e. Yadrovas appliance

81. A 62-year-old patient has a median mandibular fracture complicated by pseudoarthrosis. Objectively: the dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. There is minor mobility of fragments without displacement. What is the most appropriate type of denture for this patient?
a. Lamellar denture without a pivot point
b. Lamellar denture with Oksmans pivot point
*c. Dental bridge without a pivot point
d. Lamellar denture with Weinsteins pivot point
e. Lamellar denture with Gavrilows pivot point

82. A 45-year-old patient presented to aclinic for prosthetics. Objectively: Kennedy III type, I subtype dentition defect is present, the 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, teeth are missing. The bite is fixed. Che Crowns of the 47, 43, 33, 37 teeth are high, of a well-defined anatomical shape, intact. It is planned to fabricate a clasp denture. What system of the clasp denture fixation is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Roach clasp
b. Attachments
c. Continuous clasp
d. Telescopic system
*e. Rumpels bar system

83. A 75-year-old patient has been admitted to the dental department for the right-angle mandibular fracture with a displacement. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the post-traumatic swelling, palpation reveals the mobility of fragments and pain. The patient has a lifelong history of epilepsy. What is the best method of treatment?
a. Immobilization with Vankevich splint
b. Immobilization with Port splint
c. Immobilization with Vasilyev splints
d. Immobilization with Tigerstedt splints
*e. Osteosynthesis

84. A 27-year-old victim was delivered to to the facial surgery department with a cut wound of right cheek. The trauma is civilian, the patient got it in a fight. The deadline for early surgical d-bridement without preliminary antibiotic injection is no more than:
a. 48 hours
b. 12 hours
c. 1 hour
d. 72 hours
*e. 24 hours

85. A 37-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage, pain, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. Objectively: the gums are markedly hyperemic, swollen, bleed on touch, periodontal pockets are 3 mm deep, contain sero-purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar processes, resorption of the interdental septa down to ⅓ of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized grade II periodontitis, chronic course
*b. Generalized grade I periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Generalized grade II periodontitis, exacerbation
e. Generalized grade I periodontitis, chronic course

86. A 25-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage and enlargement. Objectively: hypertrophy of gingival papillae by ⅓ of the crown height in the frontal region of mandible. Periodontal pockets are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epulis
b. Localized periodontitis
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Ulcerous gingivitis
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

87. Examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed some white patches on the buccal mucosa along the teeth closure line that didnt protrude above the inflamed and edematous surrounding tissues. The patches could not be removed on scraping. A patient has smoken an average of 3 packs of cigarettes a day for 20 years. Specify the disease of buccal mucosa:
a. Erosive leukoplakia
*b. Leukoplakia plana
c. Pemphigus
d. Tappeiners leukoplakia (leukoplakia nicotinica)
e. Lichen ruber planus

88. A 7-year-old child sustained a sport injury. He complains about pain in the region of mandible, inability to join his teeth. Pressing against the chin causes intensification of pain in the region of mandible on the right. The child is diagnosed with a fracture of mandible body without fragment displacement. What therapeutic tactics should be chosen in order to prevent the displacement of bone fragments in the transitional dentition?
a. Administration of anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Application of sling bandage
*c. Fragment immobilization by means of an intraoral splint
d. Fixation by means of Tigerstedt splints
e. Osteosynthesis

89. A 25-year-old got a polytrauma as a result of a road accident. On examination, he was diagnosed with dislocation asphyxia. What kind of first aid should be rendered?
*a. Tongue fixation
b. Artificial ventilation of lungs
c. Tracheotomy
d. Medicamental management of laryngeal stenosis
e. Removal of mucus and foreign bodies from the upper airways

90. A 14-year-old child complains of bleeding and pain during eating in the lower right molar. Objectively: the medial contact and masticatory surfaces of the 46 tooth exhibit a large carious cavity filled with red tissue. Superficial probing causes pain and moderate bleeding. Deeper probing causes acute pain. Percussion is painlessl. What is your provisional diagnosis:
*a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic papillitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

91. A 13-year-old boy complains of pain in the region of the extracted 46 tooth, irradiating to the ear and temple, halitosis. The tooth was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Mucosa around the extracted tooth is hyperemic, edematous. The socket of the 46 tooth is filled with a gray clot. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 46 tooth
*b. Alveolitis of the extracted 46 tooth
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis starting from the 46 tooth
d. Neuralgia of the III branch of trigeminus
e. Acute odontogenous lymphadenitis of the right submandibular region

92. A 48-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the 37 tooths roots. What tool should be chosen?
a. Broad-beak forceps
*b. Closed-beak forceps
c. S-shaped forceps
d. Bayonet forceps
e. Curved beak-shaped forceps

93. A 29-year-old patient complains of acute paroxysmal pain in the upper jaw on the left, that gets worse during having cold food and irradiates into the ear and temple. A year ago she experienced intense pain in the 27 the tooth but didnt consult a dentist. Three days ago there was the second attack of pain. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 27th tooth, interconnecting with the tooth cavity. Probing the open area causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute limited pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

94. A 43-year-old patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 36th tooth. X-ray examination revealed a breakage of an endodontic tool in the distal root. The root apex exhibits a well-defined area of bone tissue destruction (d = 5 mm) with clear margins. What method of treatment is most appropriate in this case?
a. Tooth replantation
b. Conservative treatment
c. Root apex resection
*d. Dental hemisection
e. Root amputation

95. A patient complains of general weakness, pain in the gums, halitosis. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic, body temperature is 38,5°C, submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Interdental gingival papillae are inflamed, their tops are "detruncated", covered with gray-yellow necrotic incrustation. Radiography of alveolar process and blood count reveal no apparent changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis
b. Localized periodontitis
c. Acute leukosis
*d. Acute ulcerous gingivitis
e. Agranulocytosis

96. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a swelling in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of upper lip edema, nasolabial fold is smoothed. Mucogingival fold of the upper jaw vestibular surface in the region of the 11, 12, 21 teeth is smoothed, hyperemic. Palpation is painful. Fluctuation is present. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw satrting from the 21 tooth. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Extraction of the 12, 21, 22 teeth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy
d. Preservation of the 21 tooth, anti-inflammatory therapy
*e. Preservation of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy

97. A 53-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right parotid region. The tumour was revealed six months ago, within this period it doubled in size. Objectively: the right parotid region has a dense 1,5 x 2 cm large neoplasm, the duct of the right parotid gland secretes transparent saliva. The gland puncture gave no results. What disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Lipoma of parotid-masticatory region
b. Retention cyst of parotid gland
c. Chronic lymphadenitis of parotid-masticatory region
d. Fibroma of parotid-masticatory region
*e. Pleomorphic adenoma of parotid gland

98. A dentist performing gum anesthetization before the closed curettage had mistakenly used the 10% solution of silver nitrate instead of 10% lidocaine solution. The gums immediately became white, swollen, painful. Which of these medications is to be used for emergency care?
a. 50% of ethyl alcohol
b. 0,1% solution of liquid ammonia
c. 2% solution of citric acid
*d. 3% solution of potassium iodide
e. 0,5% solution of acetic acid

99. During the examinations and everyday orthopedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. How to sterilize dental mirrors?
a. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
b. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes
c. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
*d. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
e. in the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes

100. A 45-year-old patient complains of burning tongue, a metallic taste in mouth. Three months ago she got a dental bridge made of gold and supported by the 16, 14 teeth. Oral cavity exasmination reveals no objective changes. The 36, 37, 46 teeth are sealed with amalgam fillings. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
*a. Galvanic currents
b. Allergy
c. Neurologic disorder
d. Mechanic trauma
e. Chemical factors

101. A 10-year-old child complains of sore throat, cough, fever (up to 38°C). These presentations turned up 2 days ago. Objectively: acute catarrhal stomatitis is present. Tonsils are swollen, hyperemic, covered with yellow-gray friable film which can be easily removed. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes are significantly enlarged, painful on palpation. Laboratory analysis revealed leuko- and monocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diphtheria
b. Rubella
c. Measles
d. Scarlet fever
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

102. A chemical plant worker consulted a dentist about an oral mucosa burn caused by caustic soda. Which of the following medications should be chosen for emergency care?
a. 2% citric acid solution
b. 50% ethyl alcohol
*c. 0,5% acetic acid solution
d. 3% sodium chloride solution
e. 0,1% liquid ammonia

103. A 7-year-old boy complains of fever up to 38°C, headache, sore throat. Objectively: slightly hyperemic soft palate mucosa, anterior palatine arches and tonsils exhibit erosions. Submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, painless. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Loefflers Bacillus
b. Herpes simplex
c. Epstein-Barr virus
d. Bordet-Gengou bacillus
*e. Coxsackie virus

104. A 38-year-old patient complains of discomfort, occasional sensation of tearing in the 17 tooth, infrequent pain during eating hot food that lasts for 10-20 minutes. Objectively: the 17 tooth is filled with composite materials, the tooth is slightly darker than the other ones. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Recurrent caries
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic granulating pulpitis
*e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

105. A 7-year-old child presents with deterioration of general health status, body temperature rise up to 38,0°C. Objectively: buccal mucosa is covered with white maculae of a pinhead size, protruding above the level of the mucosa. There are pink maculae on the palate. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diphthera
b. Scarlet fever
c. Chicken pox
*d. Measles
e. Infectious mononucleosis

106. A 37-year-old patient has been diagnosed with abscessed furuncle of the upper lip. After dissection of the inflammation focus the exudate has been sent for bacteriological analysis. Which causative agent for furuncle is most likely to be found?
*a. Staphylococcus monoculture
b. Proteus monoculture
c. Staphylococcus and protozoa association
d. Colibacillus monoculture
e. Streptococcus monoculture

107. A 20-year-old patient is to be given applicative anaesthesia in the frontal region of the upper jaw prior to the conduction anesthesia. What concentration of lidocaine solution is required for applicative anesthesia?
a. 3%
b. 0,5%
c. 15%
d. 2%
*e. 10%

108. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on both jaws by means of fullcast combined dental bridges. The patient has a history of essential hypertension. Which haemostatic drug SHOULD NOT be used for the gums retraction?
a. Iron sulphate
*b. Noradrenaline
c. Tetrahydrozoline
d. Aluminium chloride
e. Hydrogen peroxide

109. A 30-year-old patient complains of a painless tumour-like formation in the region of the left mandibular alveolar process. Objectively: there is a pale pink 1x1,5 cm large tumour-like formation on the vestibular surface of the alveolar process at the 34 and 35 teeth. The formation has a broad base, it does not bleed. Crowns of the 34, 35 teeth are intact, the teeth are non-mobile. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows no changes in bone structure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic epulis
b. Giant-cell epulis
c. Mucosa papilloma
*d. Fibrous epulis
e. Pleomorphic adenoma

110. A 32-year-old patient needs to be provided with metal-ceramic crowns for the 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. During the dental visit he is given infiltration anaesthesia with Ultracain DS anaesthetic. What elements enter into its composition?
a. 2% articaine with epinephrine
b. 2% mepivacaine with adrenaline
c. 4% articaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
d. 3% mepivacaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
*e. 4% articaine with adrenaline

111. A patient complains of "clicking" in the TMJ. On auscultation, the sounds can be heard in the middle and at the beginning of mouth opening. These signs give evidence of:
a. Joint subluxation
*b. Reduction in occlusal vertical dimension
c. Increase in occlusal vertical dimension
d. TMJ dislocation
e. Joint capsule distension

112. A 52-year-old female patient complains of severe paroxysmal pain in the region of the 34 tooth. Throughout the year the 35, 36, 37 teeth were sequentially extracted because of pain complaints. Percussion of the 34 tooth causes acute paroxysmal pain. The same pain arises when talking and washing the projection area of the mental foramen. Clinical and roentgenologic examination revealed no signs of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. 34 tooth pulpitis
b. Facial nerve neuritis
c. Neuritis of the 3 branch of trigeminus
*d. Neuralgia of the 3 branch of trigeminus
e. Ganglionitis of pterygopalatine ganglion

113. An 8-year-old child is found to have convex facil profile, forced closing of lips, sagittal gap of 7 mm. Eschler-Bittner test produces some face improvement. This abnormality can be eliminated by means of Frankel type regulator. What is the mechanism of action of this device?
*a. Normalization of labial, buccal and lingual pressure as well as of mandible position
b. Normalization of upper front teeth position by means of a vestibular bar
c. Maxillary expansion by means of a screw
d. Inhibition of maxilla growth in the sagittal direction
e. Normalization of mandible position and growth by means of intermandibular traction

114. Preventive examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed a carious cavity in the 23 tooth located within the mantle dentin. The cavity floor and walls are of dense, markedly pigmented dentin, probing and cold test provoke no pain, percussion of the 23 tooth is painless. Electroodontometry results - 6 ma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic periodontitis
c. Chronic deep caries
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

115. A 65-year-old patient complains of a break off of three front artificial porcelain teeth of the removable denture fabricated 2 months ago. In what way are the porcelain teeth linked with the plastic denture base?
a. By means of glue
b. By means of diatoric cavities
c. By means of clasps
*d. By means of crampon-fixing wire elements
e. Due to physicochemical connection

116. On removing a dental plaque, a 19-year-old patient is found to have two white patches in the precervical region of the 11 and 21 teeth. After drying the patches increase in size. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fluorosis
*b. Initial caries
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Local hypoplasia

117. A 72-year-old patient complains of burning pain in the corners of mouth. Objectively: the folds of mouth corners have erosions, covered with white coating that can be easily removed, mucous membrane of mouth corners is macerated, of pearly colour. There is pathological tooth wear and decreased vertical dimension of occlusion. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent labial fissure
b. Streptococcal angular cheilitis
c. Atopic cheilitis
*d. Angular cheilitis candidiasis
e. Syphilitic angular cheilitis

118. A 35-year-old woman was admitetd to the oral surgery department two hours after a road accident. Objectively: cutaneous integuments are pale, there are beads of sweat on her face. Respiration is heavy and obstructed. Pulse rate is 120 bmp, AP is 70/60 mm Hg. There is wound penetrating to the oral cavity on the left cheek. During transportation the woman was in supine position with her head thrown backwards. What kind of asphyxia is likely to develop in this patient?
a. Valvular
b. Dislocational
c. Obturative
*d. Aspirating
e. Stenotic

119. A 39-year-old patient complains of some soft ulcers and tubercles on the oral mucosa, gingival haemorrhage, pain and loosening of teeth. Objectively: mucous membrane of tongue and gums presents single ulcers with soft, swollen, slightly painful edges, covered with a yellow film. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, soft, painless, not adherent to the surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Scrofuloderma
b. Lepra
c. Suttons aphthae
d. Tertiary syphilis
*e. Lupus tuberculosis

120. A 46-year-old patient has been diagnosed with chronic concrementous pulpitis of the 27 tooth. X-ray picture shows that the concrement is located in the crown part of the tooth cavity and occupies ¼ of its volume. Select an adequate method of treatment:
a. Vital amputation
b. Biologic method
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

121. A girl is 13 years old. She lives in an area where fluoride concentration in the drinking water is at the rate of 1,6 mg/l. Dental examination revealed some chalk-like spots on the vestibular surfaces of all her teeth. The white coloration is more intense in the cenre and less on the periphery. There is light-brown pigmentation in the region of the central incisors along the cutting edge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Dental fluorosis
b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
c. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
d. Amelogenesis imperfecta
e. Acute initial caries

122. A 28-year-old patient has been admitted to the oral and maxillofacial surgery for a carbuncle of face. Objectively: the patient is in a critical condition, face, mucous membranes of lips and conjunctiva are edematous and cyanotic. Body temperature is 40°C. The patient presents with delirium, hallucinations. The carbuncle is located on the upper lip, the surrounding soft tissues are swollen. Palpebral fissures are closed due to the edema of eyelids. What is the most likely complication of carbuncle?
a. Sepsis
b. Cerebral abscess
c. Meningitis
d. Orbit phlegmon
*e. Cavernous sinus thrombosis

123. Preventive examination of a 20-year-old student revealed chronic candidiasis of the oral mucosa, generalized lymphadenopathy. He has a 1-year history of herpes simplex. The body temperature often rises to 37,4-37,5°C, the patient has lost 8 kg of body weight over the last month. These symptoms may be indicative of the following disease:
*a. AIDS
b. Acute leukosis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Chronic leukosis

124. Parents of a 5-month-old baby complain of food refusal, ulcers on the palate. The infant was born prematurely, is now artificially fed. Objectively: at the junction of hard and soft palate there is an oval well-defined ulcer, covered with yellow-gray film and limited by a hyperemic swelling, protruding above the surface of oral mucosa. Which group of drugs should be administered for the aphtha epithelization?
a. Antimycotic drugs
b. Antiseptics
c. Antibiotics
*d. Keratoplastic agents
e. Antiviral drugs

125. A patient has been diagnosed with traumatic open angular fracture of mandible with a fragments displacement. Which of the following should be applied for transport immobilization of the fragments?
*a. Entin head-chin strap
b. Weber splints
c. Gunning splints
d. Standard Vasyliev splints
e. Tigerstedt splints

126. A 45-year-old female patient complains of a slightly painful, tumour-like formation in the right parotid region that appeared two months ago for no apparent reason. The patient notes weakness, occasional body temperature rise up to 37,2°C-37,6°C. Two weeks ago she underwent the anti-inflammatory therapy which did not have positive effect. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to a minor swelling in the right parotid region. Palpation reveals a roundish dense and elastic formation with even contours, it is slightly painful, not adherent to the skin. Incisive canal exudes a small amount of transparent saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sjogrens syndrome
*b. Hertsenbergs pseudoparotitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
d. Parotid atheroma
e. Acute infectious parotitis

127. A 3-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic for the traumatic loss of an upper central incisor. The patient hasnt undergone prosthetics before. He has a history of asthma. What are the first-priority measures of bronchospasm prevention?
a. Fabrication of a temporary construction
b. Teeth treatment with a remineralizing solution
c. Administration of sedative drugs
*d. Tests for plastic and metal allergy
e. Preparation following the anaesthetization

128. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and "hurt" her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and doesn’t make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphadenitis
*b. Suppurated cheek haematoma
c. Cheek haematoma
d. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible
e. Cheek phlegmon

129. A 35-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 36 tooth. There is a Blacks class II cavity affecting masticatory surface. What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
a. Light-cure microfilled composite
*b. Light-cure microhybride composite
c. Light-cure fluid composite
d. Glass ionomer cement
e. Silicophosphate cement

130. A 53-year-old patient complains of missing of mandibular teeth. He has a history of microstomy. Objectively: the 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47 and 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are stable, immobile. What kind of denture construction is recommended for this patient?
a. Clasp denture
b. Dental bridge supported by the 43, 33 teeth and removable denture
*c. Collapsible removable partial lamellar denture
d. Splint-denture
e. Removable partial lamellar denture

131. After removal of dental deposit an 18-year-old patient underwent preventive examination. It revealed painless chalky spots in the precervical area on the vestibular surface of the 22 and 41 teeth. Result of enamel resistance test is 7. What morphological changes are typical for this disease?
a. Changes in the mantle dentine
b. Damage of dentinoenamel junction
c. Degeneratic changes of odontoblasts
d. Superficial enamel demineralization
*e. Subsurface enamel demineralization

132. A 3-year-old girl has been diagnosed with acute odontogenous periostitis of mandible starting from the 74 tooth. It is required to perform periostomy and extract the 74 tooth. The child is excited. Choose the best type of anesthesia for the surgery:
a. Intubation anaesthesia
*b. Intravenous anaesthesia
c. Mandibular anaesthesia
d. Central anaesthesia
e. Infiltration anaesthesia

133. A 25-year-old patient complains of intermittent pain during taking sweet and cold food in the 21 tooth. Objectively: there is a hard tissue defect within the enamel in the cervical region of the 21 tooth. The enamel edges are uneven and chalky. Probing the cavity bottom provokes no pain, there is short-term pain reaction to cold stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Initial caries
c. Wedge-shaped defect
d. Enamel erosion
*e. Superficial caries

134. X-ray examination of the 46 tooth in a 7-year-old child reveals the following: the root walls are parallel, their thickness gradually decreases, they have pointed ends. The root canal converges towards the tooth cavity, and diverges at the developing apical hole. Periodontal gap is of the same width along the entire length of the root. At the root apex it merges with the growth zone. Specify the stage of root development:
a. Complete root and periodontium development
b. Continuing root development
c. Open apex
*d. Continuing root apex development
e. Continuing periodontium development

135. A 6-year-old boy hit his forehead one day ago. A few hours later a swelling appeared in the right superciliary region. Objectively: there is a considerable edema of forehead tissues spreading to eyelids of the right eye, the skin over the swelling is cyanotic, the swelling is of soft consistency. Fluctuation is also present. General condition of the boy is normal. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Hematoma of the right superciliary region
b. Hematic abscess of the right superciliary region
c. Fracture of frontal bone
d. Inflammatory infiltration of tissues of the right superciliary region
e. Postraumatic edema of tissues of the right superciliary region

136. The child is 13 years old. The disease began suddenly with a body temperature rise up to 39°C, swelling of the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the left cheek edema. The skin over the swollen area is hyperemic and tense. The 26 tooth exhibits a large carious cavity, percussion of the 26 tooth causes pain reaction. The 25, 26, 27 teeth are mobile. Mucogingival junction in the region of the 24, 25, 26, 27 tooth is indistinct, alveolar mucosa is hyperemic and bilaterally swollen in the region of the 25, 26. 27 teeth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Odontogenous maxillary periostitis to the left of the 26 tooth
b. Odontogenous purulent maxillary sinusitis induced by the 26 tooth
*c. Odontogenous maxillary osteomyelitis to the left of the 26 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radicular cyst induced by the 26 tooth
e. Chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth

137. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
a. Dentafol
b. Stomalgin
*c. Gelin
d. Stomatoplast
e. Orthocor

138. A 42-year-old builder complains about a condyloma on his lower lip. It appeared 1,5 month ago. It has been significantly growing throughout the last week. Objectively: the red border of the lower lip is cyanotic and infiltrated, it has some isolated closly adhering squamae. There is a well-defined hemispherical formation 8 mm in diameter and 4 mm high in the centre. The formation is of grey-and-blue-and-red colour, it has rough surface formed by thin, closely adhering and thick-based squamae. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, dense and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pyogenic granuloma
*b. Lower lip cancer
c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Verruciform precancer
e. Viral wart

139. After the extraction of the 26 tooth a 43-year-old patient presents with a communication between the oral cavity and the maxillary sinus. X-ray picture shows no changes in the maxillary sinuses. What tactics should be chosen by a dental surgeon to prevent maxillary sinusitis?
a. Socket tamponade with a iodoform turunda
*b. Plastic restoring of the communication
c. Sinus rinsing with an antibiotic solution
d. Socket filling with a hemostatic sponge
e. Socket filling with a blood clot

140. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child reveals the infantile swallowing. The bad habit of thrusting the tongue between the teeth may cause the following complication:
a. Broadenning of the upper dental arch
*b. Incomplete eruption of the front teeth
c. Broadening of the lower dental arch
d. Narrowing of the upper dental arch
e. Narrowing of the lower dental arch

141. A 13-year-old girl has been experiencing gingival hemorrhages and frontal teeth mobility throughout the last month. Objectively: gingival mucous membrane in the region of lower incisors and canines is edematic, hyperemic, it bleeds on touch. These teeth present with I degree mobility, parodontal pouches are 3 mm deep. Orthopantomogram shows reduction of bone tissue of interalveolar septa by ⅓ of their height. Frontal teeth of the lower jaw are overcrowded. Hygiene index is 4,2. What local treatment should be provided in the first place?
a. Physical therapy
b. Anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Antibacterial therapy
d. Orthodontic care
*e. Professional hygiene

142. A 21-year-old patient complains of a drop-shaped bulge in the cervical region. Objectively: there is an enamel droplet of about 2 mm in diameter on the vestibular surface of the 33 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fluorosis
b. Supernumerary tooth
c. Marble-bone disease
*d. Enamel hyperplasia
e. Enamel hypoplasia

143. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lower jaw dislocation
b. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
*c. Lower jaw subluxation
d. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
e. Meniscus tresis

144. A 47-year-old patient complains of persistent ache in the 27 tooth, that gets worse when biting. Objectively: skin colour is normal, the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens without any difficulties, alveolar mucosa at the level of 27 tooth is edematous and hyperemic. The 27 tooth presents a deep carious cavity communicating with the pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
*b. Exacerbation of acute periodontitis of the 27 tooth
c. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 27 tooh
d. Acute purulent maxillary periostitis in the region of the 27 tooth
e. Chronic odontogenic left-sided maxillary sinusitis

145. A 27-year-old patient complains of bleeding, pain and swelling of gums, tooth mobility, halitosis, general weakness. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful, gums are hyperemic and cyanotic, they are also swollen and bleed at probing, periodontal pockets are 5-8 mm deep and contain sero-purulent exudate. There is massive dental deposit, gingival recession and tooth migration. X-ray picture shows diffuse osteoporosis and irregular, predominantly vertical, resorption of alveolar septa down to ⅔ of root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Grade III parodontosis
b. Chronic generalized grade III periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized grade II periodontitis
d. Eosinophilic granuloma
*e. Exacerbation of generalized grade III periodontitis

146. A 25-year-old patient complains about a light brown spot in the upper foretooth. Objectively: the 23 tooth has a single light brown spot in the cervical region. Probing shows smooth surface. The tooth is nonresponsive to cold and probing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Acute initial caries

147. A 40-year-old patient has an open occlusion resulting from the bilateral fracture of his upper jaw and following malunion of fragments. The occlusal vertical dimension is maintained only by molar teeth. There is a gap of about 1-1,5 mm between the rest of teeth. The dentitions are without gaps. What kind of treatment would be most appropriate in this situation?
a. Orthodontic treatment
b. Combined apparatus and surgical treatment
c. Prosthetics with combined crowns
*d. The molar teeth should be ground off and covered with crowns
e. Open reposition

148. A 41-year-old patient complains of mobility of the 24, 26, 27 teeth, purulent discharges from the socket of the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 months ago the patient underwent a dissection along the mucogingival junction and extraction of the 25 tooth. Objectively: alveolar mucosa in the region of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is cyanotic and edematic. Along the mucogingival junction there is a fistula with protruding granulations. There are also purulent granulation discharges from the socket of the extracted 25 tooth. In the right infraorbital region some soft tissue swelling is present. Which disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Exacermation of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Chronic diffuse osteomyelitis
c. Maxillary actinomycosis
d. Chronic alveolitis
*e. Chronic limited osteomyelitis

149. Analysis of a 10-year-old boys jaw models revealed that occlusal plane of the frontal maxillary teeth was of concave form, its lateral parts were convex. Form of the alveolar process also represents deformation of dental arches. The upper jaw is of saddle-like form with abrupt narrowing in the region of premolar teeth. What type of bite is it?
a. Distal
b. Cross
c. Mesial
d. Deep
*e. Open

150. A 34-year-old male patient complains about acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is getting worse as affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he didnt consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

151. A 29-year-old patient undergoes a procedure of a metal inlay fabrication by the direct method. The inlay is intended for the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth presents a Black class I carious cavity. Electroodontometry results - 6 ma. Examination of the ready inlay revealed a casting defect in the region of the external angle. The dentists further actions will be:
a. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with a composite
b. Cement fixation of the inlay
*c. Fabrication of a new inlay
d. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with amalgam
e. Plastic fixation of the inlay

152. A gravida (36 weeks) complains of gingival haemorrhages and excessive plaque despite a thorough hygienic care of oral cavity. Objectively: gingival papilla and marginal gingival edge are spongiose, bleeding when touched. Fedorov-Volodkinas hygiene indexis 3,7 points. What kind of toothpaste should be recommended to this patient after the professional oral hygiene?
*a. Chlorhexidine-containing toothpaste
b. Fluorine-containing toothpaste
c. Gel toothpaste
d. Herbal toothpaste
e. Toothpaste with mineralizing agents

153. Two years after radiation therapy a 49-year-old patient has been diagnosed with recurrence of the lower lip carcinoma. Objectively: there is a 1x2 cm large neoplasm with an ulcer in the centre in the region of the right half of the lower lip. Palpation of the right submandibular region reveals two enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes of round shape. Specify the stage of the disease:
a. T1 N0 M0
b. T2 N0 M0
c. T1 N2 M0
d. T1 N1 M0
*e. T2 N1 M0

154. A 7-year-old child has been diagnosed with a complete dislocation of the 11 tooth caused by a trauma that occurred 24 hours ago. The tooth has been taken along with the patient to the dentists. Objectively: the alveolar socket edges are slightly hyperemic, the socket bone walls are intact, the socket itself is filled with a blood clot. What is the optimal way of treatment?
*a. Replantation of the 11th tooth with a prior filling of the channel
b. Extraction of the 11th tooth
c. Replantation of the 11th tooth before the filling of the channel
d. Reposition and fixation of the 11th tooth
e. Socket suturing with catgut

155. X-ray examination of the maxillary alveolar process of a 35-year-old patient reveals a root fracture of the 11 tooth in its apical region. The tooth has been treated before, the canal is filled. The patient has a history of the tooth trauma. What method of treatment is indicated for this case?
a. -
*b. Root apex resection
c. Tooth replantation
d. Tooth extraction
e. Tooth crowning

156. Mother of a 3-year-old child complains about white spots on the upper anterior teeth of her child. Objectively: the vestibular surface of the 51 and 61 teeth exhibits a defect within the enamel. Probing is painless. What is the optimal method of treatment?
a. Treatment with fluorine lacquer
b. Electrophoresis of sodium fluoride solution
c. Remodentum application
*d. Impregnation with silver nitrate solution
e. Preparation and filling

157. A patient with haemophilia consulted a dental surgeon about decay of a right lower tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 46 tooth is completely decayed below the gum level. Percussion causes minor pain reaction. It is planned to extract the 46 tooth. The extraction procedure should be performed in:
*a. Haematological department
b. Maxillofacial surgery department after the consultation with a haematologist
c. Stomatological clinic and following administration of haemostatic drugs
d. Maxillofacial surgery department
e. Stomatological clinic

158. External examination of a 9-year-old boy revealed strongly expressed nasolabial and labio-mental folds, a shortening of the lower third of face. Examination of the oral cavity revealed late transitional dentition, the upper front teeth completely overbite the lower teeth, the palate exhibits imprints of the lower incisors. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Supraocclusion
b. Mesial occlusion
c. Dentoalveolar mandibular lengthening
d. Dentoalveolar maxillary lengthening
e. Distal occlusion

159. A 38-year-old patient complains of acute paroxysmal pain in the region of his left upper jaw, left eye and temple. The pain is lasting (2-3 hours), gets worse at night. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a deep carious cavity, floor probing causes painful response, thermal stimuli provoke long-lasting pain, percussion provokes minor pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Pulpitis complicated by the periodontitis
*c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of the chronic pulpitis
e. Acute limited pulpitis

160. A 52-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. There is gingival edema, parodontal pouches are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by ½ of root length. A dentist made a diagnosis: generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is the most efficient in this situation?
a. Plastic mouthguard
b. Temporary Novotny splint
c. Mamlock splint
d. Murrays splint
*e. Elbrecht splint

161. A 12-year-old boy repeatedly visits a dentist to finish treatment of the 36 tooth for the exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. The complaints are absent. Objectively: occlusive dressing on the 36 tooth is preserved, tooth percussion is painlessl, mucous membrane of the 36 has no pathological changes, is painless on palpation. What material should be used for root canal filling in this case?
*a. Sealer with a gutta-percha point
b. Phosphate cement
c. Resorcinol-formalin paste
d. Calcium-containing paste
e. Zinc-eugenol paste

162. A 14-year-old child complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal teeth region. Objectively: enamel of the 11, 12, 21, 22, 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth is thin in the region of cutting edge, there is a sulcate enamel pit 1,5 mm wide which encircles the tooth and is parallel to the cutting edge. The cusps of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth are underdeveloped and have conical form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Stainton-Capdepont dysplasia
*c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
e. Enamel dysplasia

163. A 12-year-old boy complains of severe pain caused by cold food in the 11 tooth. A day before he had a crown break off of the 11 tooth. Examination revealed an oblique fracture of the 11 tooth crown with the opening of the tooth cavity, probing causes acute pain, comparative percussion is painful, there is minor tooth mobility. What treatment should be administered?
*a. Vital extirpation
b. Biologic method
c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

164. A 68-year-old patient with compensated insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus had to spend 8 hours at a hospital. Within this time he didnt eat and was nervous. The patient became aggressive, pale and sweaty, then he lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Acute respiratory failure
c. Collapse
d. Hypertensic crisis
*e. Hypoglycemic coma

165. An 8-year-old child complains of a painless round formation under the tongue on the left which was noticed by accident about a month ago. Objectively: there is a roundish formation up to 2,0 cm in diameter in the sublingual region deep in the soft tissues of mouth floor. It is soft, painless to palpation, the mucous membrane over it is of grayish-blue color. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidermoid cyst of the mouth floor
b. Lymphangioma of the mouth floor
*c. Ranula of the left sublingual salivary gland
d. Hemangioma of the mouth floor
e. Dermoid cyst of the mouth floor

166. A 70-year-old patient complains about the mobility of the 21 tooth. The tooth has not been treated before. Objectively: there is II class mobility of the 21 tooth, the root is exposed by ½. What tool should be used to extract the tooth?
a. Beak-shaped forceps
*b. Straight forceps
c. S-shaped forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. Bayonet forceps

167. A 12-year-old child presents with missing 31 and 41 teeth, the gap between the 32 and 42 teeth is 10 mm. Choose the most rational denture construction:
a. Dental bridge
*b. Partial lamellar removable adjustable denture
c. Interdental wedge
d. Clasp denture
e. Adjustable microprosthesis

168. A 44-year-old patient consulted a surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain was noted 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unlimited. The crown fof the 26 tooth is half-destroyed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperemic on the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth was treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
b. Acute purulent periostitis of upper jaw of the 26 tooth on the left
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
e. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth

169. Parents of a 1,5-month-old child complain of whitish depositions on the childs buccal and labial mucosa. Objectively: labial and buccal mucosa is hyperemic and covered with caseous deposition that can be easily removed. Specify the causative agent of this disease:
a. Fusiform bacillus
b. Vincents spirochaetes
c. Loefflers bacillus
*d. Candida fungi
e. Diplococci

170. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the red border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumor-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the red border, it is dense and grayish-red. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can be hardly removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Verrucous precancer of the red border of lip
b. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
c. Bowens disease
d. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the red border of lip
e. Erythroplasia of Queyrat

171. An 8-year-old boy was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 21 tooth. It was treated by extirpation method. Choose the material for root filling:
a. Glass-ionomer cement
*b. Calcium-containing material
c. Phosphate cement
d. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
e. Resorcin-formalin paste

172. A 20-year-old patient complains of general weakness, fever, headache. These presentations appeared three days ago. Objectively: the regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpationl, body temperature is 37,8°C, oral mucosa is hyperemic and edematous. Mucous mebrane of lips, palate, gums, cheeks presents single erosions of polycyclic irregular shape, covered with grayish-white film, painful. Which drugs should be administered for the local treatment of the early disease?
*a. Antiviral
b. Antiseptics
c. Corticosteroid ointments
d. Keratoplastic agents
e. Dyes

173. Examination of a 5-year-old child revealed a cariuos cavity communicating with the tooth cavity on the approximal surface of the 54 tooth. Halitosis is present. Superficial probing of the cavity is painless, deeper probing causes pain reaction. Percussion is painless. Interviewing revealed that hot food caused pain. Select the medication for antiseptic treatment of root canals:
a. Furacilin solution
b. Formalin solution
c. Aethonium solution
*d. Sodium hypochlorite
e. Alcohol

174. A 40-year-old patient has been given anesthesia, immediately after which he developed severe weakness, heart palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, skin is markedly hyperemic, there is acute headache, AP is 180/100 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. What state is it?
a. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
b. Cardial pain
c. Myocardial infarction
d. An attack of stenocardia
*e. Hypertensic crisis

175. A 26-year-old patient presented at a clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 16 tooth is destroyed by ⅓. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of cavity preparation?
a. Completing the cavity floor
b. Completing the cavity walls
c. Making additional cavities
*d. Cavity widening and necrosectomy
e. Beveling

176. An 18-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise, weakness, pain induced by eating and deglutition. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is erythematic with multiple petechia. Pharynx is hyperaemic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, painless. In blood: leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypic mononuclears, ESR is 30 mm/h. What is the leading factor of disease development?
a. Bacterial infection
b. Immediate allergy
c. Delayed allergy
d. Autoimmune disorders
*e. Viral infection

177. A 63-year-old patient requires a full-arch denture for the upper jaw. Objectively: the 18, 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing, the gag reflex is not marked, the torus is of average size. In order to avoid possible inconvenience while using the denture, the arch should be located at the following distance from the palatine fossae:
a. 16-22 mm
b. 2-3 mm
c. 23-25 mm
*d. 10-12 mm
e. 4-8 mm

178. During extration of the 26 tooth a 34-year-old patient developed tinnitus, skin pallor, weakness. She was diagnosed with vertigo. What is the most appropriate tactics of emergency care?
a. Intravenous injection of cordiamin
b. Intravenous injection of 50% analgin
c. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
d. Intravenous injection of 0,1% adrenalin
*e. Placing the patient in Trendelenburg position

179. Preventive examination of a 55-year-old man revealed a well-defined area of opaque mucosal epithelium of the left cheek that didnt protrude above the surrounding tissues and could not be removed on scraping. Crowns of the 34, 35, 36 teeth were strongly decayed and had sharp edges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Candidiasis
c. Soft leukoplakia
*d. Leukoplakia
e. Lupus erythematosus

180. A 42-year-old patient complains of a cavity in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity, dentine is dense, pigmented, there is pain reaction to a cold stimulus, percussion and probing are painless. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

181. A 59-year-old patient has a bilateral fracture of mandible in the region of the 44, 34 teeth, other masticatory teeth are missing, toothless fragments are not displaced but mobile. Which orthosis should be used for the immobilization of bone fragments?
*a. Vankevich splint with orthodontic elastics
b. Rudkos apparatus
c. Limbergs splint
d. Zbarzh apparatus
e. Petrosovs apparatus

182. A maxillofacial surgery department admitted a patient with a half-open mouth, his chin was put forward and deviated to the right. On palpation, the left mandibular fossa was found to be empty. Internal palpation failed to detect the left articular head. Mandibular movements were possible but restricted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Unilateral dislocation of the left TMJ
b. Bilateral dislocation of the TMJ
c. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
d. Unilateral dislocation of the right TMJ
e. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ

183. A 62-year-old patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic with complaints about poor fixation of complete removable lamellar dentures that shows up during talking and wide mouth opening. The dentures were fabricated 5 days ago. In course of denture fabrication process a mistake was made during:
a. Wax reproduction check
b. Occlusal plane orientation
c. Plastic polymerization
*d. Obtaining the functional impression
e. Interalveolar dimension measurement

184. A patient consulted a doctor about recurrent pain in the frontal part of his upper jaw. He has history of previous treatment for pulpitis. Objectively: the crown of the 12 tooth is restored with a filling. X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows an area of bone tissue destruction (up to 1 cm in diameter) at the root apex of the 12 tooth. The root channel of the 12 tooth is filled up to the top. The patient was diagnosed with cystogranuloma of the 12 tooth. Choose the best method of treatment:
a. Dissection along the mucogingival junction
b. Replantation of the 12 tooth
c. Conservative treatment
d. Extraction of the 12 tooth
*e. Root apex resection

185. A 47-year-old patient with completely edentulous upper jaw underwent delayed implantation with cylindrical implants. Prosthetics is recommended in:
a. 3 months
b. 2 weeks
c. 1 month
d. 24 hours
*e. 5-6 months

186. A 23-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhages, fatigue, indisposition. The symptoms have appeared quite recently. Objectively: the skin and oral mucosa are pale. Gums bleed when touched. There are petechiae on the mucous membrane of cheeks, lips and palate. What laboratory test will allow to make a diagnosis?
*a. Complete blood count
b. Immunogram
c. Blood test for sugar
d. Blood test for Vitamin C
e. Bleeding time test

187. A 32-year-old patient complains about pain and swelling in the region of his mandible and left cheek. He has been suffering from this for 2 days. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 37,5°C. There is an edema of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes are bilaterally enlarged, painful on palpation. Crown of the 37 tooth is partially decayed, the tooth is immobile, percussion is slightly painful. Mucogingival fold in the region of the 37 tooth is edematic, hyperaemic, flattened, its palpation causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
*b. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
c. Chronic productive periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
d. Abscess of alveololingual groove on the left
e. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible

188. A 35-year-old male consulted a dentist about the 26 tooth extraction. After the patient had been given tuberal anaesthesia, he presented with progressing tissue edema and limited mouth opening. This condition was caused by:
a. Hypersensitivity to the anaesthetic
b. Nerve trunk trauma
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Muscle trauma during anaesthetization
*e. Vessel trauma

189. Parents of a 12-year-old child consulted an orthodontist about improper position of the childs upper teeth. Objectively: the face is narrow, elongated; the developing occlusion is present (temporary second molars). The 13 and 23 teeth are located beyond the dental arch, they deviate to the lips above the occlusal plane, there is a 2,5 mm gap between the 12 and 14 teeth, and a 1,5 mm gap between the 22 and 24 ones, 45o rotation the 33 and 43 teeth is present. Choose the most rational method of treatment:
a. All the answers are wrong
b. Extraction of temporary premolars and expansion of dental arches
*c. Extraction of the premolars and relocation of the canines
d. Compact osteotomy and expansion of dental arches
e. Expansion of dental arches in the region of canine apices

190. A 10-year-old girl complains of minor pain in a lower jaw tooth occuring during having cold food. Objectively: the masticatory surface of the 36 tooth exhibits a carious cavity with a narrow inlet located within the mantle dentin. Probing causes pain along the enamel-dentin border. Make a diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Acute deep caries
*c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Superficial caries

191. A 23-year-old patient complains of whitish spots on the masticatory teeth, drawing of mouth during taking acidic food. The spots appeared about 3 months ago. Objectively: the cervical region of the 46, 36, 27 teeth exhibits some chalk-like spots that can be easily stained with 2% methylene blue, probing reveals the surface roughness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Endemic fluorosis
*c. Acute initial caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

192. During the cystectomy involving resection of the root apices of the 11, 21 and 22 teeth a 45-year-old patient developed skin pallor and cyanosis, a cold sweat, a sharp drop in blood pressure (70/40 mmHg). The patient is conscious but complains of weakness. What state has been developed?
*a. Collapse
b. Syncope
c. Quinckes edema
d. Epileptic seizure
e. Haematoma

193. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
*a. Method of transfer molding
b. Direct method of compression molding
c. In water under pressure
d. Inverse method of compression molding
e. Combined method of compression molding

194. A 40-year-old patient needs the oral cavity sanation, which involves extraction of the upper central incisors. What nerve structure will be blocked as a result of incisor anaesthesia?
a. Median superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
*b. Nasopalatine nerve
c. Anterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
d. Posterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
e. Dental nerve plexus

195. An 80-year-old patient presented to a clinic for the adjustment of the impression tray for the upper jaw. Objectively: alveolar process exhibits marked homogenous atrophy, maxillary tubers are absent, torus is weakly expressed. Buccal muscles and frenulum of the upper lip are attached almost at the top of the alveolar process, the palatal slope is not steep. How to adjust the impression tray in order to make a close-fitting valve?
a. To extend the external borders
b. To extend the borders in the region of maxillary tubers
*c. To extend the borders along the A line
d. To overlay buccal muscles and frenulum with the impression tray
e. To extend the borders in the frontal region

196. A 32-year-old male complains of constant mandibular movements simulating chewing that take place when he is excited. Besides that, the patient complains of teeth grinding. Objectively: the lateral surfaces of teeth have signs of abrasion, the tubercles are absent. What is the most rational method of treatment?
a. Consultation with a dental surgeon
b. Restoration with opposite-directed dentures
c. Medicamental and machine treatment with further consultation with a dental surgeon
*d. Night guard, myogymnastics, self-massage
e. Teeth alignment (selective tubercle removal)

197. A 58-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 22 tooth is stable, intact. The atrophy of the alveolar crest is present, the palate is flat. It is planned to fabricate a removable denture. What tactics should be chosen in respect of the 22 tooth?
*a. It is required to fabricate a telescopic crown
b. It is required to fabricate a stump crown
c. It should be extracted
d. It should be depulped
e. There is no need of any intervention

198. A 48-year-old woman complains about aching dull pain in the region of the left TJM, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ
b. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
c. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
d. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
*e. Arthrosis of the TMJ

199. A 22-year-old patient was undergoing treatment of the 25th tooth for deep acute caries. During preparation a dentist accidentally opened the horn of pulp. What method of treatment should be applied?
a. Devital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
*d. Biologic method
e. Vital amputation of pulp

200. A 23-year-old patient complains about root exposition, gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing, gum itch. Objectively: there is supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. Gums are hyperaemic, edematic, pouches are 3,5 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by ⅓. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
*b. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
e. II degree periodontitis

