1. A 3-year-old child got an injury of the upper teeth as a result of a fall. Objectively: crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are deep in the surrounding tissues with only their cutting edge visible, the gingival margin is hyperaemia, edematic. What is the treatment tactics?
a. Monitoring
b. Reposition
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
*d. Tooth extraction
e. Endodontic treatment

2. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Implant-supported dentures
b. Dentures with metal bases
*c. Dentures with elastic lining
d. Dentures with shortened borders
e. Dentures with extended borders

3. According to the mother, a 5-year-old child complains about pain during swallowing, weakness, body temperature rise upt to 39,5°C, swelling of submental lymph nodes. Objectively: the childs condition is grave, body temperature is 38,8°C. Mucous membrane of oral cavity is brightly hyperaemic and edematic with haemorrhages and ulcerations. Pharynx is brightly hyperemic, lacunae are enlarged and have necrosis areas. Regional, cervical, occipital lymph nodes are painful, enlarged and dense. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Lacunar tonsillitis
c. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivostomatitis
d. Herpetic angina
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

4. An 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with tooth cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed several months ago and wasnt treated. What treatment method would be efficient in this case?
a. Biological method
b. Vital extirpation
c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
*e. Devital amputation

5. A  27-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the 34 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Roentgenographical survey revealed an ill-defined zone of bone tissue destruction in the periapical region of root of the 34 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis complicated by periodontitis

6. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Kellers classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
a. Fifth
*b. First
c. Third
d. Fourth
e. Second

7. Preventive examination of an 8-year-old boy revealed some lusterless chalk-like spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth, which are localised in the precervical region. Subjective complaints are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Acute superficial caries
d. Chronic initial caries
e. White-spotted fluorosis

8. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boys mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation
c. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
d. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
e. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation

9. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain and bleeding from the carious cavity of her 27 tooth during eating. Previously she had spontaneous pain. Examination of the 27 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface consisting of red tissue, probing induced pain and haemorrhage. What treatment method should be chosen?
a. Devital amputation
b. Biological method
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Vital amputation

10. A 55-year-old patient has a painless, tuberous, cyanotic pedunculated formation 2?1?1,5 cm large that appeared on the site of the extracted 46 tooth. Opening of mouth is not limited. Intra-oral X-ray picture of alveolar process in the region of the removed 46 tooth shows a focus of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Papilloma of mucous membrane in the area of the extracted 46th tooth
*c. Giant-cell epulis
d. Ameloblastoma of mandible
e. Hard odontoma of mandible

11. A 49-year-old patient complains about pain in the oral cavity induced by eating. He suffers from CHd. Objective examination revealed dyspnea, limb edema. Oral cavity isnt sanitated. On the mucous membrane on the right, there is an ulcer with irregular edges covered with greyish-white necrotic deposit with low-grade inflammation around it. There is also halitosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Traumatic ulcer
b. Ulcero-necrotic stomatitis
*c. Trophic ulcer
d. Cancerous ulcer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

12. Parents of a 12-year-old child complain of white patches on the upper front teeth, which appeared six months ago. Objectively: chalk-like patches on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical region of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. Their enamel is dull, pliable and rough on probing. There is a history of short-term pain caused by chemical stimuli. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Chronic initial caries
*c. Acute initial caries
d. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
e. Dental fluorosis

13. A boy is 10 years old. His face is symmetric and proportional. He presents with mouth breath. Examination of the oral cavity revealed saddle-like shape of dental arches and high arched palate. Upper first molar relationship (Angles key to occlusion) remains intact. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mesial occlusion
b. Distal occlusion
c. Widening of dental arches
*d. Narrowing of dental arches
e. Elongation of dental arches

14. A 35-year-old man complains about pain in the region of the 38 tooth, painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. What anaesthesia method will be optimal during operation on account of pericoronaritis?
a. Infiltration anaesthesia
*b. Conduction Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
c. Stem anaesthesia
d. General anaesthesia
e. Application anaesthesia

15. A 12-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage, tooth mobility. He has has these presentations since the age of 4. Objectively: gingiva around all the teeth is hyperaemic, edematic, bleeds during instrumental examination. The teeth roots are exposed by 1/3 and covered with whitish plaque. The teeth are mobile. Dentogingival pockets are 4-5 mm deep. External examination revealed dryness and thickening of the outer layer of skin on the palms, anterior third of the forearms, soles; there are skin cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cyclic neutropenia
*b. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
c. Letterer-Siewe disease
d. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
e. Niemann-Pick disease

16. A 4-year-old girl complains of spontaneous acute toothache in the upper jaw on the right increasing during eating. The pain arose two days ago. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity filled with softened dentin in the 55 tooth. There is no intercommunication with the tooth cavity. Probing of the cavity floor is slightly painful. Percussion is painful. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
*a. Acute pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute generalized (serous) pulpitis

17. A 52-year-old man undergoes treatment of the 36 tooth for chronic periodontitis. Radiography revealed convoluted medial root canals; an irregular-shaped focus of destruction of bone tissue 0,2x0,2 cm large in the region of the medial root apex. Which of the following drugs is optimal for intracanal electrophoresis?
a. 1% solution of decamethoxin
b. 1% solution of novocaine
c. 3% solution of copper sulphate
*d. 10% solution of potassium iodide
e. 0,1% solution of trypsin

18. A 23-year-old patient complains about unpleasant sensations in the region of the 12 tooth, X-ray picture shows a well-defined low-density area up to 8-10 mm in diameter around the root apex of the 12 tooth. What method of surgery will be the most efficient?
*a. Root apex resection
b. Tooth removal
c. Cystotomy
d. Hemisection
e. Root amputation

19. A 9-year-old boy presents with face asymmetry due to the chin displacement to the left. When the third Ilina-Marcosian diagnostic test is performed, face asymmetry disappears. What is the most likely clinical form of this occlusal abnormality?
*a. Habitual displacement of mandible
b. Unilateral hypoplasia of mandible
c. Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
d. Bilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch
e. Unilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch

20. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
*a. Threaded
b. Plate-form
c. Conical
d. Endodontic-endoosseous
e. Subperiosteal

21. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Right angled elevator
b. Close-beaked forceps
c. Straight elevator
*d. Left angled elevator
e. Broad-beaked forceps

22. A 24-year-old male complains of pain, bad breath, body temperature rise up to 38,0°C. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. Gums are edematic, hyperaemic, ulcerated, covered with necrotic plaque. There is an excessive buildup of calculus. What additional study should be done in the first place?
a. Microscopy of gingival plaque
*b. Complete blood count
c. Test for HIV infection
d. X-ray of jaws
e. Blood sugar test

23. A 40-year-old patient complains of discoloration of the vermilion border of the lower lip that he noticed about 4 months ago. Objectively: in the center of the vermilion border of the lower lip there is an irregular homogeneous grayish-white area 1x1,5 cm large that doesnt rise above the vermilion border and has distinct outlines. Palpation of this area is painless, the surrounding tissues are not changed. The film cannot be removed when scraped. The 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth are missing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Premalignant circumscribed hyperkeratosis
c. Candidous cheilitis
d. Lichen ruber planus
*e. Leukoplakia

24. A 32-year-old female patient needs dental prosthetics. After the objective examination it was decided to use ceramic-metal crown. What impression material should be used for taking impressions for this construction?
a. Stens
*b. Stomaflex
c. Orthocor
d. Stomalgin
e. Plaster

25. A 32-year-old patient complains of acute spontaneous attacks of pain in the 14 tooth. The pain lasts for 10-20 minutes and occurs every 2-3 hours. Carious cavity in the 14 tooth is filled with softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful at one point. Cold stimulus causes pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute localized pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute deep caries
e. Hyperemia of the pulp

26. A 47-year-old female patient complains of inability to eat hot and cold food, as well as of intense pain caused by sour, sweet and salty food. Objectively: there is a slight loss of enamel on the molars and incisors. Probing and cold test cause acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hyperesthesia of dental hard tissues
b. Enamel hypoplasia
c. Pathological abrasion of dental hard tissues
d. Enamel erosion
e. Enamel necrosis

27. A 35-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the sublingual region which impairs speech and causes discomfort during eating. The swelling turned up about a week ago. Objectively: there is a roundish bulge up to 3 cm in diameter in the right sublingual region. Mucous membrane over it is not hyperaemic, there is fluctuation symptom in the center. Which disease do these symptoms correspond with?
a. Retention cyst of the right submandibular salivary gland
b. Sjogrens disease
c. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
d. Chronic sialoadenitis of sublingual salivary gland
*e. Retention cyst of the right sublingual salivary gland

28. During taking of impressions at a dentists appointment a patient presented with the following symptoms: paroxysmal cough, cyanosis, vomiting, clapping sound during inspiration. Make the diagnosis:
a. Hypersensitive gag reflex
b. Acute bronchitis
*c. Aspiration of a foreign body
d. Attack of bronchial asthma
e. Tracheitis

29. Preventive examination of a 4,5-year-old child revealed some hidden cavities on the contact surfaces of the 54 and 55 teeth. After removal of the overhanging edges of the enamel the softened dentin could be easily removed within the mantle dentin. Select the optimal material for a permanent filling:
*a. Compomer material
b. Composite material
c. Silicophosphate cement
d. Silicate cement
e. Polycarboxylate cement

30. A 5-year-old child was found to have missing upper molars. Lower incisors are in contact with the mucous membrane of palate. Specify the doctors tactics:
a. Fabricate an orthodontic appliance for the treatment of closed bite
b. Examine the child every six months until the eruption of permanent teeth
c. Examine the child once a year until the eruption of permanent teeth
*d. Fabricate a removable laminar denture
e. Medical intervention is not needed

31. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 14 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis following ineffective therapeutic treatment. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps curved right
b. Straight forceps
*c. S-shaped forceps
d. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

32. A 42-year-old patient has been hospitalized with Le Fort II fracture of maxilla. Select an appliance for the treatment of this patient:
a. Kulagin
b. Yadrova
c. Rudko
*d. Zbarzh
e. Penn-Brown

33. A patient complains of burning, itch and lower lip enlargement. He has been suffering from this for a long time. Objectively: the patients face is asymmetric due to the flattening of nasolabial fold. His lower lip is edematic, of normal colour, painless on palpation. The patient has plicated tongue. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Lymphangioma
*b. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
c. Quinckes edema
d. Granulomatous Mieschers cheilitis
e. Hemangioma

34. A 59-year-old patient has a bilateral fracture of mandible in the region of the 44, 34 teeth, other masticatory teeth are missing, toothless fragments are not displaced but mobile. Which orthosis should be used for the immobilization of bone fragments?
a. Limbergs splint
b. Rudkos apparatus
c. Petrosovs apparatus
*d. Vankevich splint with orthodontic elastics
e. Zbarzh apparatus

35. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that is getting worse during eating, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area
*b. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
c. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
d. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
e. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area

36. A 52-year-old female patient complains of dry mouth, taste impairment, burning and pricking sensations in the tongue that disappear during eating but intensify at the end of the day. For the first time such problems arose 2 years ago after a psychic trauma. She has a history of anacid gastritis. Objectively: the general condition is satisfactory, the patient is restless, tearful. Oral mucosa is pale pink, dry; filiform papillae on the dorsum of tongue are reduced. Pharyngeal reflex is dramatically reduced. There is segmetal disturbance of facial skin sensation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Glossodynia
b. Chronic atrophic candidous glossitis
c. Moller-Hunter glossitis
d. Ganglionitis of sublingual ganglions
e. Desquamative glossitis

37. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joints. The pain occurs when she uses complete removable dentures fabricated a month ago. Objectively: the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can be closed with difficulty, smiling causes exposure of the denture base, the articulation is impaired. A mistake must have been made at the following stage of denture fabrication:
a. Testing the denture construction
*b. Determination and fixation of the central occlusion
c. Fitting the dentures and their correction
d. Taking anatomic impressions
e. Taking functional impressions

38. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57-year-old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Neys clasp should be applied?
a. II type clasp
*b. V type clasp
c. I-II type clasp
d. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
e. I type clasp

39. A 35-year-old patient seeks prosthetic dentistry. Objectively: 18, 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28. The crowns confining the defect are high and stable. To restore the integrity of the dentition it is planned to fabricate a one-piece clasp denture. What kind of mechanical fixator should be used?
a. Telescopic fixation
b. Dentoalveolar clasps
*c. Bar fixation
d. Retaining clasps
e. Supporting-retaining clasps

40. At a dentists appointment a patient complained of weakness, nausea, blackout, and then he lost consciousness. Make a diagnosis:
a. Coma
*b. Syncope
c. Shock
d. Insult
e. Collapse

41. Analysis of the contents of periodontal pockets revealed a significant contamination with Candida yeast fungi. Which of the following drugs should be used for instillations?
a. Dioxydin
b. Tinidazole
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Clotrimazole
e. Trichopol

42. During the preparation of a tooth a patient had an epileptic seizure. The seizure was arrested. What mistake did the orthopaedist make?
a. Violated the rules of preparation
b. Did not apply one of the types of local anesthesia
c. Skipped psychological preparation of the patient
d. Didnt apply general anaesthesia
*e. Didnt collect complete history data

43. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
a. On the base
b. On the saddle
*c. On the arch
d. On the artificial teeth
e. On the clasps

44. A 54-year-old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by 1/3 of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
a. Metal stamped
b. Combined Belkins
c. Plastic
*d. Fullcast
e. Metal-ceramic

45. A 22-year-old medical student complains of the changed colour of his central upper incisor on the right. Two years ago the tooth was gray. Objectively: the 2 tooth is filled, changed in colour, stable, percussion is painless. The patient has closed bite. What is the absolute contraindication to making porcelain crowns for this patient?
a. Defects of pulpless teeth that can not be restored by inlays
b. Enamel hypoplasia with a change of tooth shape and colour
c. Defects of the anterior teeth that cannot be restored by fillings
*d. Closed bite
e. Abnormal tooth colour

46. While conducting experiments in chemistry lesson a 14 year-old child got a traumatic shock of face. Objectively: the skin dehydrated in the affected region. It is covered with thick dry crust with clear boundaries and peripheral hyperaemia, the crust is recessed into the skin. What is the most likely traumatic agent?
a. Radiation
b. Saline
c. Alkaline
*d. Acid
e. Thermal

47. A 44-year-old patient consulted a surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain was noted 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unlimited. The crown for the 26 tooth is half-destroyed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperaemic at the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth had been treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of upper jaw of the 26 tooth on the left
*b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
c. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
e. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth

48. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred to orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are stable. What is the most aesthetic splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Brace
b. Ring adhesion splint
*c. Mamlok splint
d. Cap splint
e. Soldered combined crowns

49. A soldier was delivered to the regiment medical station with dislocation asphyxia caused by a gunshot wound. What actions should be taken for asphyxia suppression?
a. Tracheostoma establishment
b. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
c. Artificial airway
d. Intubation of trachea
*e. Pul the tongue forwards and sew it through

50. A patient complains about paroxysmal upper jaw toothache on the left that is getting worse at night. Toothache intensifies also under stimulation and irradiates to the left eye and temple. Similar attacks were noted three months ago, the patient didnt undergo any treatment. Objectively: the 25 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain at the point of communication, vertical percussion is slightly painful, horizontal one is painless. Mucous membrane in the projection of root apex of the 25 tooth is unchanged, its palpation is painless. Thermal probe causes acute pain, the pain attack is long-lasting. Electroodontodiagnosis is 60 microampere. X-ray picture shows a slight widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 25 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute generalized pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

51. A 25-year-old patient presents with fluorosis of vestibular surfaces of the upper incisors. Which of the following constructions will provide the maximum aesthetic result?
a. Metal-plastic crown
b. Combined Kurylenko crown
c. Ceramic crown
*d. Veneers
e. Plastic crown

52. At a dentists appointment a 12-year-old child inhaled a cotton turunda: he developed noisy respiration with a whistling sound, sudden dyspnea, pallor along with pronounced cyanosis, sweating. What kind of urgent condition developed in this patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Dislocation asphyxia
*c. Obstructive asphyxia
d. Valvular asphyxia
e. Collapse

53. A 56-year-old patient presents to a dental clinic. He has an indication for the extraction of the 22 tooth. Examination revealed periosteal abscess in the projection of the 21, 22, 23 teeth, flattening of the mucogingival junction. What kind of peripheral conduction anaesthesia is most advisable?
a. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + incisor anaesthesia
b. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + palatinal anaesthesia
c. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + palatinal anaesthesia
d. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia
*e. Extraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia

54. External examination of a 7-year-old child revealed: thickening of nose bridge, semi-open mouth, dry lips. Mouth corners are peeling. Anamnesis data: the child sleeps with open mouth. Examination of oral cavity revealed no changes. What dispensary group will this child fall into?
*a. The second
b. The first
c. The third
d. The fourth
e. -

55. A patient complains of heaviness in the left section of his head, pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is destroyed by 2/3 by caries, the tooth percussion is weakly positive. X-ray picture of paranasal sinuses shows definite unilateral dome-shaped veiling of the upper left maxillary sinus. On the X-ray picture of the 26 tooth the periodontal fissure at the root apex is missing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rhinoantritis
b. Odontogenic sinusitis
*c. Radicular cyst ingrown into the maxillary sinus
d. Malignant maxillary tumour
e. Cyst of the maxillary sinus mucosa

56. An oral surgeon attended a 3-day-old child staying in the newborn pathology department. Objectively: bilateral hypogenesis of zygomatic bones and orbits, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures, nonclosure of inferior eyelids, hypogenesis of mandible (bird face), deformity of auricles with a preauricular fistula on the right. What congenital disease does the child have?
a. Oculomandibulofacial syndrome
b. Oculodentodigital syndrome
c. Oculocerebrorenal syndrome
*d. Mandibulofacial dysostosis
e. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia

57. A 3-year-old girl complains of pain and swelling in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5-37,9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a swelling in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II grade of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
b. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
c. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
d. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis

58. A female patient applied to the oral surgery department and underwent radical maxillary sinusotomy with plastic repair of fistula through the alveolar socket of the extrated 27 tooth. Infiltration and all the peripheral block anaesthesias of the left upper jaw were performed with 6,0 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. 3 minutes later the patient registered double vision in her left eye, inability to close it. Which of the performed anaesthesias is the reason for the above-mentioned presentations?
a. Incisor
b. Tuberal
*c. Infraorbital
d. Palatinal
e. Infiltration

59. A 35-year-old patient complains of a neoplasm on the tip of the tongue which he hurts with his teeth. The neoplasm sometimes increases, and sometimes decreases in size. Objectively: on the tip of tongue there is a roundish neoplasm 0,5 cm in diameter with distinct borders and broad base. The neoplasm is the same colour as the mucosa of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lipoma of tongue
*b. Papilloma of tongue
c. Abscess of tongue
d. Fibroma of tongue
e. Hemangiofibroma of tongue

60. After removal of dental plaque an 18-year-old patient underwent preventive examination. It revealed painless chalky spots in the precervical region on the vestibular surface of the 22 and 41 teeth. Result of enamel resistance test is 7. What morphological changes are typical for this disease?
a. Degeneratic changes of odontoblasts
b. Superficial enamel demineralization
*c. Subsurface enamel demineralization
d. Changes in the mantle dentine
e. Damage of dentinoenamel junction

61. A 25-year-old student complains of a carious cavity in the 22 tooth. The fillings fell out 2 months ago. The tooth had been treated before for pulpitis. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity with the rests of filling on the medial surface of the 22 tooth. The crown of the 22 tooth is dirty pink. X-ray shows a root canal filled with the filling material by 1/2 of the root length; in the region of the root apex there is a well-defined focus of destruction of bone tissue 0,3x0,3 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*b. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
c. Residual pulpitis
d. Radicular cyst
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

62. A 12-year-old child complains of body temperature rise up to 39,8°C, weakness, headache and pain in throat getting worse when swallowing. Objectively: mucous membrane of gums is edematic, hyperemic. Tonsils are bright red, hypertrophic, covered with yellow-gray deposit which does not extend beyond the lymphoid tissue and can be easily removed. Submandibular, occipital lymph nodes are significantly enlarged, slightly painful on palpation. Hepatosplenomegaly is present. Identify the causative agent of this disease:
a. Loefflers Bacillus
b. Coxsackie virus
c. Bordet-Gengou bacillus
d. Herpes virus
*e. Epstein-Barr virus

63. It is planned to lance an abscess of hard palate (it is localized close to the 23, 24, 25 teeth) and to extract the causative 24 tooth that had caused abscess development. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Tuberal and palatinal
b. Tuberal and incisor
c. Tuberal, infraorbital and incisor
*d. Infraorbital, palatinal and incisor
e. Tuberal, infraorbital and palatinal

64. A 12-year-old boy has been injured. In the region of the 44 and 45 teeth there is pathological displacement of the alveolar process and the body of the mandible, rupture of the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What additional tests should be done to specify the diagnosis?
*a. Radiography of mandible in the frontal and lateral projections
b. Tomogram of mandible
c. Radiography of skull in the frontal projection and of mandible in Parma projection
d. Radiography of skull in axillary projection
e. Radiography of skull in the axillary projection

65. A patient has got a traumatic fracture of mandible in the area of the missing 34, 35 teeth with a slight displacement and a defect of alveolar part in the area of the 34, 35 teeth. Other teeth on both lower and upper jaws are intact. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Ports splint
b. Vankevich splint
c. Vasilyevs splint
d. Plain splint cramp
*e. Tigerstedts splint with a spreading curve

66. A 25-year-old patient consulted a doctor about massive gingival haemorrhages, dry mouth, mobility and shifting of teeth, purulent discharges from the gums, bad breath. According to the patient, these presentations turned up about 2 months ago. Before the diagnosis can be made, the following tests should be done in the first place:
a. Immunological studies
b. Allergological tests
c. Serologic studies
*d. Blood sugar test
e. Acute-phase reactants tests

67. Parents of a 6-year-old child applied to a pedodontist for preventive examination of their child. The oral cavity is sanitized. According to the parents, the child has recently cut the 36 and the 46 tooth. What method of caries prevention should be applied within 1,5-2 years after cutting of the mentioned teeth?
a. Fissure silvering
b. Gargling with sodium fluoride
*c. Fissure hermetization
d. Remodentum solution applications
e. Coating the teeth with fluorine lacquer Ftorlak

68. A 25-year-old male patient has bilateral fracture of the lower jaw. A fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Shurs appliance
b. One-jaw bite-guard splint
c. Webers appliance
d. Kurlyandskys appliance with levers
*e. Posts appliance

69. A 43-year-old patient consulted a maxillofacial surgeon about a cosmetic defect in the right half of his nose. It is known from the history that 7 months ago he got a gunshot wound. Objectively: there is a perforating defect 1,5 x2 cm large in the right half of the nose. The skin around the defect has not changed in colour. It was decided to use the "Indian" method of rhinoplasty. What tissue should be taken for the defect correction?
a. Shoulder flap
*b. Forehead flap
c. Infraorbital flap
d. Cheek flap
e. Scapulohumeral flap

70. A 4-year-old girl presents with body temperature rise, aggravation of general condition. The symptoms has been observed for 3 days. Objectively: general condition is grave, body temperature is 38,6°C, the girl is anxious and pale. She presents also with halitosis, hyperaemia and edema of gingival mucous membrane in the region of the 83, 84, 85 teeth on both sides from the alveolar process. The mentioned teeth are mobile, their percussion causes acute pain; the 84 tooth is filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
b. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis beginning from the 84 tooth
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radiculodental mandibular cyst beginning from the 84 tooth
*e. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis beginning from the 84 tooth

71. A 15-year-old patient has got a trauma. He complains of mandibular pain getting worse during swallowing, chewing, especially mouth opening. Objectively: face configuration isabnormal, there is a large haematoma in the region of the right mandibular angle. Palpation of this region is painful. The mouth is half open, lower lip frenulum is shifted to the right of the central line. Pressing upon the chin causes pain in the part of mandible on the right. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Anterior unilateral dislocation of mandible
b. Posterior unilateral dislocation of mandible
*c. Fracture of mandibular angle on the right
d. Bilateral fracture of mandibular branches
e. Bilateral fracture of articular processes

72. An 8-year-old boy complains of having toothache during eating. Objectively: approximal surface of the 55 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain, there is bleeding, percussion is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
*e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

73. An orthodontist monitors a 4-year-old child with mouth breath. The child has a history of adenotomy. Objectively: primary dentition occlusion; the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by 1/3; distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are situated in the same vertical plane. What preventive device will help the child to give up the habit of mouth breath?
a. Vesibular and oral Kraus screen
b. Andresen-Haupl activator
c. Frankels function regulator
*d. Standard Schonherrs vestibular screen
e. Rudolphs appliance

74. A 13-year-old girl complains of toothache increasing while biting. Objectively: the 36 tooth has a deep carious cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity, the response to thermal stimuli is painless, percussion is sharply painful, mucous membrane is intact. X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute purulent periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

75. An 8,5-year-old child is apparently healthy. The child complains of pain in an upper tooth on the left caused by a traumatic injury sustained three hours ago. Objectively: the crown part of the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/2, the pulp is red and significantly exposed, probing causes acute pain and bleeding. Percussion of the 21 tooth is extremely painful. Choose the most efficient treatment method of the 21 tooth:
a. Bioassay technique
*b. Vital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

76. A 31-year-old male patient complains of dryness and burning of tongue back that appeared for about a week ago and get worse when he eats irritating food. The patient has a history of recent pneumonia. He had been treated in the in-patient hospital for 2 weeks, the treatment program included antibiotics. Now he doesnt take any drugs. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is hyperemic, dry, glossy. Tongue back and palate have greyish-white plicae that can be easily removed. Threads of saliva trail behind the spatula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute atrophic candidiasis
b. Medicamental stomatitis
*c. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
d. Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis
e. Chronic atrophic candidiasis

77. A 53-year-old patient consulted a dentist about pain and an ulcer that turned up in the region of hard palate under his partial removable denture. He hasnt used the denture for three weeks, but the ulcer does not heal or reduce in size. Examination reveals a 2x1,5 cm large ulcer in the region of the alveolar process and hard palate at the level of the missing 14 tooth. The ulcer has everted rolled edges and necrotic floor, it is dense and painful. Gingival and palatal tissues around the ulcer are infiltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Maxillary actinomycosis
b. Decubital ulcer
c. Maxillary syphilis
d. Maxillary tuberculosis
*e. Maxillary carcinoma

78. A 37-year-old male patient complains about pain of the 46 tooth during food intake, especially hot food, offensive breath when he sucks his tooth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, masticatory surface of the 48 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 46 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

79. A 45-year-old female patient complains of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of her partial removable laminar denture for the lower jaw, which she has used for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar process in edentulous areas is considerably atrophied, the denture keeps balance. What is the most likely cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture in this case?
*a. Atrophy of the alveolar process
b. Improper keeping of the denture
c. Wear of artificial teeth
d. Using the denture during sleep
e. Eating solid food

80. A 57-year-old patient complains about dryness and burning of the lateral surface of her tongue. These sensations disappear during eating. She noted such sensations three months ago. She has a history of gastritis with reduced secretory function. Objectively: mucous membrane of tongue and oral cavity has no peculiarities. The back of tongue has thin white coating. Regional lymph nodes are unpalpable. Oral cavity is sanitized. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Candidiasis
b. Desquamative glossitis
c. Hunter-Moeller glossitis
d. Lingual nerve neuritis
*e. Glossodynia

81. A 5-year-old boy complains of a carious cavity, periodic toothache, gum swelling. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 74 tooth has a deep cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity, cold stimuli, probing and percussion are painless, mucous membrane is pale pink, there is a caicatrix from a fistula. X-ray picture shows an ill-defined focus of bone tissue destruction in the region of the roots bifurcation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

82. A 65-year-old patient needs complete removable dentures for both jaws. At the stage of "testing the denture construction" the doctor checks the pronunciation of sounds "S" and "Z". Which method of normalization of speech functions should be applied in this case?
a. Graphic
b. Acoustic
c. Myogymnastics
d. Spectrographic
*e. Phonetic tests

83. A patient working as a bricklayer complains of itching, burning, soreness of lips that show up only in the summer period. He has been ill for 3 years. Objectively: vermilion border of the lower lip is hyperemic, edematic, covered with blisters and painful erosions 2 mm in diameter, crusts, cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Contact allergic cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Eczematous cheilitis, exudative form
*e. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form

84. A patient needs a clasp denture for the lower jaw. Objectively: dental formula is 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 44. The 44 tooth is inclined toward the cheek. What type of Neys clasp should be used?
a. Second
b. First
*c. Fourth
d. Fifth
e. Third

85. A 20-year-old patient has asymmetric face due to an upper lip edema on the left. The skin over it is bluish, there are positive symptoms of "compression" and "filling in". What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cavernous hemangioma
b. Lymphangioma
c. Capillary hemangioma
d. Branched hemangioma
e. Lentigo

86. A 70-year-old patient is awaiting complete removable dentures for both upper and lower jaws. Teeth placement will be made by Vasilyevs method. What teeth in the upper denture must not touch glass?
a. Canines and first molars
b. First and second premolars
c. Central incisors and first molars
d. Second premolars and first molars
*e. Lateral incisors and second molars

87. A 48-year-old female patient had been delivered to a hospital with a cheek wound and severe headache, nausea, dizziness. It is known from the history that the patient got a trauma as a result of a fall. After examination she was diagnosed with a contused lacerated wound of cheek, closed craniocerebral injury, brain concussion. This trauma can be qualified as:
a. Combined trauma
b. Single
*c. Concominant trauma
d. Polytrauma
e. Isolated trauma

88. A 22-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic because of missing of the 21 tooth, the 11 and 22 teeth are intact. The 21 tooth was extracted 2 months ago. What construction is most suitable in this case?
a. One-stage implantation with simultaneous fabrication of metal-ceramic crown
b. Stamped-soldered denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
c. Partial removable denture
d. Metal-plastic denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
*e. Two-stage implantation

89. A 23-year-old patient complains of root exposition, gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing, gum itch. Objectively: there is supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. Gums are hyperaemic, edematic, pockets are 3,5 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 1/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. II degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

90. After supercooling a 42-year-old patient presented with headache in the left frontal region and left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetric, breathing through the left nasal meatus is obstructed, seropurulent discharges are present. Palpation is slightly painful in the infraorbital region as well as along the mucogingival fold in projection of the 24, 25 teeth. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. Mucuous membrane of alveolar process has no visible changes. X-ray picture shows reduced pneumatization of the left upper jaw sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis of the 24 tooth
b. Acute rhinogenous maxillitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth
e. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left upper jaw

91. A patient complains about pain in the 45 tooth induced by cold, sour and sweet food stimuli. The pain abates when the stimulus action is stopped. Objectively: there is a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within mantle dentin filled with food rests and softened dentin, overhanging enamel edeges are chalky. What is the diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Acute median caries

92. A 56-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the root extraction of the 17 toot. What kind of anaesthesia should be applied?
a. Mandibular anaesthesia
b. Infiltration, inscisor anaesthesia
c. Torus anaesthesia
d. Palatinal, infraorbital anaesthesia
*e. Palatinal, tuberal anaesthesia

93. A 6-year-old child presents with weakness, pain in throat when swallowing, body temperature rise up to 38,0°C. Examination of the the oral cavity revealed massive hyperaemia of the mucous membrane of the soft palate, palatine arches, tonsils, uvula; there were also single vesicles and erosions extremely painful when touched. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chickenpox
b. Mycotic angina
*c. Herpangina
d. Diphtheria
e. Infectious mononucleosis

94. A 44-year-old male patient complains of fatigue and headache, limb numbness, dry mouth, burning and pain in the tongue. Objectively: skin and oral mucosa are pale. There are painful cracks in the corners of mouth. Dorsum of tongue is smooth, glossy, with bright red striae. In blood: Hb- 70 g/l, RBCs - 1,51012/l, color index - 1,6, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, lymphocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aplastic anemia
b. Late chlorosis
*c. Addison-Biermer anemia
d. Chronic posthaemorrhagic anemia
e. Iron deficiency anemia

95. A 51-year-old lecturer presented to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed, III grade mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
a. In 16-30 days
*b. On the day of dental extraction
c. In 2-3 months
d. In 4-6 months
e. In 5-6 days

96. A patient with a missile wound of face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
*a. Secondary care
b. Dental orthopaedic service
c. Dental health service
d. Professional care
e. Consultancy

97. A 49-year-old patient complains of constant mandibular pain irradiating to the ear, soft tissue edema, body temperature rise up to 39,0°C. Objectively: there is an edema in the submandibular region, the skin has not changed in colour. Alveolar mucosa around the 45, 46 teeth is hyperemic and edematic on the oral and vestibular side. Crowns of the 45, 46 teeth are completely destroyed, the teeth are mobile. Vincents symptom is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
b. Abscess of submandibular region
c. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
*d. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Acute serous periostitis of mandible

98. A 18-year-old patient complains of acute spontaneous toothache irradiating to the right eye and temporal region. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 27 tooth within circumpulpar dentin. Dentin is light, softened. Probing of the cavity floor and cold test cause acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

99. A 10-year-old child undergoes sanitation of the oral cavity. The girl was found to have chalky spots on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical region of the 21 and 12 teeth. Enamel surface is dull, smooth. Pain reaction to the temperature stimuli is absent. What additional method of examination is expected to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Orthopantomography
*b. Vital staining
c. Intraoral roentgenography
d. Electroodontodiagnostics
e. Ultraviolet stomatoscopy

100. An 8-year-old boy complains of improper arrangement of teeth. Examination at an orthodontic clinic revealed broad, tight, low-attached upper lip frenulum. Broad frenulum and its low attachment may cause:
a. Narrowing of the upper dentition
b. Protrusion of the upper front teeth
*c. Diastema
d. Elongation of the upper dentition
e. Shortening of the upper dentition

101. A 35-year-old patient complains of a significant enlargement of the upper lip and eyelids, which developed within a few minutes (during cleaning the house with a detergent). Objectively: there is an edema of the upper part of face, upper lip and eyelids. Palpation is painless. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Angioneurotic Quinckes edema
b. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
c. Lymphedema
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Macrocheilitis

102. A 57-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility, inability to eat. Objectively: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 47 teeth exhibit II grade mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
b. Kurliandsky splint bar
c. Removable partial denture
d. Removable Bynin splint
*e. Removable whole-piece splint

103. A 21-year-old patient complains of constant progressing throbbing pain in the 27 tooth. Objectively: a large carious cavity is filled with softened dentin, the tooth cavity is closed. Probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain, there is grade II tooth mobility. Palpation of the mucous membrane in the projection of the root apex of the 27 tooth causes pain. Radiological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

104. As a result of a car accident a 45-year-old patient got an injury of his upper jaw. Examination revealed elongated and flattened face, profuse nasal haemorrhage, liquorrhea from the nose and ears. These clinical presentations are typical for the following fracture of upper jaw:
a. Subnasal (Le Fort I)
b. Suborbital (Le Fort II)
c. -
*d. Subbasal (Le Fort III)
e. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones

105. A 12-year-old patient complains about an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, upper frontal teeth overbite the lower teeth by 3/3 of height, exhibit oral inclination, lateral parts all along exhibit cusp-to-cusp relationship between the antagonists; Angles class II malocclusion (joining of the upper permanent molars) is also present. Malocclusion is observed in the following planes:
a. In transversal and vertical
b. In transversal
c. In sagittal
d. In vertical
*e. In sagittal and vertical

106. A 39-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the history that the indicated tooth had been treated before for caries. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is edematic and hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to remove the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anaesthesia should be given?
a. Infiltration anaesthesia
b. Application anaesthesia
*c. Field block anaesthesia
d. Intraligamentous anaesthesia
e. Intraosseous anaesthesia

107. An 8-year-old child presents with an edema of the submandibular region, the mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm, further opening is difficult, body temperature is 37,6°C, mucogingival fold is vestibularly flattened, hyperaemic and swollen. The 84 and 85 teeth have fillings, their percussion is painless. The 84 tooth exhibits I degree mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Chronic odontogenic periostitis
*e. Acute odontogenic periostitis

108. A 26-year-old patient needs prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 16 tooth is destroyed by 1/3. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of making a cavity for the inlay?
a. Making the cavity walls
b. Making additional cavities
*c. Removal of affected tissues
d. Making the cavity floor
e. Making a bevel

109. A 42-year-old woman prsented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic seeking dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 18 . . . . 13 12 11&21 22 23 . . . . 2848 47 46 45 44 43 42 41&31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Clasp denture
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps
c. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
*d. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base
e. Dental bridges

110. A 43-year-old patient was found to have no crown of the 13 tooth. The root protrudes above the gum by 0,5-1 mm. The apical part is filled. History: coronal part of the tooth broke off three weeks ago. Prior to this the tooth had been treated for chronic periodontitis. Percussion is painless. The root edges are made by hard moist mucous membrane of pale pink colour. Specify the dentists tactics:
a. Fabricate a simple pivot crown
b. Remove the tooth root
*c. Fabricate a crown-root inlay and metal-ceramic crown
d. Fabricate a pivot Richmond crown
e. Restore the tooth by means of an anchor and photopolymer material

111. A 33-year-old female patient has been admitted to the maxillofacial department with complaints of pain and edema of the right submandibular region, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C. Objectively: the patient has asymmetric face because of soft tissue edema of the right submandibular region, palpation reveals a dense infiltration, the skin over it is hyperemic, does not make a fold. The 46 tooth has a deep carious cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
b. Acute right-sided osteomyelitis of mandible
c. Acute submandibular sialoadenitis
*d. Submandibular phlegmon on the right
e. Acute purulent submandibular lymphadenitis

112. A 20-year-old pregnant woman complains of gingival enlargement, bleeding and pain during eating and tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival papillae on the upper and lower jaw are hyperaemic, haemorrhagic, painfu, cover the crowns of teeth by 1/2. Scalloped contours of marginal gingiva are abnormal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form

113. A 32-year-old patient complains of mouth soreness, body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, indisposition. Such condition has occurred periodically for several years after the patient had had a cold. Objectively: lips are covered with haemorrhagic crusts, hyperaemic mucous membrane of lips and cheeks has erosions covered with fibrinous films. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
b. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatitis
*c. Multiform exudative erythema
d. Pemphigus vulgaris
e. Herpes recidivicus

114. A 45-year-old patient complains of a rapidly growing formation on his lower lip. Examination of the red border of lips revealed a greyish-red nodule with a hollow in the centre which is filled with corneous masses that can be easily removed. The nodule is painless, mobile. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Basal cell carcinoma
b. Papilloma
*c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Nodulous verrucous precancer of vermilion border
e. Circumscribed precancerous hyperkeratosis of vermilion border

115. A 34-year-old male patient complains of acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is getting worse as affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he didnt consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

116. A 24-year-old patient complains of aching pain in the 11 tooth that is getting worse on biting. Two days ago the tooth was filled for pulpitis. Objectively: the 11 tooth is filled. The thermal test causes no pain, vertical percussion is slightly painful. X-ray picture of the 11 tooth shows that the endodontic filling is 1 mm above the root apex. Which of the following methods will be most effective for eliminating this complication?
a. Ultrahigh frequency therapy
b. Analgetics
c. Relaxing incision
d. Submucous injection of 1% solution of hydrocortisone
*e. Fluctuorization

117. A week ago an 18-year-old girl complained of pain in the 22 tooth which was treated and filled several years ago. Over the past two days the pain got worse. Objectively: the 22 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, mucous membrane is hyperaemic and edematic. Spot-film roentgenograph of the 22 tooth shows an ill-defined pariapical bone rarefaction 0,4x0,5 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 22 tooth
b. Suppuration of the radicular cyst
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Acute maxillary periostitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 22 tooth

118. A 14-year-old girl complains of indistinct pronunciation that showed up at the age of 14 after the acute respiratory viral disease. Examination revealed normal face and normal teeth alignment, occlusal disharmony was not found. Palpation didnt reveal cleft palate. Uvula doesnt move during pronunciation of sounds, its palpation does not cause gag reflex. What is the reason for indistinct pronunciation of sounds?
a. Hypertrophy of lingual tonsil
b. Deformation of the bite
c. Palatal slit
d. Adenoid vegetations
*e. Paresis of the soft palate and uvula muscles

119. A patient consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect in the cervical region of the upper and lower canines. Various stimuli cause no pain. Objectively: there are V-shaped defects on the vestibular surface in the cervical area of the upper and lower canines. Their surface is smooth, shiny, hard. The reaction to probing and cold stimuli is absent. What treatment should be administered?
a. Application of fluorine lacquer
b. Medical intervention is not necessary
c. Metal crowns
d. Applications with 10% solution of calcium gluconate
*e. Filling of the defects

120. A 48-year-old patient complains of subfebrile temperature and a growing ulcer on the gingival mucosa around the molars; looseness of teeth in the affected area, cough. Objectively: gingival mucosa in the region of the lower left molars has two superficial, extremely painful ulcers with undermined edges. The ulcers floor is yellowish, granular, covered with yellowish, and sometimes pink granulations. The ulcers are surrounded by the tubercles. Dental cervices are exposed, there is a pathological tooth mobility. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and make dense matted together groups. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Tuberculosis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Acute aphthous stomatitis
d. Syphilis
e. Decubital ulcer

121. An 18-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise, weakness, pain induced by eating and deglutition. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is erythematic with multiple petechia. Pharynx is hyperaemic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, painless. In blood: leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypic mononuclear cells, ESR is 30 mm/h. What is the leading factor of disease development?
a. Immediate allergy
b. Delayed allergy
c. Bacterial infection
d. Autoimmune disorders
*e. Viral infection

122. A 33-year-old patient complains about pain, gingival haemorrhage, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37,8°C. Objectively: gums are apparently hyperaemic, edematic, bleed easily, parodontal pouches are 3-4 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar process, resorption of interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic generalized I degree periodontitis

123. A 34-year-old patient had got in a car accident. The patient stayed conscious. He complains of headache, dizziness, general weakness, nausea. 12 hours after the injury the patient got "raccoon eyes" (periorbital haematomas) within the circular muscles of eye. What fracture does the victim have?
*a. Fracture of skull base
b. Fracture of frontal bones
c. Fracture of nasal bones
d. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
e. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla

124. A 13-year-old girl complains about frequent falling out of a filling in the 21 tooth. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 years ago she underwent treatment on account of a dental trauma. Objectively: a transverse defect of 1/3 of the crown in the 21 tooth. Percussion is painless. Tooth colour is unchanged. X-ray picture shows that root canal is filled by 1 mm from the apex, filling material closely fits the walls of root canal. What stomatological tactics should be chosen?
a. The tooth should be crowned with an artificial crown
*b. The defect should be restored with photopolymer
c. The root canal should be refilled
d. The tooth should be extracted
e. The root apex should be resected

125. A 65-year-old patient complains about unsatisfactory fixation of complete removable lamellar denture of his upper jaw. The denture was fabricated 6 years ago. Objectively: balancing and poor fixation of complete removable denture is present. What is the reason of such condition?
a. Wear of artificial teeth
b. Discoloration of basic plastic
c. Loss of certain antagonists
*d. Atrophy of osseous base of the prosthetic bed tissues
e. Bad hygiene of removable denture

126. A 50-year-old woman complains about a neoplasm on her lower lip on the side of oral cavity that appeared a month ago and has been slowly growing since that. Objectively: there is a roundish, elastic, painless neoplasm inside the lower lip. Mucous membrane hasnt changed its colour. Make a diagnosis:
a. Lip papilloma
b. Lip lipoma
*c. Retention cyst of lower lip
d. Lip fibroma
e. Lip abscess

127. A 46-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 36 tooth. Its crown is decayed. The patient presented with edema of soft tissues adjacent to the mandible. Body temperature rose up to 39,0°C, the patient has chill. Examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced edema of the left mandibular alveolar process on the vestibular and oral side (acute periostitis); the 35, 36, 37 teeth are mobile, subgingival pockets contain purulent exudate; their percussion causes acute pain. Positive Vincents symptom is present. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis from the 36 tooth
c. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
e. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis

128. During orthopaedic treatment a 47-year-old patient was given anaesthesia (with Ultracain DS forte). 20 minutes after the injection the patient presented with hyperaemia of skin, headache, dizziness, increased heart rate. The patient had previously undergone dental treatment with the use of this anaesthetic. What complication developed in this patient?
a. Syncope
b. Collapse
c. Attack of stenocardia
*d. AP rise
e. Anaphylactic shock

129. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous regions is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
a. Consumption of solid food
b. Wear of artificial teeth
c. Denture using during sleep
d. Improper care of denture
*e. Alveolar process atrophy

130. The department of maxillofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a post-traumatic defect of nose wing up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
a. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
*b. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
c. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions
d. Free grafting with dermal flap
e. Grafting with tubed pedicle (Filatovs) flap

131. 2 days ago a 12-year-old patient prsented with body temperature rise up to 38,0°C, on the second day he developed a bilateral edema in the parotid region. The skin over the edema was tense, of normal color. Palpation revealed soft, enlarged, painful parotid salivary glands. Salivation from the parotid ducts was abnormal, the duct orifices were hyperaemic. Palpation caused pain in the angle of mandible, at the top of mastoid bone, in front of the antilobium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
b. Purulent-necrotic parotitis
c. Sjogrens syndrome
d. Acute bacterial parotitis
*e. Mumps

132. A 23-year-old female patient complains of a pronounced limitation of mouth opening, throat pain irradiating to the ear. Objectively: body temperature is 37,9°C. The face is symmetrical, the colour of skin has not changed. Palpation of the jaw causes acute pain, mouth opens by 1 cm. The patient had been given anasthesia by Berchet-Dubov. After it oral examination revealed an edema and hyperemia of the mucous membrane of the pterygomaxillary fold, there was an infiltration painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of alveololingual groove
b. Submandibular phlegmon
c. Parapharyngeal space phlegmon
d. Peritonsillar space abscess
*e. Abscess of pterygomaxillary space

133. Intraoral examination of a 5-year-old child revealed primary occlusion, tremas and diastemas, worn tubercles and cutting surfaces of teeth. The distal surfaces of the second lower molars are anterior to the distal surfaces of the second upper molars. This stage of primary occlusion is called:
*a. Aging
b. Stable occlusion
c. Eruption
d. Formation
e. There is no correct answer

134. A 52-year-old patient complains of teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth exhibit I grade mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit II grade mobility. There is gingival edema, peridontal pockets are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by 1/2 of root length. The patient has been diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is most efficient in this situation?
a. Plastic mouthguard
b. Murrays splint
c. Mamlock splint
d. Temporary Novotny splint
*e. Elbrecht splint

135. Objective examination of a 10-year-old child revealed that the whole lower lip was slightly hyperemic, infiltrated, dry, covered with small scales. Architectonics of lips is changed. The child complains of dryness and a feeling of tense lips, especially in autumn and winter. The child had a bad habit of lip sucking. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Microbial cheilitis
*b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Allergic cheilitis
d. Atopic cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

136. A 47-year-old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11 tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
a. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth
b. Implant
c. Clasp denture
*d. Partial removable lamellar denture
e. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth

137. A 25-year-old patient complains of a light brown spot in the upper front tooth. Objectively: the 23 tooth has a single light brown spot in the precervical region. Probing shows smooth surface. The tooth is nonresponsive to cold and probing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Fluorosis
c. Acute initial caries
*d. Chronic initial caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

138. A 35-year-old patient complains of progressing throbbing pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity filled with softened dentine, tooth cavity is closed, probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain. There is I grade tooth mobility. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

139. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
*c. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinsteins pivot point

140. A 32-year-old patient complains of the long-term dull toothache caused by hot food. The toothache appeared a month ago. Objectively: the 26 tooth has changed in colour, on the masticatory surface there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Superficial probing of pulp is painless, deep probing is painful. Electro-odontodiagnostics results: 85 µa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
*e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

141. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child revealed half-open mouth, difficult closing of lips, primary occlusion, 4 mm sagittal gap, homonymous canines and second molars. The upper dental arch is V-shaped, the lower one is trapezoid. Both dental arches in primary occlusion should have the following shape:
a. Semiellipse
*b. Semicircle
c. Triangle
d. Quadrangle
e. Parabola

142. A patient complains about spontaneous pain in the area of his 15 tooth he has been feeling for 2 days. Thermal stimuli make the pain worse, its attacks last up to 30 minutes. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 15 tooth consisting of light softened dentin, floor probing is painful in one point, reaction to the thermal stimuli is positive, percussion is painless. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
*d. Acute local pulpitis
e. Pulp hyperemia

143. A 45-year-old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
a. Clasp denture with obturating part
b. Common partial removable denture
*c. Minor saddle denture with clasp fixation
d. Protective palatal bars
e. Common dental bridge

144. An 18-year-old man complains of the 14, 13, 12, 23, 24 teeth being sensitive to sweet and sour food. Examination revealed some isolated ill-defined chalky spots in the precervical region. What is the most informative method of study that allows to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Probing
b. Thermometry
*c. Vital staining
d. X-ray
e. Electro-odontometry

145. A 25-year-old patient got a trauma in the chin region. On the basis of X-ray he was diagnosed with bilateral mental fracture of mandible. Specify the direction of displacement of the minor fragment:
a. Downward and forward
*b. Downward and backward
c. Upward and backward
d. There is no displacement
e. Upward and forward

146. A 27-year-old patient complains of the long-term pain in the 22 tooth caused by cold and hot food, as well as of spontaneous pain lasting for 30 minutes and occurring 3-4 times per day, getting worse at night. Pain arose 3 days ago after preparation of the tooth for the acrylic crown. Objectively: the 22 tooth is intact, the thermal test causes acute long-lasting pain, percussion is painless. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Biological treatment of pulpitis
*b. Vital pulp extirpation
c. Vital pulp amputation
d. Devital pulp extirpation
e. Application of fluorine lacquer

147. A 35-year-old patient complains about itch, burning and edema of lips. He has been suffering from this for a week. Objectively: reddening of vermilion border and skin, especially in the region of mouth corners, there are also vesicles, crusts, small cracks along with erythematous affection of vermilion border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
b. Multiform exudative erythema
c. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis
*d. Acute eczematous cheilitis
e. Acute herpetic cheilitis

148. A 7-year-old child has to undergo plastic surgery of the upper lip frenulum. What operation should be performed to lengthen the frenulum of the upper lip?
*a. Dieffenbach grafting
b. Szymanowsky grafting with local flaps
c. Relaxing incisions of the mucosa
d. Grafting with a pedicle flap
e. Thiersch grafting with local flaps

149. A 43-year-old patient complains about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II grade. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
a. Frontal-lateral
*b. Circle
c. Sagittal
d. Frontal
e. Transversal

150. Parents of a 7,5-year old child brought him to the dentist for oral cavity sanitation. Objectively: DEF (for primary teeth) + DMF (for permanent teeth) index = 4, Green-Vermillion index = 2,5. Fissures of the first permanent molars are open, intact, non-pigmented. What method of primary prevention of dental caries may be appropriate in this case?
a. Application of calcium gels
b. Application of fluoride varnish
*c. Non-invasive hermetization
d. Invasive hermetization
e. Application of antibacterial varnish

151. A 40-year-old patient with mandible fracture consulted a doctor 3 weeks after immobilization of fragments because of pain and body temperature rise. Objectively: a slight swelling in the mental region, mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 21|12 teeth is hyperaemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Overtooth splint on 54321|12345 teeth is in satisfactory condition, no occlusion abnormalities were detected. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of mandible. What surgical action is indicated?
a. Trepanation of the 21 and 12 teeth
b. Intraoral novocaine block
c. Surveillance of patient
d. Removal and replacement of the overtooth splint by a new one
*e. Lancing of abscess to the bone

152. A 65-year-old male patient complains of crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies having rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, there are angular fissures and cracks. Palpation reveals crepitant rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular arthrosis
b. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
*c. Costens syndrome
d. Temporomandibular arthritis
e. Temporomandibular dislocation

153. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient got a cheek abrasion which healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38,6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the parotid-masticatory region
b. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
*c. Acute lymphadenitis
d. Epidemic parotitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis

154. A 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with congenital complete nonclosure of soft and hard palate. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for uranostaphyloplasty?
a. Endotracheal narcosis through tracheostome
b. Orotracheal narcosis
c. Mask narcosis
*d. Nasotracheal narcosis
e. Intravenous narcosis

155. A 9-year-old boy has been diagnosed with a complete dislocation of the 21 tooth. The child got injured 20 hours ago. He has diabetes. Select a treatment tactics:
*a. The tooth cannot be preserved or reimplanted
b. Reimplantation, fixation of the tooth and further follow-up
c. Root apex resection, reimplantation, fixation of the tooth
d. Filling of the root canal with paste containing calcium, reimplantation, fixation of the tooth
e. Filling of the root canal with amalgam, reimplantation

156. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumour-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the vermilion border, it is dense and grayish-red. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bowens disease
*b. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion border of lip
c. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the vermilion border of lip
d. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
e. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis

157. A 42-year-old female patient complains of tooth mobility, difficult mastication. Objectively: face configuration is unchanged. The 35, 36, 38, 44, 46, 48 teeth are missing. The 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth have 1-2 grade mobility. What is the most efficient denture construction in this case?
a. Whole-piece splint with Roach clasps and a multijoint clasp
b. Interdental splint
c. Mamlock splint
*d. Whole-piece splint with vestibular clowlike hooks
e. Removable plastic splint

158. Parents of an 8-year-old child complain about a painful formation in the childs oral cavity that obstructs food intake. The same complaints were registered two years ago. Mucous membrane of lateral tongue surface is hyperemic and edematic. There is an oval erosion over 0,7 cm large covered with yellow greyish deposit. Erosion edges are hyperemic and painful on palpation. The child has a history of chronic cholecystocholangitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme
*b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Behcets syndrome
d. Traumatic erosion
e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

159. A pregnant 24-year-old woman complains about emergence of several new carious cavities, falling out of old fillings. Objective examination revealed: index of decayed, missing and filled teeth (DMF) = 16, Feodorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 3,3. Choose the optimal material for carious cavity filling in this case:
a. Silver amalgam
b. Chemical-cure composite
*c. Glass ionomer cement
d. Light-cure composite
e. Silicophosphate cement

160. Examination of an 11-year-old boy revealed thickened, somewhat cyanotic, dense gingival margin overlapping the crowns of all teeth by 1/2 of their height. Fedorov-Volodkina oral hygiene index is 2,6, PMA index is 20%. X-ray picture shows no pathological changes of periodontium. The child has a 2-year history of neuropsychiatric treatment for epilepsy. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Generalized periodontitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Localized periodontitis
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

161. During tooth extraction a 32-year-old patient presented with sudden weakness, pale skin, cold sweat, weak pulse, a significant AP drop (diastolic pressure - 40 mm Hg). What complication developed in the patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Attack of stenocardia
c. Traumatic shock
d. Syncope
*e. Collapse

162. An 11-year-old girl complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating. She has been suffering from this for a year. Gum of both upper and lower jaws is edematic and congestively hyperemic. Hygienic state of oral cavity is unsatisfactory. Bite is edge-to-edge. Roentgenological examination of periodontium revealed no pathological changes. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Localized periodontitis

163. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patients chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth are missing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get special medical aid?
*a. Specialized army surgical hospital
b. Battalion aid station
c. Separate medical detachment
d. Separate medical battalion
e. Regimental aid station

164. A 52-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic complaining of missing upper jaw teeth and difficult mastication. The patient has an indication for a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw with retaining clamps on the 14, 23 teeth. What kind of denture stabilization will enable such positioning of the clasps?
a. Sagittal
b. Sagitally-transversal
c. Diagonally-sagittal
d. Diagonal
*e. Transversal

165. During the examinations and everyday orthopaedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. What is the way of dental mirrors sterilization?
a. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
b. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
c. In the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes
*d. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
e. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes

166. A 5-year-old child complains of spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute serous pulpitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute periodontitis

167. A 23-year-old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment at a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each side. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
a. 4 cm
b. 3 cm
c. 2 cm
d. 3,5 cm
*e. 1 cm

168. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. Straight forceps
b. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
c. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight elevator

169. A 10-year-old child complains of gingival pain and haemorrhage which appeared two days ago after a cold. Objectively: the gingiva is edematic, hyperaemic, bleeds easily, painful on palpation. The tips of gingival papillae are dome-shaped. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ulcerative gingivitis
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

170. A 42-year-old patient complains about gingival pain, progressing gingival haemorrhage, increasing tooth mobility, halitosis. Objectively: gums are evidently hyperaemic, extremely edematic, they bleed easily on palpation. Tooth roots are exposed, parodontal pouches are 4-6 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate, there is also supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. II-III grade tooth mobility is present. Orthopantomogram shows resorption of interdental septa down to 1/2 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of generalized III degree periodontitis

171. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay for the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edge. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Stump fixing
b. Casting
c. Wax construction making
*d. Impression taking
e. Stump fitting

172. A patient is 48 year old, according to the results of clinicoroentgenological examination it is indicated to remove the 26 tooth because of acute condition of chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What kind of conduction anesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Torus
b. Infraorbital and incisive
*c. Tuberal and palatinal
d. Plexus
e. Infraorbital and palatinal

173. A 25-year-old man consulted a dentist about extraction of the 18 tooth, its crown is destroyed by 1/2. The tooth was treated more than once. During tooth extraction the maxillary tuber was accidentally torn of what actions should be taken?
a. To restore the fragment to its place and fix it there
b. To remove the fragment and tampon the wound
*c. To remove the fragment and stitch up the wound
d. To remove the fragment
e. To try to restore the fragment to its place

174. A 36-year-old patient complains of pain under the dental bridge. After its removal the patient has been found to have an ulcer 0,3x0,5 cm large on the alveolar process. The ulcer is slightly painful and soft, the surrounding mucosa is hyperaemic, submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Trophic ulcer
*b. Decubital ulcer
c. Sutton aphtha
d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Cancerous ulcer

175. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. History: the tooth hasnt been treated before, decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is destroyed by over 2/3, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. Crown bayonet forceps
b. S-shaped closed-beak forceps
c. S-shaped forceps (right)
d. Straight elevator
*e. Bayonet root forceps

176. A 39-year-old patient complains of a cosmetic defect, hypersensitivity of the 12, 11, 22 teeth. Objectively: vestibular surface of these teeth has oval defects with smooth shiny walls. Probing causes no pain, there is a pain reaction to cold stimuli. The defects can be stained with 5% tincture of iodine. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Systemic hypoplasia
*b. Enamel erosion
c. Wedge-shaped defect
d. Fluorosis, erosive form
e. Superficial caries

177. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flat, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
*a. Fibrous
b. Giant-cell
c. -
d. Angiomatous
e. Pregnancy epulis

178. A 32-year-old patient needs to be provided with metal-ceramic crowns for the 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. During the dental visit he is given infiltration anaesthesia with Ultracain DS anaesthetic. What elements enter into its composition?
a. 3% mepivacaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
b. 2% mepivacaine with adrenaline
*c. 4% articaine with adrenaline
d. 2% articaine with epinephrine
e. 4% articaine without a vasoconstrictor agent

179. A 30-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39,0°C, a roundish infiltrate on his upper lip, general weakness. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 days. Objectively: a roundish infiltrate in the region of the upper lip 2,5 cm in diameter, the skin over the infiltrate is red with a necrotic core in the centre. The upper lip is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst of the upper lip
b. Acute periostitis of the upper jaw
c. Carbuncle of the upper lip
d. Acute glandular abscess
*e. Furuncle of the upper lip

180. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory region, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mixed tumour
b. Glandular tuberculosis
c. Cyst of the gland
d. Chronic lymphadenitis
*e. Adenocarcinoma

181. A 57-year-old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by 2/3 in the area of the 33, and by 1/2 of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
*a. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress
b. Massive grinding off of hard tissues
c. Garland modelling in the precervical region
d. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges
e. Devitalization of supporting teeth

182. An 8-year-old child complains about pain in the 21 tooth that is getting worse during biting down. A month ago a part of tooth crown broke off as a result of a fall. The child didnt consult a dentist. Objectively: in the region of medial angle of the 21 tooth there is a crown defect that makes up 1/3 of the crowns height. Tooth cavity is open, probing and thermal stimulus cause no pain. Percussion is acutely painful. Gum around the 21 tooth is edematic and hyperaemic. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
*e. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis

183. A 12-year-old girl undergoes treatment at the maxillofacial department for nonodontogenic abscess of the left submandibular region. Postoperative wound in the stage of granulation and epithelialization. What medications speed up these processes?
a. 0,5-1% dioxydin solution, 0,1-0,2% chlorhexidine solution
b. Levomecol, laevosin ointments etc
c. Laevosin, luronitum, trypsin ointments
*d. Vishnevsky ointment, methyluracil ointment, solcoseryl gel
e. Trypisin, chymotrypsin, terrilytin etc

184. Examination of an 8-year-old child revealed irregular white spots on the vestibular surface in the precervical region of the of 11 and 12 teeth. The spots are smooth and stainable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Focal demineralization
b. Enamel hypoplasia
c. Superficial caries
d. Fourniers teeth
e. Enamel erosion

185. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic metal-ceramic denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
*a. Sielast
b. Stomalgin
c. Stens
d. Orthocor
e. Repin

186. A 17-year-old man complains of a cosmetic defect in form of light spots on the teeth. In the area of his residence the fluoride concentration in drinking water is at the rate of 1 mg/l. Objectively: vestibular surface of the 11,12, 21, 22, and tubercles of the 16, 26, 36 and 46 teeth have chalky spots with shiny surface that have been present since the time of eruption. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Endemic fluorosis
b. Amelogenesis imperfecta
c. Enamel erosion
*d. Systemic hypoplasia
e. Multiple caries

187. A 35-year-old man complains of short-term pain caused by thermal stimuli in the 46 and 47 teeth. Objectively: masticatory surfaces of the 46, 47 teeth are intact, approximal surfaces could not be examined because of a very close arrangement of teeth. What methods of study can be used in this case if you suspect the presence of hidden cavities?
a. Fluorescent study
b. Electro-odontometry
*c. X-ray
d. Measuring electrical resistance
e. Vital staining

188. A 7-year-old child has protruding chin, the lower lip overlaps the upper one. There are diastemas and tremas between the lower incisors, the lower incisors overlap the upper incisors by 2/3 of the crown height. First permanent molars demonstrate Angles class III relation. Sagittal gap is 3 mm. The correct doctors tactics will be to:
a. Recommend a complex of myogymnastic exercises
b. Use Bynin appliance
*c. Use Bruckls appliance
d. Use Schwartz appliance
e. Use Angles apparatus

189. A 45-year-old patient complains of missing teeth in the lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the 46, 45, 38, 48 teeth are missing. The 47 tooth is mobile (1 grade mobility), the crown of the 44 tooth is destroyed by 1/2. What orthopedic construction should be recommended for restoration of masticatory efficiency and prevention of periodontal overload of the 47, 44 teeth?
a. Soldered bridge supported by the 48, 44 teeth
b. Metal-ceramic bridge supported by the 47, 46 teeth
*c. Arch denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44, 34 teeth
d. Bridge supported by the 47 tooth
e. Small saddle denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44 teeth

190. A 40-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication as a result of lower jaw displacement. He has a history of mental fracture 2 months ago. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38 ... 45, 46 teeth are missing. Remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with antagonists and their oral deviation makes up 1 cm. What is the optimal construction of lower jaw denture?
a. Adhesive denture
b. Metal-ceramic dental bridge
c. Soldered splint on rings
d. Removable lamellar denture
*e. Denture with double dentition

191. A 25-year-old HIV-infected patient presented to a clinic of prosthetic dentistry seeking prosthetic services. What aseptic and antiseptic precautions should be taken?
a. The patient should be refused appointment
*b. According to the scheme
c. The impressions should be desinfected by means of a quartz lamp
d. The orthopaedist should work in gloves and a mask
e. No special precautions are required

192. A 48-year-old woman complains of aching dull pain in the region of the left TMJ, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
b. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
*c. Arthrosis of the TMJ
d. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
e. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ

193. A 9-year-old child complains of pain caused by sweet and sour food in an upper tooth on the left. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within the enamel limits. What is the optimal material to fill the 26 tooth?
a. Glass ionomer
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Zinc phosphate cement
*d. Composite
e. Silicate cement

194. A 48-year-old patient complains about itching gums. Objectively: gums are dense, of normal colour; cold water causes short-term toothache. X-ray picture shows osteosclerosis of interalveolar septa (fine granular bone texture), height of interalveolar septa and integrity of compact substance on their tops is unchanged. Which diagnosis is the most likely?
a. I degree parodontosis
b. Atrophic gingivitis
c. Initial periodontitis
d. I degree periodontitis
*e. Initial parodontosis

195. A 22-year-old student complains of gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: hyperaemia and edema of marginal gingiva of the front teeth on both jaws, periodontal pockets are absent. X-ray reveals no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Localized periodontitis
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
*d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

196. A 48-year-old patient has undergone unilateral resection of the upper jaw. He needs a resection prosthesis. Objectively: the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 teeth are stable, hard palate is broad, flat. What connection of clasps with the base will reduce the instability of the resection prosthesis?
a. Elastic
*b. Articular
c. Fixed
d. Stable
e. Does not matter

197. A 70-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower jaw region on the right. He has been using complete removable dentures for the upper and lower jaw for 12 years. He is smoker. Objectively: the right retromolar region exhibits a 1,5х1,2 cm large proliferation of mucous membrane in form of cauliflower, here and there there are dense fissure-like ulcers. The surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, infiltrated. When the teeth are closed, the mentioned formation contacts with the posterior edges of the dentures. What is the provisional diagnosis:
a. Leukoplakia
b. Papillomatosis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Decubital ulcer
*e. Cancer of the mucous membrane

198. A victim got a perforating wound of the left cheek contaminated with radioactive materials on the battlefield. The wound was dressed with aseptic bandage from the individual first-aid pack and processed with anaesthetic and antibacterial medicaments. The dressing should be changed at the following station of medical evacuation:
a. At the station of the separate medical battalion
*b. At each station of evacuation
c. Only when the dressing is unsatisfactory
d. At the regimental aid station
e. At the battalion aid station

199. A child is 7 years old. He has early transitional dentition. There is overcrowding of the lower front teeth: the 42 and 32 teeth erupted orally with a complete lack of space. Make a plan of treatment:
*a. Serial consecutive extraction by Hotz method
b. Extraction of the 84 and 74 teeth
c. Extraction of the 83 and 73 teeth
d. Extraction of the 41 and 31 teeth
e. Extraction of the 42 and 32 teeth

200. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute focal pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis
*e. Acute purulent pulpitis

