1. A prosthodontist plans to make a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for the 23 tooth. In order to correct its abnormal position in the dental arch the prosthododntist is going to use a cast post and core. What is the maximum permissible value (in degrees) of the core deviation from the tooth axis?
a. 20-25
*b. 15
c. 6-8
d. 10
e. 4

2. What impression material is used to obtain impressions for making orthodontic appliances?
*a. Ypeen
b. Repin
c. Orthocor
d. Sielast
e. Stomaflex

3. A 45-year-old woman consults a dentist for prosthetics. Objectively: the 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37 teeth are missing. There is dentoalveolar vertical displacement of the 17, 16, 26, 27 teeth; the alveolar process is hypertrophied, the cervical margins are not exposed. When the teeth are closed, the distance between the occlusal surfaces of the teeth and alveolar process is approximately 6 mm. Specify the most efficient method of treatment of secondary deformation in this patient:
a. Surgical treatment
b. Hardware-associated surgical treatment
c. Disocclusion
*d. Pulp removal and teeth grinding
e. Grinding

4. A 35-year-old patient has made an appointment with a doctor to have oral cavity sanation. Objectively: the vestibular surface of the 22 tooth has a hard tissue defect localized in the mantle dentin; the dentin is hard, dark-coloured, the floor of the cavity is coarse. Cold stimulus and probing are painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Enamel erosion
*c. Chronic median caries
d. Dental fluorosis, destructive form
e. Hard tissue necrosis

5. A 25-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about acute pain in the mandible on the right that occurs during eating. Objectively: the approximate distal surface of the 45 tooth exhibits a carious cavity filled with light softened dentin. Probing causes a minor pain response across the entire floor. Percussion causes no pain. Cold water causes transient pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

6. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that aggravates during eating, body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
b. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area
c. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
d. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
e. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area

7. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about fever up to 37, 6°C, soft tissue swelling, pain in the 47 tooth on the lower jaw on the left, the pain aggravates when the tooth is touched by its antagonist. Objectively: mucogingival fold of the alveolar process is hyperemic and flat on the vestibular side of the decayed 47 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Periodontal abscess

8. A 12-year-old boy complains of a cavity in the tooth on the lower left jaw. Objectively: 1/3 of the 36 tooth is destroyed, the carious cavity opens into the dental cavity; reaction to cold stimulus is positive; probing and percussion are painless. X-ray imaging shows the periodontal fissure of the 36th tooth roots to be widened.What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic simple pulpitis
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

9. A 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 85 tooth. What is the optimal material for the root canal filling?
*a. Zinc-eugenol cement
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Resorcinol-formalin paste
d. Calcium-containing paste
e. Zinc-phosphate cement

10. A patient complaining of constant dull pain in the 38 tooth has made an appointment with a dentist. Mouth opening is restricted to 1 cm. The patient is prescribed extraction of the 38 tooth.What kind of anesthesia should be administered?
a. Mandibular
b. Extraoral administration of mandibular anaesthesia
c. Tuberal
*d. Веrcher-Dubov anaesthesia
e. Torusal

11. A 67-year-old patient consulted an orthodontist about missing of the 34, 35, 36, 37, 45, 46 teeth. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows the alveolar bone resorption in the range of 1/3 of the interdental septa height. What construction should be offered to the patient?
a. Cap splint
b. Van Thiel splint
c. Bridges on the posterior teeth
d. Removable partial lamellar denture
*e. Clasp prosthesis with splinting elements

12. A 22-year-old student complains of gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: hyperemia and edema of marginal gingiva of the front teeth on both jaws, periodontal pockets are absent. X-ray reveals no pathological changes.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Localized periodontitis
d. Ulcerative gingivitis
*e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

13. A 32-year-old male patient complains of dryness and burning pain in the back of the tongue. The symptoms have been lasting for 1 week. The pain increases when spicy food is taken. A day prior to that the patient had suffered from pneumonia and had been taking antibiotics. Objectively: the skin and mucosa of oral cavity are pale. The tongue mucosa is hyperemic and swollen; there is crumbling grey-and-white coating in the folds of the back of the tongue; the lateral surfaces of the tongue are desquamated. The saliva is thick and drags in threads after a spatula. Choose the most effective drug complex for topical treatment:
*a. Methylene blue + Pimafucin (Natamycin)
b. Decaminum (Dequalinium chloride) + Hydrocortisone
c. Furacilinum (Nitrofural) + Solcoseryl
d. Furacilinum (Nitrofural) + Methylene blue
e. Hydrocortisone ointment + Solcoseryl

14. A 46-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 36 tooth. Its crown is decayed. The patient presented with edema of soft tissues adjacent to the mandible. Body temperature rose up to 39, 0°C, the patient has chill. Examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced edema of the left mandibular alveolar process on the vestibular and oral side (acute periostitis); the 35, 36, 37 teeth are mobile, subgingival pockets contain purulent exudate; their percussion causes acute pain. Positive Vincent’s symptom is present. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis from the 36 tooth
b. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
*d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible from the 36 tooth

15. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic porcelain-fused-to-metal denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
a. Stomalgin
b. Stens
c. Repin
*d. Sielast
e. Orthocor

16. A20-year-old patient addressed a dentist for treatment of the destroyed teeth. Examination revealed round painless papulae with hyperemic infiltrated crown 7 mm in diameter on the palatine arches, soft palate, tonsils, tongue. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, dense, elastic, painless and mobile. What tactics should a doctor choose?
*a. Refer for a consultation to a venereologist
b. Refer for a consultation to an ENT doctor
c. Perform cytological analysis
d. Perform oral cavity sanation
e. Perform bacteriological analysis

17. A week ago an 18-year-old girl complained of pain in the 22 tooth which was treated and filled several years ago. Over the past two days the pain increased. Objectively: the 22 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, mucous membrane is hyperaemic and edematic. Spot-film roentgenograph of the 22 tooth shows an ill-defined periapical bone rarefaction 0,4x0,5 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Suppuration of the radicular cyst
b. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 22 tooth
c. Acute maxillary periostitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 22 tooth
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

18. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient received a cheek abrasion that healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38, 6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region
b. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
*c. Acute lymphadenitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Epidemic parotitis

19. A 3-year-old girl complains of pain and swelling in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5- 37,9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a swelling in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II grade of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
b. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
*d. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis
e. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis

20. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of a false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect up to 1 cm large.What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Oxman’s bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilow’s pivot point
c. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxman’s pivot point
e. Clasp denture

21. A 32-year-old patient has made an appointment with a dental surgeon to have oral cavity sanation performed prior to denture installation. During examination the doctor stated the following: the crown of the 25 tooth is destroyed. The tooth root is stable, and its percussion is painless. Mucosa of the alveolar process is unchanged. X-ray reveals slight widening of the periodontal fissure. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Chronic periodontitis of the 25th tooth
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 25th tooth
c. Cystogranuloma
*d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 25th tooth
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 25th tooth

22. A 45-year-old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
*a. Minor saddle denture with clasp fixation
b. Common partial removable denture
c. Protective palatal bars
d. Common dental bridge
e. Clasp denture with obturating part

23. A 25-year-old patient presents with fluorosis of vestibular surfaces of the upper incisors. Which of the following constructions will provide the maximum aesthetic result?
a. Plastic crown
b. Combined Kurylenko crown
c. Metal-plastic crown
*d. Veneers
e. Ceramic crown

24. A 6-year-old child complains of pain in the mandibular tooth on the left during eating. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 36 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within the mantle dentin. The cavity is full of light softened dentin which can be easily removed with an excavator. Probing of the cavity walls causes pain response. The teeth are sensitive to thermal stimuli, the pain is of short-term nature. There is no response to percussion. Select the optimal filling material:
a. Zinc phosphate cement
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Polycarboxylate cement
*d. Silver amalgam
e. Silicate cement

25. A 48-year-old patient complains of subfebrile temperature and a growing ulcer on the gingival mucosa around the molars; teeth mobility in the affected area, cough. Objectively: gingival mucosa in the region of the lower left molars has two superficial extremely painful ulcers with undermined edges. The ulcers floor is yellowish, granular, covered with yellowish and isolated pink granulations. The ulcers are surrounded by the tubercles. Dental cervices are exposed, there is a pathological tooth mobility. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and make dense matted together groups. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Syphilis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Decubital ulcer
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Acute aphthous stomatitis

26. A 78-year-old patient is completely edentulous. He has been wearing dentures for 19 years. The patient complains of poor fixation of the upper denture. Objectively: the lower third of the face is shortened, the alveolar processes of both jaws aremarkedly atrophied, the palate is flat. Mucous membrane in the denture-supporting area is atrophied. How often should the dentures be remodelled or restored?
a. Every 7 years
b. Every 10-12 years
c. Every 6 months
d. Once a year
*e. Every 3-4 years

27. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory region, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesn’t excrete saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cyst of the gland
b. Mixed tumour
*c. Adenocarcinoma
d. Glandular tuberculosis
e. Chronic lymphadenitis

28. When a prosthodontist was preparing the patient’s tooth, the patient had epileptic seizure that was subsequently terminated. Whatmistake had beenmade by the doctor?
a. Did not decline the appointment
*b. No inquire into the patient anamnesis
c. No anesthesia
d. No inquire into the antecedent anamnesis
e. Crude preparation

29. A 13-year-old child complains of having a cavity in the front maxillary teeth. Contact medial surfaces of the 11 and 21 teeth exhibit cavities found within the mantle dentin and filled with dense pigmented dentin. Probing of the cavity floor causes no pain response, neither does dental percussion. Select the best filling material for the permanent seals:
a. Zinc phosphate cement
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Silicate cement
d. Silicophosphate cement
*e. Resin composite

30. A 30-year-old patient complains of toothache caused by hot and cold stimuli. The pain irradiates to the ear and temple. Previously there was spontaneous nocturnal toothache. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity communicating at one point with the tooth cavity. Probing at the communication point, as well as cold stimulus, causes acute pain. The pain persists for a long time. Electric pulp test result is 55 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

31. An 11-year-old boy complains of a carious cavity in the mandibular tooth on the right. Objectively: the 46 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within the mantle dentin. The dentin is dense, pigmented; there is pain response to the cold stimulus; probing and percussion cause no pain response. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic superficial caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Acute deep caries
*e. Chronic median caries

32. During preventive examination an 11- year-old girl presents with slight hyperemy, cyanosis, swollen gums, gingival papilla are loose, not adjacent to teeth cervices. Fedorov-Volodkina dental hygiene index is 4 points. Schiller’s test is positive. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. -
d. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

33. A 22-year-old medical student complains of the changed colour of his central upper incisor on the right. Two years ago the tooth became gray. Objectively: the 2 tooth is filled, changed in colour, stable, percussion is painless. The patient has closed bite. What is the absolute contraindication to making porcelain crowns for this patient?
a. Defects of pulpless teeth that cannot be restored with inlays
*b. Closed bite
c. Enamel hypoplasia with a change of tooth shape and colour
d. Defects of the anterior teeth that cannot be restored with fillings
e. Abnormal tooth colour

34. A 25-year-old patient complains of pain caused by eating sweet, hot and cold food; pain ceases, when stimulation stops.Objectively: the adjoining surface of the 36th tooth has a deep carious cavity localised in the circumpulpar dentin. The dentin is softened. Probing of the carious cavity floor is painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*e. Acute deep caries

35. A 27-year-old patient complains of the long-term pain in the 22 tooth caused by cold and hot food, as well as of spontaneous pain lasting for 30 minutes and occurring 3- 4 times per day, aggravating at night. Pain arose 3 days ago after preparation of the tooth for the acrylic crown. Objectively: the 22 tooth is intact, the thermal test causes acute long-lasting pain, percussion is painless. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Devital pulp extirpation
b. Vital pulp amputation
c. Application of fluorine lacquer
d. Biological treatment of pulpitis
*e. Vital pulp extirpation

36. An 11-year-old boy complains of a shortterm pain from the cold in the left mandibular tooth. Objectively: the medial surface of the 36 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin. The cavity is filled with light, softened dentin and does not communicate with the cavity of the tooth. Probing the of the 36 tooth floor causes pain response, the tooth is not sensitive to percussion, the response to the cold stimulus does not remain long after its removal.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute median caries
*d. Acute deep caries
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

37. A 46-year-old patient after the recovery froma case of influenza has suddenly started suffering from pain in the 36 tooth, the crown of which had been destroyed. The soft tissues surrounding the lower jaw are swollen. There are high fever up to 39°C and chills. Objectively: there is prominent swelling of the left lower jaw alveolar mucosa (both oral and vestibular surfaces). The 34, 35 and 37 intact teeth are mobile. Percussion is painful. The gingival pockets produce purulent exudate. Vincent’s symptom is observed.What diagnosis can be suspected?
a. Periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 36th tooth
d. Acute suppurative mandibular periostitis starting from the 36th tooth
*e. Acute odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 36th tooth

38. A doctor treating an AIDS-positive patient has accidentally pierced his own skin of the palm with a root needle.What should be the first course of actions?
a. Process the breach with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
*b. Squeeze out blood, process the breach with 70% alcohol solution
c. Apply tourniquet to the shoulder
d. Squeeze out blood, process the breach with strong solution of potassium permanganate
e. Process the breach with 5% iodine solution

39. A 57-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility, inability to eat. Objectively: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 47 teeth exhibit II grade mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
*b. Removable cast splint
c. Kurlyandsky splint bar
d. Removable partial denture
e. Removable Bynin splint

40. A 7-year-old boy complains of increased body temperature up to 38°C, headache, sore throat. Objectively: there are erosions on the slightly hyperemic mucosa of the soft palate, anterior pillars of the fauces, tonsils. The submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, painless. Name the causative agent of this disease:
a. Epstein-Barr virus
b. Herpes simplex virus
*c. Coxsackie virus
d. Klebs-Loeffler bacillus
e. Bordet-Gengou bacillus

41. A patient complains of dull ache in the 16 tooth, which occurs during eating cold food. Anamnesis: the tooth had been filled due to deep caries, the filling was lost 1 year ago. Objectively: a deep carious cavity that does not penetrate the tooth cavity is present; percussion is painless, probing is painful along the whole floor of the carious cavity. Electric pulp test - 50 microamperes. Thermodiagnosis is painful. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

42. A patient complains of acute short-term toothache caused by thermal and chemical irritants. The tooth has not been treated before, the pain arose about a month ago. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 36 tooth there is a deep carious cavity within circumpulpal dentin with overhanging chalky enamel. Probing of the cavity floor causes slight pain. There is also short-term pain from the cold stimulus. The result of electric pulp test is 8 microamperes.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulp hyperemia
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

43. A 65-year-old patient needs complete removable dentures for both jaws. At the stage of ”testing the denture construction” the doctor checks the pronunciation of sounds ”S” and ”Z”. Which method of normalization of speech functions should be applied in this case?
a. Spectrographic
b. Acoustic
c. Graphic
d. Myogymnastics
*e. Phonetic tests

44. A 7,5-year-old boy fell down on his face and damaged his front maxillary teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 11 and 12 teeth are destroyed by 1/4. The tooth cavity is closed. Probing causes pain along the break-off line, percussion of the 11 and 12 teeth causes no pain response. Mucosa around the 11 and 12 teeth is slightly hyperemic. Radiograph of the 11 and 12 teeth shows intactness of the dental tissues and alveolar process.What tactics of a dentist would be optimal in the first hours after the injury?
*a. Pulp monitoring
b. Photopolymer filling
c. Composite filling
d. Parapulpar pin reconstruction
e. Fabrication of an artificial crown

45. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotid-masticatory area and progressing facial asymmetry first noticed one month ago. The diagnosis is the cancer of parotid gland - T2N2. What method of treatment is optimal in the given case?
a. Surgical extraction of neoplasm
b. Chemotherapy
c. Lymph nodes removal
*d. Combined method
e. Radiation therapy

46. A 20-year-old male patient complains of acute pain during eating, bad breath, general weakness. Objectively: interdental papillae and marginal gingiva are covered with dirty gray film, any touch is painful. The body temperature is of 37, 5°C. Blood count: RBC- 4, 8 × 1012/l, Hb- 150 g/l, colour index - 0,9, WBC- 10, 5 × 109/l, JG- 2%, BASO- 1%, EOS- 5%, segmented neut. - 8%, stabs - 47%, LYM- 35%, PLT- 250 × 109/l. ESR- 20 mm/hour.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Agranulocytosis
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Chronic leukemia
*d. Vincent’s gingivitis
e. Acute leukemia

47. A 68-year-old patient, having suffered from stroke, suffers from periodical bouts of retching, which lead to unilateral dislocation of the temporormandibular joint. Setting the joint was possible only with anesthesia. Objectively the following teeth are absent: from the 21 to the 28, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36, 37, 44, 46, 47.What kind of denture construction will be optimal for the duration of treatment?
a. Schroder appliance with sliding joint
b. Yadrova appliance
c. Khodorovych-Burgonska appliance with restrictor
*d. Removable laminar denture with mouth opening restrictor
e. Petrosov appliance with restrictor

48. A 9-year-old child complains of pain in the left mandibular molar that occurs during eating. The masticatory surface of the 75 tooth exhibits a carious cavitiy filled with softened dentin and localized within parapulpar dentin. The cavity communicates with the tooth cavity. Probing at the site of communication causes acute pain and moderate bleeding. Percussion of the tooth causes no pain response. Radiography revaled no periodontal alterations in the 75 tooth. Select the method of treatment:
a. Devital extirpation
b. Vital amputation
c. Biological method
*d. Devital amputation
e. Vital extirpation

49. A 40-year-old patient complains of fever up to 38°C, and a roundish infiltration on the upper lip. Objectively: the upper lip on the left exhibits a round infiltrate, the overlying skin is deep crimson. The infiltrate adheres to the surrounding tissues and has a necrotic core in the center. The upper lip is hyperemic, edematous. What diagnosis can be made?
*a. Upper lip furuncle
b. Retention cyst
c. Upper lip carbuncle
d. Acute lymphadenitis
e. Acute abscess of the upper lip

50. A 25-year-old patient received a trauma to the chin region. On the basis of X-ray he was diagnosed with bilateral mental fracture of mandible. Specify the direction of displacement of the minor fragment:
a. Upward and forward
b. Downward and forward
c. There is no displacement
*d. Downward and backward
e. Upward and backward

51. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred to orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are stable. What is the most aesthetic splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Ring adhesion splint
b. Cap splint
c. Brace
*d. Mamlok splint
e. Soldered combined crowns

52. A 42-year-old patient has been hospitalized with Le Fort II fracture ofmaxilla. Select an appliance for the treatment of this patient:
a. Kulagin
b. Penn-Brown
c. Yadrova
*d. Zbarzh
e. Rudko

53. A 25-year-old patient complains of brief pain attacks during eating sweet, hot or cold food. Objectively: on the contact surface of the 36 tooth there is a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin. The dentin is softened. Probing of the cavity is painful. Vertical and horizontal percussion is painless. Electric pulp test - 9 microamperes. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Chronic median caries
*b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic deep caries

54. A 39-year-old patient suffers from microstomia. What impression tray should be used?
a. Custom plastic
b. Collapsible
c. Standard
d. Standard for edentulous jaw
*e. Demountable

55. In a prostodontic clinic a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for a 53-year-old patient. Objectively: dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27. The teeth are firm, clinical crowns are tall with pronounced equator. X-ray shows no periapical changes in the periodontium of the abutment teeth. What clammer fixation is optimal for this patient?
a. Sagittal
b. Transversal
c. Point
*d. Planar
e. Diagonal

56. An intradental splint for the 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43 teeth is being made for a 50- year-old patient. During its installation in the oral cavity hemorrhage occurred from the 41 tooth root canal. What caused the hemorrhage?
a. Pulp trauma
b. Damaged root bifurcation
c. Crown perforation
*d. Wall perforation of the root canal
e. Trauma of the gingival margin

57. A 34-year-old male patient complains of acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is aggravating when affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he did not consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis

58. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Dentures with extended borders
b. Dentures with shortened borders
c. Implant-supported dentures
*d. Dentures with elastic lining
e. Dentures with metal bases

59. A 56-year-old patient complains of frequent breakage of the basis of the partial laminar denture of the upper jaw. Objectively: only the 23 tooth is retained on the upper jaw. Cracks in the deture basis appear in the area of the 23 tooth. What should be done to reinforce the denture basis?
a. Make the basis out of Phtorax plastic
b. Make the basis out of Ethacryl-02 plastic
*c. Make a new denture with telescopic fixation on the 23rd tooth
d. Make the basis out of Prothacryl-Mplastic
e. Make the basis out of Redont plastic

60. A patronage nurse visited a newborn baby. Examination revealed the shortened lower part of the face, the backward-sloping chin, missing teeth, the retroposed lower jaw. What is the number of dental follicles in each jaw of a newborn baby?
a. 16
b. 12
c. 10
*d. 18
e. 14

61. A 47-year-old patient complains of a burning sensation and pain in the mouth. Objectively: on the mucous membrane of cheeks along the line of teeth contact and in the corners of mouth there are multiple polygonal bright red erosions 1,0-1,5 cm in diameter located on the hyperkeratinized plaque and opaque whitish mucosa. Cytological analysis revealed keratinizing epithelial cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Leukoplakia, erosive form
b. Erythema multiforme
c. Lupus erythematosus, erosive form
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Lichen planus, erosive form

62. A 27-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 35 tooth. The pain is caused by cold stimuli and quickly abates after the stimulus is removed. Objectively: in the cervical region of the 35 tooth there is a dental tissue defect within the enamel. The defect has white crumbling edges. Electroexcitability of the pulp was 5 mkA.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Enamel erosion
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Acute initial caries

63. A 27-year-old female patient has her 26 tooth cavity accidentially breached along the mesial buccal line angle during treatment of acute deep caries of the 26. Choose the optimal method of treatment:
*a. Biological method
b. Non-vital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Non-vital extirpation

64. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumor-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the vermilion border, it is dense and grayish-red in color. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
*b. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion border of lip
c. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the vermilion border of lip
d. Abrasive precancerous Manganotti’s cheilitis
e. Bowen’s disease

65. A 45-year-old man complains of dryness and painfulness of the lower lip. On examination: the lower lip is swollen, dry, covered in small scales and fissures. In the Klein area (wet-dry line) there are dilated openings of salivatory glands observed as red dots producing clear substance. The lower lip mucosa is lumpy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cheilitis glandularis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Cheilitis exfoliativa
d. Exematous cheilitis
e. Actinic cheilitis

66. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
a. Conical
*b. Threaded
c. Plate-form
d. Endodontic-endoosseous
e. Subperiosteal

67. A 40-year-old man, a chemical industry worker, notes the development of soreness of the mouth, pain response to thermal and chemical stimuli. On examination: on the vestibular surface and cutting edge of the front teeth there are enamel defects with uneven scalloped margins, chalk-like in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel hypoplasia (erosive form)
b. Superficial caries
*c. Acidic necrosis of enamel
d. Fluorosis (erosive form)
e. Median caries

68. A 57-year-old female patient complains of burning pain, dry mouth, sensation of a foreign body on the tongue back and lateral surfaces, which disappears in the process of eating. The first case of such symptoms was noted a year ago after psychological trauma. The patient suffers from pancreatic diabetes and sleep disturbance. Examination revealed the following: the tongue mucosa is without significant changes, moderately moistened. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Candidal glossitis
b. Hunter-Moeller’s glossitis
c. Glossitis with fissured tongue
*d. Glossodynia
e. Glossitis areata exfoliativa

69. A patient presented to a dental clinic for complex dental care. Objectively: the 37 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. There is no response to stimuli. Radiography reveals widening and deformation of the periodontal ligament space in the apical region.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

70. An 18-year-old patient complaining of large diastem has made an appointment with a prosthodontics specialist. Objectively: there is full lateral displacement of the central incisors due to absence of the 12 and 22 teeth. What instrument is the most advisable for moving the central incisors closer together?
a. Simple cotton ligature
b. Vasylenko appliance
*c. Korkhaus appliance
d. Kalvelis appliance
e. Begg appliance

71. An injured patient complains of limited opening of the mouth, nose bleeding, skin numbness in the infraorbital and lower eyelid region. Objectively: there is face deformation due to the depression of soft tissues in the left cheekbone region, step deformity in the middle part of the inferior margin of the left orbit and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest.What is themost likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone without displacement of fragments
b. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
c. Fracture of the malar arch
*d. Zygomatic bone fracture with displacement of bone fragments
e. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla

72. A 60-year-old patient addressed a dentist with complaints of a conic protrusion appearing on the skin of his chin on the left. Height of the protrusion is 1,5 cm, width - 0,8 cm. Palpation is painless; there are clear margins; the protrusion is gray-brown in color; on palpation of the soft tissues near the protrusion base a thickening can be detected.What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Melanoma
c. Bowen’s disease
d. Papilloma
*e. Cutaneous horn

73. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
b. Straight elevator
c. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

74. A patient complains of restricted mouth opening, pain during swallowing, fever up to 38, 5°C, weakness, indisposition. Objectively: the mouth opens up to 1 cm. After Berchet anesthesia examination of the oral cavity revealed edema, hyperemia, tenderness of the pterygomandibular fold. Lateral and posterior pharyngeal walls are intact. The 38 tooth is semi-impacted. Palpation of the internal surface of the mandibular angle is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute tonsillitis
b. Acute pericoronitis of the 38 tooth region
c. Phlegmon of the peripharyngeal space
*d. Phlegmon of the pterygomandibular space
e. Phlegmon of the infratemporal region

75. A 37-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums, bad breath, loose teeth, difficulties with chewing food. Objectively: gums are bluish-red in colour; periodontal pockets are 6 mm deep and contain serous substance; class II teeth mobility; moderate deposits of subgingival and supragingival dental calculus;OralHygiene Index equals 3 points; there is traumatical occlusuion along all the length of the dental arches. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, acute
b. Histiocytosis X
c. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, acute
*d. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, chronic
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

76. A 3-year-old child suffers from extreme gingivitis with slight teeth mobility; the teeth are intact. The skin is dry, the hair is brittle, the skin of the palms and soles of the feet is rough and covered in small cracks. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
b. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
c. Letterer-Siwe disease
d. Eosinophilic granuloma (Taratynov’s disease)
e. Niemann-Pick disease

77. A 49-year-old patient has a tooth removed from the left upper jaw under plexus anesthesia with articaine-forte (Articaine + Epinephrine). After the operation the tooth socket did not fill with blood clot. How to prevent alveolitis in this case?
a. Fill the socket with antibiotic dusting powder
*b. Loosely fill the socket with iodoform tampon
c. Lavage the socket with microcide solution
d. Fill the socket with hemostatic sponge
e. Lavage the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution

78. A 24-year-old woman consulted a dentist about pain in the 26 tooth. After a physical examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth. During the tooth extraction the coronal part of the tooth was accidentally broken. Further manipulations with bayonet forceps failed to extract the tooth roots. What actions are to be taken for the successful root extraction?
a. To complete the tooth extraction during the next visit
b. To use angular elevator
c. To send the patient to the hospital
d. To use Lecluse elevator
*e. To disjoin the roots by using a drill and fissure burr

79. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child revealed a habit of lower lip biting. What malocclusion may develop if the child keeps this habit?
a. Cross-bite
*b. Anterior bite
c. Open bite
d. Prognathic bite
e. Deep overbite

80. A 7-year-old child has protruding chin, the lower lip overlaps the upper one. There are diastemas and tremas between the lower incisors, the lower incisors overlap the upper incisors by 2/3 of the crown height. First permanent molars demonstrate Angle’s class III relation. Sagittal gap is 3 mm. The correct doctor’s tactics will be to:
a. Use Angle’s apparatus
b. Recommend a complex of myogymnastic exercises
*c. Use Bruckl’s appliance
d. Use Bynin appliance
e. Use Schwartz appliance

81. A 5-year-old child was found to have missing upper molars. Lower incisors are in contact with the mucous membrane of palate. Specify the doctor’s tactics:
*a. Fabricate a removable laminar denture
b. Examine the child once a year until the eruption of permanent teeth
c. Medical intervention is not needed
d. Fabricate an orthodontic appliance for the treatment of closed bite
e. Examine the child every six months until the eruption of permanent teeth

82. A 14-year-old girl complains of indistinct pronunciation that showed up at the age of 14 after the acute respiratory viral disease. Examination revealed normal face and normal teeth alignment, occlusal disharmony was not found. Palpation did not reveal cleft palate. Uvula does not move during pronunciation of sounds, its palpation does not cause gag reflex. What is the cause of indistinct pronunciation of sounds?
a. Deformation of the bite
*b. Paresis of the soft palate and uvula muscles
c. Palatal slit
d. Adenoid vegetations
e. Hypertrophy of lingual tonsil

83. A 42-year-old woman has made an appointment with a prosthodontic office to make a denture. Objectively the dental formula is as follows: 18 . . . . 13 12 11 21 22 23 . . . . 28 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . The patient has deep occlusion; clinical crowns are low; equator is not pronounced. The patient suffers from epileptic seizures. What kind of denture should be prescribed for this patient?
a. Bugel dental prosthesis
*b. Partial removable laminar metal-based denture
c. Partial removable laminar plastic denture with clasp-retainers
d. Dental bridge
e. Partial removable laminar denture with supporting-retaining clasps

84. A 15-year-old girl complaining of moderate swelling of the left paroticmasticatory area is being examined by a dental surgeon. Palpation revealed the left parotid gland to be bulgy, dense, and painless. Turbid saliva is being secreted from the duct. The duct orifice is dilated, the surrounding mucosa is cyanotic, pastose, with teeth imprints.What disease is it?
*a. Chronic parenchymatous sialoadenitis
b. Sialolithiasis
c. Cyst
d. Mixed tumor
e. Chronic interstitial sialoadenitis

85. A 39-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the history that the indicated tooth had been treated before for caries. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is edematic and hyperemic. Percussion of the tooth is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to remove the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anesthesia should be administered?
a. Application anaesthesia
b. Intraosseous anaesthesia
c. Infiltration anaesthesia
d. Intraligamentous anaesthesia
*e. Field block anaesthesia

86. At a prosthetics dentistry clinic a 35- year-old patient received a porcelain-fusedto- metal crown for the 21 tooth. What is the minimum warranty period for porcelainfused- to-metal crowns under the current legislation?
a. 6 months
b. 3 months
c. 24 months
d. 36 months
*e. 12 months

87. During the preparation of a tooth a patient had an epileptic seizure. The seizure was arrested.What mistake did the orthopaedist make?
a. Did not apply one of the types of local anesthesia
b. Skipped psychological preparation of the patient
c. Did not apply general anaesthesia
*d. Did not collect complete history data
e. Violated the rules of preparation

88. During the surgical removal of a retention cyst of the lower lip a 14-year-old boy complained of sudden weakness, dizziness, nausea. Objectively: the skin is covered with cold sweat. Respiration is frequent, pulse is weak, BP is low (90/60 mm Hg), the hands are cold.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
c. Toxic shock
d. Traumatic shock
*e. Syncope

89. A 56-year-old patient addressed a dental surgeon for extraction of the 27 tooth.What anesthesia should be applied?
a. Torusal
*b. Tuberal, palatal
c. Infiltration, incisive
d. Palatal, infraorbital
e. Mandibular

90. A 28-year-old patient has been suffering from gum discomfort, gingival hemorrhages and pain, especially during eating, for a week. Objectively: the gums are swollen and markedly hyperemic, especially in the area of the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth, soft plaque and tartar are present, gingival sulcus is up to 2 mm deep. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Initial stage of chronic generalized periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of initial generalized periodontitis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Acute deep gingivitis

91. An 18-year-old patient complains of chalky spot in the 23 tooth, which is slightly painful when cold stimulus is applied. Objectively: the vestibular surface near dental cervix of the 23 tooth has a white spot 2-3 mm in size. Probing is painless and reveals coarseness of the surface. Thermal stimulus causes slight pain.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Fluorosis
*e. Acute initial caries

92. A 12-year-old child presents with body temperature of 38°C, chills, nausea, vomiting, delirium, weakness. In the middle third of the face there is butterfly-shaped rash. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, slightly painful. Blood count: WBC- 12 × 109/l, lymphocytes - 8, 0 × 109/l, ESR- 26 mm/hour. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cutaneous actinomycosis
b. Facial vein phlebitis
*c. Erysipelas
d. Streptoderma. Submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute nonodontogenic sinusitis

93. Objective examination of a 65-yearold patient with the completely edentulous mandible revealed a marked uniform atrophy of the alveolar bone; bony prominences on the lingual surface in the region where premolars had previously been. Mucosa was unevenly pliable; alveolar crest was mobile in the frontal region. The clinical condition of the mandible should be taken into consideration at the following stage of denture fabrication:
a. Measuring the centric relation of jaws
*b. Taking a differentiated impression
c. Taking a positive pressure impression
d. Taking an anatomical impression
e. Taking a decompression impression

94. A 62-year-old patient diagnosed with TMJ arthritis presented to a clinic. The patient underwent radiography. Specify the radiological presentations of TMJ arthritis:
a. Compaction of the articular head cortex
*b. Changed shape of the bone elements of the joint
c. Joint space widening
d. Joint space narrowing
e. No joint space

95. A 45-year-old patient has a bilateral mental mandibular fracture with a typical displacement of fragments. What actions should be taken to eliminate asphyxia?
a. Tracheostomy
*b. Pull out and pierce the tongue
c. Tracheal intubation through the nose
d. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
e. Tracheal intubation through the mouth

96. A 53-year-old patient complains of absent 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. On examination it is decided to make a porcelainfused- to-metal bridge with the 13 and 23 as abutment teeth. During preparation ledges are created in abutment teeth. Ledge width can vary within the following range:
a. 0,1-0,2 mm
*b. 1,5-2,0 mm
c. 2,0-2,5 mm
d. 0,5-0,8 mm
e. 2,5-3,0 mm

97. A 16-year-old girl complains of cosmetic defect of the front teeth - there are dark spots and hard tissue defects. The spots were detected in the process of teething, the defects developed later. The following diagnosis was made: erosive form of fluorosis of the 16, 11, 12, 22, 26, 31, 32, 36, 41, 42, 46 teeth. Choose the method of treatment:
*a. Restoration treatment
b. Prosthetics
c. Regular medical check-ups
d. Surgical treatment
e. Remineralization treatment

98. Parents of a 6-year-old boy complain of his high body temperature, decrease of his general well-being, painful swelling of the right cheek. Objectively: the skin is pale, the face is asymmetric due to swelling of the soft tissues of the right cheek. The maxillary alveolar process is bilaterally thickened in the area of the 55, 54 and 53 teeth, painful on palpation, these teeth are partially destroyed by caries, mobile (II-III degree), their dentogingival pockets produce pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic albuminous maxillar periostitis from the 53, 54, 55
b. Odontogenic buccal phlegmon from the 53, 54, 55
c. Acute odontogenic purulent maxillar periostitis from the 53, 54, 55
d. Odontogenic buccal abscess from the 53, 54, 55
*e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis from the 53, 54, 55

99. In the process of the 26th tooth extraction a 34-year-old patient suddenly developed the following symptoms: tinnitus, weakness, paleness of skin. Vertigo was diagnosed. What is the most advisable first aid approach?
a. Subcutaneous injection of cordiamin
b. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
c. Intramuscular injection of 50% analgin (mеtamisole sodium) solution
d. Intravenous injection of 0,1%adrenaline
*e. Put the patient in the Trendelenburg position

100. A 53-year-old patient complains of an ulcer on the lateral surface of the tongue. The ulcer appeared 6 months ago in the result of a trauma caused by sharp tip of the 37 tooth metal crown. A dentist replaced the crown with the one of better quality and prescribed keratoplastic drugs. Despite these measures the ulcer continues to grow. Lately there has been pain during talking, chewing, swallowing; sometimes the pain irradiates to the pharynx. Objectively: on the lateral surface of the tongue there is a painful ulcer with uneven raised dense margins and lumpy floor covered with grayish necrotic coating. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
c. Tuberculous ulcer
*d. Cancer of the tongue lateral surface
e. Traumatic ulcer

101. An 8-year-old child has been clinically diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth. The crown is decayed by 1/2.What is the dentist’s optimal tactics?
a. Opening along the mucogingival fold, drug thrapy
*b. Extraction
c. Endodontic treatment and drug therapy
d. Endodontic treatment
e. Drug therapy

102. A laminar denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 54-year-old patient. Base plate wax is used during laboratory stage for wax templates. What group of accessory materials does such wax belong to?
*a. Modeling
b. Fixing
c. Forming
d. Impression
e. Abrasive

103. A 28-year-old patient has been scheduled for the surgical resection of the root apex of the 12 tooth for chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What kind of anesthesia should be administered before the surgery?
*a. Bilateral infraorbital and incisive
b. Plexual and palatine
c. Terminal and incisive
d. Tuberal and palatine
e. Infraorbital and palatine

104. A 11-year-old child complains of pain during eating food, especially hot, in the lower right lateral tooth. On the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth there is a large carious cavity filled with softened light-brown dentin. The cavity is located within parapulpar dentin. In the projection of medial buccal pulp horn the carious cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing is painful. Electric pulp test - 60 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute focal pulpitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

105. A 34-year-old male patient complains of a cosmetic defect, a cavity on the vestibular surface in the cervical part of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the carious cavity is within the enamel, the floor and the walls are pigmented, probing and percussion and painless. There is no pain reaction to stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Acute surface caries
d. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
*e. Chronic surface caries

106. A 12-year-old boy complains of dull ache in the upper right tooth. The pain aggravates during biting. Objectively: in the 16 tooth there is a deep carious cavity penetrating into the tooth cavity, cold test and probing are painless, mucosa is swollen, hyperemic. X-ray reveals areas of bone tissue destruction with blurred margins near root apices.What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

107. To fill a medium depth carious cavity in the 37 tooth (Black class II) of a 35- year-old male patient a doctor has chosen a technique of layer-by-layer tooth restoration. What composite material should be applied for covering the carious cavity walls and floor to create the initial super adaptive layer?
a. Macrofilled
b. Condensable
*c. Flowable
d. Microhybrid
e. Microfilled

108. A patient suffered a facial trauma. On examination and X-ray the patient was diagnosed with fracture of the maxillar alveolar process. What treatment would be most advisable in this case?
a. Zbarzh apparatus
*b. Smooth oral splint
c. Gunning splint
d. Weber splint
e. Intermaxillary ligature

109. A 20-year-old male patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 24 tooth, which arose suddenly and persists for about 15 minutes at a time. Objectively: the distal surface of the 24 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity with overhanging walls. The cavity is filled with light-colored softened dentin and communicates with the tooth cavity. The cold stimulus causes acute, slowly abating pain. Percussion causes no pain response. Select the best method of treatment:
*a. Vital extirpation
b. Biological method
c. Devital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Vital amputation

110. A 9-year-old girl has been suffering from gingival hemorrhages, cracks in the mouth angles for a month. She has a history of frequent nosebleeds, rapid fatigability. Objectively: the skin of the face and oral mucosa are pale. In the mouth angles there are cracks reaching the red border. Gingiva in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth is hyperemic and edematous, bleeds when touched.DMF/dmf = 10. Back of the tongue is bright red, smooth, glossy. Submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, mobile, painless. What specialist should be consulted in the first place?
a. Infectious disease specialist
b. Gastroenterologist
c. Neuropathist
d. Endocrinologist
*e. Hematologist

111. A 25-year-old patient complains of pain when biting on the 15 tooth. The pain arose two days ago, has a constant aching nature and increased significantly over the last day. Objectively: the crown of the 15 tooth is gray, the medial contact surface exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Percussion causes acute pain, the gingival mucosa in the projection of the 25 tooth root apex is hyperemic. The regional lymph node is tender. Radiograph shows an ill-defined zone of periapical bone destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis, intoxication stage
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative periodontitis

112. A 27-year-old patient has been referred by a prosthodontist for endodontic treatment of the 45 tooth. Objectively: the 45 tooth crown is destroyed; the lateral surface of the tongue and the buccal mucosa have patches of grayish macerated epithelium slightly rising above the mucosa surface at the points of direct contact with the 45 tooth. The uvula and palatine arches are stagnant-red in color; hard palate has papulae surrounded with red margin and covered in grayish epithelium. The submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Soft leukoplakia (leucoplakia mollis)
b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Lupus erythematosus, patch stage
*e. Secondary syphilis

113. A 20-year-old male patient with insulindependent diabetes mellitus has been given anesthesia with Ultracain DS-forte for surgical oral sanitation. What complications may develop in this case?
a. Increased blood pressure
b. Atopic dermatitis
c. Toxic shock
*d. Abnormal levels of blood glucose
e. Clonus

114. As a result of an injury the 51and 61 teeth of a 3-year-old child have completely cut into the alveolar bone. Medical history record: the teeth were partially decayed, changed in colour. Select an appropriate treatment tactics:
a. Treatment is not required
*b. Extraction of the injured teeth
c. Reposition of teeth, endodontic treatment
d. Follow-up as the teeth may erupt again
e. Extraction of teeth, endodontic treatment, reposition

115. A 5-year-old girl complains of pain in the mouth angles occurring during mouth opening. She has a history of acute bronchitis and prolonged antibiotic therapy. Objectively: the red border is dry, the mouth angles are downturned. In the mouth angles there are cracks covered with white plaque and surrounded by slightly hyperemic elevation, painful on palpation and mouth opening. Oral mucosa exhibits no pathological changes, decay-missing-filled index - 2, hygiene index - 2,0. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meteorological cheilitis
b. Streptococcal cheilitis
*c. Mycotic cheilitis
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

116. A 43-year-old patient complains of mobility and significant neck exposure of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale and cyanotic, non-bleeding. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit the I-II grade mobility. The overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth is present. The necks of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed by 1/2 of the root length, the necks of the 43, 33 teeth are exposed by 1/4. What kind of dental prosthesis should be applied in this case?
a. Half-ring splint
*b. Cast removable splint
c. Cap splint
d. Kurlyandsky splint bar
e. Portion crown

117. A patient complains of fever up to 38°C, headache, pain in the joints anf muscles, vesicles in the oral cavity, mainly in the frontal part. Eating is sharply painful. For the last several years the disease recurred during wet anf windy weather. The patient often suffers from cases of URTI. Objectively: on the buccal, lingual, labial mucosa there are confluent erosions against the erythematous background, covered in graywhite coating. There are bloody scabs on the red border and in the angles of the mouth. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute aphthous stomatitis
b. Syphilis
*c. Erythema multiforme
d. Acute necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

118. A 14-year-old adolescent complains of bleeding and pain during eating occurring in the 36 tooth. Anamnesis states intense pain in the past. Objectively: the crown is severely damaged; carious cavity is large, penetrates into the tooth cavity, and is partially filled with overgrown pulp. The tissues demonstrate low sensitivity to touch, bleed upon touching. There are significant soft dental deposits on the 35 and 34 teeth.Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic papillitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic simple pulpitis

119. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57-year-old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Ney’s clasp should be applied?
a. I-II type clasp
b. II type clasp
c. I type clasp
d. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
*e. V type clasp

120. A 12-year-old boy due to trauma of the 44 and 45 teeth area suffers from the following: pathologic displacement of the mandibular alveolar process; rupture of the alveolar process mucosa. What additional examination is necessary to specify the diagnosis?
a. Tomography of the mandibula
b. -
c. X-ray of the cranium in axillary projection
d. X-ray of the mandibula in frontal and Parma projection
*e. X-ray of the mandibula in frontal and lateral projections

121. A 5-year-old child has sustained a trauma. Objectively: the crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are shorter then the adjacent crowns. The mucosa surrounding the 51 and 61 teeth is hyperemic and swollen. Xray imaging shows the periodontal fissure to be absent in the apical area of the 51 and 61 roots, the 51 and 61 roots apexes are submerged in the spongy bone of the body of the lower jaw. Choose the optimal treatment:
a. Splinting of teeth
b. Anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Resection of the 51st and 61st teeth and their splinting
*d. Extraction of the 51st and 61st teeth
e. Regular medical check-ups

122. During teeth preparation a patient developed an epileptic attack. What measures should a prostodontist take?
*a. To take measures to prevent tongue biting
b. To call in an emergency aid team
c. To introduse an anesthetic
d. To measure blood pressure
e. To continue working

123. A 34-year-old dental patient has an indication for the extraction of the 38 tooth for chronic fibrous periodontitis. The dental surgeon used torusal (Weisbrem’s) anesthesia. What nerves are blocked by this anesthesia?
*a. Superior alveolar, lingual, buccal
b. Superior alveolar, buccal
c. Lingual, buccal, mental
d. Superior alveolar, lingual
e. Lingual, buccal

124. A 26 year-old woman suffers from bleeding gums. For 3 years she has been suffering from pancreatic diabetes. Objectively: gingival papillas of all the teeth are hyperemic, swollen and overlap with the teeth crowns by 1/3 of the crowns height. What method of examination must be conducted for differentiated diagnostics?
a. Rheoparodontography
b. Stomatoscopy
c. Schiller-Pysarev iodine test
d. Capillary fragility test
*e. X-ray radiography

125. An orthodontist has been addressed by parents of a 5-year-old child. The child has the 54 tooth extracted, all the other deciduous teeth are present. The doctor made a thin-wall crown for the 55 tooth with interdental wedge to the 53 tooth. What is the purpose of such treatment?
a. Restoration of masticatory efficiency
b. Aesthetical restoration
*c. Prevention of dentition malformation
d. Acceleration of permanent tooth eruption
e. Deceleration of permanent tooth eruption

126. A 30-year-old patient, a lecturer, complains of periodical dislocations of the lower jaw. Objectively: direct occlusion, continuous dentition is retained. During mouth opening there is a clicking sound in the temporomandibular joint. What apparatus can prevent recurrent dislocation?
*a. Petrosov apparatus
b. Limberg apparatus
c. Zbarzh apparatus
d. Shur apparatus
e. Oxman apparatus

127. A 37-year-old patient complains of severe pain in the gums, difficult chewing, smell of rot from the mouth, bleeding gums, along with general fatigue, headaches, body temperature up to 37, 9°C.Objectively: large amout of soft dental deposit, shape of the gingival margin is abnormal, the gingival margin is covered with gray coating, regional lymph nodes are painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetic stomatitis
b. Thermal trauma
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Chemical trauma
*e. Ulcerative gingivitis

128. Parents of a 5-year-old boy addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of hemorrhage occurring from the boy’s mouth. According to the mother the boy had accidentally bit his tongue. Objectively: the tongue apex is damaged, the wound is 5 mm deep and is bleeding profusely. What aid should be provided?
a. Stop the hemorrhage by ligation of the lingual artery
b. Prescribe hemostatics intravenously
c. Prescribe antibacterial treatment and antiseptic oral rinsing
d. Perform antiseptic treatment of the wound and stop the hemorrhage by pressing the tissues
*e. Perform primary surgical treatment of the wound, apply blind sutures

129. A 49-year-old patient was hospitalised to an oral surgery department with a gunshot wound of the left side of the face. There is a 3,5 cm long defect of the body of the mandible on the left. After the initial surgical d-bridement and stabilization of the patient’s general state it is planned to perform plastic correction of the defect. What treatment method is optimal in the given case?
a. Galmosh polyfunctional apparatus application
b. Substitution of the defect with an autograft
c. Osteosynthesis with titanium reconstruction plate
d. Rudko’s apparatus application
*e. Shvyrkov’s compression-distraction osteosynthesis

130. Before performing a surgery a dental surgeon treats his hands according to Spasokukotsky-Kochergin method. What antiseptic is basic in this kind of treatment and how is it applied?
a. Two tissues with 5% liquid ammonia solution, 5 minutes each
b. Tissue with 0,5% chlorhexidine digluconate, 5 minutes
c. Tissue with 98%ethanol, 5 minutes
d. Two tissues with 96% ethanol, 5 minutes each
*e. 0,5% liquid ammonia solution in two washbasins, 3-5 minutes in each

131. A 37-year-old patient addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of deteriorating welbeing, high fever up to 38, 1°C, headache, painful swelling on the chin. Objectively: there is a dense painful infiltration 3x4 cm in size on the skin of the chin. The skin over the infiltration is bluish in color. There are four necrosis areas in the focal center around the hair follicles. The submental lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Dermal actinomycosis
b. Festered atheroma
c. Furuncle
d. Erysipelas
*e. Carbuncle

132. A 43-year-old woman complains of periodical facial assymetry and bursting stabbing pain in the submandibular area on the right, which increases after eating spicy and sour food. Eventually these clinical presentations disappear. The patient notes periodical exacerbations. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unrestricted, mucosa of the oral cavity floor is without pathologies. In the area of the sublingual fold a thickening of soft tissues can be palpated. Excretory duct of the submandibular gland produces no saliva. What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
a. Exacerbation of sialolithiasis of the submandibular gland on the right
b. Abscess of the submandibular region on the right
c. Acute serous lymphadenitis of the submandibular area on the right
d. Abscess of the mental region on the right
*e. Sialolithiasis of the submandibular gland on the right

133. Parents complain of painfulness and mobility of the tooth of their 4-year-old child, which developed after the impact with a wooden object. Objectively: the face is asymmetrical due to swollen tissues of the upper lip. The 51 tooth is intact, with vestibular displacement and the II degreemobility, gums around the 51 tooth are hyperemic. What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
*a. Incomplete dislocation of the 51 tooth
b. Contusion of the 51 tooth
c. Acute purulent periostitis
d. Acute albuminous periostitis
e. Complete dislocation of the 51 tooth

134. During preventive examination of a 19- year-old man it was revealed that there are carious lesions in the fissures of the 37 and 47 teeth, sealant is fully retained in the 16 and 26 but absent in the closed intact fissures of the 36. The 46 was extracted due to complicated caries. Determine the degree of caries in this patient:
a. 6
*b. 3
c. 4
d. 2
e. 5

135. A dentist performs endodontic treatment of the 31 tooth of a 62-year-old patient. The root canal is narrow, extremely calcificated. Choose the optimal tool to pass through the root canal in this case:
a. Gates-glidden drill
b. K-File Nitiflex
c. H-File
*d. Pathfinder
e. K-Reamer

136. A crown inlay for the patient’s 46 tooth is being prepared. At the first clinical stage the cavity preparation is completed with design of an incline. What material can be used for the inlay?
a. Pressed ceramics
*b. Metal alloy
c. Porcelain
d. Sinma M plastic
e. Composite

137. A 54-year-old patient complains of frequent crunching sound in the right temporomandibular joint, which developed one month ago. In the morning the crunching is more frequent and decreases towards the evening. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the skin above the joint is without changes, the mouth opens at 2,9 mm. What diagnosis is most likely in this case?
*a. Arthrosis
b. Temporomandibular joint dislocation
c. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome
d. Chronic arthritis
e. Acute arthritis

138. On examination of a 27-year-old patient the tip of the dental probe caught on the fissures of the 36, 37, 38 teeth. Margins of the enamel defect are dark, the surface is coarse. Teeth transillumination with photopolymer lamp revealed the defect to be limited to the enamel. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Chronic primary caries
b. Acute primary caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Chronic superficial caries

139. A 21-year-old woman addressed a doctor with complaints of bleeding gums and foul smell from her mouth. Objectively: the gums are congestively hyperemic, with cyanotic color. X-ray revealed resorption of interalveolar septa up to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized periodontitis, II degree
b. Chronic generalized periodontitis, III degree
c. Acute generalized periodontitis, II degree
*d. Chronic generalized periodontitis, I degree
e. Acute generalized periodontitis, I degree

140. A 68-year-old patient addressed a surgical department of a dental clinic for extraction of the 45 tooth. During procedure the patient developed burning retrosternal pain attack irradiating to the left shoulder, scapula, hand. The skin is pale, BP is 140/100 mm Hg, heart rate is rapid. Skin hyperplasia can be observed in the Zakharin-Head’s zones. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
*a. Angina pectoris attack
b. Bronchial asthma attack
c. -
d. Hypertensic crisis
e. Heart failure

141. During administration of Ultracain solution for infiltration anesthesia the condition of a 22-year-old patient sharply deteriorated. The patient became inert, silent, developed cough attacks, expiratory dyspnea, wheezing. Viscous slimy sputum is expectorated.What urgent condition did the patient develop?
a. Asphyxia
b. Collapse
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Hypertensic crisis
*e. Bronchial asthma attack

142. A 2,5-year-old boy has been delivered to an oral surgery. The patient has the upper lip cleft into three fragments, the palate is whole. Specify the period when cheiloplasty should be performed:
a. 15-19 months
b. 20-24 months
c. 3-5 months
d. 12-14 months
*e. 6-10 months

143. A 7-year-old boy has hyperemic gums; bleeding can be detected. The teeth are mobile, with roots exposed and covered with a layer of coating. Periodontal pockets demonstrate granulation. The child is registered with a pediatrician for diabetes insipidus. The child’s mother states that her son’s condition has deteriorated lately. The child suffers from periodontal syndrome characteristic of:
*a. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
b. Gaucher’s disease
c. Letterer-Siwe disease
d. Cushing’s disease
e. Diabetes mellitus

144. A 40-year-old patient addressed a prosthodontist with complaints of absent crown of the 24 tooth due to trauma. If the crown is broken off at the gum level, the tooth should be restored with:
a. Partial denture
b. Intradental inlay
c. Semi-crown
d. Equator crown
*e. Pivot crown

145. During extraction of the 36 tooth the tooth crown was fractured.What tool should be applied to extract tooth roots?
a. S-shaped forceps right side
*b. Bayonet forceps
c. Beak-shaped straight forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps left side
e. S-shaped forceps left side

146. A patient after the surgery for phlegmon of the pterygomandibular space was prescribed compresses with a membrane perforating drug. Which of the given below is a membrane perforating drug?
*a. Dimexid (Dimethyl sulfoxide)
b. Streptocid (Sulfidine)
c. Oflocain
d. Lincomycin
e. Ectericidum

147. A 64-year-old patient complains of spots on the mucosa of the cheeks, mouth angles, palate. Objectively: on the oral cavity mucosa there are white growths that cannot be removed with spatula. The mucosa around the spots is pale pink in color. The patient has been smoking for 40 years.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
*b. Leukoplakia
c. Bowen’s disease
d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Candidiasis

148. An 8-year-old girl complains of burning pain in her tongue during eating spicy and sour food. Objectively: there are red irregular-shaped spots on the tongue apex and dorsum. Filiform papillae are absent in the affected areas. The girl states that the spots periodically grow and migrate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Raspberry tongue
*b. Benign migratory glossitis
c. Fissured tongue
d. Median rhomboid glossitis
e. Hairy tongue

149. A 70-year-old patient addressed a hospital with complaints of poorly stabilized complete dentures of the upper and lower jaws. What method of artificial teeth arrangement is preferable in making of a new denture?
a. According to prothetic occlusion planes
*b. According to individual occlusion curves
c. According to standard occlusion curves
d. According to disocclusion planes
e. According to spherical occlusion curves

150. A 2,5-year-old child has fever up to 38, 5°C, low appetite, rash inside the oral cavity. The disease onset was 3 days ago. Objectively: the skin of the perioral area is covered in scarce vesicles with clear content.Within the oral cavity on the buccal and lingual mucosa there are sharply painful erosions, 2-3 mm in size, with white coating and hyperemic crown. The gums are swollen, hyperemic. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Stomatitis with the background of chickenpox
*b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
e. Stomatitis with the background of infectious mononucleosis

151. A 9-year-old girl complains of peeling lips and sensation of dryness, strain and burning in them. Objectively: on the red border from angle to angle of the mouth and from Klein area (wet-dry line) to the red border middle there are gray scales. The scales can be removed without erosions. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
*b. Exfoliative cheilitis, dry form
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
e. Atopic cheilitis

152. A patient addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of increased body temperature up to 37, 6°C, swelling of the soft tissues, pain in the 65 tooth, which aggravates upon touching it with its antagonist tooth. On examination there are hyperemy and smoothing out of the mucogingival fold of the alveolar process in the area of the destroyed 65 tooth. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Parodontal abscess
*d. Acute odontogenic purulent periostitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

153. A 17-year-old patient has been suffering for 2 years from periodical painful swelling and fistula appearing on the skin of gonial angle area. After cleaning the fistula of its purulent content pain and swelling disappear leaving a small concave scar. Objectively: there is a small scar on the skin in the gonial angle area. Palpation of the oral cavity floor reveals a dense band in the buccal soft tissues, which connects fistula with projection of the 47 tooth roots. Crown of the 47 is destroyed. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis of the left mandibular angle
*b. Migrating subcutaneous granuloma
c. Mandibular tuberculosis
d. Festered buccal atheroma
e. Actinomycosis of the parotid-masticatory area

154. A 30-year-old woman addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of uncomfortable sensation of pressure in her upper right tooth, which aggravates due to hot stimulus, and foul smell from the mouth. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 17 tooth, which penetrates into the tooth cavity. Deep probing causes severe pain, percussion of the 17 tooth is painful. X-ray: there is slight widening of the periodontal fissure near the root apex. Electric pulp test - 70 microamperes. What final diagnosis can be made?
a. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

155. A 20-year-old patient has made an appointment with a dentist. On external examination the patient is pale, complains of long-term fever, insomnia, weight loss of 13 kg within 5 months. The patient is homeless. The therapist’s consultation states: all groups of the lymph nodes are enlarged, hepatolienal syndrome. Blood test: leukocytes - 2, 2 × 109/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
*b. HIV infection
c. Tuberculosis
d. Chroniosepsis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

156. A 45-year-old patient complains of itching gums, pain in the area of the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth caused by chemical and thermal stimuli. Objectively: the gums are pale, no bleeding, the roots of affected teeth are exposed by 0,4 mm. The 43 and 33 demonstrate cuneiform defect. The teeth are intact. X-ray: regular resorption of interalveolar septa at 1/4 of their height. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Parodontosis, I degree
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis, I degree

157. An 18-year-old woman complains of gum growth, pain and bleeding during eating solid food. Objectively: hyperemy and swelling of the gums, gingival margin hypertrophy of the 12, 13, 14 teeth up to 1/2 of the crown height. Formalin test is painless. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Catarrhal gingivitis
b. Chronic generalized periodontitis, II degree
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Ulcerative gingivitis
e. Acute generalized periodontitis, I degree

158. A 48-year-old patient has made an appointment for extraction of the 35 tooth due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Specify the most advisable method of peripheral conduction anesthesia in this case:
a. Mental
b. Plexus
c. Infiltration
d. Extraoral mandibular
*e. Torusal

159. During application of an impression tray to the upper jaw of a 62-year-old patient the tray falls out when the patient opens his mouth wide. What edge of the tray should be shortened?
*a. In posterolateral area of the maxillary tuberosity
b. In the front area
c. In the buccal-alveolar fold area
d. In the palatine torus area
e. Along the A line

160. During objective examination of the patient’s oral cavity the lower jaw is revealed to be toothless, in the front area there is a mobile band of mucosa, irregular atrophy of the alveolar process.What method of obtaining functional impression would be most advisable in the given case?
*a. Differentiated impression
b. Compression impression
c. Gradual pressure impression
d. Selective pressure impression during mastication
e. Decompression impression

161. A 46-year-old man complains of constant losing of a filling in his lower right tooth. Objectively: in the 16 tooth on the approximal masticatory surface there is a defect of crown hard tissues at 1/3. The tooth has no discoloration, percussion is painless. What construction should be prescribed?
a. 3/4 crown
b. Plastic crown
c. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
d. Semi-crown
*e. Inlay

162. A 37-year-old patient complains of an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the 13 tooth is destroyed by 2/3. The tooth is pulpless, the root canal is filled. How deep should be the root canal opened for pivot crown in this patient?
*a. 2/3 of the root canal
b. 3/4 of the root canal
c. Full length of the root canal
d. 1/2 of the root canal
e. 1/3 of the root canal

163. A 7-year-old girl hit her forehead one day ago. Several hours after the sustained trauma a swelling developed in the left superciliary area. General condition of the child is not disrupted. Objectively: swelling of forehead tissues spreading towards the left eyelids; the swelling is soft, fluctuation sign is present. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Fracture of the temporal bone
b. Hemangioma of the right superciliary area
*c. Hematoma of the left superciliary area
d. Fracture of the frontal bone
e. Hematic abscess of the left superciliary area

164. Mother of a 10-year-old girl complains of a cosmetic defect of the child’s 22 tooth that erupted with damaged enamel. Anamnesis states premature extraction of the 62 tooth due to caries complication. There is a white-yellow spot with clear margins on the vestibular surface of the 22 tooth. Enamel retains glossiness, no surface roughness can be detected on probing.Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Local enamel hypoplasia

165. A 2-year-old child has suffered a teeth trauma. Objectively: the crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are by 1/3 shorter than the others. Mucosa in the area of the 51 and 61 is hyperemic, swollen. X-ray reveals absence of the periodontal fissure in the root apex areas of the 51 and 61.What treatment tactics would be optimal?
*a. Regular medical check-ups
b. Reduction of the 51 and 61
c. Dental reimplantation
d. Ligature splint
e. Extraction of the 51 and 61

166. A mother of a newborn complains that the child cannot be breastfed. After objective examination the child was diagnosed with complete submucous cleft palate. What surgical procedure should be prescribed and when is the optimal time for such a surgery?
*a. Uranostaphyloplasty, 4-6 years
b. Uranostaphyloplasty, 6-7 months
c. Uranoplasty, 1 year
d. Staphyloplasty, 10 years
e. Cheiloplasty, 4-6 months

167. A 19-year-old girl addressed an oncologist with complaints of slowly growing tumor-like mass on the tip of her tongue. The mass was first noticed 5-6 years ago. The patient requested no medical help. Objectively: there is a pale pink round growth with wide pedicle on the tongue apex; the growth is painless, elastic; there are no changes of mucosa surrounding the pedicle. Submandibular lymph nodes cannot be palpated. What kind of tumor is it?
*a. Papilloma
b. Fibroma
c. Keratoma
d. Lipoma
e. Atheroma

168. A 48-year-old patient has addressed a hospital with complaints of defects in the paragingival area and slight sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively: there are hard tissue defects that resemble a wedge with smooth polished walls on precervical vestibular surface of the 23 and 24 teeth. Thermal test is slightly positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Endemic fluorosis
c. Enamel necrosis
d. Acute deep caries
*e. Cuneiform defect

169. Parents of a 7-year-old child addressed a hospital with complaints of the child having no permanent teeth in the front area of the mandible. Anamnesis states that the first deciduous teeth erupted at the age of 11 months. Objective clinical examination revealed the following: appearance is without changes; milk occlusion; there are physiological diastemas and tremas; edgeto- edge incisor contact. What preliminary diagnosis can be made according to Kalvelis classification?
*a. Retarded eruption
b. Adentia
c. Hypoplasia
d. Dystopia
e. Supernumerary tooth

170. Parents of a 4-year-old child have made an appointment with an orthodontist for preventive examination of the child. In the oral cavity: scissor bite is observed in the front area in the place of inscisor contact; distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are situated in one plane. Teeth in the dental arch are placed tightly, without intervals. Determine, what period of occlusion development is described:
a. Involution of temporary occlusion
b. Formation of temporary occlusion
*c. Stability of temporary occlusion
d. Early stage of developing occlusion
e. Late stage of developing occlusion

171. A 22-year-old patient addressed an orthodontist with complaints of incorrect teeth placement on the upper jaw. The appearance is without changes. Occlusion is permanent. The first molar relation is of the 1-st type according to Angle’s classification. Analysis of the control diagnostic models revealed the disturbance of the Andrews’ second key of optimal occlusion of the 12 and 22 teeth. The patient suffers from:
*a. Angulation of the maxillary teeth
b. Maxillary teeth contact
c. Spee curve concavity
d. Axial rotation of the teeth
e. Cusp-to-fissure contact between the first permanent maxillary and mandibular molars

172. A 15-year-old girl complains of brief pain attacks in her teeth due to chemical stimuli. Objectively: on the contact surfaces of the 11, 21, 22 teeth there are enamel areas matt white in color, with lost shine, covered in large amount of dental deposit. Enamel is softened and can be easily chipped off with excavator. Probing of lesions is painless. Percussion is painless. No reaction to cold stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
*b. Acute superficial caries
c. Acute initial caries
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic initial caries

173. A 5,5-year-old child is undergoing preventive examination. No complaints from the patient. Objectively: in the precervical area of buccal surface of the 75 tooth there is an enamel patch with loss of natural glossiness. The enamel surface is coarse, painless on probing. Tooth percussion is painless. Thermodiagnosis is negative. Damaged enamel stains with 2% water solution of methylene blue. Make the diagnosis:
a. Fluorosis
b. Enamel hypoplasia
*c. Acute initial caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic initial caries

174. A 13-year-old girl undergoes preventive examination. No complaints from the patient. Objectively: on the 36 masticatory surface there is a carious cavity within enamel with wide inlet. Enamel of the cavity floor and walls is dense and pigmented. Probing of the carious lesion is painless. No reaction to thermal stimuli. Tooth percussion is painless. The girl belongs to the I group according to her health status. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute initial caries
b. Acute median caries
*c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Chronic initial caries
e. Acute superficial caries

175. A 57-year-old patient adressed a prosthodontic clinic to have a denture made for him. After objective examination the patient was prescribed single-unit crowns for the 46, 47, 36, 37 teeth. What maximal angle of a tooth stump can be allowed during preparation?
*a. 3-5o
b. 10-12o
c. 7-8o
d. Stump walls should be parallel to each other
e. 5-6o

176. A 25-year-old woman, a teacher, addressed a prosthodontics clinic with complaints of cosmetic defect, inability to take a bite, disrupted enunciation. The teeth are lost due to trauma. Dental formula: 87654300!00345678. 3!3 are firm, intact, percussion is painless. What anesthesia should be administered for this group of teeth in preparation for making a porcelainfused- to-metal bridge?
a. Application
b. Tuberal
c. Intraosseous (into spongy tissue)
*d. Infiltration
e. Central conduction anesthesia

177. A 58-year-old patient after examination in a prostodontic clinic has been advised to make a full-arch prosthesis. The treatment plan was developed, the impressions of both jaws were obtained, central occlusion was determined with block method. What stage is next?
a. Frame design of a full-arch prosthesis
b. Preparation for model duplication
c. Model duplication
d. Restoration of the abutment crowns
*e. Parallelometry

178. A 25-year-old patient addressed a hospital and upon examination was diagnosed with unilateral fracture of the body of the mandible in the area of 43, 44 teeth with persistent vertical displacement of the bone ends. Choose the functional type of prosthodontic apparatus required for the patient’s treatment:
a. Forming
b. Directing
*c. Reponating
d. Substituting
e. Fixing

179. A 32-year-old patient addressed a dentist with complaints of inability to close his mouth. Objectively the mouth is half-open, the chin is protruding forwards and is displaced to the left. Such condition occurred after the mouth was opened wide. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Posterior left-sided mandibular dislocation
*b. Anterior right-sided mandibular dislocation
c. Anterior bilateral mandibular dislocation
d. Anterior left-sided mandibular dislocation
e. Posterior right-sided mandibular dislocation

180. A 37-year-old patient has symmetrical face; the mucosa in the area of the 12 tooth root apex projection is pale pink; palpation is painless; the tooth crown is destroyed by 1/3; percussion is painless. X-ray: the root canal of the 12 tooth is filled to the apex; granuloma 4 mm in diameter surrounds the root apex. Choose the method of surgical treatment:
a. Root hemisection
b. Root amputation
c. Tooth extraction
*d. Granuloma removal with root apex resection
e. Coronary radicular tooth separation

181. During preventive examination a patient was diagnosed with precancerous hyperkeratosis of the lower lip red border. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + chemotherapy
b. Palliative treatment
c. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + close-focus roentgenotherapy
d. No treatment is required
*e. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues

182. In the district dispensary center for children with cleft lip and palate a child was diagnosed with congenital incomplete cleft upper lip on the left with malformed cutaneo-cartilaginous portion of the nose. What dispensary group does the child belong to?
a. Second
b. Fourth
c. Fifth
*d. First
e. Third

183. Preventive examination of the oral cavity of a 9,5-year-old child revealed bilateral cross bite without displacement of the lower jaw. What biometric method of dentition model investigation should be applied in this case?
a. Korkhaus index
b. Tonn index
c. Gerlach index
d. Schwarz index
*e. Pont index

184. For a 30-year-old patient a composite inlay for the 37 tooth is being made.Objectively: there is a carious cavity of medium size (Black’s classification I class) on the masticatory surface of the 37 tooth.What specifics are required for the tooth preparation in this case?
*a. Creating a flat floor
b. Creating an incline
c. Creating an auxiliary cavity
d. Widening of the cavity floor
e. Creating an auxiliary ledge

185. A bugle denture for the lower jaw is planned to be made for a 53-year-old patient. Objectively: the 38, 37, 35, 34, 45, 46, 47 teeth are absent. The retained teeth are firm, with low clinical crowns. What fixation method of bugle denture would be optimal in this case?
*a. Telescopic system
b. Beam system
c. Ball joint attachment
d. Attachments
e. Supporting retentive clammers

186. A 30-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain attacks in the lower left tooth, which occurred 2 hours ago during travel by plain. Objectively: there is pathological abrasion of the 36 tooth, tooth percussion is slightly painful. After additional investigation the diagnosis is made: chronic pulpitis. What investigation allows to make such a diagnosis?
a. Electric pulp test
*b. X-ray radiography
c. Thermal tests
d. Probing
e. Luminescence diagnostics

187. A 22-year-old student arrived for an appointment with a dentist in the afternoon after his classes were over. The patient is registered for regular check-ups with an endocrinologist. During treatment the patient developed excited state followed by loss of consciousness. Objectively: tremor of the extremities, moist skin, heart rate - 100/min., BP- 100/60 mm Hg. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Epileptic attack
c. Syncope
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Hypoglycemic coma

188. A 32-year-old patient consulted a dentist with complaints of tooth crown discoloration on the upper right jaw. Anamnesis: 3 weeks ago the patient suffered a trauma of the upper jaw. On examination: crown of the 11 tooth is intact, gray, painless on percussion, no changes of mucosa in the area of root apex projection of the 11 tooth. Electric pulp test - 100 microamperes. The patient was diagnosed with traumatic periodontitis of the 11 tooth. What method of removing tooth discoloration would be advisable after endodontic treatment?
a. External bleaching
b. Microabrasion method
c. Air-abrasive method
*d. Intracrown bleaching
e. Custom teeth whitening with a bleaching tray (kappa)

189. A 39-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis, initial stage. After undergoing complex treatment the patient received instructions and was registered for regular check-ups. How often should the patient undergo these regular check-ups?
a. Once every 9 months
b. Once every 3 months
*c. Once every 6 months
d. Once every 12 months
e. Once every 18 months

190. A 22-year-old patient is diagnosed with chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 46 tooth. During the first appointment the patient was prescribed a temporary filling made of antibacterial mateterial that stimulates osteo-, dentino- and cement genesis. Specify the material that satisfies this requirements:
a. Thymol
b. Camphor
c. Iodoform
d. Dexamethasone
*e. Calcium hydroxide

191. A 24-year-old patient addressed a first-aid center with complaints of facial pain on the left, restricted mouth opening. Objectively: there is moderate swelling and hematoma in the left malar arch area. On palpation there is bone tissue retraction and moderate painfulness. Occlusion is intact. Mouth opening is 1-1,5 cm. Upon attempt to open the mouth further there are a sensation of mechanical obstructon and pain aggravation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. -
*b. Fracture of the left malar arch
c. Le Fort maxillary fracture, III grade
d. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone
e. Le Fort maxillary fracture, II grade

192. A 22-year-old patient has suffered unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was provided with full dental brace with loops and intermaxillary elastic expansion. Recovery was uncomplicated. The brace should be removed after:
a. 2 weeks
b. 10 days
c. -
*d. 3 weeks
e. 1 week

193. A 19-year-old woman complains of aesthetic defects, dry lips, unpleasant sensation of strain in the lower lip and its constant peeling. The patient often bites her lips, rips and bites off peeling flakes, which sometimes results in bleeding; she notes her increased irritability. On examination there are numerous transparent scales between the red border and mucosa. The scales are tightly adjacent in the center and loose at the periphery. They can be easily removed, produce no erosion. Regional lymph nodes cannot be palpated. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Actinic cheilitis
*b. Cheilitis exfoliativa
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Mycotic cheilitis
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

194. A 73-year-old man is registered for regular check-ups in an oncological clinic after completion of the combined treatment for oral mucosa cancer stage II (radiation therapy and surgery). During one of the routine check-ups an area of exposed mandibular bone is detected. There are no inflammatory changes of surrounding mucosa. A sinus tract with weak granulation is observed. Mandibular X-ray shows sequestrum without clear margin between healthy and necrotic bone. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Relapse of oral mucosa cancer
b. Chronic mandibular periostitis
c. Acute purulent mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Posttraumatic mandibular osteomyelitis
*e. Mandibular osteoradionecrosis

195. A patient with odontogenic phlegmon of the oral cavity floor and neck has been delivered into an oral surgery department. The patient’s general condition is severe, labored breating, inflammatory masticatory muscles contracture II degree, swallowing is impossible. There can be determined dense sharply painful infiltration of the lower face, oral cavity floor and neck; the skin is strained and cannot be pinched in a fold; fluctuation can be palpated in the oral cavity. After 30 minutes of the patient’s stay in the in-patient department the patient’s neck swelling significantly enlarged, breating deteriorated. What kind of asphyxia can develop in the patient?
a. Aspiration
b. Dislocational
*c. Stenotic
d. Valvular
e. Obturative

196. A 16-year-old girl suffers from enlarged gums. Objectively: gingival margin of the vestibular surface of the gums is diffusely thickened, dense, pale pink in color. Gingival papilla cover crowns of all the teeth up to 1/2 of their height, hemorrhage is absent. Xray reveals no pathological changes of periodontal tissues. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. Gingival fibromatosis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Exacerbation of catarrhal gingivitis

197. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the tragus area, clicking during mouth opening, stuffed ears. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening path is straight. Dentition defect can be estimated as the I class by Kennedy; the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are absent. In this case the load would be the most traumatizing for the following anatomical structure:
a. Distal slope of the articular tubercle
b. Socket floor of the temporal bone
c. Articular capsule
d. Articular head
*e. Interarticular disk

198. A 34-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower right jaw, reduced mouth opening. Objectively: dentition is intact both on the upper and lower jaw, there is premature contact between the 46 and 47 teeth. Diagnosis: traumatic fracture of the mandible in the area of the 46 tooth with fragment displacement. What construction would be advisable for temporary immobilization of the mandible fragments?
a. Entin’s head-chin strap
b. Temporary plastic splint
*c. Tigerstedt’s splint
d. Plastic kappa
e. Weber’s splint

199. A 55-year-old patient addressed a prostodontic clinic to have a denture made. During preparation of the 44 and 47 teeth for crown installation the patient became unwell: he developed vertigo, nausea, tinnitus, blurred vision, dyspnea. Unconsciousness followed, the pupils were dilated, heart rate was weak. After 1 minute the patient’s condition improved. What condition occurred in the patient?
a. Bronchial asthma
*b. Dizziness
c. Collapse
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Hypoglycemic coma

200. A 23-year-old woman complains of carious cavity present in the 27 tooth, where food particles are retained. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 27 tooth filled with dense dark-brown dentin. Probing of the cavity floor and walls is painless, thermometry and percussion are painless. Electric pulp test - 10 microamperes. X-ray reveals no pathological changes. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic deep caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic median caries

