1. A 27-year-old man complains of teeth mobility in his upper and lower jaws. Objectively: dentition is intact. Central occlusion is determined. What examination methods should be applied?
a. X-ray
b. Electromyography
c. Gnathodynamometry
d. Masticatiography
*e. Analysis of diagnostic models of the jaws

2. A 47-year-old man complains of mobility of the artificial crown on the 36 tooth, which was made 2 years ago. Objectively: the 36 tooth is covered with full metal swaged crown. Crown decementation and dentin demineralization are observed. What is the cause of such complication?
a. The crown edge is embedded into the gingival pocket
b. The crown contacts with antagonistic teeth
c. Useful life of the crown is exceeded
*d. The crown is loose at the tooth cervix
e. There are interdental contacts

3. A 48-year-old man complains of itching gums. Objectively: the gums are firm; cold water causes short-time pain in the teeth. X-ray imaging shows osteosclerosis of the alveolar septum: close-meshed bone structure, the alveolar septum height and intactness of the cortical plates is retained. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontosis, stage I
*b. Initial periodontosis
c. Initial periodontitis
d. Atrophic gingivitis
e. Periodontitis, stage I

4. A 60-year-old man complains of stabbing pain near the root of the tongue on the right, which develops during eating, especially sour food. Objectively: there is a swelling in the right submandibular area. On palpation the submandibular gland is dense and enlarged. Excretory duct orifice of the right submandibular gland is dilated and produces mucopurulent secretion. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Calculous sialadenitis of the sublingual gland
b. Acute sialodochitis
c. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular area
*d. Sialolithiasis of the submandibular gland
e. Acute suppurative lymphadenitis

5. A 19-year-old woman, an actress, complains of discoloration of her left maxillary central incisor. One year ago the pulp of this tooth was removed and the tooth was filled. Gradually the tooth assumed grayish color. Objectively the 11 is filled, discolored, stable, painless on percussion. Deep occlusion is observed. What part of the clinical presentation contraindicates installation of an all-porcelain crown?
a. Devitalized teeth defects that cannot be corrected with dental inlays
*b. Deep occlusion
c. Enamel hypoplasia with tooth deformation and discoloration
d. Front teeth defects that cannot be corrected with fillings
e. Tooth discoloration

6. A 18-year-old woman needs a denture. Objectively: the 21 tooth is dark gray in color, devitalized; orthognathic occlusion is observed. The tooth is to be covered with plastic crown. What plastic should be used to make the crown?
*a. Sinma-M
b. Protacryl-M
c. Etacryl
d. Bacryl
e. Phtorax

7. A 58-year-old patient has made an appointment to make a denture. Objectively: the 22 tooth is firmand intact. The alveolar crest is atrophied; the palate is flat. Removable denture is to be made. What approach regarding the 22 tooth should be chosen by a dentist?
a. Tooth extraction
b. To make a stump crown
c. To retain the tooth
d. Removal of tooth pulp
*e. To make a telescopic crown

8. A patient needs his 26 tooth extracted. After application of tuberal anaesthesia he developed general fatigue, nausea, and, later, severe itching and skin rashes. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Collapse
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Urticaria
d. Quincke’s edema
e. Unconsciousness

9. For a 24-year-old woman a Richmond crown is being made to restore the crown of the central maxillar incisor. The cap is completed. What is the next step?
*a. To fit the cap on the tooth stump and place the post in the root canal
b. To fit the cap and the post to the tooth root
c. To fixate the tooth with cement
d. To make the combination dental crown
e. To solder the post with the cap

10. A 25-year-old patient complains of profuse gingival hemorrhages, pain in the oral cavity, weakness, fatigue, fever up to 38°C. These presentations appeared a week ago. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic. Examination of the oral mucosa reveals multiple hemorrhages, friable gums, necrotic areas on the tops of gingival papillae, as well as enlarged, soft, painless lymph nodes. The oral mucosal lesion can be a symptom of the following disease:
a. Vincent’s stomatitis
b. Chronic leukemia
*c. Acute leukemia
d. Hypovitaminosis C
e. Intoxication with heavy metal salts

11. A 67-year-old patient complains of recurrent erosion on the red border of the lower lip. Objectively: the erosion is oval in shape, 0,8х1,3 sm in size, covered in thin scabs that reveal glossy surface with punctate bleeding, when removed. There are atrophic areas of the red border detected. Infiltration elements are absent. The submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Cheilitis glandularis
*b. Manganotti’s abrasive precancerous cheilitis
c. Keratoacanthosis
d. Leukoplakia, erosive ulcerative form
e. Bowen’s disease

12. A 53-year-old patient complains of pain and clicking in the left temporomandibular joint. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, palpation of the lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left side. Mouth opening is reduced. Tomography shows the bone outline of joint surfaces to be smooth. Which disease of those listed below corresponds with this clinical presentation?
a. Joint ankylosis
*b. Temporomandibular joint disfunction
c. Deforming arthrosis
d. Rheumatic arthritis
e. Acute posttraumatic arthritis

13. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient received a cheek abrasion that healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had been observing progressing pain and fever up to 38, 6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained, without discoloration. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute lymphadenitis
b. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region
c. Epidemic parotitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis

14. A 33-year-old woman has been admitted to the dentofacial department with complaints of pain and edema in the right submandibular region, body temperature rise up to 39, 5°C. Objectively: the patient has asymmetric face because of soft tissue edema of the right submandibular region, palpation reveals a dense infiltration, the skin over it is hyperemic, cannot make a fold. The 46 tooth has a deep carious cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute right-sided osteomyelitis of the mandible
*b. Submandibular phlegmon on the right
c. Acute suppurative periostitis of the mandible
d. Acute submandibular sialadenitis
e. Acute suppurative submandibular lymphadenitis

15. Having recovered from acute respiratory disease, a patient has made an appointment with a dentist. The patient complains of pain in the gums, foul breath, inability to take food, general weakness. Objectively: the gums are hyperemic, swollen, covered with necrotic dirty-gray coating; the gums bleed when the coating is removed.Microbiological study of tissues revealed a great number of cocci, bacilli, fusobacteria, and spirochaete. Specify the drug for etiotropic treatment:
a. Galascorbinum
b. Tripsin
c. Carotolinum (Betacarotene)
*d. Metronidazole
e. Potassium permanganate

16. A 35-year-old patient complains of itch, burning and edema of lips. These presentations occured a week ago.Objectively: there is reddening of the red border and skin, especially in the area of the mouth corners, there are also vesicles, scabs, small cracks against the background of erythematous affection of the red border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic cheilitis
b. Multiform exudative erythema
*c. Acute eczematous cheilitis
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis

17. A 47-year-old patient presents with rounded bone protrusions 0,7-0,8 cm in size on the inner surface of the edentulous mandible in the premolar area. The denture for this patient should have:
a. Orifices for the exostoses
b. Dentogingival clasps
c. Kemeny clasps
d. Metal base
*e. Elastic liner

18. A 78-year-old patient is completely edentulous. He has been wearing dentures for 19 years. The patient complains of poor fixation of the upper denture. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, the alveolar processes of both jaws aremarkedly atrophied, the palate is flat. Mucous membrane in the denture-supporting area is atrophied. How often should the dentures be remodelled or restored?
a. Every 6 months
b. Every 7 years
c. Every 10-12 years
*d. Every 3-4 years
e. Once a year

19. A 12-year-old boy complains of painful and bleeding gums on his upper jaw. Objectively the gingival margin in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth is swollen, hyperemic, deformed due to overgrowths. Gingival papilla cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height, bleed on touch. Upper front teeth are overcrowded. X-ray shows no pathological changes of the periodontium. What drugs should be administered for topical treatment in the first place?
a. Sclerosants
b. Keratoplastic agents
c. Cytostatic agents
*d. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
e. Steroidal antiinflammatory drugs

20. A girl is 8 years old. She complains of impaired mastication. Objectively: on examination of the oral cavity the cutting edges of her lower incisors touch the palatine mucosa in the frontal area; the upper frontal teeth overlap with the lower ones by full height of their crowns. On the lower jaw the occlusal curve of the front teeth is markedly concave. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. False prognathism
b. Open bite
*c. Deep overbite
d. True prognathism
e. Cross bite

21. A 43-year-old woman complains of mobility and displacement of her upper front teeth. Objectively: dental formula is17 16 15 14 13 12 11 21 22 23 24 25 26 2747 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . Teeth 12 11 21 22 are slanted towards the vestibular side, diastema and tremata are observed, I-II degree teeth mobility is detected. Select the orthodontic appliance for correction of teeth misalignment as a part of complex treatment of periodontal disease:
a. Bynin appliance
b. Katz crown
c. Palatal plate with inclined plane
*d. Palatal plate with vestibular arch
e. Schwartz appliance

22. A 44-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that aggravates during teeth joining. The pain appeared 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is not limited. The crown of the 26 tooth is half-decayed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperemic at the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth had been treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute suppurative periodontitis of the 26 tooth
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute suppurative periostitis of the left upper jaw extending from the 26 tooth
e. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, and 28 teeth

23. When a prosthodontist was preparing the patient’s tooth, the patient had epileptic seizure that was subsequently terminated. Whatmistake had beenmade by the doctor?
a. No inquire into the antecedent anamnesis
b. Crude preparation
c. Did not decline the appointment
*d. No inquire into the patient anamnesis
e. No anaesthesia

24. Parents of a 3-year-old child report that the child suffers from constant pain in the upper front teeth. Objectively: the coronal part of the 61 tooth is gray and decayed. Probing of the root canal orifice is painful and accompanied by bleeding. The tooth percussion provokes acute pain. Mucosa is hyperemic, edematic and painful. Palpation in the region of the 61 and 62 teeth reveals a fistula. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

25. A 30-year-old patient complains of a toothache caused by hot and cold stimuli. The pain irradiates to the ear and temple. Previously this tooth presented with spontaneous nocturnal toothache. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity communicating at one point with the tooth cavity. Probing at the communication point, as well as cold stimulus, causes acute pain. The pain persists for a long time. Electric pulp test result is 5 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

26. A 52-year-old woman complains of periodical appearance of a gingival fistula in the area of the 15 tooth. The tooth had been treated 1,5 years ago for caries. Objectively: the 15 tooth is filled. In the root apex projection there is a fistula; purulent exudate discharges on pressure. Tooth percussion is painless. On X-ray: the root canal is not filled, there is a destruction focus with blurred margins near the root.Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
*c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Periapical cyst
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

27. A man was diagnosed with hard palate abscess. What approach should be chosen for abscess dissection?
a. Linear dissection parallel to the hard palate raphe
b. Pus aspiration with a syringe
c. Abscess puncture
*d. Triangular dissection of the hard palate area
e. Linear dissection perpendicular to the hard palate raphe

28. A 32-year-old patient presents with body temperature of 38, 9°C, general fatigue, impaired speech, inability to eat. This condition has been recurring for the last 4 years in autumn and spring. There are vesicles and erosions covered in grayish fibrinous coating on the hyperemic and swollen labial and buccal mucosa. Nikolsky’s sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pemphigus vulgaris
b. Nonacantholytic pemphigus
c. Dermatitis herpetiformis (Duhring’s disease)
*d. Erythema multiforme
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

29. A 56-year-old man complains of enlarged lower lip, pain induced by hot, sour, salty, and bitter foods, and lips gluing together in the morning. The lower lip has been gradually enlarging and developing lumps his whole life. On examination: the lower lip is enlarged. The middle third of the Klein’s zone presents with several small red dots with openings that discharge clear drops. The red border is dry and peeling, there are fissures and erosions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cheilitis exfoliativa
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
c. Atopic cheilitis
*d. Cheilitis glandularis
e. Cheilitis actinica

30. A 57-year-old retired man complains of attacks of burning pain and rashes on the skin of his face and oral mucosa on the right. Anamnesis: a course of radiation therapy for treatment of the gastric disease, past case of chickenpox. Objectively: along the third branch of the trigeminal nerve the skin of the face presents with isolated erosions covered in fibrinous coating. There are multiple vesicles on the hyperemic and swollen oral mucosa. Rightsided lymphadenitis is observed. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Murrain
b. Neuralgia
*c. Herpes zoster
d. Acute recurrent herpes
e. Neuritis

31. A 42-year-old woman complains of acute pain in her lower jaw, teeth mobility, high fever. The condition persists for 2 days. On clinical examination a doctor diagnosed her with acute mandibular osteomyelitis. What tactics regarding the mobile teeth should the doctor choose?
a. Conservative treatment of the causative tooth
b. Extraction of all mobile teeth
*c. Extraction of the causative tooth only
d. Conservative treatment of all mobile teeth
e. Extraction of the causative tooth, trepanation and treatment of all mobile teeth

32. A 7-year-old boy complains of increased body temperature, up to 38°C, headache, sore throat. Objectively: there are erosions on the slightly hyperemic mucosa of the soft palate, anterior palatal bars, and tonsils. The submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, painless. Name the causative agent of this disease:
a. Epstein-Barr virus
b. Herpes simplex virus
*c. Coxsackie virus
d. Klebs-Loeffler bacillus
e. Bordet-Gengou bacillus

33. A 6-year-old boy complains of a cavity in the prevoiusly treated tooth. Objectively: in the 85 tooth there is a carious cavity within mantle dentin; the dentin is dense and pigmented; probing of the cavilty floor and walls, thermal stimuli, and percussion are painless. Sensitivity of the dentinenamel junction is observed during the cavity preparation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
*b. Chronic median caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Acute deep caries

34. A patient consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect in the cervical region of the upper and lower canines. Various stimuli cause no pain. Objectively: there are V-shaped defects on the vestibular surface in the cervical area of the upper and lower canines. Their surface is smooth, glossy, hard. There is no reaction to probing and cold stimuli. What treatment should be administered?
a. Applications with 10% solution of calcium gluconate
b. Metal crowns
*c. Filling of the defects
d. Application of fluorine lacquer
e. Medical intervention is unnecessary

35. A boy is 10 years old. He complains of sloped chin and impaired mastication. Anamnesis states formula feeding. Objectively: corellation of the 6th teeth is of the Angle’s II class. Sagittal fissure is 7 mm. Eschler-Bittner test is positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Progenia, mandibular macrognathia
b. Protrusion of the upper jaw frontal area
c. Prognathism, maxillary macrognathia
d. Retrusion of the lower jaw frontal area
*e. Prognathism, distal mandibular displacement

36. A 10-month-old child is fussy, refuses to eat. Disease onset was 2 days ago. The child is been treated by a pediatrician for pneumonia, receives antibiotics and sulfanilamides. Objectively: the oral mucosa is hyperemic, swollen; there is whitish coating on the mucosa of the cheeks, lips, soft and hard palate; coating removal can cause erosions. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Allergic contact stomatitis
c. Chronic candidal stomatitis
*d. Acute candidal stomatitis
e. Geographic tongue

37. A 20-year-old man complains of sharp pain in the mouth, increase of body temeperature up to 38, 5°C, headache and aching joints, general weakness. The disease onset was 3 days ago due to overexposure to cold. Objectively: the red border is covered with hemorrhagic scabs, oral mucosa has large erosions and ulcers merging with each other and covered with grayish-white coating against the background of diffuse hyperemia. Conjunctivitis is observed. The skin of the forearms has erythematous spots 1,5 cm in diameter, with blisters in their center. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lyell’s syndrome
b. Behcet’s syndrome
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Drug-induced stomatitis
*e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

38. Parents of a 12-year-old child are concerned about the child having white spots on the frontal teeth of the upper jaw; the spots appeared half a year ago. Objectively: there are chalky spots detected in the cervical zone vestibular surfaces of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 teeth. The enamel in those spots is dull; probing revealed it to be pliant and coarse. The anamnesis states short-time pain caused by chemical stimuli. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic initial caries
b. Systemic hypoplasia of enamel
c. Dental fluorosis
*d. Acute initial caries
e. Acute superficial caries

39. A 22-year-old woman complains of pain caused by hot food and bursting sensation in the tooth. Half a year ago she presented with brief bouts of pain in the night, which over time increased in duration. Objectively: there is a large carious cavity in the 24 tooth, which opens to the dental cavity, deep probing is painful. Electric pulp test is 80 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
*c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Acute suppurative pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

40. A 14-year-old girl complains of bleeding gums and foul smell from her mouth. Objectively: gingival mucosa is hyperemic, pastose, hemorrhaging. Schiller-Pisarev test is positive. Papillary marginal alveolar index is 70%. Fedorov-Volodkina Hygiene Index equals 3. X-ray of the frontal area of jaws demonstrates retained cortical plate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic generalized periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic generalized periodontitis
*d. Chronic generalized catarrhal gingivitis
e. Acute generalized catarrhal gingivitis

41. A 40-year-old man had his root canal of the 34 tooth filled due to chronic fibrous periodontitis. Soon the treated place became painful. On X-ray the root canal of the 34 tooth is filled to the root apex. What tactics should the dentist choose to manage the pain?
a. To rinse with antiseptic mouthwash
b. To provide conduction anesthesia
c. To provide infiltration anesthesia
*d. To prescribe physiotherapeutic procedures
e. To make insicion along the mucogingival fold

42. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred for orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, and 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are firm. What is the most aesthetic dental splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Ring splint
b. Cap splint
c. Mouthguard
*d. Mamlok’s splint
e. Soldered combined crowns

43. The 40-year-old woman complains of inability to properly masticate due to the loss of the following lateral teeth: 18, 16, 15, 25, 26, 28, 38, 35, 36, 44-46, and 48. The rest of her teeth present with the I-II degree of mobility. Generalized periodontitis is observed. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
*a. Removable dental splint
b. Removable laminar denture
c. Metal-based denture
d. Fixed dental bridge
e. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture

44. A 55-year-old patient requires a denture. Objectively: Kennedy’s I class dentition defect; the 16, 17, 18, 26, 27, and 28 teeth are missing. The patient presents with fixed occlusion. The 15 and 25 teeth have low crowns with poor anatomic contours, intact. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture is being made for the patient. What fixation system would be optimal in this case?
a. Roach clasp (clammer)
b. Attachments
*c. Telescopic fixation
d. Aker-Roach combined clasp (clammer)
e. Continuous clasp (clammer)

45. A patient needs a clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture. It is planned to study the jaw model by means of a parallelometer in order to determine the required depth of the undercuts on the abutment teeth. Specify the length of the measuring rods used for this purpose:
a. 0,35 0,60 0,85
*b. 0,25 0,50 0,75
c. 0,20 0,45 0,70
d. 0,15 0,40 0,65
e. 0,30 0,55 0,80

46. In a prostodontic clinic a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for a 53-year-old patient. Objectively: dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27. The teeth are firm, clinical crowns are tall with pronounced equator. X-ray shows no periapical changes in the periodontium of the abutment teeth. What clasp fixation is optimal for this patient?
a. Diagonal
b. Sagittal
*c. Planar
d. Transversal
e. Point

47. A 20-year-old man complains of missing tooth on the upper right jaw, aesthetic defect. Objectively: the 12 tooth is absent, adjacent teeth are intact, firm, with distinct anatomical shape and tall crowns. Direct occlusion is observed. During the interview the patient was found out to have congenital heart disease. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge with 14 and 13 abutment teeth
b. Plastic dental bridge
*c. Adgesive dental bridge
d. Plastic-fused-to-metal dental bridge
e. Swaged-soldered dental bridge

48. The 15 tooth must be extracted. The tooth crown is retained. What instrument should be used in this case?
a. Left-sided forceps with S-shaped handles
b. Right-sided forceps with S-shaped handles
c. Straight forceps
d. Bayonet forceps
*e. Forceps with S-shaped handles

49. A 7-year-old child complains of pain and swelling in the left submandibular region. The swelling in this region developed 2 days ago. Objectively: the child is in a satisfactory condition, body temperature is of 37, 3°C. Face is asymmetrical due to the soft tissue swelling in the left submandibular region. Palpation reveals a round formation 2x2 cm in size. The formation is mobile, painful, unattached to the skin. The 74 tooth is discolored, percussion is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute serous nonodontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
b. Phlegmonous adenitis of the right submandibular region
c. Lateral cervical cyst
*d. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
e. Acute suppurative odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region

50. A 32-year-old woman complains of tumor-like growth in the mucosa of her left cheek. Locally: buccal mucosa is of normal color. In the distal area there is a rounded elongated growth, soft and elastic, attached to a pedicle sized 0,5х1,5 cm. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Fibroma
*b. Papilloma
c. Hemangioma
d. Lipoma
e. Pleomorphic adenoma

51. A 52-year-old patient complains of pain and swelling in the right parotid region. These manifestations have been present for about 2 years. Over the last month the swelling has enlarged, pain has intensified. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the dense infiltrate in the right parotid region. The poorly circumscribed, painful formation infiltrates the surrounding tissues. At the right side of neck in front and behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle there are enlarged, dense, mobile lymph nodes. The right naso-buccal groove is flattened, the corner of the mouth is downturned. The mouth opens freely. The are pronounced symptoms of the right facial nerve paresis. What disease can be suspected?
a. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland
*b. Adenocarcinoma of the parotid salivary gland
c. Actinomycosis of the parotid-masseteric region
d. Chronic parotitis
e. Chronic lymphadenitis

52. A 57-year-old woman came to a dentist for extraction of the 34 tooth due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. What instrument would be optimal for tooth extraction in the given case?
a. Straight elevator
b. Curved elevators
c. Beak-shaped crushing forceps
d. Beak-shaped curved forceps
*e. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps

53. A 35-year-old patient has been diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 36 tooth. There is a Black’s class II cavity affecting masticatory surface. What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
a. Light-cure fluid composite
b. Light-cure microfilled composite
c. Glass ionomer cement
d. Silicophosphate cement
*e. Light-cure microhybrid composite

54. A cast clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture is being made for a 58-yearold patient. Impressions are made, centric jaw relation is determined, plaster casts are obtained. What is the next stage?
a. Wax modelling of the denture frame
b. Transfer of denture frame pattern to the working model
*c. Examination of the working model with a parallelometer
d. Duplication of the working model
e. Marking the border seal

55. A 13-year-old boy complains of general weakness, high body temperature up to 39°C, lack of appetite, constant pain in the body of the lower jaw. Objectively: observed is significant asymmetry of the face caused by soft tissues swelling in the left buccal and submandibular areas. Mouth opening is reduced. Intraoral examination revealed the following: the 34, 35, 36, and 37 teeth are mobile; teeth percussion is painful. The crown of the 36 tooth is completely destroyed. The mucosa of those teeth is hyperemic and painful when palpated.Mufflike enlargement of the lower jaw alveolar process is detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the right submandibular area
*b. Acute mandibular odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Acute mandibular odontogenic suppurative periostitis
d. Acute mandibular hematogenous osteomyelitis
e. Ewing’s sarcoma

56. What denture constructions should be chosen in the cases of multiple adentia during the initial period of occlusion change?
a. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
b. Dental bridge
*c. Removable partial denture
d. No denture is necessary
e. Removable complete denture

57. On objective examination a 59-year-old man with the edentulous mandible presents with bone protrusions and mobile areas of the alveolar crest. To ensure proper fixation of the denture and even load distribution the following functional impression should be made:
a. Compression
b. Complete anatomical
*c. Differentiated
d. Decompression
e. Combined

58. A 49-year-old woman complains of cosmetic defect of the 11, 21, and 22 teeth, which developed over a year ago. Objectively: on the vestibular surface at the equator of the 11, 21, and 22 teeth there are shallow cup-shaped enamel defects that are dense on probing. Cold water induces no pain. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
*d. Enamel erosion
e. Superficial caries

59. A 47-year-old patient complains of a burning sensation and pain in the mouth. Objectively: on the mucous membrane of cheeks along the line of teeth contact and in the corners of the mouth there are multiple polygonal bright red erosions 1,0-1,5 cm in diameter located on the hyperkeratinized plaque and opaque whitish mucosa. Cytological analysis revealed keratinizing epithelial cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme
b. Lichen ruber planus, erosive form
*c. Leukoplakia, erosive form
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Lupus erythematosus, erosive form

60. A 28-year-old man complains of pain in the infraorbital and parotid region on the left. On examination: hemorrhage occurs in the lower eyelid and conjunctiva of the left eye, there are signs of crepitation and step deformity of the eyesocket lower edge. The mouth opens by 1 cm. Make the diagnosis:
a. Left articular process fracture
b. Malar arch fracture
*c. Zygomatic bone fracture
d. Traumatic arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Hematoma of the infraorbital region

61. A child is 8 years old. There are complaints of congested upper incisors. Objectively: the first molars closure is of Angle’s I class, frontal overbite is orthognathic. The 12 and 22 teeth erupt palatinally with space deficiency of 2/3 of the tooth crown. The 11 and 21 teeth are 10 mm each in cross-section. The child has inherited father’s facial type with prognathism and macrodontia of the central incisors. Choose the preventive treatment, considering this hereditary pathology:
a. Filing down of the 11 and 21 approximal surfaces to provide the space for the 12 and 22 teeth
*b. Hotz serial extraction to reduce the dental arch
c. Massage of the 12 and 21 teeth area to stimulate their eruption
d. Jaw expansion to provide the space for the 12 and 21 teeth
e. Extraction of the 12 and 21 teeth to reduce the dental arch

62. A 65-year-old woman complains of a neoplasm in the area of the nasolabial fold on the left, which appeared one month ago. Objectively: there is a gray neoplasm on the skin of the nasolabial fold on the left, markedly keratotic, 3,0х0,5х0,3 cm in size. Neoplastic base is painless, dense, and elastic. What is the most likely pathology that results in such clinical presentation?
a. Senile keratosis of the left nasolabial fold
b. Common wart of the left nasolabial fold
*c. Cutaneous horn of the left nasolabial fold
d. Keratoacanthoma of the left nasolabial fold
e. Lupus

63. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a rounded tumor-like formation about 1 cm in diameter located within the red border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumor-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the red border, is dense and grayishred. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Verrucous precancer of the red border
b. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the red border
c. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
d. Bowen’s disease
e. Manganotti’s abrasive precancerous cheilitis

64. A 38-year-old woman complains of burning pain in her lips and angles of her mouth, their dryness. Anamnesis states that she has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for the last 8 years. Objectively: the red border is dry, congestively hyperemic, covered in scales of variable size. In the angles of the mouth there are fissures covered in white coating, the skin is macerated. What ointment should be prescribed for topical treatment in the given case?
a. Lanolin
b. Erythromycin
c. Interferon
d. Prednisolone
*e. Clotrimazol

65. A 35-year-old woman complains of lips enlargement. The first incident occurred one year ago, when she developed lip edema that abated quickly, but the lips remained slightly enlarged. Three days ago after overexposure to cold her lips enlarged again. Objectively: ptosis, upper and lower lips are markedly enlarged, more on the left, soft, elastic, and painless on palpation; no impressions on the lip surface are left after pressing it with a finger. The tongue is swollen, with tuberous surface and folds on its back. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Achard’s syndrome
b. Meige’s trophedema
c. Miescher granulomatous cheilitis
d. Quincke’s edema
*e. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome

66. A 5-year-old child has bad habit of sucking on his tongue. At the front area there is a small vertical fissure up to 2 mm in size. Neutral closure is observed in the lateral areas of the jaws. The child is diagnosed with open traumatic bite of the I degree. A vestibulo-buccal shield was prescribed for treatment. What is the function of the appliance in the given case?
a. Prevention
b. Passive
c. Treatment
*d. Treatment and prevention
e. Retention

67. A 40-year-old man, a chemical industry worker, notes the development of sour taste of the mouth, pain response to thermal and chemical stimuli. On examination: on the vestibular surface and cutting edge of the front teeth there are enamel defects with uneven scalloped margins, chalk-like in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Superficial caries
b. Fluorosis (erosive form)
c. Median caries
*d. Acidic necrosis of enamel
e. Enamel hypoplasia (erosive form)

68. A patient with post-resection upper jaw defect that invades the nasal cavity has come to a prosthodontic clinic. What denture is recommended in the given case?
*a. Replacement denture with obturating element
b. Mouthguard
c. Replacement denture
d. Forming denture
e. Floating obturator

69. An injured patient complains of reduced opening of the mouth, nose bleeding, skin numbness in the infraorbital and lower eyelid region. Objectively: there is face deformation due to the depression of soft tissues in the left cheekbone region, step deformity in the middle part of the inferior margin of the left orbit and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone without displacement of the bone fragments
b. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
c. Fracture of the malar arch
*d. Zygomatic bone fracture with displacement of the bone fragments
e. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla

70. A 30-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a slightly bleeding ”sore” on her lower lip, which is located at its median and bisects the lip into two even parts.On palpation the lip is swollen and slightly painful. What diagnosis corresponds with the given clinical presentation?
a. Lichen ruber planus, erosive-ulcerative form
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Tappeiner’s leukoplakia
d. Erosive-ulcerative leukoplakia
*e. Chronic labial fissure

71. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
*b. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
c. Straight forceps
d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
e. Straight elevator

72. A 62-year-old patient came to a dental clinic with complaints of facial swelling, pain in the lower left jaw, and numb lower lip. On clinical examination he was diagnosed with fracture of the body of mandible on the left, edentulous jaws, microstomia. Choose the optimal construction:
a. Weber’s dental splint
b. Elbrecht’s dental splint
c. Vankevych dental splint
*d. Limberg’s dental splint
e. Guning-Port’s dental splint

73. Prior to dental treatment a 13-year-old patient had been administered anaesthesia. The patient complained of itching, tingling skin of the face, vertigo, nausea, labored respiration, spontaneous vision impairment. Objectively: pale face, swollen eyelids and red border, dilated pupils, thready pulse, and rapid labored respiration with crackles. Make the diagnosis:
a. Collapse
b. Syncope
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Epileptic attack
e. Quincke’s edema

74. A 48-year-old patient came to a dentist after the maxillectomy on one side conducted 3 days ago. Remaining teeth are firm. Treatment plan foresees making an Oxman’s denture for the patient. What part of the denture should be produced first?
a. Forming
b. Substituting
c. Obturating
d. Resection
*e. Fixating

75. Parents of an 8-year-old child have made and appointment with an orthodontist. There are complaints of their child having traumas of oral mucosa. Objectively: decreased height of the lower face, everted lower lip, deep labiomental furrow, milk occlusion. The upper incisors fully cover the lower ones; cutting surface of the lower incisors make contact with the anterior third of the palate. Mesiodistal ratio of the canines and the first permanent molars is normal. Grouping of the upper and lower front teeth is dissimilar. Make the diagnosis according to the Kalvelis classification:
a. Deep incisor overbite
b. Deep prognatic (roof-shaped) occlusion
c. -
*d. Deep traumatic overbite
e. Deep neutral occlusion

76. A 46-year-old patient complains of mastication disorder caused by the lack of the 34, 35, and 36 teeth. The antecedent anamnesis is as follows: the teeth were extracted 3 months ago due to complication of cariosity. The patient anamnesis: the history of tonsillitis, rheumatoid arthritis and Botkin’s disease. After the appointment with this patient the instruments should be sterilized in the following way:
a. Processing with 0,1% chloramine solution
b. General procedure
c. Dry-heat sterilizer
d. Processing with lysol
*e. Specialized procedure

77. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child revealed a habit of lower lip biting. What malocclusion may develop if the child keeps this habit?
*a. Anterior bite
b. Open bite
c. Cross-bite
d. Deep overbite
e. Prognathic bite

78. A 7-year-old child has protruding chin, the lower lip overlaps the upper one. There are diastema and tremata between the lower incisors, the lower incisors overlap the upper incisors by 2/3 of the crown height. First permanent molars demonstrate Angle’s class III relation. Sagittal gap is 3 mm. The correct treatment tactics would be to:
a. Use Schwartz’s appliance
*b. Use Bruckl’s appliance
c. Use Angle’s slider appliance
d. Recommend a complex of myogymnastic exercises
e. Use Bynin’s appliance

79. A 62-year-old man had been wearing a full removable upper jaw denture. He complains of inability to use this denture due to constant burning sensation in the hard palate and dryness of the oral cavity. Objectively: on the hard palate under the denture base there are an edema and marked hyperemia. What means of prevention would be optimal in the given case?
a. Strict indications for the choice of material
*b. Shielding of denture base
c. Careful selection of impression paste
d. Strict adherence to polymerization procedure
e. Determination of risk group during examination

80. A 42-year-old woman has made an appointment with a prosthodontic office to make a denture. Objectively: dental formula is as follows: 18 . . . . 13 12 11 21 22 23 . . . . 28 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . The patient has deep occlusion; clinical crowns are low; equator is not pronounced. The patient suffers from epileptic seizures. What kind of denture should be prescribed for this patient?
a. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
*b. Removable partial laminar metal-based denture
c. Removable partial laminar plastic denture with retainers (clammers)
d. Dental bridge
e. Removable partial laminar denture with supporting-retaining clasps (clammers)

81. A 27-year-old woman complains of painful and bleeding gums, with the signs aggravating during eating, and indisposition. One week ago she had a case of URTI. Within the last 5 years she periodicaly presents with gingival hemorrhages. Objectively: the gums are bright red, markedly swollen; gingival papillae are friable, bleed on the slightest touch. There is moderate accumulation of dental calculus, large amount of soft dental deposit. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. On X-ray: osteoporosis of alveolar septa is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of initial generalized periodontitis
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form

82. A 30-year-old man complains of pain in his front lower teeth, which he attributes to a trauma to the mental region. Objectively: continuous dentition, orthognathic occlusion. X-ray shows a median mandibular fracture. What dental splint would be optimal?
a. Weber’s splint
b. Plastic mouthguard
c. Soldered splint on rings
d. Cap splint
*e. Flat occlusal splint

83. The department of dentofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a post-traumatic nose wing defect up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
*a. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
b. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
c. Free grafting with dermal flap
d. Grafting with tubed pedicle flap (Filatov’s flap)
e. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions

84. A 25-year-old woman consulted a dentist about acute pain in her upper jaw on the left. The pain occurs during eating. Objectively: on the distal approximal surface of the 26 tooth there is a cavity filled with light soft dentin. Probing causes slight pain along the dentin-enamel junction, percussion is painless. Cold water causes quickly abating pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Acute deep caries
*e. Acute median caries

85. A 27-year-old woman complains of recurrent loss of a tooth filling in the lower right jaw. Objectively: in the 46 tooth on the masticatory approximal surface there is a defect of hard tooth tissues affecting 1/3 of the tooth crown, no tooth discoloration; positive, quickly abating reaction to cold stimulus is observed. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Combined crown
b. Plastic crown
c. Partial crown
*d. Dental inlay
e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown

86. A 10,5-year-old child complains of painful rash on his lips. Objectively: the red border of the lips is swollen, hyperemic, covered in fissures and numerous scabs of dried blood. The skin of the upper lip has small blisters containing serous substance, which merge with each other in some places. Maceration and weeping skin also can be observed, especially in the corners of the mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
*c. Exematous cheilitis
d. Actinic cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

87. A 27-year-old man complains of aching long-lasting pain in the 15 tooth during eating, especially cold food. Sometimes the pain occurs when the temperature changes. Objectively: on the distal surface of the 15 tooth there is a cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing is painful. Electroexcitability of the pulp is 35 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Hyperemia of the pulp
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
*d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

88. A 56-year-old patient suffering from exacerbation of schizophrenia has been hospitalised in an oral in-patient department with a diagnosis of the lower jaw displaced fracture in the area of the 34-35 teeth. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. One arch flat occlusal splint
b. Weber’s dental splint
c. Vankevych dental splint
*d. Osteosynthesis
e. Dual splint

89. During preventive examination a 5-yearold child was found to have insufficient physiological attrition of tubercles of the deciduous canines. What treatment tactics should a doctor choose?
a. Medical examination every 6 months until the incisors are replaced
b. Medical examination once a month until the incisors are replaced
*c. To shave off the retained canine tubercles
d. Medical examination every 6 months until the canines are replaced
e. No medical intervention is necessary

90. A 25-year-old HIV-infected patient came to a clinic of prosthetic dentistry to have a denture made for him. What aseptic and antiseptic precautions should be taken?
a. The patient should be refused appointment
b. The impressions should be desinfected under a quartz lamp
*c. According to the scheme
d. No special precautions are required
e. The orthopaedist should work in gloves and a mask

91. A 3-year-old child received an injury of the upper teeth as a result of a fall. Objectively: crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are embedded deep into the surrounding tissues with only their cutting edge visible, the gingival margin is hyperemic, edematic. What is the treatment tactics?
*a. Tooth extraction
b. Reposition
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Endodontic treatment
e. Monitoring

92. A 60-year-old patient has been undergoing the procedure of checking the complete removable dentures construction and fixing teeth on wax bases. The following flaws have been detected: fissure between the teeth in the frontal area and tubercule contact in the lateral area. What mistake had been made?
a. Lateral occlusion was determined instead of central one
b. Posterior occlusion was determined instead of central one
*c. Anterior occlusion was determined instead of central one
d. Models were plastered in a wrong way in an occluder
e. Swabs were crushed, when central occlusion was being determined

93. Dental splint is being designed in a prosthodontics clinic for a 39-year-old patient with generalized periodontitis, II degree. Gnathodynamometer is used to measure the periodontium load resistance. What anatomico-functional data are obtained with this method?
a. Periodontium pliancy
b. Masticatory force
*c. Masticatory pressure
d. Masticatory muscles tone
e. Masticatory efficiency

94. A 45-year-old man complains of impaired chewing due to pathologic lower jaw mobility. The patient was diagnosed with false joint in the area of absent 33 and 34 teeth. On X-ray: defect of the mandibular body is 0,8 cm in size. The teeth on the fragments on both sides of the defect are intact. What denture would be recommended in this case?
a. Weber’s dental splint
b. Tigerstedt’s flat occlusal splint
*c. Oxman’s fixed dental bridge
d. Entin’s stiff head-chin strap
e. Tigerstedt’s wire anchor splint

95. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain and swelling in the area of the left parotid salivary gland, which occurred 7 days after he had undergone abdominal cavity surgery. Objectively: body temperature equals 39°C, reduced mouth opening; dry mouth; when the gland is massaged, there is purulent exudate being secreted from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with the following disease:
a. Acute epidemic parotitis
b. Parenchymatous parotitis
c. Phlegmon of parotid-masseteric region
*d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Phlegmon of submasseteric space

96. A 53-year-old patient complains of an ulcer on the lateral surface of the tongue. The ulcer appeared 6 months ago in the result of a trauma caused by sharp tip of the 37 tooth metal crown. A dentist replaced the crown with the one of better quality and prescribed keratoplastic drugs. Despite these measures the ulcer continues to grow. Lately there has been pain during talking, chewing, and swallowing, with occasional irradiation to the pharynx. Objectively: on the lateral surface of the tongue there is a painful ulcer with uneven raised dense margins and lumpy floor covered with grayish necrotic coating. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer
*b. Cancer of the tongue lateral surface
c. Traumatic ulcer
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

97. A 15-year-old girl complains of toothache that persists for a day and increases on biting. Objectively: in the 36 tooth there is a deep carious cavity noncommunicating with the dental cavity. No reaction to the thermal stimuli is observed, probing of the carious cavity floor is painless. Vertical percussion is markedly painful. Gingival mucosa in the area of the 36 tooth is unaltered. X-ray presents with no alterations. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
d. Acute suppurative pulpitis
e. Acute serous pulpitis

98. A 35-year-old patient, a veterinarian, came to a dentist with complaints of chills, fatigue, fever up to 38°C, muscle pain, sensations of dryness, burning, and pain in the oral cavity, excessive salivation, vesicles in the interdigital folds, on the lips, oral and nasal mucosa. On examination of the oral cavity there were detected painful bright red erosions with polycyclic contours against the background of inflammation. The following was observed: scabs on the lips, enlarged tongue, impaired speech, salivation up to 4 liters per day. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Murrain
b. Chickenpox
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Measles
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

99. During examination of a 5-year-old child the orthodontist revealed no wear of teeth, no tremata and diastemata, orthogenic occlusion. Which of the following symptoms detected in the 5-year old child is a sign of future teeth overcrowding?
*a. Absence of tremata and diastemata
b. Orthogenic occlusion
c. Absence of mesial step in the region of second temporary molars
d. Orthognathic bite
e. Absence of wear of teeth

100. An 8-year-old child has been clinically diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth. The crown is decayed by 1/2. What is the optimal tactics of dental treatment?
*a. Extraction
b. Endodontic treatment and drug therapy
c. Opening along the mucogingival fold, drug thrapy
d. Drug therapy
e. Endodontic treatment

101. A 7-year-old child is diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 55 tooth. Additionally accompanying diagnosis of rheumatic endocarditis is made. What treatment tactics should a dentist choose?
a. Case monitoring
b. Endodontic treatment and case monitoring
c. Endodontic treatment
d. Endodontic treatment and physical therapy
*e. Tooth extraction

102. Parents of an 8-year-old child complain of rashes in the child’s oral cavity. Lately the child has been inert, refused to eat. On the oral mucosa there are small round erosions with clear margins. There are vesicles with turbid content on the child’s face and scalp. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Hypertensive-hydrocephalic syndrome
b. Measles
*c. Chickenpox
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Scarlet fever

103. A 45-year-old patient is prescribed a dental bridge supported with implants. In the process of preparation to the prosthodontic treatment there were intraosseous screw two-stage implants placed in the area of the 34 and 36 teeth. How long is the period necessary for implant integration in this case?
a. 6 months
b. 2 weeks
*c. 3 months
d. 10 months
e. 1 year

104. A 1-month-old child has problems with breastfeeding, insufficiently gains weight. On examination a doctor made the diagnosis of abnormal attachment of the tongue frenulum. What method of surgical treatment should be chosen in this case?
*a. Transversal dissection of the frenulum
b. Vestibuloplasty
c. Dieffenbach’s frenuloplasty
d. Limberg’s relocation of triangular flaps
e. Lingual frenulectomy

105. A 5-year-old child complains of spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that aggravates at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-term pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative pulpitis
d. Acute serous pulpitis
e. Acute periodontitis

106. A 10-year-old girl complains of sensations of dryness and pain in her lips, which develop in the summer. On examination: the red border has areas of congestive hyperemia and infiltration, scales and scabs, that, when removed, result in hemorrhaging erosions. The skin surrounding lips is unaltered. No rashes are detected on the oral mucosa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form
*c. Actinic cheilitis, dry form
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Meteorological cheilitis

107. A laminar denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 54-year-old patient. Base plate wax is used during the laboratory stage for wax templates. What group of accessory materials does such wax belong to?
a. Forming
*b. Modeling
c. Fixing
d. Abrasive
e. Impression

108. A man complains of short-term pain attacks caused by cold stimuli in the tooth on his upper left jaw, which have been observed for the last 3 weeks. Objective examination of the 25 revealed a Black’s I class carious cavity located within mantle dentin. The cavity has narrowopening, its walls and floor are covered with softened dentin. Probing is painful along the dentin-enamel border, percussion is painless, thermometry is painful, the pain quickly abates after removal of a stimulus. Electric pulp test is 6 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
*e. Acute median caries

109. A 54-year-old man complains of tooth hard tissue defects on the upper and lower jaws. Objectively: in the precervical area of the upper and lower premolars within the external layer of dentin there are hard tissue defects with surfaces meeting under the angle. Surface of the defects is smooth, glossy, and dense. What measure should be taken to prevent further progression of the morbid process in the patient?
*a. To train him in efficient toothbrushing
b. To prescribe calcium preparations intake
c. To limit sweet foods in the diet
d. To limit sour foods in the diet
e. To perform functional examination of the thyroid

110. A 35-year-old man has been hospitalized into a dentofacial unit with complaints of mobility of the 38, 37, and 36 teeth and a fistulous tract in the socket of the extracted 35 tooth. The condition has been persisting for 3 months. Insertion of a grooved probe into the fistulous tract palpated bared coarse bone fragment that easily moved under pressure. X-ray of the lower jaw demonstrates a focus of bone tissue destruction, with a spot of dense bone tissue 0,5х0,3 cm in size. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
b. Acute osteomyelitis
*c. Chronic osteomyelitis
d. Chronic periostitis
e. Actinomycosis

111. After extreme overexposure to cold a 42-year-old patient complains of headache in the left frontal lobe and the left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical; left nasal meatus breathing is obstructed, and serous-purulent discharge is being produced; palpation of the suborbital area and further along the mucogingival fold in the 24 and 25 teeth projection reveals slight pain. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. The alveolar process mucosa has no visible alterations. X-ray imaging shows decreased pneumatization of the left maxillary sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis of the 24
b. Acute rhinogenous maxillary sinusitis
c. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left maxilla
*d. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24

112. A 8,5-year-old child is mostly healthy. There is a complaint of pain in the upper left tooth, due to it having been physically damaged 3 hours ago. Objectively: 1/2 of the 21 tooth crown is destroyed, the pulp is significantly exposed, red, sharply painful and bleeding when probed. Percussion of the 21 tooth is sharply painful. Choose the optimal method of the 21 tooth treatment:
a. Devital amputation
b. Vital extirpation
*c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Biological method

113. A 11-year-old child complains of pain during eating food, especially hot, in the lower right lateral tooth. On the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth there is a large carious cavity filled with softened light-brown dentin. The cavity is located within parapulpar dentin. In the projection of mesiobuccal pulp horn the carious cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing is painful. Electric pulp test — 60 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute focal pulpitis
*d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

114. A 28-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding of gums in the frontal part of the upper jaw on the left. Two years ago, the 22 tooth was covered with a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown. Objectively: interdental papilla between the 21 and 22 tooth is hypertrophied, markedly hyperemic, overlaps the crown of the 22 by 1/3 of its height, bleeds when touched. Periodontal pocket between the 21 and 22 tooth is 4 mm deep. Artificial crown is located on the gingival margin. Radiography reveals resorption of the interalveolar septa between the 21 and 22 tooth by 1/3 of their height. Specify a priority action in the treatment of this patient:
a. Sclerotherapy
*b. Removal of the artificial crown
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Gingivectomy
e. Curettage of the periodontal pocket

115. A 45-year-old patient came to a prosthodontics clinic. During the objective examination the doctor checked the sagittal movements of the lower jaw. What muscles are responsible for sagittal movements of the lower jaw?
a. Mentohyoid muscle
*b. Lateral pterygoid muscles
c. Mandibulohyoid muscle
d. Medial pterygoid muscles
e. Digastric muscle

116. An 18-year-old patient complains of a white spot on the vestibular surface of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the white spot is located near the cutting edge. The spot surface is glossy, its size remains unaltered on drying. Make the diagnosis:
a. Fluorosis
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
*d. Local hypoplasia
e. Initial caries

117. A 20-year-old man complains of spontaneous pain in the 24 tooth, which arose suddenly and persists for about 15 minutes. Objectively: the distal surface of the 24 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity with overhanging walls. The cavity is filled with light softened dentin and communicates with the tooth cavity. The cold stimulus causes acute, slowly abating pain. Percussion causes no pain response. Select the best method of treatment:
a. Biological method
b. Vital amputation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

118. A 25-year-old patient complains of pain when biting on the 15 tooth. The pain arose two days ago, has a constant aching nature and increased significantly over the last day. Objectively: the crown of the 15 tooth is gray, the medial contact surface exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Percussion causes acute pain, the gingival mucosa in the projection of the 25 tooth root apex is hyperemic. The regional lymph node is tender. Radiograph shows an ill-defined zone of periapical bone destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis, intoxication stage
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative periodontitis

119. A 27-year-old patient has been referred by a prosthodontist for endodontic treatment of the 45 tooth. Objectively: the 45 tooth crown is destroyed; the lateral surface of the tongue and the buccal mucosa have patches of grayish macerated epithelium slightly rising above the mucosa surface at the points of direct contact with the 45 tooth. The uvula and palatal bars are stagnant-red in color; hard palate presents with papulae surrounded with red margin and covered in grayish epithelium. The submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Soft leukoplakia (leucoplakia mollis)
c. Lichen ruber planus
*d. Secondary syphilis
e. Lupus erythematosus, patch stage

120. A 43-year-old patient complains of mobility and significant neck exposure of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, and 34 teeth are pale and cyanotic, non-bleeding. The 42, 41, 31, and 32 teeth exhibit the I-II grade mobility. The overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, and 32 teeth is present. The necks of the 42, 41, 31, and 32 teeth are exposed by 1/2 of the root length, the necks of the 43 and 33 teeth are exposed by 1/4. What kind of denture should be applied in this case?
a. Kurlyandsky’s bar splint
b. Partial crown
c. Half-ring splint
*d. Cast removable splint
e. Cap splint

121. A 35-year-old woman complains of toothache and thickened body of the mandible. Objectively: the lower left jaw is thickened, Dupuytren’s symptom is observed on the vestibular surface of the mucogingival fold in the area of the 36 and 37 teeth. X-ray of the lower left jaw demonstrates the rounded focus of bone tissue destruction with clear margins. The roots of the 36 and 37 teeth are resorbed. Puncture yielded brown liquid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sarcoma of the body of mandible
*b. Giant cell tumor of the body of mandible
c. Fibrous dysplasia of bone
d. Ameloblastoma of the body of mandible
e. Cancer of the body of mandible

122. A patient complains of the alveolar process deformation on the left upper jaw. Objectively: the crown of the 25 tooth is destroyed with cariosity. X-ray image of the paranasal sinuses shows the left one to have veil-like shading with clear dome-shaped margin. X-ray image of the crown of the 25 tooth shows absence of the periodontal fissure at the the palatal root apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Radicular cyst that invaded in the maxillary sinus
b. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Maxillary cancer
d. Maxillary sinus mucosal cyst
e. Chronic rhinogenous maxillary sinusitis

123. A patient with ischemic heart disease has developed ventricular fibrillation. What is the first-priority therapeutic action?
a. Lidocaine injection
b. Potassium chloride injection
c. Novocaine amide injection
*d. Electric defibrillation
e. Adrenaline injection

124. A 7-year-old boy came to a dental surgeon with complaints of painful swelling of his right cheek and high body temperature. Objectively the body temperature is 38,2°C, facial asymmetry caused by the right cheek edema, no skin discoloration, skin can be pinched in a fold, no mouth opening reduction. In the oral cavity the mucogingival fold in the area of the 84 and 85 teeth is smoothed out, the fold is hyperemic, fluctuation is observed. The 85 tooth is destroyed by cariosity, painless on percussion.Make the diagnosis:
a. Odontogenic abscess of the buccal area originating from the 85 tooth
*b. Acute odontogenic suppurative mandibular periostitis originating from the 85 tooth
c. Acute odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis originating from the 85 tooth
d. Acute odontogenic albuminous mandibular periostitis originating from the 85 tooth
e. Suppuration of the periapical cyst of the 85 tooth

125. A 15-year-old adolescent boy complains of pain in the lower right jaw, which increases during chewing, and impaired closure of the teeth. Anamnesis: 2 days ago a trauma was received. Based on objective examination results and X-ray data the patient was diagnosed with open fracture of the mandible between the 45 and 46 teeth. Choose the method of treatment:
a. Temporary immobilization
b. Rudko’s appliance
c. Ligature
*d. Removable braces
e. Port’s dental splint

126. A woman came to a dentist for consultation. She is 4 months pregnant. Objectively: marginal gingiva presents with dense gingival papillae, torus-shaped, oval, enlarged up to 1/3 of the tooth crowns. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Periodontitis
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Periodontosis
e. Ulcerative gingivitis

127. A 53-year-old man complains of increased teeth sensitivity to chemical stimuli. Objectively: the gums are pale pink, roots are bared by 1/3 of their length. Small amount of dental deposit is observed. The 15, 14, and 24 present with cuneiform defects. Probing of the bared cervices and defects is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Periodontosis, I degree
b. Periodontitis, II degree
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
d. Periodontitis, I degree
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

128. A 24-year-old man complains of painful and bleeding gums. The condition onset was 3 days ago after the patient had a case of acute respiratory disease. Objectively the gingival mucosa is swollen, bright-red, bleeds on probing, painful on palpation; tips of the gingival papilla are rounded; soft dental deposit is observed. X-ray shows no changes in the bone. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ulcerative gingivitis
*b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Atrophic gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Periodontitis

129. A 22-year-old woman came to a dentist for preventive examination. During examination of the oral cavity the dentist detected a defect of hard tooth tissues in the cervical area of the 22 tooth within mantle dentin. The dentin is dense and pigmented. No reaction to percussion and probing is observed.Make the diagnosis:
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Acute median caries
c. Necrosis of hard tooth tissues
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute deep caries

130. Spot X-ray is performed for a 12-yearold child. The X-ray film shows the 35 tooth root to be of nornal length, its walls are parallel to each other and gradually thin out towards the apex. At the entrance the root canal is slightly smaller in diameter than near the forming apex. The periodontal fissure is uniformly wide along the whole length of the formed part of the root. In the apical area of the root it merges with growth zone. What stages of root and periodontium development correspond with this X-ray image?
a. Fully formed root and periodontium
*b. Unformed apex
c. Open apical foramen
d. Lengthwise growth of a root
e. Unformed periodontium

131. A 10-year-old boy complains of painful sore in the mouth, which has been persisting and increasing in size for 1,5 months. Objectively: on the buccal mucosa there is a soft shallow ulcer 2 cm in diameter with uneven undermined edges. The floor of the ulcer is tuberous, covered in yellowgray coating. The ulcer is surrounded with numerous yellowish tubercles. The regional lymph nodes are elastic, painful, and matted together. These symptoms are characteristic of the following disease:
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Cancer
c. Syphilis
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

132. A 47-year-old man complains of persisting dull pain in his upper right jaw. Anamnesis states that the 13 tooth has been treated repeatedly to no effect. Objectively: oral mucosa in the area of the 13 and 14 teeth is hyperemic and painless on palpation. The crown of the 13 tooth is destroyed to the gingival margin. Percussion is sharply painful. What conduction anaesthesia should be applied to extract the 13 tooth?
*a. Infraorbital, incisor, palatal
b. Infraorbital, palatal, tuberal
c. -
d. Infraorbital, palatal
e. Infraorbital, incisor

133. A 29-year-old man came to an oral surgery department to extract the 38 tooth. There are complaints of pain and reduced mouth opening. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C, general condition is satisfactory, slight facial asymmetry is observed due to soft tissue swelling under the gonial angle on the left. Inflammatory contracture of the III degree is observed. In the oral cavity there are edema and hyperemia of mucosa along the pterygomandibular fold on the left. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. What conduction anaesthesia should be applied prior to the extraction of the 38 tooth?
a. Tuberal
*b. Berchet-Dubov anaesthesia
c. Buccal, lingual
d. Mandibular, lingual
e. Infiltration

134. A 52-year-old man was referred to an in-patient dentofacial department with complaints of pain in the submandibular area, aggravating during eating. Anamnesis states frequent exacerbations of inflammatory processes. Main and additional investigations resulted in provisional diagnosis of submandibular sialolithiasis. A concrement 1,5 cm in diameter is localized in the body of the gland. What tactics should a dental surgeon choose?
a. Physiotherapeutic procedures
b. Saliva-producing diet
*c. Gland extirpation
d. Puncture biopsy
e. Extract the concrement from the gland and place a blind suture

135. A 70-year-old patient complains of impaired mastication. Objectively: the 33 and 43 teeth on the lower jaw are retained, firm, but have significantly destroyed crowns. Removable partial denture is required. Choose the optimal method of denture fixation:
a. Intracoronal attachments
*b. Extracoronal attachments
c. Wire clasps (clammers)
d. Telescopic crowns
e. Cast clasps (clammers)

136. A patient diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis came to a dental surgeon complaining of painfulmouth opening characterized by pain on both sides of the jaw. The following is characteristic of rheumatoid arthritis of the temporomandibular joint:
a. Pain is observed on one side of the temporomandibular joint
b. Clicking is observed in the joint on the right
c. Clicking is observed in the joint on the left
*d. Pain is observed on both sides of the temporomandibular joint
e. Pain can be observed on one or both sides of the temporomandibular joint

137. A 38-year-oldman after a domestic accident complains of pain and mobility of his upper teeth, problems with eating. Objectively: soft tissues edema. The 11 and 21 teeth are displaced towards the palate, mobile (II degree), painful on percussion. Mucosa surrounding the affected teeth is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray demonstrates widened periodontal fissure of the 11 and 21. Choose the treatment method:
a. Immobilization or mouthguard
b. Removal of tooth pulp in the 11 and 21 teeth
c. Extraction of the 11 and 21 teeth
d. Reimplantation of the 11 and 21 teeth
*e. Setting of the teeth and their fixation with a flat occlusal splint

138. Parents complain of painfulness and mobility of the tooth of their 4-year-old child, which developed after the impact with a wooden object. Objectively: the face is asymmetrical due to swollen tissues of the upper lip. The 51 tooth is intact, with vestibular displacement and the II degreemobility, gums around the 51 tooth are hyperemic. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Contusion of the 51 tooth
b. Complete dislocation of the 51 tooth
*c. Incomplete dislocation of the 51 tooth
d. Acute albuminous periostitis
e. Acute suppurative periostitis

139. A 7-year-old child is in a grave condition, teeth of the upper left jaw are painful, body temperature is 39, 3°C. The child is pale, adynamic; the face is asymmetrical due to infiltration in the upper left jaw. The 64 tooth is filled, painful on percussion. The 63 and 65 teeth are intact, painful on percussion. The I degree of tooth mobility is observed; pus is being discharged from under the marginal gingiva of the 64 tooth. The alveolar process is deformed at its vestibular and palatine surfaces. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative periostitis
b. Acute albuminous periostitis
*c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Ossification periostitis
e. Ewing’s sarcoma

140. A 4-year-old child has developed acute spontaneous pain in the tooth on the lower right jaw, which aggravates on biting. Objectively: in the 85 tooth there is a deep carious cavity non-penetrating to the dental cavity. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity floor. Painful reaction to cold water stimulus and percussion is observed; mucosa surrounding the 85 is hyperemic. Submandibular lymphadenitis is detected. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute albuminous periostitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
*e. Acute pulpitis complicated with periodontitis

141. An 18-year-old girl came to a dentist to check the quality of fissure sealing that had been performed one year ago. Objectively: the sealant is completely retained in the 17, 16, 26, 27, 37, and 47. No sealant was detected in the 36 and 46, in the distal longitudinal fissures of these teeth there is softened enamel. Fedorov-Volodkina Hygiene Index is 2,5. What tactics regarding the 36 and 46 should the dentist choose in this case?
a. Invasive sealing
b. Repeated noninvasive sealing
*c. Preventive filling
d. Applications with fluorine-containing gel
e. Electrophoresis of calcium-containing solution

142. A patient needs the 36 tooth extracted. After administering anaesthesia the doctor started applying the elevator. However, immediately after that the patient suddenly paled, complained of dizziness, ear noise, and blackout and slid down in the chair. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Shock
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Collapse
*e. Unconsciousness

143. A 54-year-old patient complains of frequent crunching sound in the right temporomandibular joint, which developed one month ago. In the morning the crunching is more frequent and decreases towards the evening. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the skin above the joint is unaltered, the mouth opens by 2,9 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute arthritis
b. Chronic arthritis
c. Pain dysfunction syndrome of the temporomandibular joint
*d. Arthrosis
e. Temporomandibular joint dislocation

144. A 34-year-old man came to a dental clinic for extraction of the 26 tooth. After application of 1,7 ml of Ultracain (Articaine) solution for local anaesthesia the patient developed general fatigue and nausea. Objectively: the skin is pale, cold, cyanotic, covered in clammy sweat; BP is 60/40 mm Hg. What urgent condition did the patient develop?
a. Loss of consciousness
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Collapse
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Urticaria

145. Carious cavities of the 11 and 21 teeth were detected during the preventive examination of a 20-year-old patient. Whatmaterial should be used to fill the detected cavities?
a. Plastic
*b. Microhybrid composite
c. Amalgam
d. Macrofilled composite
e. Phosphate cement

146. A 14-year-old boy complains of rapid wearing-off of tooth crowns. Objectively: tooth crowns are worn-off by 1/3. Enamel easily chips off and is pale gray in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Fluorosis
b. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
*c. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
d. Systemic hypoplasia
e. Focal hypoplasia

147. A patient complains of periodical gingival hemorrhages during tooth brushing and increased teeth sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli, which persist for the last 6 years. On examination the gums are swollen and hyperemic. Periodontal pockets are 5mm deep with serous purulent content, tooth cervices are bared, I degree tooth mobility is observed. On X-ray: irregular resorption of of alveolar septa up to their 1/2. What diagnosis corresponds with the given clinical presentation?
*a. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis, II degree
b. Periodontosis, I degree
c. Exacerbation of severe catarrhal gingivitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis, I degree
e. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome

148. A 63-year-old man complains of pain in the area of maxillary mucogingival fold caused by using a removable laminar denture. Objectively: in the area of the mucogingival fold there is a trophic ulcer with swollen margins and hemorrhaging floor. Make the diagnosis:
a. Toxic chemical stomatitis
b. Allergic contact stomatitis
c. Greenhouse effect
*d. Denture-related stomatitis
e. Toxic infectious stomatitis

149. A 64-year-old man complains of pain and mobility of his front lower teeth. Objectively: the 43, 42, 41, and 31 teeth demonstrate the III degree mobility. These teeth are planned to be extracted and immediate-insertion denture is to be made. When should this denture be put in place?
a. In 3-6 days after the teeth extraction
b. In 1-2 days after the teeth extraction
c. In 2-4 days after the teeth extraction
d. In 6-8 days after the teeth extraction
*e. On the day of the teeth extraction

150. During the oral cavity sanation on the vestibular surface of the 21 and 12 teeth in the cervical area there were detected chalky spots. Enamel surface is dull and coarse, no reaction to thermal stimuli. DecayedMissing-Filled Index (dmft/DMFT) is 6, Hygiene Index is 2. Mesial occlusion is observed. Within the first year of life the patient had been suffering from frequent cases of URTI and a case of chicken pox. What additional investigation methods would be useful for the diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Electric pulp test
b. Anamnesis data
*c. Vital staining
d. X-ray
e. Stomatoscopy

151. Apatient complains of pain and sensation of heaviness in the left side of his face and mucous discharge from the nose. On examination: left cheek edema, destroyed 26 tooth. Tooth percussion is sharply painful. X-ray demonstrates shadowed left maxillary sinus. What disease corresponds with the given clinical presentation?
a. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
b. Acute rhinogenic maxillary sinusitis
*c. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Cyst of the maxillary sinus
e. Acute ethmoiditis

152. During application of tuberal anaesthesia the patient developed rapidly increasing tissue edema and reduced mouth opening. What resulted in such a condition?
a. Anaphylactic shock
*b. Vascular trauma
c. Nerve trunk trauma
d. Muscle trauma during anaesthesia application
e. Intolerance to the anaesthetic

153. During application of infraorbital anaesthesia the patient developed a postinjection hematoma. What vessel had been damaged?
a. Palatine artery
*b. Infraorbital artery
c. Pterygoid venous plexus
d. Maxillary artery
e. Temporal artery

154. A patient came to a dental surgeon with complaint of periodical pains in the 22 tooth. On X-ray examination the patient was diagnosed with granulomatous periodontitis developed due to filling material penetrating the space behind the root apex. What further treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Referral to an oncologist
b. Recurrent endodontic treatment
c. Extraction of the 22 tooth
d. Prescription of anaesthetics
*e. Resection of the root apex

155. After the inflammatory process in the parotid area a woman developed frequent pain attacks resembling electric current in her face on the right. The attacks last for 15- 20 minutes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
*b. Trigeminal neuralgia
c. Trigeminal neuritis
d. Tympanic plexus neuralgia
e. Exacerbation of chronic maxillary sinusitis

156. A 24-year-old woman came to a dentist to receive sanation. Objectively on the masticatory surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity connected with the dental cavity. The cavity probing is painless, no reaction to thermal stimuli is observed in the tooth, percussion is painless. EOD is 108 microamperes. X-ray shows traces of filling material in the rooth canal of the 37 tooth, periodontal fissure is enlarged and deformed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 37 tooth
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 37 tooth
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 37 tooth
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 37 tooth
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 37 tooth

157. A 40-year-old man came to an admission room with an incised wound of the infraorbital region received 8 hours ago. On examination the wound underwent primary surgical treatment. In case of an incised wound its edges:
a. Should be cleaned and drained
*b. Should not be excised
c. Should be closed with primary delayed sutures
d. Should be closed with secondary sutures
e. Should be processed with antibiotic solution

158. An ambulance has delivered an 8year-old child to an admission room. An oral surgeon has made the following diagnosis: odontogenic phlegmon of the right submandibular area. What surgical approach would be advicable for open treatment of this phlegmon?
a. Dissection along the lower neck fold
b. Dissection in the area of pterygomandibular fold
c. Dissection parallel to the torus mandibularis
d. Dissection around the mandibular angle
*e. Dissection in the submandibular area, parallel to the mandible

159. A 14-year-old child complains of throbbing undulating pain in the lower left teeth, which aggravates due to hot stimuli. Objectively: on the masticatory surface of the 36 tooth there is a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin, which is non-communicating with the dental cavity. The cavity floor probing is painless, tooth percussion is painful. What treatment method would be optimal in the given case?
a. Devital amputation
b. Devital extirpation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Biological method

160. An orthodontist has registered for regular check-ups a 3,5-year-old child, who has a bad habit of finger sucking and presents with infantile swallowing. On examination: milk occlusion, direct contact of incisors. What preventive appliance would be optimal in this case?
a. Frankel’s functional regulator
b. Schonherr’s standard vestibular plate
*c. Vestibulo-buccal shield
d. Janssen’s bionator
e. Rudolf’s plate with loops

161. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and crepitation in the temporomandibular joint during the movements of the lower jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with slight displacement to the left. Dentition is intact. To clarify the diagnosis X-ray of the temporomandibular joint was performed. Where should the heads of the mandible be located normally during maximum mouth opening?
a. In front of the articular tubercle
b. In the center of the glenoid fossa
*c. At the top of the articular tubercle
d. In the center of the articular tubercle
e. Closer to the distal part of the glenoid fossa

162. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and crepitation in the temporomandibular joint during the movements of the lower jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with slight displacement to the left. Dentition is intact. On occlusiography there were detected centric and eccentric supracontacts. What treatment methods should be applied in the first place?
a. Mouthguards that increase the height of central occlusion
b. Lower jaw immobilization
c. Mouthguard for muscle relaxation
d. Appliances that limit mouth opening
*e. Selective teeth shaving

163. A 65-year-old man during the tooth extraction suddenly felt unwell, he developed severe pain irradiating to the left scapula and numbness of the left hand. Objectively: the patient is pale, beads of perspiration appeared on his forehead, BP is 170/90 mm Hg, heart rate is 86/min., rhythmical. The dentist stopped the manipulations in the oral cavity. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Zelenin drops
b. Valocordin
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
*d. Nitroglycerine
e. Valerian tincture

164. A 45-year-old patient after administration of local anaesthesia in preparation to oral surgery has suddenly felt unwell, developed increasing edema of laryngeal mucosa and respiration disorder. The dentist stopped the manipulations in the oral cavity. What type of asphyxia developed in the patient?
a. Valvular
b. Dislocational
*c. Stenotic
d. Obturative
e. Aspiration

165. A 19-year-old young man complains of a fistula on the neck anterior surface, which periodically reappears at the same place. Objectively: at the neck midline between the hyoid bone and thyroid cartilage there is a fistula; the skin of the affected area is scarred, drawn-in, and macerated. In the surrounding tissues a dense band extending from the fistula opening to hyoid bone can be palpated. A doctor has made a provisional diagnosis of thyroglossal fistula. Specify the additional method of investigation:
a. -
*b. Contrast radiography
c. Computer tomography
d. Probing
e. Ultrasound

166. Mother of an 8-month-old girl came to a clinic with complaints of the child’s anxiety, fussiness, high fever up to 38, 5°C, signs of alimentary canal irritation, vomiting and refusal to eat. On objective examination the child is pale, crying, presents with hyperemia, edema, gingival pain in the frontal area of the upper jaw, no erupted teeth can be detected. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Hindered tooth eruption
b. Food poisoning
c. Odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
d. Hematogenous osteomyelitis of the maxilla
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

167. A 45-year-old patient complains of inability to properly masticate due to the loss of lateral teeth. The 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27, 37, 36, 35, 44, 45, and 46 teeth are missing. The retained teeth exhibit the I-II degree of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis. Kennedy class I dentition defects are observed. What construction would be optimal in the given case?
a. Cantilever dental bridge
*b. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture with splinting elements
c. Elbrecht’s dental splint
d. Partial laminar denture
e. Mamlok’s dental splint

168. Removable complete laminar denture is being made for a 63-year-old edentulous man. At the stage of placing the artificial teeth in the dental articulator it is necessary to determine sagittal articular angle. This angle equals:
a. 5-15
b. 20-25
c. 40-50
*d. 20-40
e. 15-20

169. In a new neighbourhood unit of a large city a dental clinic is being opened. The clinic will employ 3 prosthodontists. How many positions of dental technicians, dental nurses, and orderlies should be provided?
a. 6 dental technicians, 1 dental nurse, 0,5 position of an orderly
b. 1,5 position of a dental technician, dental nurse, and an orderly
c. 3 dental technicians, 1 dental nurse, 1 orderly
d. 3 dental technicians, 1,5 position of a dental nurse, 1 orderly
*e. 6 dental technicians, 1 dental nurse, 1 orderly

170. A 25-year-old man complains of shortterm pain in the tooth on the lower right jaw during eating sweet, hot, and cold food. Objectively: in the 36 tooth on the distal surface there is a carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity, dentin is softened. Probing of the cavity floor is painful, percussion is painless. Electric pulp test is 16 microamperes. Make the final diagnosis:
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Hyperemia of the pulp
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute median caries

171. A 30-year-old woman complains of a carious cavity in the 16 tooth, food retention in the gap between the 16 and 17 teeth. During examination there was detected a carious cavity within mantle dentin with wide opening on the approximal-medial surface of the 16 tooth. The cavity floor and walls are pigmented, dense, painless on probing. Percussion of the 16 tooth is painless. On thermodiagnostics a short-term reaction can be observed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic concrementous pulpitis

172. A 40-year-old patient requires surgical sanation of the oral cavity. Objectively: the 36 tooth is completely destroyed.Mouth can be fully opened. What anaesthesia would be optimal for extraction of the 36 tooth?
a. Mental
b. Mandibular
*c. Torusal
d. Infiltration
e. Berchet-Dubov

173. A 45-year-old woman needs a denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 12, 25, and 26 teeth are missing. Specify the Kennedy’s class of dentition defects in the given case:
*a. II class, 2 subclass
b. III class, 1 subclass
c. II class, 3 subclass
d. III class, 3 subclass
e. II class, 4 subclass

174. A 37-year-old patient complains of an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the 13 tooth is destroyed by 2/3. The tooth is pulpless, the root canal is filled. How deep should the root canal be opened for pivot crown installation in this patient?
a. Full length of the root canal
*b. 2/3 of the root canal
c. 3/4 of the root canal
d. 1/3 of the root canal
e. 1/2 of the root canal

175. A 10-year-old boy complains of acute pain attacks in the area of his upper left teeth. The toothache persisted for a night. Objective examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 26 tooth within parapulpar dentin. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity floor. Markedly positive reaction to cold water stimulus is observed. Select the most likely diagnosis:
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute suppurative periodontitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
*d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

176. A 15-year-old patient complains of carious cavity and short-term ”lightning-fast” pain attacks in the 26 tooth. The pain attacks cease in 1-2 minutes after eating. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity filled with softened dentin. The cavity floor is painful on probing.Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute traumatic pulpitis
b. Acute local pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Pulpal hyperemia
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

177. A 7-year-old girl hit her forehead one day ago. Several hours after the sustained trauma a swelling developed in the left superciliary area. General condition of the child is unaffected. Objectively: swelling of the forehead tissues spreading towards the left eyelids; the swelling is soft, fluctuation sign is present. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Hemangioma of the right superciliary area
b. Fracture of the frontal bone
c. Hematic abscess of the left superciliary area
*d. Hematoma of the left superciliary area
e. Fracture of the temporal bone

178. Mother of a 10-year-old girl complains of a cosmetic defect of the child’s 22 tooth that erupted with damaged enamel. Anamnesis states premature extraction of the 62 tooth due to caries complication. There is a white-yellow spot with clear margins on the vestibular surface of the 22 tooth. Enamel retains glossiness, no surface roughness can be detected on probing.Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Local enamel hypoplasia

179. A 48-year-old patient has come to a hospital with complaints of defects in the paragingival area and slight sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively: there are hard tissue defects that resemble a wedge with smooth polished walls on the precervical vestibular surface of the 23 and 24 teeth. Thermal test is slightly positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel necrosis
b. Enamel erosion
c. Endemic fluorosis
*d. Cuneiform defect
e. Acute deep caries

180. Parents of a 3-year-old child complain that the child has a neck growth that developed 3 months after the birth. Objectively: in the upper lateral neck area there is a semicircular neoplasm with limited mobility, soft elastic consistency, no skin alterations, painless on palpation. Puncture yielded puslike clear yellow substance. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Lymphangioma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
*c. Branchial cleft cyst
d. Specific lymphadenitis
e. Hemangioma

181. A 16-year-old adolescent girl complains of pain caused by cold stimuli and food particles retained in her upper jaw tooth. Objectively: on the contact surface of the 24 tooth there is a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin. The cavity floor and walls are covered with light softened dentin. The carious cavity floor is sensitive to probing, percussion of the 24 is painless. Cold water stimulus is painful, the pain quickly abates after the stimulus is removed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

182. A 15-year-old girl complains of brief pain attacks in her teeth due to chemical stimuli. Objectively: on the contact surfaces of the 11, 21, and 22 teeth there are enamel areas matt white in color, with lost shine, covered in large amount of dental deposit. Enamel is softened and can be easily chipped off with excavator. Probing of lesions is painless. Percussion is painless. No reaction to cold stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Acute initial caries

183. A 32-year-old patient addressed a dentist with complaints of inability to close his mouth. Objectively the mouth is halfopen, the chin is protruding forwards and is displaced to the left. Such condition occurred after the mouth was opened wide. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anterior left-sided mandibular dislocation
b. Posterior right-sided mandibular dislocation
c. Posterior left-sided mandibular dislocation
*d. Anterior right-sided mandibular dislocation
e. Anterior bilateral mandibular dislocation

184. A 37-year-old patient has symmetrical face; the mucosa in the area of the 12 tooth root apex projection is pale pink; palpation is painless; the tooth crown is destroyed by 1/3; percussion is painless. X-ray: the root canal of the 12 tooth is filled to the apex; granuloma 4 mm in diameter surrounds the root apex. Choose the method of surgical treatment:
a. Root hemisection
b. Root amputation
c. Tooth extraction
*d. Granuloma removal with root apex resection
e. Coronary radicular tooth separation

185. During preventive examination a patient was diagnosed with precancerous hyperkeratosis of the red border of the lower lip. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + chemotherapy
b. Palliative treatment
c. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + close-focus roentgenotherapy
d. No treatment is required
*e. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues

186. A 23-year-old patient is hospitalized into a dentofacial unit with provisional diagnosis of the II degree thermal burns of the right buccal and parotid-masseter region. What scar tissue will develop in this case?
*a. Healing without a scar
b. Hypertrophic scar
c. Keloid scar
d. Hypotrophic scar
e. Atrophic scar

187. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the gonial angle. Objectively: the 45, 46, 34, 35, and 36 teeth are missing; there are slight swelling and reduced mouth opening observed. X-ray: right-sided fracture of the body of mandible in the area of the 45 and 46 teeth without bone defect. What dental splint should be used for treatment?
a. Limberg
b. Zbarzh
c. Vankevych
*d. Weber
e. Tigerstedt

188. A clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture for the lower jaw is to be made for a 53-year-old patient. Objectively: the 38, 37, 35, 34, 45, 46, and 47 teeth are missing. The retained teeth are firm, with low clinical crowns. What fixation method of the denture would be optimal in this case?
a. Bar system
b. Supporting-retaining clasps (clammers)
*c. Telescopic system
d. Attachments
e. Ball joint attachments

189. A 28-year-old woman is diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis, II degree. The doctor prescribed her amouthwash with chlorhexidine gluconate as a part of complex therapy. This drug belongs to the following group of antiseptics:
a. Halogens
b. Dyes
*c. Detergents
d. Oxidants
e. Acids and alkalis

190. A 22-year-old patient has suffered unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was provided with full dental brace with loops and intermaxillary elastic expansion. Recovery was uncomplicated. The brace should be removed after:
a. 1 week
b. 2 weeks
*c. 3 weeks
d. 10 days
e. -

191. A 33-year-old man, a metalworker, complains of pain and itching in the gums, gingival hemorrhages intensifying during tooth brushing. The onset of the disease was 1 year ago. Objectively: the gums in the area of upper and lower frontal teeth are hyperemic, swollen, and cyanotic. There are significant mineralized deposits on the teeth; the periodontal sockets are 3 mm deep and produce small amount of serous discharge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized periodontitis, I class
b. Exacerbation of chronic generalized periodontitis, II class
c. Generalized periodontosis, I class
d. Acute localized periodontitis, II class
e. Chronic localized periodontitis, I class

192. A 34-year-old man complains of pain in the area of his right eye, headache, and body temperature rise up to 38,6°C. Two days ago the patient developed an infiltration in the lower eyelid of the right eye. Objectively the eyelids are markedly swollen, palpebral fissure is closed, conjunctiva is swollen. Exophthalmos is observed. The eyeball is immobile, vision is impaired. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Orbital phlegmon
b. Purulent maxillary sinusitis
c. Lower eyelid abscess
d. Angular vein trombophlebitis
e. Eyelid phlegmon

193. A 35-year-old patient complains of burns of the face and neck, swelling and burning pain in the affected area. On examination: edema of the face and neck, palpebral fissure is narrowed due to swelling, affected skin is hyperemic and covered with strained thin-walled blisters filled with clear content. Where blisters are broken, there are pink wounds, sharply painful to touch. Determine the degree of the burns:
a. III B
b. IV
c. I
d. III A
*e. II

194. A 19-year-old patient came to a dentofacial clinic with complaints of pain in the gonial angle on the right, impaired mouth opening and painful chewing. The signs had been persisting for 5 days, emerged spontaneously and had been aggravating gradually. Mandibular contracture is of the III degree. On examination of the oral cavity: hyperemia, edema of the retromolar space on the right, hood-shaped mucosa from under which pus is being discharged and 2 tooth tubercles can be detected. X-ray shows oblique medial tooth position. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute suppurative pericoronitis of the 48 tooth
b. Chronic local mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Acute submandibular sialadenitis
d. Fracture of the gonial angle
e. Acute suppurative periostitis from the 48 tooth

195. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a massive and extremely dense (resembling wood) infiltration in the parotid and retromandibular areas, which persists for 1,5months. The patient’s general condition remains largely undisturbed, signs of inflammatory process are vague and indistinct. Periodically in the infiltration area the skin assumes cyanotic-purple color, a soft patch appears in the center, where 1-2 fistulae develop and discharge pus with white granules. Periodically fistulae close and reopen.Make the diagnosis:
a. Parotid erysipelas
b. Parotid tuberculosis
*c. Parotid actinomycosis
d. Chronic parotid sialadenitis
e. Adenocarcinoma of the parotid gland

196. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain of their child having a gradually enlarging neoplasm in the left parotid-masticatory region. Skin over the tumor is without discoloration. The tumor is painless, but when the head bends down the tumor increases in size and assumes bluish coloring. What disease can be suspected in the child?
*a. Hemangioma
b. Atheroma
c. Cyst of the parotid gland
d. Lymphangioma
e. Fibroma

197. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the tragus area, clicking sound during mouth opening, stuffed ears. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening path is straight.Dentition defect can be estimated as Kennedy I class; the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, and 28 teeth are missing. In this case the load would be the most traumatizing for the following anatomical structure:
a. Distal slope of the articular tubercle
b. Socket floor of the temporal bone
c. Articular capsule
d. Articular head
*e. Interarticular disk

198. A 50-year-old man complains of bared dental cervices on his upper and lower jaws. Objectively: the teeth and dentition are intact, clinical crowns are elongated, the teeth have no pathologic mobility, are worn off within the physiological norm. To remove supracontacts it is planned to perform selective teeth shaving. What additional investigation is necessary in the given case?
a. X-ray
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Mastication tests
*d. Occlusiography
e. Masticatiography

199. A 28-year-old man presents with profuse caseous coating on the posterior third of the back of his tongue, soft palate, tonsils, and posterior wall of the pharynx. Submandibular, submental and deep cervical lymph nodes have been enlarged for 4 months. Two weeks ago the patient developed intermittent fever and general fatigue. Select the correct sequence of HIV diagnosing:
a. Viral cultivation, enzymoimmunoassay
*b. Enzymoimmunoassay, immunoblotting (Western-Blot)
c. Complete blood count, viral load
d. CD4 cell count, enzymoimmunoassay
e. Complete blood count, enzymoimmunoassay

200. A 38-year-old man complains of sensation of a foreign body on his tongue and development of gag reflex during talking. The signs appeared after the prolonged taking of antibiotics. Objective examination detected thickened and pigmented filiform papillae enlarged to 2-3 cm in size. Histologically papillar hyperplasia and marked keratinization without alteration of the surrounding tissues were detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Geographic tongue
*b. Black hairy tongue
c. Fissured tongue
d. Median rhomboid glossitis
e. Glossitis areata exfoliativa

