1. ?A removable full denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 75-year-old man. Objectively the alveolar process is slightly atrophied. Herbst tests are performed during ?tting of an impression tray. When lips are stretched forwards the tray slips off. Where should the tray edge be shortened in this case?
a. From behind the mandibular tuberosity to the mylohyoid line
b. From canine to canine on the lingual side
*c. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
d. Along the mylohyoid line
e. In the premolar area on the lingual side

2. A 18-year-old boy complains of bleeding and pain in her gums. The disease onset was 4 days ago. Objectively the skin is pale, body temperature is 38.5°C. Her submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged, painful, non-fused with the surrounding tissues. The gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37 are hyperemic, ulcerated, and covered in necrotic deposit. Teeth present with soft dental plaque. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. —

3. A 60-year-old man complains of stabbing pain near the root of the tongue on the right, which develops during eating, especially sour food. Objectively: there is a swelling in the right submandibular area. On palpation the submandibular gland is dense and enlarged. Excretory duct ori?ce of the right submandibular gland is dilated and produces mucopurulent secretion. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Sialolithiasis of the submandibular gland
b. Acute suppurative lymphadenitis
c. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular area
d. Acute sialodochitis
e. Calculous sialadenitis of the sublingual gland

4. A 19-year-old woman, an actress, complains of discoloration of her left maxillary central incisor. One year ago the pulp of this tooth was removed and the tooth was ?lled. Gradually the tooth assumed grayish color. Objectively the 11 is ?lled, discolored, ?rm, painless on percussion. Deep occlusion is observed. What part of the clinical presentation contraindicates installation of an all-porcelain crown?
a. Devitalized teeth defects that cannot be correctedwithdentalinlays
*b. Deep occlusion
c. Enamel hypoplasia with tooth deformation and discoloration
d. Front teeth defects that cannot be corrected with ?llings
e. Tooth discoloration

5. A 32-year-old woman needs a denture. On objective examination the decision was made in favor of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown. What material should be used in this case to obtain the impression?
a. Orthocor
*b. Stoma?ex
c. Stomalgin
d. Repin
e. Stens

6. Parents of a 6-month-old child complain of their child having a large amount of dental deposit in the oral cavity. Objectively the oral mucosa is hyperemic, covered in white easily removed deposit that resembles curdled milk. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Herpes simplex virus
b. Coxsackie virus
c. Epstein-Barr virus
*d. Candida fungi
e. Klebs-Loef?er bacillus

7. A 55-year-old man complains of heartburn and unpleasant sensations in his tongue. The patient has been suffering from gastritis with low acidity for approximately 5 years. What changes in the tongue are the most likely to be detected in this patient?
a. Erosions on the lateral surfaces of the tongue
b. Hypertrophic lingual papillae
*c. Atrophied and smoothed out lingual papillae
d. Coated tongue
e. Fissured tongue

8. A 10-year-old child is referred by the orthodontist for extraction of tooth 53. Objectively the crown of 53 is retained, the tooth is immobile. X-ray of tooth 53 shows root resorption by less than 1/3. Choose the best instrument for extraction of tooth 53:
a. Straight elevator
b. Crown forceps with S-shaped handles
c. Beak-shaped root forceps
*d. Straight crown forceps
e. Root bayonet forceps

9. A 24-year-old woman has Richmond crown being made to restore the crown of the central maxillar incisor. The cap is completed. What is the next step of prosthesis-making?
*a. To ?t the cap on the tooth stump and place the post in the root canal
b. To ?t the cap and the post to the tooth root
c. Tooth ?xation with cement
d. Making of combination dental crown
e. To solder the post with the cap

10. Removable full dentures are being made for a 65-year-old man. Progenic occlusion is determined. What are the speci?cs of teeth placement in case of progenic occlusion of edentulous jaws?
a. Short-bite anterior teeth
*b. Superior dental arch is shortened by two premolars
c. Inferior dental arch is shortened by two premolars
d. Anterior teeth are placed in direct occlusion
e. Anterior teeth are placed in orthognathic occlusion

11. A 53-year-old patient complains of pain and clicking in the left temporomandibular joint. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, palpation of the lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left side. Mouth opening is reduced. Tomography shows smooth bone outline of joint surfaces. Which disease of those listed below corresponds with this clinical presentation?
a. Deforming arthrosis
b. Rheumatic arthritis
*c. Temporomandibular joint dysfunction
d. Acute posttraumatic arthritis
e. Joint ankylosis

12. A 47-year-old man complains of partial loss of his upper teeth. The patient’s medical history states loss of teeth due to trauma sustained 3 months ago. 11 and 12 are lost. 13, 21, and 22 are destroyed by 2/3 and restored with ?llings. Occlusion is orthognathic. What denture construction would be optimal for this patient, considering his occupation as a lecturer?
a. Plastic dental bridge
b. Removable partial laminar denture for the upper jaw
c. Swaged-soldered metal dental bridge with faceted intermediate part
*d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge
e. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture with attachments

13. A 7-year-old boy is diagnosed with epidemic parotitis (mumps). Name the most likely complication of this disease:
*a. Orchitis
b. Dermatitis
c. Cholecystitis
d. Pneumonia
e. Colitis

14. During preventive examination a 40-yearold man presents with the following changes: marginal gingiva is enlarged, torus-shaped, cyanotic, slightly bleeding when touched with a dental probe; there is no pain. Staining the gums with Lugol’s iodine solution results in light-brown coloring of mucosa. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Generalized periodontitis
*d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis

15. A 4-year-old boy has been diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw originating from the 64 tooth. Choose the optimal treatment tactics:
*a. The 64 tooth extraction, periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
b. Endodontological treatment of the 64 tooth, anti-in?ammatory pharmacotherapy
c. Periosteotomy, anti-in?ammatory pharmacotherapy
d. Endodontological treatment of the 64 tooth, periosteotomy
e. The 64 tooth extraction, anti-in?ammatory pharmacotherapy

16. An adolescent complains of reduced and painful mouth opening, dif?culties when eating, and swelling in the left mandibular angle that developed after tooth 37 was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue swelling in the area of the left mandibular angle. Mouth opening is painful and reduced to 2.0 cm. Disturbed occlusion is observed. Palpation of the left mandibular angle is painful, the tissues are soft, bone crepitus is detected. ”Indirect load to the chin” symptom is positive in the area of the left mandibular angle. The socket of the extracted tooth is packed with iodoform gauze. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Left mandibular angle fracture
b. Anterior mandibular fracture
c. Odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Mandibular periostitis on the left
e. Mandibular alveolar fracture

17. A 32-year-old man has metallic inlay made for him. The denture is being made for tooth 36 with Black’s class I carious cavity. What surfaces of the inlay should be ?led down and polished before ?xing the denture?
a. Lateral surfaces
b. Inlay bottom
c. Lateral surfaces and inlay bottom
*d. Occlusal surface
e. All surfaces

18. A 12-year-old boy complains of painful and bleeding gums on his upper jaw. Objectively the gingival margin in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 teeth is swollen, hyperemic, deformed due to gingival overgrowths. Gingival papillae cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height, bleed on touch. Upper front teeth are overcrowded. X-ray shows no pathological changes of the periodontium. What drugs should be administered for topical treatment in the ?rst place?
a. Steroidal anti-in?ammatory drugs
b. Sclerosants
*c. Nonsteroidal anti-in?ammatory drugs
d. Keratoplastic agents
e. Cytostatic agents

19. A 43-year-old woman complains of mobility and displacement of her upper front teeth. Objectively: dental formula is 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37. Teeth 12 11 21 22 are slanted towards the vestibular side, diastema and tremata are observed, I-II degree teeth mobility is detected. Select the orthodontic appliance for correction of teeth misalignment as a part of complex treatment of periodontal disease:
*a. Palatal plate with vestibular arch
b. Schwartz appliance
c. Palatal plate with inclined plane
d. Katz crown
e. Bynin appliance

20. A 45-year-old man complains of toothache and mobility of his upper front teeth. Objectively his dental formula is as follows: 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . Dental cervices of 13 12 11 21 22 are exposed and demonstrate mobility of the III degree. Mobile teeth are to be extracted and immediate denture is to be made for the patient. How soon after the teeth extraction should such dentures be inserted?
a. In 5-6 days
b. In 6-7 days
c. In 1-2 days
d. In 3-4 days
*e. On the day of teeth extraction

21. A 56-year-old man complains of swelling and pain in his right parotid area. The swelling was noticed 5-6 months ago. Objectively right-sided paresis of the facial muscles can be determined. Palpation reveals there a modrately painful tuberous tumor fused with surrounding tissues. In the center of the tumor there is an area of softening. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and dense. The mouth can be opened without restriction. There is no saliva out?ow from the opening of the right parotid gland. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Actinomycosis of the right parotid gland
*b. Adenocarcinoma of the right parotid gland
c. Chronic lymphadenitis of the right parotid area
d. Chronic non-epidemic parotitis
e. Mixed tumor of the right parotid gland

22. Parents of a 3-year-old child report that the child suffers from constant pain in the upper front teeth. Objectively: the coronal part of the 61 tooth is gray and decayed. Probing of the root canal ori?ce is painful and accompanied by bleeding. The tooth percussion provokes acute pain. Mucosa is hyperemic, edematic and painful. Palpation in the region of the 61 and 62 teeth reveals a ?stula. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

23. Puncture sample taken from a 13-yearold child contains giant Reed-Sternberg cells. What diagnosis can be con?rmed by the cell content of this puncture material?
a. Lymph node actinomycosis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Tuberculous lymphadenitis
d. Lymphocytic leukemia
*e. Lymphogranulomatosis

24. A 25-year-old man complains of genelal malaise, high body temperature, acute gingival bleeding, and gingival enlargement. He has a history of nosebleeds. Objectively the patient presents with systemic lymphoid hyperplasia, pallor of skin and mucosa, II-III degree hyperplasia of the gingival mucosa, hemorrhages into the buccal mucosa, and ulcers covered with gray deposit. What examination method would be optimal for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Immunoassay
b. Blood glucose test
c. Yasynsky test
d. Bacterioscopy
*e. Complete blood test panel

25. A 19-year-old young man complains of constant pain in tooth 22, which intensi?es on biting with this tooth, sensation of ”protruding” tooth, and upper lip edema. The patient has history of upper jaw trauma. Objectively tooth 22 is intact. Vertical percussion is acutely painful. The upper lip is swollen, mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 22 is red and painful on palpation. What examination method is necessary for diagnosismaking in this case?
a. Thermometry
*b. X-ray
c. Rheodentography
d. Dental pulp test
e. Transillumination

26. A patient complains of carious cavity in tooth 11. The ?lling was lost one week ago. The tooth crown is dark, there is residual ?lling material at the bottom of the carious cavity. Vertical percussion is painless. X-ray shows an oval area of bone tissue resorption with clear margins, 0.4х0.3 cm in size. The root canal is ?lled by 2/3 of its length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Radicular cyst
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

27. A 28-year-old man is referred for oral cavity sanation. On examination there is a ?lling on the masticatory surface of tooth 17, percussion is painless. Mucosa in the root apex projection of 17 is cyanotic, vasoparesis symptom is positive. X-ray shows foci of bone tissue destruction with fuzzy margins in the area of root apices, root canals are not ?lled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
*b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
e. Radicular cyst

28. A 30-year-old woman complains of mild burning sensation in her lower lip and its dryness. She peels skin scales off with her teeth. She has been presenting with this condition for 10 years. On examination the skin scales are gray and located on the lip from the Klein’s line to the center of the vermillion border from angle to angle of the mouth. The scales are ?rmly attached in the center and are loose on the periphery. Their forcible removal does not result in erosions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
b. Eczematous cheilitis
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Meteorological cheilitis
*e. Exfoliative cheilitis

29. A 32-year-old patient presents with body temperature of 38.9°C, general fatigue, impaired speech, inability to eat. This condition has been recurring for the last 4 years in autumn and spring. There are vesicles and erosions with grayish ?brinous coating on the hyperemic and swollen labial and buccal mucosa. Nikolsky’s sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Pemphigus vulgaris
*c. Erythema multiforme exudativum
d. Nonacantholytic pemphigus
e. Dermatitis herpetiformis (Duhring’s disease)

30. A 28-year-old woman complains of persisting pain in tooth 34, which intensi?es on biting. Four days ago arsenic paste was left in the 34. The patient missed her appointment with the dentist. Objective examination detected occlusive dressing on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 34, percussion is acutely painful. What treatment tactics would be the most advisable in this case?
a. The root canal is lavaged with antidote and ?lled
b. —
c. Dentin dressing is removed, electrophoresis with antidote along the mucogingival fold is prescribed
d. The root canal is lavaged with antidote, the tooth remains uncovered
*e. Arsenic antidote is placed into the root canal under occlusive dressing

31. A 35-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic with complaints of teeth mobility on his lower jaw. What type of occlusion stabilization is recommended in this case?
a. Frontal
b. Sagittal
*c. Arch
d. Parasagittal
e. Frontosagittal

32. A 57-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility and inability to eat. Objectively: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 47 teeth exhibit grade II mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
*b. Removable cast splint
c. Kurlyandsky splint bar
d. Removable partial denture
e. Bynin removable splint

33. A 16-year-old young man complains of temperature increase up to 38.7°C, pain when eating and swallowing, foul acrid smell from his mouth. Lymph nodes, especially cervical ones, are enlarged, mobile, and painless. Objectively the patient presents with generalized hyperemia of the oral mucosa, multiple petechiae, necrotic spots, and profuse coating of the anterior pharynx. Blood test: increased ESR, marked leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypical mononuclear cells, thrombocytopenia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vincent stomatitis (acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis)
b. Monoblastic leukemia
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Herpetic angina

34. A 57-year-old retired man complains of attacks of burning pain and rashes on the skin of his face and oral mucosa on the right. Anamnesis: a course of radiation therapy for treatment of gastric disease, past case of chickenpox. Objectively: along the third branch of the trigeminal nerve the skin of the face presents with isolated erosions covered in ?brinous coating. There are multiple vesicles on the hyperemic and swollen oral mucosa. Right-sided lymphadenitis is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuralgia
b. Acute recurrent herpes
c. Neuritis
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Murrain

35. A 12-year-old girl has complaint of a carious cavity in her tooth. Objectively: there is Black’s class 1 carious cavity in the 36 tooth; it is localized in the parapulpar dentin; the mouth of the cavity is wide. The dentin is dense and pigmented. It is sensitive to cold stimulus, percussion is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Acute median caries
c. —
*d. Chronic deep caries
e. Acute deep caries

36. A 35-year-old woman has complaints of cosmetic defects of the front upper teeth crowns. The defects have been aggravating for the last 10 years. The patient suffers from unpleasant sensations when brushing her teeth, and when chemical stimuli are applied. Objective examination revealed defects localized in the enamel of the front upper teeth vestibular surface. The defects are oval, saucer-shaped, and have clear margins. Response to probing and cold stimuli was positive. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Chemical necrosis of the tooth
c. Hyperesthesia of tooth hard tissues
*d. Enamel erosion
e. Cuneiform defect

37. A patient complains of dull ache in the 16 tooth, which occurs during eating cold food. Previously the tooth had been ?lled due to deep caries, the ?lling was lost 1 year ago. Objectively: a deep carious cavity that does not communicate with the tooth cavity is present; percussion is painless, probing is painful along the whole ?oor of the carious cavity. Electric pulp test - 50 microamperes. Thermodiagnosis is painful. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
b. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic deep caries

38. A 35-year-old man complains of thickening of his maxillary alveolar process. Preliminary diagnosis of maxillary radicular cyst was made. What substance will be obtained as the result of the puncture of the alveolar process in the area of buccal thickening?
*a. Yellowish liquid
b. Pus
c. Turbid in?ltration
d. Epithelium
e. Blood

39. Six months ago a 40-year-old man had his tooth 26 extracted; afterwards his oral cavity and maxillary sinus became communicating and the patient developed the ?rst signs of maxillary sinusitis. What surgical procedure should be performed in this case?
a. Osteotomy of the alveolar process
*b. Maxillary sinusotomy with simultaneous plastic surgery for repair of the ?stula
c. Fistula plication
d. Caldwell-Luc surgery
e. Fistula packing with Iodoform gauze

40. A 46-year-old woman complains of bleeding gums, suppuration, teeth mobility. She has been presenting with these signs for 10 years. On examination her upper and lower gums are hyperemic, swollen, bleed on touch. In the area of 42, 41, 31, and 32 periodontal pockets are up to 8 mm deep, contain purulent discharge; these teeth demonstrate mobility of the II degree, other teeth present with mobility of the I degree. In the area of 42, 41, 31, and 32 X-ray shows interalveolar septa resorption by 1/2 of the root length and signs of osteoporosis. What is the most advisable method of surgical treatment in this case?
a. Gingivectomy
b. Flap surgery
c. Curettage
d. Gingivotomy
*e. Osteoplasty

41. A 40-year-old man had his root canal of the34tooth?lled due to chronic ?brous periodontitis. Soon the treated place became painful. On X-ray the root canal of the 34 tooth is ?lled to the root apex. What tactics should the dentist choose to manage the pain?
a. To provide conduction anesthesia
b. To provide in?ltration anesthesia
c. To rinse with antiseptic mouthwash
d. To make insicion along the mucogingival fold
*e. To prescribe physiotherapeutic procedures

42. A 49-year-old man was diagnosed with recurrence of lower lip cancer two years after he had undergone radiation therapy. Objectively in the area of his lower right lip there is a neoplasm 1x2 cm in size with an ulcer in its center. In the right submandibular area there are 2 round, enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes. What approach to the treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Rectangular resection of the lower lip
b. Wedge resection of the lower lip
*c. Combined treatment
d. Trapezial resection of the lower lip
e. Vanakh’s operation

43. During regular check-up a 6.5-year-old child presents with carious cavity on the distal proximal surface of 65 within mantle dentin. Cavity walls and bottom are pigmented, dense, painless on probing; there is no response to cold stimulus; percussion is painless. During tooth preparation there is tenderness at the level of dentinoenamel junction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Chronic median caries

44. After adenotonsillectomia it is necessary to break the mouth breathing habit in a 4year-old child. The orthodontist recommends application of an oral vestibular shield (Kerbitz’ vestibular plate). Vestibular shield facilitates training of the following muscle:
a. Masseter muscle
b. Temporal muscle
*c. Orbicular muscle
d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
e. Medial pterygoid muscle

45. A 30-year-old man presents with fresh median mandibular fracture without visible displacement of the fragments. What will be the function of the dental apparatus to be prescribed in this case?
a. Formation
*b. Fixation
c. Directing
d. Setting
e. Replacement

46. A 43-year-old woman complains of her lower teeth mobility. Objectively the teeth mobility is of the I-II degree. It is planned to make a full-cast removable occlusal splint for her. What material would be optimal for this splint?
a. Stainless steel
b. ”EI-95” alloy
*c. Cobalt nickel chromium alloy
d. ”PD-250” alloy (silver palladium alloy)
e. Gold alloy of 900 millesimal ?neness

47. A 4-year-old practically healthy child came for oral cavity sanation. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 75 there is a carious cavity within mantle dentin. The cavity is ?lled with softened dentin. Dentinoenamel junction is painful on probing. What material would be optimal for permanent ?lling?
a. Phosphate cement
b. Composite material
c. Silicate cement
*d. Glass ionomer cement
e. Silicophosphate cement

48. A 7.5-year-old practically healthy child complains of crown fracture and pain in the upper right incisor. Objectively 2/3 of crown of 11 is absent, the pulp is exposed and red; on probing it is acutely painful and bleeding; tooth percussion is painful. The trauma occurred 2 hours ago. What would be the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
*c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Biological approach

49. Parents of a 2.5-year-old child complain of gradual destruction of the upper front teeth of their child for the last several months. Objectively there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the contact and vestibular surfaces of 52, 51, 61, and 62. The cavities are ?lled with softened pigmented dentin that can be easily removed with dental excavator. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Chronic super?cial caries
*d. Acute median caries
e. Acute deep caries

50. A 49-year-old man complains of progressing reduction of mouth opening, pain on the left when swallowing, severe deterioration of his general well-being, temperature increase up to 39.3°C. Destroyed tooth 38 presents with acute pain. Objectively the face is symmetrical, the submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painful on palpation. Palpation under the left mandibular angle and in the the left retromandibular area provokes sharp pain. Mouth opening and movement of the mandible to the left are signi?cantly reduced. The left pterygomandibular fold is hyperemic and in?ltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the sublingual fossa
*b. Phlegmon of the pterygomandibular space
c. Phlegmon of the retromandibular area
d. Phlegmon of the parapharyngeal space
e. Phlegmon of the submandibular space

51. A 40-year-old man presents with pathologic teeth grinding caused by their functional overload due to the loss of many antagonist teeth. With direct occlusion, vertical grinding of the front teeth resulted in protrusion of the patient’s lower jaw forwards. Interalveolar space is diminished, the lower third of the face is shortened. What would be the most advisable treatment in this case?
a. Teeth shortening
b. Prothetic treatment
*c. Prosthetics that increase interalveolar height
d. Prosthetic treatment
e. Instrumental surgical treatment

52. A 7-year-old child complains of pain and swelling in the left submandibular region. The swelling in this region developed 2 days ago. Objectively: the child is in a satisfactory condition, body temperature is of 37.3°C. Face is asymmetrical due to the soft tissue swelling in the left submandibular region. Palpation reveals a round formation 2x2 cm in size. The formation is mobile, painful, nonfused with the skin. The 74 tooth is discolored, percussion is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Phlegmonous adenitis of the right submandibular region
b. Lateral cervical cyst
c. Acute serous nonodontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
d. Acute suppurative odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
*e. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region

53. A 48-year-old patient complains of the lower jaw teeth mobility. Van Thiel dental splint is to be made for prosthodontic treatment. What construction elements are supposed to ?xitinplace?
*a. Whole piece proximal grip clasps
b. Wire clasps
c. Equator crowns
d. Parapulpar posts
e. Full metal crowns

54. A 55-year-old man suffered a blow to the frontal mandibular area. He is diagnosed with mandibular fracture. Prior to trauma he was wearing removable dentures (partial laminar denture for the lower law and full denture for the upper jaw). What can be used for transport immobilization of the fracture?
a. Zbarzh apparatus
b. Vasiliev splint
c. Weber splint
d. Vankevych splint
*e. Patient’s dentures

55. A 57-year-old woman came to a dentist for extraction of the 34 tooth due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. What instrument would be optimal for tooth extraction in the given case?
a. Beak-shaped curved forceps
b. Beak-shaped crushing forceps
*c. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. Curved elevators

56. A cast clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture is being made for a 58-yearold patient. Impressions are made, centric jaw relation is determined, plaster casts are obtained. What is the next stage?
a. Marking the border seal
*b. Examination of the working model with a parallelometer
c. Wax modelling of the denture frame
d. Transfer of denture frame pattern to the working model
e. Duplication of the working model

57. A 7-year-old boy underwent ?ssure sealing in teeth 36 and 46. Fissure sealing would be most effective:
a. In 3-4 years after tooth eruption
*b. Immediately after eruption of the permanent tooth
c. If permanent teeth are affected with caries
d. After permanent occlusion is formed
e. In 1-2 years after tooth eruption

58. A 6-year-old girl took paracetamol to treat a case of URTI two days ago, which resulted in the development of her present condition. The disease onset was acute with temperature increase up to 39.8°C. Objectively there are cockade-shaped maculopapular rashes on her face. The vermilion border is swollen, hyperemic, covered in massive brown crusts, and presents with bleeding cracks. Conjunctivitis is detected. Swollen and hyperemic oral mucosa presents with numerous erosions covered with ?brinous incrustations; the erosions are sharply painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Pemphigus
c. Erythema multiforme exudativum
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

59. How often should the dentures be replaced in children during the period of milk occlusion according to Ilyina-Markosian?
a. Every 12-16 months
b. Every 16 months
c. Every 8-10 months
d. Every 10-12 months
*e. Every 6-8 months

60. On objective examination a 59-year-old man with the edentulous mandible presents with bone protrusions and mobile areas of the alveolar crest. To ensure proper ?xation of the denture and even load distribution the following functional impression should be made:
a. Decompression
b. Combined
c. Complete anatomical
d. Compression
*e. Differentiated

61. A 28-year-old man complains of pain in the infraorbital and parotid region on the left. On examination: hemorrhage occurs in the lower eyelid and conjunctiva of the left eye, there are signs of crepitation and step deformity of the eyesocket lower edge. The mouth opens by 1 cm. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Zygomatic bone fracture
b. Left articular process fracture
c. Hematoma of the infraorbital region
d. Traumatic arthritis of the temporo- mandibular joint
e. Malar arch fracture

62. A child is 8 years old. There are complaints of congested upper incisors. Objectively: the ?rst molars closure is of Angle’s I class, frontal overbite is orthognathic. The 12 and 22 teeth erupt palatinally with space de?ciency of 2/3 of the tooth crown. The 11 and 21 teeth are 10 mm each in cross-section. The child has inherited father’s facial type with prognathism and macrodontia of the central incisors. Choose the preventive treatment, considering this hereditary pathology:
a. Massage of the 12 and 21 teeth area to stimulate their eruption
b. Jaw expansion to provide the space for the 12 and 21 teeth
*c. Hotz serial extraction to reduce the dental arch
d. Extraction of the 12 and 21 teeth to reduce the dental arch
e. Shave off the approximal surfaces of the 11 and 21 to provide the space for the 12 and 22 teeth

63. A 38-year-old woman complains of burning pain in her lips and angles of her mouth, their dryness. Anamnesis states that she has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for the last 8 years. Objectively: the vermillion border is dry, congestively hyperemic, covered in scales of varying size. In the angles of the mouth there are ?ssures covered in white coating, the skin is macerated. What ointment should be prescribed for topical treatment in the given case?
a. Prednisolone
b. Interferon
*c. Clotrimazol
d. Lanolin
e. Erythromycin

64. A 35-year-old woman complains of lips enlargement. The ?rst incident occurred one year ago, when she developed lip edema that abated quickly, but the lips remained slightly enlarged. Three days ago after overexposure to cold her lips enlarged again. Objectively: ptosis, upper and lower lips are markedly enlarged, more on the left, soft, elastic, and painless on palpation; no impressions on the lip surface are left after pressing it with a ?nger. The tongue is swollen, with tuberous surface and folds on its back. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
b. Quincke’s edema
c. Meige’s trophedema
d. Achard’s syndrome
e. Miescher’s granulomatous cheilitis

65. A 45-year-old man complains of dryness and pain in the lower lip. On examination: the lower lip is swollen, dry, covered in small scales and ?ssures. In the Klein area (wet-dry line) there are dilated openings of salivatory glands observed as red dots producing clear substance. The lower lip mucosa is lumpy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Eczematous cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Actinic cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
*e. Glandular cheilitis

66. A 23-year-old man complains of gum bleeding when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively: the gums of the front lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen and bleeding when palpated. Oral and gingival mucosa in other areas are not affected. The occlusion is deep. The teeth are ?rm, except for the 41 and 31 (degree 1 mobility). X-ray shows resorption of the alveolar septum in the area of the 41, 42, 32, and 31 teeth up to 1/3 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Catarrhal gingivitis
b. Parodontosis, stage I
c. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage
d. Generalized periodontitis, stage I
*e. Localized periodontitis

67. A 40-year-old man, a chemical industry worker, notes the sour sensation in his mouth, pain response to thermal and chemical stimuli. On examination: on the vestibular surface and cutting edge of the front teeth there are chalky enamel defects with uneven scalloped margins. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acidic necrosis of enamel
b. Enamel hypoplasia (erosive form)
c. Median caries
d. Fluorosis (erosive form)
e. Super?cial caries

68. A 42-year-old woman complains of acute lip enlargement, itching, and bursting sensation. She ascribes her condition to introduction of a new lipstick. On examination the lips are signi?cantly enlarged and turgid, on palpation they are ?rm, elastic, and painless. Regional lymph nodes are without changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exfoliative cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
*c. Allergic contact cheilitis
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Actinic cheilitis

69. A 50-year-old patient, an employee of the print shop, complains of foul smell from his mouth and excessive salivation. Objectively against the background of hyperemic and slightly swollen gums there is a blue-black border along the gum margin of the lower jaw and upper front teeth. There is a large amount of dental deposit observed. Name the type of stomatitis in this patient:
a. Necrotizing ulcerative
*b. Lead
c. Bismuth
d. Mercury
e. Catarrhal

70. A 25-year-old man complains of incorrectly positioned maxillary left central incisor due to trauma sustained 2 months ago. Objectively tooth 21 is rotated around its axis into palatal position. What would be the most advisable treatment method for correction of this defect?
a. -
b. Splinting followed by prosthetic treatment
c. Surgical treatment
d. Instrumental surgical treatment
*e. Orthodontic treatment

71. A 44-year-old woman complains of the face swelling in the right lower jaw area and teeth mobility. Objectively: soft tissues are without changes, the regional lymph nodes cannot be palpated. The alveolar process and the body of the lower jaw near the 46, 47, and 48 teeth are thickened, painless when palpated, and lumpy. The teeth in the thickened area are mobile. Puncture consists of brown ?uid without cholesterol crystals. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Adamantinoma
b. Follicular cyst
c. Odontoma
*d. Osteoclastoma
e. Osteoma

72. A 6.5-year-old child has closed nonpigmented ?ssures in the ?rst permanent molar, which have been revealed during preventive examination. Enamel transparency is retained, its probing reveals no coarseness. Choose the optimal method of treatment in this case:
a. Regular medical check-ups
*b. Non-invasive sealing
c. Preventive ?lling
d. Invasive sealing
e. ART technique

73. A man complains of gingival pain in his upper left jaw and bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively on the upper jaw he wears a swaged-soldered metal bridge with 14 and 16 as abutment teeth. The crown edge is pushed under the gingival margin by 0.3 mm. Intermediate part is closely ?tted to the gums. The mucosa is hyperemic, swollen, interdental papillae are smoothed out; touching mucosa with a dental instrument provokes bleeding. What medical tactics should the dentist choose in the ?rst place?
a. Refer the patient for clinical blood test
b. Make metal-fused-to-porcelain dental bridge
c. Refer the patient for cosultation with the dental therapist
d. Refer the patient for X-ray
*e. Remove the dental bridge

74. When checking construction of the soldered dental bridge with the 35 and 38 abutment teeth the following was detected: pores in the place where abutment crowns and intermediate part are soldered together; masticatory cusps are sharply de?ned; there is early contact with antagonist teeth; the intermediate part makes tight contact with the alveolar process mucosa. How can those ?aws be corrected?
*a. Dental bridge should be remade
b. Masticatory surface should be corrected, and soldered places - polished
c. Tooth-antagonists should be shaved off
d. Masticatory surface should be corrected, and the height of the ?ushing part is to be increased up to 2 mm
e. Intermediate part should be corrected

75. A 50-year-old man was diagnosed with sialolithiasis with the salivary gland stone located deep within the salivary gland. Choose the optimal treatment tactics:
a. Radiation therapy
b. Removal of the sialolith while retaining the gland
c. Conservative pharmacotherapy
*d. Submandibular gland excision
e. Sclerotherapy

76. Due to lack of timely specialized treatment a 44-year-old man presents with incorrectly healed displaced mandibular fracture. Objectively the lower jaw narrows sharply, vestibular cusps of the lower teeth contact with oral cusps of the upper teeth. The patient declined surgical treatment. What treatment tactics should be chosen by the dentist in this case?
a. Make a non-removable dental bridge with movable joint
b. Correct the malocclusion via instrumental surgical method
c. Make a dentogingival laminar denture
*d. Make a prosthesis with double dentition
e. Correct the malocclusion by ?ling down the patient’s teeth

77. A 57-year-old man presents with habitual mandibular dislocation. To reduce mouth opening, Yadrova apparatus was made. How long should the treatment last in this case?
*a. 3 months
b. 9 months
c. 18 months
d. 12 months
e. 6 months

78. An HIV-infected patients needs a dental prosthesis. The dentist plans to make dental bridges for this patient. How should the instruments be processed after the appointment?
a. In a hot air sterilizer
b. According to the usual scheme
*c. According to the special scheme
d. With lysoformin
e. With 3% chloramine solution

79. A 30-year-old man complains of pain in his front lower teeth, which he attributes to a trauma to the mental region. Objectively: continuous dentition, orthognathic occlusion. X-ray shows a median mandibular fracture. What dental splint would be optimal?
a. Plastic mouthguard
*b. Flat occlusal splint
c. Cap splint
d. Soldered splint on rings
e. Weber’s splint

80. To make the external prosthesis for a 62year-old man it is necessary to obtain a Hippocrates facial moulage of this patient. What impression material should be used?
*a. Plaster
b. Stens
c. Repin
d. Stoma?ex
e. Dentafol

81. A 19-year-old young man complains of cosmetic defect of all his teeth, which developed immediately after the teeth eruption. Objectively on the vestibular and masticatory surfaces of all patient’s teeth there are enamel defects, tooth crowns present with dark brown discoloration. Percussion and probing are painful. In this area ?uoride levels in water are 2.6 mg/L. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Enamel erosion
b. Chronic super?cial caries
c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Chronic initial caries
*e. Fluorosis

82. A 14-year-old teenager complains of dry and chapped lips especially in autumn and winter. Objetively the vermillion border is dry, in?ltrated, and covered in numerous scales. Skin of the lips is dense, pigmented, with pronounced pattern, peeling, and radial cracks. At the same time the skin of the face is dry, licheni?ed, and excoriated. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Actinic cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
*c. Atopic cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

83. A 56-year-old patient suffering from exacerbation of schizophrenia has been hospitalized in an oral in-patient department with a diagnosis of the displaced mandibular fracture in the area of teeth 34 and 35. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. Onearchsmoothdentalbraces
b. Weber splint
c. Vankevych splint
*d. Osteosynthesis
e. Full dental splint

84. During preventive examination a 5-yearold child was determined to have insuf?cient physiological attrition of the cusps of the deciduous canines. What treatment tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Medical examination every 6 months until the canines are replaced
b. No medical intervention is necessary
c. Medical examination once a month until the incisors are replaced
d. Medical examination every 6 months until the incisors are replaced
*e. To shave off the retained canine cusps

85. A 60-year-old patient has been undergoing the procedure of checking the complete removable dentures construction and ?xing teeth on wax bases. The following ?aws have been detected: ?ssure between the teeth on the frontal area and cusp-to-cusp contact in the lateral area. What mistake had been made?
*a. Anterior occlusion had been determined instead of central one
b. Lateral occlusion had been determined instead of central one
c. Swabs had been crushed during determination of central occlusion
d. Models had been plastered in a wrong way in an occluder
e. Posterior occlusion had been determined instead of central one

86. A 35-year-old man complains of sour sensation in his mouth and front teeth sensitivity to thermal and mechanical stimuli. Objective examination revealed visible changes in the enamel of 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23. The enamel is dull, rough, missing on the cutting edge. Probing of the vestibular surface of these teeth is painful, response to thermal stimuli is positive. The patient’s medical record states his occupation in industrial production of inorganic acids. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Fluorosis
*c. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
d. Pathologic teeth grinding
e. Enamel hypoplasia

87. A 55-year-old man was delivered into the hospital with bilateral mandibular fracture within the dentition. Objectively teeth 34, 35, 36, 45, and 46 are missing. Lower incisors are mobile (I-II degree). Fragment displacement is insigni?cant. What splint should be made forthispatient?
a. Flat occlusal splint
b. Gunning-Port
c. Vankevych
d. Tigerstedt
*e. Weber

88. A 30-year-old patient is diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic periostitis of the upper left jaw originating from tooth 23. The crown of 23 on the left is destroyed with caries by 1/3. Teeth 22 and 24 are intact. Spot?lm X-ray shows widening of the periodontal ?ssure of 23. What treatment would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Extraction of the causative tooth, periosteotomy
*b. Periosteotomy and pharmacotherapy followed by treatment of the causative tooth
c. Extraction of the causative tooth, physiotherapy
d. -
e. Extraction of the causative tooth, pharmacotherapy

89. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain and swelling in the area of the left parotid salivary gland, which occurred 7 days after he had undergone abdominal cavity surgery. Objectively: body temperature is 39°C, reduced mouth opening, dry mouth; when the gland is massaged, there is purulent exudate being secreted from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with the following disease:
a. Parenchymatous parotitis
b. Phlegmon of parotid-masticatory region
c. Acute epidemic parotitis
d. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
*e. Acute non-epidemic parotitis

90. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated in?ltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the in?ltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the in?ltration there is a ?stula. In theoralcavitythecrownof46isdestroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the ?stula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Actinomycosis
*b. Migrating facial granuloma
c. Cheek furuncle
d. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Odontogenic lymphadenitis

91. A 53-year-old patient complains of an ulcer on the lateral surface of the tongue. The ulcer appeared 6 months ago as the result of a trauma caused by sharp tip of the 37 tooth metal crown. A dentist replaced the crown with the one of better quality and prescribed keratoplastic drugs. Despite these measures the ulcer continues to grow. Lately there has been pain observed during talking, chewing, swallowing; sometimes the pain irradiates to the pharynx. Objectively on the lateral surface of the tongue there is a painful ulcer with uneven raised dense margins and lumpy ?oor with grayish necrotic coating. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic ulcer
b. Trophic ulcer
*c. Cancer of the lateral surface of the tongue
d. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Tuberculous ulcer

92. A 13-year-old child complains of periodical gingival bleeding during teeth brushing, which has been observed for half a year. Objectively the gingival mucosa in the frontal mandibular area presents with congestive hyperemia and edema. Decay-missing-?lled (DMF) index equals 4. Oral cavity hygiene is unsatisfactory. In this case it is necessary to recommend the patient the toothpastes with:
a. Zinc citrate
b. Amine ?uorides
c. Salt additives
*d. Herbal extracts
e. Calcium glycerophosphate

93. A 70-year-old man has edentulous maxilla. Objectively maxillary tuberosity and alveolar processes are completely atrophied; palatine vault is ?at, its mucosal layer is moderately pliant. In this case the patient’s atrophic edentulous maxilla can be classi?ed as:
a. Keller class II
b. —
c. Keller class III
d. Schroeder class II
*e. Schroeder class III

94. Teeth 71 and 81 erupted in a 6-year-old child, the lower jaw is retrogenic, the palate is ?at with pronounced cross-folds. Determine the condition of the oral cavity:
*a. Physiologic
b. Abnormal
c. Decompensated
d. Subcompensated
e. Pathologic

95. A 12-year-old girl complains of pain in her mouth that occurs during eating. According to her medical history these symptoms reemerge once or twice per year. Objectively on the mucogingival fold there are 3 aphthae 5-7 mm in size, they have yellowish coating and in?amed red border and are acutely painful on touch. Name the most likely diagnosis:
a. Toxic-allergic drug-induced stomatitis
*b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Chronic recurrent herpetic stomatitis
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

96. An 8-year-old girl complains of tooth 21 discoloration and pain response to hot stimulus. Several months ago tooth 21 was treated for acute diffuse pulpitis by means of vital amputation. Objectively tooth 21 is ?lled, percussion is painless. X-ray shows the rooth to be formed by 2/3, cortical plate of the tooth socket remains intact in the area of root radix. What material should be used for root canal ?lling in this case?
a. Zinc phosphate cement
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. —
*d. Calcium hydroxide paste
e. Resorcinol-formalin paste

97. The medical station of a regiment received a patient with signs of bilateral mandibular fracture. What is the main task of ?rst aid in this case?
*a. To control shock, bleeding, and asphyxia and to provide transport immobilization
b. To administer analgesics and cardiac medications
c. To provide symptomatic therapy and care
d. To clean oral cavity from blood clots, tooth shards, and bone fragments
e. To check and correct previously applied bandages

98. A 35-year-old man has been hospitalized into a dentofacial unit with complaints of mobility of the 38, 37, and 36 teeth and a ?stulous tract in the socket of the extracted 35 tooth. The condition has been persisting for 3 months. Insertion of a grooved probe into the ?stulous tract palpated a bared coarse bone fragment that easily moved under pressure. X-ray of the lower jaw demonstrates a focus of bone tissue destruction, with a spot of dense bone tissue 0.5х0.3 cm in size. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
b. Acute osteomyelitis
*c. Chronic osteomyelitis
d. Chronic periostitis
e. Actinomycosis

99. A 10-year-old child complains of persisting throbbing pain in tooth 36, which appeared one day ago. Hot stimulus aggravates the pain, while cold mitigates it slightly. Objectively on the masticatory and medial surfaces of tooth 36 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity bottom and percussion are painful. X-ray shows no pathologic changes of the periodontium. What treatment method shold be chosen in this case?
a. Devital amputation
b. Conservative treatment
c. Devital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
*e. Vital extirpation

100. A 11-year-old child complains of pain in the lower right lateral tooth, which occurs when eating, especially hot food. On the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth there is a large carious cavity ?lled with softened lightbrown dentin. The cavity is located within parapulpar dentin. In the projection of the medial buccal pulp horn the carious cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing is painful. Electric pulp test - 60 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
c. Acute focal pulpitis
*d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

101. A 7-year-old practically healthy child was undergoing the carious cavity preparation of tooth 46 due to acute median caries. During this procedure the mesio-buccal pulp horn was accidentally exposed. What treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
*b. Biological approach
c. Devital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Vital amputation

102. A woman complains of pain in her gums, unpleasant smell from her mouth, dif?cult eating, general weakness, lowgrade fever. Objectively her gums are hyperemic, with areas of ulceration, covered in necrotic deposit. Microscopy revealed fusospirochetosis. Choose the medication for etiotropic treatment:
*a. Metronidazole
b. Galascorbin
c. Chymotrypsin
d. Chlorhexidine
e. Keratoline

103. A man complains of gingival bleeding that has been persisting for the last 2 years. Objectively he presents with chronic diffuse catarrhal gingivitis, teeth mobility is of the I degree, periodontal pockets are 2-3 mm deep with small amount of serous exudate, occlusion is markedly traumatic. X-ray shows damaged cortical plate, enlarged periodontal ?ssure in the apical areas of the interalveolar septa, osteoporosis, and interalveolar septa resorption by 1/3 of their height. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, exacerbated development
c. Generalized periodontitis, early stage, chronic development
*d. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, chronic development
e. Parodontosis, stage I

104. A 55-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic to have a denture made for him. Tooth 11 is missing in the patient. Two days ago he was released from the in-patient unit after a case of myocardial infarction. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Perform implantation
*b. Make a temporary removable denture
c. Make a dental bridge with 12 and 21 as abutment teeth
d. Make a clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
e. Temporarily refrain from making a denture

105. A 23-year-old man complains of acute gingival bleeding and unpleasant smell from the mouth that appeared 5 days ago. Objectively gingival papillae and marginal gingiva are friable, bright red, swollen, painful, and bleed profusely on palpation. Gingival pockets are 3 mm deep. X-ray shows marked osteoporosis of the interalveolar septa, periodontal ?ssure in the apical areas of the interalveolar septa is enlarged. Cortical plate is intact. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute leukemia
b. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, exacerbated development
c. Hypovitaminosis C
*d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis

106. A 27-year-old patient has been referred by a prosthodontist for endodontic treatment of the 45 tooth. Objectively: the 45 tooth crown is destroyed; the lateral surface of the tongue and the buccal mucosa have patches of grayish macerated epithelium slightly protruding above the mucosa surface at the points of direct contact with the 45 tooth. The uvula and palatal bars are stagnantred in colour; hard palate has papulae surrounded with red margin and covered in grayish epithelium. The submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
*b. Secondary syphilis
c. Lupus erythematosus, patch stage
d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Soft leukoplakia (leucoplakia mollis)

107. A 6-year-old boy with congenital heart disease (pulmonary artery stenosis) presents with suppurative periostitis of the maxilla. The child needs surgical treatment. What unit should he be referred to?
*a. The pediatric maxillofacial unit
b. The out-patient unit after preliminary cardiological treatment
c. The out-patient or in-patient unit at the discretion of the child’s parents
d. The cardiology unit
e. The out-patient unit, no precautions are necessary

108. Parents of a 3-year-old child complain of food periodically getting into the child’s nasal cavity during feeding. Objectively there is a ?ssure in the area of the soft palate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Isolated nonunion of the hard and soft palate
b. Congenital hidden cleft palate
*c. Isolated partial nonunion of the soft palate
d. Cleft hard palate
e. Combined cleft palate

109. A 9-year-old girl complains of persisting pain in tooth 11 that one month ago sustained a trauma resulting in broken crown. The tooth received no treatment. Objectively the 1/4 of the tooth crown of 11 is broken off, the remaining crown is grayish, the dental cavity is not exposed. Percussion is acutely painful. The mucogingival fold is hyperemic and acutely painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse suppurative pulpitis
*c. Acute traumatic periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

110. A patient complains of fever up to 38°C, headache, pain in the joints anf muscles, vesicles in the oral cavity, mainly in the frontal part. Eating is sharply painful. For the last several years the disease has been recurring during wet and windy weather. The patient often suffers from cases of URTI. Objectively: on the buccal, lingual, labial mucosa there are con?uent erosions against the erythematous background, with gray-white coating. There are bloody scabs on the vermillion border and in the angles of the mouth. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Syphilis
d. Acute aphthous stomatitis
*e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

111. A patient with complaints of toothache in the left upper jaw has made an appointment with a dental clinic. He was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth. What kind of anesthesia is necessary for painless extraction of the 24 tooth?
a. Tuberal and palatinal anesthesia
b. Tuberal and incisor anesthesia
c. Surface and tuberal anesthesia
*d. Infraorbital and palatinal anesthesia
e. Infraorbital and incisor anesthesia

112. A 2.5-year-old child is registered for regular check-ups with the orthodontist. The I stage of physiogical occlusion development corresponds with eruption of the following group of temporary teeth:
a. Front teeth
*b. Temporary molars
c. Temporary lateral incisors
d. Temporary central incisors
e. Temporary canines

113. Due to trauma of the area of teeth 44 and 45, a 12-year-old boy suffers from the pathologic displacement of the mandibular alveolar process and rupture of the alveolar process mucosa. What additional examination is necessary to specify the diagnosis?
a. —
*b. X-ray of the mandible in frontal and lateral projections
c. X-ray of the mandible in frontal and Parma projection
d. Skull X-ray in axillary projection
e. Computed tomography of the mandible

114. A 12-year-old child presents with temperature 38°C, chills, nausea, vomiting, delirium, and weakness. On the middle third of the face there is hyperemia in a butter?y-shaped pattern. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and mildly painful. In blood: leukocytes - 12 × 109/L, lymphocytes 8.0×109/L, ESR- 26 mm/hour. What diagnosis should be made?
a. Streptoderma, submandibular lymphadenopathy
b. Acute non-odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Facial vein thrombophlebitis
d. Cutaneous actinomycosis
*e. Erysipelatous in?ammation

115. X-ray of the patient shows a focus of bone destruction 3x4 cm in size in the mandibular body. The focus is structured as numerous small cavities different in size and shape and separated by septa. Tumor puncture yielded brown liquid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Soft odontoma of the mandible
b. Mandibular ameloblastoma
c. Radicular cyst of the mandible
d. Carcinoma of the mandible
*e. Giant cell tumor of the mandible

116. An orthodontist has been addressed by parents of a 5-year-old child. The child has the 54 tooth extracted, all the other deciduous teeth are present. The doctor made a thinwall crown for the 55 tooth with interdental wedge to the 53 tooth. What is the purpose of such treatment?
*a. Prevention of dentition malformation
b. Restoration of masticatory ef?ciency
c. Deceleration of permanent tooth eruption
d. Acceleration of permanent tooth eruption
e. Aesthetic restoration

117. Removable partial dentures for upper and lower teeth are being made for a 45-yearold man. Complete anatomical impressions were made using ”Ypeen” alginate material. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
a. 0.1% desoxone solution
b. Phenol solution in proportion 1:20
c. 6% hydrogen peroxide solution
*d. 2.5% glutaraldehyde with рH- 7.0 - 8.7
e. -

118. A 48-year-old man complains of gingival overgrowth (”gums cover the teeth”). The patient suffers from epilepsy and takes anticonvulsant agents. Objectively gingival papillae are of normal color, dense, with lumpy surface; they do not bleed on probing and cover the lower front teeth up to their incisal surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis, ?brous form, degree II
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form, degree II
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form, degree III
d. Gingival ?bromatosis
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, ?brous form, degree III

119. A 21-year-old man came to the dentist complaining of general weakness, muscle pain, body temperature up to 38.3°C, indigestion, excessive salivation, and rashes in the oral and nasal cavities, urethra, on the wings of the nose, and in the interdigital folds. These symptoms appeared after ingestion of milk during the patient’s stay in the village. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Behcet’s disease
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Herpetic stomatitis
d. Herpes zoster
*e. Murrain

120. A 28-year-old man complains of painless sore in his mouth that persists despite the attempts at self-treatment. Objectively the regional lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painless. Mucosa of the left cheek presents with round ulcer, 1 cm in diameter, with raised margins and cartilage-like in?ltration in its basis. The surface of the ulcer is colored meat red and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cancer
b. Lupus vulgaris
c. Decubitus ulcer
*d. Primary syphilis
e. Secondary syphilis

121. A 25-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for oral cavity sanation. Objectively the crown of tooth 37 is destroyed by 2/3. Gingival mucosa around tooth 37 is without changes. What anesthesia should the dental surgeon give to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Mental nerve block
*b. Mandibular and buccal anesthesia
c. Tuberal anesthesia
d. Intraoral infraorbital nerve block
e. Mandibular anesthesia

122. A 34-year-old man complains of soft tissues edema in his lower left jaw and ?stulae in the submandibular area. Teeth 36 and 37 are destroyed. Alveolar mucosa is swollen and hyperemic at the level of 36 and 37. X-ray detected sequestra in the mandibular body on the left. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Extraction of teeth 36 and 37
b. Puncture of the in?amed area
c. Antibacterial treatment
*d. Extraction of teeth 36 and 37 and mandibular sequestrectomy
e. Mandibular sequestrectomy

123. A 42-year-old man was delivered to the hospital in the severe condition: inert, body temperature is 39.1°C, there is acutely painful in?ltration of the mouth ?oor and submandibular area on the right. The skin over the in?ltration is turgid and cyanotic. Palpation detects crepitus under the skin. What diagnosis can be made in this case?
*a. Ludwig’s angina (suppurative-necrotic phlegmon of the mouth ?oor)
b. Malignant tumor of the mouth ?oor
c. Odontogenic phlegmon of the mouth ?oor
d. Actinomycosis of the mouth ?oor
e. Adenophlegmon of the mouth ?oor

124. After a blow to the temporomandibular joint the patient developed facial hematoma, the joint is dif?cult to move, mandibular mobility is reduced. Attempts to open the mouth wide are painful. What examination should be performed to make the diagnosis?
a. Rheoencephalography and consultation with the neurologist
b. Panoramic dental X-ray
c. Limit the joint mobility
d. X-ray and consultation with the neurologist
*e. Bilateral X-ray of the temporomandibular joint with mouth open and closed

125. A 38-year-old man after a domestic accident complains of pain and mobility of his upper teeth, problems with eating. Objectively: soft tissues edema. The 11 and 21 teeth are displaced towards the palate, mobile (II degree), painful on percussion. Mucosa surrounding the affected teeth is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray demonstrates widened periodontal ?ssure of the 11 and 21. Choose the treatment method:
a. Extraction of the 11 and 21 teeth
b. Immobilization or mouthguard
c. Removal of tooth pulp in the 11 and 21 teeth
*d. Setting of the teeth and their ?xation with a ?at occlusal splint
e. Reimplantation of the 11 and 21 teeth

126. A 4-year-old child has developed acute spontaneous pain in the tooth on the lower right jaw, which aggravates on biting. Objectively: in the 85 tooth there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity ?oor. Painful reaction to cold water stimulus and percussion is observed; mucosa surrounding the 85 is hyperemic. Submandibular lymphadenitis is detected. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute serous periostitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
*e. Acute pulpitis complicated with periodontitis

127. During Eschler-Bittner test the pro?le of a 12-year-old girl with posterior occlusion has shown some improvement. Specify the condition that resulted in the development of posterior occlusion in this patient:
a. Mandibular underdevelopment and maxillary overdevelopment
b. Maxillary overdevelopment
*c. Mandibular underdevelopment
d. Mandibular overdevelopment
e. Maxillary underdevelopment

128. Parents of an 8-year-old girl complain of their child having an aesthetic defect of her teeth. Objectively the patient’s lower face is shortened. Her chin protrudes forwards and her upper lip is sunken. During teeth closure the deep underbite becomes apparent. Mesio-occlusion is observed in the lateral areas. Choose the apparatus optimal for the treatment:
a. Andresen-Haupl activator
b. Frankel functional regulator - 1
c. Frankel functional regulator - 2
d. Osadchy apparatus
*e. Frankel functional regulator - 3

129. During or immediately after an injection, certain local complications can develop. What is NOT one of those complications?
*a. Mucosal necrosis
b. Diplopia
c. Damage to a blood vessel by the needle
d. Functional paralysis or paresis of facial muscles
e. Dermal ischemia

130. What manipulation of those listed below is NOT a part of typical procedure of tooth extraction with forceps?
a. Applying forceps jaw to the tooth
b. Closure of forceps handles
c. Tooth dislocation and extraction from the socket
*d. Applying tip of forceps jaw to the edge of alveolar process
e. Pushing forceps jaw to the cementoenamel junction

131. A patient needs the 36 tooth extracted. After administering anesthesia the doctor started applying the elevator. However, immediately after that the patient suddenly paled, complained of dizziness, ear noise, and blackout and slid down in the chair. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
*b. Unconsciousness
c. Collapse
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Shock

132. A child is diagnosed with congenital cleft in the soft palate and posterior part of the hard palate. What type of anesthesia should be given to the patient for uranostaphyloplasty?
*a. Intubation narcosis
b. Anesthesia mask
c. Conduction anesthesia
d. In?ltration anesthesia
e. Intravenous narcosis

133. A 6-year-old child complains of pain and edema in the upper right jaw, body temperature up to 37.9°C, and deterioration of general well-being. Symptom onset was 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue edema of buccal and infraorbital regions on the right. The crown of 54 is destroyed by 1/2, percussion is painful; the tooth previously had been treated for complicated caries. On the palatine side of the affected tooth area there is a painful in?ltration with ?uctuation in its center; the tissues over the in?ltration are hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
b. Acute serous periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54
*c. Acute suppurative periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of 54
e. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla

134. A 27-year-old man presents with missing crown of 11. Objectively teeth 21 and 12 are intact; intraoral spot ?lm X-ray shows the root of 11 to be ?lled to the apex, no changes in the periapical tissues, no pathologic mobility. What construction of the denture should be recommended for this patient?
a. Remove the root of 11 and perform implantation
*b. Metal stump inlay with overlaying porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
c. Stump inlay with overlaying plastic crown
d. Stump inlay with overlaying swaged crown
e. Stump inlay with overlaying full cast metal crown

135. A 54-year-old patient complains of frequent crunching sound in the right temporomandibular joint, which developed one month ago. In the morning the crunching is more frequent and decreases towards the evening. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the skin over the joint is without changes, the mouth opens by 2.9 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic arthritis
b. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome
c. Acute arthritis
d. Temporomandibular joint dislocation
*e. Arthrosis

136. On examination of a 27-year-old patient the tip of the dental probe caught on the ?ssures of the 36, 37, and 38 teeth. Margins of the enamel defect are dark, the surface is coarse. Teeth transillumination with photopolymer lamp revealed the defect to be limited to the enamel. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Acute initial caries
*d. Chronic super?cial caries
e. Acute super?cial caries

137. A 68-year-old patient addressed a surgical department of a dental clinic for extraction of the 45 tooth. During procedure the patient developed burning retrosternal pain attack irradiating to the left shoulder, scapula, hand. The skin is pale, BP is 140/100 mm Hg, heart rate is rapid. Skin hyperplasia can be observed in the Zakharin-Head’s zones. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
a. Heart failure
b. Hypertensic crisis
c. —
*d. Angina pectoris attack
e. Bronchial asthma attack

138. After sustained trauma a man developed nose bleeding, reduced mouth opening, sensation of paresthesia in the right infraorbital region and lower eyelid. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to concave right temporal region; step deformity symptom is observed in the middle of the lower right eye socket and in the area of zygomaticoalveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nondisplaced fracture of the temporal bone
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
*c. Displaced fracture of the temporal bone
d. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
e. Zygomatic arch fracture

139. A 14-year-old boy complains of rapid wearing-off of tooth crowns. Objectively: tooth crowns are worn-off by 1/3. Enamel easily chips off and is pale gray in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Focal hypoplasia
*b. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
c. Fluorosis
d. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
e. Systemic hypoplasia

140. A 63-year-old man complains of pain in the area of maxillary mucogingival fold caused by using a removable laminar denture. Objectively: in the area of the mucogingival fold there is a trophic ulcer with swollen margins and hemorrhaging ?oor. Make the diagnosis:
a. Allergic contact stomatitis
b. Greenhouse effect
c. Toxic chemical stomatitis
d. Toxic infectious stomatitis
*e. Denture-related stomatitis

141. Objective examination of a 10-year-old child revealed slight hyperemia, in?ltration, and dryness of the whole surface of the vermillion border. Architectonics of the lips is disturbed. Dryness and contracted sensation are observed in the lips, especially during cold seasons. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Cheilitis of microbial origin
*d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

142. A 24-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for extraction of tooth 38. What anesthesia should be given to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Tuberal
b. Mandibular
*c. Torusal
d. In?ltration
e. Plexus

143. During application of tuberal anesthesia the patient developed rapidly increasing tissue edema and reduced mouth opening. What resulted in such a condition?
a. Nerve trunk trauma
b. Muscle trauma during anesthesia application
*c. Vascular trauma
d. Intolerance to the anesthetic
e. Anaphylactic shock

144. A woman came to the dental surgeon with complaints of teeth mobility. After objective examination and X-ray analysis she was diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of stages I and II. Which teeth of those affected by periodontitis should be extracted?
a. Carious teeth
*b. With degrees 2-3 of tooth mobility
c. Teeth with painful percussion
d. Intact teeth
e. With degree 1 of tooth mobility

145. After the in?ammatory process in the parotid area a woman developed frequent pain attacks resembling electric current in her face on the right. The attacks last for 1520 minutes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Exacerbation of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
c. Tympanic plexus neuralgia
d. Trigeminal neuritis
*e. Trigeminal neuralgia

146. Mother and her 11-year-old daughter came to the medical station. According to the mother her daughter has fallen when playing outdoors. The doctor determined the patient to have an isolated mechanical injury of soft tissues in her cheek with damaged skin. Make the diagnosis:
a. Wound
*b. Abrasion
c. Bruice
d. Contusion
e. Hematoma

147. The patient with shallow vestibule of mouth and edentulous mandible underwent a surgery: a mucoperiosteal ?ap was relocated from the alveolar ridge to the body of the mandible and ?xed with denture acting as a bandage. What surgical procedure was used for vestibular deepening?
a. Rhermann
*b. Rumpel
c. Thiersch
d. Kazanjian
e. Trauner

148. A 7-year-old girl received conduction anesthesia with 2% articaine solution for extraction of tooth 16. She has no history of allergies. After receiving anesthesia the patient complained of weakness, she developed skin pallor, cyanosis, and nausea. Her blood pressure dropped signi?cantly. The patient is conscious. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pain shock
b. Ver t i go
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Allergic response to the anesthetic
*e. Collapse

149. An ambulance has delivered an 8year-old child to an admission room. An oral surgeon has made the following diagnosis: odontogenic phlegmon of the right submandibular area. What surgical approach would be advicable for surgical treatment of this phlegmon?
a. Dissection along the lower neck fold
b. Dissection in the area of pterygomandibular fold
c. Dissection parallel to the torus mandibularis
d. Dissection around the mandibular angle
*e. Dissection in the submandibular area, parallel to the mandible

150. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontics clinic to have dental prosthesis made for him. Objectively teeth 34, 35, 36, 43, and 16 are absent in this patient. During examination alginate impressions for diagnostic models were obtained. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
a. Sterillium
b. 3% sodium hypochlorite solution
c. 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
d. 10% hydrogen peroxide solution
*e. 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution

151. A 36-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Objectively there is a carious cavity on the mesial masticatory surface of tooth 46, interdental contact is disturbed. Dental inlay is to be made for this patient. According to Black’s classi?cation of dental caries this cavity is class:
a. 4
b. 3
*c. 2
d. 5
e. 1

152. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and crepitation in the temporomandibular joint during the movements of the lower jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with slight displacement to the left. Dentition is intact. On occlusiography there were detected centric and eccentric supracontacts. What treatment methods should be applied in the ?rst place?
*a. Selective teeth shaving
b. Appliances that limit mouth opening
c. Lower jaw immobilization
d. Mouthguards that increase the height of central occlusion
e. Mouthguard for muscle relaxation

153. A 45-year-old patient after administration of local anesthesia in preparation for oral surgery has suddenly felt unwell, developed increasing edema of laryngeal mucosa and respiration disorder. The dentist stopped the manipulations in the oral cavity. What type of asphyxia developed in the patient?
a. Obturative
b. Aspiration
c. Dislocational
d. Valvular
*e. Stenotic

154. A 19-year-old young man, who was waiting for the appointed time at the dentist’s, suddenly developed an attack: his face became purple, bloody foam ?owed from his mouth (bitten tongue), pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light, the patient developed ?rst tonic then clonic convulsions that stopped spontaneously, after that he calmed down and fell asleep quickly. What happened with the patient?
a. Sympathoadrenal crisis
b. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome
c. Pulmonary embolism
*d. Epileptic seizure
e. Spasmophilia

155. A victim of a traf?c accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. How should this patient be transported?
*a. In the prone position on a soft stretcher
b. In the sitting position with the head thrown back
c. Positioned on the side on a soft stretcher
d. In the sitting position with air tube inserted into the upper airways
e. Positioned on the side on a rigid stretcher

156. A victim of a traf?c accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. What measures should be taken to prevent complications in this case?
a. Fixation of the tongue to the patient’s collar
b. Removal of foreign bodies from the oral cavity
c. Excision of injured mucosal ?aps
*d. Fixation of the lower jaw and tongue with standard Entin’s head-chin strap
e. Tracheostomy and arti?cial pulmonary ventilation

157. The hospital received a 19-year-old patient injured in a landmine explosion with an open displaced mandibular fracture in the area of the left mandibular angle and a contused lacerated wound of the left submandibular area. The patient is in moderately severe condition, pulse is 80/min., blood pressure is 110/80 mm Hg. What anesthesia should be given to the patient for initial surgical d-bridement?
a. Intravenous anesthesia
b. Conduction anesthesia with premedication
c. Conduction anesthesia
*d. Endotracheal anesthesia
e. Neuroleptanalgesia

158. A 5-year-old child developed a hemorrhage after pulp extirpation of 74 due to exacerbated chronic pulpitis. The child suffers from Von Willebrand disease. What actions should be taken by the dental surgeon to stop bleeding?
a. To plug the cavity with hemostatic sponge
*b. To hospitalize the child to the hematological unit
c. To place sutures on the mucosa
d. To hospitalize the child to the maxillofacial unit
e. To plug the cavity with epsilonaminocaproic acid dressing

159. Parents of a 9-year-old child came to the dentist complaining that their child presents with enlarged cervical lymph nodes on the right. During examination palpation revealed the lymph nodes in the right submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and infraclavicular areas to be enlarged up to 2-2.5 cm in diameter, painless, non-matted together, and non-fused to the skin (resemble ”potatoes in a sack”). The parents note rapid fatigability and night sweats in their child. What additional examinations should the child be referred for?
*a. Puncture biopsy of the lymph nodes
b. Wassermann test
c. Clinical blood and urine tests
d. CT of the cervical spine
e. Pirquet and Mantoux tests

160. A 45-year-old patient complains of inability to properly masticate due to the loss of lateral teeth. The 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27, 37, 36, 35, 44, 45, and 46 teeth are missing. The retained teeth exhibit the I-II degree of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis. Kennedy class I dentition defects are observed. What construction would be optimal in the given case?
a. Mamlok’s dental splint
b. Cantilever dental bridges
c. Partial laminar denture
d. Elbrecht’s dental splint
*e. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture with splinting elements

161. A 70-year-old patient addressed a hospital with complaints of poorly stabilized complete removable dentures of the upper and lower jaws. What method of arti?cial teeth arrangement is preferable in making of a new complete removable denture?
*a. According to individual occlusal curves
b. According to standard occlusal curves
c. According to prothetic occlusal planes
d. According to spherical occlusal curves
e. According to disocclusal planes

162. A 2.5-year-old child has fever up to 38.5°C, low appetite, rashes in the oral cavity. The disease onset was 3 days ago. Objectively: the skin of the perioral area is covered in scarce vesicles with clear content. Within the oral cavity on the buccal and lingual mucosa there are sharply painful erosions, 2-3 mm in size, with white coating and hyperemic crown. The gums are swollen, hyperemic. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
c. Stomatitis with the background of chickenpox
d. Stomatitis with the background of infectious mononucleosis
e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

163. A 25-year-old man complains of shortterm pain in the tooth on the lower right jaw during eating sweet, hot, and cold food. Objectively: in the 36 tooth on the distal surface there is a carious cavity noncommunicating with the dental cavity, dentin is softened. Probing of the cavity ?oor is painful, percussion is painless. Electric pulp test is 16 microamperes. Make the ?nal diagnosis:
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
c. Acute median caries
d. Pulpal hyperemia
*e. Acute deep caries

164. A 30-year-old woman came to the dentist with complaints of uncomfortable sensation of pressure in her upper right tooth, which aggravates in response to hot stimulus, and foul smell from the mouth. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 17 tooth, which communicates with the tooth cavity. Deep probing causes severe pain, percussion of the 17 tooth is painful. X-ray: there is slight widening of the periodontal ?ssure near the root apex. Electric pulp test - 70 microamperes. What ?nal diagnosis can be made?
a. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic ?brous periodontitis
c. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
*e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

165. Medical committee registers the patients, who for a long time lived in an area polluted with radiation. The patients are advised on the diet that will quickly purge the body from radionuclides. The portion of products rich in pectine should be increased in their diet. Name these products:
a. Meat products
b. Dairy products
c. Baked goods
*d. Fruits and vegetables
e. Pasta

166. A 44-year-old man came to extract destroyed tooth 24. Objectively his face is symmetrical, the crown of 24 is destroyed by 2/3, percussion is painless. Gingival mucosa surrounding the tooth is unchanged. X-ray shows enlarged periodontal ?ssure in the area of the root apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis of 24
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of 24
c. Chronic gangrenous periodontitis of 24
*d. Chronic ?brous periodontitis of 24
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of 24

167. A 46-year-old man complains of constant losing of a ?lling in his lower right tooth. Objectively: in the 16 tooth on the approximal masticatory surface there is a defect of crown hard tissues at 1/3. The tooth has no discoloration, percussion is painless. What construction should be prescribed?
a. Plastic crown
*b. Inlay
c. Semi-crown
d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. 3/4 crown

168. A 10-year-old boy complains of acute pain attacks in the area of his upper left teeth. The toothache persisted for a night. Objective examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 26 tooth within parapulpar dentin. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity ?oor. Markedly positive reaction to cold water stimulus is observed. Select the most likely diagnosis:
*a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

169. In a state of inebriation a 36-year-old woman suffered a domestic accident 4 hours ago. She was delivered to the maxillofacial surgery unit. On examination she was provisionally diagnosed with a deep perforating incised wound of the lateral surface of her face with injured perioral area and parotid gland. The woung edges are gaping. This gaping is caused by:
a. Location of masticatory muscles
b. Depth of the wound
c. Wound communication with the oral cavity
d. Speci?cs of facial innervation
*e. Location of facial muscles

170. The maxillofacial surgery unit received a patient with complaints of inability to close his mouth. This condition occurred when the patient was biting an apple. Objectively there is a frightened expression on the patient’s face, the mouth is open wide, the chin is displaced to the left, salivation is observed. Palpation through the external acoustic meatus detected no movements of the right articular head. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Right temporomandibular joint dislocation
b. Acute temporomandibular arthritis
c. Bilateral temporomandibular joint dislocation
d. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome
e. Fracture of the mandibular process

171. A 19-year-old girl addressed an oncologist with complaints of slowly growing tumorlike mass on the tip of her tongue. The mass was ?rst noticed 5-6 years ago. The patient requested no medical help. Objectively: there is a pale pink round growth with wide pedicle on the tongue apex; the growth is painless, elastic; there are no changes of mucosa surrounding the pedicle. Submandibular lymph nodes cannot be palpated. What kind of tumor is it?
a. Keratoma
*b. Papilloma
c. Fibroma
d. Atheroma
e. Lipoma

172. During carious cavity preparation in a 20-year-old man, the pulp-chamber ?oor was accidentally perforated and horn of the pulp was exposed. On the carious cavity ?oor there is a point-like puncture surrounded with white predentin. Pink pulp can be seen through the perforation, pulp probing is acutely painful. What treatment should be given to the patient?
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Biological approach
c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Devital amputation

173. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist with complaints of brief attacks of toothache caused by eating sweets. Objectively there is a shallow carious cavity within enamel. On probing cavity walls and bottom are coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Endemic ?uorosis
d. Enamel hypoplasia
*e. Acute super?cial caries

174. A 24-year-old patient came to the dentist complaining of chalky lesions on the front teeth. Objectively teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 present with chalky lesions separated by areas of healthy unchanged enamel. Lesion surface is coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Childhood years of the patient were spent in the area with ?uorine level of 1.8 mg/L in drinking water. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel hyperplasia
b. Enamel hypoplasia
*c. Endemic ?uorosis
d. Acute super?cial caries
e. Chronic super?cial caries

175. A 48-year-old patient has addressed a hospital with complaints of defects in the paragingival area and slight sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively there are hard tissue defects that resemble a wedge with smooth polished walls on the precervical vestibular surface of the 23 and 24 teeth. Thermal test is slightly positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Endemic ?uorosis
*b. Cuneiform defect
c. Acute deep caries
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Enamel erosion

176. Parents of a 7-year-old child addressed a hospital with complaints of their child having no permanent teeth in the front area of the mandible. Anamnesis states that the ?rst deciduous teeth erupted at the age of 11 months. Objective clinical examination revealed the following: appearance is without changes; milk occlusion; there are physiological diastema and tremata; edge-to-edge incisor contact. What preliminary diagnosis can be made according to Kalvelis classi?cation?
a. Adentia
b. Supernumerary tooth
*c. Retarded eruption
d. Dystopia
e. Hypoplasia

177. A 5.5-year-old child is undergoing preventive examination. There are no complaints from the patient. Objectively: in the precervical area of buccal surface of the 75 tooth there is an enamel patch with loss of natural glossiness. The enamel surface is coarse, painless on probing. Tooth percussion is painless. Thermodiagnosis is negative. Damaged enamel stains with 2% water solution of methylene blue. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute initial caries
b. Fluorosis
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Acute super?cial caries
e. Enamel hypoplasia

178. A 68-year-old man has removable partial dentures made for him. At the stage of checking the denture construction, occlusal contact in the lateral areas is cusp-to-cusp and frontal area has sagittal ?ssure. What mistake was made by the doctor?
a. Height of centric occlusion is overstated
*b. Anterior occlusion is ?xed
c. Prothetic plane is designed incorrectly
d. Lateral occlusion is ?xed
e. Height of centric occlusion is understated

179. An 80-year-old man needs a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. How should the denture boder be located relative to the natural teeth?
a. Reaches dental cervices
b. Located below dental cervices
c. Covers the crowns by 1/3 of their height
d. Fully covers the crowns
*e. Covers the crowns by 2/3 of their height

180. A 52-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Upon objective examination a removable partial laminar denture is determined to be optimal denture construction in her case. What material should be applied to the impression tray edges?
a. Plaster
b. Silast
c. Stens
*d. Orthocor
e. Wax

181. A 46-year-old man, a teacher, complains of lower teeth mobility that impedes the process of biting. Objectively the dentition is uninterrupted, front teeth demonstrate the II degree of mobility. X-ray shows straight and ?lled root canals of 32, 31, 41, and 42. What appliance will stabilize front teeth while retaining their aesthetic appearance?
a. Splint with embrasure clasps
b. Semicrown splint
c. Removable segmented splint for the front teeth
d. Cap splint
*e. Mamlok’s dental splint

182. A woman complains of spontaneous attacks of acute pain, with practically no intermissions and irradiation into the temple; cold water slightly mitigates the pain. In tooth 26 examiantion revealed deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity bottom is acutely painful, the tooth is tender on vertical percussion. Make the provisional diagnosis regarding tooth 26:
a. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Pulpal hyperemia
*e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

183. A 78-year-old man complains of a painful sore in his mouth that has been persisting for 2 months already. The patient is a smoker. Objectively on the buccal mucosa on the right there is a shallow ulcer up to 1.5 cm in size with lumpy ?oor and uneven margins. There are yellowish granules on its periphery. Palpation is painful, the lesion is soft. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and matted together. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Hard chancre
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Decubitus ulcer
*e. Tuberculous ulcer

184. A 37-year-old patient has symmetrical face; the mucosa in the area of the 12 tooth root apex projection is pale pink; palpation is painless; the tooth crown is destroyed by 1/3; percussion is painless. X-ray: the root canal of the12toothis?lled to the apex; granuloma 4 mm in diameter is located near the root apex. Choose the method of surgical treatment:
*a. Granuloma removal with root apex resection
b. Coronary radicular tooth separation
c. Tooth extraction
d. Root amputation
e. Root hemisection

185. A 48-year-old man presents with verruciform, dense, gray-white growths on the buccal mucosa. The growths protrude above the neighbouring tissues and are surrounded by keratinized gray-white spots that cannot be scraped off. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
b. Papillomatosis
c. Erosive leukoplakia
d. Bowen’s disease
*e. Verrucous leukoplakia

186. During preventive examination a patient was diagnosed with precancerous hyperkeratosis of the lower lip vermillion border. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Palliative treatment
*b. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues
c. No treatment is necessary
d. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + close-focus roentgenotherapy
e. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + chemotherapy

187. A 63-year-old man complains of fever and multiple painful rashes in his oral cavity and on his face and torso. 3-4 days before the rashes appeared he had noticed a burning sensation followed by sharp shooting pain resembling that which occurs during lumbago. The patient takes cytotoxic drugs for leukemia treatment. On examination there are multiple aphthae located in a row on the vermillion border and labial, lingual, and buccal mucosa on the right. The aphthae have hyperemic borders, they are not fused together and are sharply painful on palpation. The right side of the face presents with erythematous spots, vesicles, and erosions. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Secondary syphilis
b. Chronic recurrent herpes
c. Toxic allergic dermatostomatitis
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*e. Herpes zoster

188. A 34-year-old man presents with persisting dull pain in his tooth, which aggravates on biting. One week ago the tooth was treated for deep caries. Objectively on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 there is a ?lling, percussion is painful, there is a supracontact observed in the area of 36. X-ray shows unchanged periodontium. What mistake was made when tooth 36 was ?lled?
a. Filling without medicinal substance sealed inside
*b. High ?lling
c. Gingival attachment is disturbed
d. Filling without insulation layer
e. Insulation layer exceeds borders of the dentinoenamel junction

189. A 35-year-old man complains of persisting pain in tooth 24, which intensi?es on biting. Objectively on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 24 there is a deep carious cavity ?lled with food debris. Percussion of cavity bottom is painless, there is no pain response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of tooth 24 is acutely painful. X-ray shows no pathologic changes of periapical tissues in the area of root apices of 24. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative pulpitis
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

190. A 22-year-old man complains of tearing, throbbing, constant, intensifying pain in the tooth on the upper left jaw. The pain has been persisting for 4 days. Objectively tooth 26 has deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing is painless. Percussion is acutely painful. The tooth is mobile. Mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 26 is painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute local pulpitis

191. A 22-year-old patient has suffered unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was provided with full dental brace with loops and intermaxillary elastic expansion. Recovery was uncomplicated. The brace should be removed after:
*a. 3 weeks
b. 1 week
c. —
d. 10 days
e. 2 weeks

192. A 27-year-old patient was provisionally diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic maxillary sinusitis. What radiology method would be the most informative in this case?
a. Spot-?lm radiography
b. —
c. X-ray
d. Panoramic radiography
*e. Computed tomography

193. A 22-year-old man presents with swollen and hyperemic mucosa of the retromolar area; tooth 38 is covered with hood-shaped gingival ?ap that discharges pus on palpation; body temperature is 37.5°C. What urgent aid should be given to the patient in this case?
a. Gingival ?ap excision
b. Antibiotic treatment
c. Gingival ?ap incision
*d. Gingival ?ap incision and antibacterial treatment
e. Extraction of tooth 38

194. A 43-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgeon with complaints of aesthetic defect. Examination revealed excessive accumulation of adipose tissue in the patient’s neck and upper torso, which resembles collar with unclear magins; neck mobility is reduced. Family history shows the same symptoms to be present in the patient’s father. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Lymphangioma
*b. Madelung’s deformity
c. Neuro?bromatosis
d. Lipoma
e. Fibroma

195. A 73-year-old man is registered for regular check-ups in an oncological clinic after completion of the combined treatment for oral mucosa cancer stage II (radiation therapy and surgery). During one of the routine check-ups an area of exposed mandibular bone is detected. There are no in?ammatory changes of surrounding mucosa. A ?stula tract with soft granulation is detected. Mandibular X-ray shows a sequestrum without clear margin between healthy and necrotic bone. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic mandibular periostitis
*b. Mandibular osteoradionecrosis
c. Posttraumatic mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Acute purulent mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Relapse of oral mucosa cancer

196. A 19-year-old patient came to a dentofacial clinic with complaints of pain in the gonial angle on the right, impaired mouth opening and painful chewing. The signs had been persisting for 5 days, emerged spontaneously and had been aggravating gradually. Mandibular contracture is of the III degree. On examination of the oral cavity: hyperemia, edema of the retromolar space on the right, hood-shaped mucosa from under which pus is being discharged and 2 tooth tubercles can be detected. X-ray shows oblique medial tooth position. Make the diagnosis:
a. Mandibular angle fracture
b. Acute submandibular sialadenitis
c. Acute suppurative periostitis from the 48 tooth
d. Chronic local mandibular osteomyelitis
*e. Acute suppurative pericoronitis of the 48 tooth

197. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain of their child having a gradually enlarging neoplasm in the left parotid-masticatory region. Skin over the tumor is without discoloration. The tumor is painless, but when the head bends down the tumor increases in size and assumes bluish coloring. What disease can be suspected in the child?
a. Lymphangioma
b. Cyst of the parotid gland
c. Fibroma
d. Atheroma
*e. Hemangioma

198. An 11-year-old child presents with protrusion of the upper front teeth, there are tremata and diastema between the child’s teeth. What apparatus can be used for treatment of this pathology?
a. Frankel, type 3
b. Brukle
*c. Osadchy
d. Vasylenko
e. Mershon

199. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the tragus area, clicking during mouth opening, stuffed ears. Objectively the face is symmetrical, mouth opening path is straight. Dentition defect can be estimated as the I class by Kennedy; the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. In this case the load would be the most traumatizing for the following anatomical structure:
a. Distal slope of the articular tubercle
b. Floor of the temporal bone socket
c. Articular capsule
d. Articular head
*e. Interarticular disk

200. A 38-year-old man complains of sensation of a foreign body on his tongue and development of gag re?ex during talking. The signs appeared after the prolonged taking of antibiotics. Objective examination detected thickened and pigmented ?liform papillae enlarged to 2-3 cm in size. Histological analysis detected papillar hyperplasia and marked keratinization without alteration of the surrounding tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fissured tongue
b. Median rhomboid glossitis
*c. Black hairy tongue
d. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
e. Geographic tongue

