1. A 56-year-old patient suffering from exacerbation of schizophrenia has been hospitalised in an oral in-patient department with a diagnosis of the lower jaw displaced fracture in the area of the 34-35 teeth. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
*a. Osteosynthesis
b. Dual splint
c. One arch flat occlusal splint
d. Weber’s dental splint
e. Vankevych dental splint

2. A 57-year-old man complains of pain and creaking in his right temporomandibular joint when eating. In the evening the signs diminish. The pain is observed for the last 2-3 years. Objectively the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is reduced to 2.5 cm. Molars are missing on both jaws. X-ray shows deformed articular surfaces of the right temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
*b. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint
c. Pain dysfunction syndrome of the right temporomandibular joint
d. Ankylosis of the right temporomandibular joint
e. Contracture of the right temporomandibular joint

3. A 30-year-old woman complains of mild burning sensation in her lower lip and its dryness. She peels skin scales off with her teeth. She has been presenting with this condition for 10 years. On examination the skin scales are gray and located on the lip from the Klein’s line to the center of the vermillion border from angle to angle of the mouth. The scales are firmly attached in the center and are loose on the periphery. Their forcible removal does not result in erosions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
*b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Lupus erythematosus

4. A 25-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for oral cavity sanation. Objectively the crown of tooth 37 is destroyed by 2/3. Gingival mucosa around tooth 37 is without changes. What anesthesia should the dental surgeon give to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Mandibular anesthesia
b. Intraoral infraorbital nerve block
c. Mental nerve block
d. Tuberal anesthesia
*e. Mandibular and buccal anesthesia

5. The dental surgery department received a women with complaints of swollen right side of the fase and indisposition. According to her medical history, one week ago she sensed itching in the right side of her face and noticed there a small dense nodule. She started to apply various ointments. Swelling was gradually increasing, the woman developed pain and fever. Objectively her condition is of moderate severity, body temperature is 39°C. Her right buccal region is swollen, with hyperemic skin; in the center there is an oval edema elevated above the surrounding tissues with a black scab visible on its apex. Palpation detects a painful infiltration, 3.5 cm in diameter, and enlarged and painful submandibular lymph nodes. Mouth opening is slightly impaired, oral cavity is clean. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Furuncle
b. Acute lymphadenitis
c. Carbuncle
d. Acute lymphangitis
e. Phlebitis of the facial vein

6. What shape does the upper dental arch have in the permanent dentition?
a. Semicircle
b. Parabola
c. Trapezoid
d. Saddle-shaped
*e. Semi-ellipse

7. During examination the child presents with retracted mucosa on the soft palate and uvula. The child was diagnosed with congenital submucous cleft soft palate. What surgical operation is necessary in this case?
a. Uranostaphyloplasty
*b. Veloplasty
c. Uranoplasty
d. Cheiloplasty
e. Rhinocheiloplasty

8. A patient was diagnosed with cancer of the right parotid gland, T2N2M0. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Radiation therapy
*b. Combined therapy
c. Surgical removal of the neoplasm
d. Surgical removal of the lymph node
e. Chemotherapy

9. A 50-year-old man was diagnosed with recurrent sialolithiasis with the sialolith located deep within the submandibular salivary gland. Choose the optimal treatment tactics:
*a. Submandibular gland excision
b. Removal of the sialolith while retaining the gland
c. Sclerotherapy
d. Conservative pharmacotherapy
e. Radiation therapy

10. During administration of ultracain solution for infiltration anesthesia the condition of a 22-year- old patient sharply deteriorated. The patient became inert, silent, developed cough attacks, expiratory dyspnea, wheezing. Viscous slimy sputum is being expectorated. What urgent condition did the patient develop?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Asphyxia
c. Hypertensic crisis
*d. Bronchial asthma attack
e. Collapse

11. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated infiltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the infiltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the infiltration there is a fistula, fn the oral cavity the crown of 46 is destroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the fistula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cheek furuncle
b. Odontogenic lymphadenitis
*c. Migrating facial granuloma
d. Actinomycosis
e. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis

12. A 7-year-old boy was brought to the dentist. Objectively his gums are hyperemic and bleeding, the teeth are mobile and covered in plaque, their roots are exposed, periodontal pockets are pathologic and filled with granulations. The child is registered for regular check-ups with the pediatrician. According to the mother, lately the child’s condition has been deteriorating. The boy presents with diabetes insipidus and exophthalmos. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Gaucher disease
b. Letterer-Siwe disease
*c. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
d. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
e. Taratinov disease (eosinophilic granuloma of bone)

13. A 12.5-year-old child came to the dentist for oral cavity sanitation. Objectively caries progression in this child is severe: decay- missing- filled index is DMF=2+0+4=6. Green-Vermillion index is 1.7. Gingival mucosa is pale pink. What toothpastes should be prescribed in this case for oral hygiene?
a. Enzyme
b. Herbal extract
c. Salt supplement
d. Antiseptic
*e. Amine fluoride

14. A 65-year-old man with fully edentulous upper jaw needs removable full laminar denture. To make the denture, anatomical impressions of the upper and lower jaws are necessary. The patient exhibits heightened gag reflex. What drug can be used to suppress the gag reflex in this patient?
a. 0.1 % atropin solution
b. 0.2% noradrenaline solution
*c. 10% lidocaine solution
d. 1% dimedrol (diphenhydramine) solution
e. 10% glucose solution

15. A 50-year-old man complains of gum discoloration, pain when eating spicy food, weakness, and irritability. He notes that periodically spots and vesicles appear on his skin. For a long time he has been working in the galvanic workshop of a factory. On examination the patient is pale, he has a gray-black border on his gums, and on his oral mucosa there are single erosions that are painful on palpation. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Mercury salt poisoning
b. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis (Vincent stomatitis)
*c. Lead salt poisoning
d. Acute leukemia
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

16. A 28-year-old patient complains of aesthetical defect. Objectively the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 are destroyed by caries by over 2/3 of their heights. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. X- ray shows the root canals of these teeth to be completely filled; no pathologic changes detected in the periapical tissues. What approach to teeth restoration would be optimal in this case?
a. Combined swaged crowns, made in Borodiuk technique
*b. Stump inlays and porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns
c. Immediate denture with posts
d. Crown restoration with photopolymer fillings
e. Plastic-faced stump inlays

17. A 44-year-old man came to the dental polyclinic to have a denture made for him. He complains of problematic chewing and aesthetical defects. Objectively teeth 14, 15, and 22 are missing. According to Agapov, the loss of masticatory efficiency in this case is:
a. 20%
*b. 18%
c. 16%
d. 12%
e. 9%

18. A patient needs a removable full laminar denture for the upper jaw. Objectively on the mucosa of the denture bed there are numerous dense papillomas of varying size. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Removable dentures are contraindicated in this case
b. Make a 3D-model of the denture base
c. Make a denture base from metal
*d. Remove papillomas and make a denture with a double layered base lined with elastic material
e. Reduce the area of the denture base

19. Biopsy material was obtained from the focus of a lesion in the retromolar space. Pathohistological findings: cellular polymorphism in the stratum spinosum, increased mitotic number, giant multinucleate cells, acanthosis, some cells in the stratum spinosum exhibit signs of parakeratosis, keratin pearls are detected. These pathohistological findings indicate the following disease:
a. Leukoplakia
*b. Bowen disease
c. Lichen ruber planus, verrucous form
d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Lupus erythematosus

20. A 29-year-old man is diagnosed with medial maxillary fracture. The line of the fracture is symmetrical on both sides. In this case sensory perception in the teeth and mucosa is likely to be disturbed within the following interval:
a. From tooth 13 to tooth 23
b. Sensitivity of the teeth and mucosa will remain undisturbed
c. From tooth 11 to tooth 21
d. From tooth 18 to tooth 28
*e. From tooth 15 to tooth 25

21. A 45-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums and bad breath. After examination the patient was provisionally diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis of the II degree. To make the final diagnosis, it is necessary to:
a. Measure the depth of the periodontal pockets
*b. Perform an X-ray
c. Perform Kulazhenko test (capillary resistance test)
d. Determine teeth mobility
e. Perform Kotzshke test (periodontal pocket suppuration test)

22. A 10-year-old girl complains of an aesthetic flaw. The anamnesis states, that she had been sucking her right thumb up to the age of 7. Objectively: the face lower third is somewhat reduced. Tire sagittal fissure between the upper and lower incisors, is 9 mm wide, class 2 according to the Angle classification. Eshler-Bittner test leads to initial temporary improvement of the girl’s face, followed by renewed deterioration. What clinical malocclusion is the most likely in this case?
a. Maxillary macrognathia
b. Mandibular micrognathia
*c. Maxillary macrognathia and mandibular micrognathia
d. Maxillary prognathism with lateral compression
e. Mandibular retrognathia

23. A 37-year-old patient complains of an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the 13 tooth is destroyed by 2/3. The tooth is pulpless, the root canal is filled. How deep should the root canal be opened for pivot crown in this patient?
a. Full length of the root canal
*b. 2/3 of the root canal
c. 1/2 of the root canal
d. 1/3 of the root canal
e. 3/4 of the root canal

24. A 38-year-old man after a domestic accident complains of pain and mobility of his upper teeth, problems with eating. Objectively: soft tissues edema. The 11 and 21 teeth are displaced towards the palate, mobile (II degree), painful on percussion. Mucosa surrounding the affected teeth is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray demonstrates widened periodontal fissure of the 11 and 21. Choose the treatment method:
a. Immobilization with mouthguard
b. -
*c. Setting of the teeth and their fixation with a flat occlusal splint
d. Extraction of the 11 and 21 teeth
e. Removal of tooth pulp in the 11 and 21 teeth

25. A 39-year-old woman complains of teeth mobility in her lower jaw. Objectively her dental formula is as follows: 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 / 21 22 23 24 25 26 27, 47 46 45 44 43 42 41/31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The teeth are intact, crowns are tall. Gingival pockets and mobility of the I and II degrees are observed in teeth 42 41/31 32. To immobilize the mobile teeth, a cap splint with fixed crowns was made for 43/33. What type of stabilization provides this splint?
a. Parasagittal
*b. Frontal
c. Sagittal
d. Frontal-sagittal
e. Circumferential

26. One of the stages of making a removable full denture includes fitting of an impression tray and obtaining the functional impression. What material is applied to the edges of the impression tray?
a. Stomalgin
*b. Orthocor
c. Thiodent
d. Plaster
e. Kromopan

27. A 28-year-old woman came to the dentist for oral cavity sanation. She was diagnosed with acute deep caries of tooth 24. She has a history of seasonal allergic rhinitis and drug allergy that manifests as a skin rash and Quincke edema. She does not remember whether she has been given local anesthesia at the dentist’s office previously. What tactics should the dentist choose regarding the anesthesia in this case?
*a. Referral to the allergologist for consultation and anesthetic allergy testing
b. Perform an anesthetic scratch test in the dental chair immediately before giving anesthesia
c. Perform a cutaneous anesthetic allergy test in the dental chair immediately before giving anesthesia
d. Use ether anesthetic
e. Use amide local anesthetic

28. A 47-year-old man has lost his lower left premolars. After that the teeth at the edges of the defect have been gradually sliding inside the defect. At the same time the antagonist teeth started to protrude toward the edentulous segment of the alveolar bone. In the medical literature, such clinical presentation is called:
a. Phenomenon of relative tooth-alveolar lengthening
*b. Popov-Godon phenomenon
c. Castaigne syndrome
d. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
e. Kourliandski phenomenon

29. During preventive examination a 40-year- old man presents with the following changes: marginal gingiva is enlarged, torus-shaped, cyanotic, slightly bleeding when touched with a dental probe; there is no pain. Staining the gums with Lugol’s iodine solution results in light-brown coloring of mucosa. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
*c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

30. A 48-year-old man complains of a lumor-like formation on the hard palate. Examination detected a semi-spherical protrusion with clear margins in the anterior portion of the palate. Teeth 11 and 21 are intact. X-ray shows a homogeneous focus of bone tissue rarefaction. The focus is 3.5x2.5 cm and has clear margins. Against the background of rarefied bone tissue there are projections of intact teeth 11 and 21; periodontal fissure is visible. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Nasopalatine duct cyst
b. Follicular cyst of the maxilla
c. Radicular cyst of the maxilla
d. Maxillary ameloblastoma
e. Giant-cell tumor of the maxilla

31. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed a hemorrhage from the socket of the extracted tooth. What tactics should the dentist choose in this case?
a. Insert a gauze pack soaked in 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
b. Administer 5-10 mL of 10% calcium chloride solution intravenously
*c. Tightly pack the tooth socket with a strip of iodoform gauze
d. Administer vicasol (menadione) solution intramuscularly
e. Place sutures into the soft tissues

32. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic. He complains of inability to chew his food due to partial loss of teeth. Objectively in the lateral regions teeth 18,16, 15, 25, 26, 28, 38, 35, 36, 44, 46, 48 are missing. Other teeth present with I-II degrees of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of the II degree. What type of denture would be optimal for this patient?
a. Metal-based dentures
b. -
c. Non-removable full cast dental bridges
d. Removable partial laminar denture
*e. Clasp-retained (bugel) dentures with splinting elements

33. A man complains of destroyed crown of the 16 tooth. Objectively the crown portion of the 16 tooth is completely destroyed. The patient is diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 16 tooth and this tooth needs to be extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used for this procedure?
a. Infraorbital and tuberal anesthesia
b. Tuberal anesthesia
*c. Tuberal and palatal anesthesia
d. Infraorbital anesthesia
e. Tuberal and incisor anesthesia

34. A 25-year-old man was brought to the hospital for specialized medical care 48 hours after he received a shrapnel wound of the maxillofacial area. Examination shows a large gaping wound of irregular shape in the soft facial tissues. Wound edges are infected and swollen. What type of surgical wound treatment should be conducted at this stage?
a. Secondary
b. Delayed primary
*c. Late primary
d. Early primary
e. -

35. During intraoral examination the dentist suspected that the patient has syphilis. What should the dentist do in this case?
a. Continue the examination and start the teeth preparation
b. Inform the patient of the suspected diagnosis and end the visit
*c. Complete the examination and refer the patient for necessary tests
d. Decline to provide dental services for this patient
e. Obtain the impressions to study the diagnostic models

36. During application of tuberal anaesthesia the patient developed rapidly increasing tissue edema and reduced mouth opening. What resulted in such a condition?
a. Anaphylactic shock
*b. Vascular trauma
c. Nerve trunk trauma
d. Muscle trauma during anaesthesia application
e. Intolerance to the anaesthetic

37. After extraction of tooth 46, a 41-year- old man noticed a dark defect on the distal contact surface of tooth 45. The defect is limited to the enamel, has blurred margins and dark brown color. The affected tissue crumbles when probed. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic superficial caries, Black class II
b. Chronic superficial caries, Black class IV
c. Chronic initial caries, Black class IV
d. Chronic initial caries, Black class II
e. Chronic median caries, Black class IV

38. A 35-year-old man complains of persisting pain in tooth 24, which intensifies on biting. Objectively on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 24 there is a deep carious cavity filled with food debris. Percussion of cavity bottom is painless, there is no pain response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of tooth 24 is acutely painful: X-ray shows no pathologic changes of periapical tissues in the area of root apices of 24. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

39. Decay-missing-filled index of a 6.5-year- old child is DMF+df=7. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.5. Fissures in the permanent molars are intact, deep, and open. What method of caries prevention would be advisable in this case?
a. Application of remineralization solution
b. Application of fluoride varnish
c. Invasive fissure sealing
*d. Noninvasive fissure sealing
e. Electrophoresis-aided application of remineralization solution

40. A woman came to the dental surgeon with complaints of teeth mobility. After objective examination and X-ray analysis she was diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of the 1-2 degrees of severity. Which teeth of those affected by periodontitis should be extracted?
a. Intact teeth
b. With degree 1 of tooth mobility
*c. With degrees 2-3 of tooth mobility
d. Carious teeth
e. Teeth with painful percussion

41. To extract tooth 27, the patient was given tuberal and palatal anesthesia. When the needle was being pulled out from the soft tissues after the palatal anesthesia, the patient developed bleeding. What should be done to stop the bleeding in this case?
a. Ligate the external carotid artery
*b. Press the place of injection with a tampon
c. Place sutures
d. Intramuscular administration of vicasol (menadione)
e. Intravenous administration of 10% calcium chloride solution

42. A 24-year-old patient came to the dentist complaining of chalky lesions on the front teeth. Objectively teeth 11, 21, 31, 41 present with chalky lesions separated by areas of healthy unchanged enamel. Lesion surface is coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Childhood years of the patient were spent in the area with fluorine level of 1.8 mg/L in drinking water. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Enamel hyperplasia
*c. Endemic fluorosis
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Enamel hypoplasia

43. During examination the child presents with micrognathia and open bite. X-ray shows no joint space, the right branch of the lower jaw immediately continues as the temporal bone. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic right-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
b. Right-sided sclerosing arthrosis of the temporomandibular joint
c. Right-sided fibrous ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
*d. Right-sided bony ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
e. First and second branchial arch syndrome

44. A 10-year-old child is referred by the orthodontist for extraction of tooth 53. Objectively the crown of 53 is retained, the tooth is immobile. X-ray of tooth 53 shows root resorption by less than 1/3. Choose the best instrument for extraction of tooth 53:
a. Beak-shaped root forceps
b. Crown forceps with S-shaped handles
*c. Straight crown forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. Root bayonet forceps

45. An 18-year-old patient with complaint of large diastem has made an appointment with prosthodontics specialist. Objectively: there is full lateral displacement of central incisors due to absence of the 12th and 22nd teeth. What instrument is the most advisable for moving the central incisors closer together?
a. Kalvelis appliance
b. Begg appliance
*c. Korkhaus appliance
d. Simple cotton ligature
e. Vasylenko appliance

46. A 30-year-old patient is diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic periostitis of the upper left jaw originating from tooth 23. The crown of 23 on the left is destroyed with caries by 1/3. Teeth 22 and 24 are intact. Spot- film X-ray shows widening of the periodontal fissure of 23. What treatment would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Extraction of the causative tooth, periosteotomy
*b. Periosteotomy and pharmacotherapy followed by treatment of the causative tooth
c. -
d. Extraction of the causative tooth, physiotherapy
e. Extraction of the causative tooth, pharmacotherapy

47. A patient is diagnosed with mandibular ameloblastoma. What type of surgery is recommended for this patient?
*a. Mandibular resection at the distance of 1.5 cm from the lesion focus
b. Cystectomy
c. Only conservative treatment
d. Tumor curettage within healthy tissue
e. I umor cryodestruction

48. A 21-year-old man complains of difficult mouth opening and visible facial deformation throughout the last 2 years. He has a history of facial trauma several years ago. Examination shows the right side of the face to be flattened, the chin is displaced to the right. Palpation detects diminished excursion of the articular head in the left lower jaw. Mouth opening is reduced to 1 cm. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Anterior dislocation of the lower jaw
b. Exacerbated chronic arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Acute arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
*e. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint

49. What prosthodontic appliance has mechanical type of action?
a. Bynin appliance
*b. Expansion plate with Coffin spring
c. Case obturator
d. Frankel functional regulator
e. Schonherr vestibular plate

50. A 37-year-old patient has symmetrical face; the mucosa in the area of the 12 tooth root apex projection is pale pink; palpation is painless; the tooth crown is destroyed by 1/3; percussion is painless. X-ray: the root canal of the 12 tooth is filled to the apex; granuloma 4 mm in diameter surrounds the root apex. Choose the method of surgical treatment:
a. Tooth extraction
b. Coronary radicular tooth separation
*c. Granuloma removal with root apex resection
d. Root hemisection
e. Root amputation

51. In the maxillofacial department a 6- month-old boy was hospitalized due to bleeding from a wound in the frenulum of his tongue. He has a medical history of frenulotomy the day before. The bleeding started 6 hours after the surgery. Suturing the wound was ineffective against the bleeding. The child was brought to the hematology department, where the bleeding was stopped by intravenous administration of coagulation factor IX concentrate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Suppurated tongue wound
*c. Hemophilia B
d. Willebrand disease
e. Iron-deficiency anemia

52. A 40-year-old man had his root canal of the 34 tooth filled due to chronic fibrous periodontitis. Soon the treated place became painful. On X-ray the root canal of the 34 tooth is filled to the root apex. What tactics should the dentist choose to manage the pain?
a. To make insicion along the mucogingival fold
b. To rinse with antiseptic mouthwash
c. To provide infiltration anesthesia
*d. To prescribe physiotherapeutic procedures
e. To provide conduction anesthesia

53. A 50-year-old man complains of painful defect that manifests as a crack in his lower lip. The defect appeared one month ago. Objectively the lower lip is dry, intactness of the vermillion border of the lower lip is linearly disturbed by a lesion that is located in the middle of the lip, is covered in dried blood, and extends to the labial mucosa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Chronic lymphedema of lips
c. Miescher cheilitis granulomatosa
*d. Chronic lip fissure
e. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome

54. A 34-year-old man presents with persisting dull pain in his tooth, which aggravates on biting. One week ago the tooth was treated for deep caries. Objectively on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 there is a filling, percussion is painful, there is a supracontact observed in the area of 36. X-ray shows unchanged periodontium. What mistake was made when tooth 36 was being filled?
a. Gingival attachment is disturbed
b. Filling without medicinal substance sealed inside
*c. High filling
d. Filling without insulation layer
e. Insulation layer exceeds borders of the dentinoenamel junction

55. A 45-year-old man complains of persisting dull pain in 46 that occurs in response to thermal and chemical stimuli. Examination of 46 detected in the precervical area of its vestibular surace a deep carious cavity filled with soft pigmented dentin. Probing is sharply painful at one point. Cold water stimulus induces a dull pain that<'gradually intensifies. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
*c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic deep caries

56. A 35-year-old man has been hospitalized into a maxillofacial unit with complaints of mobility of the 38, 37, and 36 teeth and a fistulous tract in the socket of the extracted 35 tooth. The condition has been persisting for over 3 months. Insertion of a grooved probe into the fistulous tract palpated exposed coarse bone fragment that easily moved under pressure. X-ray of the lower jaw demonstrates a focus of bone tissue destruction, with a spot of dense bone tissue 0.5x0.3 cm in size. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
b. Chronic periostitis
c. Actinomycosis
d. Acute osteomyelitis
*e. Chronic osteomyelitis

57. An 18-year-old young man complains of a cavity in 27 and pain when eating solid food. He has a history of severe pain in 27 one year ago; he requested no medical help at the time. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 27 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. The cavity is nearly completely filled with overgrown granulation tissue. Probing of the granulations leads to mild pain and bleeding. Percussion is painless. EPT is 45 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

58. A patient received a chemical bum to the face. The burn was caused by sulfuric acid. What substance should be used in the wound processing to neutralize this acid?
a. Acid
b. Flowing water
*c. Alkali
d. Alcohol
e. Antiseptic

59. A 6-year-old child for a 3rd day presents with body temperature up to 38-39°C and painful swallowing. Objectively on the mucosa of the palatine arches, tonsils and a part of the soft palate there are several erosions up to 2 mm in diameter. Tire erosions are situated on the hyperemic mucosa and covered in whitish plaque. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
b. Diphtheria
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
*e. Herpetic angina

60. A 48-year-old man presents with verruciform, dense, gray-white growths on the buccal mucosa. The growths protrude above the neighbouring tissues and are surrounded by keratinized gray- white spots that cannot be scraped off. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Verrucous leukoplakia
b. Erosive leukoplakia
c. Papillomatosis
d. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
e. Bowen’s disease

61. A 36-year-old man complains of an ulcer on his lower left lip. Three weeks ago a smal round red spot appeared on his lip. Eventually it became more dense and noticeable and 2- 3 days ago developed an ulcer in its center, while under the lower jaw appeared multiple painless nodules. Objectively on the mucosa of the lower left lip there is an oval ulcer, I. 2 cm in diameter, with smooth clear margins and bright-red glossy floor. Ulcer edges form a cushion that smoothly descends to the bottom of the ulcer. In the base of the ulcer there is a dense painless infiltration. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless, the skin over them remains unchanged. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following disease:
*a. Syphilis (initial period)
b. Lip cancer
c. Ulcerative cheilitis
d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Trophic ulcer

62. A 20-year-old pregnant woman with the term of 22 weeks complains of thermal sensitivity of her upper front teeth. The sensitivity developed one month ago. She was diagnosed with acute initial caries of teeth 12, 11, 21, 22, Black class V Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.8. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Remineralization therapy and filling of teeth 12,11,21, and 22
b. Professional teeth cleaning, remineralization therapy, and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and
c. Postpone the treatment until 30 weeks of gestation
d. Professional teeth cleaning and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
*e. Professional teeth cleaning and remineralization therapy

63. A 66-year-old woman complains of dull pain in her left parotid-masseteric region and increasing facial assymetry that she first noticed 2-3 months ago. Objectively the patient is undernourished, pale, and suffers from the left-sided paresis of the mimic muscles. In front of her earlobe, there is a lumpy infiltration without clear margins. The infiltration is 4x5 cm in size. It is fused to the surrounding tissues and moderately painful. No saliva could be produced from the duct of the left parotid gland. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes on the left are enlarged. Survey X-ray of the mandible shows no changes in the structure of the bone tissue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
b. Mixed tumor of the left parotid gland
c. Actinomycosis of the left parotid-masseteric region
d. Exacerbated chronic parotitis
*e. Adenocarcinoma

64. An 18-year-old girl needs consultation of the dentist regarding a neoplasm that appeared in the frontal area of her face. On the frontal area there is a pink-red semicircular spot on her skin 3-4 cm in size, with clear margins. When pressed, the skin in the affected area discolors and becomes pale. As soon as the pressing stops, the skin again assumes its pink-red color. When the patient bows her head, the spot darkens and enlarges in volume; when the patient lifts her head, the spot gradually returns to its initial pink-red color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cavernous hemangioma
b. Neurofibromatosis
*c. Capillary hemangioma
d. Lymphangioma
e. Birthmark (nevus)

65. A 12-year-old boy complains of constant pain in the upper tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 26 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Thermal stimuli and probing of the cavity floor are painless. Percussion is sharply painful. Mucosa in the area of tooth 26 exhibits mild signs of inflammation. X- ray of tooth 26 shows no changes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

66. A 15-year-old girl complains of brief pain attacks in her teeth due to chemical stimuli. Objectively: on the contact surfaces of the 11, 21, 22 teeth there are enamel areas matt white in color, with lost shine, covered in large amount of dental deposit. Enamel is softened and can be easily chipped off with excavator. Probing of lesions is painless. Percussion is painless. No reaction to cold stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute superficial caries
b. Acute initial caries
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Acute median caries

67. The 40-year-old woman complains of inability to properly masticate due to the loss of the following lateral teeth: 18,16,15,25,26,28, 38, 35, 36, 44-46, and 48. The rest of her teeth present with the 1-11 degree of mobility. Generalized periodontitis is observed. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Fixed dental bridge
b. -
c. Metal-based denture
*d. Removable dental splint
e. Removable laminar denture

68. A 28-year-old man has received a hit to the chin. He complains of pain in the right side of his face. Examination shows asymmetrical face due to tissue swelling in the upper right parotid area, mouth opening is painful, limited, the jaw is displaced to the right, right-sided crossbite is observed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Displaced traumatic mental fracture of the mandible
b. Displaced traumatic unilateral fracture of the body of the mandible
c. Displaced traumatic double fracture of the body of the mandible
d. Displaced traumatic central fracture of the mandible
*e. Displaced traumatic fracture of the cervix of the mandibular articular process

69. A 42-year-old woman after examination was diagnosed with closed medial mandibular fracture in the area of 31, 41, non-displaced. Crown portions of her other teeth are intact. Additionally she was diagnosed with chronic generalized parodontitis of moderate severity. What type of splint would be the most advisable for fracture treatment in this patient?
*a. Weber dentogingival splint
b. Vankevych dentogingival splint
c. Port gingival splint
d. Tigerstedt splint with anchor hooks
e. Tigerstedt splint

70. A man complains of pain in his lower right jaw and impaired mouth opening. Objectively on visual examination his face is symmetrical, mouth opening is slightly impaired, trismus of the 1 degree is observed. Mucosa behind tooth 47 is swollen, hyperemic, and painful on palpation. Medial cusps of tooth 48 are visible, while the tooth itself has not fully erupted. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*d. Pericoronitis
e. Abscess of the pterygomandibular space

71. A 48-year-old woman complains of low-grade fever and a gradually enlarging ulcer on her gingival mucosa near the molars; the teeth in the affected area are mobile. Objectively on the gingival mucosa between the lower left molars there are two superficial sharply painful ulcers with undermining margins. Floor of the ulcers is granulated and covered in yellow-gray coating. Small tubercles surround the ulcers. Tooth cervices are exposed, pathologic tooth mobility is observed. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and matted together into dense clusters. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Acute aphthous stomatitis
c. Syphilis
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Cancerous ulcer

72. A 21-year-old man with facial furuncle was brought to the maxillofacial department. What facial localization of furuncles and carbuncles is often complicated by trombophlebitis of the angular vein?
a. Cheek and parotid-masseteric region
b. Lower lip and chin
c. Nose and external canthus of the eye
*d. Upper lip and infraorbital area
e. Lower lip and jaw angle

73. A 20-year-old young woman complains of pain and marked bleeding in her gums when she brushes her teeth and eats even soft food. Objectively her gingival mucosa is swollen, hyperemic and bleeds even on the slightest touch. The teeth are covered with moderate amount of soft dental plaque. What toothpaste should be recommended to this patient as a part of complex treatment of her condition?
a. Gel toothpaste with microelements
*b. Herbal toothpaste
c. Antifungal toothpaste
d. Mineral-rich toothpaste
e. Fluoride toothpaste

74. A 28-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgery department. He complains of a cutaneous neoplasm in his right submandibular region. The neoplasm appeared approximately 2 years ago. In the process of shaving, the neoplasm was frequently injured. He was diagnosed with papilloma. In the neoplastic area, examination shows an ulcer against the background of hyperemic skin. What tactics should the dental surgeon choose?
a. Antibacterial and anti-inflammatory therapy, observation
b. Removal of the papilloma and postoperative radiation therapy
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy followed by removal of the papilloma
*d. Prevention of malignant transformation of the papilloma. Removal of the papilloma
e. Anti-inflammatory therapy followed by observation

75. A 10-year-old child complains of pain, dryness, enlargement, and peeling of the lips. Exaination detected hyperemic labial mucosa and enlarged lips; when the lips are pulled taut, secretion resembling ’’dewdrops” is being produced from minor salivary glands. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
*a. Cheilitis glandularis
b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Meteorological cheilitis

76. One week ago a patient received removable dentures for the upper and lower jaws. During a follow-up visit to the dentist the patient complains of accidental cheek- biting and pain. Objectively he presents with hyperemia, edema, ulceration of the buccal mucosa along the line of teeth closure in the area of the artificial molars. What is the likely cause of this condition?
a. Toxic-allergic reaction to the plastic components of denture base
b. Due to diabetes mellitus, mucosa is more susceptible to trauma
c. Fixed anterior occlusion
*d. Cusps of the molars on the upper and lower jaw are closing in one vertical plane
e. Incorrectly measured height of the occlusion

77. An 18-year-old girl in her childhood underwent a surgery for complete bilateral cleft upper lip. Examination detects multiple scars on the markedly flat upper lip. There is no visible asymmetry, but the upper lip is slightly deformed. Wide bases of the wings of her nose are symmetrically displaced laterally and posteriorly. Her nasal septum is shortened. The tip of the nose is bifurcated and drawn to the upper lip. Her nasal dorsum is arcuate. What changes occurred in the patient’s jaws?
*a. The upper jaw is underdeveloped, the intermaxilla is frontally displaced due to interrupted labial muscle layer
b. The lower jaw is underdeveloped due to reduced masticatory load, the upper jaw is flattened
c. Both upper and lower jaws are flattened in their lateral areas due to disturbed nasal breathig
d. Both upper and lower jaws are underdeveloped due to reduced masticatory load and flattened in their frontal areas
e. The upper jaw is underdeveloped in its frontal area, while its lateral areas remain without pathologic changes

78. A woman complains of pain response to thermal stimuli in her lower right jaw. The pain quickly abates after the stimulus is withdrawn. Objectively on the masticatory surface of the 26 there is a carious cavity with narrow “entrance” located within the mantle dentin. The dentin is soft and light-colored. Percussion of the 26 is painless. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Acute median caries

79. A 7-year-old girl complains of a neoplasm on her lower lip. The neoplasm appeared 3 months ago and has been slowly growing since then. Objectively on the mucosa of the lower right lip there is a round neoplasm 0.5-1 cm in diameter. It protrudes from the mucosa, has smooth surface, and its clear bluish content is visible through its walls. On palpation it is painless and elastic. Make the clinical diagnosis:
a. Papilloma of the lower lip
b. Lymphangioma of the lower lip
c. Fibroma of the lower lip
*d. Retention cyst of the lower lip
e. Hemangioma of the lower lip

80. A 32-year-old woman needs a denture. After objective examination the decision was made in favor of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown. What material should be used in this case to obtain the impression?
a. Repin
b. Stens
*c. Stomaflex
d. Orthocor
e. Stomalgin

81. A 64-year-old man undergoes fixation of a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. The dentist examined the denture base and noticed there a clearly visible ’’marble pattern’.’ This net of white lines runs through the whole plastic base. What is the most likely cause of this defect?
a. Fractures in the denture base caused by mechanical damage
*b. Disturbed process of acrylic resin polymerization
c. Disturbed process of denture base polishing
d. Uneven moistening of acrylic resin with a monomer
e. 1 7oreign admixtures in the denture base

82. To make the external prosthesis for a 62-year- old man it is necessary to obtain a Hippocrates facial moulage of this patient. What impression material should be used?
a. Stens
*b. Plaster
c. Dentafol
d. Repin
e. Stomaflex

83. A 29-year-old man needs to replace a number of dentition defects on his upper jaw. The defects can be replaced with dental bridges with aesthetical coating. ”Sinma-M” plastic coating is securely attached to the frame of the full cast metal-plastic dental bridges with:
a. Sandblasting
b. Thorough polishing of the frame
c. EDA varnish
*d. Retention spheres
e. “Conalor” dental resin

84. A 38-year-old man complains of sensation of a foreign body on his tongue and development of gag reflex during talking. The signs appeared after the prolonged taking of antibiotics. Objective examination detected thickened and pigmented filiform papillae enlarged to 2-3 cm in size. Histologically papillar hyperplasia and marked keratinization without changes in the surrounding tissues were detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Median rhomboid glossitis
b. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
c. Fissured tongue
d. Geographic tongue
*e. Black hairy tongue

85. A 30-year-old woman addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of uncomfortable sensation of pressure in her upper right tooth, which aggravates due to hot stimulus, and foul smell from the mouth. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 17 tooth, which penetrates into the tooth cavity. Deep probing causes severe pain, percussion of the 17 tooth is painful. X-ray: there is slight widening of the periodontal fissure near the root apex. Electric pulp test - 70 microamperes. What final diagnosis can be made?
*a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

86. A 16-year-old girl complains of constant dull pain in her lower tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 46 there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Comparative percussion is sharply painful. Thermal stimuli and probing are painless. Mucosa in the area of tooth 46 is markedly hyperemic, swollen, painful on palpation. X-ray shows an irregularly shaped focus of bone tissue destruction with blurred margins. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis

87. A 27-year-old woman complains of general weakness and pain in her lower jaw during swallowing. Two days ago she developed pain in tooth 38. Mouth opening is impossible. What anesthesia should be given to the patient before examination of the oral cavity and extraction of 38?
a. Mental
b. Infilti ation
c. Verlotsky
*d. Berchet-Dubov
e. Tuberal

88. A 22-year-old patient has suffered unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was provided with full dental brace with loops and intermaxillary elastic expansion. Recovery was uncomplicated. The brace should be removed after:
a. 1 week
b. -
*c. 3 weeks
d. 2 weeks
e. 10 days

89. A 38-year-old woman complains of burning pain in her lips and angles of her mouth, their dryness. She has an 8-year- long history of diabetes mellitus. Objectively: the vermillion border is dry, congestively hyperemic, covered in scales of variable size. In the angles of the mouth there are fissures covered in white coating, the skin is macerated. What ointment should be prescribed for topical treatment in the given case?
a. Interferon
b. Lanolin
*c. Clotrimazol
d. Eryth romycin
e. Prednisolone

90. A 32-year-old patient presents with body temperature of 38.9°C, general fatigue, impaired speech, inability to eat. This condition has been recurring for the last 4 years in autumn and spring. There are vesicles and erosions covered in grayish fibrinous coating on the hyperemic and swollen labial and buccal mucosa. Nikolsky’s sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nonacantholytic pemphigus
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*c. Erythema multiforme exudativum
d. -
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

91. A 50-year-old woman complains of pain and creaking in her temporomandibular joint. Objectively there are multiple premature occlusal contacts and localized pathologic tooth wear. The teeth are stable, with exposed cervices; the gingival margin is hyperemic. Selective teeth shaving is planned. How many visits to the dentist are necessary for the full procedure?
a. 2-3 visits at one-day intervals
b. 2-3 visits at one-month intervals
*c. 3-4 visits at one-week intervals
d. 1-2 visits within a year
e. A single visit

92. A 28-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding of gums in the frontal part of the upper jaw on the left. Two years ago, the 22 tooth was covered with a porcelain-fused-to- metal crown. Objectively: interdental papilla between the 21 and 22 tooth is hypertrophied, markedly hyperemic, overlaps the crown of the 22 by 1/3 of its height, bleeds when touched. Periodontal pocket between the 21 and 22 tooth is 4 mm deep. Artificial crown is placed on the gingival margin. X-ray reveals resorption of the interalveolar septa between the 21 and 22 tooth by 1/3 of their height. Specify a priority action in the treatment of this patient:
a. Anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Gingivectomy
c. Sclerotherapy
*d. Removal of the artificial crown
e. Curettage of the periodontal pocket

93. A 55-year-old patient requires a denture. Objectively: Kennedy’s I class dentition defect; the 16, 17, 18, 26, 27, and 28 leeth are missing. The patient presents with fixed occlusion. The 15 and 25 teeth have low crowns with poor anatomic contours, intact. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture is being made for the patient. What fixation system would be optimal in this case?
a. Attachments
b. Continuous clasp (clammer)
c. Aker-Roach combined clasp (clammer)
d. Roach clasp (clammer)
*e. Telescopic fixation

94. To clarify the diagnosis, the orthodontist performed Eschler-Bittner clinical diagnostic test. As the result the facial signs became more marked. What jaw abnormality is the most likely in this case?
a. Mandibular micrognathia
b. Combined pathology of both jaws
c. Maxillary micrognathia
*d. Maxillary macrognathia
e. Mandibular macrognathia

95. A 21-year-old man 3 hours ago received a knife wound to the right cheek; the wound was initially bleeding, but by the time of examination the bleeding has already stopped. Objectively in the area of the right cheek there was a wound 4x1 cm with even margins that does not penetrate into the oral cavity and is filled with clotted blood. What sutures should be applied to the wound in this case?
a. Late secondary suture
b. Primary approximation suture
c. Primary apposition suture
*d. Primary blind suture
e. Early secondary suture

96. A 38-year-old man came to the dentist. After history-taking and examination he was found to have exacerbated generalized periodontitis of the II degree with periodontal pockets 3-5 mm deep. After the local factors were removed and anti- inflammatory treatment was provided to the patient, it is necessary to remove the periodontal pockets. What method should be applied in this case?
a. Vestibuloplasty
b. Gingivotomy
c. Flap surgery
*d. Curettage
e. Gingivectomy

97. A 28-year-old woman complains of dull pain when biting on tooth 16. Upon examination she was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. She is prescribed extaction of tooth 16. What forceps should be used for tooth extraction in this case?
a. Beak-shaped curved forceps
b. Straight forceps
*c. S-shaped right forceps
d. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps
e. S-shaped left forceps

98. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the tragus area, clicking during mouth opening, stuffed ears. Objectively; the face is symmetrical, mouth opening path is straight. Dentition defect can be estimated as the I class by Kennedy; the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are absent. In this case the load would be the most traumatizing for the following anatomical structure:
a. Articular capsule
b. Socket floor of the temporal bone
c. Distal slope of the articular tubercle
d. Articular head
*e. Interarticular disk

99. A 2-year-old child received a dental trauma. Objectively the crowns of 51 and 61 are shorter than the crowns of adjacent teeth by 1/3. Mucosa in the area of 51 and 61 is hyperemic and swollen. X- ray shows no periodontal fissure in the apical area of the roots of 51 and 61. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Extraction of teeth 51, 61
b. Reposition of teeth 51, 61
*c. Dispensary observation
d. Reimplantation
e. Ligature splinting

100. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and crepitation in the temporomandibular joint during the movements. of the lower jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with slight displacement to the left. Dentition is intact. On occlusiography there were detected centric and eccentric supracontacts. What treatment methods should be applied in the first place?
a. Lower jaw immobilization
b. Mouthguards that increase the height of central occlusion
*c. Selective teeth shaving
d. Mouthguard for muscle relaxation
e. Appliances that limit mouth opening

101. During preventive examination, a 20- year-old man was found to have enamel defects that look like irregularly shaped coarse white spots in the vestibular precervical area of teeth 11 and 12. The spots stain with 2% methylene blue solution. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute superficial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class III
b. Acute initial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class III
c. Focal enamel hypoplasia of teeth 11 and 12
*d. Acute initial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class V
e. Acute superficial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class V

102. A patient complains of carious cavity in tooth 11. The filling was lost one week ago. The tooth crown is dark, there is residual filling material at the bottom of the carious cavity. Vertical percussion is painless. X-ray shows an oval area of bone tissue resorption with clear margins, 0.4x0.3 cm in size. The root canal is filled by 2/3 of its length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Radicular cyst
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

103. The medical station of a regiment received a patient with signs of bilateral mandibular fracture. What is the main task of first aid in this case?
*a. To control shock, bleeding, and asphyxia and to provide transport immobilization
b. To check and correct previously applied bandages
c. To provide symptomatic therapy and care
d. To clean the oral cavity from blood clots, tooth shards, and bone fragments
e. To administer analgesics and cardiac medications

104. In the epicenter of a natural disaster, a man with a lacerated wound of soft facial tissues was found. The wound cuts open the patient’s lower lip and chin; external bleeding is observed. The patient is conscious. What first aid should be provided for this man?
a. Use a syrette from the personal medical kit to provide anesthesia with 2% promedol (trimeperidine) solution
b. Position the flaps correctly and place the U- shaped mattress sutures
c. Provide primary surgical processing of the wound, place the sutures
d. Thoroughly ligate the vessel in the wound, position the flaps correctly, place the U-shaped mattress sutures, apply sterile bandage
*e. Stop the external bleeding, pack the wound, apply sterile bandage, provide transport immobilization

105. A 67-year-old woman complains of an ulcer on her oral mucosa and pain when eating. She has a history of decompensated valvular heart diseases. Examination detected in the posterior portion of her left buccal region an irregularly shaped ulcer with white- gray coating. Surrounding mucosa is not inflamed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Trophic ulcer
b. Decubitus ulcer
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Cancerous ulcer

106. A 40-year-old man presents with a medial defect of the hard palate 2x3 cm in size. Dentition is intact. What type of obturator would be optimal in this case?
*a. Palatal plate
b. Pomerantseva-Urbanska obturator
c. Ilina-Markosian obturator
d. Floating obturator
e. Plate prosthesis with obturator

107. A 53-year-old man complains of increased teeth sensitivity to chemical stimuli. Objectively: the gums are pale pink, roots are exposed by 1/3 of their length. Small amount of dental deposit is observed. The 15, 14, and 24 present with cuneiform defects. Probing of the exposed cervices and defects is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis, I degree
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
d. Periodontitis, II degree
*e. Periodontosis, I degree

108. During preventive examination a 5- year-old child was found to have insufficient physiological attrition of cusps of the deciduous canines. What treatment tactics should a doctor choose?
a. Medical examination every 6 months until the canines are replaced
b. Medical examination every 6 months until the incisors are replaced
*c. To file down the retained canine cusps
d. No medical intervention is necessary
e. Medical examination once a month until the incisors are replaced

109. A 34-year-old man complains of acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is aggravating when affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache in the 27 tooth one year ago, but he did not consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 27 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 27 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis

110. Parents of a 5-year-old girl brought her to the pediatric dentist for oral cavity sanation. After clinical examination she was diagnosed with chronic deep caries in 54. What filling material would be optimal for the treatment of tooth 54 in this case?
a. Silicate cement
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Zinc phosphate cement
d. Composite
*e. Glass ionomer cement

111. A 57-year-old man presents with habitual mandibular dislocation. To reduce mouth opening, Yadrova apparatus was made. How long should the treatment last in this case?
a. 12 months
b. 6 months
c. 9 months
d. 18 months
*e. 3 months

112. What medical establishment provides dental and prosthodontic (making of splints, appliances, and dentures) treatment for those who received maxillofacial injuries on the battlefield?
a. Separate medical battalion
*b. Specialized surgical field hospital
c. Separate medical platoon
d. Evacuation hospital
e. Civilian medical establishment

113. A patient needs endodontic treatment of tooth 21. The canal is being processed with manually operated endodontic instruments. Name one such instrument made by means of conical spiral threading (turning) of a steel wire with round cross-section (milling):
a. Spreader
b. Plugger
c. K-file
*d. H-file
e. K-reamer

114. A patient is prescribed mandibular vestibuloplasty. What pathology is likely to occur if the vestibule of the mouth is too shallow?
a. Delayed growth of the jaw
*b. Diseases of periodontal tissues
c. Parafunction of mimic muscles
d. Overcrowding of the front teeth
e. Deep occlusion

115. A 27-year-old woman complains of recurrent loss of a tooth filling in the lower right jaw. Objectively: in the 46 tooth on the masticatory approximal surface there is a defect of hard tooth tissues affecting 1/3 of the tooth crown, no tooth discoloration; positive, quickly abating reaction to cold stimulus is observed. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Partial crown
b. Plastic crown
c. Combined crown
*d. Dental inlay
e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown

116. A new dental polyclinic is being opened in the city There are to be 38 doctors in the dental surgery department. How many department heads should supervise this number of personnel according to the normatives?
a. 5
b. 1
c. 2
d. 4
*e. 3

117. A 6-year-old child complains of pain and edema in the upper right jaw, body temperature up to 37.9°C, and deterioration of general well-being. Symptom onset was 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue edema of buccal and infraorbital regions on the right. The crown of 54 is destroyed by 1/2, percussion is painful; the tooth previously had been treated for complicated caries. On the palatine side of the affected tooth area there is a painful infiltration with fluctuation in its center; the tissues over the infiltration are hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute serous periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54
b. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of 54
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
*e. Acute suppurative periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54

118. After extraction of tooth 27 the dental surgeon suspected that the maxillary sinus was perforated. To clarify this provisional diagnosis the doctor desided to conduct an oronasal communication test (Valsalva maneuver). What manipulations are necessary for this test?
a. Ask the patient to blow through the mouth, while observing the socket of 27
b. Ask the patient to inhale through the nose, pinch the nostrils together, and exhale through the mouth
c. Pinch the nostrils together to occlude the patient’s nose and ask the patient to blow through the mouth, while observing the socket of 27"""
*d. Pinch the nostrils together to occlude the patient’s nose and ask the patient to blow through the nose, while observing the socket of 27
e. Ask the patient to blow through the nose, while observing the socket of 27

119. A 38-year-old man needs to have his 12 tooth extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Infraorbital, palatal and incisor
b. Infraorbital
c. Infraorbital and palatal
d. Incisor
*e. Infraorbital and incisor

120. A 45-year-old patient after administration of local anaesthesia in preparation for oral surgery has suddenly felt unwell, developed increasing edema of laryngeal mucosa and respiration disorder. The dentist stopped the manipulations in the oral cavity. What type of asphyxia developed in the patient?
a. Dislocational
b. Asp iration
c. Obturative
*d. Stenotic
e. Valvular

121. What period of bite formation in a child can be normally characterized by physiological tremata and diastemata?
*a. Preparation for the change of dentition (4.5-6 years)
b. Changing occlusion
c. Permanent occlusion
d. It is always a sign of pathology
e. Formation of milk occlusion (6 months - 3 years)

122. A 6-year-old child was referred for extraction of the temporary lower central incisors due to changes in the occlusion. The teeth exhibit the 111 degree of mobility. What type of anesthesia would be optimal in this case?
a. Inhalation narcosis
b. Conduction anesthesia
*c. Application anesthesia
d. Intraosseous anesthesia
e. Infiltration anesthesia

123. A woman complains of a neoplasm in her sublingual area. The neoplasm makes eating and speaking difficult. In the sublingual area examination detects a soft-elastic neoplasm lcm in diameter with smooth surface and clear margins. The sign of fluctuation is noticeable on palpation. Oral mucosa is stretched tightly over the neoplasm and is blue-tinged and semi-transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mixed tumor of the submandibular gland
b. Hemangioma of the submandibular region
*c. Ranula of the sublingual gland
d. Calculous sialoadenitis
e. Adenolymphoma

124. A 45-year-old man came to the prosthodontic department to have a denture made for him. Before the preparation of the hard tissues of the intact teeth, the patient was given an infiltration anesthesia with 0.5% lidocaine solution. Several minutes later he developed depressed level of consciousness, his blood pressure dropped, convulsions started, and involuntary urination occurred. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Pain shock
c. Heart failure
d. Syncope
e. Collapse

125. During examination of schoolchildren, the orthodontist noticed that some of them present with strained orbicularis oris muscle. What dental appliance can be used for exercising of the orbicularis oris muscle?
a. Frankel functional regulator 111
b. Bruckl appliance
*c. Dass activator appliance
d. Andresen-Haupl activator appliance
e. Angle appliance

126. A 28-year-old man complains of pain in the infraorbital and parotid region on the left. On examination: hemorrhage occurs in the lower eyelid and conjunctiva of the left eye, there are signs of crepitation and step deformity of the eyesocket lower edge. The mouth opens by 1 cm. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Zygomatic bone fracture
b. Malar arch fracture
c. Left articular process fracture
d. Traumatic arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Hematoma of the infraorbital region

127. A 23-year-old man complains of gum bleeding when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively: the gums of the front lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen and bleeding when palpated. Oral and gingival mucosa in other areas are not affected. The occlusion is deep. The teeth are firm, except for the 41 and 31 (degree 1 mobility). X-ray shows resorption of the alveolar septum in the area of the 41, 42, 32, and 31 teeth up to 1/3 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage
*b. Localized periodontitis
c. Parodontosis, stage I
d. Generalized periodontitis, stage I
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

128. A child is 8 years old. There are complaints of overcrowded upper incisors. Objectively: the first molars closure is of Angle’s I class, frontal overbite is orthognathic. The 12 and 22 teeth erupt palatinally with space deficiency of 2/3 of the tooth crown. The 11 and 21 teeth are 10 mm each in cross-section. The child has inherited father’s facial type with prognathism and macrodontia of the central incisors. Choose the preventive treatment, considering this hereditary pathology:
a. Extraction of the 12 and 21 teeth to reduce the dental arch
b. Filing down of the 11 and 21 approximal surfaces to provide the space for the 12 and 22 teeth
c. Massage of the 12 and 21 teeth area to stimulate their eruption
d. Jaw expansion to provide the space for the 12 and 21 teeth
*e. Hotz serial extraction to reduce the dental arch

129. During preventive examination a 10- year-old child was found to have matt white spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth. The spots are located in the area of tooth cervix. Enamel surface in the affected area is undamaged and can be stained with methylene blue. Subjectively the child has no complaints. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Teeth sealing
b. ART technique
c. Preparation and filling
*d. Remineralization therapy
e. Impregnation method

130. After the inflammatory process in the parotid area a woman developed frequent pain attacks resembling electric current in her face on the right. The attacks last for 15-20 minutes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Tympanic plexus neuralgia
b. Exacerbation of chronic maxillary sinusitis
*c. Trigeminal neuralgia
d. Trigeminal neuritis
e. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis

131. A 26-year-old woman needs dental prosthetics. Objectively the crown of 16 is destroyed by 1/3. Its anatomical shape will be restored with a porcelain inlay. Direct method is chosen for inlay-making. What should be used to obtain the impression of the formed inlay cavity?
a. Thermoplastic materials
b. Solid crystal materials
*c. Gold or platinum foil
d. Silicone materials
e. Wax

132. A 36-year-old woman complains of dryness and peeling of her lower lip vermillion border. Both dryness and peeling have been observed for a month. Application of indifferent ointments was ineffective. Objectively the vermillion border of the lower lip is bright red, moderately infiltrated, and densely covered in white-gray scales, that cannot be removed without pain and bleeding. The lesion focus contains concave areas, while on the periphery there are patches of dull epithelium that look like irregular white stripes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Candidal cheilitis
b. Leukoplakia
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Exfoliative cheilitis
*e. Lupus erythematosus

133. A 43-year-old man came to the admission room. He complains of facial edema and enlarged upper lip and tongue. This condition developed approximately 40 minutes ago, when he took aspirin. Objectively the patient is anxious, his skin is of normal color, respiration is partially disturbed. The upper lip, eyelids, cheeks, tongue, and soft palate are swollen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lymphedema of the lips
b. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
c. Cheilitis glandularis
*d. Quincke edema
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

134. A 6-month-old child was diagnosed with bilateral bronchopneumonia and prescribed broad- spectrum antibiotics. The child is formula-fed and presents with maldigestion (dyspepsia). What pathologic changes can occur in the hard dental tissues in this case?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Hutchinson teeth
*c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Fournier teeth
e. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome

135. A 12-year-old girl complains of spontaneous pain in tooth 16 with short periods of remission (10-20 minutes) that developed 4 days ago. The pain increases at night and irradiates to the upper right jaw. Examination revealed a deep carious cavity in 16, the dentin is soft, the probing is painful at all points of the cavity floor, vertical percussion is slightly tender, the pain increases in response to thermal stimuli. EPT is 25 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute apical periodontitis
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
*d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

136. During the treatment of acute deep caries in 16 in an 18-year-old girl, the pulp chamber was accidentally perforated. Perforation is punctate and located in the area of a pulp horn. What treatment tactics would be advisable in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
*b. Biological approach
c. Devital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Insulating inlay and permanent filling

137. A 7.5-year-old practically healthy child complains of crown fracture and pain in the upper right incisor. Objectively 2/3 of crown of 11 is absent, the pulp is exposed and red; on probing it is acutely painful and bleeding; tooth percussion is painful. Tire trauma occurred 2 hours ago. What would be the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Devital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Biological approach
*e. Vital amputation

138. A 35-year-old patient undergoes treatment of chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth. The canal is to be filled using the warm gutta-percha vertical condensation technique. What instrument is needed for gutta-percha condensation?
a. Root needle
b. Spreader
*c. Plugger
d. Endodontic probe
e. K-file

139. An adolescent complains of reduced and painful mouth opening, difficulties when eating, and swelling in the left mandibular angle that developed after tooth 37 was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue swelling in the area of the left mandibular angle. Mouth opening is painful and reduced to 2.0 cm. Disturbed occlusion is observed. Palpation of the left mandibular angle is painful, the tissues are soft, bone crepitus is detected. ’’Indirect load to the chin” symptom is positive in the area of the left mandibular angle. The socket of the extracted tooth is packed with iodoform gauze. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Left mandibular angle fracture
b. Odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Mandibular periostitis on the left
d. Mandibular alveolar fracture
e. Anterior mandibular fracture

140. A 7-year-old child complains of pain and swelling in the left submandibular region. The swelling in this region developed 2 days ago. Objectively: the child is in a satisfactory condition, body temperature is of 37.3°C. The face is asymmetrical due to the soft tissue swelling in the left submandibular region. Palpation reveals a round formation 2x2 cm in size. The formation is mobile, painful, unattached to the skin. The 74 tooth is discolored, percussion is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Lateral cervical cyst
b. Acute suppurative odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
*c. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
d. Phlegmonous adenitis of the right submandibular region
e. Acute serous nonodontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region

141. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist to have her 25 tooth extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Unilateral infraorbital and palatal anesthesia
b. Unilateral tuberal and palatal anesthesia
c. Unilateral central anesthesia
*d. Unilateral tuberal, infraorbital, and palatal anesthesia
e. Unilateral infraorbital and incisor anesthesia

142. A 25-year-old man complains of incorrectly positioned maxillary left central incisor due to trauma sustained 2 months ago. Objectively tooth 21 is rotated around its axis into palatal position. What would be the most advisable treatment method for correction of this defect?
*a. Orthodontic treatment
b. Surgical treatment
c. Splinting followed by prosthetic treatment
d. Instrumental surgical treatment
e. -

143. A victim of a traffic accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. What measures should be taken to prevent complications in this case?
a. Excision of injured mucosal flaps
b. Fixation of the tongue to the patient’s collar
c. Removal of foreign bodies from the oral cavity
d. Tracheostomy and artificial pulmonary ventilation
*e. Fixation of the lower jaw and tongue with standard Entin’s head-chin strap

144. A 60-year-old man needs a removable partial denture for the upper jaw. Arrangement of the artificial teeth on the wax base was checked in the oral cavity of the patient. What is the next stage in the making of a removable partial denture?
a. Placing the plaster casts in an articulator
b. Measurement and fixation of the centric jaw relation
*c. Fitting and fixation of the removable partial dentures in the oral cavity
d. Final modelling of the denture base
e. Final polishing of the denture

145. A 55-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic to have a denture made for him. Tooth 11 is missing in the patient. Two days ago he was released from the inpatient unit after a case of myocardial infarction. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Make a clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
b. Temporarily refrain from making a denture
*c. Make a temporary removable denture
d. Perform implantation
e. Make a dental bridge with 12 and 21 as abutment teeth

146. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with ulcerative gingivitis. After processing the patient’s oral cavity with an antiseptic, the doctor applied anesthesia and removed dental plaque and necrotic coating. Final part of the medical appointment is the application of gingival dressing. What etiotropic drug should this dressing contain?
a. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
b. Methyluracil
*c. Metronidazole
d. Pimafucin (Natamycin)
e. Terrilytin

147. A 25-year-old man complains of a cavity in his lower left tooth, pain after eating sweet, sour, or solid food. Objectively in tooth 16 there is a deep carious cavity filled with light- colored softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful, pain stimulus is painful, but cold abates immediately after the stimulus is removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute focal pulpitis

148. Parents of a 2.5-year-old child complain of gradual destruction of the upper front teeth of their child for the last several months. Objectively there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the contact and vestibular surfaces of 52, 51, 61, and 62. The cavities are filled with softened pigmented dentin that can be easily removed with dental excavator. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic superficial caries
*e. Acute median caries

149. A 29-year-old man came to the surgery department of a dental hospital. He complains of painful facial swelling on the right that appeared 1.5-2 months ago and has been gradually increasing since then. Objectively mouth opening is unrestricted, the face is asymmetrical due to a swelling in the right parotid-masseteric region. The skin over the edema is hyperemic and swollen; palpation detects a painful infiltration 3 cm in size. Massage in this region results in discharge of clear saliva from the excretory duct of the right parotid salivary gland. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Acute suppurative parotitis on the right
b. Submasseteric abscess on the right
c. Furuncle of the right parotid-masseteric region
*d. Chronic suppurative lymphadenitis of the right parotid-masseteric region
e. Chronic interstitial parotitis on the right

150. An 18-year-old girl complains of pain in her parotid regions and general indisposition. Examination shows bilateral swelling of the parotid regions, painful mouth opening. In the oral cavity, mucosa near the openings of parotid salivary glands is hyperemic and swollen. There are signs of general intoxication: body temperature of 38°C and myalgia. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Phlegmon of the parotid-masseteric region
b. Acute suppurative lymphadenitis
*c. Acute epidemic parotitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis

151. A 20-year-old man complains of spontaneous pain attacks (5-7 minutes) in the area of 36 that occur for the last 24 hours. Objectively in 36 there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface. Probing is painful at one point, response to cold stimulus is painful, with an aftereffect that lasts for 5 minutes. Percussion is painless. X-ray shows root canals to be slightly curved, canal lumen is clearly visible. The tooth is planned to be used as an abutment for a dental bridge. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Biological approach
b. Devital amputation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Filling of the carious cavity
e. Vital amputation

152. A 60-year-old patient came to the maxillofacial inpatient department. He complains of pain, bleeding, and chewing problems. He has a history of mandibular trauma at the level of the central incisors. Objectively the traumatized place is swollen, mouth opening is unrestricted. He was diagnosed with medial mandibular fracture. Both jaws are edentulous. What splint would be optimal in tljis case?
a. Limberg gingival splint
b. Vankevych dentogingival splint
c. Gunning gingival splint
*d. Port gingival splint
e. Rudko appliance

153. A group of experts conducts epidemiologic investigation of certain age groups by severity of signs of periodontal damage and their need for treatment. What index allows to study these criteria?
a. PDI (Ramfjord)
b. PM A (Parma)
c. PI (Russel)
*d. CPITN (WHO)
e. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion)

154. A 18-year-old young man complains of bleeding and pain in his gums. The disease onset was 4 days ago. Objectively the skin is pale, body temperature is 38.5°C. Submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged, painful, non-fused with the surrounding tissues. The gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37 are hyperemic, ulcerated, and covered in necrotic deposit. Teeth are covered with soft dental plaque. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. -
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*d. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis

155. A 48-year-old patient has come to the hospital with complaints of defects in the paragingival area and slight sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively: there are hard tissue defects that resemble a wedge with smooth polished walls on precervical vestibular surface of the 23 and 24 teeth. Thermal test is slightly positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Endemic fluorosis
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Acute deep caries
d. Enamel erosion
*e. Cuneiform defect

156. A 7-year-old boy during primary examination was found to have a habit of sleeping with his fist under the cheek. What bite anomaly can develop due to this habit?
*a. Crossbite
b. Mesial bite
c. Deep bite
d. Open bite
e. Prognathism

157. During planned sanation of a 3-year- old child, a deep carious cavity filled with food debris and softened dentin is detected in tooth 54. After tooth preparation the pulp of 54 is bleeding, probing is sharply painful. To treat pulpitis by means of devital amputation, during the first visit it is necessary to use:
a. Iodoform paste
b. Calcium-containing paste
c. Dentin paste
d. Zinc-eugenol paste
*e. Paraformaldehyde paste

158. After adenotonsillectomia it is necessary to break the mouth breathing habit in a 4- year-old child. The orthodontist recommends application of an oral vestibular shield (Kerbitz’ vestibular plate). Vestibular shield facilitates training of the following muscle:
a. Medial pterygoid muscle
b. Masseter muscle
c. Temporal muscle
*d. Orbicular muscle
e. Lateral pterygoid muscle

159. A hit to the face has forced the upper central incisors of a 15-year-old boy to sink into the jaw to the half of their crown height . What treatment tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Transplantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, endodontic treatment
b. Dynamic observation, endodontic treatment of 11 and 21 if necessary
c. Extraction of 11 and 21, their replacement with dentures
d. Replantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, ligation
*e. Surgical repositioning of 11 and 21, teeth immobilization, endodontic treatment if necessary

160. An 11-year-old girl was diagnosed with chronic parenchymatous parotitis. What X- ray sign indicates this disease?
a. Fluctuation sign
b. Filling defect
*c. "Bunch of grapes" sign"
d. "String of pearls" sign"
e. "Leafless tree"sign"

161. A 6-year-old girl took paracetamol to treat a case of URTI two days ago, which resulted in the development of her present condition. The disease onset was acute with temperature increase up to 39.8°C. Objectively there are cockade-shaped maculopapular rashes on her face. The vermillion border is swollen, hyperemic, covered in massive brown crusts, and presents with bleeding cracks. Conjunctivitis is detected. Swollen and hyperemic oral mucosa presents with numerous erosions covered with fibrinous incrustations; the erosions are sharply painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
*c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Pemphigus
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

162. During preventive examination a patient was diagnosed with precancerous hyperkeratosis of the lower lip vermillion border. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Palliative treatment
b. No treatment is required
c. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + chemotherapy
*d. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues
e. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + close-focus roentgenotherapy

163. A removable partial laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for the patient. The central occlusion is determined and fixed. What stage is next?
a. Arrangement of artificial teeth
b. Determining the edges of the base
*c. Fitting the wax model of the denture in the oral cavity
d. Measuring the interalveolar height
e. Replacing wax with plastic

164. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 27. Vital extirpation is chosen as the treatment method. Amide anesthetic is to be used for tuberal and palatal anesthesia. What anesthetic solution needs to be administered in this case?
a. 10% lidocaine
b. 5% anaesthesin (benzocaine)
*c. 3% mepivastesin (mepivacaine)
d. 2% novocaine (procaine)
e. 2% dicain (tetracaine)

165. A removable full denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 75-year-old man. Objectively the alveolar process is slightly atrophied. Herbst tests are performed during fitting of an impression tray. When lips are stretched forwards the tray slips off. Where should the tray edge be shortened in this case?
a. From canine to canine on the lingual side
b. Along the mylohyoid line
*c. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
d. In the premolar area on the lingual side
e. From behind the mandibular tuberosity to the mylohyoid line

166. A 12-year-old boy is in the dental office to complete the treatment of chronic periodontitis exacerbation in the 36 tooth. There are no complaints. Objectively: occlusive dressing of the 36 tooth is intact; tooth percussion is painless; there are no pathologies of the mucosa surrounding the 36: palpation is painless. What material is the most advisable for root canal filling in this case?
a. Resorcinol-formalin paste
*b. Sealer with gutta-percha post
c. Phosphate cement
d. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
e. Calcium-containing paste

167. A 35-year-old man needs an adhesive dental bridge. Objectively tooth 15 is missing. Abutment teeth 14 and 16 are firm. Teeth crowns are of medium height. Dental equator is markedly visible. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. What will most likely be an abutment part of this adhesive denture?
a. Equator crowns
b. Stump inlays
c. Combined crowns
*d. Whole or perforated cast overlays
e. Full cast crowns

168. A 30-year-old man complains of lost dental filling on his upper right jaw. Objectively in tooth 16 there is a deep carious cavity filled with dense pigmented dentin. What dentin layer forms as the result of tooth irritation in the course of caries process?
a. Hybrid
b. Predentin
c. Primary
*d. Tertiary
e. Secondary

169. A 70-year-old man has edentulous maxilla. Objectively maxillary tuberosity and alveolar processes are completely atrophied; palatine vault is flat, its mucosal layer is moderately pliant. In this case the patient’s atrophic edentulous maxilla can be classified as:
a. Keller class III
b. Keller class II
c. Schroeder class II
d. -
*e. Schroeder class III

170. An 8-year-old boy complains of a dull pain in his lower right tooth. The pain appears in response to thermal stimuli and slowly abates after the stimuli are removed. Objectively on the approximal surface of tooth 46 there is a deep carious cavity. During necrectomy with a dental excavator, communication between the carious and dental cavities is detected. Probing of the communication area results in sharp pain and bleeding. What method of pulpitis treatment is recommended in this case?
a. Devital amputation
b. Vital extirpation
c. Biological approach
*d. Vital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

171. A 25-year-old man was diagnosed with acute deep caries of tooth 13, Black class V Photopolymer composite material is planned to be used for aesthetical restoration of tooth. What material should be used as a lining for the floor of the carious cavity in this case?
a. Dentin paste
b. Iodoform paste
*c. Calcium-containing paste
d. Devitalizing paste
e. Resorcin-formalin paste

172. A 10-year-old boy complains of acute pain attacks in the area of his upper left teeth. The toothache persisted for a night. Objective examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 26 tooth within parapulpar dentin. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity floor. Markedly positive reaction to cold water stimulus is observed. Select the most likely diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. -
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

173. A 46-year-old man needs a classic 2-stage surgical installation of implants into the upper jaw. How long should be the interval between stages 1 and 2?
a. 3 months
*b. 3-6 months
c. 1 month
d. 0.5 months
e. 1.5 months

174. The maxillofacial surgery unit received a patient with complaints of inability to close his mouth. This condition occurred when the patient was biting an apple. Objectively there is a frightened expression on the patient’s face, the mouth is open wide, the chin is displaced to the left, salivation is observed. Palpation through the external acoustic meatus detected no movements of the right articular head. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Right temporomandibular joint dislocation
b. Bilateral temporomandibular joint dislocation
c. Fracture of the mandibular process
d. Acute temporomandibular arthritis
e. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome

175. A 46-year-old man, a teacher, complains of lower teeth mobility that impedes the process of biting. Objectively the dentition is uninterrupted, front teeth demonstrate the II degree of mobility. X-ray shows straight and filled root canals of 32, 31. 41, and 42. What appliance will stabilize front teeth while retaining their aesthetic appearance?
a. Removable segmented splint for the front teeth
b. Semicrown splint
c. Splint with embrasure clasps
d. Cap splint
*e. Mamlok’s dental splint

176. A 14-year-old boy complains of rapid wearing-off of tooth crowns. Objectively: tooth crowns are worn-off by 1/3. Enamel easily chips off and is pale gray in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Focal hypoplasia
d. Fluorosis
*e. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome

177. During his shift a dentist of the prosthodontics unit has consulted and examined the patient, checked the crowns, installed dental bridges, measured centric jaw relation, and made necessary corrections to the removable dentures. What is the normal workload of a dentist per shift and per month measured in arbitrary units of labor intensity (AU) in a five-day work week and according to the normatives for provision of healthcare to the adults?
a. 5 AU -105 AU
*b. 6 AU-126 AU
c. 9 AU - 189 AU
d. 8 AU - 168 AU
e. 7 AU- 147 AU

178. Parents of a 5-year-old child came to the dentist for sanation of the child’s oral cavity. Objectively on the masticatory surfaces of teeth 54, 64, 74, 75, and 85 there are carious cavities within the softened mantle dentin. The child is anxious and misbehaves. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Deep fluoridation
b. Impregnation treatment
c. Preventive filling
*d. ART technique
e. Invasive sealing

179. A 22-year-old man is referred for extraction of tooth 36. In the office of the dental surgeon before the anestehesia was given to him he felt weakness and developed tinnitus and visual blackout. Objectively the face is pale and covered in cold sweat, blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg. For several seconds the patient was unconscious. What complication occurred during the visit to the dentist?
a. Collapse
b. Angina pectoris
*c. Fainting (Syncope)
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Epileptic seizure

180. A 35-year-old man suffers from localized periodontitis of the front teeth on his lower jaw. Objectively on the upper jaw his dentition is uninterrupted, while on the lower jaw teeth 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 are missing, other teeth present with mobility of the II degree, tremata, and diastema. What tactics should a prosthodontist choose in this case?
a. Temporary splinting of the teeth on the lower jaw
b. Restore the height of the occlusion with a partial removable laminar denture
*c. Orthodontic treatment followed by splinting and prosthesis-making
d. Restore the height of the occlusion with a clasp- retained (bugel) denture
e. Splinting of the mobile teeth followed by prosthesis-making

181. A 53-year-old patient complains of an ulcer on the lateral surface of the tongue. The ulcer appeared 6 months ago in the result of a trauma caused by sharp tip of the 37 tooth metal crown. A dentist replaced the crown with the one of better quality and prescribed keratoplastic drugs. Despite these measures the ulcer continues to grow. Lately there has been pain during talking, chewing, swallowing; sometimes the pain irradiates to the pharynx. Objectively: on the lateral surface of the tongue there is a painful ulcer with uneven raised dense margins and lumpy floor covered with grayish necrotic coating. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Traumatic ulcer
*b. Cancer of the tongue lateral surface
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

182. A 43-year-old woman complains of mobility and displacement of her upper front teeth. Objectively: dental formula is 17 16 15 14 13 12 11|21 22 23 24 25 26 27|47 46 45 44 43 42 41|31 32 33 34 35 36 37.Teeth 12 11 | 21 22 are slanted towards the vestibular side, diastema and tremata are observed, I-II degree teeth mobility is detected. Select the orthodontic appliance for correction of teeth misalignment as a part of complex treatment of periodontal disease:
a. Schwartz appliance
b. Katz crown
c. Bynin appliance
*d. Palatal plate with vestibular arch
e. Palatal plate with inclined plane

183. A 13.5-year-old girl complains of swollen gums that bleed when she brushes her teeth. This condition has been observed for the last half a year. Objectively gingival mucosa surrounding the front teeth of the upper jaw is swollen and cyanotic. Interdental papillae are round, dense, and enlarged, they cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height. Teeth 13 and 23 are positioned vestibularly. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Generalized periodontitis, degree 1
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Localized periodontitis, degree I

184. The parents of a 3-year-old child came to the orthodontist. They complain of an aesthetical defect in the teeth of their child. The child has a history of tongue sucking habit. In the front region there is a vertical fissure 5 mm. What orthodontic appliance is indicated for the treatment of this pathology?
a. Friel plate
b. Kerbitz plate
c. Schonherr plate
d. Dass activator appliance
*e. Kraus plate

185. After a clasp-retained (bugel) maxillary denture is made, it is necessary to assess the quality of the newly-made construction. Width of the denture arch should be:
a. 10-12 mm
b. 1.5-2 mm
c. 3-5 mm
*d. 5-8 mm
e. 12-15 mm

186. A 35-year-old woman has complaints of cosmetic defects of the front upper teeth crowns. The defects have been aggravating for the last 10 years. The patient suffers from unpleasant sensations when brushing her teeth, and when chemical stimuli are applied. Objective examination revealed defects localized in the enamel of the front upper teeth vestibular surface. The defects are oval, saucer-shaped, and have clear margins. Response to probing and cold stimuli was positive. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Enamel hypoplasia
c. Chemical necrosis of the tooth
d. Hyperesthesia of tooth hard tissues
*e. Enamel erosion

187. Objective examination of a 10-year-old child revealed slight hyperemia, infiltration, and dryness of the whole surface of the vermillion border. Architectonics of the lips is disturbed. Dryness and contracted sensation are observed in the lips, especially during cold seasons. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
d. Cheilitis of microbial origin
*e. Meteorological cheilitis

188. A non-removable porcelain-fused-to- metal dental bridge is being made for a 35- year-old woman. Two-layer impressions were obtained using ’’Silafex” silicone material. The impression were sent for disinfection. What antiseptic should be used to process the impressions?
a. 0.5% hydrogen peroxide solution
b. 1.5% sodium bicarbonate solution
c. 70% alcohol solution
d. 3% chloramine solution
*e. 0.5% hypochlorite sodium solution

189. A 38-year-old man, an arc welder, is a chain smoker. He came to the dentist to have a denture made for him. Howerver, in the middle of his lower lip against the background of unchanged vermillion border there is a gray-white polygonal lesion 6x4 mm with clear margins. The lesion is covered with tightly attached small scales and is level with the vermillion border (neither protruding nor retracted). Palpation of the lesion focus is painless, the lesion has no thickened base; lateral palpation detects thickened surface of the lesion. Regional lymph nodes are unchanged. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Lichen ruber planus, hyperkeratotic form
b. Cancer of the lower lip
*c. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis
d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Verrucous precancer

190. A 2.5-year-old child has fever up to 38.5°C, low appetite, rashes in the oral cavity. The disease onset was 3 days ago. Objectively: the skin of the perioral area is covered in scarce vesicles with clear content. Within the oral cavity on the buccal and lingual mucosa there are sharply painful erosions, 2-3 mm in size, with white coating and hyperemic crown. The gums are swollen, hyperemic. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Stomatitis with the background of chicken- pox
b. Stomatitis with the background of infectious mononucleosis
c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

191. The 15 tooth must be extracted. Tire tooth crown is retained. What instrument should be used in this case?
a. Right-sided forceps with S-shaped handles
b. Bayonet forceps
c. Left-sided forceps with S-shaped handles
*d. Forceps with S-shaped handles
e. Straight forceps

192. A 27-year-old woman complains of an aesthetical defect in the area of her upper centra] incisors. She was diagnosed with chronic deep caries, Black class IV Aesthetic restoration of teeth 11 and 21 is planned. What material has optimal combination of strength and aesthetical properties?
a. Liquid composites
b. Microfilled composites
c. Compomers
d. Macrofilled composites
*e. Hybrid composites

193. An 18-year-old young man complains of tooth sensitivity in his lower left jaw when eating sweet food. Examination shows enamel defects in the fissures on the masticatory surface of tooth 37. The enamel there is dull white and fragile when (chips off) probed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries of tooth 37
b. Chronic initial caries of tooth 37
c. Acute initial caries of tooth 38
*d. Acute superficial caries of tooth 37
e. Chronic superficial caries of tooth 37

194. On objective examination a 59-year-old man with the edentulous mandible presents with bone protrusions and mobile areas of the alveolar crest. To ensure proper fixation of the denture and even load distribution the following functional impression should be made:
*a. Differentiated
b. Combined
c. Complete anatomical
d. Compression
e. Decompression

195. A 54-year-old patient is prescribed full cast porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridges for the upper and lower jaws. What type of impression material should be chosen in this case?
a. Thermoplastic
b. Alginate
c. Plaster
*d. Silicone
e. Zinc oxide eugenol

196. How often should a dentist’s office be thoroughly cleaned?
a. No less than once a year
b. No less than once a month
c. No less than twice a week
d. No less than once every 2 weeks
*e. No less than once a week

197. A porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for tooth 11 is being made for the patient. The tooth will be left vital. What measures should be taken during treatment to prevent pulpitis in this tooth?
a. Physical therapy
b. Calcium preparations
c. Anti-inflammatory preparations
*d. Pharmaceutical crown
e. Fluorine preparations

198. An 8-year-old girl complains of bleeding gums. The child has diabetes mellitus. Objectively the interdental papillae between the teeth of the upper and lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen, and cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height. The teeth exhibit mobility of the I degree. What investigation technique is necessary for diagnosis-making in this case?
*a. X-ray
b. Vacuum test
c. Rheoparodontography
d. Stomatoscopy
e. PMA index

199. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with acute odontogenic mandibular periostitis on the right originating from tooth 74. What treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. Endodontic treatment of 74, pharmacotherapy
*b. Extraction of 74, periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
c. Endodontic treatment of 74, periosteotomy
d. Periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
e. -

200. A 12-year-old boy, due to trauma of the 44-th and 45-th teeth area, suffers from the following: pathologic displacement of the mandibular alveolar process; rupture of the alveolar process mucosa. What additional examination is necessary to specify the diagnosis?
*a. X-ray radiography of mandibula in frontal and lateral projections
b. X-ray radiography of cranium in axillary projection
c. -
d. 1 omography of mandibula
e. X-ray radiography of mandibula in frontal and Parma projection

