1. An excess of concentrated ammonium hydroxide is a group reagent for the cations of the VI analytical group (acid-base classification) Co2+, Ni2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Hg2+. In this case the following substances are formed:
a. Hydroxides of the cations insoluble in the excess of ammonium hydroxide
*b. Water-soluble ammonia complexes
c. Stained, water-insoluble compounds
d. Hydroxides of acid-soluble cations
e. Hydroxides of alkali-soluble cations

2. Both external and internal indicators are used in the following titrimetric method of analysis
a. Argentometry
*b. Nitritometry
c. Chelatometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Permanganatometry

3. A chemist in analytical laboratory needs to standardize solution of sodium hydroxide. What primary standard solution can be applied for this purpose?
a. Chloride acid
b. Acetate acid
*c. Oxalic acid
d. Sodium tatraborate
e. Sodium chloride

4. Choose reagents for detection of nitrite ions in presence of nitrate ions contained in a pharmaceutical under examination:
a. Iron (II) chloride
b. Iron (III) chloride
c. Iron (II) sulfate (diluted) and potassium iodide
d. Iron (III) sulfate (concentrated) and potassium bromide
*e. Antipyrin and chlorohydrogen acid (diluted)

5. A chemist in an analytical laboratory needs to standardize a sodium hydroxide solution. What primary standard solution can be used for this purpose?
a. Sodium chloride
*b. Oxalic acid
c. Chlorohydrogen acid
d. Acetic acid
e. Sodium tetraborate

6. Dimethyl glyoxime entered into reaction with a solution that contained cations of the IV analytical group (acid-base classification). The deposition turned crimson. What cation caused this analytical effect?
a. Mercury cation (II)
b. Cadmium cation (II)
c. Cobalt cation (II)
*d. Nickel cation (II)
e. Copper cation (II)

7. Thiocyanatometry is based upon using of secondary standard solution of potassium thiocyanate that should be standardized according to the following standard solution of:
*a. Silver nitrate
b. Sulfuric acid
c. Copper (II) nitrate
d. Iron (II) sulfate
e. Hydrochloric acid

8. Concentration of potassium dichromate in a solution was determined by means of iodometry. Name a titrant of iodometric method for determination of strong oxidizer:
*a. Sodium thiosulfate
b. Potassium iodide
c. Potassium bromate
d. Potassium permanganate
e. Sodium hydroxide

9. Solution of potassium chromate was added to a solution under examination. As a result of it some yellow deposition settled down. This deposition cannot be dissolved in acetic acid. This means that the solution under examination contains cations of:
*a. Barium
b. Sodium
c. Magnesium
d. Cobalt
e. Calcium

10. Solution of Trilon B is the titrant in chelatometry. It makes complex compounds with metal cations irrespective of their valency with the following proportion:
a. 1:3
b. 2:1
c. 3:1
*d. 1:1
e. 1:2

11. What indicator is used for the quantitative determination of sodium carbonate in a preparation by the method of acid-base titration?
a. Diphenylamine
b. Ferroin
c. Murexide
d. Methylene blue
*e. Methyl orange

12. Concentration of ethyl alcohol in some drug formulations and tinctures can be determined by means of refractometry. For this purpose the following characteristic is measured:
a. Angle of rotation of plane of polarized light
b. Light ray angle
c. Angle of light refraction
*d. Index of solution refraction
e. Angle of total internal reflection of light ray

13. Quantitative determination of pharmaceutical substances can be done by means of acidimetry. Its titrant is the secondary standard solution of hydrochloric acid. According to which compound the precise concentration of hydrochloric acid can be determined?
*a. Sodium tetraborate
b. Potassium dichromate
c. Magnesium sulphate
d. Sodium thiosulfate
e. Oxalic acid

14. For determination of nitrate ions diphenylamine was added to the solution under examination. The following changes were observed:
a. Generation of brown gas
b. Emergence of a typical smell
c. Generation of yellow deposition
d. Generation of blue deposition
*e. Generation of blue solution

15. Concentrated nitric acid and crystalline lead dioxide were added to a solution under examination. The solution turned crimson. This analytical effect indicates presence of:
a. Tantum (II)
*b. Manganese (II)
c. Iron (III)
d. Bismuth (III)
e. Chromium (III)

16. Determination of chlorides in potable water can be done by means of mercurymetry. The following solution is used as a titrant:
a. HgSO4
b. Hg2Cl2
c. Hg2(NO3)2
d. HgCl2
*e. Hg(NO3)2

17. Iodometric determination of formaldehyde in formaline can be done by the back titration. Iodine surplus is titrated with the standard solution of:
a. Sodium carbonate
b. Sodium phosphate
c. Sodium nitrate
d. Sodium sulphate
*e. Sodium thiosulphate

18. Titrant of chelatometry method is trilon B solution that forms complex compounds with metal cations irrespective of their valence at a ratio of:
*a. 1:1
b. 1:2
c. 3:1
d. 2:1
e. 1:3

19. Name the type of reaction that takes place during detection of ascorbic acid in a preparation by iodometric method:
a. Acylation
b. Precipitation
c. Complexing
*d. Oxidation-reduction
e. Neutralization

20. During quantitative estimation of glucose by polarimetric method the following factor is measured:
a. Rate of polarized beam absorption by a solution
b. Coefficient of light refraction
*c. Angle of rotation of polarized beam plane
d. Beam dispersion by a solution
e. Optical density of a solution

21. Sodium arsenate solution can be distinguished from the arsenite solution by means of the following reagent:
a. Potassium nitrate
b. Potassium sulphate
*c. Magnesia mixture
d. Sodium chloride
e. Sodium fluoride

22. Excess of ammonia was added to a solution under examination. The solution turned bright blue. This indicates presence of the following ions:
*a. Copper
b. Lead
c. Mercury (II)
d. Bismuth
e. Silver

23. Quantitative determination of calcium chloride is carried out by method of direct chelatometric titration. Choose an indicator for fixation of the titration endpoint:
a. Methyl red
b. Phenolphthalein
*c. Eriochrome black T
d. Eosin
e. Starch

24. Determination of sodium and potassium chlorides in pharmaceuticals can be done by means of:
*a. Argentometry, Mohr method
b. Alkalimetry
c. Chelatometry
d. Acidimetry
e. Reduction-oxidation titration

25. The solid residue obtained after evaporation of the sample solution makes the colorless flame of burner turn yellow, and when watched through a blue glass, it looks purple. What cations are present in the solid residue?
a. Na+ , Sr2+
b. Сa2+, K+
*c. Na+, K+
d. Li+, Ba2+
e. Na+, Ca2+

26. Filter paper impregnated with solution of cobalt (II) nitrate and a solution under examination makes blue ash when burned down. This is the evidence of presence of the following ions:
a. Sb3+
b. Zn2+
c. Cr3+
d. Ni2+
*e. Al3+

27. After a solution had been heated with (NH4)2S2O8 in presence of AgNO3, it turned crimson. What ions were present in the solution?
a. Cu2+
*b. Mn2+
c. Fe2+
d. Fe3+
e. Co2+

28. A solution under examination was added to the solution of FeSO4 in presence of concentrated H2SO4. Formation of a brown ring indicates presence of:
*a. Nitrate ions
b. Carbonate ions
c. Phosphate ions
d. Oxalate ions
e. Acetate ions

29. Specify standard substances used for standardization of titrant solutions (NaOH, KOH) in the alkalimetric method:
*a. Oxalic and succinic acids
b. Formic and acetic acids
c. Sulphanilic and salicylic acids
d. Sulphanilic and oxalic acids
e. Acetic and succinic acids

30. 1 M sulphuric acid solution was added to the solution under study. This resulted in formation of white sediment that was soluble in the alkalies. This indicated that the solution contains:
a. Mercury (I) cations
*b. Plumbum cations
c. Barium cations
d. Calcium cations
e. Argentum cations

31. Cations of the third analytical group (acid-base classification) can be isolated in course of systematic analysis by means of the following group reagent:
*a. 1 M solution of sulfate acid in presence of ethanol
b. 0,1 M solution of sodium carbonate
c. 1 M solution of ammonium carbonate
d. 0,1 M solution of ammonium oxalate
e. 1 M solution of potassium chromate

32. A solution contains cations of zinc and aluminum. Specify the reagent that allows to detect cations of zinc in this solution:
a. Excess of 6M sodium hydroxide in presence of hydrogen peroxide
b. Sulfuric acid solution
c. Sodium hydroxide solution
d. Cobalt nitrate Co(NO3)2
*e. Potassium hexacyanoferrate (II) solution

33. In a solution containing cations of copper (II) and zinc, the copper cations can be identified by means of the excess of the following reagent:
a. 2M sulfuric acid solution
b. 2M hydrochloric acid solution
c. 2M solution of ammonium carbonate
*d. 6M ammonia solution
e. 6M potassium hydroxide solution

34. Solution of potassium iodide was added to the solution acidated with sulfate acid that contained anions of the third analytical group. Release of free iodine is observed. What anion are present in the solution?
a. Acetate ions
*b. Nitrite ion
c. Sulfate ion
d. Carbonate ion
e. Bromide ions

35. A solution contaning anions of the second analytical group has been blended with the solution of argentum nitrate. This resulted in formation of black precipitate insoluble in the ammonia solution and soluble in the diluted nitric acid at heating. What anions are present in the solution?
*a. Sulphide ions
b. Chloride ions
c. Arsenite ions
d. Bromide ions
e. Iodide ions

36. Argentum nitrate solution was added to a solution containing anions of the second analytical group. This resulted in formation of light-yellow sediment that was insoluble in the nitric acid and partly soluble in the ammonia solution. What anions were present in the solution?
*a. Bromide ions
b. Chloride ions
c. Arsenite ions
d. Sulphide ions
e. Iodide ions

37. During gravimetric determination of mass fraction of sulfate ions in the magnesium sulfate preparation precipitation is performed by means of barium chloride solution. Precipitated barium sulfate should be rinsed with:
*a. Diluted solution of sulfate acid
b. Solution of barium chloride
c. Solution of hydrochloride acid
d. Solution of sodium sulfate
e. Distilled water

38. A medicament comprises sodium bicarbonate and sodium chloride. What method is used for quantitative determination of sodium bicarbonate?
a. Complexometric titration
b. Coulometric titration
c. Precipitation titration
d. Redox titration
*e. Acid-base titration

39. Concentration of magnesium sulfate in a drug can be determined by complexometric titration. Choose an indicator to detect the end point of titration:
a. Methyl orange
b. Phenolphtalein
*c. Chromogen black
d. Eosin
e. -

40. Choose a pair of electrodes for potentiometric pH measurement of a solution:
a. Quinhydrone and antimonial
b. Calomel and silver chloride
*c. Glass and silver chloride
d. Mercury sulphate and silver chloride
e. Glass and antimonial

41. The mass percentage of ascorbic acid can be determined by the cerimetric analysis in the presence of the following redox indicator:
a. Eosin
b. Methylene red
*c. Ferroin
d. Fluorescein
e. Methylene orange

42. ,1 M solution of potassium permanganate is used as a titrant in permanganatometry. The solution is prepared like the secondary standard solution and standardized according to:
*a. Ammonia oxide
b. Sodium chloride
c. Calcium oxide
d. Sodium carbonate
e. Potassium dichromate

43. Specify the reaction conditions (medium, to) in the standardization of potassium permanganate solution by sodium oxalate solution:
*a. Acidic, heating
b. Alkaline, heating
c. Neutral, cooling
d. Acidic, cooling
e. Neutral, heating

44. Specify the standardized solutions used for direct and back titration of reducing agents in the iodometric method:
*a. I2, Na2S2O3
b. I2, KI
c. K2Cr2O7, I2
d. KMnO4, KI
e. K2Cr2O7, Na2S2O3

45. Determination of medications containing cations of magnesium and calcium is done by trilonometric titration. What type of chemical reaction takes place in this case?
a. Oxidation-reduction
b. Alkylation
c. Precipitation
*d. Complexation
e. Electrophylic substitution

46. Halide ions in drugs are determined by titration based upon the reaction of:
a. Oxidation-reduction
b. Acid-base
c. Complexing
*d. Precipitation
e. Substitution

47. Name a standard solution of iodometric determination of reducing agents (direct titration)?
a. Solution of Na2S2O3
b. Solution of KMnO4
*c. Solution of I2
d. Solution of K2Cr2O7
e. Solution of KI

48. Specify the standard solution for the iodometric determination of reducing agents (direct titration):
*a. I2 solution
b. Na2S2O3 solution
c. KI solution
d. K2Cr2O7 solution
e. KMnO4 solution

49. Choose a pair of electrodes for FeSO4 determination by method of potentiometric titration:
*a. Platinum and chlorosilver
b. Chingidron and zink
c. Antimonial and silver
d. Hydrogen and glass
e. Copper and glass

50. The fourth group of cations includes the cations Al3+, Sn2+, Sn(IV), As(V), As(III), Zn2+, C3+. The group reagent for the fourth group of cations is the solution of:
a. N2S2O4
b. H2SO4, N2O2
c. HCl
d. NH3, N2O2
*e. NaOH, N2O2

51. During the qualitative analysis under the influence of group reagent NaOH upon the aluminium ions the following substance is produced:
a. Aluminium hydroxide
b. Basic aluminium salts
c. Aluminium oxide
*d. Sodium hexahydroxoaluminate
e. Sodium metaaluminate

52. During the quantitative analysis carried out under the primary conditions, a specific reagent to Fe3+ cations is K4[Fe(CN)6]. Their interaction gives a precipitate of the following colour:
a. White
b. Red
c. Black
*d. Blue
e. Brown

53. In the qualitative analysis which involves precipitation of sulphates of the third analytical group cations (Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+) the solubility of sulphates can be reduced by adding:
*a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Benzene
c. Amyl alcohol
d. Chloroform
e. Distilled water

54. In a qualitative analysis, when an excess of the group reagent (NH3 solution) reacts with the cations of the sixth analytical group (Cu2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Cd2+, Hg2+), the following compounds are formed:
a. Basic metal salts
b. Metal hydroxides
*c. Metal ammine complexes
d. Aqua complexes of metals
e. Hydroxocomplexes of metals

55. Sodium fluoride is one of the components of the drugs used in the treatment of dental caries. NaF reacts with the following compound:
a. NaCl
b. CO2
*c. H2SO4
d. KI
e. CH3COOH

56. The most common technology in pharmaceutical production is maintaining constant temperature and pressure. What is this process called?
a. Isochoric
b. Isothermal
c. Isochoric-isothermal
d. Isobaric
*e. Isobaric-isothermal

57. Some medications are colloidal solutions. What size of the colloidal particles is typical for the colloidal dispersion?
a. 10-5 – 10-7 м
b. 10-5 - 10-3 м
c. > 10-3 м
*d. 10-7 – 10-9 м
e. 10-10 – 10-11 м

58. The ability of reagent to ensure a stable analytical effect in the interaction with the analyzed substance is characterized by:
a. -
*b. Reaction sensitivity
c. Reaction specificity
d. Reaction selectivity
e. Reagent amount

59. To maintain a certain level of pH-medium, the buffer solutions are used. Specify a composition of substances that DOES NOT EXHIBIT buffer properties:
a. HCOOH+HCOONa
b. NaH2PO4+Na2HPO4
c. CH3COOH+CH3COONa
d. NH4Cl+NH3 H2O
*e. NaOH+NaCl

60. Quantitative analysis of zinc salts is performed by method of trilonometry. What indicator is used for this purpose?
*a. Eriohrome black-T
b. Methyl black
c. Thymol blue
d. Potassium dichromate
e. Phenolphtalein

61. During analysis of cations of the IV analytic group Zn cations can be detected under certain conditions with the following reagent:
a. Ammonia solution
b. Alkali metal carbonates
c. Dimethylglyoxime
*d. Dithizone
e. Alkali

62. Specify the titration method, in which a standardized titrant solution is gradually added to the solution under study until a titration endpoint is reached:
*a. Direct titration
b. Indirect titration
c. Residue titration
d. Substitution titration
e. Back titration

63. What analytical effect is observed after fixing the endpoint during the titration by Mohr method?
a. White precipitate
b. Yellow precipitate
c. Red colour of solution
d. Yellow colour of solution
*e. Brick-red precipitate

64. What standard solution (titrant) is used in Folgards method of direct titration?
a. Silver nitrate
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Ammonium thiocyanate
d. Potassium chromate
e. Potassium dichromate

65. What solution can be determined by photocolorimetric method by self-absorbance?
a. Potassium phosphate
*b. Potassium chromate
c. Potassium sulphate
d. Potassium chloride
e. Potassium nitrate

66. While detecting Co2+ ions in presence of Fe3+ the following ions should be added to the solution in order to mask Fe3+ ions:
a. Sulphate ions
*b. Fluoride ions
c. Bromide ions
d. Chloride ions
e. Nitrite ions

67. Nitrite ions in presence of nitrate ions can be detected by means of:
*a. Crystalline antipyrine in presence of dilute HCl
b. Dimethylglyoxime
c. Diphenylcarbazone
d. Crystalline iron (III) sulfate
e. Crystalline sodium thiosulfate

68. You need to prepare ammoniac buffer solution. For this purpose you should add the following solution to the water solution of ammonia:
a. Solution of potassium chloride
b. Solution of sodium sulfate
c. Solution of chloride acid
d. Solution of sulfate acid
*e. Solution of ammonium chloride

69. What saturated heated solution is used for transformation of sulphates BaSO4, SrSO4, CaSO4 to carbonates during the systematic analysis?
a. CO2
*b. Na2CO3
c. (NH4)2CO3
d. CaCO3
e. MgCO3

70. Which indicatorless method enables quantitative determination of iron (II) content?
a. Nitritometry
*b. Permanganatometry
c. Argentometry
d. Chelatometry
e. Iodometry

71. Choose a pair of substances that can be used for standardization of 0,1 M solution of KMnO4:
a. Na2C2O4, CH3COOH
*b. Na2C2O4, H2C2O4
c. CH3COOK, H2C2O4
d. K2CO3, CH3COOH
e. KHC2O4, HCOOH

72. Permanganatometry enebles determination of H2O2 in high-acidity medium. What acid can be used for production of such medium?
a. HNO3
b. HCl
*c. H2SO4
d. CH3COOH
e. H3PO4

73. It is required to determine the amount of sodium salicylate in a solution. What titrimetric method can be applied for the quantitative determination of aromatic compounds?
a. Mercurimetry
b. Argentometry
c. Chelatometry
*d. Bromometry
e. Cerimetry

74. You are given 0,05 M solution of versene. What is standard substance for standardization of this solution?
a. Potassium dichromate
*b. Metallic zinc
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Sodium tetraborate
e. Oxalic acid

75. For the quantitative analysis of ethanol the gas chromatography was used. Which parameter was measured?
a. Peak width
b. Peak width at half height
c. Retention time
d. Retention volume
*e. Peak height or area

76. Coulometry is based upon measurement of electrics that is spent on electrode reaction. What law underlies coulometric method?
a. Bouguer-Lambert-Beer law
*b. Faraday law
c. Newton law
d. Archimedes principle
e. Stokes law

77. In order to determine mass fraction of calcium in a pharmaceutical preparation, gravimetric method was applied. Ammonium oxalate solution was used as a precipitating agent. What is the gravimetric form in this case?
*a. Calcium chloride
b. Monohydrous calcium oxalate
c. Calcium hydroxide
d. Calcium carbonate
e. Anhydrous calcium oxalate

78. Analytical indication of effect of potassium iodide solution upon unstained oxidizing anions in presence of chloroform is:
a. Origination of deposition and its solution in reagent excess
*b. Brown stain of free iodine
c. Change of aggregate state
d. Settling down of white deposition
e. Emission of gas bubbles

79. Dosage forms produced as coarse dispersion systems with the liquid dispersion medium and the solid phase are called:
a. Emulsion
b. Powder
c. Foam
*d. Suspension
e. Aerosol

80. Specify the relevant indicators for fixation of the titration endpoint when using nitritometric method:
a. Starch solution
b. Diphenylamine
c. Methylene blue
d. Methylene orange
*e. Tropeolin 00+methylene blue

81. Choose a reduction-oxidation method for the quantitative determination of iron (II) salts in a solution that contains hydrochloric acid:
a. Ascorbinometry
*b. Dichromatometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Iodometry
e. Nitritometry

82. During thin-layer chromatography of novocaine, the developed plate represented a stain 3 cm away from the start line, and the length of solvent front was 10 cm. What is the Rf value of novocaine?
a. 0,7
*b. 0,3
c. 0,5
d. 0,4
e. 0,6

83. A compound undeer examination contains cations of iron (III) and copper (II). What group reagent can separate these cations?
a. Concentrated solution of hydrochloride acid
b. Solution of sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide
*c. Concentrated ammonia solution
d. Solution of sodium hydroxide
e. Concentrated solution of sulfuric acid

84. In order to choose an indicator during the acid-bace titration a titration curve is made which is the dependence of:
a. pH solution from the volume of the solution under analysis
b. pH solution from the concentration of the added titrant
*c. pH solution from the volume of the added titrant
d. Concentration of the solution under analysis from pH solution
e. pH solution from the temperature

85. What method of titrimetric analysis can be applied for the quantitative determination of sulphuric acid by means of the potassium hydroxide solution?
a. Oxidation-reduction
b. Acidimetry
*c. Alkalimetry
d. Precipitation
e. Complexation

86. You have to carry out a qualitative analysis. What substance will originate from chromium ions under the influence of group reagent excess (solution of sodium hydroxide) upon cations of the IV analytical group?
a. Chromium (II) oxide
*b. Sodium hexahydroxochromate (III)
c. Chromium (III) oxide
d. Chromium (III) hydroxide
e. Chromium (II) hydroxide

87. Choose the reagents for detection of the sulphate ions in a solution containing carbonate, sulphate and phosphate ions:
a. CaCl2, NH4OH
b. AgNO3, HNO3
c. Ba(NO3)-2, NaOH
d. BaCl2, H2O
*e. Ba(NO3)2, HCl

88. Emulsions of 0.1 - 74% dispersed-phase volume relate to:
*a. Concentrated
b. Highly concentrated
c. O/W type
d. WO type
e. Diluted

89. A composition under examination contains ions of Cl-, Brl- and I- in equimolar quantities. The sequence of precipitate formation in course of argentometric titration will be determined by:
a. Value of oxidation-reduction potentials
b. Value of corresponding ion mobility
c. Ionic strength of solution
*d. Solubility product of the corresponding silver halogenides
e. Way of titration - either back or direct

90. The molar mass of calcium hydroxide equivalent (M(Ca(OH)2) = 74 g/mol) is:
a. 148 g/mol
*b. 37 g/mol
c. 32 g/mol
d. 19 g/mol
e. 74 g/mol

91. Choose an appropriate indicator for fixation of titration end point in method of bromatometry:
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Methyl blue
c. Tropeolin 00
*d. Methyl red
e. Starch

92. Choose a pair of titrants for the qualitative determination of ammonia in a solution by the method of back titration:
a. HCl, H2SO4
b. NaOH, KCl
c. H2SO4, K2SO4
*d. HCl, NaOH
e. KOH, NaOH

93. Nitritometric determination of compounds containing primary aromatic amino group can be carried out under the following conditions:
*a. With observation of all the mentioned conditions
b. With adding of the crystalline KBr (catalyst)
c. Slow titration
d. Chloric acid excess
e. At a temperature up to 10oC

94. To identify a drug by thin-layer chromatography the following parameter is used:
a. Kp
*b. Rf
c. E, mV
d. n
e. I, A

95. What electrode is used as indicator during dichromatometric determination of FeSO4 in a solution provided that fixation of the equivalence point is done by a potentiometric method?
*a. Platinum
b. Quinhydrone
c. Silver chloride
d. Silver
e. Glass

96. Content of potassium dichromate in a solution was determined by iodometric method. Name the titrant of iodometric method for oxidant determination:
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Potassium bromate
*d. Sodium thiosulfate
e. Potassium iodide

97. When ammonia enters into reaction with acids, this results in formation of ammonium salts. Which properties of ammonia characterize this process?
a. Ability to hydrolyze
*b. Ability to accept the hydrogen ions
c. Acidic properties
d. Reductive properties
e. Oxidative properties

98. What cations added to the solution of potassium iodide form orange-red deposition that is soluble in reagent excess and builds up a colourless solution?
*a. Mercury (II)
b. Bismuth
c. Lead
d. Antimony (V)
e. Mercury (I)

99. Nitritometric determination of primary aromatic amines in acidic medium results in generation of the following reaction product:
a. Nitrose arylenamine
b. Nitrosoamine
*c. Diazonium salt
d. Nitrose antipyrine
e. Azide

100. What is the primary standard for standardization of Hg2(NO3)2 solution?
a. Sodium dichromate
*b. Sodium chloride
c. Sosium sulphate
d. Sodium bromide
e. Sodium hydroxide

101. Determination of sodium chloride by Folgards method involves the following techniques:
a. Substitute titration
b. Direct titration, argentometry
*c. Back titration, argentometry
d. Back titration, mercurimetry
e. Direct titration, mercurimetry

102. What reactions are used in the methods of permanganatometry, dichromatometry, iodometry?
a. Neutralization
b. Hydrolysis
c. Precipitation
d. Complexation
*e. Oxidation-reduction

103. Quantitative determination of iodide can be done by method of:
a. Spectrophotometry
b. Precipitating titration
c. Acid-base titration
d. Chelatometry
*e. Oxidation-reduction titration

104. In order to bind hydrogen ions during the identification of potassium ions with tartaric acid the following solution is used:
a. Sulfuric acid
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Ammonia
*e. Sodium acetate

105. A solution containing calcium and magnesium cations is titrated with Trilon B solution. Complexometric titration of these cations requires the following medium:
*a. Ammonium buffer solution
b. Neutral medium
c. Acetate buffer solution
d. Acidic solution
e. Formate buffer solution

106. What analytical effect is observed when potassium cation is being determined by the sodium hexanitrocobaltate (III) solution?
a. White crystalline precipitate
b. Black crystalline precipitate
c. Red crystalline precipitate
*d. Yellow crystalline precipitate
e. Yellow colouring of the solution

107. What substance can be identified by method of acid-base titration and oxidation-reduction titration?
a. Calcium nitrate
b. Sodium sulphate
*c. Oxalate acid
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Ammonium chloride

108. Quantitative determination of pharmaceutical substances can be carried out by method of alkalimetry using 0,1 M sodium hydroxide solution as a titrant. Precise concentration of sodium hydroxide can be determined according to:
a. Potassium dichromate
b. Sodium tetraborate
*c. Oxalic acid
d. Sodium thiosulphate
e. Ammonium hydroxide

109. A drug solution under examination contains cations of magnesium (II) and aluminium (III). Which reagent can help to separate these cations during analysis of this drug?
a. Solution of chloride acid
*b. Alkali solution
c. Solution of silver nitrate
d. Solution of hydrogen peroxide in acidic medium
e. Ammonia solution

110. As a rule, the maximum oxidation number of an element is:
a. Row number
b. -
c. Subgroup number in the periodic system
d. Period number
*e. Group number in the periodic system

111. Pharmacopoeia test reaction for determination of benzoate ions is the interaction with the following solution:
a. Diphenylamine
*b. Iron (III) chloride
c. Resorcinol
d. Potassium chloride
e. Acetic anhydride

112. A solution containing the cations of the V analytic group (acid-base classification) has been taken for the analysis. The solution of sodium hydroxostannite has been added to the composition which resulted in formation of black deposition. This is the evidence of presence of the following cation:
*a. Bi3+
b. Sb3+
c. Mg2+
d. Fe3+
e. Fe2+

113. What cations relate to the I analytic group according to the acid-base classification?
a. Potassium, barium, bismuth
*b. Sodium, potassium, ammonium
c. Silver, lead, nickel
d. Calcium, strontium, barium
e. Aluminium, magnesium, zinc

114. What working solutions (titrants) are used in the method of precipitation titration - Folgard method?
a. KMnO4 and KBrO3
b. HClO4 and KOH
c. H2SO4 and NaOH
d. Na2S2O3 and K(I3)
*e. AgNO3 and NH4SCN

115. In which of these reactions hydrogen acts as an oxidizing agent?
a. CuO+H2 H2O+Cu
b. Cl2+H2 2HCl
*c. 2Na+H2 2NaH
d. N2+3H2 2NH3
e. F2+H2 2HF

116. In course of the systematic analysis separation of cations of the V and VI analytic groups (according to the acid-base classification) is carried out under the action of excess of:
a. Sodium hydroxide solution
b. Potassium hydroxide solution
c. Sulphuric acid solution
*d. Concentrated ammonia solution
e. Hydrochloric acid solution

117. What is the equivalent of Al(OH)3 in the reaction Al(OH)3+2HCl = Al(OH)Cl2+2H2O?
a. 1/3 mol
b. 2 mol
c. 3 mol
*d. 1/2 mol
e. 1 mol

118. In order to identify the cations of zinc (II) an analytical chemist used the reagent solution of hexacyanoferrate (II) potassium (Pharmacopeia reaction). What colour precipitate is formed in this reaction?
a. Black
b. Yellow
*c. White
d. Green
e. Red

119. Choose a reaction, in which a basic salt is formed:
a. KOH+H2SO4
b. NaOH+HCl
c. Fe(OH)3+3KCl
d. 2NaOH+H2SO4
*e. Fe(OH)3+2HCl

120. Ammonia solution has been added to the solution under examination. A black precipitate fell out. This indicates the presence of the following cations in the solution:
a. Silver (I)
*b. Mercury (I)
c. Iron (III)
d. Copper (II)
e. Iron (II)

