1. A patient with stenocardia has been administered acetylsalicylic acid for:
a. Aggregate effect
b. Inhibition of blood fibrinolytic activity
*c. Antiplatelet effect
d. Anti-inflammatory effect
e. Increase in blood fibrinolytic activity

2. A patient with hypertensive crisis has been given an intravenous injection of clonidine. What mechanism underlies the antihypertensive effect of clonidine?
a. Blockade of N-cholinergic receptors
b. Direct myotropic effect on blood vessels
c. Blockade of peripheral alpha1-adrenoceptors
d. Blockade of beta-adrenoceptors
*e. Stimulation of presynaptic central alpha2-adrenoceptors

3. A patient with hypertensive crisis should be administered a diuretic as a part of complex therapy. What drug should be given the patient?
*a. Furosemide
b. Spironolactone
c. Amiloride
d. Triamterene
e. Diacarb

4. Consult a patient on which antihistamine drug DOES NOT have sedative and hypnotic effect:
a. Promethazine
b. Diphenhydramine
*c. Loradatine
d. Suprastinum
e. Tavegil (Clemastine)

5. A patient with hypertension has been prescribed a drug that blocks angiotensin receptors. Specify this drug:
a. Nifedipine
b. Captopril
c. Apressin
*d. Losartan
e. Prazosin

6. A patient with gastric ulcer has been administered omeprazole. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Blockade of histamine H2-receptors
b. Neutralization of HCl
c. Stimulation of mucus production
*d. Inhibition of H+, K+-ATPase
e. M-cholinergic receptor blockade

7. A patient with a heart rhythm disorder has been given lidocaine. Apart from the local anesthetic effect, this drug has the following pharmacological effect:
a. Antipyretic
b. Hypnotic
*c. Antiarrhythmic
d. Antidepressant
e. Nootropic

8. A patient with acute heart failure and cardiac glycosides intolerance was given an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Stimulation of alpha1-adrenoceptors
b. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase activity
c. Stimulation of M-cholinergic receptors
*d. Stimulation of beta1-adrenoceptors
e. Blockade of K+-, Na+-ATPase

9. A patient with renal colic has been administered a spasmolytic from the group of M-cholinergic antagonists as a part of the complex therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Benzohexonium
*b. Atropine
c. Galantamine
d. Proserin
e. Dithylinum

10. A pharmacy dispenses glaucine hydrochloride to a patient with chronic bronchitis. The patient must be warned about the following typical side effect of the drug:
*a. Blood pressure fall
b. Arrhythmia
c. Allergic skin rash
d. Rise of intraocular pressure
e. Excitation of the central nervous system

11. A 40-year-old patient has a history of bronchial asthma and bradyarrhythmia. In order to eliminate bronchospasm, the drugs of the following pharmacological group should be administered:
*a. M-anticholinergics
b. M-cholinergic agents
c. Muscle relaxants
d. Anticholinesterase agents
e. beta-adrenergic blocking agents

