1. A 26-year-old patient needs an inlay for a class V cavity of the 35 tooth. During the cavity preparation a prosthodontist has accidentally opened the pulp. What might be the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Absence of an additional cavity
*b. Forming a flat floor
c. Forming convergent walls
d. Forming divergent walls
e. Forming a bevel

2. A 29 year old patient complains that the crown of his 26 tooth broke off. Objectively: tooth decay index is 0,9, root tissues are hard, roentgenography revealed that the canal was filled to the top, no chronic inflammations of periodontium were revealed. What construction should be used for prosthetics of the 26 tooth?
a. Simplified pin tooth
*b. Pin stump inlay and a crown
c. Pin tooth with an inlay
d. Pin tooth with a ring
e. Pin tooth with protective bar

3. An orthopedist plans to fabricate a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for the 23 tooth. In order to correct its abnormal position in the dental arch the orthopedist is going to use a cast post and core. What is the maximum permissible value (in degrees) of the core deviation from the tooth axis?
*a. 15
b. 6-8
c. 20-25
d. 4
e. 10

4. A 32-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhages during eating and tooth brushing. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 weeks ago the patient got a cast metal crown. Objectively: the 27 tooth has a cast metal crown going beyond the gingival edge by 1-1,5 mm, touching causes haemorrhage. Percussion is slightly painful. What tactics is the most appropriate in this case?
*a. To remove the crown and fabricate a splint
b. To open the crown through the masticatory surface
c. To remove the crown and administer treatment for marginal periodontitis
d. To give the patient time to get used to the prosthesis
e. To administer gargling with Rotocan

5. A 38 year old patient was admitted to the orthopaedic department after a therapeutic treatment on account of periodontitis. His anamnesis contains data about frequent recurrences of this disease, acute attacks are accompanied by periodontal abscesses. Objectively: the 42, 41,31, 32 teeth manifest mobility of I-II degree, the 43 and 33 are stable, tooth cervices are dehisced by 1/4, hyperesthesia of hard tooth tissues is not observed. What rational construction of permanent splint should be recommended?
*a. Fullcast circle removable splint
b. Mamlocks splint
c. Girder Kurliandkys splint
d. Crown-shell splint
e. Halfcrown splint

6. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth. What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Bent wire clasp
*b. Acker clasp
c. Jackson clasp
d. Roach clasp
e. Telescopic fixation

7. A 55-year-old woman complains about liquid pouring through her nose during eating of fluid food. Objectively: there is a perforating defect of alveolar process 3x2,8 cm deep in the lateral part of the upper jaw at level with the extracted 16 tooth. The patient refused operative intervention. What construction should be offered?
a. Fixed dental bridge
b. Celluloid mouth protector
c. Clasp dental prosthesis with obturating element made of elastic plastic
d. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
*e. Minor saddle prosthesis with clasp fixation

8. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joint. The dentures were fabricated a month ago. Objectively: face configuration is abnormal, the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can only be closed with difficulty, the speech is indistinct. When smiling, the base of the complete removable denture is exposed. What mistakes were made during the fabrication of complete removable dentures for the upper jaw?
a. The vertical occlusal dimension was underrated
b. Misidentified anterior occlusion
c. Misplacement of maxillary teeth
*d. The vertical occlusal dimension was overrated
e. Misidentified posterior occlusion

9. A 25-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the 23 tooth is pulpless. The filling restores vestibular-approximal surface of the tooth crown by 1/3, it is stable, closely fits within cavity walls, its colour doesn’t match the colour of the tooth. The tooth itself has changed its colour, its percussion is painless. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for this patient?
a. Inlay
*b. Metal-ceramic crown
c. Metal swaged crown
d. Elastic crown
e. Portion crown

10. A 45-year-old female patient complains of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of her partial removable laminar denture for the lower jaw, which she has used for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar process in edentulous areas is considerably atrophied, the denture keeps balance. What is the most likely cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture in this case?
a. Wear of artificial teeth
b. Using the denture during sleep
c. Eating solid food
*d. Atrophy of the alveolar process
e. Improper keeping of the denture

11. A 24-year-old female patient complains about hard tissues defect of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/3 along the cutting edge, it is changed in color. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled to the top. It was decided to fabricate a plastic crown. Where should the crown edge be situated against the marginal gingiva?
*a. At a level with gingiva
b. 1,0 mm away of gingiva
c. 1,0 mm below the gingiva
d. 0,5 mm below the gingiva
e. 0,5 mm away of gingiva

12. A 52 year old patient complains of gum inflammation, tooth mobility. Objectively: dentitions are intact, all teeth have the 1-2 degree of mobility. What type of teeth stabilization should be applied in this case?
a. Frontosagittal
*b. Arch-directed stabilization
c. Parasagittal
d. Frontal
e. Sagittal

13. A 42-year-old female patient complains of tooth mobility, difficult mastication. Objectively: face configuration is unchanged. The 35, 36, 38, 44, 46, 48 teeth are missing. The 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth exhibit 1-2 grade mobility. What is the most efficient denture construction in this case?
a. Whole-piece splint with Roach clasps and a multijoint clasp
b. Removable plastic splint
c. Interdental splint
*d. Whole-piece splint with vestibular clowlike hooks
e. Mamlok splint

14. A 70-year-old male patient ordered complete removable dentures for both jaws. In the clinical stage he came for "identification of central relationship". For verification of interalveolar height the patient underwent speaking test. The patient was asked to pronounce the sounds "O", "E", "M". What distance should be between the occlusal rims for correct identification of interalveolar height?
*a. 5-6 mm
b. 3-4 mm
c. 7-8 mm
d. 1-2 mm
e. 9-10 mm

15. A 65-year-old patient needs prosthetic services. Objectively: the 43, 33 teeth are decayed by 2/3. EPT result is 6 mA. Other teeth in the lower jaw are missing. What crowns should be fabricated for fixing the removable denture?
a. Full cast crowns
b. Equator crowns
*c. Telescopic crowns
d. Plastic crowns
e. Portion crowns

16. A 58-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 22 tooth is stable, intact. The atrophy of the alveolar crest is present, the palate is flat. It is planned to fabricate a removable denture. What tactics should be chosen in respect of the 22 tooth?
a. There is no need of any intervention
b. It should be extracted
c. It is required to fabricate a stump crown
*d. It is required to fabricate a telescopic crown
e. It should be depulped

17. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
a. Inverse method of compression molding
b. Direct method of compression molding
*c. Method of transfer molding
d. Combined method of compression molding
e. In water under pressure

18. A 29-year-old patient complains of decay of the 21 tooth, an aesthetic defect. Objectively: on the medial surface of the 21 tooth there is a carious cavity, the cutting edge is partly decayed. Specify the class of this cavity according to Blacks classification:
a. Class II
b. Class I
*c. Class IV
d. Class III
e. Class V

19. A 20-year-old patient seeks dental prosthetics. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 16 tooth there is a cavity, two walls of the tooth crown are intact. Method of orthopedic treatment is determined by the degree of destruction of the occlusal surface of teeth (IROPZ-index). Who suggested its definition?
a. Gavrilov
*b. Milikevich
c. Shcherbakov
d. Kopeikin
e. Kurlyandsky

20. A 26-year-old patient needs prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 16 tooth is decayed by 1/3. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of making a cavity for the inlay?
a. Making the cavity floor
b. Making the cavity walls
c. Making additional cavities
d. Making a bevel
*e. Removal of affected tissues

21. A 19-year-old patient needs a plastic crown for the 22 tooth. The orthopedist has already taken working and auxiliary impressions. What technological process should be next?
a. Processing, polishing of the crown
*b. Moulding of a plaster model
c. Investment of plastered model into a cuvette
d. Making a wax crown model
e. Making a plastic crown model

22. A 47-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dental cervix exposure on both jaws. Objectively: the dentitions are intact, the dental cervixes are exposed. Untimely teeth contacts are present. It is planned to perform selective grinding. What controlling method should be chosen?
*a. Occlusiography
b. Chewing test
c. Gnathodynamometry
d. Roentgenography
e. Masticatiography

23. A 70-year-old male patient complains about total teeth missing on both jaws. It is planned to fabricate a complete removable lower jaw prosthesis. Objectively: alveolar process of the lower jaw is atrophied only in the frontal aspect. Identify the type of lower jaw atrophy according to Kellers classification:
a. ІІІ
b. -
c. ІІ
d. І
*e. ІV

24. A 62-year-old patient has a median mandibular fracture complicated by pseudoarthrosis. Objectively: the dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. There is minor mobility of fragments without displacement. What is the most appropriate type of denture for this patient?
a. Lamellar denture with Oksmans pivot point
b. Lamellar denture with Weinsteins pivot point
c. Lamellar denture without a pivot point
d. Lamellar denture with Gavrilows pivot point
*e. Dental bridge without a pivot point

25. A 18-year-old female patient ordered a metal-ceramic crown for the 24 tooth. It is necessary to choose an optimal impression material for combined impression of the upper jaw. What material should be used for a preliminary impression?
*a. Stens
b. Orthocar
c. Protacryl
d. Wax
e. Dentafol

26. A 67-year-old patient consulted an orthodontist about missing of the 34, 35, 36, 37, 45, 46 teeth. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows the alveolar bone resorption in the range of 1/3 of the interdental septa height. What construction should be offered the patient?
*a. Clasp prosthesis with splinting elements
b. Removable partial lamellar denture
c. Van Thiel splint
d. Cap splint
e. Bridges on the posterior teeth

27. A 67-year-old patient needs a complete removable denture for his lower jaw. The adjustment of custom tray is done by method of Herbst. It is required to specify the boundary of tray for the sublingual region, 1 cm away from the midline. What Herbst test should be applied for this purpose?
*a. Alternate touching the cheeks with the tongue
b. Active movements of mimic muscled
c. Slow mouth opening
d. Swallowing
e. Touching the red border of the upper lip with the toungue

28. A 40-year-old patient has an open occlusion resulting from the bilateral fracture of his upper jaw and following malunion of fragments. The occlusal vertical dimension is maintained only by molar teeth. There is a gap of about 1-1,5 mm between the rest of teeth. The dentitions are without gaps. What kind of treatment would be most appropriate in this situation?
*a. The molar teeth should be ground off and covered with crowns
b. Combined apparatus and surgical treatment
c. Prosthetics with combined crowns
d. Open reposition
e. Orthodontic treatment

29. A 54-year-old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by 1/3 of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
a. Metal-ceramic
*b. Fullcast
c. Metal stamped
d. Combined Belkins
e. Plastic

30. An 80-year-old patient presented to a clinic for the adjustment of the impression tray for the upper jaw. Objectively: alveolar process exhibits marked homogenous atrophy, maxillary tubers are absent, torus is weakly expressed. Buccal muscles and frenulum of the upper lip are attached almost at the top of the alveolar process, the palatal slope is not steep. How to adjust the impression tray in order to make a close-fitting valve?
a. To overlay buccal muscles and frenulum with the impression tray
*b. To extend the borders along the A line
c. To extend the borders in the frontal region
d. To extend the external borders
e. To extend the borders in the region of maxillary tubers

31. A 32-year-old male complains of constant mandibular movements simulating chewing that take place when he is excited. Besides that, the patient complains of teeth grinding. Objectively: the lateral surfaces of teeth have signs of abrasion, the tubercles are absent. What is the most rational method of treatment?
a. Restoration with opposite-directed dentures
b. Consultation with a dental surgeon
c. Teeth alignment (selective tubercle removal)
*d. Night guard, myogymnastics, self-massage
e. Medicamental and machine treatment with further consultation with a dental surgeon

32. A 38-year-old female patient complains about pain in projection of the external acoustic meatus, clicking during mouth opening, ear stuffiness. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth is opened in staright path. There is Kennedy I type dentition defect, the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. What anatomical formation carries the maximum load?
*a. Articular disk (meniscus)
b. Distal clivus of medial articular tubercle
c. Joint capsule
d. Glenoid fossa floor of temporal bone
e. Articular head

33. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic porcelain-fused-to-metal denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
a. Stens
b. Repin
c. Stomalgin
d. Orthocor
*e. Sielast

34. A 40-year-old patient complains of experiencing eating difficulties for 3 days due to the injury of the alveolar process mucosa of maxilla. Objectively: at a level of the mucogingival fold of the 14, 15 teeth on the vestibular side there is a decubital ulcer sized 1x3 mm with smooth pink edges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Traumatic stomatitis
b. Allergic stomatitis
c. Syphilitic ulcer
d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Candidiasis

35. A 45-year-old patient presented to aclinic for prosthetics. Objectively: Kennedy III type, I subtype dentition defect is present, the 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, teeth are missing. The bite is fixed. Che Crowns of the 47, 43, 33, 37 teeth are high, of a well-defined anatomical shape, intact. It is planned to fabricate a clasp denture. What system of the clasp denture fixation is the most appropriate in this case?
*a. Rumpels bar system
b. Roach clasp
c. Telescopic system
d. Continuous clasp
e. Attachments

36. A 50-year-old patient complains of missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact, stable, with anatomically shaped crowns, rather high, relatively parallel to each other. Boundary line has a typical direction along the 35, 44 abutment teeth. What fixation element should be used in a clasp prosthesis supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Jackson clasp
b. Roach clasp
*c. Akers clasp
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Wrought wire clasp

37. Physical examination of a patient revealed a hard tissues defect of the 24 tooth. Index of occlusal surface destruction was 0,8. The defect was restored by filling that doesnt meet the requirements. The tooth is of rose colouring. X-ray picture shows no patological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
a. Artificial crown
b. Portion crown
c. Equator crown
*d. Pivot crown
e. Inlay

38. A 23-year-old serviceman needs orthopedic treatment in a specialized hospital. The patient has been diagnosed with false joint in the anterior lower jaw. The teeth are intact, stable, 3 on each side. Orthopedic treatment can be carried out using a bridge prosthesis, if the jaw defect is no bigger than:
a. 3 cm
b. 2 cm
c. 2,5 cm
*d. 1 cm
e. 3,5 cm

39. A 38 year old patient got a blow that resulted in upper jaw fracture. Objectively: flattening and impression of face, mobility and dangling of broken jaw with cartilage of nose and eyeballs, nasal haemorrhage, tissue edema, "glasses" symptom; palpation reveals crepitation, subcutaneous emphysema, liquorrhea, loss of sensitivity in the area of half the upper jaw, nose wing and frontal teeth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Upper jaw cancer on the right
*b. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
c. Upper jaw odontoma
d. Upper jaw ostemia
e. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw

40. A 59-year-old patient has a bilateral fracture of mandible in the region of the 44, 34 teeth, other masticatory teeth are missing, toothless fragments are not displaced but mobile. Which orthosis should be used for the immobilization of bone fragments?
a. Petrosovs apparatus
b. Zbarzh apparatus
c. Rudkos apparatus
d. Limbergs splint
*e. Vankevich splint with orthodontic elastics

41. A 58-year-old male patient has considerable microstomia as a result of a face trauma and burn. The patient has indication for fabrication of a partial removable prosthesis. What construction of prosthesis should be used in this case?
a. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
*b. Collapsible prosthesis
c. Clasp dental prosthesis with attachments
d. Clasp dental prosthesis
e. Pivot-point removable prosthesis

42. A 50-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing. The state of the abutment teeth is satisfactory. What type of fixation will provide the best conditions for the stabilization of a removable denture?
a. Transversal
b. Sagittal
*c. Planar
d. Linear
e. Point

43. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect caused by partial teeth missing. Objectively: the 15, 14, 24, 25 teeth are missing, the central group of upper jaw teeth is in protrusion and presents with diasthemas. What orthodontic appliance should be used to prepare the oral cavity for prosthetics?
a. Palatine plate with oblique plane and vestibular bow
b. Schwarz guard
*c. Palatine plate with vestibular bow
d. Brueckls appliance
e. Expansion plate for the upper jaw with orthodontic lock

44. A 35-year-old patient has teeth mobility of І degree, the teeth have apparent dental cusps. The dentist recommends to do occlusive teeth grinding. What method is the most objective for determining the grinding topography?
a. Masticatiography
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Rubinovs masticatory test
*d. Occlusiography
e. Roentgenography

45. It is planned to organize a dental room with three universal dental sets. The total area of the room must be:
*a. No less than 28 square metres
b. No less than 30 square metres
c. No less than 18 square metres
d. No less than 42 square metres
e. No less than 21 square metres

46. A 29-year-old patient undergoes a procedure of a metal inlay fabrication by the direct method. The inlay is intended for the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth presents a Black class I carious cavity. Electroodontometry results - 6 mA. Examination of the ready inlay revealed a casting defect in the region of the external angle. The dentists further actions will be:
a. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with amalgam
*b. Fabrication of a new inlay
c. Plastic fixation of the inlay
d. Cement fixation of the inlay
e. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with a composite

47. A 53-year-old patient complains of missing of mandibular teeth. He has a history of microstomy. Objectively: the 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47 and 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are stable, immobile. What kind of denture construction is recommended for this patient?
a. Removable partial lamellar denture
b. Clasp denture
c. Splint-denture
*d. Collapsible removable partial lamellar denture
e. Dental bridge supported by the 43, 33 teeth and removable denture

48. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of a false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect up to 1 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Oxmans bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
c. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
e. Clasp denture

49. A 60-year-old male patient has an extensive defect of nose caused by an injury. The patient temporarily refused operative intervention, it was suggested to fabricate an external nasal prosthesis fixed by eyeglass frame. What impression material should be used?
a. Impression of the whole face with thermoplastic material
b. Impression of the defect with thermoplastic mass
c. Gypseous impression
*d. Gypseous impression of the whole face
e. Impression of the defect with elastic material

50. During the examinations and everyday orthopaedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. What is the way of its sterilization?
*a. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
b. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
c. In the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes
d. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
e. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes

51. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
*a. Inlay splint
b. Crown cap splint
c. Intradental splint
d. Equator crown splint
e. Fixed crown splint

52. A 28-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 13 tooth is decayed by 2/3 of its height, the stump sticks out above the gum line by 2 mm. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled up to the top. What construction should be fabricated for the patient?
a. Crown
b. Equator crown
c. The crown should be restored with photopolymer
*d. Pivot tooth
e. Inlay

53. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
a. On the saddle
b. On the base
c. On the clasps
*d. On the arch
e. On the artificial teeth

54. A 59-year-old patient presented to a clinic for prosthetics. Three months ago he was treated for the fracture of the body of mandible on the left. The 18, 27, 28, 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48 teeth are missing. The patient has left-sided cross-bite with lateral occlusal contact. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Selective teeth grinding followed by fixed prosthetics
b. Implant-supported fixed denture
c. Removable denture with Kemeny clasps
*d. Removable denture with double dentition
e. Orthopedic treatment

55. A 32-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic with a diagnosis of maxillary fracture.The fracture can be treated by means of standard maxillo-mandibular Zbarzh set. Which construction provides the intra-oral fixation?
a. Crown-supported soldered splint
*b. Standard double arch
c. Plastic biteplate
d. Aluminium arch bar
e. Webers splint

56. A 40-year-old patient complains about frequent falling out of a filling. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious (Black’s class II) cavity. It is planned to restore the anatomic form of the tooth by means of a metal inlay. What is the peculiarity of the cavity preparation for the inlay in this case?
*a. Forming a bevel
b. Cavity floor widening
c. Cavity deepening
d. Preparation for parapulpar posts
e. Forming an additional shoulder

57. A 43-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, as well as significant cervixes exposure. Objectively: gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale with cyanotic tint. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth present with I-II degree mobility. The 42, 41, 31, 31 teeth are overcrowded. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have cervix exposure by 1/2 and the 43, 33 teeth have cervix exposure by 1/4. What orthopaedic construction should be used in this situation?
a. Cast bar Kurliandsky splint
b. Portion crown splint
c. -
*d. One-piece guard
e. Cap splint

58. A 45-year-old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
a. Protective palatal bars
*b. Minor saddle denture with clasp fixation
c. Common partial removable denture
d. Clasp denture with obturating part
e. Common dental bridge

59. A 25-year-old patient presents with fluorosis of vestibular surfaces of the upper incisors. Which of the following constructions will provide the maximum aesthetic result?
a. Plastic crown
b. Combined Kurylenko crown
c. Metal-plastic crown
*d. Veneers
e. Ceramic crown

60. 3 months after the immediate prosthetics a patient complained about the prosthesis balancing. Objectively: there is a gap between the prosthesis edge and vestibular surface of alveolar process. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Correction of prosthesis edges
b. Dentition buildup with quick-setting plastic
c. Correction of dentitions
*d. Fabrication of a new prosthesis
e. Prosthesis relocation with quick-setting plastic

61. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed full-cast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
b. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
c. Visually by means of models in the articulator
d. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper
*e. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials

62. A 36-year-old patient requires a full coverage swaged metal crown for the 37 tooth. The patient presented to a clinic for the crown adjustment. During the adjustment it was revealed that the crown was to loose to fit the tooth cervix properly. How to eliminate this defect?
a. To swage a new crown using the same matrix
b. To anneal the crown
c. To bend in the crown edges by using clamp forceps
*d. To get an impression and swage the crown anew
e. To bend in the crown edges by using beak-shaped forceps

63. An 18-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 21 tooth is pulpless, of dark-grey colour. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. It is planned to crown the tooth with a plastic crown. Choose the plastic mass for its fabrication:
a. Acrel
b. Ethacryl
*c. Sinma
d. Ftorax
e. Bakril

64. A 43 year old man applied to the dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 37th tooth is decayed by 2/3, buccal and lingual walls are thin. Occlusion picture shows strong contact with antagonists. How thick should be the layer of tooth surface that must be ground off during preparation for metallic stamped crown?
a. 0,1-0,2 mm
b. 0,6-0,7 mm
c. 0,7-0,8 mm
*d. 0,28-0,3 mm
e. 0,5-0,6 mm

65. A 68 year old patient has a defect in the lower third of his nose as a result of malignant tumour removal. Objectively: dorsum of nose up to the middle third and external nostril outlines are intact. Skin at the base of nose is thinned and erosive. The patient strongly objects to any plastic operation. What method of fixation of nose ectoprosthesis is the most acceptable?
a. Head cap
*b. On the glasses frame
c. Transparent adhesive tape
d. By means of lace
e. Anatomic retention

66. A 12 year old girl complained about a crown defect in the frontal part of her upper jaw. Anamnesis data: the tooth was filled more than once but the fillings fell out. Objectively: the 12 tooth is filled. There is IV class defect according to Blacks classification. Devitalization has never been performed, percussion of the 12 tooth is painless. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Metal crown
*b. Circumpulpar pin inlay
c. Halfcrown
d. Metal-ceramic crown
e. Ceramic crown

67. A 22-year-old medical student complains of the changed colour of his central upper incisor on the right. Two years ago the tooth was gray. Objectively: the 2 tooth is filled, changed in colour, stable, percussion is painless. The patient has closed bite. What is the absolute contraindication to making porcelain crowns for this patient?
*a. Closed bite
b. Enamel hypoplasia with a change of tooth shape and colour
c. Defects of pulpless teeth that can not be restored by inlays
d. Abnormal tooth colour
e. Defects of the anterior teeth that cannot be restored by fillings

68. A 48-year-old male patient has been wearing partial removable dentures for 3 months. According to the patient, results of physical examination and additional methods of testing, the patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis provoked by dyes of the acrylic resin of his prosthesis. Allergic effects of dyes can be eliminated in the following way:
a. Moulding of plastic by method of casting
b. Fabrication of bilayer bases
*c. Fabrication of a denture out of colorless plastic
d. Fabrication of cast metal prosthetic bases
e. Fabrication of swaged metal bases

69. A 43-year-old patient was found to have no crown of the 13 tooth. The root protrudes above the gum by 0,5-1 mm. The apical part is filled. History: coronal part of the tooth broke off three weeks ago. Prior to this the tooth had been treated for chronic periodontitis. Percussion is painless. The root edges are surrounded with hard moist mucous membrane of pale pink colour. Specify the dentists tactics:
a. Fabricate a simple pivot crown
b. Extract the tooth root
*c. Fabricate a crown-root inlay and porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
d. Restore the tooth by means of an anchor and photopolymer material
e. Fabricate a pivot Richmond crown

70. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
a. Orthocor
b. Dentafol
c. Stomatoplast
d. Stomalgin
*e. Gelin

71. A 23 year old woman came to a dental clinic for restoration of the 11th tooths crown. Objectively: root of the 11th tooth is at a level with gingival edge, its walls are thick enough. A dentist made and adjusted a stump inlay upon which a metal-plastic crown will be fixed. What plastic will be used for veneering?
a. Carbodent
b. Acryloxide
*c. Sinma-M
d. Noracryl
e. Protacryl

72. A patient ordered soldered stainless-steel bridge prostheses. Their fabrication involves calibration of crown sleeves. Which device is used for this purpose?
*a. Samson
b. Larins
c. Bromshtrom
d. Copes
e. Parkers

73. A 35-year-old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37th tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the peculiarity of tooth preparation?
a. Forming flat floor
b. Forming additional cavity
c. Forming an additional shoulder
d. Widening of cavity floor
*e. Forming a bevel

74. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay for the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edge. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Stump fitting
b. Stump fixing
c. Wax construction making
d. Casting
*e. Impression taking

75. A 23-year-old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment at a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each side. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
a. 3,5 cm
b. 4 cm
c. 2 cm
d. 3 cm
*e. 1 cm

76. A 56-year-old patient complains about missing lateral teeth on both sides of mandible. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. Make a diagnosis:
a. Kennedy II denttion defect
b. Kennedy IV denttion defect
*c. Kennedy I denttion defect
d. Kennedy III denttion defect
e. Betelman II denttion defect

77. A 45-year-old patient complains of missing teeth in the lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the 46, 45, 38, 48 teeth are missing. The 47 tooth is mobile (1 grade mobility), the crown of the 44 tooth is decayed by 1/2. What orthopedic construction should be recommended for restoration of masticatory efficiency and prevention of periodontal overload of the 47, 44 teeth?
a. Bridge supported by the 47 tooth
b. Small saddle denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44 teeth
c. Soldered bridge supported by the 48, 44 teeth
d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge supported by the 47, 46 teeth
*e. Bugel denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44, 34 teeth

78. A 59-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility, inability to eat. Inspection results: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 47 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 46 teeth exhibit II grade mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable partial denture
b. Removable Bynin splint
c. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
*d. Removable cast splint
e. Kurlyandsky splint bar

79. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joints. The pain occurs when she uses complete removable dentures fabricated a month ago. Objectively: the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can be closed with difficulty, smiling causes exposure of the denture base, the articulation is impaired. A mistake must have been made at the following stage of denture fabrication:
a. Taking functional impressions
b. Taking anatomic impressions
*c. Determination and fixation of the central occlusion
d. Testing the denture construction
e. Fitting the dentures and their correction

80. A 48-year-old female patient complains about some discomfort induced by wearing an upper jaw clasp denture with elastic attachments. The patient notes the denture mobility during mastication and articulation. The patient asks to fabricate a new denture with consideration of the indicated defects. Clinical crowns of abutment teeth are low. What fixation should be the most efficient in this case?
a. Arch-bar
b. Saddle-type
c. Clasp
*d. Telescopic
e. Locking

81. A 65-year-old patient needs complete removable dentures for both jaws. At the stage of "testing the denture construction" the doctor checks the pronunciation of sounds "S" and "Z". Which method of normalization of speech functions should be applied in this case?
a. Myogymnastics
b. Graphic
*c. Phonetic tests
d. Spectrographic
e. Acoustic

82. A 75-year-old patient ordered a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. While adjusting the individual tray by Herbsts method the orthodontist revealed that the tray could be thrown off when the patient rounded his lips. What part of the tray requires correction?
a. Along the whole vestibular edge
b. Behind the maxillary tuber
c. Distal part along the A line
d. In the region of buccal cords
*e. Vestibular part between the canines

83. A 68-year-old patient had a stroke, after which she now experiences  often urges to vomit causing unilateral TMJ dislocations. The dislocations could only be reduced under anesthesia. The 21-28, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36, 37, 44, 46, 47 teeth are missing. What denture construction is optimal for this patient for the treatment period?
a. Petrosovs appliance with a stopper
b. Schroeder appliance with sliding pivot
*c. Removable lamellar denture with a mouth opening stopper
d. Yadrovas appliance
e. Khodorovich-Burgonskaya appliance with a stopper

84. A 32-year-old female patient needs dental prosthetics. After the objective examination it was decided to use ceramic-metal crown. What impression material should be used for taking impressions for this construction?
*a. Stomaflex
b. Stomalgin
c. Orthocor
d. Stens
e. Plaster

85. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaws. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic. What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Locate and fix central occlusion
b. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
c. Fabricate occlusal rims
*d. Adjust individual trays
e. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity

86. A 52-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic complaining of missing upper jaw teeth and difficult mastication. The patient has an indication for a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw with retaining clamps on the 14, 23 teeth. What kind of denture stabilization will enable such positioning of the clasps?
a. Sagittal
b. Sagitally-transversal
c. Diagonally-sagittal
*d. Transversal
e. Diagonal

87. A 57 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about dull pain in the area of his right temporomandibular joint that is getting worse during eating. The disease developed gradually, it began with constrained mandibular motion in the morning that sometimes grew more intensive, sometimes less. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the mouth can be opened up to 3 cm. Opening of mouth is accompanied by articular noise and clicking (step-like dislocation of mandible). Skin above the joint is intact. Muscle tone is palpatory unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Neuromuscular syndrome
b. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
*c. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint
d. Occlusive articulation syndrome
e. Subluxation of mandible

88. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Objectively: the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are destroyed by caries by 2/3 of their height. The occlusion is orthognathic. X-ray picture shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no patological changes in periapical tissues. What construction should be the most efficient in this situation?
a. Restoration of tooth crowns with composite materials
b. Artificial metal swaged crowns
*c. Stump inlays and metal-ceramic crowns
d. Fabrication of plastic inlays
e. Richmonds pivot crowns

89. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred to orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are stable. What is the most aesthetic splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Cap splint
b. Brace
c. Ring adhesion splint
d. Soldered combined crowns
*e. Mamlok splint

90. The patient is 75 years old. The inspection of construction of complete removable dentures revealed that only lateral artificial teeth were in contact, there was a gap between frontal teeth. In the lateral part on one side cusp-to-cusp contact was present, on the other side there was a horizontal gap; the central line was deviated. What mistake was made?
a. The patient was thought to have anterior occlusion
b. Occlusal rims were irregularly softened
*c. The patient was thought to have lateral occlusion
d. Interalveolar height was increased
e. Wax moulds were deformed while determining central occlusion

91. A 48-year-old patient complains of pain in the 32, 38 teeth which arose 3 months after installing a dental bridge upon them. Objectively: the gums around the abutment teeth are hyperemic, edematous, mobile in the vestibular-oral direction. What is the most likely cause of this complication?
*a. Functional overload of abutment teeth paradontium
b. The form of the intermediate denture part
c. Solid food consumption
d. Contact of the denture with opposing teeth
e. Improper preparation of abutment teeth

92. A 43-year-old patient complains about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II grade. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
a. Frontal
b. Sagittal
c. Transversal
*d. Circle
e. Frontal-lateral

93. A 25-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible without evident displacement of fragments. All the teeth are intact. What kind of wire splint is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Splint with hooks
b. Smooth splint with a spreading curve
*c. Smooth splint
d. Splint with guide plane
e. Pomerantseva-Urbanskayas splint

94. A patient needs a clasp denture for the lower jaw. Objectively: dental formula is 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 44. The 44 totoh is inclined toward the cheek. What type of Neys clasp should be used?
a. Third
b. Fifth
c. First
d. Second
*e. Fourth

95. A 65-year-old patient complains about unsatisfactory fixation of complete removable lamellar denture of his upper jaw. The denture was fabricated 6 years ago. Objectively: balancing and poor fixation of complete removable denture is present. What is the reason of such condition?
a. Bad hygiene of removable denture
b. Wear of artificial teeth
*c. Atrophy of osseous base of the prosthetic bed tissues
d. Discoloration of basic plastic
e. Loss of certain antagonists

96. A female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the patients face is shortened, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of lower and upper jaw teeth is missing, the crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn off by 2/3 of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented. The alveolar process isnt hypertrophied. Interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological tooth wear in this patient:
a. Combined, noncompensated, III grade severity
*b. Horizontal, noncompensated, III grade severity
c. Vertical, noncompensated, III grade severity
d. Horizontal, compensated, II grade severity
e. Vertical, compensated, III grade severity

97. A 30-year-old saxophonist complains about wearing of the occlusal surface of his frontal teeth along with separation between the upper and lower teeth (apertognathia). Height of the lower third of the patient’s face remains unchanged. What method should be applied for elimination of this deformity?
a. Shortening of teeth
b. Increase of the interalveolar height
*c. Protetic
d. Orthodontic
e. Instrumental-and-surgical

98. A 50-year-old patient needs a splint for the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43 teeth present I-II class mobility and are devitalized. Which splint would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Kurliandsky splint
b. Elbrechts splint
*c. Mamlok-type splint
d. Murrays splint
e. Van Thiel splint

99. A 57-year-old patient complains of mobility of all mandibular teeth. Objectively: the 34, 35, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth are missing. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows resorption of the alveolar process within 1/3 of interdental septa height. What construction should be offered to the patient?
a. Van-Thiel splint
*b. Clasp denture with splinting appliances
c. Partial removable lamellar denture
d. Bridge dentures in the region of masticatory teeth
e. Cap splint

100. A 69-year-old patient underwent an operation for complete removal of his lower jaw. They took impressions of both jaws and fabricated a lower jaw replacement prosthesis before operation. What elements will provide fixation of this prosthesis in the oral cavity?
a. Magnets
b. Attachments
c. Wire loops
d. Clasps
*e. Foshars spiral springs

