1. A 47-year-old patient complains about discolouration of the 11, 12 teeth. Objectively: the 12, 12 are changed in colour, canals are filled to the top. It was decided to make metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of approximal surfaces of abutment teeth?
a. 10-15 degrees
b. 15-20 degrees
*c. 5-8 degrees
d. 20-25 degrees
e. 30-35 degrees

2. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Dentures with metal bases
b. Dentures with extended borders
*c. Dentures with elastic lining
d. Dentures with shortened borders
e. Implant-supported dentures

3. A 48-year-old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervixes of the 42, 41, 31, 32 are exposed by 2/3, there is pathological III degree mobility. It is indicated to extract the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be used for the direct prosthetics?
a. Swaged-and-soldered bridge-like denture
*b. Removable partial lamellar denture
c. Adhesive
d. Clasp denture
e. Metal-ceramic bridge-like denture

4. A month after cementing the metal-ceramic crown on the 23 tooth a patient complained of its decementing. Examination revealed that the tooth stump was of sufficient height, stump walls were convergent to the vertical tooth axis at an angle of approximately 30 degrees. What angle of convergence had to be formed?
a. 15-18 degrees
b. 12-15 degrees
*c. Up to 8 degrees
d. 22-25 degrees
e. 10-12 degrees

5. A 57-year-old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by 2/3 in the area of the 33, and by 1/2 of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
a. Garland modelling in the precervical region
*b. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress
c. Devitalization of supporting teeth
d. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges
e. Massive grinding off of hard tissues

6. During lateral movements of mandible the frontal teeth are displaced sidewards. Deviation of incisor point from the central position is measured by an angle of 100-110o. What is characterized by such a value of incisor point deviation?
a. Lateral joint path
b. Sagittal joint path
c. Bennetts angle
*d. Lateral incisor path
e. Sagittal incisor path

7. Following the upper jaw examination (according to Schroeder) a 65-year-old patient was found to have atrophied maxillary tubers, alveolar processes covered with atrophic, thin and pale mucous membrane. What kind of functional impression technique should be applied?
a. Compressive
b. Pressure-free
c. Differentiated
*d. Decompressive
e. Dosated

8. A 52-year-old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: in the lateral parts of mandible teeth are worn down to the gums, in the frontal parts teeth are worn by one third. Treatment includes two stages. What prosthetic construction should be applied for bite disjoining and myotatic reflex change?
a. Plastic splint for the whole dentition
b. Crown splint for the lateral parts
c. Elastic plastic splint
*d. Periodontal splint for the lateral parts
e. Plastic splint for the frontal part

9. A 47-year-old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11 tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
*a. Partial removable lamellar denture
b. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth
c. Implant
d. Clasp denture
e. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth

10. A 53 year old patient has to undergo resection of the left half of mandible together with its ramus. It is indicated to make an immediate Oxmans denture. What denture element keeps the remaining mandible fragment from deviation towards the defect?
a. The whole fixing part
b. Resection part
c. Artificial teeth
*d. Removable or non-removable inclined plane
e. Multiclasp system

11. A 62-year-old patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic with complaints about poor fixation of complete removable lamellar dentures that shows up during talking and wide mouth opening. The dentures were fabricated 5 days ago. In course of denture fabrication process a mistake was made during:
*a. Obtaining the functional impression
b. Interalveolar dimension measurement
c. Plastic polymerization
d. Wax reproduction check
e. Occlusal plane orientation

12. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 13 and 24 teeth remain as well as all the teeth on the lower jaw. The lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, crowns of the 13, 24 teeth are worn off by 2/3. What constructional element will provide optimal fixation of the partial removable prosthesis on the upper jaw?
a. Compound clasps
b. Bars
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
*d. Telescopic crowns
e. Retaining clasps

13. A 70-year-old patient is awaiting complete removable dentures for both upper and lower jaws. Teeth placement will be made by Vasilyevs method. What teeth in the upper denture must not touch glass?
a. First and second premolars
b. Central incisors and first molars
*c. Lateral incisors and second molars
d. Canines and first molars
e. Second premolars and first molars

14. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
a. Plate-form
b. Endodontic-endoosseous
*c. Threaded
d. Subperiosteal
e. Conical

15. A 47-year-old patient with completely edentulous upper jaw underwent delayed implantation with cylindrical implants. Prosthetics is recommended in:
a. 3 months
*b. 5-6 months
c. 2 weeks
d. 24 hours
e. 1 month

16. A 28-year-old male patient presented to a clinic on the 2nd day after the face trauma and complained of bilateral mandibular pain, difficult swallowing and obstructed breathing. Objectively: there was a slight swelling in the region of the molars on both sides, the teeth were intact but the jaw fragment with the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth deviated downward and backward. Manual reposition didnt produce any positive result. Which appliance should be used for treatment?
a. One-jaw Katz appliance
b. Brun appliance
c. Betelman appliance
*d. Posts appliance
e. One-jaw Kurliandsky appliance

17. An 18-year-old patient presented to the orthopedic department with complaint of a large diastema. Objectively: bodily lateral movement of central incisors induced by the missing 12, 22 teeth. What is the optimal appliance for moving the central incisors together?
a. Vasilenko apparatus
b. Kalvelis apparatus
c. Begg appliance
*d. Korkhaus apparatus
e. Cotton ligature

18. A 25-year-old male patient has bilateral fracture of the lower jaw. A fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Webers appliance
b. Shurs appliance
c. One-jaw bite-guard splint
d. Kurlyandskys appliance with levers
*e. Posts appliance

19. A 36 year old patient applied to a dentist 1,5 month after a mandibular trauma with complaints about difficult food mastication, esthetic face defect. Objectively: the face is proportional, asymmetric as a result of oral displacement of a lateral fragment of the left lower jaw. When the jaws are closed the 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are not in contact with their antagonists. The patient strongly objects to surgical operation. What orthopaedic treatment should be administered?
*a. A denture with double dentition
b. Interjaw traction
c. Levelling of occlusal surface
d. Crowns with occlusal applications
e. Mechanotherapy

20. A 20-year-old patient is to be given applicative anaesthesia in the frontal region of the upper jaw prior to the conduction anesthesia. What concentration of lidocaine solution is required for applicative anesthesia?
a. 15%
*b. 10%
c. 2%
d. 0,5%
e. 3%

21. A 43 year old patient complains of tooth mobility and considerable dehiscence of dental cervices of the lower jaw in its frontal part. Objectively: gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale, slightly cyanotic, without haemorrhage. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have mobility of the I-II degree. There is also overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced by 1/2 of root length, of the 43, 33 - by 1/4. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Kurlandskys girder splint
b. Halfcrown splint
c. Semicircle splint
*d. Fullcast removable kappa
e. Cap splint

22. A 48 year old patient complained about posttraumatic pain in the area of his chin. Examination revealed median fracture of lower jaw with I class dentition defect (according to Kennedy classification). It is indicated to make a Vankevich splint in Stepanovs modification. What will determine the height of directing planes of this splint?
a. It will be determined arbitrary
b. Form of edentulous alveolar crests of the lower jaw
c. Height of molar teeth of the upper jaw
*d. Extent of mouth opening
e. Height of central jaw correlation

23. A 24-year-old soldier was injured by a shell splinter. He was diagnosed with a mandibular fracture with a bone defect in the mental region over 2 cm long. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
b. Tigerstedts splints
*c. Fragments fixation by means of Rudkos apparatus
d. Gunning-Ports splint
e. Direct osteosynthesis

24. A 40-year-old patient is hospitalized with Le Fort II maxillary fracture. The teeth are intact. Choose the most appropriate apparatus for this patient:
*a. Standard Zbarzh construction
b. Rudkos apparatus
c. Gunning-Ports splint
d. Yermolaev-Kulagovs apparatus
e. Yadrovas apparatus

25. During the examination of a soldered dental bridge supported by the 35 and 38 teeth the following flaws were revealed: the pores in the soldered joints between the intermediate part and supporting crowns, strongly expressed masticatory tubercles, early contact with the opposing teeth, the intermediate part is tightly adjacent to the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What is the way to eliminate these defects?
a. To correct the intermediate part
b. To correct the masticatory surface and increase the height of the intermediate saddle part up to 2 mm
c. To remove the tubercles of opposing teeth
*d. To remake the dental bridge
e. To correct the masticatory surface and polish the joints

26. A patient ordered partial removable lamellar dentures for the upper and lower jaw. An orthodontist took elastic alginate impressions of both jaws. What is his next step?
a. To put the impressions into the microten bag for 90 minutes
*b. To send the impressions for disinfection
c. To invite a dental mechanic for joint analysis of the impressions
d. To let the impressions dry out in the open air
e. To send the impressions immediately to the laboratory

27. A patient is waiting for a partial removable laminar denture. Anatomic models of both jaws were made by means of elastic alginate material "Ipin" and referred for disinfection. What disinfection method should be applied?
a. Hydrogen peroxide solution 6%
b. Alcohol solution 70%
c. Sodium hypochloride 0,5%
d. Desoxone 0,1%
*e. Glutaraldehyde 2,5% рH 7,0-8,7

28. A 35-year-old female patient seeks prosthetic dentistry. Objectively: the 18, 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28 teeth need restoration. The crowns confining the defect are high and stable. To restore the integrity of the dentition it is planned to fabricate a cast clasp denture. What kind of mechanical fixator should be used?
*a. Bar fixation
b. Retaining clasps
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Supporting-retaining clasps

29. A 22-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic because of missing of the 21 tooth, the 11 and 22 teeth are intact. The 21 tooth was extracted 2 months ago. What construction is most suitable in this case?
a. Metal-plastic denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
*b. Two-stage implantation
c. Partial removable denture
d. One-stage implantation with simultaneous fabrication of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. Swaged and soldered denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth

30. A 48-year-old patient has undergone unilateral resection of the upper jaw. He needs a resection prosthesis. Objectively: the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 teeth are stable, hard palate is broad, flat. What connection of clasps with the base will reduce the instability of the resection prosthesis?
a. Elastic
b. Stable
*c. Articular
d. Fixed
e. Does not matter

31. A 43-year-old female patient complains of mobility of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. The 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit grade II mobility, the mucous membrane around them is swollen and cyanotic. What splinting construction is optimal for this patient?
*a. Composite splint reinforced with fiberglass
b. Clasp denture with multilink clasp and claw-like processes
c. Clasp denture-splint in the frontal part
d. Clasp denture with antithrowers
e. Partial removable denture with a vestibular bar

32. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
*a. Fixed Oxmans prosthesis with pivot point
b. Gavrilows prosthesis with pivot point
c. Oxmans double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
d. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp
e. Oxmans single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point

33. A 39-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the history that the indicated tooth had been treated before for caries. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is edematic and hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to remove the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anaesthesia should be given?
a. Intraosseous anaesthesia
*b. Field block anaesthesia
c. Intraligamentous anaesthesia
d. Infiltration anaesthesia
e. Application anaesthesia

34. An orthodontist was treating a patient infected with AIDS virus. Accidentally he injured skin of one of his fingers with a dental disk during tooth preparation. What actions should the orthodontist take in this case?
a. To treat the skin with 5% iodine solution
b. To press blood out and treat the skin with strong solution of KMnO4
c. To apply a tourniquet on the shoulder
d. To perform diathermo-coagulation
*e. To press blood out and treat the skin with 70% alcohol solution

35. A patient consults a prosthodontist about a dentition defect of the 14, 15, 16 teetht. It is necessary to prepare teth for crowning. Before the preparation the handpiece must be processed with:
a. With furacilin solution
*b. With 3% solution of chloramine (two times with 15 minute interval)
c. With 3% solution of chloramine once
d. With 3% solution of hydrogen oxide
e. With solution of potassium permanganate

36. A 36-year-old female patient complains about acute pain, clicking in the right temporomandibular joint, burning pain in the region of the right external acoustic meatus. Movements of lower jaw are step-like with short-standing disabling moments and acute pain in the joint. Objectively: the face is symmetric. Occlusion is orthognathic. Palpation of lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the right. Tomogram shows that bone structure circuits of joints are smooth and slick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatic arthritis of TMJ
b. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
c. Ankylosis of TMJ
*d. Dysfunction of TMJ
e. Acute posttraumatic arthritis of TMJ

37. A 45-year-old teacher consulted a prosthodontist about choosing efficient prosthetic tactics. Objectively: the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth present with III degree mobility. What orthopaedic care is the most efficient?
a. Clasp denture
*b. Immediate prosthetics
c. Fixed prosthesis
d. Early prosthetics
e. Delayed prosthetics

38. A 40-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication as a result of lower jaw displacement. He has a history of mental fracture 2 months ago. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38 ... 45, 46 teeth are missing. Remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with antagonists and their oral deviation makes up 1 cm. What is the optimal construction of lower jaw denture?
a. Soldered splint on rings
b. Metal-ceramic dental bridge
*c. Denture with double dentition
d. Removable lamellar denture
e. Adhesive denture

39. A patient is 24 years old. Artificial crown of his 22 tooth broke off. The tooth was devitalized 8 years ago and its crown is totally decayed. What microprosthesis should be made for restoration of tooth crown?
a. Filling
b. Application
c. Stamped crown
*d. Stump-root inlay
e. Inlay

40. Examination of a 25-year-old male patient revealed maximal number of occlusional contacts of opposing teeth during denture joining. X-ray picture shows that the articular head of the lower jaw is near the base of the slope of articular tubercle. What type of occlusion is present?
a. Right lateral occlusion
b. Anterior occlusion
*c. Central occlusion
d. Left lateral occlusion
e. Posterior occlusion

41. One of the methods to define central occlusion is to construct a flat that will go through cutting edges of central incisors and distalobuccal tubercles of last molar teeth providing that there is sufficient quantity of teeth. What flat should be constructed?
*a. Occlusal flat
b. Vertical
c. Frankfort
d. Transversal
e. Sagittal

42. A 49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to 1/3 of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Kogan
b. Kopeinin
c. Mamlock
d. Treuman
*e. Novotny

43. A 65-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about fabrication of an external prosthesis of orbit that was lost as a result of a trauma. What is the fixing element of the orbit prosthesis?
*a. Spectacle frame
b. Swivel devices
c. Magnets
d. Clamps
e. Watch spring

44. During the preparation of a tooth a patient had an epileptic seizure. The seizure was arrested. What mistake did the orthopaedist make?
a. Skipped psychological preparation of the patient
b. Didnt apply general anaesthesia
c. Did not apply one of the types of local anesthesia
d. Violated the rules of preparation
*e. Didnt collect complete history data

45. A 32-year-old patient needs to be provided with metal-ceramic crowns for the 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. During the dental visit he is given infiltration anaesthesia with Ultracain DS anaesthetic. What elements enter into its composition?
*a. 4% articaine with adrenaline
b. 4% articaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
c. 2% articaine with epinephrine
d. 3% mepivacaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
e. 2% mepivacaine with adrenaline

46. A 56-year-old patient needs a partial removable lamellar denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 25, 26, 27, 28 teeth on the upper jaw are missing. In order to provide transversal line of clasps the clasp arms should be placed upon the following teeth:
a. -
*b. 13 and 24
c. 24 and 18
d. 13 and 18
e. 24, 13 and 18

47. A 56-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain underneath the bar of her clasp prosthesis. It is known from the anamnesis that the clasp was placed in another city a week ago. Examination revealed a mechanic injury of mucous membrane of the palatine vault caused by the bar of the clasp prosthesis. What distance should exist between the palate and the bar of the clasp prosthesis in order to prevent this complication?
a. 1,5-2,0 mm
b. 5-6 mm
c. 2-3 mm
d. 0,2-0,3 mm
*e. 0,5 mm

48. For fabrication of an external prosthesis a 62-year-old male patient needs "Hippocratic facies". What impression material should be applied?
a. Dentafol
b. Stomaflex
c. Repin
*d. Gypsum
e. Stens

49. A 32-year-old female patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 14, 25 teeth. It is planned to make metal-ceramic crowns. What impression material should be used for making these crowns?
a. Wax
b. Hardening
*c. Silicone
d. Alginate
e. Zinc oxide eugenol

50. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patients chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth are missing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get special medical aid?
*a. Specialized army surgical hospital
b. Regimental aid station
c. Separate medical battalion
d. Separate medical detachment
e. Battalion aid station

51. A 60-year-old patient presented to a clinic for checking her complete removable denture. During the teeth placement on the wax bases a gap between the front teeth and cuspal interference of the lateral teeth was revealed. What mistake was made?
a. The patient was found to have posterior occlusion instead of centric one
b. The models were improperly plastered in the occludator
c. During establishing the centric occlusion, the occlusal rims were overpressed
*d. The patient was found to have anterior occlusion instead of centric one
e. The patient was found to have lateral occlusion instead of centric one

52. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a free-end edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
*a. Attachments and bar system
b. Ney clasps
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
d. Jackson clasps
e. Telescopic crowns

53. A 34-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain and clicking in the final stage of mouth opening. The patient has a history of a dislocation. Amplitude of maximal mouth opening is 58 mm. Mouth opening should be limited down to the following amplitude:
*a. Up to 40-50 mm
b. Up to 50-60 mm
c. Up to 90-100 mm
d. Up to 10-15 mm
e. Up to 25-30 mm

54. A 53-year-old patient with generalized periodontitis presented to a prosthodontics clinic for fabrication of fixed splints for his both jaws intended to stabilize the dentitions along the entire dental arch. Which of the upper jaw buttresses will be functionally significant for the distribution of masticatory pressure?
*a. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
b. Zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
c. Frontonasal, zygomatic, palatine
d. Frontonasal, pterygopalatine, palatine
e. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine

55. A 62-year-old patient diagnosed with TMJ arthritis presented to a clinic. The patient underwent radiography. Specify the radiological presentations of TMJ arthritis:
a. No joint space
b. Compaction of the articular head cortex
c. Joint space narrowing
d. Joint space widening
*e. Changed shape of the bone elements of the joint

56. A 60-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication due to the mandible displacement that resulted from an untreated fracture. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38, 45, 46 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with the upper lateral teeth, and exhibit oral deviation up to 1 cm. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for the manible?
*a. Prosthesis with double dentition
b. Arch bar prosthesis
c. Vankevich splint
d. Adhesive prosthesis
e. Whole-piece bridge

57. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed by 80%, the root is stable, the canal is filled up to the top. After examination it was decided to restore the decayed tooth with a cast stump inlay. The root canal of the 23 tooth should be broadened by:
a. 1/2 of canal length
b. 1/4 of canal length
c. By the total canal length
*d. 2/3 of canal length
e. 1/3 of canal length

58. A 50-year-old patient complains of a traumatic break-off in the front teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 12, 21 teeth are broken off by 3/4, X-ray picture shows that the channels of the 11, 21 teeth are properly filled, the other teeth are intact. What actions should the dentist take?
a. Fabricate restorative swaged metal crowns for the 11 and 21 teeth
b. Fabricate a dentogingival plastic splint
c. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 12 and 22 teeth
d. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a partial removable lamellar denture for the upper jaw
*e. Fabricate fullcast metal stumps with a post and restorative metal-ceramic crowns

59. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain in the left parotid-masticatory region, disorder of mandible movements. Objectively: skin over the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is reddened, the surrounding tissues are edematic. Disfunction of the left temporomandibular joint is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Arthrosis of the left TMJ
b. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of TMJ
*c. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of TMJ
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
e. Ankylosis of the left TMJ

60. A patient complains about limited mouth opening. She has a history of intra-articular disorders in the left temporomandibular joint. Roentgenological examination revealed subchondral sclerosis of articular plates, regular narrowing of articular cavity, limited excursion of condylar process of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Deforming arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
*c. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint

61. A 46-year-old patient complains of difficult opening of her mouth, body temperature rise, tissue edema around both temporomandibular joints (TMJ). It is known from the anamnesis that the patient had short-term non-intense bilateral pain in the parotid-masticatory region, limited mouth opening, tension and discomfort in the region of both temporomandibular joints that had been observed for a couple of days. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectional arthritis
b. Fibrous ankylosis
c. Deforming atrhrosis
*d. Rheumatic arthritis
e. Arthrosis

62. A 40-year-old patient suffers from chronic generalized periodontitis. Objectively: both dentitions are intact, the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit I degree mobility. What splint would be aesthetically acceptable for this group of teeth?
a. Cap splint
b. Ring splint
c. Guard splint
d. Splint of soldered combined crowns
*e. Glass Span and photopolymer splinting

63. A 64 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: there is a sharp bony prominence in the area of the missing 15 tooth. It is planned to make a partial removable denture with two-layer base. What plastic should be used for elastic backing?
a. Acryl
b. Ftorax
*c. Plastic PM-01
d. Protacryl
e. Bacryl

64. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Examination revealed that the 21 tooth was missing, the crowns of the 11 and the 22 tooth are intact, high, relatively parallel. The patient refused teeth preparation as well as implantation or fabrication of a removable denture. What orthopedic construction should be fabricated?
a. Clasp denture
b. Immediate denture
c. Polypropylene denture
*d. Adhesive denture
e. Lamellar denture

65. A 40-year-old patient underwent selective grinding of teeth on account of TMJ disease provoked by functional occlusal disorder. 3 days later the patient consulted the orthopaedist about injuring buccal mucosa because of its getting in between dentitions on the right. What mistake was made during teeth grinding?
a. Lingual tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
b. Tops of the buccal tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
*c. Tops of the support palatal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
d. Buccal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
e. Upper teeth tubercles were ground off

66. A 51-year-old lecturer presented to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed, III grade mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
a. In 2-3 months
b. In 16-30 days
*c. On the day of dental extraction
d. In 4-6 months
e. In 5-6 days

67. A 32 year old patient lost his 41 and 31 teeth as a result of a sporting accident. Replantation is impossible because these teeth have cracks and splits both on crown and root surfaces. Clinical and roentgenological examination proved the possibility of immediate implantation. What implant materials should be preferred?
a. Carbon
b. Platinum
c. Sapphire
*d. Titanium
e. Ceramic

68. A 38-year-old patient consulted an orthopedist about metal taste, dry mouth and tongue burning. Objectively: defects of the lower dental arch were replaced with soldered stainless steel bridges. What examination method would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Electroodontometry
*b. Galvanometry
c. Occlusiography
d. Masticatiography
e. Myography

69. A 28-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw. Objectively: the crown part of the 11 tooth is decayed below the gum level. The root is stable, percussion is painless. It is planned to restore the tooth with a stump inlay and cover it with a metal-ceramic crown. What additional method of diagnostics should be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Electroodontodiagnostics
*b. X-ray diagnostics
c. Masticatiography
d. Electromyography
e. Gnathodynamometry

70. A patient came to a dental clinic for dental prosthetics. Objectively: total lack of teeth on the mandible. Sharp and regular atrophy of alveolar part. Frenula attachment and fold position is high. Name the type of atrophy of edentulous mandible using Kellers classification:
a. I type
b. IV type
c. V type
*d. II type
e. III type

71. During military operations the head of the Army Medical Department gave the order to deploy a stomatological aid unit on the territory of the Army Hospital Base. A patient with missile wound of face was admitted to the unit. What kind of aid can be rendered in the stomatological unit?
a. Prosthodontic aid
*b. Specialized (secondary) aid
c. Consultation aid
d. Qualified aid
e. Stomatological aid

72. A patient with a missile wound of face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
a. Dental orthopaedic service
*b. Secondary care
c. Consultancy
d. Professional care
e. Dental health service

73. A 26-year-old patient presented at a clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 16 tooth is destroyed by 1/3. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of cavity preparation?
a. Completing the cavity floor
b. Completing the cavity walls
c. Making additional cavities
d. Beveling
*e. Cavity widening and necrosectomy

74. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinsteins pivot point
*b. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point

75. A 68-year-old patient complains about pain in the palate that occurs during wearing a complete removable denture the patient got 3 months ago. Objectively: palatine torus is strongly marked, mucous membrane around it is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Prosthesis base is made of acrylic plastic
*b. Torus wasnt isolated
c. Functional impression was taken by means of a rigid individual tray
d. Previous impression was made in plaster
e. It was made anatomic teeth arrangement

76. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 5 cm
b. 12 cm
c. 18 cm
*d. 9 cm
e. 7 cm

77. A 40-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about upper jaw teeth mobility that turned up after therapeutic treatment. Objectively: the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless, exhibit II degree mobility, unchanged colour. What prosthetic construction should be applied?
*a. Mamlock splint
b. Elastic crown splint
c. Wire-band splint
d. Cast bar splint
e. Crown soldered splint

78. A 65-year-old patient complains of a break off of three front artificial porcelain teeth of the removable denture fabricated 2 months ago. In what way are the porcelain teeth linked with the plastic denture base?
a. By means of diatoric cavities
*b. By means of crampon-fixing wire elements
c. Due to physicochemical connection
d. By means of glue
e. By means of clasps

79. Tooth replacement with complete removable dentures involves adjustment of occlusal relations by different movements of the lower jaw. Transversal movements of the lower jaw are initiated by the following muscle:
a. Internal (medial) pterygoid muscle
b. Mastication muscle
c. Digastric muscle
*d. External (lateral) pterygoid muscle
e. Temporal muscle

80. A patient complains of clicking in the TMJ. On auscultation, the sounds can be heard in the middle and at the beginning of mouth opening. These signs give evidence of:
a. Joint capsule distension
b. Joint subluxation
c. Increase in occlusal vertical dimension
d. TMJ dislocation
*e. Reduction in occlusal vertical dimension

81. At the stage of adjustment of an individual tray the Herbst test should be done. What muscles cause the shift of the individual tray during functional testing - alternate touching right or left cheek with the tip of tongue?
a. Mimic muscles
b. Mastication muscles
c. Digastric, geniohyoid
d. Mentalis and orbicular muscle of mouth
*e. Mylohyoid

82. A 37 year old patient was diagnosed with arthrosis of mandibulotemporal joint. During auscultation the doctor heard pathological rustle in the area of the joint, namely "clicking" that was caused by a load. What is the mechanism of this pathological rustle?
a. Loosening of mandibulotemporal joint ligaments
b. Friction of bone surfaces in the joint
*c. Asynchronous movement of disc and articulation head
d. Calcification of mandibulotemporal joint disc
e. Inflammation of cartilaginous tissue of the disc

83. A 65-year-old male patient complains of crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies having rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, there are angular fissures and cracks. Palpation reveals crepitatnt rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular arthritis
b. Temporomandibular dislocation
c. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
*d. Costens syndrome
e. Temporomandibular arthrosis

84. A 50-year-old patient complains about pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mouth opening. Dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44. While opening the mouth the lower jaw moves in a zigzag manner towards the affected joint. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Sclerosing arthrosis of TMJ
b. Habitual TMJ dislocation
*c. Musculoarticular dysfunction
d. Chronic arthritis of TMJ
e. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ

85. A 35-year-old patient is at a dentist. He is anxious, complains of being afraid of the dentist, is unwilling to let the dentist examine him. Drugs of which group should be given the patient before stomatological manipulations?
a. Hypotensive
b. Analgetics
*c. Sedative
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Desensitizing

86. A 32-year-old patient presented to a clinic for takingof an upper jaw impression. During this procedure she choked with a piece of impression material, there was risk of asphyxia. What are the first-priority actions within emergency care?
a. Artificial ventilation of lungs
b. Closed-chest cardiac massage
c. Tracheotomy
*d. Abrupt push-like compressions of the lower thorax
e. Plaster removal from the airways

87. A 52-year-old patient complains of teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth exhibit I grade mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit II grade mobility. There is gingival oedema, peridontal pockets are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by one second of root length. The patient has been diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is most efficient in this situation?
a. Mamlock splint
b. Temporary Novotny splint
c. Plastic mouthguard
d. Murrays splint
*e. Elbrecht splint

88. A 20 year old man got a blow to the chin. He remained conscious. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. He has an oedema and haematoma in the area of his lower jaw on both sides. Jaw palpation causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited. There is also a rupture of mucous membrane of oral cavity in the area of the 44, 43 and 34, 35 teeth. Occlusion is deviated. What type of asphyxia  can be developed?
a. Valve
b. Aspirative
c. Obturative
d. Stenotic
*e. Dislocative

89. A patient with a relevant history of allergic reactions had undergone tests for allergic sensitivity to metals. According to indications, the bridges of precious metal (gold) were fabricated. Specify the warranty period starting from the day of finishing the prosthetic procedures?
a. 18 months
*b. 12 months
c. 6 months
d. 3 months
e. 9 months

90. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57-year-old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Neys clasp should be applied?
a. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
b. I type clasp
*c. V type clasp
d. I-II type clasp
e. II type clasp

91. A 63-year-old patient requires a full-arch denture for the upper jaw. Objectively: the 18, 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing, the gag reflex is not marked, the torus is of average size. In order to avoid possible inconvenience while using the denture, the arch should be located at the following distance from the palatine fossae:
a. 23-25 mm
b. 4-8 mm
*c. 10-12 mm
d. 2-3 mm
e. 16-22 mm

92. A patient ordered metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. Block anaesthesia was performed before preparation. In a few minutes the patient felt anxiety, tinnitus, abdominal pain, giddiness. Breathing is hurried, pulse is rapid, AP is 60/40 mm Hg. What aid should be rendered to the patient in the first place?
a. Make an injection of aminophylline
*b. Intravenous introduction of 0,5 ml of 0,1% adrenaline solution, prednisolone
c. To soak a cotton web with some liquid ammonia and give it for the patient to inhale
d. Promedol, suprastin
e. To bring the patient into horizontal position

93. A 43 year old patient applied to a prosthetic dentistry for the purpose of prosthetics. In anamnesis: has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. The patient has been very anxious before the appointment with a doctor. Suddenly the patients condition grew worse, he felt limb weakness. The patient became covered with cold clammy sweat and lost consciousness. What critical state is it?
a. Syncope
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Myocardium infarction
*d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Hyperglycemic coma

94. A 47-year-old patient complains of pain in the lateral part of mandible to the left of the toungue edge, which is caused by tongue movements. Two days ago the patient was provided with claspps fixation a partial removable clasp denture for the 47, 42, 33 teeth. Retroalveolar region of the mucous membraneis exhibits a localized hyperemic area matching the edge of the denture. Which muscle contractions demarcate the boundary in this region?
a. Geniohyoid
b. Medial wing muscle
c. Masticatory
*d. Mandibulohyoid
e. Hyoglossal

95. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous regions is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
a. Improper care of denture
b. Consumption of solid food
c. Wear of artificial teeth
*d. Alveolar process atrophy
e. Denture using during sleep

96. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
b. Meniscus tresis
c. Lower jaw dislocation
d. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
*e. Lower jaw subluxation

97. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Kellers classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
a. Fifth
b. Third
*c. First
d. Second
e. Fourth

98. A 68-year-old patient with compensated insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus had to spend 8 hours at a hospital. Within this time he didnt eat and was nervous. The patient became aggressive, pale and sweaty, then he lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Collapse
*b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Hypertensic crisis
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Acute respiratory failure

99. A 22-year-old patient is afraid of pain from conduction anaesthesia. A dentist decided that this anaesthesia should be preceded by applicational anaesthesia of mucous membrane on the spot of injection. What drug should be used for this purpose?
a. 5% oxacillin ointment
b. 1% synthomycin ointment
*c. 5% lidocaine ointment
d. 3% sinaflan ointment
e. 3% doxycyclin ointment

