1. A patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about pain and edema in the right infraorbital region and right zygomatic region, skin numbness in the area of the right half of his upper lip; nasal haemorrhage. These symptoms turned up after a trauma. What disease should be suspected?
a. Fracture of nose bones
*b. Fracture of zygomatic bone
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
e. Le Fort III maxillary fracture

2. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
a. Verrucous precancer of red border
b. Bowens disease
c. Erythroplasia
*d. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
e. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border

3. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumour-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the vermilion border, it is dense and grayish-red. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
b. Bowens disease
c. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
*d. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion border of lip
e. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the vermilion border of lip

4. Examination of a male patient revealed that a tumour occupied the major part of his tongue; tongue mobility was limited, there were solitary regional nodes in the region of affection. After the cytological analysis the patient was diagnosed with cancer of tongue T2N1M0. What treatment should be chosen for this patient?
a. Chemotherapy
b. Removal of lymph nodes
c. Radiation therapy
d. Surgical removal of tumor
*e. Combined method

5. A 30-year-old patient has got an edema and hyperemia of nose wing skin spreading to the skin of his upper lip and cheek. Examination revealed a fissure along the infra-external edge of the left nostril. The skin is tense, dense, red-and-cyanotic, skin line pattern is smoothed; rise of local temperature is present. The zone of affection is well-defined and irregularly shaped. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermal tuberculosis
b. Dermal actinomycosis
*c. Erysipelatous inflammation
d. Dermal cancer
e. Thrombophlebitis of the facial vein

6. On the second day after tooth extraction a 35-year-old woman applied to a facial surgeon and complained about pain in the parotid-masticatory region and sensation of lacking contact between the upper and lower jaw teeth on the right. Examination revealed chin deviation to the left, half-open mouth, closed lips, disturbed occlusion. There is also limitation of lateral mandible movements. In front of the right ear tragus soft tissues sink down. What examination is expected to be the most informative in this case?
*a. TMJ roentgenography
b. Mandible roentgenography
c. -
d. Bimanual TMJ investigation
e. TMJ ultrasound

7. A patient has got a traumatic fracture of mandible in the area of the missing 34, 35 teeth with a slight displacement and a defect of alveolar part in the area of the 34, 35 teeth. Other teeth on both lower and upper jaws are intact. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Ports splint
b. Plain splint cramp
*c. Tigerstedts splint with a spreading curve
d. Vasilyevs splint
e. Vankevich splint

8. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by one third. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
b. Straight elevator
c. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

9. A 26-year-old patient consulted a dentist about the 24 tooth extraction because of chronic periodontitis exacerbation. The crown of the 24 tooth is intact. Choose the right tool for the tooth exraction:
a. Straight elevator
*b. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
c. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

10. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanitation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. History: the tooth hasnt been treated before, it has decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is decayed by over 2/3, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped closed-beak forceps
b. Crown bayonet forceps
c. S-shaped forceps (right)
d. Straight elevator
*e. Bayonet root forceps

11. A 25-year-old patient has a face trauma. Objectively: there is a significant soft tissue swelling of the left half face, haemorrhage into the left eye sclera, crepitation in the region of nose bones. Palpation reveals the mobility of the upper jaw, its percussion reveals tympanitis. X-ray picture shows the fracture line running through the lower margin of the orbit on both sides of the sphenozygomatic suture and reaching behind the maxillary tuber. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of nose bones
*b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
e. Fracture of the left articular bone

12. A 50-year-old woman complains about a neoplasm on her lower lip on the side of oral cavity that appeared a month ago and has been slowly growing since that. Objectively: there is a roundish, elastic, painless neoplasm inside the lower lip. Mucous membrane hasnt changed its colour. Make a diagnosis:
a. Lip lipoma
*b. Retention cyst of lower lip
c. Lip papilloma
d. Lip abscess
e. Lip fibroma

13. A 35-year-old patient complains of a neoplasm on the tip of his tongue which he injures with his teeth. The neoplasm sometimes increases, and sometimes decreases in size. Objectively: on the tip of tongue there is a roundish well-defined neoplasm 0,5 cm in diameter with broad base. The neoplasm is the same colour as the mucosa of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lipoma of tongue
b. Abscess of tongue
*c. Papilloma of tongue
d. Hemangiofibroma of tongue
e. Fibroma of tongue

14. A 57-year-old patient complains of a tumor in the left parotid region, which appeared 3 years ago. Over the past six months, the tumor has increased significantly. Objectively: there is a non-mobile lobulated tumour in the left parotid region, palpation causes minor pain reaction. The skin over the tumour plicates easily, its upper part has well-defined margins, the bottom part grows into the depth of gland. The tumour is 3x2,5 cm large. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Pleomorphic adenoma
b. Fibroma
c. Parotid gland carcinoma
d. Cyst
e. Chronic parotitis

15. A 53-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right parotid region. The tumour was revealed six months ago, within this period it doubled in size. Objectively: the right parotid region has a dense 1,5 x 2 cm large neoplasm, the duct of the right parotid gland secretes transparent saliva. The gland puncture gave no results. What disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Chronic lymphadenitis of parotid-masticatory region
b. Fibroma of parotid-masticatory region
c. Lipoma of parotid-masticatory region
*d. Pleomorphic adenoma of parotid gland
e. Retention cyst of parotid gland

16. A 41-year-old patient complains of mobility of the 24, 26, 27 teeth, purulent discharges from the socket of the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 months ago the patient underwent a dissection along the mucogingival junction and extraction of the 25 tooth. Objectively: alveolar mucosa in the region of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is cyanotic and edematic. Along the mucogingival junction there is a fistula with protruding granulations. There are also purulent granulation discharges from the socket of the extracted 25 tooth. In the right infraorbital region some soft tissue swelling is present. Which disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Exacermation of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Chronic diffuse osteomyelitis
c. Chronic alveolitis
d. Maxillary actinomycosis
*e. Chronic limited osteomyelitis

17. Before extraction of a left upper tooth a 49-year-old patient had been given plexus anaesthesia with Ultracaine Forte. After the operation the socket didnt get filled with a blod clot. What is the way to prevent alveolitis development in this patient?
*a. To fill the socket with a loose iodoform tampon
b. To rinse the socket with microcide solution
c. To fill the socket with antibiotic powder
d. To rinse the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution
e. To fill the socket with a hemostatic sponge

18. Examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed some white patches on the buccal mucosa along the teeth closure line that didnt protrude above the inflamed and edematous surrounding tissues. The patches could not be removed on scraping. A patient has smoken an average of 3 packs of cigarettes a day for 20 years. Specify the disease of buccal mucosa:
a. Erosive leukoplakia
b. Tappeiners leukoplakia (leukoplakia nicotinica)
c. Lichen ruber planus
*d. Leukoplakia plana
e. Pemphigus

19. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flat, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
a. -
*b. Fibrous
c. Giant-cell
d. Angiomatous
e. Pregnancy epulis

20. X-ray examination of the maxillary alveolar process of a 35-year-old patient reveals a root fracture of the 11 tooth in its apical region. The tooth has been treated before, the canal is filled. The patient has a history of the tooth trauma. What method of treatment is indicated for this case?
a. Tooth replantation
b. -
c. Tooth extraction
d. Tooth crowning
*e. Root apex resection

21. As a result of a car accident a 45-year-old patient got an injury of his upper jaw. Examination revealed elongated and flattened face, profuse nasal haemorrhage, liquorrhea from the nose and ears. These clinical presentations are typical for the following fracture of upper jaw:
a. Suborbital (Le Fort II)
b. Subnasal (Le Fort I)
*c. Subbasal (Le Fort III)
d. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
e. -

22. A 57-year-old patient complains about a slowly growing swelling in the sublingual region. She noted it 3 months ago. Objectively: there is an elastic swelling in the sublingual region. The swelling is painless, mucous membrane over it is with tints of blue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Salivolithiasis
b. Lipoma of sublingual area
c. Hemangioma of sublingual area
*d. Ranula
e. Dermoid cyst of oral cavity floor

23. A 38-year-old patient consulted dental surgery about extraction of the 36 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction?
a. Infiltration
b. Voino-Yasenetsky truncal
c. Mandibular
d. Tuberal
*e. Torus

24. A 49-year-old patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about permanent intense dull pain in the region of the right upper jaw. It is known from the anamnesis that the 17 tooth has been repeatedly treated for exacerbation of chronic periodontitis but the treatment appeared to be ineffective. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Incisor and paltinal
b. Torus
c. Tuberal and incisor
d. Tuberal, incisor and palatinal
*e. Tuberal and palatinal

25. A 35-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the sublingual region which impairs speech and causes discomfort during eating. The swelling turned up about a week ago. Objectively: there is a roundish bulge up to 3 cm in diameter in the right sublingual region. Mucous membrane over it is not hyperaemic, there is fluctuation symptom in the center. Which disease do these symptoms correspond with?
a. Chronic sialoadenitis of sublingual salivary gland
b. Sjogrens disease
c. Retention cyst of the right submandibular salivary gland
d. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
*e. Retention cyst of the right sublingual salivary gland

26. The department of maxillofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a post-traumatic defect of nose wing up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
a. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
b. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions
*c. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
d. Grafting with tubed pedicle (Filatovs) flap
e. Free grafting with dermal flap

27. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Arthrosis of the right TMJ
b. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ
c. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible
d. Fracture of the right condyle of mandible
e. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ

28. A 60 year old man has got a pustule on his chin skin that quickly developed into a hard, strongly painful infiltrate 3х3 cm large. In the epicentre three necrosis zones around hair follicles are present. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged, painful. Body temperature is 38,5°C. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin
b. Chin furuncle
c. Allergic chin dermatitis
*d. Chin carbuncle
e. Suppurated atheroma

29. A 34-year-old patient got a trauma (fall) that resulted in mobility of alveolar process and all the upper jaw teeth, occlusion was also changed. X-ray picture depicts the fracture line that runs in both directions from the piriform opening along the floor of maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Partial fracture of the alveolar process
*c. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
e. Unilateral maxillary fracture

30. A 35-year-old man complains about pain in the region of the 38 tooth, painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. What anaesthesia method will be optimal during operation on account of pericoronaritis?
a. Stem anaesthesia
b. Application anaesthesia
c. Infiltration anaesthesia
d. General anaesthesia
*e. Conduction Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia

31. A 23-year-old patient complains about periodical pain in the region of the 11 tooth, protrusion of the alveolar process. The patient got a trauma 4 years ago. Objectively: crown of the 11 tooth is dark, percussion is painless. X-ray picture shows roundish well-defined area of bone tissue rarefication by the root apex of the 11 tooth. The area is 2,0 cm in diameter. Puncture results: yellow fluid with cholesterol crystals. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic maxillary osteomyelitis
b. Soft maxillary odontoma
c. Maxillary osteoclastoma
*d. Maxillary radicular cyst
e. Maxillary ameloblastoma

32. A 33-year-old patient complains about an ulcer of oral cavity floor, that is located under his tongue on a level between the 43 to the 33 tooth. Examination reveales that ulcer edges are undermined and scalloped. Its grey-yellow floor is shallow and it is covered with small, easily bleeding granulations. There is no ulcer infiltration. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Gummatous ulcer of oral cavity floor
b. Migratory granuloma of oral cavity floor
c. Decubital ulcer of oral cavity floor
d. Cancerous ulcer of oral cavity floor
*e. Tubercular ulcer of oral cavity floor

33. A female patient applied to the oral surgery department and underwent radical maxillary sinusotomy with plastic repair of fistula through the alveolar socket of the extrated 27 tooth. Infiltration and all the peripheral block anaesthesias of the left upper jaw were performed with 6,0 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. 3 minutes later the patient registered double vision in her left eye, inability to close it. Which of the performed anaesthesias is the reason for the above-mentioned presentations?
a. Tuberal
b. Incisor
c. Infiltration
*d. Infraorbital
e. Palatinal

34. Regimental Aid Station (RAS) admitted a soldier with an injury in the maxillofacial region. Dosimetric control revealed radiation affection in this patient. The injured should be referred to the following functional unit of RAS:
a. Admission and sorting pavilion
*b. Decontamination station
c. Evacuation pavilion
d. Dressing pavilion
e. Isolator

35. On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Parenchymatous parotiditis
b. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region
c. Acute epidemic parotiditis
d. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
*e. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis

36. A 56-year-old patient complains about a painless neoplasm on the alveolar crest of the right upper jaw. Objectively: there is a bright-red wide-based tumour in the region of premolars. It is localized on both sides from the alveolar crest. The tumour is dense and elastic, painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gingival fibromatosis
b. Central osteoclastoma
*c. Peripheral osteoclastoma
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Papilloma

37. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a swelling in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of upper lip edema, nasolabial fold is smoothed. Mucogingival fold of the upper jaw vestibular surface in the region of the 11, 12, 21 teeth is smoothed, hyperemic. Palpation is painful. Fluctuation is present. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw satrting from the 21 tooth. Choose the treatment tactics:
*a. Preservation of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of the 12, 21, 22 teeth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy
e. Preservation of the 21 tooth, anti-inflammatory therapy

38. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and hurt her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and does not make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphadenitis
*b. Suppurated cheek haematoma
c. Cheek haematoma
d. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible
e. Cheek phlegmon

39. A 33-year-old officer delivered from a battlefield has shoot off mental part o fmandible, drooling, insignificant haemorrhage from the oral cavity, asphyxia that occurs periodically because of head repositioning. What actions should be taken to prevent the asphyxia development?
a. Fixation of jaws with a mental sling
b. Thacheostome construction
*c. Fixation of tongue, transportation in prone position
d. Surgical d-bridement, tracheostome construction
e. Transportation in prone position

40. During extraction of the 14 tooth a 64-year-old patient complained about retrosternal pain irradiating to his back. There is paleness of membrane and skin integument as well as pulse assymetry on the carotid arteries. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Angioneurotic Quinckes edema
b. Collapse
c. Hypertensic crisis
d. Acute respiratory failure
*e. Acute myocardial infarction

41. A 47-year-old patient consulted a doctor about an itching tumour in the right buccal area that has significantly enlarged lately. Examination revealed an irregularly shaped tumour up to 1,5 cm large, the tumour is black and glossy. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Cutaneous horn
*b. Dermal melanoma
c. Dermal basalioma
d. Pigmented nevus
e. Dermal cancer

42. A 24-year-old victim consulted a doctor about a face burn. He was injured by the open flame. He complains about pain and burning of face skin. Objectively: hyperemia of face skin; in the region of chin, nose, forehead, eyebrows, cheekbones there are burn blisters containing transparent liquid. These presentations correspond with the following degree of burn severity:
a. II-IV degree
*b. I-II degree
c. II-III B degree
d. II-III A degree
e. III B-IV degree

43. A 20-year-old patient complains about inability to move with his lower jaw, speech difficulty and problems during eating. He associates his condition with a trauma he got when biting on apple. Examination revealed half-open mouth, open bite due to the solitary contacts of distal tubercles of the last molars, salivation, indistinct speech. Articular heads of mandible can be felt anterior to both tragi. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic bilateral fracture of articular processes of mandible
b. Fracture of articular processes of mandible
c. Fibrous ankylosis of temporomandibular joint
d. Exacerbation of osteoarthritis of temporomandibular joint
*e. Acute anterior bilateral mandible luxation

44. A 30-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39°C, a roundish infiltrate on his upper lip, general weakness. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 days. Objectively: a roundish infiltrate in the region of the upper lip 2,5 cm in diameter, the skin over the infiltrate is red with a necrotic core in the centre. The upper lip is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Carbuncle of the upper lip
b. Acute periostitis of the upper jaw
c. Acute glandular abscess
*d. Furuncle of the upper lip
e. Retention cyst of the upper lip

45. A 48-year-old woman complains of aching dull pain in the region of the left TMJ, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ
b. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
c. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
d. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
*e. Arthrosis of the TMJ

46. A 30-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dull pain, numbness in the lower teeth, the lower lip and chin on the right. Anamnesis data: the problems arose a week ago after the extraction of an impacted wisdom tooth on the right lower jaw. The patient developed the following disease:
a. Neuralgia of the third branch of the trigeminal nerve
b. Neuralgia of the auriculotemporal nerve
c. Neuritis of the trigeminal nerve
*d. Neuritis of the inferior alveolar nerve
e. Neuritis of the facial nerve

47. After anesthetization a 55 year old patient felt sudden attack of weakness, pain behind his breastbone irradiating to his left arm and scapular area, palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, his forehead is covered with cold sweat, the skin is pale, AP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart tones are dull, pulse is thready and arrhythmic. What state is developing?
a. Collapse
b. -
c. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
d. Stenocardia attack
*e. Myocardium infarction

48. During tooth extraction a 55 year old patient felt dull pain behind her breastbone, got a sense of compression. A dental surgeon diagnosed her with a stenocardia attack. What medication should be given this patient in order to arrest this state?
a. Baralgin
b. Analgin
*c. Nitroglycerine, validol
d. Dimedrol
e. Ketanov

49. A 58 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon and complained about painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue. Objectively: left lateral surface of tongue has a roundish ulcer with undermined soft overhanging edges, palpatory painful, ulcer floor is slightly bleeding and covered with yellowish nodules. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Syphilis
b. Actinomycosis
c. Trophic ulcer
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Traumatic ulcer

50. A 30-year-old patient was diagnosed with posttraumatic osteomyelitis of mandible in the region of mandible body on the right. The patient got the trauma 1,5 month ago. X-ray picture shows the fracture line and the shadow of osseous sequestre along the fracture line. There is a fistula with purulent discharge on skin. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Sequestrectomy
b. Physiotherapy
*c. Fistulectomy, sequestrectomy
d. Fistulectomy
e. Fistulectomy, antibacterial therapy

51. A 27-year-old victim was delivered to to the facial surgery department with a cut wound of right cheek. The trauma is civilian, the patient got it in a fight. The deadline for early surgical d-bridement without preliminary antibiotic injection is no more than:
*a. 24 hours
b. 72 hours
c. 1 hour
d. 12 hours
e. 48 hours

52. A 28-year-old patient has been admitted to the oral and maxillofacial surgery for a carbuncle of face. Objectively: the patient is in a critical condition, face, mucous membranes of lips and conjunctiva are edematous and cyanotic. Body temperature is 40°C. The patient presents with delirium, hallucinations. The carbuncle is located on the upper lip, the surrounding soft tissues are swollen. Palpebral fissures are closed due to the edema of eyelids. What is the most likely complication of carbuncle?
a. Cerebral abscess
b. Meningitis
*c. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
d. Sepsis
e. Orbit phlegmon

53. A 37-year-old patient has been diagnosed with abscessed furuncle of the upper lip. After dissection of the inflammation focus the exudate has been sent for bacteriological analysis. Which causative agent for furuncle is most likely to be found?
a. Proteus monoculture
b. Colibacillus monoculture
*c. Staphylococcus monoculture
d. Staphylococcus and protozoa association
e. Streptococcus monoculture

54. After the unproblematic extraction of the 37 tooth a 60-year-old patient presents with profuse haemorrhage from the tooth socket. The patient has a 6-year history of essential hypertension. Now his AP is 180/110 mm Hg. What emergency aid should be rendered?
a. Pack of the tooth socket with haemostatic sponge
b. Suture ligature of the tooth socket
c. Injection of haemostatic drugs
*d. Injection of hypotensive drugs and tight pack of the tooth socket
e. Pack of the tooth socket with iodoform tampon

55. A 48-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the region of the 38 tooth. She has been suffering from this for 3 days. Crown of the 28 tooth is completely decayed. What forceps should be applied for extraction of roots of the 28 tooth?
a. Straight root forceps
b. S-shaped forceps curved left
*c. Bayonet-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped close-beak forceps
e. S-shaped broad-beak forceps

56. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumor-like formation in the region of his lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: there is a round tumour-like formation up to 1cm in diameter on the red border of the lower lip on the right. Roll-like edges of the formation protrude above the level of the red border. In the centre of the formation a brown crust is visible. After its removal a crateriform hole can be seen. There is no bleeding or pain. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lower lip carcinoma
b. Lower lip fibroma
c. Verrucous carcinoma
*d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Lower lip papilloma

57. After supercooling a 42-year-old patient presented with headache in the left frontal region and left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetric, breathing through the left nasal meatus is obstructed, seropurulent discharges are present. Palpation is slightly painful in the infraorbital region as well as along the mucogingival fold in projection of the 24, 25 teeth. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. Mucuous membrane of alveolar process has no visible changes. X-ray picture shows reduced pneumatization of the left upper jaw sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis of the 24 tooth
b. Acute rhinogenous maxillitis
c. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left upper jaw
*d. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth

58. A 52-year-old female patient complains of severe paroxysmal pain in the region of the 34 tooth. Throughout the year the 35, 36, 37 teeth were sequentially extracted because of pain complaints. Percussion of the 34 tooth causes acute paroxysmal pain. The same pain arises when talking and washing the projection area of the mental foramen. Clinical and roentgenologic examination revealed no signs of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Neuralgia of the 3 branch of trigeminus
b. Facial nerve neuritis
c. Neuritis of the 3 branch of trigeminus
d. Ganglionitis of pterygopalatine ganglion
e. 34 tooth pulpitis

59. A 27-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the region of her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the patients face is slightly asymmetric due to thickening of mandibular body on the right. Adjacent soft tissues are of unchanged colour and normal consistency. Mouth opening is not limited. Mucous membrane of oral cavity presents no changes. In the right lower dentition the 45 tooth is missing. X-ray picture of the right half of the mandible in its lateral view shows an oval well-defined 2x3 cm large radiolucency in the bone tissue. The coronal portion of the retinated horizontally positioned 45 tooth is turned inward the radiolucent area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Osteoclastoma of mandible
*b. Follicular cyst of mandible
c. Sarcoma of mandible
d. Adamantinoma of mandible
e. Odontoma of mandible

60. A 52-year-old patient complains about a nonhealing ulcer on his lower lip. The patient is smoker. He hasn’t ever consulted a doctor about it. In the region of red border of the lower lip a roundish ulcer is present. It is up to 2,0 cm in diameter. The ulcer edges are thickened and a little bit raised in form of a whitish swelling. In the left submandibular region palpation revealed enlarged, painless, dense lymph nodes with limited mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cancer of the lower lip
b. Keratoacanthoma
c. Syphilitic ulcer
d. Fibroma of the lower lip
e. Erosive verrucous leukoplakia

61. A 45-year-old female patient complains of a slightly painful, tumour-like formation in the right parotid region that appeared two months ago for no apparent reason. The patient notes weakness, occasional body temperature rise up to 37,2°C-37,6°C. Two weeks ago she underwent the anti-inflammatory therapy which did not have positive effect. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to a minor swelling in the right parotid region. Palpation reveals a roundish dense and elastic formation with even contours, it is slightly painful, not adherent to the skin. Incisive canal exudes a small amount of transparent saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidemic parotitis
b. Sjogrens syndrome
c. Parotid atheroma
d. Acute infectious parotitis
*e. Hertsenbergs pseudoparotitis

62. A 62– year patient was at a dentists and suddenly there appeared dyspnea and hacking cough, sense of progressing asphyxia. The patients condition is getting progressively worse; number of respiratory movements reached 30/min, acrocyanosis became more evident, there appeared gargling breathing, oral cavity excretes a lot of albuminoid sputum. Psychomotor agitation and arterial hypertension are present. What pathological state is it?
a. An attack of bronchial asthma
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Spontaneous pneumothorax
*d. Pulmonary edema
e. Epileptic attack

63. A 32-year-old male patient was delivered to traumatology. He complains about nosebleed, severe cephalalgia, giddiness, face deformation, heavy breathing, mastication inability. He sustained an injury in the mine over three hours ago. He was conscious. Objectively: the middle third of his face is elongated, there are considerable hematomas and there is an edema in the region of nose root and eyelids of both eyes. The upper jaw is displaced downwards, it is mobile together with nasal bones, cheek bones and eyeballs. Palpation reveals deformation, pain and pathological mobility in the region of the nose bridge, external socket edges, pterygoid processes of basilar bone. Nosebleed is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (lower)
b. Fracture of zygomatic bone
c. Fracture of nasal bone
*d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
e. Le Fort II maxillary fracture

64. A patient was delivered to an admission room after a road accident. Examination of the patient revealed in the area of oral floor a large haematoma spreading to the neck area as well as a significant edema of soft tissues of oral floor and neck. There are signs of asphyxia. What type of emergency care is indicated?
a. Symptomatic medicamental treatment
*b. Tracheotomy performing
c. Tongue fixation
d. Lobeline introduction
e. Opening and draining of haematoma

65. A 42 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. After anesthetization the patient felt sudden attack of nausea, weakness, he got the sense of compression behind his breastbone, heart pain; he began vomiting. The patient lost consciousness, there appeared convulsions. Objectively: the patients skin is pale, covered with cold clammy sweat, pupils dont react to the light. The pulse is thready, arterial pressure cannot be detected. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Collapse
b. Traumatic shock
c. Epileptic attack
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Syncope

66. A 47-year-old patient complains of persistent ache in the 27 tooth, that gets worse when biting. Objectively: skin colour is normal, the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens without any difficulties, alveolar mucosa at the level of 27 tooth is edematous and hyperemic. The 27 tooth presents a deep carious cavity communicating with the pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenic left-sided maxillary sinusitis
*b. Exacerbation of acute periodontitis of the 27 tooth
c. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 27 tooh
d. Acute purulent maxillary periostitis in the region of the 27 tooth
e. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth

67. A 42 year old patient complains about a neoplasm in the anterior palatal part that has been forming for 10 years. The 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth are intact. Intraoral X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows a single focus of bony tissue destruction, well-defined, 2,5 by 1,5 cm large. Periodontal fissure in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth can be well seen. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Nasopalatine canal cyst
b. Globulomaxillary cyst
c. Follicular cyst
d. Residual cyst
e. Radicular cyst

68. A 76-year-old patient has a roundish ulcer in the area of the right nasolabial sulcus. The ulcer has dense, rough floor covered with yellowish-grey crusts, and resembles of a cone. The ulcer edges are dense, crater-like; the ulcer grows both sidewards and deepwards. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Basalioma
b. Actinomycotic ulcer
c. Squamous cell carcinoma of skin
d. Syphilitic ulcer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

69. A 40-year-old patient complains about a long-existing fissure in the central part of red border of his lower lip. He has been smoking since he was 16. Objectively: there is a deep 1,0 cm long fissure along the median line of red border of the lower lip, the fissure edges are bulging. Characteristic quality of the fissure is its spontaneous healing, but after epithelization the fissure recurs. The patient was diagnosed with chronic fissure of the lower lip. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Choose the most appropriate treatment method in this situation:
a. Diathermo-coagulation
b. Cryodestruction
*c. Excision within evidently healthy tissues
d. Excision 0,5 cm off the neoplasm limits
e. Close-focus roentgenotherapy

70. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the roots of the 36 tooth. The tooth decayed long ago. Objectively: the crown of the 36 is destroyed by 2/3, percussion is painless, mucosa around the 36 tooth exhibits no evident pathological changes. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows a roundish well-defined radiolucency near the apex of the medial root. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

71. A victim got a face and temporal region trauma. A doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
*a. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
b. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone
c. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
d. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone
e. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone

72. It is planned to lance an abscess of hard palate (it is localized close to the 23, 24, 25 teeth) and to extract the causative 24 tooth that had caused abscess development. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Tuberal, infraorbital and incisor
b. Tuberal and incisor
c. Tuberal and palatinal
*d. Infraorbital, palatinal and incisor
e. Tuberal, infraorbital and palatinal

73. A 28-year-old patient had to undergo extraction of the 46 tooth under Weisbrems apodactylic mandibular anaesthesia. What is the target site of the anaesthetic solution injection?
*a. A segment of mandibular torus
b. Retromolar fossa
c. Retromandibular fossa
d. A segment of temporal crest of mandible
e. A segment of maxillary tuber

74. A 36-year-old patient consulted a dentist about permanent acute pain in the upper jaw teeth, body temperature rise. The dentist found out that the 26 tooth had been repeatedly treated, the rest of teeth were intact. After roentgenological examination the patient was diagnosed with acute highmoritis. What is the most effective way of treatment?
*a. Extraction of the causative tooth and medicamentous therapy
b. Puncture of the maxillary sinus and medicamentous therapy
c. Medicamentous and physiotherapeutic treatment
d. Medicamentous therapy
e. Caldwell-Luc maxillary sinusotomy

75. A 23-year-old patient complains about unpleasant sensations in the region of the 12 tooth, X-ray picture shows a well-defined low-density area up to 8-10 mm in diameter around the root apex of the 12 tooth. What method of surgery will be the most efficient?
*a. Root apex resection
b. Hemisection
c. Cystotomy
d. Tooth removal
e. Root amputation

76. A patient has orthopaedic indications for the 37 tooth extraction. What kind of anaesthesia should be given to this patient before the extraction?
a. Infraorbital + buccal anaesthesia
b. Tuberal + buccal anaesthesia
c. Mandibular
*d. Mandibular torus anaesthesia
e. Mental + buccal anaesthesia

77. A 32-year-old patient complains about pain and swelling in the region of his mandible and left cheek. He has been suffering from this for 2 days. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 37,5°C. There is an edema of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes are bilaterally enlarged, painful on palpation. Crown of the 37 tooth is partially decayed, the tooth is immobile, percussion is slightly painful. Mucogingival fold in the region of the 37 tooth is edematic, hyperaemic, flattened, its palpation causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
b. Chronic productive periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
c. Abscess of alveololingual groove on the left
d. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
e. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible

78. A 38-year-old patient consulted a dentist about aching pain in the region of the 48 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Body temperature rise up to 37,6°C and aggravation of general condition is present. Objectively: insignificant swelling of retromolar region as well as hyperaemia of mucous membrane. The 48 tooth is covered with occlusal pad. It is painful on palpation. Purulent discharges are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aphthous stomatitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Acute pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis of the 48 tooth
*e. Acute purulent pericoronitis

79. A patient was admitted to the oral surgery department with a diagnosis "odontogenous phlegmon of mouth floor". Objectively: general condition of the patient is grave, abed position is forced, the patient is sitting with lowered head. He complains about pain behind his breastbone that is getting worse during backward flexion of head; cough, dyspnea. What complication has developed?
a. Cervical phlegmon
b. Phlegmon of retropharyngeal space
*c. Mediastinitis
d. Phlegmon of tongue root
e. Phlegmon of peripharyngeal space

80. A 34-year-old patient has indication for extraction of the 38 tooth because of chronic fibrous periodontitis. Oral surgeon performed torus anaesthesia. This anaesthesia blocked transmission of pain information from the following nerves:
a. Infraalveolar, lingual
b. Lingual, buccal, mental
c. Lingual, buccal
d. Infraalveolar, buccal
*e. Infraalveolar, lingual, buccal

81. A 40-year-old patient needs the oral cavity sanation, which involves extraction of the upper central incisors. What nerve structure will be blocked as a result of incisor anaesthesia?
a. Anterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
b. Posterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
c. Dental nerve plexus
*d. Nasopalatine nerve
e. Median superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve

82. A patient with unilateral dislocation of mandibulotemporal joint was delivered to the maxillofacial department. What type of local anesthesia is indicated for relaxation of masticatory muscles during diaplasis?
*a. Subzygomatic Bersche-Dubov-Uvarovs anesthesia
b. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia, submandibular way
c. Torus anesthesia
d. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia, retromandibular way
e. Intraoral mandibular anesthesia

83. A maxillofacial surgery department admitted a patient with a half-open mouth, his chin was put forward and deviated to the right. On palpation, the left mandibular fossa was found to be empty. Internal palpation failed to detect the left articular head. Mandibular movements were possible but restricted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bilateral dislocation of the TMJ
b. Unilateral dislocation of the right TMJ
*c. Unilateral dislocation of the left TMJ
d. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
e. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ

84. A patient got a trauma that resulted in limited mouth opening, nasal haemorrhage, numbness of inferior eyelid as well as skin in the infraorbital area. Objectively: there is face deformation caused by depression of soft tissues in the malar region on the left; there is also a step-off deformity in the median part of the infraorbital rim and in the region of zygomatico-alveolar crest. What method of examination will be the most effective for the diagnostics?
a. Orthopantomogram
*b. X-ray study of facial skull in the axial projection
c. X-ray study of facial skull in the lateral projection
d. X-ray study of facial skull in the frontal projection
e. X-ray study of facial skull and paranasal sinuses

85. A 64 year old patient was waiting to see an oral surgeon. Suddenly she fell, there appeared coarse breathing, spasmatic twitching of upper and lower extremities. Face and neck became cyanotic, pupils became mydriatic, reaction to the light was absent, arterial pressure and pulse could not be detected, heart tones could not be heard, involuntary urination was observed. What state are these symptoms typical for?
a. Collapse
*b. Clinical death
c. Stroke
d. Loss of consciousness
e. Myocardium infarction

86. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about intense lancinating paroxysmal pain accompanied by a sensation of current passage in the region of her upper lip on the right. Pain attacks occur spontaneously and last 3-5 minutes. The patient usually has 2-3 attacks a day. The patient is unable to establish the cause of this disease. Examination of her oral cavity revealed no pathological changes. Oral cavity is sanitated. Test orthopantomogram shows an impacted supernumerary 13 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Right-sided upper jaw pulpitis
*b. Peripheral neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
c. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
d. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
e. Central neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus

87. During the cystectomy involving resection of the root apices of the 11, 21 and 22 teeth a 45-year-old patient developed skin pallor and cyanosis, a cold sweat, a sharp drop in blood pressure (70/40 mmHg). The patient is conscious but complains of weakness. What state has been developed?
a. Syncope
*b. Collapse
c. Epileptic seizure
d. Haematoma
e. Quinckes edema

