1. A 42-year-old patient complains about general weakness. Body temperature is 41°C, he presents with sickness, emesis, dyspnea. There is evident well-defined skin redness in form of flame tips on her face. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlebitis of facial vein
b. Streptococcal impetigo
*c. Erysipelas
d. Lupus
e. Anthrax

2. A 35-year-old male consulted a dentist about the 26 tooth extraction. After the patient had been given tuberal anaesthesia, he presented with progressing tissue edema and limited mouth opening. This condition was caused by:
a. Anaphylactic shock
*b. Vessel trauma
c. Nerve trunk trauma
d. Muscle trauma during anaesthetization
e. Hypersensitivity to the anaesthetic

3. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumour-like formation in the region of the lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: on the vermilion border of the lower lip on the right there is a roundish tumour up to 1 cm in diameter with raised rolled edges. The tumour is painless, the regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Papilloma of the lower lip
b. Carcinoma of the lower lip
*c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Fibroma of the lower lip
e. Verrucous precancer

4. A 34-year-old patient had got in a car accident. The patient stayed conscious. He complains of headache, dizziness, general weakness, nausea. 12 hours after the injury the patient got "raccoon eyes" (periorbital haematomas) within the limits of the circular muscle of eye. What fracture does the victim have?
a. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
b. Fracture of frontal bones
c. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
d. Fracture of nasal bones
*e. Fracture of skull base

5. After a car accident a patient consulted a dentist about pain at the base of the nose. Palpation reveals tenderness of the nose wall, mobility of the nasal bones. Nasal passages are filled with blood clots. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Le Fort III fracture of maxilla
b. Fracture of cheekbone
c. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla
d. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
*e. Fracture of nasal bones

6. A victim got a perforating wound of the left cheek contaminated with radioactive materials on the battlefield. The wound was dressed with aseptic bandage from the individual first-aid pack and processed with anaesthetic and antibacterial medicaments. The dressing should be changed at the following station of medical evacuation:
a. At the battalion aid station
b. At the station of the separate medical battalion
c. Only when the dressing is unsatisfactory
*d. At each station of evacuation
e. At the regimental aid station

7. A 49-year-old patient complains of constant mandibular pain irradiating to the ear, soft tissue edema, body temperature rise up to 39 degrees. Objectively: there is an edema in the submandibular region, the skin has not changed in colour. Alveolar mucosa around the 45, 46 teeth is hyperemic and edematic on the oral and vestibular side. Crowns of the 45, 46 teeth are completely destroyed, the teeth are mobile. Vincents symptom is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
d. Acute serous periostitis of mandible
e. Abscess of submandibular region

8. A 43-year-old man complains about painful swallowing, limited mouth opening. Destroyed 37 tooth caused pain 3 days ago. Painful swallowing appeared the next day. Limited mouth opening was present a day later. Objectively: there is a small soft swelling in the left submaxillary area. An enlarged lymph node is palpated. The mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm. Edema of left palatine arch and pharynx lateral wall is present. The 37 tooth is destroyed. Mucous membrane around the tooth is edematic. Percussion is slightly painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Odontogenic peripharyngeal phlegmon
b. Odontogenic submaxillary phlegmon
c. Acute submaxillary lymphadenitis
d. Peritonsillar abscess
e. Odontogenic pterygomandibular phlegmon

9. A 43-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right submandibular region which appeared two months ago after having flu. Objectively: palpation of the right submandibular region reveals a painful spherical neoplasm of dense elastic consistency with regular outlines which is not attached to the skin. Submandibular salivary gland secretes transparent saliva. Sublingual plica is unchanged. Which disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
*a. Chronic lymphadenitis
b. Sialolithiasis
c. Lipoma
d. Adenoma of the salivary gland
e. Chronic sialoadenitis

10. A 27-year-old male patient underwent extraction of the medial root of the 36 tooth, but the distal tooth root was broken in its middle third. What tools should be applied for root extraction?
a. Broad-beaked forceps
b. Close-beaked forceps
c. Right angled elevator
d. Straight elevator
*e. Left angled elevator

11. A 64-year-old patient presents with bleeding from the left nostril, mobility of the upper left teeth. For the last 2 years the patient has had dull pain in the left side of maxilla. On the left side of neck there is a dense tumour-like formation. The patient is exhausted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis of the left upper jaw
b. Osteoclastoma of the left upper jaw
c. Left-sided sinusitis
d. Left-sided maxillary cyst
*e. Left-sided maxillary carcinoma

12. A 42-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) that irradiates to the ear; headache, general indisposition, impossible mastication and limited mouth opening. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric due to the edema in the region of the left temporomandibular joint. The skin in this region is hyperemic. The pain is made worse by the smallest movements of mandible. Palpation of the joint causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited down to 15-20 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
b. Mandible subluxation
c. Myogenous osteoarthrosis
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
e. Acute purulent parotitis

13. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that is getting worse during eating, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area
b. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
c. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
*d. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
e. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area

14. A 42-year-old patient complains about pain in the submandibular and sublingual region that is getting worse during eating; body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. The patient has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: along the right sublingual plica there is infiltration, hyperaemia, edema of soft tisues, acute pain on palpation. The duct of the right submandibular salivary gland discharges turbid saliva with pus admixtures. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
*b. Exacerbation of urolithiasis
c. Adenophlegmon of submandibular region
d. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submandibular region
e. Abscess of alveololingual groove

15. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about fever up to 37,6 degrees, soft tissue swelling, pain in the 47 tooth on the lower jaw on the left, the pain is getting worse when the tooth is touched by the antagonist. Objectively: mucogingival fold of the alveolar process is hyperemic and flat on the vestibular side of the decayed 47 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Periodontal abscess
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis

16. A 48-year-old female patient had been delivered to a hospital with a cheek wound and severe headache, nausea, dizziness. It is known from the history that the patient had got a trauma as a result of a fall. After examination she was diagnosed with a contused lacerated wound of cheek, closed craniocerebral injury, brain concussion. This trauma can be qualified as:
a. Polytrauma
b. Single
c. Isolated trauma
d. Combined trauma
*e. Concominant trauma

17. A 38-year-old female patient came to a hospital and complained about a wound on her left cheek. She got this trauma 16-18 hours ago, didnt loose consciousness. Objectively: a 3 cm long injury of skin, subcutaneous fat and muscle. The wound is bleeding. What kind of initial surgical d-bridement should be performed?
*a. Early surgical d-bridement
b. Secondary surgical d-bridement
c. -
d. Initial surgical d-bridement along with plasty
e. Delayed surgical d-bridement

18. A patient complains about mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth, periodic pain, sensation of heaviness in the corresponding half of the upper jaw, haemorrhagic discharges from the left side of nose. These presentations have been observed for 4 months, within the last month the pain has become worse, the patient presents now with general weakness. Examination of the oral cavity reveals the grade II mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth. On palpation of the maxillary tuber, the bone wall was found to be absent. X-ray picture shows a homogeneous shadowing of maxillary sinus; bone structures have unclear contours. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Upper jaw cancer
b. Upper jaw sarcoma
c. Upper jaw osteoclastoma
d. Chronic odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
e. Upper jaw adamantinoma

19. A patient consulted a dentist about constant dull pain in the 38 tooth. Mouth opening is limited down to 1 cm. It is necessary to extract the 38 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for operation?
*a. Bercher-Dubov
b. Torus
c. Tuberal
d. Extraoral mandibular technique
e. Mandibular

20. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Right angled elevator
b. Straight elevator
c. Broad-beaked forceps
d. Close-beaked forceps
*e. Left angled elevator

21. A patient consulted a doctor about recurrent pain in the frontal part of his upper jaw. He has history of previous treatment for pulpitis. Objectively: the crown of the 12 tooth is restored with a filling. X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows an area of bone tissue destruction (up to 1 cm in diameter) at the root apex of the 12 tooth. The root channel of the 12 tooth is filled up to the top. The patient was diagnosed with cystogranuloma of the 12 tooth. Choose the best method of treatment:
a. Extraction of the 12 tooth
b. Dissection along the mucogingival junction
c. Replantation of the 12 tooth
*d. Root apex resection
e. Conservative treatment

22. A 67 year old patient complains about frequently recurring erosion in the area of vermilion border of his lower lip. The erosion is oval, 0,8х1,3 cm large, covered with thin crusts. After their removal some petechial haemorrhages on glossy surface can be seen. There are also some atrophied areas of the vermilion border. Infiltration is absent. Submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
*a. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
b. Keratoacanthosis
c. Glandular cheilitis
d. Bowens disease
e. Erosive-ulcerous form of leukoplakia

23. During an armed conflict soldier K. was injured and delivered to the station of the separate medical battalion. The patient has a gunshot wound of his right cheek, splintered fracture of the body of mandible, arterial bleeding from the wound. A brigade of the separate medical battalion performed surgical debridement and final bleeding arrest. Specify the scope of further medical and evacuation actions for this patient:
a. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
b. Therapeutic immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
*c. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation of the patient to the military field surgical hospital
d. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, no need of further evacuation
e. No need of fragment immobilization, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties

24. A 46-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 36 tooth. Its crown is decayed. The patient presented with edema of soft tissues adjacent to the mandible. Body temperature rose up to 39,0°C, the patient has chill. Examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced edema of the left mandibular alveolar process on the vestibular and oral side (acute periostitis); the 35, 36, 37 teeth are mobile, subgingival pockets contain purulent exudate; their percussion causes acute pain. Positive Vincents symptom is present. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis from the 36 tooth
b. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
*d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible from the 36 tooth

25. A 58 year old patient complains about clicking in the mandibulotemporal joint during eating. Periodically as a result of wide mouth opening the mandible takes up such a position that makes mouth closing impossible. The mandible can be easily placed into its initial position by pressing with fingers upon its coronoid processes. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Subluxation of mandible
b. Acute dislocation of mandible
*c. Habitual dislocation of mandible
d. Anterior dislocation
e. Posterior dislocation

26. After a fall a 28-year-old patient visited the clinic of maxillofacial surgery and complained of restricted mouth opening, skin numbness in the left infraorbital region, upper lip, wing of the nose, pain in the left zygomatic region that gets worse when he opens his mouth. Palpation revealed step deformity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone
*b. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone with a displacement
c. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort II (medium type)
d. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone without a displacement
e. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort I (top type)

27. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a dental surgeon about an enlarging "mothers mark", itch and desquamation. According to patient, changed in color and size skin area appeared a year ago after a shaving trauma. Objectively: there is an intensely pigmented brown spot up to 2 cm large with small oval protruding nodules on its surface in the infraorbital region on the left. Desquamation factors are present. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are matted together with skin and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidermoid cancer
b. Papillomatosis
c. Pigmented nevus
d. Verrucous nevus
*e. Melanoma

28. A 75-year-old patient has been admitted to the dental department for the right-angle mandibular fracture with a displacement. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the post-traumatic swelling, palpation reveals the mobility of fragments and pain. The patient has a lifelong history of epilepsy. What is the best method of treatment?
a. Immobilization with Vasilyev splints
b. Immobilization with Port splint
c. Immobilization with Vankevich splint
*d. Osteosynthesis
e. Immobilization with Tigerstedt splints

29. A female patient consulted a stomatologist about inability to close her mouth, speech difficulty. Objectively: the oral cavity is half-open, there is drooling, central line deviates to the right. There is a depression in front of the tragus, and above the malar arch the mandibular condyle bulges inward the infratemporal fossa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bilateral anterior dislocation
*b. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the left
c. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the left
d. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the right
e. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the right

30. A week ago an 18-year-old girl complained of pain in the 22 tooth which was treated and filled several years ago. Over the past two days the pain got worse. Objectively: the 22 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, mucous membrane is hyperaemic and edematic. Spot-film roentgenograph of the 22 tooth shows an ill-defined pariapical bone rarefaction 0,4x0,5 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Suppuration of the radicular cyst
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 22 tooth
d. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 22 tooth
e. Acute maxillary periostitis

31. A 36 year old man complains about acute headache, body temperature rise up to 39,1°C, indisposition. Objectively: a slight face asymmetry because of soft tissue edema of the left infraorbital area. Crown of the 26 tooth is partly decayed. Percussion is acutely painful. Mucous membrane on the vestibular side in the area of the 25, 26 teeth is edematic, hyperemic. Breathing through the left part of nose is laboured, there are purulent discharges. X-ray picture showed a homogeneous shadow of the left part of maxillary sinus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Suppuration of maxillary cyst
b. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
c. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute periostitis of upper jaw
*e. Acute purulent odontogenous maxillary sinusitis

32. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient got a cheek abrasion which healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38,6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
b. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
*d. Acute lymphadenitis
e. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region

33. A 33-year-old female patient has been admitted to the maxillofacial department for pain and edema of the right submandibular region, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C. Objectively: the patient has asymmetric face because of soft tissue edema of the right submandibular region, palpation reveals a dense infiltration, the skin over it is hyperemic, does not make a fold. The 46 tooth has a deep carious cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
b. Acute submandibular sialoadenitis
*c. Submandibular phlegmon on the right
d. Acute purulent submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute right-sided osteomyelitis of mandible

34. A 32-year-old patient complains of a fistula in the submandibular region. Objectively: cheek is swollen in the region of mandible on the left, palpation revealed induration of soft tissues. In projection of the 35, 36 teeth there is a fistula containing pus and granulations. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone, sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sarcoma
b. Osteoma
c. Actinomycosis
d. Syphilis
*e. Chronic osteomyelitis

35. Biopsy material obtained by puncture of a maxillary tumour looks like a foul-smelling mush. What kind of tumour is it typical for?
a. Radicular cyst
b. Ameloblastoma
c. Atheroma
*d. Cholesteatoma
e. Osteoclastoma

36. X-ray picture depicts a circular well-defined area of bone tissue destruction 0,7х 0,7 cm large in the projection of root apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteoma
*b. Cystogranuloma
c. Granuloma
d. Cyst
e. Odontoma

37. A patient has been diagnosed with traumatic open angular fracture of mandible with a fragments displacement. Which of the following should be applied for transport immobilization of the fragments?
a. Weber splints
*b. Entin head-chin strap
c. Standard Vasyliev splints
d. Tigerstedt splints
e. Gunning splints

38. A 20-year-old patient has asymmetric face due to an upper lip edema on the left. The skin over it is bluish, there are positive symptoms of "compression" and "filling in". What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Capillary hemangioma
b. Branched hemangioma
*c. Cavernous hemangioma
d. Lymphangioma
e. Lentigo

39. A 24 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for root removal of her upper wisdom tooth. Tuberal anesthesia caused a postinjection haematoma. What was injured during anesthetization?
*a. Pterygoid venous plexus
b. Infraorbital artery
c. Palatine artery
d. Zygomatic artery
e. Maxillary artery

40. A 45-year-old patient complains about pain in his mandible that arose after extraction of the 36 tooth. Objectively: alveolar socket is covered with bloody clot. X-ray picture shows unextracted root of the 36 tooth. What tools are necessary for extraction of this root?
*a. Angled elevator curved right
b. Straight elevator
c. Bayonet-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped forceps
e. Angled elevator curved left

41. A 70-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the central upper jaw incisors with ІІІ degree mobility. What tools should be applied?
a. S-shaped forceps
*b. Straight forceps
c. Beak-shaped forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. Bayonet-shaped forceps

42. A patient complains of pain and swelling in the right submandibular area. She has been treating the 45 tooth for a week. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. There is a painful tense infiltration in the right submandibular region. The skin doesn’t make a fold, its hyperemic and glossy. The mouth can be opened by 3 cm. Deglutition is painless. These clinical findings correspond with the following disease:
a. Acute odontogenous sialoadenitis
b. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
c. Abscess of the right alveololingual groove
d. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular region
*e. Odontogenous phlegmon of the right submandibular region

43. During endodontic treatment of periodontitis a tool was broken in the middle third of the medial root. Choose the treatment method:
a. Crown radicular separation
b. Medial root amputation
*c. Medial root hemisection
d. Resection of medial root apex
e. Tooth extraction

44. A 65 year old patient complains about pain during eating, reduced tongue mobility, an ulcer in the posterior part of mouth floor on the left, weight loss. Objectively: the patient uses a partial removable denture for the lower jaw. In the area of the left mylohyoid duct there is an ulcer in form of a cleft up to 1,6 cm long with everted edges, covered with grey-yellowish deposit, closely adhering to an infiltrate that can be detected during bimanual palpation. In the left submandibular and superolateral areas of neck several enlarged nonmobile lymph nodes can be palpated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer of mouth floor
b. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous ulcer)
c. Actinomycosis of mouth floor
*d. Cancer of mucous membrane of mouth floor
e. Decubital ulcer of mouth floor

45. A 70-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower jaw region on the right. He has been using complete removable dentures for the upper and lower jaw for 12 years. He is smoker. Objectively: the right retromolar region exhibits a 1,5х1,2 cm large proliferation of mucous membrane in form of cauliflower, here and there there are dense fissure-like ulcers. The surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, infiltrated. When the teeth are closed, the mentioned formation contacts with the posterior edges of the dentures. What is the provisional diagnosis:
a. Decubital ulcer
b. Leukoplakia
*c. Cancer of the mucous membrane
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Papillomatosis

46. A patient consulted an oral surgeon about pain in the region of his left upper jaw that appeared 3 days ago. After examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 17 tooth. It is indicated to extract the 17 tooth. What nerves should be blocked for painless extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Greater palatine nerve
b. Median alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
c. Nasopalatine nerve
*d. Posterior alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
e. Anterior alveolar nerves and incisor nerve

47. A 32 year old patient applied to a dental surgeon for oral cavity sanitation before prosthetics. During examination of oral cavity the dentist revealed that crown of the 35 tooth was decayed. The root is stable, its percussion is painless. Mucous membrane of alveolar process was unchanged. X-ray picture showed a slight broadening of periodontal fissure. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Cystogranuloma
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
d. Chronic periodontitis of the 25 tooth
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 25 tooth

48. A patient has indication for removal of his medial incisor of the right upper jaw on account of chronic periodontitis. What types of anaesthesia should be applied for tooth removal?
*a. Infraborbital and incisive
b. Terminal and incisive
c. Plexual and incisive
d. Infraorbital, palatine and incisive
e. Infraorbital and palatine

49. A 48-year-old patient complains of subfebrile temperature and a growing ulcer on the gingival mucosa around the molars; looseness of teeth in the affected area, cough. Objectively: gingival mucosa in the region of the lower left molars has two superficial, extremely painful ulcers with undermined edges. The ulcers floor is yellowish, granular, covered with yellowish, and sometimes pink granulations. The ulcers are surrounded by the tubercles. Dental cervices are exposed, there is a pathological tooth mobility. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and make dense matted together groups. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Decubital ulcer
*b. Tuberculosis
c. Acute aphthous stomatitis
d. Syphilis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

50. A 31-year-old patient complains of experiencing recurrent pain in the 48 tooth for 4 years. Objectively: right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. Mucous membrane around the partialy erupted 48 tooth is hyperemic. On probing the subgingival pocket of the 48 tooth exudes pus mixed with blood. What additional study will be most informative for diagnosing this pathology?
a. Blood count
b. Blood and urine tests
c. Contrast radiography
*d. Radiography
e. Electroodontometry

51. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory region, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic lymphadenitis
*b. Adenocarcinoma
c. Cyst of the gland
d. Mixed tumour
e. Glandular tuberculosis

52. A 43-year-old patient complains about constant pain in the upper jaw region on the right, that irradiate to the temple. The pain was noted one month ago. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of the swollen right cheek. Mucous membrane has no changes. The breathing through the right nasal meatus is obstructed, there are foul-smelling saniopurulent discharges. Plan X-ray film of facial skeleton in the semi-axial projection shows intensive opacity of the right maxillary sinus and violated intactness of its interior and superior walls. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
*c. Upper jaw cancer
d. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
e. Upper jaw osteoma

53. A 47-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the 27 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, skin is of normal colouring, the mouth can be fully opened, mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic and hyperemic at a level of the 27 tooth. The 27 tooth has a deep carious cavity interconnecting with pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic left-sided odontogenous highmoritis
*b. Exacerbated chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
c. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
d. Chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw beginning from the 27 tooth

54. A 28-year-old patient hadan appointment with a dental surgeon to prepare the oral cavity for a prosthesis. Examination revealed that the 11 tooth crown was decayed, the root was stable, its percussion was painless. The mucous membrane of the alveolar process was not changed. Ro-gram of the alveolar process shows widening of periodontal ligament space in the region of the 11 tooth. Alveolar process structure is not changed. The root canal was passable all through. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 11 tooth
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 11 tooth
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 11 tooth
d. Periodontitis of the 11 tooth
e. Chronic periodontitis of the 11 tooth, hypercementosis

55. A 44-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain appeared 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is not limited. The crown of the 26 tooth is half-decayed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperaemic at the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth had been treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute purulent periostitis of the left upper jaw extending from the 26 tooth
c. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
e. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth

56. A patient complains about acute constant pain that is getting worse when biting down on food, sensation of a recently erupted tooth on the right upper jaw. Examination of the 15 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Tooth percussion causes acute pain. Probing is painless. Mucous membrane in projection of the root apex is hyperemic, painful on palpation. X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Acute albuminous periostitis

57. A patient complains about acute intense pain and a slight swelling in the area of a decayed tooth of the lower jaw on the right, ill health, body temperature rise up to 38,3 degrees, lack of appetite, insomnia. Objectively: there is collateral edema of soft tissues of submandibular area and lower part of right cheek. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged on the right, palpatory painful. Crown of the 46 tooth is half decayed, the 45, 46, 47 teeth are mobile, there is also a cuff infiltrate in the area of these teeth. Vincents symptom is positive on the right. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute purulent odontogenuos periostitis
b. Acute condition of chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
c. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
*d. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

58. A 40-year-old patient with mandible fracture consulted a doctor 3 weeks after immobilization of fragments because of pain and body temperature rise. Objectively: a slight swelling in the mental region, mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 21|12 teeth is hyperaemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Overtooth splint on 54321|12345 teeth is in satisfactory condition, no occlusion abnormalities were detected. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of mandible. What surgical action is indicated?
a. Removal and replacement of the overtooth splint by a new one
b. Intraoral novocaine block
*c. Lancing of abscess to the bone
d. Trepanation of the 21 and 12 teeth
e. Surveillance of patient

59. A 43-year-old patient complains about a neoplasm in the right submandibular region that appeared a month ago after angina. The patient underwent anti-inflammatory therapy but it led to no reduction of the neoplasm. Objectively: body temperature is up to 37,2°C. Palpation reveals a slightly painful, spherical, freely movable, well-defined neoplasm of dense and elastic consistency in the right submandibular region. The duct of submandibular salivary gland discharges transparent saliva. The sublingual plica is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic sialoadenitis
b. Adenoma of salivary gland
c. Atheroma
*d. Chronic lymphadenitis
e. Sialolithiasis

60. A 37 year old man complained about pain and a slight swelling emerging during eating in the left submaxillary area. Objectively: a painful elastic infiltration in the left submaxillary area. Mouth opening is not limited. Bimanual palpation in the area of mylohyoid groove revealed a compact movable oblong induration. Mucous membrane is unchanged. Duct of the left submandibular gland doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pleomorphic adenoma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
*c. Salivolithiasis
d. Retention cyst
e. Submaxillary lipoma

61. Two years after radiation therapy a 49-year-old patient has been diagnosed with recurrence of the lower lip carcinoma. Objectively: there is a 1x2 cm large neoplasm with an ulcer in the centre in the region of the right half of the lower lip. Palpation of the right submandibular region reveals two enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes of round shape. Specify the stage of the disease:
a. T1 N0 M0
*b. T2 N1 M0
c. T1 N1 M0
d. T2 N0 M0
e. T1 N2 M0

62. A 45-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 13 tooth. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps
*b. Straight forceps
c. Bayonet-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped forceps curved right
e. Straight elevator

63. A 19 year old patient came to traumatology centre and complained about face asymmetry, right-sided paresthesia of his upper lip, nasal haemorrhage. Objectively: evident face asymmetry due to an edema and haematoma of the right inferior eyelid and infraorbital area. Opening of mouth is slightly limited, occlusion is normal. Palpation reveals a symptom of "step" in the area of the right zygomaticomaxillary suture, deformity in the area of external edge of the right orbit and zygomaticoalveolar crest, gaseous crepitation in the right infraorbital area; percussion reveals a "bursted nut" symptom. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
b. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
c. Fracture of nose bones
d. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw (superior)
e. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw (inferior)

64. A patient is 48 year old, according to the results of clinicoroentgenological examination it is indicated to remove the 26 tooth because of acute condition of chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What kind of conduction anesthesia is indicated for this operation?
*a. Tuberal and palatinal
b. Infraorbital and incisive
c. Infraorbital and palatinal
d. Plexus
e. Torus

65. After the clinical and radiographic examination a 32-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic odontogenic sinusitis, fistula between sinus and oral cavity through the socket of the 27 tooth. Specify the optimal method of surgical treatment of this disease:
a. Radical maxillary sinusotomy
b. Local tissue plasty of fistula, anti-inflammatory therapy
*c. Radical maxillary sinusotomy and local tissue plasty of fistula
d. Fistula plasty with a hard palate graft
e. Fistula suturing, sinus lavage

66. A 64-year-old patient complains about a slightly painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue that appeared over 2 months ago. Objectively: lateral surface of tongue has an ulcer with raised edges, tissues around it are infiltrated. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, adhering to each other and surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Ulcero-necrotic lesion associated with blood disorders
*b. Lingual cancer
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Syphilis (hard chancre)
e. Decubital ulcer

67. A patient complained about painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. Several days ago the 47 tooth was removed because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. The patients condition kept worsening. Body temperature is 37,9°C. Results of external examination: the face is symmetric, face skin is slightly pale. Right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, palpatory painful. Examination of oral cavity is impossible because of evident contracture of lower jaw (the mouth opens up to 0,5 cm between central incisors). What anesthesia will provide mouth opening?
*a. Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
b. Torus
c. Mandibular anesthesia
d. Block of upper cervical plexus
e. Plexus

68. A 55-year-old patient has a painless, tuberous, cyanotic pedunculated formation 2х1х1,5 cm large that appeared on the site of the extracted 46 tooth. Opening of mouth is not limited. Intra-oral X-ray picture of alveolar process in the region of the removed 46 tooth shows a focus of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Hard odontoma of mandible
*c. Giant-cell epulis
d. Papilloma of mucous membrane in the area of the extracted 46th tooth
e. Ameloblastoma of mandible

69. A 56-year-old patient presents to a dental clinic. He has an indication for the extraction of the 22 tooth. Examination revealed periosteal abscess in the projection of the 21, 22, 23 teeth, flattening of the mucogingival junction. What kind of peripheral conduction anaesthesia is most advisable?
a. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + palatinal anaesthesia
*b. Extraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia
c. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + palatinal anaesthesia
d. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia
e. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + incisor anaesthesia

70. A patient complains about destroyed crown of the 27 tooth. The patient was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the indicated tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 27 tooth is destroyed completely. It is necessary to extract this tooth. What field block anesthesia should be applied for operation?
*a. Tuberal and palatinal
b. Tuberal
c. Tuberal and incisor
d. Infraorbital and tuberal
e. Infraorbital

71. A 40-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 38°C, and of a roundish infiltration on his upper lip. Objectively: there is a roundish infiltration on the upper lip on the left, the skin above it is wine red, the infiltration adheres to the surrounding tissues and has a seapus necroticus in the middle. The upper lip is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphadenitis
b. Upper lip carbuncle
c. Acute periostitis of the upper lip
d. Retention cyst
*e. Upper lip furuncle

72. A 43-year-old patient consulted a maxillofacial surgeon about a cosmetic defect in the right half of his nose. It is known from the history that 7 months ago he got a gunshot wound. Objectively: there is a perforating defect 1,5x2 cm large in the right half of the nose. The skin around the defect has not changed in colour. It was decided to use the "Indian" method of rhinoplasty. What tissue should be taken for the defect correction?
a. Scapulohumeral flap
*b. Forehead flap
c. Infraorbital flap
d. Cheek flap
e. Shoulder flap

73. A soldier injured by a shell splinter was diagnosed with gunshot fracture of mandible accompanied by an over 3 cm long bone defect in the chin area. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Tigerstedts splints
b. Gunning-Ports splint
c. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
*d. Machine osteosynthesis (Rudko, Bernadsky)
e. Direct osteosynthesis

74. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of his 24, 26, 27 teeth, pus excretion from alveolus of the the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 month ago dissection along the mucogingival fold was performed and the 25 tooth was extracted. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of soft tissues in the right infraorbital area, lymph nodes of the right submaxillary area are enlarged, slightly painful, nasal breathing is normal. Mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is edematic and cyanotic. There is also a fistula with bulging granulations along the mucogingival fold. Alveolus of the extracted 25 tooth excretes purulent granulations. What disease does this clinical presentation correspond with?
a. Acute condition of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Chronic alveolitis
c. Acute osteomyelitis
d. Acute condition of localized periodontitis
*e. Chronic localized osteomyelitis

75. A 24-year-old patient complains of acute pain and swelling in the submandibular triangle that is getting worse when he eats spicy food. He has been diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic calculous sialoadenitis with the concrement localized in the median part of the salivary duct. Which method is most rational in this case?
*a. Duct dissection and concrement removal
b. Duct bougienage
c. Physiotherapy
d. Ptyalalogue diet
e. Gland extirpation

76. A 25-year-old patient got a trauma in the chin region. On the basis of X-ray he was diagnosed with bilateral mental fracture of mandible. Specify the direction of displacement of the minor fragment:
a. There is no displacement
*b. Downward and backward
c. Upward and backward
d. Upward and forward
e. Downward and forward

77. 2 days ago a 12-year-old patient presented with body temperature rise up to 38°C, on the second day he developed a bilateral edema in the parotid region. The skin over the edema was tense, of normal color. Palpation revealed soft, enlarged, painful parotid salivary glands. Salivation from the parotid ducts was abnormal, the duct orifices were hyperaemic. Palpation caused pain in the angle of mandible, at the top of mastoid bone, in front of the antilobium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Mumps
b. Acute bacterial parotitis
c. Sjogrens syndrome
d. Purulent-necrotic parotitis
e. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis

78. A 25-year-old male patient came to the traumatology. He complains about pain in the right half of his face, limited mouth opening. Objectively: there is a moderate edema and haematoma in the region of the right malar arch. Palpation shows a slightly painful impaction of bone tissue in the region of the right malar arch. The bite isnt disturbed. Amplitude of mouth opening is 1,5 cm. At making an attempt to open the mouth wider the patient feels a mechanical obstacle and pain intensification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
d. Traumatic arthritis of TMJ
*e. Fracture of the right malar arch

79. A 69-year-old patient needs extraction of the 12, 11 teeth. He is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis, the 12 and 11 teeth exhibit II degree mobility. Choose a proper instrument for extraction:
a. S-shaped forceps curved right
b. S-shaped forceps
*c. Straight forceps
d. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

80. A 42-year-old patient has been hospitalized with Le Fort II fracture of maxilla. Select an appliance for the treatment of this patient:
a. Kulagin
b. Penn-Brown
c. Yadrova
*d. Zbarzh
e. Rudko

81. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the right side of her head, restricted movements of the lower jaw, clicking sound, periodic spasms of chewing muscles. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is restricted. On palpation of the right temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ) there are crepitation and clicking accompanying mandible movements. Examination of the oral cavity revealed also a Kennedys class II defect on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ
b. Contracture of the right TMJ
c. Myositis ossificans
*d. Pain dysfunction of the right TMJ
e. Sclerosing osteoarthritis of the right TMJ

82. During opening a phlegmon of mouth floor a doctor revealed greyish necrotic masses in purulent foci, gas vesicles and fat droplets, sharp unpleasant smell of exudate. The tissues are of dark-brown colour, muscles resemble of boiled meat. What medications should be administered in order to prevent further spreading of this process?
*a. Polyvalent antigangrenous serum
b. Glucocorticoid medications
c. Immunomodulators
d. Hyposensitizing medications
e. Challenging dose of broad spectrum antibiotics

83. A 19-year-old patient complains about pain in the submental part of mandible. The day before he got a trauma. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of tissues in the mental area. The mouth can be opened widely enough. All the teeth are intact. Mucous membrane is edematic in the region of central incisors, it bleeds slightly. In this region mobility of mandible fragments is present. Occlusion is undisturbed. What splint should be chosen by the dentist?
a. Splint with guide plane
b. Splint with spacer bar
*c. Smooth brace
d. Anchor splint with intermandibular fixation
e. Ivy loops for 31, 32, 42, 41

84. A 25-year-old man complains of itching and reddening of skin in the buccal area, general weakness, inertness. He associates origin of the disease with a skin injury he got during shaving. Objectively: body temperature is 39,0°C. A well-defined section of skin in the buccal area is hyperemic, it slightly protrudes above the surface. Hyperemic surface has some vesicles containing serous fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anthrax
b. Streptococcal impetigo
c. Phlegmon of buccal area
d. Furuncle
*e. Erysipelatous inflammation of skin

85. A patient complains of heaviness in the left section of his head, pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is destroyed by 2/3 by caries, the tooth percussion is weakly positive. X-ray picture of paranasal sinuses shows definite unilateral dome-shaped veiling of the upper left maxillary sinus. On the X-ray picture of the 26 tooth the periodontal fissure at the root apex is missing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Malignant maxillary tumour
*b. Radicular cyst ingrown into the maxillary sinus
c. Odontogenic sinusitis
d. Rhinoantritis
e. Cyst of the maxillary sinus mucosa

86. A 28 year old man applied to a dental surgeon for removal of the 38 tooth. What forceps should be chosen for this tooth?
a. Beak-shaped forceps with thorns
b. Root bayonets
c. Broad-beaked forceps (with non-converging beaks)
d. Beak-shaped forceps with converging beaks
*e. Beak-shaped curved forceps

87. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 14 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis following ineffective therapeutic treatment. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
b. Straight forceps
c. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
*d. S-shaped forceps
e. S-shaped forceps curved right

88. After complex extraction of the 37 tooth a patient experienced anaesthesia of the left half of his lower lip and chin. Electroodontodiagnos showed reduction of lower jaw teeth electroexcitability on the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Alveolitis in the region of socket of the 37 tooth
b. Neuralgia of the left inferior alveolar nerve
*c. Neuritis of the left inferior alveolar nerve
d. Herpes Zoster n.Trigemini
e. Acute osteomyelitis of mandible body

89. Examination of a patient revealed a roundish neoplasm in the submental area. Skin above it is unchanged, makes a fold easily. Puncture sample contains strow-yellow liquid with cholesterol admixture. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
b. Dermoid cyst
c. Lipoma
d. Lymphadenitis
*e. Inborn median cyst

90. A 25-year-old man consulted a dentist about extraction of the 18 tooth, its crown is destroyed by 1/2. The tooth was treated more than once. During tooth extraction the maxillary tuber was accidentally torn off. What actions should be taken?
a. To remove the fragment
b. To remove the fragment and tampon the wound
c. To try to restore the fragment to its place
d. To restore the fragment to its place and fix it there
*e. To remove the fragment and stitch up the wound

91. A 53-year-old patient consulted a dentist about pain and an ulcer that turned up in the region of hard palate under his partial removable denture. He hasnt used the denture for three weeks, but the ulcer does not heal or reduce in size. Examination reveals a 2x1,5 cm large ulcer in the region of the alveolar process and hard palate at the level of the missing 14 tooth. The ulcer has everted rolled edges and necrotic floor, it is dense and painful. Gingival and palatal tissues around the ulcer are infiltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Maxillary tuberculosis
b. Maxillary syphilis
*c. Maxillary carcinoma
d. Maxillary actinomycosis
e. Decubital ulcer

92. A 20 year old patient complains of a tumour-like formation on the lateral surface of his neck on the right. He revealed this tumour a year ago. Objectively: there is a semi-oval well-defined tumour 3х2 cm large on the lateral neck surface. The tumour doesnt hold together with skin, it is painless, dense and elastic, upwardly and sidewardly movable. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. After the tumour puncture some light yellow liquid was obtained that consisted of cast-off epithelium, cholesterol crystals, lymphocytes, erythrocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lateral neck cyst
b. Dermoid neck cyst
c. Chronic neck lymphadenitis
d. Neck chemodectoma
e. Median neck cyst

93. A 30-year-old patient complains of a painless tumour-like formation in the region of the left mandibular alveolar process. Objectively: there is a pale pink 1x1,5 cm large tumour-like formation on the vestibular surface of the alveolar process at the 34 and 35 teeth. The formation has a broad base, it does not bleed. Crowns of the 34, 35 teeth are intact, the teeth are non-mobile. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows no changes in bone structure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic epulis
*b. Fibrous epulis
c. Mucosa papilloma
d. Pleomorphic adenoma
e. Giant-cell epulis

94. A 48-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the 37 tooths roots. What tool should be chosen?
a. Broad-beak forceps
b. Bayonet forceps
c. Curved beak-shaped forceps
*d. Closed-beak forceps
e. S-shaped forceps

95. After the extraction of the 26 tooth a 43-year-old patient presents with a communication between the oral cavity and the maxillary sinus. X-ray picture shows no changes in the maxillary sinuses. What tactics should be chosen by a dental surgeon to prevent maxillary sinusitis?
a. Sinus rinsing with an antibiotic solution
b. Socket filling with a blood clot
c. Socket tamponade with a iodoform turunda
d. Socket filling with a hemostatic sponge
*e. Plastic restoring of the communication

96. A 70-year-old patient complains about the mobility of the 21 tooth. The tooth has not been treated before. Objectively: there is II class mobility of the 21 tooth, the root is exposed by 1/2. What tool should be used to extract the tooth?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Straight elevator
c. Beak-shaped forceps
*d. Straight forceps
e. Bayonet forceps

97. A 56-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the root extraction of the 17 toot. What kind of anaesthesia should be applied?
a. Infiltration, inscisor anaesthesia
b. Palatinal, infraorbital anaesthesia
*c. Palatinal, tuberal anaesthesia
d. Mandibular anaesthesia
e. Torus anaesthesia

98. A 23-year-old female patient complains of a pronounced limitation of mouth opening, throat pain irradiating to the ear. Objectively: body temperature is 37,9°C. The face is symmetrical, the colour of skin has not changed. Palpation of the jaw causes acute pain, mouth opens by 1 cm. The patient had been given anasthesia by Berchet-Dubov. After it oral examination revealed an edema and hyperemia of the mucous membrane of the pterygomaxillary fold, there was an infiltration painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Submandibular phlegmon
*b. Abscess of pterygomaxillary space
c. Parapharyngeal space phlegmon
d. Abscess of alveololingual groove
e. Peritonsillar space abscess

99. A 48-year-old patient got a pustule on his chin that quickly developed into a dense and acutely painful infiltration 3x5 cm large. The skin above it is of blue-red colour. In the centre one can see three zones of necrosis around the hair follicles. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermal actinomycosis of chin
b. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin
*c. Chin carbuncle
d. Suppurated atheroma
e. Chin furuncle

100. A 20 year old patient got a trauma in the area of his upper jaw. He applied to a dentist and complained about mobility of his frontal upper teeth, pain during cutting and joining of teeth. Objectively: the 11 and 21 teeth have II-III degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact but have oral position. Complete joining of teeth is impossible because the teeth are situated beyond the dental arch. X-ray picture shows a slight broadening of periodontal fissure of the 11 tooth up to 0,5-2 mm. The roots are intact. Make a correct diagnosis:
a. Fracture of alveolar process in the area of the 11, 21 teeth
b. Traumatic extraction of the 11, 21 teeth
c. Traumatic periodontitis of the 11, 21 teeth
d. Traumatic complete dislocation of the 11, 21 teeth
*e. Traumatic subluxation of the 11, 21 teeth

