1. A 38 year old driver complains of acute pain in his mouth and sore throat, difficult ingestion, indisposition, temperature rise up to 38,6°C. These symptoms appeared after exposure to cold. He has been ill for a day, in the evening he has to go to work. Objectively: gums in the area of inferior frontal teeth as well as pharynx mucous membrane are hyperemic, edematic; gingival edge is necrotic, tonsills are enlarged. Results of bacterioscopy: fusospirochetal symbiosis. In blood: erythrocytes - 4,5x1012/l; leukocytes - 7,2x109/l; ESR - 18 mm/h. What actions should a stomatologist take?
*a. To prescribe a medication and give a sick-list
b. To give him an order for hospitalization in oral department
c. To refer him to an otolaryngologist
d. To refer him to an infectious disease specialist
e. To prescribe a medication and allow to go to work

2. A 17-year-old man complains of a cosmetic defect in form of light spots on the teeth. In the area of his residence the fluoride concentration in drinking water is at the rate of 1 mg/l. Objectively: vestibular surface of the 11,12, 21, 22, and tubercles of the 16, 26, 36 and 46 teeth have chalky spots with shiny surface that have been present since the time of eruption. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Amelogenesis imperfecta
c. Multiple caries
d. Endemic fluorosis
*e. Systemic hypoplasia

3. A 65 year old patient complains of pain in the area of mucous membrane of hard palate on the left that is getting worse during eating with use of a complete removable denture. He has been suffering from this for 1,5 month. Objectively: left-sided hyperemia and edema of mucous membrane of hard palate; at the border of distal denture edge there is an ulcer with dense walls and fundus, surrounding tissues are infiltrated. The ulcer floor is tuberous, covered with fibrinous deposit; ulcer palpation is painful. What examination method is to be applied in the first place?
a. Bacterioscopy
b. Allergic contact plastic test
c. Serological reactions
*d. Biopsy
e. Cytology

4. A 42-year-old patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of generalized grade II periodontitis accompanied by abscess formation. What method of general treatment should be administered in the first place?
*a. Antibiotic therapy
b. Hyposensitization therapy
c. Detoxification therapy
d. Stimulating therapy
e. Vitamin therapy

5. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain and bleeding from the carious cavity of her 27 tooth during eating. Previously she had spontaneous pain. Examination of the 27 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface consisting of red tissue, probing induced pain and haemorrhage. What treatment method should be chosen?
a. Devital amputation
b. Devital extirpation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Biological method

6. A 43-year-old patient complains of increased tooth sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli, gum itch. Objectively: the roots of the teeth are exposed to 1/3 of their length, the gums are dense, pale pink. Thre is a small amount of dental plaque. In the region of the 15, 14, 24, 25, 44, 34 teeth there are wedge-shaped defects within the dentin. Probing of exposed cervices and wedge-shaped defects causes pain reaction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atrophic gingivitis
b. Gingival recession
c. Localized periodontitis
*d. Parodontosis
e. Generalized periodontitis

7. A 40 year old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 22 tooth. Objectively: a deep carious cavity on the medial surface of the 22 tooth, probing induces mild pain. What is the optimal material for filling of the 22 tooth?
a. Silica-alumina cement
b. Glass-ionomer chemical-setting cement
c. Silicophosphate cement
*d. Composite light-setting material
e. Glass-ionomer light-setting cement

8. A 25-year-old student complains of a carious cavity in the 22 tooth. The fillings fell out 2 months ago. The tooth had been treated before for pulpitis. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity with the rests of filling on the medial surface of the 22 tooth. The crown of the 22 tooth is dirty pink. X-ray shows a root canal filled with the filling material by half of the root length; in the region of the root apex there is a well-defined focus of destruction of bone tissue 0,3*0,3 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Residual pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Radicular cyst

9. A 35-year-old patient complains about constant dull pain in the 25 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 25 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. The purulent discharges from the canal followed the probing. What method of diagnostics should be applied to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Bacteriological examination
b. Deep probing
c. Electric pulp test
d. Thermal test
*e. X-ray examination

10. A 32-year-old patient complains of mouth soreness, body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, indisposition. Such condition has occurred periodically for several years after the patient had had a cold. Objectively: lips are covered with haemorrhagic crusts, hyperaemic mucous membrane of lips and cheeks has erosions covered with fibrinous films. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pemphigus vulgaris
b. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatitis
c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
*d. Multiform exudative erythema
e. Herpes recidivicus

11. A 28 year old woman complains about acute pain on the left of her upper jaw during eating. 6 days ago the 28 tooth was extracted, after that the pain came. The patient considers that extraction of the 28 tooth caused "damaging" of the next tooth. Objectively: alveolus of the 28 tooth is at a stage of healing. On the distal surface of the 27 tooth there is a carious cavity in the precervical area that doesnt communicate with the tooth cavity. Cold stimulus causes short attack of pain. Dentin of walls and floor is light and softened. Probing of the floor is painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Acute local pulpitis

12. A 34-year-old male patient complains of acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is getting worse as affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he didnt consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis

13. A patient complains about pain in the 45 tooth induced by cold, sour and sweet food stimuli. The pain abates when the stimulus action is stopped. Objectively: there is a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within mantle dentin filled with food rests and softened dentin, overhanging enamel edeges are chalky. What is the diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Acute median caries

14. A 35-year-old patient has been diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 36 tooth. There is a Blacks class II cavity affecting masticatory surface. What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
*a. Light-cure microhybride composite
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Light-cure microfilled composite
d. Light-cure fluid composite
e. Glass ionomer cement

15. A 25-year-old patient complains of intermittent pain during taking sweet and cold food in the 21 tooth. Objectively: there is a hard tissue defect within the enamel in the cervical region of the 21 tooth. The enamel edges are uneven and chalky. Probing the cavity bottom provokes no pain, there is short-term pain reaction to cold stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel erosion
*b. Superficial caries
c. Initial caries
d. Wedge-shaped defect
e. Enamel hypoplasia

16. Preventive examination of a 55-year-old man revealed a well-defined area of opaque mucosal epithelium of the left cheek that didnt protrude above the surrounding tissues and could not be removed on scraping. Crowns of the 34, 35, 36 teeth were strongly decayed and had sharp edges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Candidiasis
b. Soft leukoplakia
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Lupus erythematosus
*e. Leukoplakia

17. A 50-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the upper frontal teeth. After meticulous examination the patient was diagnosed with wedge-shaped defect of the 11, 12, 13, 21, 22, 23 teeth. What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
a. Glass-ionomer cement
b. Silicate cement
*c. Compomer restorative material
d. Chemical-cure composite
e. Silicophosphate cement

18. A 30-year-old patient has a carious cavity in the 11 tooth within parapulpar dentin. The tooth corner and its cutting edge are affected. What filling material is best for restoration of the anatomic tooth form?
a. Light-cure glass-ionomer cement
b. Silicate cement
*c. Light-cure composite
d. Chemical-cure paste-paste composite
e. Chemical-cure powder-liquid composite

19. A 29-year-old patient complains of acute paroxysmal pain in the upper jaw on the left, that gets worse during having cold food and irradiates into the ear and temple. A year ago she experienced intense pain in the 27 the tooth but didnt consult a dentist. Three days ago there was the second attack of pain. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 27th tooth, interconnecting with the tooth cavity. Probing the open area causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute limited pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

20. A 33-year-old male patient complains about tongue pain that is getting worse during eating and talking. Objectively: there is a painful ulcer 0,6 cm large on the lateral surface of tongue. The floor is covered with grey deposit. The crown of the 47 tooth is destroyed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Decubital ulcer
b. Hard chancre
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Trophic ulcer

21. A 27-year-old patient complains about pain of the 35 tooth caused by cold stimuli, that quickly abates after elimination of stimulus. Objective examination of the 35 tooth revealed a defect of hard tooth tissue within enamel. Defect edges are fragile and white. Electroodontodiagnosis is 5 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
*c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Enamel erosion

22. A 20-year-old pregnant woman complains of gingival enlargement, bleeding and pain during eating and tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival papillae on the upper and lower jaw are hyperaemic, haemorrhagic, painfu, cover the crowns of teeth by 1/2. Scalloped contours of marginal gingiva are abnormal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form
*b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

23. A 23-year-old patient complains of whitish spots on the masticatory teeth, drawing of mouth during taking acidic food. The spots appeared about 3 months ago. Objectively: the cervical region of the 46, 36, 27 teeth exhibits some chalk-like spots that can be easily stained with 2% methylene blue, probing reveals the surface roughness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic superficial caries
*b. Acute initial caries
c. Enamel hypoplasia
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Endemic fluorosis

24. A 23-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating solid food. Objectively: gingiva of the frontal part of mandible is hyperaemic, edematic, it bleeds on palpation. Mucous membrane of the oral cavity as well as gingiva in other regions present no changes. The patient has deep overbite. Teeth are stable except for the 41 and 31 (І degree of mobility). X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by one third of root length in the region of the 42, 41, 32, 31 teeth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Catarrhal gingivitis
b. I degree parodontosis
c. Initial generalized periodontitis
d. Generalized I degree periodontitis
*e. Localised periodontitis

25. A 22-year-old patient complains about short-lasting spasmodic pain in the 26 tooth with long periods of pain absence. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity in the masticatory surface, dental cavity is not opened. Probing causes pain in the pulp horn projection. Thermal stimuli cause sharp pain, percussion is painless. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
*c. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

26. A 27-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival edge is hyperaemic, edematic, painful on touch. Periodontal pouches are absent. X-ray picture shows resorption of cortical plate, osteoporosis of interdental septa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Initial generalized periodontitis
b. Generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Periodontitis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis

27. A 20 year old patient complains about gum itching, gingival haemorrage during tooth brushing and eating, unusual look of gums. He has been observing these presentations for the last 1,5 year. It is known from the patients anamnesis that he has been taking diphenylamine anticonvulsants for 2 years. Objective examination revealed gingival hyperemia and edema. In the frontal part the gums cover vestibular surface of teeth by 1/2 of their height. Along the loose gingival edge growth of granulation tissue is present, probing causes gingival haemorrage. No roentgenological changes were revealed. Make a diagnosis:
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Chronic ulcerative gingivitis
*c. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Localized periodontitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

28. A 20-year-old patient complains about pain and haemorrhages in the region of the 36 tooth occuring during eating solid food. Objectively: medial masticatory surface of the 36 tooth has a large carious cavity occupied by a carneous tumour-like formation, probing induces haemorrhage and pain in the region of connection of the carious cavity with the pulp chamber. Percussion is painless. Electroodontodiagnosis is 40 microampere. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Hypertrophic papillitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Epulis

29. A patient complains about spontaneous pain in the area of his 15 tooth he has been feeling for 2 days. Thermal stimuli make the pain worse, its attacks last up to 30 minutes. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 15 tooth consisting of light softened dentin, floor probing is painful in one point, reaction to the thermal stimuli is positive, percussion is painless. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Acute local pulpitis
b. Pulp hyperemia
c. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute deep caries
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

30. A 57-year-old patient complains about dental hypersensitivity to chemical stimuli, gum itch. Objectively: roots are exposed down to 1/3 of their length, gums are dense and pale rose. Wedge-shaped defects in the area of the 14, 13, 24, 25, 26, 34 teeth are within the dentine. Probing of dental cervixes and wedge-shaped defects is painfull. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atrophic gingivitis
b. Localised periodontitis
c. Generalized periodontitis
d. II degree periodontitis
*e. I degree parodontosis

31. A 35-year-old patient complains of progressing throbbing pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity filled with softened dentine, tooth cavity is closed, probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain. There is I grade tooth mobility. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

32. A patient complains of burning, itch and lower lip enlargement. He has been suffering from this for a long time. Objectively: the patients face is asymmetric due to the flattening of nasolabial fold. His lower lip is edematic, of normal colour, painless on palpation. The patient has plicated tongue. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
b. Lymphangioma
c. Granulomatous Mieschers cheilitis
d. Hemangioma
e. Quinckes edema

33. A 43-year-old patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 36th tooth. X-ray examination revealed a breakage of an endodontic tool in the distal root. The root apex exhibits a well-defined area of bone tissue destruction (d = 5 mm) with clear margins. What method of treatment is most appropriate in this case?
a. Root apex resection
b. Tooth replantation
c. Root amputation
*d. Dental hemisection
e. Conservative treatment

34. A 30-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect and slight pain in the 44 tooth during tooth brushing. Objectively: there is a Blacks class V carious cavity within mantle dentine. Probing of the cavity walls causes slight pain, thermal probe is positive. What filling material is to be chosen for restoration of this cavity?
a. Metal ceramics
*b. Compomer restorative material
c. Amalgam
d. Chemical-cure composite
e. Polycarboxylate cement

35. A 37-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage, offensive breath, tooth mobility, difficult mastication. Objectively: the gums are of cyanotic-red colour, periodontal pockets are 6 mm deep and contain serous exudate, there is II class tooth mobility, moderate amount of subgingival and supragingival tartar; hygiene index is 3 points, there is traumatic occlusion along the entire length of the dental arches. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Acute generalized grade I periodontitis
*c. Chronic generalized grade II periodontitis
d. Histiocytosis-X
e. Acute generalized II grade periodontitis

36. X-ray examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced damage of the compact bone, mild osteoporosis of apices of interalveolar septa and widened periodontal ligament space around the dental necks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontosis, I stage
b. Periodontosis, initial stage
c. Chronic generalized periodontitis, I stage
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*e. Chronic generalized periodontitis, initial stage

37. An 18-year-old patient complains of short-term pain in the 37 tooth caused by sweet and cold stimuli. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity within mantle dentine. The cavity is filled with softened dentine. Probing of the cavity walls induces pain in the region of dentinoenamel junction, electroodontodiagnosis is 6 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Pulp hyperaemia
*d. Acute median caries
e. Acute deep caries

38. An 18 year old patient complains of gingival painfulness and haemorrhage, halitosis, temperature rise up to 38,6°C, general weakness, appetite loss. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is hyperemic and dry; tongue is covered with white fur, gingival papillae are edematic, their apices have areas of necrotic deposit that can be easily removed leaving bleeding surface beneath. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged, palpatory painful. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Candida fungi
*b. Fusospirochetal symbiosis
c. Pale treponema
d. Streptostaphylococci
e. Virus of herpes simplex

39. A 52-year-old female patient complains of dry mouth, taste impairment, burning and pricking sensations in the tongue that disappear during eating but intensify at the end of the day. For the first time such problems arose 2 years ago after a psychic trauma. She has a history of anacid gastritis. Objectively: the general condition is satisfactory, the patient is restless, tearful. Oral mucosa is pale pink, dry; filiform papillae on the dorsum of tongue are reduced. Pharyngeal reflex is dramatically reduced. There is segmetal disturbance of facial skin sensation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Desquamative glossitis
*b. Glossodynia
c. Ganglionitis of sublingual ganglions
d. Moller-Hunter glossitis
e. Chronic atrophic candidous glossitis

40. A 27-year-old patient complains of bleeding, pain and swelling of gums, tooth mobility, halitosis, general weakness. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful, gums are hyperemic and cyanotic, they are also swollen and bleed at probing, periodontal pockets are 5-8 mm deep and contain sero-purulent exudate. There is massive dental deposit, gingival recession and tooth migration. X-ray picture shows diffuse osteoporosis and irregular, predominantly vertical, resorption of alveolar septa down to 2/3 of root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Eosinophilic granuloma
b. Grade III parodontosis
*c. Exacerbation of generalized grade III periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized grade III periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of generalized grade II periodontitis

41. A 16-year-old patient complains about experiencing gingival enlargement, pain and haemorrhage throughout a year. Objectively: gingival papillae are enlarged and overlap tooth crowns by 1/2 of their height. Gums exhibit bright red granulations and are painful on palpation. There are considerable calculus deposits. X-ray picture shows no changes of alveolar process. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Localised periodontitis
d. Ulcerous gingivitis
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

42. During restoration of a II class (according to Blacks classification) carious cavity of the 25 tooth a doctor applied methods of total mordanting and drying of hard tissues. After that he noticed that enamel surface became chalky and dentin became completely dry. How should he treat enamel and dentin surfaces for the further restoration by method of "wet-Bonding"?
*a. With dentin wetting agent
b. Enamel and dentin should be treated with adhesive system
c. Enamel and dentin should be treated with alcohol
d. Enamel and dentin should be treated with hydrogen peroxide
e. Enamel and dentin should be treated with mordanting gel once again

43. A 42 year old patient complains about tooth mobility, change of tooth position, foul taste, pain during food mastication. Objectively: teeth of both upper and lower jaws are mobile (2-3 degree), there are also diastems and diaereses. Tooth roots are dehisced by 1/2. There are serous purulent discharges from periodontal pockets. Orthopantomogram shows bony tissue destruction down to 2/3 of root length. There are bone pockets. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized periodontitis (III degree)
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Chronic generalized periodontitis (II degree)
d. Atrophic gingivitis
e. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome

44. A 37-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage, pain, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. Objectively: the gums are markedly hyperemic, swollen, bleed on touch, periodontal pockets are 3 mm deep, contain sero-purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar processes, resorption of the interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized grade II periodontitis, chronic course
b. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Generalized grade I periodontitis
d. Generalized grade II periodontitis, exacerbation
e. Generalized grade I periodontitis, chronic course

45. A 21-year-old patient complains of a drop-shaped bulge in the cervical region. Objectively: there is an enamel droplet of about 2 mm in diameter on the vestibular surface of the 33 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Supernumerary tooth
c. Marble-bone disease
*d. Enamel hyperplasia
e. Fluorosis

46. A 67-year-old patient was diagnosed with cemental caries of the 35 tooth. What filling material should be chosen?
a. Silver amalgam
b. Silidont
c. Silicin
*d. Glass-ionomer cement
e. Chemical-cure composite material

47. A 50-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication, teeth mobility, offensive breath, gingival hemorrhage. Objectively: the gum is hyperemic and cyanotic, dental calculus is present. Parodontal pouches are 8 mm deep within upper jaw molars. The pouches of other teeth are 6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of bone tissue by 2/3-1/2 of tooth roots. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute generalized ІІ degree periodontitis
*b. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
c. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Acute generalized ІІІ degree periodontitis

48. An 18 year old patient complains about gingival enlargement, haemorrhage and pain during eating. Objectively: gingival edema, hyperemia, enlargement is up to 1/3 of tooth crown length. Palpation causes intense haemorhage and pain. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute condition of initial generalized periodontitis
*b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

49. An 18-year-old patient complains about gingival enlargement, pain and haemorrhage when eating solid food. Objectively: hyperaemia, gingival edema, hypertrophy of gingival edge up to 1/2 of crown height by the 12, 13, 14 teeth. Formalin test is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ulcero-necrotic gingivitis
b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Generalized II degree periodontitis, chronic course
d. Catarrhal gingivitis
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

50. A 27-year-old male patient complains of aching long-lasting pain in the 15 tooth during having meals, especially cold food. Sometimes the pain occurs when the temperature changes. Objectively: on the distal surface of the 15 tooth there is a cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing is painful. Electroexcitability of the pulp is 35 mA. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
*b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Hyperemia of the pulp

51. A 20-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 44 tooth. Objectively: the 44 tooth has a deep carious cavity in the masticatory surface, the dentine is dense and pigmented. Probing, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 12 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic median caries
*c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

52. A 25-year-old patient complains of a light brown spot in the upper front tooth. Objectively: the 23 tooth has a single light brown spot in the precervical region. Probing reveals smooth surface. The tooth is nonresponsive to cold and probing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute initial caries
e. Fluorosis

53. A 45-year-old patient complains of a rapidly growing formation on his lower lip. Examination of the red border of lips revealed a greyish-red nodule with a hollow in the centre which is filled with corneous masses that can be easily removed. The nodule is painless, mobile. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Basal cell carcinoma
b. Circumscribed precancerous hyperkeratosis of vermilion border
c. Papilloma
d. Nodulous verrucous precancer of vermilion border
*e. Keratoacanthoma

54. A 60-year-old patient underwents sanitation of the oral cavity before an operation on account of cataract. After examination the patient was diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 22 tooth (Blacks class V). What filling material should NOT be used in this patient?
a. Chemical-cure glass-ionomer cement
b. Chemical-cure microhybrid material
*c. Light-cure microhybrid material
d. Silicate cement
e. Chemical-cure macrofilled composite

55. A young woman complained about having vesicles in oral cavity, painful ulcers, especially during talking and eating; muscle and joint pain, body temperature rise, indisposition, weakness. She fell suddenly ill 2 days ago. Objectively: to- 38,4°C. Vermilion border is covered with bloody crusts that stick together and impede mouth opening. Mucous membrane of lips, cheeks, mouth floor, tongue, soft palate is hyperemic and edematic; there are single vesicles and large painful erosions covered with fibrinous deposit on it. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. There is hypersalivation. Nikolskys symptom is negative. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Non-acantholytic pemphigus
c. Acantholytic pemphigus
d. Secondary syphilis
*e. Multiform exudative erythema

56. A steeplejack with a long record of service consults a dentist about dryness, burning and insignificant lip edema. The same symptoms were noted one year ago in autumn. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Manganottis cheilitis
b. Cheilitis exfoliativa
c. Contact cheilitis
d. Cheilitis glandularis
*e. Meteorogical cheilitis

57. A 20 year old patient complains about gingival pain and haemorrhage she has been suffering from for a week. The pain is getting worse during eating, haemorrhage is usually induced by mechanical stimuli. Objectively: there are evident hyperemia and edema of gums in the area of inferior frontal teeth. Apices of gingival papillae are dome-shaped, enlarged. Gum palpation causes pain, slight haemorrhage. No roentgenological changes were revealed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Atrophic gingivitis
*b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Localized periodontitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Ulcerative gingivitis

58. A 42 year old patient applied to a dentist and complained about white caseous deposit on the dorsum of his tongue and burning sensation. It is known from the patients anamnesis that he underwent treatment in an in-patient hospital on account of pneumonia. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute pseudomembranous candidosis
b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Scarlet fever
e. Typical form of leukoplakia

59. A patient complained about frequent haemorrhages from the mucous membrane of oral and nasal cavities, he mentioned also that his father had the same problems. Objectively: there are multiple telangiectasias and angimatous formations on face skin as well as on mucous membrane of nose, cheeks and lips. Blood count is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Addison-Biermer disease
*b. Rendu-Osler-Weber disease
c. Vaquez disease
d. Werlhofs disease
e. Cushings basophilism

60. Unused stomatological instruments were left on a sterile table at the end of the working day. What measures should be taken in order to provide sterility of these instruments?
a. Disinfection, sterilization
b. Presterilization treatment, sterilization
c. Disinfection only
*d. Sterilization without preliminary processing
e. Disinfection, presterilization treatment, sterilization

61. A 42-year-old patient complains about gingival pain, progressing gingival haemorrhage, increasing tooth mobility, halitosis. Objectively: gums are evidently hyperaemic, extremely edematic, they bleed easily on palpation. Tooth roots are exposed, parodontal pouches are 4-6 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate, there is also supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. II-III grade tooth mobility is present. Orthopantomogram shows resorption of interdental septa down to 1/2 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of generalized III degree periodontitis
c. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis

62. A 23 year old patient underwent treatment of pulpitis of her 16 tooth. During endodontic procedure an obstructed distal buccal canal was found. What medications can be applied for chemical dilatation of root canal?
a. Essential oils
b. Medications with antibacterial and anti-inflammatory effect
c. Resorcin-formaline liquid
d. 30% solution of silver nitrate
*e. 10-20% solutions of EDTA sodium salts

63. A 38-year-old patient complains of discomfort, occasional sensation of tearing in the 17 tooth, infrequent pain during eating hot food that lasts for 10-20 minutes. Objectively: the 17 tooth is filled with composite materials, the tooth is slightly darker than the other ones. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Recurrent caries
e. Chronic granulating pulpitis

64. A 28-year-old patient complains about constant localised pain that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the carious cavity causes no pain, percussion is painful, X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute purulent periodontitis
*e. Acute serous periodontitis

65. A 23-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 16 tooth. Objectively: the 16 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing, percussion cause no pain. There is a fistula on the gingiva in the region of root apex projection of the 16 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

66. A patient applied to a dentist and complained about periodical pain in his upper jaw. Anamnesis data: the 12 tooth has been previously treated on account of pulpitis. Objectively: crown of the 12 tooth was restored by permanent filling material. X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows a focus of bony tissue destruction near the root apex of the 12 tooth up to 15 mm in diameter. Root canal is filled up to the top. What is the most optimal treatment method?
a. Dissection along the mucogingival fold
*b. Root apex resection of the 12 tooth
c. Removal of the 12 tooth
d. Conservative treatment
e. Replantation of the 12 tooth

67. A dentist was called to a patient being treated in the cardiological department after myocardium infarction. The patient was diagnosed with acute condition of chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 36 tooth. What method of pulpitis treatment should be chosen taking into account grave condition of the patient?
a. Conservative method
*b. Devital amputation
c. Vital amputation
d. Vital extirpation
e. Devital extirpation

68. Renovation of a dental office involves installation of luminous tube lamps. Specify the required illuminance level in lux:
a. 400 lx
b. 200 lx
c. 100 lx
*d. 500 lx
e. 300 lx

69. Walls and floor of a dental room were painted with recommended light colours. What is the required coefficient of reflection from the walls, ceiling and floor?
a. 30
b. 35
*c. 60
d. 25
e. 20

70. A 42-year-old builder complains about a condyloma on his lower lip. It appeared 1,5 month ago. It has been significantly growing throughout the last week. Objectively: the red border of the lower lip is cyanotic and infiltrated, it has some isolated closly adhering squamae. There is a well-defined hemispherical formation 8 mm in diameter and 4 mm high in the centre. The formation is of grey-and-blue-and-red colour, it has rough surface formed by thin, closely adhering and thick-based squamae. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, dense and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Viral wart
*b. Lower lip cancer
c. Pyogenic granuloma
d. Verruciform precancer
e. Keratoacanthoma

71. A patient complains about pain in the oral cavity, burning and dryness. Examination revealed fiery-red dry mucous membrane. The tongue is crimson, dry, glossy, filiform papillae are atrophied. There is some deposit in tongue folds that is hard to be removed. The patient undergoes treatment for pneumonia, she takes antibiotics. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. B2 hypovitaminosis
b. Benign migratory glossitis
c. Fastened erythema
d. Pellagrous glossitis
*e. Acute atrophic candidiasis

72. A dentist applied to the regional sanitation center for a permission to open a private dental office with two universal dental sets. Planned area of the reception room is 26 m2. According to existing norms, the dental office with two universal dental sets must have the following area:
a. 20 m2 for each set and 12 m2 in addition
*b. 14 m2 for each set and 10 m2 in addition
c. 10 m2 for each set and 7 m2 in addition
d. 10 m2 for each set and 10 m2 in addition
e. 7 m2 for each set and 7 m2 in addition

73. A 20-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic deep caries of the 12 tooth. Objectively: the 12 tooth has a deep carious cavity on the aproximal-distal surface. Distal crown angle of the 12 tooth is also affected with caries. Choose the material for correction of the indicated defect:
a. Silica-alumina cement
*b. Light-cure composite material
c. Light-cure glass-ionomer cement
d. Chemical-cure glass ionomer cement
e. Polycarboxylate cement

74. Examination of a 23 year old patient revealed chronic candidosis of oral mucous membrane, generalized lymphadenopathy. Anamnesis data: the patient has been suffering from herpes for a year. Body temperature persistently rises up to 37,4-37,5°C, body weight has reduced by 8 kg over the last month. What disease can be indicated by this symptom group?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Chronic leukosis
c. Candidosis
*d. AIDS
e. Acute leukosis

75. A dentist performing gum anesthetization before the closed curettage had mistakenly used the 10% solution of silver nitrate instead of 10% lidocaine solution. The gums immediately became white, swollen, painful. Which of these medications is to be used for emergency care?
a. 50% of ethyl alcohol
*b. 3% solution of potassium iodide
c. 0,1% solution of liquid ammonia
d. 0,5% solution of acetic acid
e. 2% solution of citric acid

76. A 35 year old patient complained about toothache on the left of his upper jaw that appears during eating, can be caused by thermal stimuli (especially by cold water) as well as by mechanical and chemical stimuli. The pain abates when the stimuli are eliminated. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity with a narrow inlet within circumpulpar dentin. Probing of carious cavity floor is painful. Thermodiagnosis causes acute pain that abates immediately after stimulus elimination. Electric odontodiagnostics results - 15 microampere. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Acute partial pulpitis
c. Chronic simple pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Pulp hyperemia

77. A patient complains about paroxysmal upper jaw toothache on the left that is getting worse at night. Toothache intensifies also under stimulation and irradiates to the left eye and temple. Similar attacks were noted three months ago, the patient did not undergo any treatment. Objectively: the 25 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain at the point of communication, vertical percussion is slightly painful, horizontal one is painless. Mucous membrane in the projection of root apex of the 25 tooth is unchanged, its palpation is painless. Thermal probe causes acute pain, the pain attack is long-lasting. Electroodontodiagnosis is 60 microampere. X-ray picture shows a slight widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 25 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute generalized pulpitis

78. A 23-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing, intensive formation of dental plaque despite thorough dental care. Objectively: gingival papillae are slightly edematic, congestively hyperemic, bleed when touched. Hygiene index according to Fedorov and Volodkina is 3,5. What toothpaste would you recommend this patient as a part of complex therapy?
a. Toothpaste containing mineralizing components
b. Gel toothpaste with microelements
c. Toothpaste with antifungal agents
*d. Salt-containing toothpaste
e. Fluorine-containing toothpaste

79. A dentist fills a Black class II carious cavity in the 36 tooth of a 35-year-old man by sandwich method in one office visit. What glass-ionomer cement should be chosen as basic liner in this case?
a. Reinforced
*b. Hybrid
c. Classical
d. Water-hardening
e. Condensable

80. A pregnant 24-year-old woman complains about emergence of several new carious cavities, falling out of old fillings. Objective examination revealed: index of decayed, missing and filled teeth (DMF) is 16, Feodorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 3,3. Choose the optimal material for carious cavity filling in this case:
a. Silicophosphate cement
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Chemical-cure composite
d. Silver amalgam
e. Light-cure composite

81. A 22-year-old patient undergoes treatment for acute deep caries of the 26th tooth. The pulp-capping material of choice is Ca(OH)2/salicylate cement "Life", the constant filling material is ligh-cure condensable composite "Solitaire-2". The pulp cap should be covered with:
*a. Glass-ionomer cement
b. Insulating varnish
c. Zinc-eugenol cement
d. Phosphate cement
e. Adhesive composite system

82. A 19 year old man complained about gingival haemorrhage and painfulness. Objectively: in the frontal part of his upper and lower jaws overcrowding of teeth is present; there are hyperemia, cyanosis and enlargement of gingival papillae up to one third of crown height; massive formation of soft tooth deposit. What procedure should be included into the treatment program?
a. Fluctuating currents
*b. Darsonval currents
c. Microwave therapy
d. Diathermy
e. Ultra-high frequency therapy

83. A 54-year-old male patient complains about progressing pain in the area of upper jaw on the left that first arose 3 days ago. Body temperature is up to 37,2°C. Objectively: gingival mucous membrane is edematic, hyperemic, it bleeds slightly. Parodontal pouches are 6-7 mm deep and contain a small amount of purulent exudate. A painful infiltrate is palpated in the region of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth has ІІІ degree mobility, the rest of teeth have І-ІІ degree mobility. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 2/3 of root length. What is the most appropriate treatment method of the 26 tooth?
a. Lancing of abscess via parodontal pouch
*b. Extraction of the 26 tooth
c. Curettage of parodontal pouche
d. Temporal splintage, conservative therapy
e. Lancing of abscess via gum

84. A group of specialists conducts an epidemiological survey of certain age groups of population aimed at evaluation of periodontal disease prevalence and treatment needs. These rates are studied by means of the following index:
a. PI (Russel index)
b. PMA (Parma)
c. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion index)
d. PDI (Ramfjord index)
*e. CPITN (WHO index)

85. A 25-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the mouth, headache, articular pain, body temperature rise up to 38,6°C. Red border of lips is covered with haemorrhagic crusts, mucous membrane of the oral cavity has big erosions and ulcers coated with greyish incrustation. Hand skin exhibits erythematous spots 1-1,5 cm in diameter with a vesicle in the middle. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Medicamentous stomatitis
*b. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
c. Lyells syndrome
d. Behcets syndrome
e. Multiform exudative erythema

86. A 36-year-old female patient complains about an aesthetic defect of upper frontal teeth. In past history: she undergoes regular check-up in the endocrinological department on account of thyrotoxicosis. Enamel defects appeared several years ago and since that have been gradually expanding. Examination revealed that the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth had transverse oval enamel defects on the vestibular surfaces. Probing and cold test is painless. Floor of the defects is smooth, glossy and hard. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Necrosis of hard tissues
*d. Erosion of hard tissies
e. Wedge-shaped defects

87. A 23-year-old patient complains of minor root exposure, gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing, gum itch. Objectively: there is supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. Gums are hyperaemic, edematic, pockets are 3,5 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 1/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. II degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

88. A dentist treats a 22-year-old patient on account of acute deep caries of the 26 tooth. As lining material the dentist chose calcium salicylate cement "Life". What material should be chosen for insulation of the lining?
a. Insulating varnish
b. Zinc phosphate cement
c. Zinc oxide eugenol cement
*d. Glass ionomer cement
e. Adhesive composite system

89. A 62-year-old patient complains of a painless formation on his tongue that appeared several months ago. Objectively: the patient has a lot of carious and completely decayed teeth, lateral surface of tongue exhibits a painless whitish formation 10*5 mm large with irregular surface in form of verrucae. Histological examination revealed thickening of corneal epithelial layer of intermittent keratinization type. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Verrucous form of leukoplakia
b. Hyperplastic form of candidiasis
c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Hyperkeratotic form of lichen ruber planus
e. Verrucous precancer

90. A gravida (36 weeks) complains of gingival haemorrhages and excessive plaque despite a thorough hygienic care of oral cavity. Objectively: gingival papilla and marginal gingival edge are spongiose, bleeding when touched. Fedorov-Volodkinas hygiene indexis 3,7 points. What kind of toothpaste should be recommended to this patient after the professional oral hygiene?
a. Fluorine-containing toothpaste
b. Gel toothpaste
c. Toothpaste with mineralizing agents
d. Herbal toothpaste
*e. Chlorhexidine-containing toothpaste

91. A 35-year-old man has a medium deep carious cavity in the 37 tooth (Blacks class II). For its filling a dentist chose technique of layer-by-layer restoration. What composite should be coating the floor and walls of the carious cavity in order to form superadaptive initial layer?
a. Condensable
b. Microhybrid
c. Microfilled
*d. Flowable
e. Macrofilled

92. A patient had an epileptic attack during tooth preparation. What actions should the doctor take?
a. No actions should be taken
b. To seat the patient with forward position of his head, to fix his hindhead
c. To lay the patient in prone, head-down position, to fix his arms
*d. To lay the patient down with laterad position of his head, to fix his tongue
e. To seat the patient on an armchair in upright position

93. A patient being at a dentist presented suddenly with tachycardia, sweating, trembling, nausea, hunger. The patient is conscious. He suffers from diabetes mellitus. What aid should be rendered by the dentist?
a. The dentist should lay the patient down on a flat surface, lower cephalic pole, open the windows
b. The dentist should make intramuscular injection of adrenaline (0,5-1,0 mg)
c. The dentist should make intravenous injection of corticosteroids
*d. The dentist should break the procedure off and give the patient sugar in any form
e. The dentist should give the patient nitroglycerine in form of spray or sublingually

94. On removing a dental plaque, a 19-year-old patient is found to have two white patches in the precervical region of the 11 and 21 teeth. After drying the patches increase in size. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Initial caries
b. Local hypoplasia
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Fluorosis

95. A 27-year-old patient has been referred for endodontic treatment on the 45 tooth. Objectively: the tooth crown is decayed, the lateral surface of tongue and cheek mucosa being in direct contact with the 45 tooth are covered with grayish plaques of macerated epithelium that are somewhat raised above the surface of the mucous membrane. Uvula and palatine arches are of dark red colour, and the hard palate has papules with a red rim and covered with grayish epithelium. Submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. White sponge nevus
b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Lupus erythematosus, plaque stage
*e. Secondary syphilis

96. A 44-year-old patient complains about the astringent sensation in the upper jaw incisor, which appeared 1,5 years ago. Objectively: the most convex part of the vestibular surfaces of the 12, 11, 21, 22 crowns has roundish defects with smooth, shiny, dense surface, that reach dentine in depth. The depth of defects is gradually decreasing from the centre to the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Destructive fluorosis
c. Wedge-shaped defect
d. Systemic hypoplasia
*e. Enamel erosion

97. A 42-year-old patient complains of a cavity in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity, dentine is dense, pigmented, there is pain reaction to a cold stimulus, percussion and probing are painless. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
*c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

98. An 18-year-old patient complains about ulceration in the oral cavity, spontaneous bleeding of mucous membrane, pain during food intake and talking, nosebleeds. He has a history of: aggravation of general condition, weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, headache, joint pain. What method of diagnostics should be applied to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Immunogram
b. Blood sugar test
*c. Clinical blood analysis
d. HIV test
e. Allergy test

99. A 25 year old patient applied to a clinic for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. During preparation of the 45 tooth on account of chronic median caries the patient turned pale, there appeared cold clammy sweat on her forehead, nausea, ear noise. The patient lost consciousness. Objectively: pulse - 50 bpm, AP - 80/60 mm Hg, shallow breath, miotic pupils. Make a diagnosis of this state:
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
c. Quinckes edema
*d. Syncope
e. Stenocardia

100. Rising from a chair after a dental procedure, a 60-year-old patient felt retrosternal pain radiating to the left arm, nausea, weakness. Objectively: the patient is pale, his face is sweaty. AP is 90/60 mm Hg, pulse is arrhythmic, of poor volume, 100/min. Heart sounds are muffled, vesicular breathing is present. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary artery thrombosis
*b. An attack of coronary artery disease
c. Hypertensic crisis
d. Myocardial infarction
e. Stenocardia

101. A 23-year-old patient was delivered to a traumatology centre with a dirty cut wound of her right foot. A doctor performed initial surgical d-bridement and made an injection of antitetanus serum. Some time later the patient’s condition got abruptly worse: she developed extreme weakness, dizziness, palpitation. Objectively: the skin is pale, the patient has cold sweat, frequent pulse of poor volume at a rate of 100 bpm, AP is 90/40 mm Hg. What is the cause of such aggravation?
a. Haemorrhagic shock
b. Infectious-toxic shock
c. Drug disease (seroreaction)
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Pain shock

102. A man was found in a street in unconscious state and delivered to the sanitary inspection room. At small intervals the man presents with recurrent attacks of tonic and clonic convulsions of the upper and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, his pupils are mydriatic, don’t react to light. The tongue has teeth indentations. Involuntary urination was noted. Examination revealed no symptoms of focal cerebral lesion. AP is 140/90 mm Hg. The patients head can be freely brought to the chest. Specify the most probable pathology:
a. Tetanus
b. Acute meningoencephalitis
c. Parenchymatous hemorrhage
d. Cerebral infraction
*e. Epilepsy, status epilepticus

103. A patient was found unconscious in her flat heated with firewood. The stove pipe damper was closed, it smelt of smoke in the room. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, her skin and mucous membranes are of cherry red colour. Pupils exhibit no reaction to light, corneal and tendinous reflexes are absent, muscle tone is decreased. Ps is 96 bpm, of poor volume. Heart sounds are muffled, there are solitary extrasystoles, AP is 90/60 mm Hg. In the lower lungs solitary small bubbling rales are present, respiratory rate is 28/min. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute methane intoxication
b. Acute benzol intoxication
c. Acute chlorine intoxication
d. Acute intoxication with sulfur dioxide gas
*e. Acute intoxication with carbon oxide

104. During transportation of a 60-year-old patient an emergency doctor noted aggravation of his general condition, pulselessness, mydriatic pupils, absence of respiratory movements. It will take 5 minutes to get to the admission ward. What actions should the doctor take in the first place?
a. Deliver the patient to the hospital as soon as possible
b. Facilitate oxygen inhalation
c. Make an intravenous injection of polyglucinum
*d. Start cardiopulmonary resuscitation
e. Make an intracardiac injection of adrenaline

105. An 18-year-old woman has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 5 years. She receives 36 units of insulin per day. During pneumonia her condition got abruptly worse: the patient presented with increased thirst, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and sleepiness. In the evening the patient refused to eat and did not get her regular insulin dose; in the morning she lost consciousness. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, the skin is dry, turgor is decreased. The tongue is also dry. Respiration is deep and noisy, there is sharp smell of acetone from the mouth. Body temperature is 36,6 degrees, Ps is 100, small; AP is 90/50 mm Hg. Urine exhibits extremely positive reaction to acetone. Blood glucose is 33 millimole/l. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Hepatic coma
b. Cerebral coma
c. Hyperosmolar coma
d. Lactacidemic coma
*e. Ketoacidotic coma

106. A 28-year-old man attended a glasshouse in a botanic garden. After he had smelt at an orchid he turned pale and lost consciousness. Objectively: heart rate is 115/min, arterial pressure is 50/0 mm Hg. What drug should be injected to the patient in the first place?
a. Strophanthine
b. Cordiamin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Mesaton
e. Dimedrol

107. A 68-year-old patient has been taking diclofenac because of pain in the knee joints for about a year. In the evening after substantial meal the patient presented with liquid black stool, drastic weakness, single vomiting after which the patient lost consciousness. Emergency team delivered him to the hospital. Objectively: the patient is conscious, with slightly deferred reaction, pale. Heart rate is 20 breaths/min, Ps is 102 bpm, AP is 110/70 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, painful in the epigastrium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of mesenterial arteries
*b. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
c. Myocardium infarction
d. Food poisoning
e. Apoplectic attack

