1. A 45-year-old female patient complains about pain caused by thermal srtimuli and spontaneous pain in the 26 tooth. A week ago this tooth was treated for pulpitis. Objectively: the 26 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, thermal stimulus causes slowly intensifying long-lasting pain. X-ray picture shows that the palatine canal is filled by 2/3, buccal canals contain no filling material. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Trauma of periodontium tissue
*b. Incomplete pulp extirpation
c. Infection
d. Inadequate canal filling
e. Inflammation in the periodontium

2. A 49-year-old patient complains about pain in the oral cavity induced by eating. He suffers from CHD. Objective examination revealed dyspnea, limb edema. Oral cavity isnt sanitated. On the mucous membrane on the right, there is an ulcer with irregular edges covered with greyish-white necrotic deposit with low-grade inflammation around it. There is also halitosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Ulcero-necrotic stomatitis
*b. Trophic ulcer
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Traumatic ulcer
e. Cancerous ulcer

3. A 48-year-old patient complains about itching gums. Objectively: gums are dense, of normal colour; cold water causes short-term toothache. X-ray picture shows osteosclerosis of interalveolar septa (fine granular bone texture), height of interalveolar septa and integrity of compact substance on their tops is unchanged. Which diagnosis is the most likely?
a. I degree periodontitis
b. I degree parodontosis
c. Atrophic gingivitis
d. Initial periodontitis
*e. Initial parodontosis

4. A patient complains of spontaneous, paroxysmal, irradiating pain with short pain-free intervals. The pain arose 2 days ago and occurs only at night. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute deep caries
*c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

5. A 20 year old homeless and unemployed patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39°C, pain during eating and deglutition, nasal haemorrhages. He has been suffering from this for 10 days. Objectively: herpetic rash on the lips, irregular-shaped erosions covered with fibrinous deposit on the mucous membrane of oral cavity; filmy deposits on the tonsils. Liver is enlarged and sclerotic. Blood count: erythrocytes - 4,5x10^12/l; hemoglobin - 120 g/l; ESR - 25 mm/h; leukocytes – 10x10^9/l; eosinophils - 0; rod nuclear cells - 2; segmentonuclear leukocytes - 31, lymphocytes - 41; monocytes - 10; atypical mononuclears - 14%, plasmatic cells - 2. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Oropharyngal diphtheria
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. AIDS
e. Acute leukosis

6. A 22 year old patient complained about colour change of the 11 tooth crown. The tooth was treated on account of chronic deep caries a year ago. Immediately after treatment the patient felt slight pain. She didnt consult a dentist. X-ray picture shows broadening of periodontal fissure in the area of root apex of the 11 tooth. Percussion is painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic deep caries
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulematous periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

7. A 47-year-old female patient complains of inability to eat hot and cold food, as well as of intense pain caused by sour, sweet and salty food. Objectively: there is a slight loss of enamel on the molars and incisors. Probing and cold test cause acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Enamel hypoplasia
c. Pathological abrasion of dental hard tissues
*d. Hyperesthesia of dental hard tissues
e. Enamel necrosis

8. After removal of dental plaque an 18-year-old patient underwent preventive examination. It revealed painless chalky spots in the precervical region on the vestibular surface of the 22 and 41 teeth. Result of enamel resistance test is 7. What morphological changes are typical for this disease?
a. Degeneratic changes of odontoblasts
*b. Subsurface enamel demineralization
c. Damage of dentinoenamel junction
d. Changes in the mantle dentine
e. Superficial enamel demineralization

9. A 34-year-old male patient consults a dentist about an ulcer on the hard palate. It appeared about a month ago. He has treated it by rinsing with herbal water, but the ulcer is gradually "creeping". Objectively: there is a shallow erethistic ulcer with uneven and undermined edges of soft consistency within the mucous membrane of hard palate. Granulations of the ulcer floor are also present. Yellowish granules are visible on the ulcer periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Actinomycosis
*b. Tuberculous ulcer
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Syphilitic ulcer

10. A 45 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for oral cavity sanation. Anamnesis data: mild case of diabetes. Objectively: mucous membrane of cheeks is unchanged, mainly in retromolar area there are symmetrically placed whitish papulae protruding over the mucous membrane and forming a lace-like pattern. On the upper jaw there are two soldered bridge dentures, the 47 tooth has an amalgam filling, the 46 tooth has a steel crown. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic atrophic candidosis
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Secondary syphilis
d. Leukoplakia
*e. Lichen ruber planus

11. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain caused by cold and sweet food in the 11, 21 teeth, as well as of a cosmetic defect. Examination of the 11, 21 teeth revealed some oval, diagonally arranged enamel defects on the convex part of the vestibular surface of tooth crowns. The defects had smooth, glossy, dense floor. The patient has a history of thyrotoxicosis. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Enamel necrosis
b. Amelogenesis imperfecta
c. Wedge-shaped defect
d. Surface caries
*e. Erosion of dental hard tissues

12. A 36-year-old patient complains of pain under the dental bridge. After its removal the patient has been found to have an ulcer 0,3x0,5 cm large on the alveolar process. The ulcer is slightly painful and soft, the surrounding mucosa is hyperaemic, submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Cancerous ulcer
b. Tuberculous ulcer
c. Trophic ulcer
d. Sutton aphtha
*e. Decubital ulcer

13. A 53-year-old patient was diagnosed with leucoplakia nicotinica Tappeiner. What pathohistological process predominates in histologic pattern of this disease?
a. Papillomatosis
*b. Hyperkeratosis
c. Dyskeratosis
d. Acanthosis
e. Parakeratosis

14. A 16-year-old male patient complains about pain in the oral cavity, ulceration, body temperatureup to 38°C, headache. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is hyperemic and edematic. There are a lot of confluent erosions of polycyclic shape, covered with grey and white deposit, located on hard palate, gums, lips. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Allergic stomatitis
*b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Pemphigus vulgaris
d. Erythema multiforme
e. Aphthous fever

15. A 20-year-old patient complains about feeling spontaneous undurable localised pain in the 26 tooth for one day. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a deep Blacks class I carious cavity. Dentine of its walls and floor is unpigmented, softened, carious cavity is not communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain focused at a single point, cold test induces long-lasting pain. What method of treatment is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Devital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
c. Vital amputation
d. Vital extirpation
*e. Biological method

16. A 22-year-old patient was undergoing treatment of the 25th tooth for deep acute caries. During preparation a dentist accidentally opened the horn of pulp. What method of treatment should be applied?
a. Vital amputation of pulp
b. Vital extirpation
c. Devital extirpation
*d. Biologic method
e. Devital amputation

17. A 39-year-old patient complains of some soft ulcers and tubercles on the oral mucosa, gingival haemorrhage, pain and loosening of teeth. Objectively: mucous membrane of tongue and gums presents single ulcers with soft, swollen, slightly painful edges, covered with a yellow film. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, soft, painless, not adherent to the surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Scrofuloderma
b. Suttons aphthae
c. Lepra
d. Tertiary syphilis
*e. Lupus tuberculosis

18. A 40-year-old patient complains of constant intense throbbing pain in the 23 tooth lasting for 3 days. This problem hasnt bothered him before. Vertical and horizontal percussion is positive, the tooth is mobile, mucous membrane around the 26 tooth is hyperemic and edematous. Palpation of the mucogingival fold in the root apex projection is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute localized periodontitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute purulent pulpitis of the 26 tooth
*c. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute serous pulpitis of the 26 tooth
e. Acute serous periodontitis of the 26 tooth

19. A 25-year-old patient complains of heavy gingival haemorrhages, pain in the oral cavity, weakness, fatigue, fever up to 38°C. These presentations appeared a week ago. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic. Examination of the oral mucosa reveals multiple haemorrhages, friable gums, necrotic areas on the tops of gingival papillae, as well as enlarged, soft, painless lymph nodes. The oral mucosal lesion can be a symptom of the following disease:
*a. Acute leukemia
b. Vincent stomatitis
c. Intoxication with heavy metal salts
d. Hypovitaminosis C
e. Chronic leukemia

20. Preventive examination of a 20-year-old student revealed chronic candidiasis of the oral mucosa, generalized lymphadenopathy. He has a 1-year history of herpes simplex. The body temperature often rises to 37,4-37,5°C, the patient has lost 8 kg of body weight over the last month. These symptoms may be indicative of the following disease:
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
*b. AIDS
c. Acute leukosis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Chronic leukosis

21. A 26 year old patient complains about a sense of tooth heaviness and pain caused by hot food stimuli, halitosis. Objectively: crown of the 46 tooth is grey, there is a deep carious cavity communicating with tooth cavity, superficial probing is painless, deep one is painful, percussion is painful, mucous membrane has no pathological changes. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

22. A 22-year-old student complains of gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: hyperaemia and edema of marginal gingiva of the front teeth on both jaws, periodontal pockets are absent. X-ray reveals no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Localized periodontitis
d. Ulcerative gingivitis
*e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

23. A 31-year-old patient consulted a dentist about teeth sanitation. Objectively: in the precervical region of the 13 and 23 teeth there are irregularly-shaped defects of hard tissues within deep layers of enamel. The floor of the defects is rough, their edges are chalky. What tactics should be chosen as to these defects?
*a. Preparation and filling
b. Remineralizing therapy
c. Silvering of the defects
d. Grinding of the defects
e. Filling with composite material without preparation

24. A 51-year-old female patient complains about food sticking in a right inferior tooth. Objectively: distal masticatory surface of the 45 tooth has a deep carious cavity filled with dense pigmented dentin that doesnt communicate with the tooth cavity. The patient was diagnosed with chronic deep caries. What method of examination allowed the dentist to eliminate chronic periodontitis?
a. Cold test
*b. Electro-odontometry
c. Palpation of projection of root apex
d. Probing
e. Percussion

25. A 38-year-old male patient complains of a carious cavity. He had experienced spontaneous dull pain in the tooth in question before. Objectively: the distal masticatory surface of the 37 tooth presents a deep cavity made of soft pigmented dentin. Percussion is painless. After removing the decay from the cavity, cold water has caused pain lasting for about a minute. X-ray picture shows the deformation of the periodontal gap in the region of the 37 root apices. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
*c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

26. A 37-year-old male patient complains about pain of the 46 tooth during food intake, especially hot food, offensive breath when he sucks his tooth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, masticatory surface of the 48 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 46 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

27. A 17-year-old girl complains about painfulness and gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing and food intake. She has been suffering from it for 1,5 year. She consulted a dentist. There was no considerable effect from treatment. Objectively: gingival papillae are flabby and cyanotic in the region of frontal teeth on both jaws, they overlay teeth crowns by 1/3-1/2 of their height, they bleed on touch. Therapeutic effect can be achieved by means of electrophoresis with:
a. Sodium fluoride
*b. Heparin
c. Vitamin B1
d. Aloe
e. Tripsin

28. A 24-year-old male complains of pain, bad breath, body temperature rise up to 38°C. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. Gums are edematic, hyperaemic, ulcerated, covered with necrotic plaque. There is an excessive buildup of calculus. What additional study should be done in the first place?
a. Test for HIV infection
b. X-ray of jaws
c. Blood sugar test
d. Microscopy of gingival plaque
*e. Complete blood count

29. A 32-year-old patient complains of experiencing dryness and burning of tongue back for a week. The burning intensifies during taking irritating foods. Some time ago he had pneumonia and was treated with antibiotics. Objectively: skin and oral mucosa are pale. The lingual mucosa is hyperemic and edematous, the folds at the back of tongue are covered with the crumbling gray-white plaque, desquamation of the lateral surface of tongue is also present. Saliva is thick and attaches to a spatula. Choose the most effective drug complex for the local treatment:
a. Furacilin + methylene blue
b. Furacilin + solcoseryl
c. Hydrocortizone ointment + solcoseryl
d. Decamin + hydrocortizone ointment
*e. Methylene blue + pimafucin

30. An 18-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise, weakness, pain induced by eating and deglutition. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is erythematic with multiple petechia. Pharynx is hyperaemic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, painless. In blood: leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypic mononuclear cells, ESR is 30 mm/h. What is the leading factor of disease development?
a. Bacterial infection
b. Immediate allergy
c. Delayed allergy
*d. Viral infection
e. Autoimmune disorders

31. A 72-year-old patient complains of burning pain in the corners of mouth. Objectively: the folds of mouth corners have erosions, covered with white coating that can be easily removed, mucous membrane of mouth corners is macerated, of pearly colour. There is pathological tooth wear and decreased vertical dimension of occlusion. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Streptococcal angular cheilitis
c. Syphilitic angular cheilitis
*d. Angular cheilitis candidiasis
e. Chronic recurrent labial fissure

32. Analysis of the contents of periodontal pockets revealed a significant contamination with Candida yeast fungi. Which of the following drugs should be used for instillations?
*a. Clotrimazole
b. Dioxydin
c. Tinidazole
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Trichopol

33. A 50-year-old patient complains about increased sensibility of the exposed tooth cervixes, displacement of teeth, gum itch, pain in the region of the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth caused by chemical and thermal stimuli. Objectively: the gums are dense and anemic. X-ray picture shows atrophy of the alveolar bone reaching two third of interalveolar septa height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atrophic gingivitis
*b. III degree parodontosis
c. Chronic generalized III degree parodontosis
d. II degree parodontosis
e. Chronic generalized II degree parodontosis

34. A 25-year-old patient consulted a doctor about massive gingival haemorrhages, dry mouth, mobility and shifting of teeth, purulent discharges from the gums, bad breath. According to the patient, these presentations turned up about 2 months ago. Before the diagnosis can be made, the following tests should be done in the first place:
a. Immunological studies
b. Acute-phase reactants tests
c. Serologic studies
*d. Blood sugar test
e. Allergological tests

35. A 23-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhages, fatigue, indisposition. The symptoms have appeared quite recently. Objectively: the skin and oral mucosa are pale. Gums bleed when touched. There are petechiae on the mucous membrane of cheeks, lips and palate. What laboratory test will allow to make a diagnosis?
a. Bleeding time test
b. Immunogram
c. Blood test for sugar
d. Blood test for Vitamin C
*e. Complete blood count

36. A 23-year-old patient complains about a small ulcer on the red border of her lower lip that has been irresponsive to self-treatment for two weeks. Objectively: unchanged red border of lower lip has a circular ulcer of 2 mm in diameter with raised regular edges, its floor is of meat-like colour, dense, shiny, with "stearic film", with cartilaginoid infiltration, painless on palpation. Regional lymph node is enlarged, of tight elastic consistency, painless, mobile. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer
*b. Primary syphilis
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Decubital ulcer
e. Lupus erythematosus

37. A 20-year-old patient complains of general weakness, fever, headache. These presentations appeared three days ago. Objectively: the regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpationl, body temperature is 37,8°C, oral mucosa is hyperemic and edematous. Mucous mebrane of lips, palate, gums, cheeks presents single erosions of polycyclic irregular shape, covered with grayish-white film, painful. Which drugs should be administered for the local treatment of the early disease?
a. Keratoplastic agents
b. Antiseptics
c. Dyes
*d. Antiviral
e. Corticosteroid ointments

38. A 29-year-old patient complains about acute attack-like pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left, as well as in the region of his left maxillary sinus, eye and temple. The pain is long-lasting (2-3 hours), it is getting worse at night. The patient has a history of recent acute respiratory disease. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity, floor probing is painful, thermal stimuli cause long-lasting pain, percussion causes slight pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Inflammation of maxillary sinus
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute focal pulpitis
d. Acute apical periodontitis
*e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

39. A 20-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in an upper right tooth. Objectively: the 16 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity, probing at the opening point is painless, percussion of the 16 causes mild pain. There is a fistula on the gingiva in the region of root apex projection of the 16 tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

40. A 16-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in form of white spots in the region of the upper frontal teeth. The defect was revealed long ago and doesnt change with time. Objectively: white spots on the vestibular surfaces of the 11, 12, 21, 22 teeth close to the cutting edge and on the vestibular surfaces of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth close to the masticatory surface. On probing the spot surface was smooth, painless; cold stimulus produced no pain. The spots couldnt be stained with 2% solution of methylene blue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fluorosis in form of spots
b. Erosion of dental solid tissues
c. Local enamel hypoplasia
d. Acute initial caries
*e. Systemic enamel hypoplasia

41. Preventive examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed a carious cavity in the 23 tooth located within the mantle dentin. The cavity floor and walls are of dense, markedly pigmented dentin, probing and cold test provoke no pain, percussion of the 23 tooth is painless. Electroodontometry results - 6 mA. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic periodontitis
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Chronic median caries

42. A 35-year-old patient complains about a cavity in a lower jaw tooth on the left, and the pain caused by sweet, sour and solid food. Examination of the 36 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity filled with light softened dentine. Probing of the carious cavity floor is painful, reaction to the cold stimulus is painful, undurable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Acute median caries
e. Acute focal pulpitis

43. A 29-year-old female patient complains of peeling, dryness and burning of the lower lip. Objectively: on the vermilion border of lip there are multiple gray scales with tightly attached center and peeling off edges. The scales are found all across the mouth and from the wet-dry line to the middle of the lip. The skin is not affected. Scales removal doesnt lead to erosions. The patient has the lability of psycho-emotional sphere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exfoliative cheilitis, dry form
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Actinic cheilitis
d. Eczematous cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form

44. A 31-year-old male patient complains of dryness and burning of tongue back that appeared for about a week ago and get worse when he eats irritating food. The patient has a history of recent pneumonia. He had been treated in the in-patient hospital for 2 weeks, the treatment program included antibiotics. Now he doesnt take any drugs. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is hyperemic, dry, glossy. Tongue back and palate have greyish-white plicae that can be easily removed. Threads of saliva trail behind the spatula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute atrophic candidiasis
b. Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis
*c. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
d. Medicamental stomatitis
e. Chronic atrophic candidiasis

45. A 39-year-old patient complains of a cosmetic defect, hypersensitivity of the 12, 11, 22 teeth. Objectively: vestibular surface of these teeth has oval defects with smooth shiny walls. Probing causes no pain, there is a pain reaction to cold stimuli. The defects can be stained with 5% tincture of iodine. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Systemic hypoplasia
b. Fluorosis, erosive form
c. Superficial caries
d. Wedge-shaped defect
*e. Enamel erosion

46. A 40-year-old patient complains of discoloration of the vermilion border of the lower lip that he noticed about 4 months ago. Objectively: in the center of the vermilion border of the lower lip there is an irregular homogeneous grayish-white area 1x1,5 cm large that doesnt rise above the vermilion border and has distinct outlines. Palpation of this area is painless, the surrounding tissues are not changed. The film cannot be removed when scraped. The 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth are missing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Candidous cheilitis
c. Premalignant circumscribed hyperkeratosis
*d. Leukoplakia
e. Lichen ruber planus

47. A 35-year-old patient complains about itch, burning and edema of lips. These presentations occured a week ago. Objectively: there is reddening of vermilion border and skin, especially in the region of mouth corners, there are also vesicles, crusts, small cracks along with erythematous affection of vermilion border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
b. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis
c. Multiform exudative erythema
d. Acute herpetic cheilitis
*e. Acute eczematous cheilitis

48. A 44-year-old male patient complains of fatigue and headache, limb numbness, dry mouth, burning and pain in the tongue. Objectively: skin and oral mucosa are pale. There are painful cracks in the corners of mouth. Dorsum of tongue is smooth, glossy, with bright red striae. Blood count: Hb - 70 g/l, RBCs - 1,5x10^12/l, colour index - 1,6, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, lymphocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Late chlorosis
b. Chronic posthaemorrhagic anemia
*c. Addison-Biermer anemia
d. Iron deficiency anemia
e. Aplastic anemia

49. A patient complains about intensive throbbing toothache in his lower jaw on the left. He cant show the aching tooth. It hurts all the time, the pain goes down sometimes, but it becomes stronger as affected by stimuli. Within the last hours the pain provoked by cold stimuli has somewhat reduced. Objectively: the 17 tooth has a carious cavity, probing causes no pain, the pulp chamber is closed. What method of treatment is indicated?
a. Vital amputation
*b. Vital extirpation
c. Devital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Biological method

50. A patient complains about pain in the 51 tooth that is getting worse during cutting. Anamnesis data: the patient underwent treatment on account of pulpitis of the 51 tooth, the tooth was treated with devitalizing paste, the patient didnt come to see a dentist for the second time. Objectively: carious cavity of the 51 tooth is closed by dentin layer. Percussion is painful. Mucous membrane in the root apex projection of the 51 tooth is hyperemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Acute arsenous periodontitis
b. Pulpitis complicated by focal periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute infectious periodontitis

51. A 27-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the 34 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Roentgenographical survey revealed an ill-defined zone of bone tissue destruction in the periapical region of root of the 34 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis complicated by periodontitis

52. A male patient complains of acute pain in the 26 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. 4 days ago arsenic paste was applied, but the patient did not keep the appointment with the dentist. Objectively: the dressing of the 26 tooth is kept. There is pain reaction to percussion. Ro-gram shows no changes in the periapical tissues. After mechanical and pharmacological treatment of the root canals the gauze pads are moist, not stained. What drug substance must be left in the root canals for the maximal clinical effect?
a. Hydrogen peroxide
b. Trypsin
c. Chlorhexidine
d. Chloramine
*e. Unitiol

53. A 55 year old woman complains of ulcers on the mucous membrane of oral cavity, pain during eating and talking. She fell abruptly ill over a month ago. Objectively: unchanged mucous membrane of her gums, soft palate and palatine arches has big bright-red erosions on it. Intact mucous membrane peels easily off when slightly rubbed and this results in erosions and small haemorrhages. What is the leading diagnostic symptom in the differential disease diagnostics?
a. Presence of blisters in the oral cavity
b. Positive Nikolskys symptom
*c. Tzanck cells in the impression smears
d. Presence of Wickhams striae
e. Presence of phagocytes in the impression smears

54. A 19-year-old girl complains about having crusts, lip tenderness, especially at lip joining. Objectively: there are yellow-brown crusts on the lip red border from Klein zone to its middle, after their removal bright red smooth surface without erosions appears. Mucous membrane in Klein zone is slightly hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exudative form of cheilitis exfoliativa
b. Epidermolysis bullosa
c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Exudative form of cheilitis actinica

55. A 35-year-old man complains of short-term pain caused by thermal stimuli in the 46 and 47 teeth. Objectively: masticatory surfaces of the 46, 47 teeth are intact, approximal surfaces could not be examined because of a very close arrangement of teeth. What methods of study can be used in this case if you suspect the presence of hidden cavities?
a. Electro-odontometry
*b. X-ray
c. Fluorescent study
d. Vital staining
e. Measuring electrical resistance

56. A 52-year-old man undergoes treatment of the 36 tooth for chronic periodontitis. Radiography revealed convoluted medial root canals; an irregular-shaped focus of destruction of bone tissue 0,2x0,2 cm large in the region of the medial root apex. Which of the following drugs is optimal for intracanal electrophoresis?
a. 1% solution of novocaine
b. 1% solution of decamethoxin
*c. 10% solution of potassium iodide
d. 3% solution of copper sulphate
e. 0,1% solution of trypsin

57. A 38-year-old patient complains of acute paroxysmal pain in the region of his left upper jaw, left eye and temple. The pain is lasting (2-3 hours), gets worse at night. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a deep carious cavity, floor probing causes painful response, thermal stimuli provoke long-lasting pain, percussion provokes minor pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute limited pulpitis
b. Pulpitis complicated by the periodontitis
*c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of the chronic pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

58. A 30-year-old patient complains of toothache caused by hot and cold stimuli. The pain irradiates to the ear and temple. Previously there was spontaneous nocturnal toothache. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity communicating at one point with the tooth cavity. Probing at the communication point, as well as cold stimulus, cause acute pain. The pain persists for a long time. Electric pulp test result is 5 mA. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

59. A 46-year-old patient has been diagnosed with chronic concrementous pulpitis of the 27 tooth. X-ray picture shows that the concrement is located in the crown part of the tooth cavity and occupies 1/4 of its volume. Select an adequate method of treatment:
a. Devital amputation
*b. Vital extirpation
c. Devital extirpation
d. Biologic method
e. Vital amputation

60. A 16 year old patient complained about discomfort in the area of her upper jaw teeth she has been feeling for 2 weeks. Examination of precervical area of the 11 and 12 teeth revealed whitish matt spots with indistinct outlines that absorb dyes intensively. What treatment of the 11 and 12 teeth should be administered?
a. Preparation and filling
b. Antiseptic treatment
c. Silver impregnation
*d. Remineralizing therapy
e. Spot removal

61. A 18-year-old patient complains of acute spontaneous toothache irradiating to the right eye and temporal region. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 27 tooth within circumpulpar dentin. Dentin is light, softened. Probing of the cavity floor and cold test cause acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

62. A 40-year-old patient complains of discomfort in the 24 tooth. He has a history of periodical swelling in the region of the affected tooth. Objectively: the 24 tooth cavity is wide open. Probing and percussion are painless. There is positive vasoparesis symptom. Radiograph shows bone destruction with indistinct outlines. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
*e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

63. A 64-year-old female patient was waiting for her turn at the dentist’s. Suddenly she fell down, her respiration became hoarse, she got convulsive twitching in her upper and lower limbs, face and neck turned cyanotic, eye pupils became mydriatic, reaction of eye to light was absent. Arterial pressure and pulse couldn’t be measured. Heart sounds couldn’t be auscultated. Involuntary urination was noted. What condition is characterized by such symptoms?
a. Epilepsy
b. Coma
c. Collapse
*d. Clinical death
e. Shock

64. A 48 year old patient complained about having pain in the 45 tooth during cutting for a year. The 45 was treated before. Objectively: mucous membrane in the area of this tooth is hyperemic and slightly cyanotic. The 45 tooth is pink, the filling fell out. What examination method should be applied in order to choose treatment?
a. Thermometry
b. Probing
c. Electric odontodiagnostics
*d. Roentgenography
e. Gum palpation

65. A 28-year-old patient complains of a painless nonhealing mouth ulcer. Objectively: regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painless, of cartilaginous consistency. On the buccal mucosa there is a round ulcer 1 cm in diameter with regular raised edges and a dense elastic infiltrate at the base. The ulcer surface is of red colour, painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Secondary tuberculosis
b. Primary tuberculosis
*c. Primary syphilis
d. Cancer
e. Secondary syphilis

66. A 32-year-old patient complains of acute spontaneous attacks of pain in the 14 tooth. The pain lasts for 10-20 minutes and occurs every 2-3 hours. Carious cavity in the 14 tooth is filled with softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful at one point. Cold stimulus causes pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Acute localized pulpitis
e. Hyperemia of the pulp

67. A 42-year-old patient complains of a painful ulcer in the mouth that is getting bigger and does not heal over 1,5 months. Objectively: on the buccal mucosa there is a shallow soft ulcer 2 cm in diameter with irregular undermined edges. The ulcer floor is uneven and covered with yellow-gray coating. The ulcer is surrounded by many small yellowish tubercles. Regional lymph nodes are elastic, painful, matted together. Which disease is characterized by such symptoms?
*a. Tuberculosis
b. Lichen planus
c. Ulcerative necrotizing stomatitis
d. Cancer
e. Syphilis

68. A patient complains of general weakness, pain in the gums, halitosis. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic, body temperature is 38 degrees, submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Interdental gingival papillae are inflamed, their tops are detruncated, covered with gray-yellow necrotic incrustation. Radiography of alveolar process and blood count reveal no apparent changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Localized periodontitis
*b. Acute ulcerous gingivitis
c. Acute leukosis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Agranulocytosis

69. A 32-year-old patient complains of the long-term dull toothache caused by hot food. The toothache appeared a month ago. Objectively: the 26 tooth has changed in colour, on the masticatory surface there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Superficial probing of pulp is painless, deep probing is painful. Electro-odontodiagnostics results: 85 µA. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
*c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic concrementous pulpitis

70. A 27-year-old patient complains of the long-term pain in the 22 tooth caused by cold and hot food, as well as of spontaneous pain lasting for 30 minutes and occurring 3-4 times per day, getting worse at night. Pain arose 3 days ago after preparation of the tooth for the acrylic crown. Objectively: the 22 tooth is intact, the thermal test causes acute long-lasting pain, percussion is painless. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
*a. Vital pulp extirpation
b. Biological treatment of pulpitis
c. Vital pulp amputation
d. Devital pulp extirpation
e. Application of fluorine lacquer

71. A 24-year-old patient complains of aching pain in the 11 tooth that is getting worse during biting down on food. Two days ago the tooth was filled for pulpitis. Objectively: the 11 tooth is filled. The thermal test causes no pain, vertical percussion is slightly painful. X-ray picture of the 11 tooth shows that the endodontic filling is 1 mm above the root apex. Which of the following methods will be most effective for eliminating this complication?
a. Relaxing incision
b. Ultrahigh frequency therapy
*c. Fluctuorization
d. Submucous injection of 1% solution of hydrocortisone
e. Analgetics

72. A 20-year-old patient complains about unaesthetic look of the 24 tooth from the moment of its eruption. Objectively: enamel of the 24 tooth is partly absent, the dentine is yellow. The 64 tooth was treated more than once when she was a child, but because of frequent exacerbations, edemas and gingival fistula the 64 tooth was extracted when she was 9 years old. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel aplasia
*b. Localised hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
d. Initial caries
e. Systemic hypoplasia

73. A 45-year-old patient complains of burning tongue, a metallic taste in mouth. Three months ago she got a dental bridge made of gold and supported by the 16, 14 teeth. Oral cavity exasmination reveals no objective changes. The 36, 37, 46 teeth are sealed with amalgam fillings. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Chemical factors
b. Mechanic trauma
c. Allergy
d. Neurologic disorder
*e. Galvanic currents

74. A 50-year-old female patient complains about sensation of tightness of buccal mucosa and roughness of the lateral surface of tongue. The patient undergoes regular check-up at a dispensary department for compensated form of diabetes mellitus. Objectively: there are white and grey areas in form of lacy pattern on the buccal mucosa on the right and on the lateral surface of tongue. The surface of affected region cannot be scraped off. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Secondary syphilis
*c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Pseudomembranous candidiasis
e. Leukoplakia

75. A 55-year-old patient complains of general weakness, spasmodic neuralgic pain in the right side of face, rash in the mouth and on the skin. Objectively: lip and chin skin is markedly hyperemic, there are numerous vesicles with clear exudate on the right. The right cheek mucosa is hyperemic, there is a string of erosions covered with fibrinous pellicle. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Aphthous fever
*b. Herpes zoster
c. Pemphigus vulgaris
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Allergic stomatitis

76. A 25-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage and enlargement. Objectively: hypertrophy of gingival papillae by 1/3 of the crown height in the frontal region of mandible. Periodontal pockets are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epulis
*b. Hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Ulcerous gingivitis
d. Catarrhal gingivitis
e. Localized periodontitis

77. A 19-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about gingival pain and bleeding when eating and brushing his teeth. Objectively: anterior maxillary and mandibular teeth are overcrowded, there is hyperemia, cyanosis and overgrowth of gingival papillae up to 1/3 of the crown height. The soft plaque is present. The gums bleed when touched with a tool. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Localized periodontitis
b. Ulcerative gingivitis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
*e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis

78. A 23-year-old female patient complains of short-term pain caused by thermal stimuli in a lower jaw tooth on the right. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 46 tooth there is a deep cavity with softened light dentin on the floor and walls. Probing causes a slight pain across the cavity floor. Pulp electroexcitability is 10 mA. During the cavity preparation a drop of blood showed up on its floor. What paste should be applied to the cavity floor?
a. Resorcinol-formalin
*b. Calcidont
c. Arsenous
d. Corticosteroid
e. Paraformaldehyde

79. A 17 year old girl applied to a dental clinic and complained about hard tissue defects on her frontal and lateral teeth. Subjectively these defects dont cause any inconvenience. Crown defects appeared long ago. The patient was born and and has been living in an area where fluorine concentration in the drinking water makes up 1,2 mg/l. Objectively: on the vestibular surfaces of incisors on both upper and lower jaws in the equator area there are hard tissue defects within deep layers of enamel. The defects are parallel to the cutting edge. The same defects were revealed in the area of tubera of the first molars, floor and walls of the defects are smooth. Enamel of the defect floor is light-brown. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Endemic fluorosis
b. Erosion of hard tissues of tooth
c. Local hypoplasia
d. Focal odontodysplasia
*e. Systemic hypoplasia

80. A patient working as a bricklayer complains of itching, burning, soreness of lips that show up only in the summer period. He has a 3-year history of this disease. Objectively: vermilion border of the lower lip is hyperemic, edematic, covered with blisters and painful erosions 2 mm in diameter, crusts, cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
*b. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Contact allergic cheilitis
e. Eczematous cheilitis, exudative form

81. An 18-year-old student complains of roughness and dryness of mucous membrane of the oral cavity. He always bites uncontrolledly off mucous membrane along the line of teeth joining. The patient suffers from chronic cholecystitis, he is smoker. Hygiene index is 2,3. Objectively: mucous membrane along the line of teeth joining is quaggy, edematic, whitish. What is the leading factor of this disease development?
a. Smoking
*b. Habitual biting of mucous membrane of the oral cavity
c. Somatic pathology
d. Unsatisfactory level of oral cavity hygiene
e. Xerostomia

82. A chemical plant worker consulted a dentist about an oral mucosa burn caused by caustic soda. Which of the following medications should be chosen for emergency care?
a. 2% citric acid solution
*b. 0,5% acetic acid solution
c. 0,1% liquid ammonia
d. 50% ethyl alcohol
e. 3% sodium chloride solution

83. A 28-year-old patient suffers from a disease without prodromal manifestations that declares itself through oral mucosa lesion consisting of 1-2 roundish elements 5-8 mm large which are circumscribed by a hyperemic rim and covered with yellow-grey coating. The disaese recurrence is observed quite regularly 3-4 times a year. These presentations are typical for the following disease:
*a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Chronic herpes recidivicus
c. Papular syphilis
d. Erythema multiforme
e. Lichen ruber planus

84. A patient consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect in the cervical region of the upper and lower canines. Various stimuli cause no pain. Objectively: there are V-shaped defects on the vestibular surface in the cervical area of the upper and lower canines. Their surface is smooth, shiny, hard. The reaction to probing and cold stimuli is absent. What treatment should be administered?
a. Medical intervention is not necessary
*b. Filling of the defects
c. Applications with 10% solution of calcium gluconate
d. Metal crowns
e. Application of fluorine lacquer

85. A 57-year-old patient complains about dryness and burning of the lateral surface of her tongue. These sensations disappear during eating. She noted such sensations three months ago. She has a history of gastritis with reduced secretory function. Objectively: mucous membrane of tongue and oral cavity has no peculiarities. The back of tongue has thin white coating. Regional lymph nodes are unpalpable. Oral cavity is sanitized. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Desquamative glossitis
b. Hunter-Moeller glossitis
c. Lingual nerve neuritis
d. Candidiasis
*e. Glossodynia

86. An 18-year-old man complains of the 14, 13, 12, 23, 24 teeth being sensitive to sweet and sour food. Examination revealed some isolated ill-defined chalky spots in the precervical region. What is the most informative method of study that allows to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Probing
b. X-ray
*c. Vital staining
d. Electro-odontometry
e. Thermometry

87. A 23-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 15 tooth that he noted a year ago. Examination revealed that approximal surface had a deep carious cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity and filled with dense pigmented dentine. Probing, cold test, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 10 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*e. Chronic deep caries

88. A 36-year-old woman complains about experiencing lip dryness and desquamation for a month. Application of indifferent ointments is ineffective. Objectively: red border of lower lip is of rich red color, it is moderately infiltrated, covered with closely adhering greyish scales, it bleeds and hurts in the attempt to remove them. Opacification of epithelium in form of white stripes is present in the nidus periphery, there is also an area of depression in the centre. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leukoplakia
b. Cheilitis exfoliativa
c. Commissural cheilitis
d. Lichen ruber planus
*e. Lupus erythematosus

89. A 30-year-old patient complains about pain in the upper jaw tooth caused by sweet and cold food, that was first registered one month ago. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity within mantle dentine. Dentine of its walls is softened. Probing along the enamel-dentine junction is painful. Percussion is painless. Thermodiagnosis causes pain, that quickly abtes after elimination of stimulus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute initial caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*d. Acute median caries
e. Pulp hyperaemia

90. A 47-year-old patient complains about a sensation of foreign body on his tongue, discomfort during talking, oral cavity dryness. Objectively: there are dark filiform papillae up to 5 mm long on the back of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Benign migratory glossitis
b. Median rhomboid glossitis
*c. Glossophytia
d. Fissured tongue
e. Acute glossitis

91. A 33-year-old patient complains about pain, gingival haemorrhage, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37,8°C. Objectively: gums are apparently hyperaemic, edematic, bleed easily, parodontal pouches are 3-4 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar process, resorption of interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

92. A 40 year old woman complains about slight painfulness of gums, high temperature sensitivity of teeth. Objectively: the gums are pale and compact, in the area of lower frontal teeth there is retraction with cervix dehiscence. X-ray picture shows steady decrease of interdental septa height down to 1/3 of root length. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Localized periodontitis
b. Papillitis
c. Generalized periodontitis
d. Gingivitis
*e. Parodontosis

93. A 21-year-old patient complains of a constant progressing throbbing pain in the 27 tooth. Objectively: a large carious cavity is filled with softened dentin, the tooth cavity is closed. Probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain, there is grade II tooth mobility. Palpation of the mucous membrane in the projection of the root apex of the 27 tooth causes pain. Radiological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

94. A female patient complains about pain in the 11 tooth caused by sour and sweet food. Objectively: enamel changes in form of chalky appearance, a defect with light bottom within dentinoenamel junction on the vestibular surface in the precervical area of the 11 tooth. Probing was painless, percussion and cold stimulus caused no pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Acute initial caries
*c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel hypoplasia
e. Fluorosis

95. A 27-year-old woman has been treated for pulpitis by method of devital extirpation. Arsenic paste was left in the 15 tooth. The patient came to see a dentist for the second time only on the fourth day after her previous visit. She was diagnosed with toxic periodontitis. What is the most optimal agent for treatment of root canal in this case?
a. Tripsin
b. Cresophene
*c. Unithiol
d. Eugenol
e. Hydrocortisone emulsion

96. A 37-year-old female patient complains about pain, gingival haemorrhage, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37,2°C. Objectively: gums are apparently hyperaemic, edematic, bleed easily, parodontal pouches are 3-4 mm deep and contain purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar process, resorption of interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Exerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis

97. A 24-year-old woman complains about severe pain in the mouth, body temperature up to 38°C, indisposition. The same condition occurs periodically for several years after catching a cold. Objectively: the lips are covered with bloody crusts, there are opened bladders and erosions, covered with fibrinogenous deposit on mucous membrane of lips and cheeks that is apparently hyperemic and edematic. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic herpes recidivicus
*b. Erythema multiforme
c. Dermatitits multiformis, Duhrings disease
d. Pemphigus vulgaris
e. Nonacantholytic pemphigus

98. A patient complains about long-lasting pain attacks in the lower jaw teeth, on the left. The pain irradiates to the ear, occiput and is getting worse during eating cold and hot food. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the approximal-medial surface of the 36 tooth. Floor probing is overall painful and induces a pain attack. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute local pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
*e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

99. A 30-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity. Objectively: the 16 tooth is discoloured and has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 100 microampere. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

100. A 35 year old woman complains about periodical appearance of small ulcers in the oral cavity. She has been suffering from this for 5 years, recurrences happen 4-5 times a year. The ulcer healing lasts for 10 days. Objectively: on a mucous membrane of lower lip there is a roundish lesion element 0,5 cm large covered with white deposit and surrounded by hyperemia border, very painful when touched. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Secondary syphilis
c. Duhrings herpetiform dermatitis
d. Chronic recurrent herpes
e. Traumatic erosion

