1. A 1,5 y.o. child fell ill acutely with high temperature 38°С, headache, fatigue. The temperature declined on the fifth day, muscular pain in the right leg occured in the morning, there were no movements and tendon reflexes, sensitivity was reserved. What is the initial diagnosis?
a. Viral encephilitis
b. Hip joint arthritis
c. Polyartropathy
*d. Polyomyelitis
e. Osteomyelitis

2. A patient complains of intense pressing pain in the pharynx, mainly to the right, impossibility to swallow even liquid food. The illness started 5 days ago. The patients condition is grave. Body temperature - 38,9°С, speech is difficult, voice is constrained, difficulties in opening the mouth. Submaxillary glands to the right are painful, enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Peritonsillar abscess
b. Diphtheria
c. Vincents disease
d. Pharyngeal tumour
e. Phlegmonous tonsillitis

3. On observation of sanitary conditions of studying at the technical university it was necessary to evaluate the visual regimen of students, who study from 9 a.m to 3 p.m. What index of natural light will be the most informative?
a. Time of the room insolation
b. Depth of study room
c. Presence of mixed (upper-lateral) light
*d. Natural light coefficient
e. Light coefficient

4. A 17 y.o. patient complains of acute pain in the knee joint and t°– 38°С. He was ill with angina 3 weeks ago. Objectively: deformation and swelling of the knee joints with skin hyperemia. Small movement causes an acute pain in the joints. Which diagnose is the most correct?
a. Reactive polyarthritis
*b. Rheumatism, polyarthritis
c. Systemic lupus eritematodes
d. Infectious-allergic polyarthritis
e. Rheumarthritis

5. A 20 y.o. pregnant woman with 36 weeks of gestation was admitted to the obstetrical hospital with complains of pain in the lower abdomen and bloody vaginal discharge. The general condition of the patient is good. Her blood pressure is 120/80 mm Hg. The heart rate of the fetus is 140 bpm, rhythmic. Vaginal examination: the cervix of the uterus is formed and closed. The discharge from vagina is bloody up to 200 ml per day. The head of the fetus is located high above the minor pelvis entry. A soft formation was defined through the anterior fornix of the vagina. What is the probable diagnosis?
a. Uterine rupture
b. Threatened premature labor
c. Premature placental separation
d. Incipient abortion
*e. Placental presentation

6. A female rheumatic patient experiences diastolic thoracic wall tremor (diastolic thrill), accentuated S1 at apex, there is diastolic murmur with presystolic intensification, opening snap, S2 accent at pulmonary artery. What rind of heart disorder is observed?
a. Mitral valve insufficiency
b. Aortic valve insufficiency
c. Opened arterial duct
*d. Mitral stenosis
e. Pulmonary artery stenosis

7. A 43 y.o. woman complains of contact hemorrhages during the last 6 months. Bimanual exam: cervix of the uterus is enlarged, restricted in mobility. Mirrors showed the following: cervix of the uterus is in the form of cauliflower. Chrobak and Schiller tests are positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Polypus of the cervis of the uterus
b. Leukoplakia
c. Nascent fibroid
*d. Cancer of cervix of the uterus
e. Cervical pregnancy

8. A 20 y.o. patient suddely felt ill 12 hours ago. There was pain in epigactric area, nausea, sporadic vomiting. He had taken alcohol before. In few hours the pain localized in the right iliac area. On examination: positive rebound tenderness symptoms. WBC- 12,2×109/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Rightside kidney colic
b. Perforated ulcer
c. Acute pancreatitis
*d. Acute appendicitis
e. Acute cholecystitis

9. A patient complains of pathological lump, appearing in the right inguinal region on exercise. The lump is round-shaped, 4 cm in diameter, on palpation: soft elastic consistency, positions near the medial part of Pouparts ligament. The lump is situated inwards from the spermatic cord. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Right-sided femoral hernia
b. Varicose veins of the right hip
*c. Right-sided direct inguinal hernia
d. Lipoma of the right inguinal area
e. Right-sided oblique inguinal hernia

10. A 35 y.o. woman was admitted to thoracic surgery department with fever up to 40°С, onset of pain in the side caused by deep breathing, cough with considerable quantity of purulent sputum and blood with bad smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Actinomycosis of lungs
b. Bronchiectatic disease
c. Complication of liver echinococcosis
d. Pulmonary tuberculosis
*e. Abscess of the lung

11. A 25 y.o. patient was admitted with chest trauma. Clinical and X-ray examination have revealed tense pneumothorax on the left. What emergency treatment should be undertaken?
a. Intravenous infusions
b. Analgetics
*c. Pleural cavity drainage
d. Intubation
e. Oxigenotherapy

12. A 12 y.o. child with acute glomerulonephritis presented with hypertensive syndrom during first days of the disease. What is the role of angiotesin II in the pathogenesis?
*a. Intensifies production and secretion of aldosterone
b. Increases heart output
c. Increases erythropoetin production
d. Infibits deppresive action of prostaglandins
e. Increases renine level

13. A 18 y.o. female student complains of dyspnea during the intensive exertion. The condition became worse half a year ago. On examination: pulse rate is 88 bpm, accelerated, AP- 180/20 mm Hg, pale skin, heart borders are dilated to the left and up. There is systolic-diastolic murmur in the 2hd intercostal space, S2 at pulmonary artery is accentuated. ECG has revealed both ventricles hypertrophy. Thoracic X-ray has revealed pulsation and protrusion of the left ventricle, lung trunk. What doctors tactics should be?
a. Dispensary observation
b. Administration of therapeutic treatment
c. Continuation of investigation
d. Exemption from physical exercises
*e. Cardiosurgeon consultation

14. Define the basic registration document at the profound study of a case rate with temporary lost labor ability at the industrial enterprise:
a. A ambulatory medical card
b. The inpatient medical record
c. The sick-leave certificate
*d. A card of the personal account of a case rate
e. "The Report on reasons of a temporary lost labor ability"

15. A patient had macrofocal myocardial infarction. He is overweight for 36%, AP is 150/90 mm Hg, blood sugar- 5,9 mmol/L, general cholesterol- 4,9 mmol/L, uric acid- 0,211 mmol/L. Which risk factor should be urgently eradicated during the secondary prevention?
a. Hyperuricemia
b. Arterial hypertension
*c. Obesity
d. Hypercholesterolemia
e. Hyperglycemia

16. A 64 y.o. patient has developed of squeering substernal pain which had appeared 2 hours ago and irradiated to the left shoulder, marked weakness. On examination: pale skin, cold sweat. Pulse- 108 bpm, AP- 70/50 mm Hg, heart sound are deaf, vesicular breathing, soft abdomen, painless, varicouse vein on the left shin, ECG: synus rhythm, heart rate is 100 bmp, ST-segment is sharply elevated in II, III aVF leads. What is the most likely disorder?
a. Pulmonary artery thromboembolia
*b. Cardiogenic shock
c. Disquamative aortic aneurizm
d. Cardiac asthma
e. Cardiac tamponade

17. A 19 y.o. man was admitted to the reception department in 20 minutes after being wounded with the knife to the left chest. The patient is confused. The heart rate is 96 bpm and BP- 80/60 mm Hg. There are the dilated neck veins, sharply diminished apical beat and evident heart enlargement What kind of penetrative chest wound complications has developed in in patient?
a. Valve-likes pneumothorax
b. Massive hemothorax
c. Closed pneumothorax
*d. Pericardium tamponade
e. Open pneumothorax

18. A 30 y.o. patient had deep burn covering 30% of body 30 days ago. Now he presents with continued fever, loss of appetite, night sweats. Burned surface weakly granulates. What is the stage of burn disease?
a. Convalescence
*b. Septicotoxemia
c. Acute burn toxemia
d. Primary burn shock
e. Secondary burn shock

19. The district pediatrician is charged with the analysis of infant mortality. What is taken for the unit of observation in infant mortality investigation?
a. A baby dead at birth
*b. A baby dead at the age up to 12 months
c. A baby dead at the age up to 6 days
d. A baby dead at the age up to 1 months
e. A baby dead at the age over 28 days

20. A 67 y.o. patient complains of palpitation, dizziness, noise in ears, feeling of shortage of air. Objectively: pale, damp skin. Vesicular respiration, respiratory rate- 22 per min, pulse- 200 bpm, AP- 100/70 mm Hg. On ECG: heart rate- 200 bmp, ventricular complexes are widened, deformed, location of segments ST and of wave T is discordant. The wave Р is not changed, superimposes QRST, natural conformity between Р and QRS is not present. What kind of arrhythmia is present?
a. Sinus tachycardia
b. Atrial flutter
*c. Paroxismal ventricular tachycardia
d. Ventricular extrasystole
e. Atrial tachycardia

21. The complications of acute cholecystitis which require surgical intervention are as follows EXCEPT:
a. Cholangitis conditioned by the presence of stones in the bile tract
b. Gall-bladder perforation
c. Emphysematous gall-bladder
*d. Jaundice
e. Empyema of the gall-bladder

22. A boy, aged 9, is examined: height- 127 cm (-0,36), weight - 28,2 kg (+0,96), chest circumference- 64,9 cm (+0,66), lung vital capacity - 1520 ml (-0,16). What is the integrated assessment of the childs physical development?
*a. Harmonious
b. Excessive
c. Below the average
d. Markedly disharmonious
e. Disharmonious

23. An infant aged 1 year on the third day of common cold at night developed inspiratory stridor, hoarse voice and barking cough. Physical examination revealed suprasternal and intercostal chest retractions. There is a bluish skin discoloration moistly seen over the upper lip. The respiratory rate is 52 per min and pulse- 122 bpm. The body temperature is 37,5°С. What disease does the infant have?
a. Acute laryngitis
*b. Acute infectious croup due to viral laryngotracheitis
c. Bronchopneumonia without complications
d. Acute epiglottitis
e. Acute bronchiolitis with respiratory distress

24. A child was born at 34 weeks of gestation in bad condition. The cardinal symptoms show respiratoty disorders: sound prolonged expiration, additional muscles taking part in breathing, crepitation rales on the background of the rough breath sounds. Assesment according to Silvermans scale was 0, in 3 hours- 6 with presence of clinical data. What diagnostic method can determine pneumopathys type in the child?
*a. Chest X-ray
b. Immunologic investigation
c. Blood gases
d. Blood test
e. Proteinogram

25. A 6 y.o child complains of thirst, polyuria, increased appetite for 2 months with weight loss for 3 kg. There has been nocturnal enuresis during last week. On examination: hyperglycemia 14 mol/L. The diagnosis is diabetis mellitus I type. What is the genesis of this disease?
*a. Autoimmune
b. Neurogenic
c. Bacterial
d. Virus-bacterial
e. Viral

26. A 60 y.o. patient experiences acute air insufficiency following of the venoectomy due to subcutaneous vein thrombophlebitis 3 days ago. Skin became cianotic, with grey shade. Marked psychomotor excitement, tachypnea, substernal pain. What postoperative complication has occured?
a. Valvular pneumothorax
b. Hypostatic pneumonia
*c. Thromboembolia of pulmonary artery
d. Hemorrhagia
e. Myocardial infarction

27. A 40 y.o. patient of rheumatic heart disease complains of anorexia, weakness and loss of weigth, breathless and swelling of feet. On examination: t°- 39°С, pulse is 100/min. As ucultation: diastolic murmur in the mitral area. Petechical lesion a round clavicle; spleen was palpable, tooth extraction one month ago
a. Mitral stenosis
b. Aortic stenosis
c. Recurrence of rheumatic fever
d. Thrombocytopenia purpure
*e. Subacute bacteria endocarditis

28. Body temperature of a 12 y.o. girl increased up to 39-40°С in 4-5 hours after she had taken 2 pills of aspirin. Complains of general discomfort, dizziness, sudden appearance of red spots on the skin with blister formation or exfoliation of the epidermis with erosive surface. Lesions on the skin looked like burns of II degree. Nikolsky syndrome is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bullous dermatitis
*b. Acute epidermical necrolysis
c. Duhrings disease
d. Pemphigus vulgaris
e. Polymorphic exudative erythema

29. A 2 m.o. child was delivered at term with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of child
*a. Corresponding to the age
b. Hypotrophy of II grade
c. 150 g less than necessary
d. Paratrophy of I grade
e. Hypotrophy of I grade

30. A 52 y.o. man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detects murmur. What diagnostic method is necessary to apply first?
*a. Ultrasound dopplerography
b. CTof the brain
c. MRI of the brain
d. Cerebral angiography
e. Electroencephalography

31. Ats planned to construct multifield a new hospital in one of the cental city districts. What building type is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Blocked
b. Decentralized
*c. Centralized and blocked
d. Mixed
e. Centralized

32. Deputy of chief medical officer carried out a study of morbidity rate for population which had been served at the polyclinics for the last 5 years. What statistical values can help in calculations of diseases level dissamination?
*a. Relative values
b. Standart values
c. Absolute values
d. Average values
e. Dynamic row

33. There is a dynamic growth of number of congenital abnormalities such as central paralysis, newborns blindness, idiocy among the population that lives near to pesticides production enterprise. Compounds of which pollutant can cause the development of this pathology?
a. Cadmium
b. Iron
*c. Mercury
d. Chrome
e. Strontium

34. A worker, aged 38, working in the slate production during 15 years, complains of expiratory exertional dyspnea, dry cough. On examination: deafening of the percutory sounds in interscapular region, rough breath sounds, dry disseminated rales. On fingers skin - greyish warts. Factorys sectorial doctor suspects asbestosis. Which method is the most informative for diagnosis verification?
a. Blood gases examination
b. Spirography
*c. Thorax roentgenography
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Bronchoalveolar lavage

35. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with vomiting and acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease should be suspected?
a. Perforated gastric ulcer
b. Renal colic
c. Acute enterocolitis
d. Acute appendicitis
*e. Acute pancreatitis

36. The child is 11 m.o. He suffers from nervous-arthritic diathesis. The increased synthesis of what acid is pathogenic at nervous-arthritic diathesis?
a. Hydrochloric acid
*b. Uric acid
c. Phosphoric acid
d. Sulfuric acid
e. Acetic acid

37. A 35 y.o. patient complains of a difficult swallowing, pain behind the breastbone. He can eat only liquid food. While swallowing sometimes he has attacks of cough and dyspnea. Above mentioned complaints are progressing. It is known that the patient has had a chemical burn of esophagus one month ago. What complication does the patient have?
*a. Corrosive esophagitis and stricture
b. Esophageal diverticula
c. Cardiac achalasia
d. Esophagitis
e. Cardiac insufficiency

38. A 43 y.o. patient complains of mass and, pain in the right breast, elevation of temperature to 37,2°С during 3 last months. Condition worsens before the menstruation. On examination: edema of the right breast, hyperemia, retracted nipple. Unclear painful infiltration is palpated in the lower quadrants. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right side acute mastitis
b. Premenstrual syndrome
*c. Cancer of right mammary gland
d. Right side chronic mastitis
e. Tuberculosis of right mammary gland

39. A patient, aged 16, complains of headache, mainly in the frontal and temporal areas, superciliary arch, appearing of vomiting at the peak of headache, pain during the eyeballs movement, joints pain. On examination: excited, t°- 39°С, Ps- 110/min. Tonic and clonus cramps. Uncertain meningeal signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Parainfluenza
*b. Influenza with cerebral edema manifestations
c. Respiratory syncytial virus
d. Adenovirus infection
e. Influenza, typical disease duration

40. A full-term new-born suffered ante- and intranatal hypoxia, was born in asphyxia (Apgar score 2-5 points). After birth babys excitation is progressing, occurs vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, squint, spontaneous Babinski and Moros reflexes. What is the most probable location of the intracranial haemorrhage in this case?
*a. Subarachnoid hemorrhages
b. Periventricular hemorrhages
c. Subdural hemorrhages
d. Haemorrhages in ventricles of brain
e. Small hemorrhages in brain tissue

41. A 26 y.o. woman complains of a mild bloody discharge from the vagina and pain in the lower abdomen. She has had the last menstruation 3,5 months ago. The pulse is 80 bpm. The blood pressure (BP) is 110/60 mm Hg and body temperature is 36,6°С. The abdomen is tender in the lower parts. The uterus is enlarged up to 12 weeks of gestation. What is your diagnosis?
*a. Inevitable abortion
b. Complete abortion
c. Incipient abortion
d. Disfunctional bleeding
e. Incomplete abortion

42. A 52 y.o. male patient suffers from squeezing pain attacks in substernal area which irradiates to the left hand and occurs occasionally and on physical exertion. He has had it for 1 year. On examination: heart boarders are dilated to the left side, sounds are muffled, pulse- 76 bmp, rhythmic, AP- 155/80 mm Hg, ECG: the left type, the rest of signs are normal. What additional examination is necessary to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Echocardiography
*b. Bicycle ergometry
c. Blood lipoproteins
d. Transaminases of blood
e. General blood count

43. The 67 y.o. patient had 5 recurrent fractures of the lower extremities without considerable cause within 5 years. O-shaped deformity of the legs in the knee joints has appeared. The skull, pelvis and lower extremities X-Ray shows the thickening of flat bones. In the long bones there is a hyperostosis along the bone axis.The blood test has not revealed any inflammation activity. Serum calcium is normal. What disease do you consider in this case?
a. Hyperparathyoid dystrophy
b. Myeloma
*c. Pagets disease
d. Mottled disease (marble disease)
e. Chronic osteomyelitis

44. A man, aged 68, complains of tiredness, sweating, enlargement of cervical, submaxillary and axillary lymph nodes. Blood tests: WBC- 35×109/L, lymphocytes - 60%, Botkin and Gumprecht bodies, level of haemoglobin and quantity of thrombocytes is normal. Myelogram showed 40% of lymphocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic myeloleucosis
b. Tuberculous lymphadenitis
*c. Chronic lympholeucosis
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Acute leucosis

45. Male 30 y.o., noted growing fingers and facial scull, changed face. Complains of poor eyesight, weakness, skin darkening, loss of body weight. X-ray shows broadening of sella turcica, thinning of tuberculin sphenoidale, signs of increased intracranial pressure. What diagnosis can you make?
a. Optico - hiasmatic arachnoiditis
*b. Adenoma of hypophysis
c. Adrenal gland tumor
d. Tumor of pondo-cerebellar corner
e. Encephalitis of truncus

46. A male patient presents with swollen ankles, face, eyelids, elevated AP- 160/100 mm Hg, pulse- 54 bpm, daily loss of albumine with urine- 4g. What therapy is pathogenetic in this case?
a. Diuretics
*b. Corticosteroids
c. Calcium antagonists
d. NSAID
e. Antibiotics

47. A 40 h.o. child age has hyperosthesia, CNS depression, dyspepsia. Sepsis is suspected. What should the differential diagnosis be made with?
a. Hyperbilirubinemia
b. Hyperkaliemia
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Hypomagnesemia
*e. Hypoglycemia

48. A 13 y.o. patient was treated in dermatological hospital for atopic dermatitis exacerbation. He was discharged in the condition of clinical remission. What recommendations should the doctor give to prevent exacerbations?
*a. Use of neutral creams to protect skin
b. Frequent skin washing with detergents
c. Avoidance of skin insolation
d. Systematic use of local corticosteroids
e. Systematic skin disinfection

49. 7 y.o. boy with chronic sinusitis and rercurent pulmonary infections has chest X-ray demonstrating a right-sided cardiac silhouette. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cystic fibrosis (mucoviscidosis)
b. Laryngotracheomalacia
*c. Kartagener syndrome
d. ?-antitrypsin deficiency
e. Bronchiolitis obliterans

50. A 27 y.o. gravida with 17 weeks of gestation was admitted to the hospital. There was a history of 2 spontaneous miscarriages. On bimanual examination: uterus is enlarged to 17 weeks of gestation, uterus cervix is shortened, isthmus allows to pass the finger tip. The diagnosis is isthmico-cervical insufficiency. What is the doctors tactics?
a. To administer tocolytic therapy
b. To perform amniocentesis
c. To interrupt pregnancy
*d. To place suture on the uterus cervix
e. To administer hormonal treatment

51. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
a. Common cold prophilaxis
b. Hardening of the child
c. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention
*d. Strict following of feeding regimen
e. Feces observation

52. A newborn aged 3 days with hyperbilirubinemia (428 mkmol/L) developed following disorders. From beginning there were severe jaundice with poor suckling, hypotomia and hypodynamia. Little bit later periodical excitation, neonatal convulsions and neonatal primitive reflexes loss are noted. Now physical examination reveals convergent squint, rotatory nystagmus and setting sun eye sign. How to explain this condition?
a. Hydrocephalus
*b. Encephalopathy due to hyperbilirubinemia
c. Brain tumour
d. Skull injury
e. Spastic cerebral palsy

53. A 43 y.o. woman complains of shooting heart pain, dyspnea, irregularities in the heart activity, progressive fatigue during 3 weeks. She had acute respiratory disease a month ago. On examination: AP- 120/80 mm Hg, heart rate 98 bpm, heart boarders +1,5 cm left side, sounds are muffled, soft systolic murmur at apex and Botkins area; sporadic extrasystoles. Liver is not palpated, there are no edema. Blood test: WBC- 6,7*10*9/L, sedimentation rate- 21 mm/hour. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute myocarditis
b. Rheumatism, mitral insufficiency
c. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
d. Ichemic heart disease, angina pectoris
e. Climacteric myocardiodystrophia

54. At term of a gestation of 40 weeks height of standing of a uterine fundus is less then assumed for the given term. The woman has given birth to the child in weight of 2500 g, a length of a body 53 cm, with an assessment on a scale of Apgar of 4-6 points. Labor were fast. The cause of such state of the child were:
a. Delay of an intra-uterine fetation
b. Prematurity
c. Placental detachment
*d. Chronic fetoplacental insufficiency
e. Infection of a fetus

55. 3 weeks ago the patient was ill with tonsillitis. Clinical examination reveals edema, arterial hypertension, hematuria, proteinuria (1,8 g/per day), granular and erythrocital casts. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Renal amyloidosis
*b. Glomerulonephritis
c. Pyelonephritis
d. Intestinal nephritis
e. Cystitis

56. A patient complains of a tormental (agonizing) cough with expectoration of up to 600 ml/daily purulent chocolatecolor sputum with a decay smell. Onset of illness was abrupt, t°- 39°С, fever of irregular type. There is the area of darkening with a cavity in a center on X-ray film, with irregular contours and level of liquid. What disease is the question?
*a. Gangrene of lung
b. Lobar pneumonia
c. Bronchiectatic illness
d. Tuberculosis
e. Pneumonia complicated by an abscess

57. A patient with unstable angina pectoris was given the following complex treatment: anticoagulants, nitrates, ?-adrenoblockers. However on the third day of treatment the pain still romains. Which in vestigation shoud be carried out to establish diagnosis?
a. Stress-echocardiogram
b. Myocardial scintigraphy
c. Test with dosed physical exercises
d. Esophageal electrocardiac stimulator
*e. Coronarography

58. A 30 y.o. primipara has intensive labor pushings with an interval of 1-2 min and of 50 sec duration. There is a appearing of the fetus head. Perineum is of 4 cm height, has turned pale. What should be done in this case?
a. Observation
*b. Episiotomy
c. Perineotomy
d. Perineum protection
e. Vacuum extraction of the fetus

59. 18 y.o. woman complains of pain in the lower abdomen. Some minutes before she has suddenly appeared unconscious at home. The patient had no menses within last 3 months. On examination: pale skin, the pulse- 110 bpm, BP- 80/60 mm Hg. The Schyotkins sign is positive. Hb- 76 g/L. The vaginal examination: the uterus is a little bit enlarged, its displacement is painful. There is also any lateral swelling of indistinct size. The posterior fornix of the vagina is tendern and overhangs inside. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Ovarian apoplexy
b. Twist of cystoma of right uterine adnexa
c. Acute salpingoophoritis
d. Acute appendicitis
*e. Impaired extrauterine pregnancy

60. A local doctor has to prepare a report about the health condition of the population of his region. What medical indexes of population health condition should he use?
a. Average longevity
b. Social welfare, satisfaction of life quality
c. Average treatment duration, complications
*d. Morbidity, disabilities, demographic, physical development
e. Way of life, genetic, pollution

61. In the gynecologic office a 28 y.o. woman complains of sterility within three years. The menstrual function is not impaired. There were one artificial abortion and chronic salpingo-oophoritis in her case history. Oral contraceptives were not used. Her husbands analysis of semen is without pathology. From what diagnostic method will you start the workup in this case of sterility?
a. Hormone investigation
b. Ultra sound investigation
c. Hysteroscopia
d. Diagnostic scraping out of the uterine cavity
*e. Hysterosalpingography

62. A patient was admitted to the hospital on the 7th day of the disease with complaints of high temperature, headache, pain in the muscles, especially in calf muscles. Dermal integuments and scleras are icteric. There is hemorrhagic rash on the skin. Urine is bloody. The patient was fishing two weeks ago. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Leptospirosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Salmonellosis
d. Trichinellosis
e. Brucellosis

63. A 60 y.o. man complains of significant pain in the right eye, photophobia, lacrimation, reduced vision of this eye, headache of the right part of the head. Pain occured 2 days ago. On examination: Vis OD- 0,03, congested injection of the eye ball, significant cornea edema, front chamber is deep, pupil is narrow, athrophic iris, there is optic nerve excavation on the eye fundus, intraocular pressure- 38 mm Hg. Vis OS- 0,8 unadjustable. The eye is calm, healthy. Intraoccular pressure- 22 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Eye nerves neuritis
b. Maculodystrophy
c. Right eyes uveitis
*d. Acute glaucoma attack
e. Right eyes keratitis

64. A woman complains of high temperature to 38°С, mild pain in the throat during 3 days. On examination: angle lymphatic nodes of the jaw are 3 cm enlarged, palatinel tonsils are enlarged and coated with grey plaque which spreads to the uvula and frontal palatinel arches. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Larynx dyphtheria
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Oropharyngeal candidosis
d. Agranulocytosis
e. Vincents angina

65. A 41 y.o. woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis during 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: marked inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous. In blood: WBC- 9,8×109/L, RBC- 3,0×1012/L, sedimentation rate- 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
a. Kreon
b. Motilium
c. Linex
d. Vikasolum
*e. Sulfasalasine

66. A 2,5 m.o. child presents with muscle hypotonia, sweating, alopecia of the back of the head. The child is prescribed massage, curative gymnastics and vitamind. What is the dosage and frequency of vitamin D administration?
a. 1000 IU daily
b. 1000 IU every other day
c. 500 IU daily
d. 500 IU every other day
*e. 3000 IU daily

67. A 2,9-kg term male infant is born to a mother who developed polyhydramnios at 34 weeks gestation. At birth, the Apgar scores were 9 and 9. The infant develops choking and cyanosis with the first feed. In addition, is unable to place a nasogastric tube. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Laryngomalacia
b. Tracheal atresia
c. Choanal atresia
d. Respiratory distress syndrome
*e. Esophageal atresia

68. A 49 y.o. female patient presents with acute attacks of headache associated with pulsation in temples, increasing AP to 280/140 mmHg. Pheochromocytoma is suspected. What is the mechanism of hypertensive crisis in this patient?
a. Increasing of thyroxine excretion
b. Increasing of plasma renin activity
c. Increasing of aldosterone level in blood
d. Increasing of vasopressin excretion
*e. Increasing of catecholamines concentration

69. A 24 y.o. male patient was transferred to the chest surgery department from general surgical department with acute post-traumatic empyema of pleura. On the X-ray: wide level horizontal of fluid on the right. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. Pneumoectomy
b. Decortication of pleura
*c. Punction and drainage of pleural cavity
d. Thoracoplasty
e. Lobectomy

70. A 27 y.o. man complains of pain in epigastrium which is relieved by food intake. EGDFS shows antral erosive gastritis, biopsy of antral mucous presents Hеlicobacter Pylori. What can be diagnosed in this case?
a. Gastritis of A type
b. Rigid antral gastritis
c. Menetriers disease
*d. Gastritis of type B
e. Reflux - gastritis

71. Chief district pediatrician has to carry out analysis of infant mortality rate. What should he take as a unit of the observation?
a. Child death case at the age up to the first month
b. Child death case during first 7 days of life
c. Child death case on labor
d. Child death case after 28 days of life
*e. Child death case at the age up to 1 year

72. A 75 y.o patient can not tell the month, date and season of the year. After long deliberations she manages to tellher name. She is in irritable and dissatisfied mood. She always carries a bundle with belongings with her, hides a parcel with bread, shoes in her underwear in her bosom as well as "invaluable books". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Behaviour disorder
*b. Senile dementia
c. Dissociated personality (psychopathy)
d. Atherosclerotic (lacunar) dementia
e. Presenile melancholia

73. A 19 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He sufferes from hemophilia B-type. What antihemophilic medicine should be inclended in pre-and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Dried plasma
b. Cryoprecipitate
c. Fresh frosen blood
*d. Fresh frosen plasma
e. Native plasma

74. A 35 y.o. woman is suspected of aplastic anemia. The bone marrow punction has been administered with the diagnostic purpose. What changes in the marrow punctatum are suggested?
a. Absolute lymphocytosis
b. Prevalence of megaloblasts
c. Presence of blast cells
d. Replacement of marrow elements with fibrous tissue
*e. Replacement of marrow elements with adipose tissue

75. A 55 y.o. male patient complains of weakness during 2 months, pain in the right side of the thorax, cough, blood-streaked sputum. On X-ray: intensive triangle shadow in the area of lower lobe that is connected to mediastinum. What is the most likely disorder in the lungs?
a. Bronchiectasia
b. Tuberculosis of lungs
*c. Central cancer of lungs
d. Pulmonary infarction
e. Pleuropneumonia

76. A 37 y.o. woman is suffering from squeezing substernal pain on physical exertion. On examination: AP- 130/80 mm Hg, heart rate=pulse rate 72 bpm, heart boarders are dilated to the left side, aortic systolic murmur. ECG- signs of the left venticle hypertrophy. What method of examination is the most informative in this case?
a. Coronarography
b. X-ray
*c. Echocardiography
d. Sphygmography
e. Phonocardiography

77. During intramuscular DTP vaccination in clinic, a 3 m.o. child developed signs of laryngospasm, paleness of skin, cyanosis of lips, "cock cry", stop of respiration, tension of the whole body with overturned backward head. Allergological history of the child is not complicated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cerebral haemorrhage, tonic spasms
b. Anaphylactic shock, clonic spasms
*c. Spasmophilia, tonic spasms
d. Meningism, clonic and tonic spasms
e. Meningoencephalitic reaction, clonic and tonic spasms

78. A 30 y.o. female with rheumatoid arthritis of five years duration complains of pain in the frist three fingers of her right hand over past 6 weeks. The pain seems especially severe at night often awakening her from sleep.The most likelly cause is?
*a. Carpal tunnel syndrome
b. Sensory peripheral neuropathy
c. Rheumatoid vasculitis
d. Atlanto-axial sublaxation of cervical spine
e. Rheumatoid arthritis without complication

79. A 28 y.o. primagravida, pregnancy is 15-16 weaks of gestation, presents to the maternity clinics with dull pain in the lower part of the abdomen and in lumbar area. On vaginal examination: uterus cervix is 2,5 cm, external isthmus allows to pass the finger tip. Uterus body is enlarged according to the pregnancy term. Genital discharges are mucous, mild. What is the diagnosis?
a. Placenta presentation
b. Stopped pregnancy
*c. Threatened spontaneous abortion
d. Hydatid molar pregnancy
e. Spontaneous abortion which has begun

80. A patient with nosocomial pneumonia has signs of collapse. Which of the following pneumonia complication is the most likely to be accompanied with collapse?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Toxic hepatitis
c. Emphysema
d. Bronchial obstruction
*e. Septic shock

81. A woman in labor, on vaginal inspection: cervix dilation is up to 2 cm, fetal bladder is intact. Sacral cavity is free, sacral promontory is reachable only with a bent finger, the inner surface of the sacrococcygeal joint is accessible for inspection. The head of the fetus presents. Sagittal suture occupies the transverse diameter of pelvic inlet, the small fontanel to the left, on the side. What labor stage is this?
a. Preliminary stage
b. Placental stage
c. Expulsion of fetus stage
*d. Cervix dilation stage
e. Prodromal stage

82. A 2 m.o. breast-fed child suffers from cheek skin hyperemia, sporadic papulous elements on the skin of the chest and back following the apple juice introduction. The child is restless. What is the initial pediatritians tactics?
a. Apply ointment with corticosteroids to affected skin areas
*b. Clarify mothers diet and exlude obligate allergens
c. Administer general ultraviolet irradiation
d. Refer to prescribe dermathologist
e. Treat with claritine

83. A worker was temporarily off work because of illness during 16 days, was under out-patient treatment. The doctor in charge issued a sick-list first for 5 days, then prolonged it for 10 days. Who can further prolong the sick-list to this patient?
*a. The doctor in charge of the case together with the head of department
b. Deputy head physician on the working ability expertise
c. The head of department
d. The doctor in charge of the case with the permission of the head of department
e. Working ability expertise committee

84. A 36 y.o. patient is diagnosed with right sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
*a. Surgical drainage of the pleural cavity
b. Symptomatic therapy
c. Antiinflammation therapy
d. Pleural puncture
e. Thoracotomy

85. A 98 y.o. male patient complains of pain in the left lower limb which intensifies on walking, feeling of cold and numbness in both feet. He has been ill for 6 years. On examination: pale dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Hairy covering is poorly developed on the left shin. "Furrow symptom " is positive on the left. Pulse on foot arteries and popliteal artery isnt palpated, on the femoral artery its weak. On the right limb the artery pulsation is reserved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Obliterating endarteritis
b. Hemoral arthery thombosis
*c. Arteriosclerosis obliterans
d. Buergers disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
e. Raynaulds disease

86. A child, aged 4, has being ill for 5 days, suffers from cough, skin rash, t°- 38,2°С, facial hydropy, photosensitivity, conjunctivitis. On the face, neck, upper part of the chest there is bright maculopapular rash with areas of merging. Hyperemic throat. Seropurulent nasal discharge. In lungs there are dry crackles. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Enterovirus exanthema
b. Adenovirus infection
c. Rubella
d. Scarlet fever
*e. Measles

87. A gravida with 7 weeks of gestation is referred for the artificial abortion. On operation while dilating cervical canal with Hegar dilator №8 a doctor suspected uterus perforation. What is immediate doctors tactics to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Bimanual examination
b. Metrosalpingography
c. Laparoscopy
d. Ultrasound examination
*e. Probing of uterus cavity

88. A 65 y.o. woman complains of complicated mouth opening following foot trauma 10 days ago. Next day she ate with difficulties, there were muscles tension of back, the back of the head and abdomen. On the third day there was tension of all muscle groups, generalized convulsions every 10-15 min. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic stroke
b. Meningoencephalitis
c. Epilepsy
*d. Tetanus
e. Tetania

89. A 2 y.o. girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low–grade fever, severe catarrhal symptoms, non-abundant maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital glands. What is your diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Pseudotuberculosis
*c. Rubella
d. Adenoviral infection
e. Scarlet fever

90. Ambulance was called to a 48 y.o. man. From the words of relatives he has had three episodes of lost consciousness and attacks during the day. On examination: the following fit is observed: patient is unconscious, fell on the floor, tonic and then clonic convuesions of trunk and extremities happened. The attack lasted for 4 minute, ended by involuntary urination. What type of attack was observed?
a. Vegetatic crisis
*b. Major epileptic seizure
c. Fainting
d. Absence
e. Episode of hysteria

91. A woman, primagravida, consults a gynecologist on 05.03.2002. A week ago she felt the fetus movements for the first time. Last menstruation was on 10.01.2002. When should she be given maternity leave?
a. 25 July
*b. 8 August
c. 11 July
d. 22 August
e. 5 September

92. A 30 y.o. woman has second labor which lasts for 14 hours. The fetus heartbeat is mufflet, arrhythmic, 100 bpm. On vaginal examination: complete cervix dilatation, fetus head is in the area of small pelvis outlet. Sagital suture is in the direct size. The small fontanelle is at the symphis. What is the further tactics of the labor?
a. Application of obstetrical cavity forceps
b. Ceasarian section
*c. Application of obstetrical forceps
d. Application of craniodermal forceps by Ivanovs
e. Stimulation of the labor activity with oxitocyne

93. A 31 y.o. woman has suffered from systemic sclerodermia for 14 years. She was treated in hospitals many times. She complains of periodical dull pain in the cardiac area, palpitation, dyspnea, headache, eyelids swelling, weight loss, pain and limbs deformities. Which organs disorder worsens the prognosis?
a. Heart
b. Lungs
*c. Kidneys
d. Gastro-intestinal tract
e. Skin and joints

94. A child was delivered severely premature. After the birth the child has RI symptoms, anasarca, fine bubbling moist rales over the lower lobe of the right lung. Multiple skin extravasations, bloody foam from the mouth have occured after the 2 day. On chest X-ray: atelectasis of the lower lobe of the right lung. In blood: Hb-100 g/L, Ht- 0,45. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Disseminated intravascular clotting syndrome
b. Pulmonary edema
*c. Edematous-hemorrhagic syndrome
d. Hyaline membrane disease
e. Congenital pneumonia

95. A 20 y.o. patient with bronchial asthma experiences dyspnea attacks 3-4 times a week. Nocturnal attacks are 1 time a week. FEV1- 50% of necessary figures, during the day its variations is 25%. What is the severity of bronchial asthma condition?
a. Intermittent flow
b. Asthmatic status
c. Serious condition
d. Mild condition
*e. Moderate severity condition

96. A 18 y.o. male patient complains of pain in knee and ankle joints, temperature elevation to 39,5°С. He had a respiratory disease 1,5 week ago. On examination: temperature- 38,5°С, swollen knee and ankle joints, pulse- 106 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 90/60 mm Hg, heart borders without changes, sounds are weakened, soft systolic apical murmur. What indicator is connected with possible etiology of the process?
*a. Antistreptolysine-0
b. Creatinkinase
c. Seromucoid
d. Rheumatic factor
e. 1-antitrypsine

97. The 28 y.o. woman applied to doctor because of limited loss of the hair. In the anamnesis - she had frequent headache indisposition, arthromyalgia, fever, irregular casual sexual life, drug user. RW is negative. What examination must be done first?
a. Examination for gonorrhea
b. Examination for fungi
c. Examination for trichomoniasis
d. Examination for neuropathology
*e. Examination for HIV

98. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
a. Allergic reaction
*b. Citrate intoxication
c. Citrate shock
d. Pyrogenous reaction
e. Anaphylactic shock

99. A 43 y.o. patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago due to chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has suffered from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. During last 2 weeks jaundice hasnt gone. Stenoutic papillitis 0,5 cm in length has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
a. -
b. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
*c. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
d. To perform external choledoch drain
e. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs

100. A 35 y.o. female patient was admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of ulcerative gastric hemorrhage. Its been the third hemorrhage for the last 2 years. After conservative treatment vomiting with blood stopped, hemoglobin elevated from 60 till 108 g/L. General condition became better. But profuse vomiting with blood reoccured in 2-3- hours. Hemoglobin decreased to 93,1 g/L then to 58,1 g/L. What is the tactics of treatment?
a. Taylors treatment
b. Deferred surgery
*c. Urgent surgery
d. Conservative treatment
e. Conservative treatment with following surgery

101. A 43 y.o. male complains of stomach pain, which relieves with defecation, and is accompanied by abdominal winds, rumbling, the feeling of incomplete evacuation or urgent need for bowel movement, constipation or diarrhea in alternation. These symptoms have lasted for over 3 months. No changes in laboratory tests. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic enterocolitis, exacerbation phase
b. Atonic colitis
c. Colitis with hypertonic type dyskinesia
*d. Irritable bowel syndrome
e. Spastic colitis

102. In an inhabited locality there is an increase of diphtheria during the last 3 years with separate outbursts in families. What measure can effectively influence the epidemic process of diphtheria and reduce the morbidity rate to single cases?
a. Hospitalization of patients
b. Disinfection in disease focus
c. Early diagnostics
*d. Immunization of the population
e. Detection of carriers

103. A 62 y.o. patient with DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. Patient has to undergo an operation for inguinal hernia. What the tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be used?
a. Continue with the current therapy
b. Give Glurenorm in place of Maninilum
c. Prescribe guanyl guanidines
*d. Prescribe fast-acting insulin
e. Prescribe long-acting insulin

104. A patient, aged 25, complains of pain in the I finger on the right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain gets worse. Acute pain appears on touching with the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Articular (joint) panaritium
b. Bone panaritium
*c. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)
d. Paronychia
e. Subcutaneous panaritium

105. Choose a method of a graphic representation of monthly information about number of the registered cases of acute intestinal infection and their comparisons to the average monthly values, obtained for 5 previous years:
a. The sector diagram
*b. The linear diagram
c. The curvilinear disgram
d. The radial diagram
e. The figured diagram

106. A 27 y.o. woman suffers from pyelonephritits of the only kidney. She presents to the maternity welfare centre because of suppresion of menses for 2,5 months. On examination pregnancy 11 weeks of gestation was revealed. In urine: albumine 3,3 g/L, leucocytes cover the field of vision. What is doctors tactics in this case?
*a. Immediate pregancy interruption
b. Maintenance of pregnancy till delivery term
c. Pregnancy interruption after urine normalization
d. Pregnancy interruption at 24-25 weeks
e. Maintenance of pregnancy till 36 weeks

107. A 24 y.o. emotionally-labile woman presents with irritation, depressed mood, palpitation, shooting pain in the heart area, generalized fatigue following the divorce. On examination: palm hyperhydrosis, pulse rate- 72-78 bpm, labile, heart without changes. ECG is normal. What is the most probable pathology in this case?
a. Ipochondric neurosis
b. Compulsive neurosis
c. Depressive neurosis
d. Schizophrenia
*e. Neurasthenia

108. A 30 y.o. male patient complains of itching of the skin which intensifies in the evening. He has been ill for 1,5 months. On examination: there is rash with paired papules covered with bloody crusts on the abdomen, hips, buttocks, folds between the fingers, flexor surfaces of the hand. There are traces of line scratches. What additional investigations are necessary to make diagnosis?
a. Examination for helmints
b. Serologic blood examination
*c. Examination of rash elements scrape
d. Determination of dermographism
e. Blood glucose

109. A patient aged 18 with a cranial injury was in comatose state during several hours. In post-comatose period gets tired quickly, non-productive in dialog - in the beginning answers 2-3 questions, then gets tired and can not understand the point of the question. Which psychotropic should be given to the patient to prevent psychoorganic syndrome?
a. Neuroleptics
b. Tranquillisers
c. Antidepressants
d. Stimulators
*e. Nootropics

110. A 5 y.o. child with stigmas of dysembryogenesis (small chin, thick lips, opened mouth, hyperthelorismus) has systolic murmur in the second intercostal to the right of the sternum. The murmur passes to the neck and along the sternum left edge. The pulse on the left brachial artery is weakened. BP on the right arm is 110/60 mm Hg, on the left - 100/60 mm Hg. ECG results: hypertrophy of the right ventricle. What defect is the most probable?
a. Defect of interatrial septum
b. Defect of interventricular septum
c. Coarctation of the aorta
*d. Aortic stenosis
e. Open aortic duct

111. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
*a. Increase of bleeding speed
b. Presence of hypervolemia
c. Depositing of blood in venous channel
d. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
e. Shunting

112. A 9 y.o. girl has an average height and harmonic growth development. She was ill with acute respiratory infection for five times. Define the group of her health
a. 1st group
b. 3rd group
*c. 2nd group
d. 5th group
e. 4th group

113. A 51 y.o. woman complains of dull pain in the right subcostal area and epigastric area, nausea, appetite decline during 6 months. There is a history of gastric peptic ulcer. On examination: weight loss, pulse is 70 bpm, AP is 120/70 mm Hg. Diffuse tenderness and resistance of muscles on palpation.There is a hard lymphatic node 1x1cm in size over the left clavicle. What method of investigation will be the most useful?
*a. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsy
b. Ultrasound examination of abdomen
c. Ureatic test
d. Stomach X-ray
e. pH-metry

114. A district pediarician has carried out infant mortality rate analysis in his area. What data has been used?
*a. Mortality of children under 1 y.o. structured by age, sex, causes
b. Mortality of district newborn
c. Hospital mortality of children, structured by age
d. Mortality of children under 1 y.o., natimortality
e. Mortality of district adolescents

115. In a forest summer camp children have variable procedures to harden their organisms. What procedure has the most hardening power?
a. Walking on the fresh air
b. Bath with hydromassage
c. Morning exercises on the fresh air
d. Hygienic shower
*e. Contrast shower

116. A 29 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute girdle pain in epigastric area, vomiting in 1 hour after the meal. On examination: pale, acrocyanosis. Breathing is frequent, shallow. Abdominal muscles are tensed, positive Schotkin-Blumbergs symptom. What is the maximal term to make a diagnosis?
a. In 1 hour
*b. In 2 hours
c. In 3 hours
d. In 0,5 hours
e. In 6 hours

117. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the reception room of the Central District Hospital. He complains of a severely painful swelling localized on posterior neck, fever up to 38,4°С and general weakness. In anamnesis: diabetes mellitus within 5 years. On physical examination on the posterior neck surface there is an infiltrate elevated above surrounding skin. The tissues affected by swelling are tense and blue reddish discoloration in central area. There are also several purulent necrotic pustules which are connected with each other and form a large skin necrosis. A thinned necrotic skin of this swelling has holes looking like sieve, pus discharges through out. What disease should a doctor consider first of all?
a. Furuncle
b. Acute skin cellulitis
*c. Carbuncle
d. Carbuncle associated with anthrax
e. Skin abscess

118. A 32 y.o. patient complains of severe weakness, tremor of extremities. On physical examination, there is loss of body weight, wet and warm skin. The thyroid gland is enlarged up to the 3rd degree, painless, elastic. Ps- 108 bpm. BP- 160/55 mm Hg. The rest is in norm. What can be diagnosed?
a. Chronic fibrous thyroiditis
b. Diffuse euthyroid goitre of the 3rd degree
c. Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, hypertrophic type
*d. Diffuse toxic goitre of the 3rd degree, thyrotoxicosis of the average degree
e. Toxiferous adenoma of the thyroid gland

119. A 45 y.o. woman complains of contact bleedings during 5 months. On speculum examination: hyperemia of uterus cervix, looks like cauliflower, bleeds on probing. On bimanual examination: cervix is of densed consistensy, uterus body isnt enlarged, mobile, nonpalpable adnexa, parametrium is free, deep fornixes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Polypose of cervix of uterus
b. Fibromatous node which is being born
c. Cervical pregnancy
*d. Cancer of cervix of uterus
e. Cancer of body of uterus

120. In a 65 y.o. female patient a tumor 13х8 сm in size in the umbilical area and above is palpated, mild tenderness on palpation, unmovable, pulsates. On ausculation: systolic murmur. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Arterio-venous aneurism
b. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
c. Mitral insufficiency
d. Stomach tumor
*e. Abdominal aortic aneurism

121. An employee of a private company was ill with acute respiratory viral infection. Consulted a district doctor, who determined the fact of temporary loss of working ability, but refused to issue a sick-list, arguing that the patient worked in the private and not state-owned company. Should the sick-list be issued to the employees of private companies?
a. Issued only on condition of payment guarantee by the companys proprietor
*b. Issued regardless of companys ownership
c. Issued a medical certificate of a free form
d. Issued only to empties of state-owned companies
e. Issued a medical certificate of a set form

122. A 58 y.o. male patient is examined by a physician and suffers from general weakness, fatigue, mild pain in the left subcostal area, sometimes frequent painful urination. Moderate splenomegaly has been revealed. Blood test: neutrophilic leukocytosis with the progress to myelocyte; basophil- 2%; eosinophil- 5%. There is a urate crystales in urine, erythrocyte- 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Chronic myeloleucosis
b. Urolithiasis
c. Hepar cirrhosis
d. Leukemoid reaction
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

123. A 38 y.o. patient complains of pain in lumbar part of spinal column with irradiation to the back surface of the left leg following the lifting of a heavy object. Pain is increasing on change of the body position and in vertical position. positive stretching symptoms were revealed on examination. What is an initial diagnosis?
a. Polyneuritis
b. Spinal cord tumor
c. Myelopathy
*d. Intervertebral ligaments disorder
e. Arachnomielitis

124. What developes most often after accidental intake of Hydrochloric acid?
a. Acute pancreatitis
*b. Cardiac insufficiency
c. Kutlings syndrome
d. Cushings syndrome
e. Deyladss syndrome

125. A patient, aged 58, was fishing in the winter. On return home after some time felt some pain in the feet. Consulted a doctor. On examination: feet skin was pale, then after rewarming became red, warm to the touch. Edema is not significant, limited to the toes. All types of sensitivity are preserved. No blisters. What degree of frostbite is observed?
a. III degree
*b. I degree
c. II degree
d. V degree
e. IV degree

126. On the 5-th day of the respiratory disease a 24 y.o. man has developed progressive headaches systemic dizziness, feeling of seeing double, paresis of mimic muscles on the right, choking while swallowing. Acute viral encephalitis has been diagnosed. What is the main direction of urgent therapy?
*a. Zovirax
b. Lasix
c. Ceftriaxon
d. Glucocorticoids
e. Hemodesis

127. A patient, aged 40, has been ill during approximately 8 years, complains of pain in the lumbar part of the spine on physical excertion, in cervical and thoracal part (especially when coughing), pain in the hip and knee joints on the right. On examination: the body is fixed in the forward inclination with head down, gluteal muscles atrophy. Spine roentgenography: ribs osteoporosis, longitudinal ligament ossification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Psoriatic spondyloarthropatia
b. Tuberculous spondylitis
c. Spread osteochondrosis of the vertebral column
*d. Ancylosing spondyloarthritis
e. Spondyloarthropatia on the background of Reiters disease

128. A 54 y.o. male patient suffers from dyspnea during mild physical exertion, cough with sputum which is excreted with diffculty. On examination: diffuse cyanosis. Is Barrel-chest. Weakened vesicular breathing with prolonged expiration and dry whistling rales. AP is 140/80 mm Hg, pulse is 92 bpm, rhythmic. Spirography: vital capacity (VC)/predicted vital capacity- 65%, FEV1/FVC– 50%. Determine the type of respiratory insufficiency (RI)
a. RI of obstructive type
*b. RI of mixed type with prevailing obstruction
c. RI of mixed type with prevailing resriction
d. There is no RI
e. RI of restrictive type

129. A primapara with pelvis size 25-28-31-20 cm has active labor activity. Waters poured out, clear. Fetus weight is 4500 g, the head is engaged to the small pelvis inlet. Vastens sign as positive. Cervix of uterus is fully dilated. Amniotic sac is absent. The fetus heartbeat is clear, rhythmic, 136 bpm. What is the labor tactics?
a. Conservative tactics of labor
b. Stimulation of the labor activity
*c. Caesarean section
d. Vacuum extraction of the fetus
e. Obstetrical forseps

130. An unconscious patient presents with moist skin, shallow breathing. There are signs of previous injection on the shoulders and hips. BP- 110/70 mm Hg. Tonus of skeletal muscles and reflexes are increased. Cramps of muscles of the extremities are seen. What is the most likely disorder?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Hyperlactacidotic coma
*c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Hyperosmolar coma
e. Stroke

131. A 14 y.o. child suffers from of vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has developed sympathoadrenal crisis. What medicine should be used for crisis reduction?
a. Euphyline
b. Amisyl
c. No-shpa
d. Corglicone
*e. Obsidan

132. A victim of a road accident, aged 44, is operated on account of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. In which case can the patients blood from the abdominal cavity be used for autotransfusion?
a. Bladder rupture
b. Small intestines rupture
c. Splenic rupture
d. Liver rupture
*e. Stomach rupture

133. A 28 y.o. homeless male was admitted to the hospital because of initial diagnosis "influenza". Roseolo-petechiae rash has appeared on the trunk and internal surfaces of the limbs on the fifth day. Temperature is 41°С, euphoria, face and scleras hyperemia, tongue tremor, tachycardia, splenomegaly, excitement. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Leptospirosis
*c. Typhus
d. Alcogolic delirium
e. Abdominal typhoid

134. A patient, aged 81, complains of constant urinary excretion in drops, feeling of fullness in the lower abdomen. On examination: above pubis there is a spherical protrusion, over which there is a dullness of percussion sound, positive suprapubic punch. What symptom is observed in this patient?
a. Enuresis
b. Pollakiuria
c. Dysuria
*d. Paradoxal ischuria
e. Urinary incontinence

135. The 56 y.o. patient has worked at the aluminium plant more than 20 years. Within 3 last years he has developed loosening of teeth, bone and joint pains, piercing pains in heart area, vomiting. The preliminary diagnosis is:
*a. Fluorine intoxication
b. Phosphorus intoxication
c. Mercury intoxication
d. Lead intoxication
e. Manganese intoxication

136. There were registered 500 cases of urolithiasis per 10000 inhabitants. What kind of statictical indices is presented?
a. Incidence rate
b. Index of compliance
c. Index of visualization
*d. Prevalence rate
e. Correlation coefficient

137. A 52 y.o. woman complains of weakness, painful itching after washing and bathing, sensation of heaviness in the head. On examination: hyperaemia of skin of face, neck, extremities. АP- 180/100 mm Hg. Spleen is 4 cm below the rib arch edge. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Essential hypertension
b. Systemic sclerodermia
c. Dermatomyositis
*d. Erythremia
e. Allergic dermatitis

138. A mother of a newborn child suffers from chronic pyelonephritis. She had acute respiratory viral disease before the labor. Labor in time, with prolonged period without waters. A child had erythematous eruption on the 2 day, then there were seropurulent vesicles about 1cm. Nikolskys symptom is positive. Erosions have occured after vesicle rupture. The child is flabby. The temperature is subfebrile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pseudofurunculosis
b. Vesiculopustulosis
*c. Newborn pemphigus
d. Ritters dermatitis
e. Sepsis

139. A 25 y.o. woman complains of profuse foamy vaginal discharges, foul, burning and itching in genitalia region. She has been ill for a week. Extramarital sexual life. On examination: hyperemia of vaginal mucous, bleeding on touching, foamy leucorrhea in the urethral area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Gonorrhea
*b. Trichomonas colpitic
c. Bacterial vaginosis
d. Vagina candidomicosis
e. Chlamydiosis

140. A 24 y.o. woman presents with prolonged fever, nocturnal sweating. Shes lost weight for 7 kg during the last 3 months. She had irregular intercourses. On examination: enlargement of all lymphaden groups, hepatolienal syndrom. In blood: WBC- 2,2×109/L. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. HIV-infection
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Tuberculosis
d. Chroniosepsis
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

141. A 52 y.o. male patient has become ill gradually. There is pain in the left side of the thorax during 2 weeks, elevation of temperature till 38-39 degree С. On examination: left chest side falls behind in breathing movement no voice tremor over the left lung. Dullness that is more intensive in lower parts of this lung. Right heart border is deviated outside. Sharply weakened breathing over the left lung, no rales. Heart sounds are mufflet, tachycardia. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Atelectasis of lung
*b. Exudative pleuritis
c. Cirrhotic tuberculosis
d. Infarction-pneumonia
e. Spotaneous pneumothorax

142. A 28 y.o. male patient was admitted to the hospital because of high temperature 39°С, headache, generalized fatigue, constipation, sleep disorder for 9 days. There are sporadic roseolas on the abdomen, pulse- 78 bpm, liver is enlarged for 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brucellosis
*b. Abdominal typhoid
c. Typhus
d. Leptospirosis
e. Sepsis

143. In treatment and prevention establishments, regardless of their organisational and proprietary form, the rights of the patients should be observed. Which of these rights is the most significant?
a. The right to the protection from incompetence
b. The right to the information
c. The right to the free choice
*d. The right to the protection of the patients interests
e. The right to be heard

144. A 40 y.o. patient was admitted to the gasteroenterology with skin itching, jaundice, discomfort in the right subcostal area, generalized weakness. On examination: skin is jaundice, traces of scratches, liver is +5 cm, splin is 6x8 cm. In blood: alkaline phosphatase - 2,0 mmol/(hourL), general bilirubin - 60 mkmol/L, cholesterol - 8,0 mmol/L. What is the leading syndrome in the patient?
*a. Сholestatic
b. Liver-cells insufficiency
c. Mesenchymal inflammatory
d. Сytolytic
e. Asthenic

145. A youth, aged 15, from childhood suffers from atopic dermatitis and allergy to the shellfish. In the last 3 months after acquiring aquarium fish, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, itching in the nose developed. What level of immunologic index should be defined in this case?
a. IgA
b. Circulating immunocomplexes
c. IgJ
*d. IgE
e. IgM

146. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m hight on the ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain here. There is microhematuria in the urea. On urography kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Kidneys abruption
b. Paranephral hematoma
*c. Kidneys contusion
d. Multile kidneys ruptures
e. Subcapsular kidneys rupture

147. A 43 y.o. woman complains of severe pain in the right abdominal side irradiating in the right supraclavicular area, fever, dryness and bitterness in the mouth. There were multiple vomitings without relief. Patient relates the onset of pain to the taking of fat and fried food. Physical examination: the patient lies on the right side, pale, dry tongue, tachycardia. Right side of abdomen is painful during palpation and somewhat tense in right hypochondrium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Right-sided renal colic
*c. Perforative ulcer
d. Acute bowel obstruction
e. Acute appendicitis

148. A 20 daily y.o. female patient is suffering from chronic bronchitis. Recently there has been production about 0,5 L of purulent sputum with maximum discharge in the morning. Fingers are like "drum sticks", there are "watching glass" nails. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic bronchitis
b. Tuberculosis
c. Gangrene of lungs
*d. Bronchiectasia
e. Pneumonia

149. A 19 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with closed abdominal trauma. On operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can determine patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. A surgeon
b. A traumotologist
c. A laboratory physician
*d. A doctor of any speciality
e. An anaesthesilogist

150. The physician must undertake measures for primary prophylaxis of iron deficiency anemia. Which of the following categories of patient are subject to such primary prophylactic measures?
a. Workers of industrial enterprises
b. Patients after 60
c. All children
*d. Pregnant women
e. Patients after operation

151. Patient with thyrotoxicosis is in the 2-beds hospital ward of therapeutic department. The area of the ward is 18 m2, height 3 m, ventilation rate 2,5/hr. Air temperature - 20°С, relative humidity 45%, air movement velocity 0,3 m/s, light coefficient ⅕, noise level 30 dB. Make hygienic evaluation of the conditions
a. All conditions are OK
b. High level of noise
*c. Discomfortable microclimate
d. Poor lighting
e. Non-effective ventilation

152. A girl, aged 13, consults the school doctor on account of moderate bloody discharge from the genital tracts, which appeared 2 days ago. Secondary sexual characters are developed. What is the most probable cause of bloody discharge?
*a. Menarche
b. Werlhofs disease
c. Haemophilia
d. Endometrium cancer
e. Juvenile haemorrhage

153. A 3 y.o. child with weight defficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. There was a history of some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different moist rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 mol/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchiectasis
*b. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
c. Pulmonary hypoplasia
d. Recurrent bronchitis
e. Bronchial asthma

154. A 26 y.o. male patient with postoperative hypothyroidism take thyroxine 100 mg 2 times a day. He has developed tachycardia, sweating, irritability, sleep disorder. Determine further treatment tactics
a. To increase thyroxine dosage
b. To administer sedatives
c. To administer betablockers
d. To add mercasolil to the treatment
*e. To decrease thyroxine dosage

155. The woman who has delivered twins has early postnatal hypotonic uterine bleeding reached 1,5% of her bodyweight. The bleeding is going on. Conservative methods to arrest the bleeding have been found ineffective. The conditions of patient are pale skin, acrocyanosis, oliguria. The woman is confused. The pulse is 130 bpm, BP– 75/50 mm Hg. What is the further treatment?
a. Putting clamps on the uterine cervix
*b. Uterine extirpation
c. Inner glomal artery ligation
d. Supravaginal uterine amputation
e. Uterine vessels ligation

156. A male patient complains of heartburn which gest stronger while bending the body, substernal pain during swallowing. There is a hiatus hernia on X-ray. What disoeder should be expected at gastroscopy?
*a. Gastroesophageal reflux
b. Chronic gastritis
c. Acute erosive gastritis
d. Duodenal peptic ulcer
e. Gastric peptic ulcer

157. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with stopped recurrent peptic ulcer bleeding. On examination he is exhausted, pale. Нb– 77 g/L, Нt– 0,25. Due to anemia there were two attempts of blood transfution of identical blood group А(ІІ)Rh+. Both attempts were stopped because of anaphylactic reaction. What blood transfution environment is desirable in this case?
a. Erythrocyte mass (native)
*b. Washed erythrocytes
c. Erythrocyte mass poor for leucocytes and thrombocytes
d. Erythrocyte emulsion
e. Freshcitrated blood

158. On medical observation a doctor identified girl (162 cm tall and 59 kg weight) who complained loss of ability to see surrounding objects clearly in the evening. On examination: dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Her daily ration includes the following vitamines: vitamine А– 0,5 mg, vit.В1– 2,0 mg, vit.В2– 2,5 mg, vit.В6– 2 mg, vit.С– 70 mg. What is the hypovitaminosis type?
*a. A-hypovitaminosis
b. B6-hypovitaminosis
c. B1-hypovitaminosis
d. C-hypovitaminosis
e. B2-hypovitaminosis

159. A 2 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with weight loss, unstable discharges, anorexia, following the semolinas introduction (since 5 months). The child is adymanic, flabby, pale dry skin, subcutaneous layer is emaciated. Distended and tensed abdomen, tympanitis on percussion of the upper part of the abdomen, splashing sounds, feces are foamy, of light color, foul. On coprocytogram: a lot of neutral fat. What is the cause of the disease?
a. Intestinal dysbacteriosis
b. Chronic enteritis
c. Disaccharidase insufficiency
d. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
*e. Celiakia (celiac disease)

160. A 40 y.o. man complains of headache in occipital area. On physical examination: the skin is pale; face and hand edema, BP- 170/130 mm Hg. On EchoCG: concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle. Ultrasound examination of the kidneys reveals thinned cortical layer. Urine analysis shows proteinuria of 3,5 g/day. What is the probable diagnosis?
a. Cushings disease
b. Chronic pyelonephritis
c. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*d. Essential arterial hypertension
e. Polycystic disease of the kidneys

161. A 7 y.o. child had elevation of temperature tol 40°С in anamnesis. For the last 3 months he presents fusiform swelling of fingers, ankle joints and knee joint, pain in the upper part of the sternum and cervical part of the spinal column. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Toxic synovitis
*b. Juvenile rheumatic arthritis
c. Osteoarthrits
d. Septic arthritis
e. Rheumatism

162. A 14 y.o. girl complains of profuse bloody genital discharges during 10 days after suppresion of menses for 1,5 months. Similiar bleedings recur since 12 years on the background of disordered menstrual cycle. On rectal examination: no pathology on the internal genitalia. In blood: Нb– 70 g/L, RBC- 2,3×1012/L, Ht– 20. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Juvenale bleeding, posthemorrhagic anemia
b. Hormonoproductive ovary tumor
c. Werlholfs disease
d. Polycyst ovarian syndrome
e. Noncomplete spontaneous abortion

163. 33 y.o. woman works as the secretary. Her diet contains 150 g of protein (including 100 g of animal protein), 200 g of fat, 600 g of carbohydrates. What pathology can develop from this diet?
a. Uterine fibromyoma
b. Schizophrenia
c. Common cold
d. Paradontosis
*e. Obesity

164. A 56 y.o. man, who has taken alcoholic drinks regularly for 20 years, complains of intensive girdle pain in the abdomen. Profuse nonformed stool 2-3- times a day has appeared for the last 2 years, loss of weight for 8 kg for 2 years. On examination: abdomen is soft, painless. Blood amylase - 12g/L. Feces examination-neutral fat 15 g per day, starch grains. What is the most reasonable treatment at this stage?
a. Contrykal
b. Levomicytine
c. Aminocapron acid
*d. Pancreatine
e. Imodium

165. A 31y.o. patient has had mental disorder for a long time. He suffers from insomnia for a long time. He has developed fears, suicidal thoughts, tried to hang himself. His mood is depressed, he refuses from treatment. What measures are the most expedient for the prevention of suicide?
*a. Admission to the mental hospital
b. Psychotherapeutic conversation
c. Admission to the nu erological department
d. Strict home supervision
e. Out-patient treatment

166. The girl of 11 y.o. She is ill for 1 month. She has "butterfly"-type rash on face (spots and papules), pain and swelling of small joints on arms and legs, signs of stomatitis (small-sized ulcers in mouth). CBC: Нb– 80 g/L, RBC– 2,9×1012/L, WBC– 15×109/L, ESR- 40 mm/hour. Urinalysis: protein– 0,33 g/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dermatomyositis
b. Periarteriitis nodosa
*c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Acute rheumatic fever
e. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, systemic type

167. A 14 y.o. patient suddenly fell ill when high fever, acute pain in the right shin. In two weeks X-ray showed translucent spaces (destructive focuses) with unevel countours in the middle third of tibia diaphysis. Along the bone edge there was a narrow line of shadow (periostitis) 1-2 mm from the surface. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bone cyst of tibia
b. Right shin syphilis
c. Right shin trauma
*d. Right shin osteomielitis
e. Right shin tuberculosis

168. The patient has developed pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is marked, the tongue is coated by white coating. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodules are determined in the axillary area. The skin is erythematous and glistering over the lymphatic nodules. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Anthrax
*b. Bubonic plague
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Tularemia
e. Acute purulent lymphadenitis

169. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for potable water in the field conditions
a. River water
b. Water from melted snow
c. Rain water
d. Spring water
*e. Artesian well water

170. A 33 y.o. male patient was admitted to a hospital. A patient is pale, at an attempt to stand up he complains of strong dizziness. There was vomiting like coffee-grounds approximately hour ago. BP- 90/60 mm Hg., pulse- 120 b/min. In anamnesis, a patient has suffered from ulcer of the stomach, painless form during 4 years. An ulcer was exposed at gastrofiberoscopy. Your diagnosis:
a. Acute myocardial infarction, abdominal form
b. Erosive gastritis
*c. Ulcer of stomach, complicated with bleeding
d. Ulcer of duodenum, complicated with bleeding
e. Acute pleurisy

171. A sample of milk was taken for testing from a 5 ton milk batch. Lab analysis showed the following: fat content 2%, specific density- 1,04 g/cm3, acidity 21°С, reductase probe – weak positive. What way the product is to be used in? What would you advise?
a. Utilize technically
b. Sell without limitations
c. Annihilate the product
*d. Sell but inform customers about milk quality
e. Write the product off for animal feeding

172. A 18 y.o. woman complains of weakness, dizziness, loss of appetite, menorrhagia. There are petechiae on the skin of the upper extremities. Blood test: Hb– 105 g/L; RBC- 3,2×1012/L; coloured index– 0,95; thromb.– 20×109/L. The sedimantation time according to Lee White is 5; hemorrhagia duration according to Duke is 8, "pinch and tourniquet" test is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Iron deficiency anemia
c. Hemorrhagic diathesis
d. Marchiafava-Michelis disease
e. Hemophilia

173. A 36 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with sharp pain in substernal area following occasional swallowing of a fish bone. On esophagoscopy the foreign body wasnt revealed. The pain increased and localized between scapulas. In a day temperature elevated, condition became worse, dysphagia intensified. What complication has developed?
a. Esophageal hemorrhage
b. Obstruction of esophagus
c. Pulmonary atelectasis
d. Aspirative pneumonia
*e. Perforation of esophagus with mediastinitis

174. A 55 y.o. patient complains of distended abdomen and rumbling, increased winds evacuation, liguid foamy feces with sour smell following the diary products consumption. What is the correct name of this syndrome?
a. Malabsorption syndrome
*b. Syndrome of fermentative dyspepsia
c. Syndrome of decayed dyspepsia
d. Dyskinesia syndrome
e. Syndrome of fatty dyspepsia

175. At year-end hospital administration has obtained the following data: annual number of treated patients and average annual number of patient-used beds. What index of hospital work can be calculated based upon this data?
a. Average annual bed occupacy
*b. Bed turnover
c. Average bed idle time
d. Average duration of patients presence in the hospital
e. Bed resources of the hospital

176. A patient, aged 25, suffering from stomach ulcer. Had a course of treatment in the gastroenterological unit. 2 weeks later developed constant pain, increasing and resistant to medication. The abdomen is painful in epigastric area, moderate defence in pyloroduodenal area. Which complication development aggravated the patients state?
a. Stenosis
b. Penetration
*c. Malignisation
d. Haemorrhage
e. Perforation

177. After delivery and revision of placenta there was found the defect of placental lobe. General condition of woman is normal, uterine is firm, there is moderate bloody discharge. Inspection of birth canal with mirrors shows absence of lacerations. What is the following necessary action?
*a. Manual exploration of the uterine cavity
b. Use of hemostatic medications
c. Use of uterine contracting agents
d. External massage of uterus
e. Urine drainage, cold at lower abdomen

178. A 74 y.o. female patient complains of pain, distended abdomen, nausea. She suffers from heart ichemia, post-infarction and diffusive cardiosclerosis. On examination: grave condition, distended abdomen, abdominal wall fails to take active part in breathing. On laparoscopy: some cloudy effusion, one of the bowel loops is dark-blue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Mesenterial vessels thrombosis
b. Ichemic abdominal syndrome
c. Acute intestinal obstruction
d. Volvulus
e. Erysipelas

179. A 27 y.o. woman turns to the maternity welfare centre because of infertility. She has had sexual life in marriage for 4 years, doesnt use contraceptives. She didnt get pregnant. On examination: genital development is without pathology, uterus tubes are passable, basal (rectal) temperature is one-phase during last 3 menstrual cycles. What is the infertility cause?
a. Immunologic infertility
b. Genital endometriosis
c. Abnormalities in genital development
d. Chronic adnexitis
*e. Anovular menstrual cycle

180. A 38 y.o. woman complains of a purulent discharge from the left nostril. The body temperature is 37,5°С. The patient is ill during a week and associates her illness with common cold. Pain on palpation of her left cheek reveals tenderness. The mucous membrane in the left nasal cavity is red and turgescent. The purulent exudates is seen in the middle meatus in maxillary. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent frontitis
*b. Acute purulent maxillary sinusitis
c. -
d. Acute purulent ethmoiditis
e. Acute purulent sphenoiditis

181. A woman, aged 40, primigravida, with infertility in the medical history, on the 42-43 week of pregnancy. Labour activity is weak. Longitudinal presentation of the fetus, I position, anterior position. The head of the fetus is engaged to pelvic inlet. Fetus heart rate is 140 bmp, rhythmic, muffled. Cervix dilation is 4 cm. On amnioscopy: greenish colour of amniotic fluid and fetal membranes. Cranial bones are dense, cranial sutures and small fontanel are diminished. What should be tactics of delivery?
a. Medication sleep, amniotomy, labour stimulation
*b. Caesarean section
c. Fetal hypoxia treatment, conservative delivery
d. Fetal hypoxia treatment, in the ІІ period - forceps delivery
e. Amniotomy, labour stimulation, fetal hypoxia treatment

182. Full term newborn has developed jaundice at 10 hours of age. Hemolytic disease of newborn due to Rh-incompatibility was diagnosed. 2 hours later the infant has indirect serum bilirubin level increasing up to 14 mmol/L. What is most appropriate for treatment of hyperbilirubinemia in this infant?
*a. Exchange blood transfusion
b. Intestinal sorbents
c. Infusion therapy
d. Phenobarbital
e. Phototherapy

183. What methods of the collecting of the information is preferable for study of housing conditions of students of medical HIGH SCHOOL for a training period?
a. Statistical
b. Interviewing
*c. Questioning
d. Selecting of materials
e. A method of the directed selection

184. A female, aged 20, after smoking notices a peculiar inebriation with the feeling of burst of energy, elation, irreality and changing of surroundings: the world gets full of bright colours, the objects change their dimensions, peoples faces get cartoon features, loss of time and space judgement. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Barbiturism
*b. Cocainism
c. Nicotinism
d. Cannabism
e. Morphinism

185. A 42 y.o. man died in a road accident after the haemorrhage on the site, due to acute hemorrhagic anaemia. What minimum percentage volume of the total blood loss would result in death at acute haemorrhage?
*a. 25-30%
b. 15-20%
c. 6-9%
d. 35-50%
e. 10-14%

186. Examination of placenta, which has just been born, reveals defect 2x3 cm in size. There is no bleeding. What tactics is the most reasonable?
a. Instrumental uterus cavity revision
b. External uterus massage
c. Administration of uterotonic medicines
d. Parturient supervision
*e. Manual uretus cavity revision

187. A 18 y.o. woman consulted a gynecologist with complaints of the pain in the lower part of the abdomen, fever up to 37,5°С, considerable mucopurulent discharges from the genital tract, colic during urinating. After mirror and vagina examination the results are the following: the urethra is infiltrated, cervix of the uterus is hyperemic, erosive. The uterus is painful, ovaries are painful, thickened, free. Bacterioscopy test showed diplococcus. What diagnosis is the most probable?
*a. Recent acute ascending gonorrhea
b. Chlamydiosis
c. Trichomoniasis
d. Candydomycosis
e. Chronic gonorrhea

188. A man, aged 30, complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39°С. Sudden onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic without definite borders and without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Gout
b. Osteoarthritis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Infectional arthritis
e. Erysipelatous inflammation

189. A 70 y.o. male patient with mild headaches complains of speech disorder, weakness in right limbs. There was a history of miocardial infarction and arrhythmia. On nu eroligical examination there are elements of motor aphasia, central paresis of VII and XII cranial nerves pairs on the right side, cental type of hemiparesis and hemihyperesthisia on the same side. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic stroke
b. Epidural hematoma
c. Transitory ischemic attack
*d. Ischemic stroke
e. Cerebral tumor

190. A child from the first non-complicated pregnancy but complicated labor had cephalhematoma. On the second day there developed jaundice. On the 3th day appeared changes of neurologic status: nystagmus, Graefes sign. Urea is yellow, feces- golden-yellow. Mothers blood group is А(II)Rh-, child- А(II)Rh+. On the third day childs Hb is 200 g/L, RBC- 6,1*10^12/L, bilirubin in blood - 58 mk mol/L due to unconjugated bilirubin, Ht- 0,57. What is the childs jaundice explanation?
a. Bile ducts atresia
*b. Brain delivery trauma
c. Physiologic jaundice
d. Hemolytic disease of newborn
e. Fetal hepatitis

191. A 38 y.o. patient was urgently admitted to the hospital with complaints of sudden weakness, dizziness, loss of consciousness, body weight loss, nausea, vomiting, severe pain in epigastric area, diarrhea, skin hyperpigmentation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pellagra
b. Acute gastroenteritis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Scleroderma
*e. Addisonic crisis

192. A 35 y.o. male patient suffers from chronic glomerulohephritis and has been on hemodialysis for the last 3 years. He has developed irregularities in the heart activity, hypotension, progressive weakness, dyspnea. On ECG: bradycardia, 1st degree atrioventicular block, high sharpened T-waves. Before he had severely disturbed the drinking and diet regimen. What is the most likely cause of these changes?
a. Hyperhydratation
*b. Hyperkaliemia
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Hypernatremia
e. Hypokaliemia

193. A 41 y.o. man complains of acute pain in the right side of the thorax and sudden increase of dyspnea following the lifting of heavy object. The patients condition is serious: lips and mucous are cyanotic, breathing rate is 28 per min, pulse- 122 bpm., AP- 80/40 mm Hg. There is tympanitis on percussion and weakened breathing on auscultaion on the right. S2 is accentuated over pulmonary artery. What is the urgent measure on the prehospital stage?
a. Epinephrine introduction
b. Euphilline introduction
*c. Air aspiration from the pleural cavity
d. Oxygen inhalation
e. Call for cardiologic team

194. What preparations are used for prevention of fungal infection?
a. Captopril, Enalapril
b. Cytosar, Cormyctin, Lomycitin
c. Isoniazid, Ftibazid, Pyrazinamid
*d. Fluconozol, Orungol, Nisoral
e. Rubomycin, Bleomycin, Mytomycin C

195. The girl is 12 y.o. Yesterday she was overcooled. Now she complains on pain in suprapubic area, frequent painful urination by small portions, temperature is 37,8°С. Pasternatsky symptom is negative. Urinalysis: protein- 0,033 g/L, WBC– 20-25 in f/vis, RBC– 1-2 in f/vis. What diagnosis is most probable?
a. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
b. Urolithiasis
*c. Acute cystitis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Acute pyelonephritis

196. 30 y.o. woman, had mild trauma of 5th finger of the left hand 15 days ago. She has treated her self at home. She presents to the hospital due to deterioration of the condition and temperature rise. Objectively: hyperemia and swelling on the ventral surface of finger. Restricted movements of the finger. X-ray of the left hand: an early stage of оsteomyolitis of the fifth finger could not be excluded. The diagnosis: panaris of 5th finger of the left hand. What form of panaris has occurred in the patient?
a. Hypodermic
b. Joints type
c. Tendon type
d. Paronychia
*e. Bony

197. On physiologic-sanitary examination of railway department work it was revealed that loaders work is of III degree of difficulty. They unload vagons with sand, manually break coagulated mass by shovel and shift it. What criteria was used to evaluate work of loaders?
a. Time of passive observation,% to the shift duration
*b. Maximun load weigh which is shifted
c. Time of active activities,% to the shift duration
d. Intellectual efforts
e. Value of static loading for the shift

198. 47 y.o. patient complains of intensive skin itching, jaundice, bone pain. The skin is hyperpigmentated. There is multiple xanthelasma palpebrae. The liver is +6 cm enlarged, hard with acute edge. The blood analysis revealed total bilirubin 160 mkmol/L, direct – 110 mkmol/L, AST (asparate aminotransferase)- 2,1 mmol/L per hour, ALT– 1,8 mmol/L, alkaline phosphotase- 4,6 mmol/L per hour, cholesterol– 9,2 mmol/L, antimitochondrial antibodies M2 in a high titer. What is probable diagnosis?
a. Acute viral hepatitis B
*b. Primary biliary liver cirrhosis
c. Alcoholic liver cirrhosis
d. Chronic viral hepatitis B
e. Primary liver cancer

199. A 52 y.o. hard smoker patient complains of persistent cough with purulent sputum discharge especially in mornings, dyspnea provoked even by slight physical exertion, wheezing chest, tahypnoe, general weakness. He considers himself to be ill during 12 years. The overwritten conditions appear 3-4 times per year usually after common cold and have tendency to progress. What disease do you think about first of all?
a. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
b. Bronchoectatic disease
c. Aspergillosis
d. Bronchial asthma
*e. Chronic obstructive lung disease

200. A 24 y.o. patient complains of nausea, vomiting, headache, shortness of breath. He had an acute nephritis being 10 y.o. Proteinuria was found out in urine. Objectively: a skin is grey-pale, the edema is not present. Accent of II tone above aorta. BP 140/100-180/100 mm Hg. Blood level of residual N2- 6,6 mmol/L, creatinine- 406 mmol/L. Days diuresis- 2300 ml, nocturia. Specific density of urine is 1009, albumin- 0,9 g/L, WBC- 0-2 in f/vis. RBC- single in f/vis., hyaline casts single in specimen. Your diagnosis?
a. Nephrotic syndrome
b. Feochromocitoma
*c. Chronic nephritis with violation of kidney function
d. Stenosis of kidney artery
e. Hypertensive illness of the II degree

