1. A 40 y.o. woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Painless movable induration
b. Painful movable induration
c. Pure discharges from the nipple
d. Bloody discharges from the nipple
*e. Skin induration with inverted nipple

2. Heart auscultation of a 16 y.o. boy without clinical symptoms revealed accent of the S II and systolic murmur above the pulmonary artery. Heart sounds are resonant, rhythmic. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Defection of interatrial septum
*b. Functional murmur
c. Nonclosure of Botallos duct
d. Stenosis of pulmonary artery valve
e. Insufficiency of pulmonary artery valve

3. A 54 y.o. woman complains of increasing fatigue and easy bruising of 3 weeks duration. Physical findings included pale, scattered ecchymoses and petechiae and mild hepatosplenomegaly. In blood: RBC- 2,5×1012/L; Hb- 73 g/L; HCT- 20%; PLT- 23×109/L; and WBC- 162×109/L with 82% blasts, that contained Auric rods; peroxidase stain was positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Chronic leukemia
*c. Acute leukemia
d. Megaloblastic anemia
e. Hemolytic anemia

4. In course of observation of sanitary conditions of studying at the technical university it was necessary to evaluate the visual regimen of students, who study from 9 a.m to 3 p.m. What index of natural light will be the most informative?
a. Depth of study room
b. Light coefficient
c. Time of the room insolation
d. Presence of mixed (upper-lateral) light
*e. Natural light coefficient

5. A 37 y.o. patient complains of pain in the right arm which increases during motion, raised body temperature up to 39°С. In the right cubital fossa there is a trace of injection, hyperemia and thickening along the vein. Your diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Abscess
c. Phlegmon
*d. Phlebitis
e. Inflammation of lymph

6. A patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of periodical pain in the lower part of abdomen that gets worse during menses, weakness, malaise, nervousness, dark bloody smears from vagina directly before and after menses. Bimanual examination revealed that uterus body is enlarged, appendages cannot be palpated, posterior fornix has tuberous surface. Laparoscopy revealed: ovaries, peritoneum of rectouterine pouch and pararectal fat have "cyanotic eyes". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis of genital organs
b. Chronic salpingitis
c. Polycystic ovaries
*d. Disseminated form of endometriosis
e. Ovarian cystoma

7. A patient who takes diuretics has developed arrhythmia as a result of cardiac glycoside overdosE. What is the treatment tactics in this case?
a. Reduced magnesium concentration in blood
b. Increased sodium consentration in blood
c. -
d. Increased calcium level in blood
*e. Increased potassium concentration in blood

8. A 30 y.o. man complains of sharp pain in the right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 m, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
a. Chronic purulent otitis media
b. Acute mastoiditis
*c. Acute purulent otitis media
d. Chronic secretory otitis media
e. Eustachian tube disfunction

9. A 28 y.o. patient who has no permanent residence was admitted to the hospital with preliminary diagnosis "influenza", on the 5-th day of disease there are appeared maculopapular and petechial rash on his body and internal surfaces of his extremities. Body temperature is 41°С, euphoria, hyperemic face, scleras reddening, tongue tremor, tachycardia, splenomegaly, excitement. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Leptospirosis
c. Typhoid fever
d. Delirium alcoholicum
*e. Spotted fever

10. A 58 y.o. patient complains of weakness, leg edemata, dyspnea, anorexia. He has been suffering from chronic bronchitis for many years. During the last 5 years he has been noting intensified discharge of sputum that is often purulent. Objectively: RR- 80/min, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Disseminated edemata, skin is dry and pale, low turgor. In urine: intense proteinuria, cylindruria. Specify the most probable pathological process in kidneys:
a. Chronic pyelonephritis
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Interstitial nephritis
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*e. Renal amyloidosis

11. A patient has got pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is evident, the tongue is coated with white coating. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodes are revealed in the axillary area. The skin is erythematous and glistering over the lymphatic nodes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
*b. Bubonic plague
c. Anthrax
d. Acute purulent lymphadenitis
e. Tularemia

12. A district doctor keeps the record of reconvalescents after infectious diseases, people who are disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases, patients with chronic pathologies. What category of patients should belong to the III health group?
a. All above mentioned categories
b. People with chronic pathologies and disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases
c. Reconvalescents after infectious diseases and patients with chronic pathologies
*d. People with chronic diseases
e. People disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases

13. At year-end hospital administration has obtained the following data: annual number of treated patients and average annual number of beds used for patients treatment. What index of hospital work can be calculated based upon this data?
a. Average annual bed occupancy
*b. Bed turnover
c. Average duration of patients presence in the hospital
d. Bed resources of the hospital
e. Average bed idle time

14. A 50 y.o. woman for 1 year complained of attacks of right subcostal pain after fatty meal. Last week the attacks have repeated every day and become more painful. What diagnostic study would you recommend?
a. Liver function tests
*b. Ultrasound examination of the gallbladder
c. Blood cell count
d. X-ray examination of the gastrointestinal tract
e. Ultrasound study of the pancreas

15. A 10 y.o. child who is at oligoanuretic stage of acute renal insufficiency has got sensations of pricking in the mucous membrane of oral cavity and tongue, extremities numbness, reduced reflexes, respiratory disturbance, arrhythmia. What are these symptoms caused by?
a. Hyperazotemia
b. Acidosis
*c. Hyperkaliemia
d. Alkalosis
e. Hyponatremia

16. A young man has painful indurations in the peripapillary regions of both mammary glands. The most reasonable action will be:
a. To remove them
*b. To leave these indurations untouched
c. To cut and drain them
d. To administer steroids locally
e. To take an aspirate for bacterial inoculation and cytology

17. A 75 y.o. man with IHD (atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis, atrial fibrillation, cardiac insufficiensy stage 2 B; chronic pyelonephritis) was prescribed digoxin. During the first 6 days the digoxin dose amounted 0,25 mg twice per day that let to abatement of dyspnea, edemata and cyanosis. But on the 7-th day the patient developed nausea and bradycardia. What is the most probable cause of digoxin intoxication?
a. Treatment complex doesnt include unitiole
b. Too long intake of saturating dose
c. Disturbed metabolism of digoxin in liver
d. Exceeding daily saturating dose
*e. Disturbed elimination of the medication by kidneys

18. The patient was admitted to the hospital on the 7-th day of the disease with complaints of high temperature, headache, pain in the muscles, especially in calf muscles. The dermal integuments and scleras are icteric. There is hemorrhagic rash on the skin. Urine is bloody. The patient went fishing two weeks ago. What is the diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Brucellosis
c. Yersiniosis
d. Trichinellosis
*e. Leptospirosis

19. A 19 y.o. girl was admitted to Emergency Department: unconsionsness state, cyanosis, myotic pupil, superficial breathing - 12/min. BP- 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action corresponding to this clinical situation:
*a. Controlled respiration
b. Caffeine injection
c. Oxygen inhalation
d. Gastric lavage
e. Cordiamine injection

20. A 3 m.o. child fell seriously ill, body temperature rised up to 37,8°С, there is semicough. On the 3-rd day the cough grew worse, dyspnea appeared. On percussion: tympanic sound above lungs, on auscultation: a lot of fine moist and wheezing rales during expiration. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchopneumonia
b. Acute respiratory viral infection, focal pneumonia
c. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis
d. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis with asthmatic component
*e. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchiolitis

21. 3 weeks ago a patient was ill with tonsillitis. Clinical examination reveals edema, arterial hypertension, hematuria, proteinuria (1,8 g/per day), granular and erythrocital casts. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Intestinal nephritis
b. Pyelonephritis
c. Cystitis
*d. Glomerulonephritis
e. Renal amyloidosis

22. A child is 2 m.o. Inguinofemoral folds contain acutely inflamed foci with distinct borders in form of spots that are slightly above the surrounding areas due to skin edema. The rash has appeared during the week. Vesiculation and wetting are absent. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Napkin-area dermatitis
b. Psoriasis
c. Complicated course of scabies
d. Infantile eczema
e. Dermatomycosis

23. A child was born with body weight 3250 g and body length 52 cm. At the age of 1,5 month the actual weight is sufficient (4350 g), psychophysical development corresponds with the age. The child is breast-fed, occasionally there are regurgitations. What is the cause of regurgitations?
a. Pylorostenosis
b. Esophageal atresia
*c. Aerophagia
d. Pylorospasm
e. Acute gastroenteritis

24. A 30 y.o. patient has got multiple body skin rash consisting of small paired elements that are scattered on the skin diorderly and mostly focally, they are accompanied by itch. The rash appeared a few days after attending sport centre and sauna. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Allergic dermatitis
*b. Scabies
c. Neurodermitis
d. Contact dermatitis
e. Eczema

25. A primigravida woman appealed to the antenatal clinic on the 22.03.03 with complaints of boring pain in the lower part of abdomen. Anamnesis registered that her last menstruation was on the 4.01.03. Bimanual examination revealed that uterine servix is intact, external fauces is closed, uterus is enlarged up to the 9-th week of pregnancy, movable, painless. What complication can be suspected?
a. Hysteromyoma
b. -
*c. Risk of abortion in the 9-th week of pregnancy
d. Vesicular mole
e. Abortion that started in the 9-th week of pregnancy

26. An 8 y.o. child presents with low-grade fever, arthritis, colicky abdominal pain, and a purpuric rash limited to the lower extremities. laboratory studies reveal a guaiac-positive stool, a urinalysis with red blood cell (RBC) casts and mild proteinuria, and a normal platelet count. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
b. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
c. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
*e. Henoch-Schonleins vasculitis

27. A 49 y.o. female patient was admitted to the hospital with acute attacks of headache accompanied by pulsation in temples, AP rised up to 280/140 mm Hg. Pheochromocytoma is suspected. What mechanism of hypertensive atack does this patient have?
a. Increasing of plasma renin activity
*b. Increasing of catecholamines concentration
c. Increasing of thyroxine excretion
d. Increasing of aldosterone level in blood
e. Increasing of vasopressin excretion

28. A 24 y.o. patient 13 months after the first labour consulted a doctor about amenorrhea. Pregnancy has concluded by a Cesarean section concerning to a premature detachment of normally posed placenta hemorrhage has made low fidelity 2000 ml owing to breakdown of coagulability of blood. Choose the most suitable investigation:
*a. Determination of the level of Gonadotropins
b. USI of organs of a small pelvis
c. Progesteron assay
d. Computer tomography of the head
e. Determination of the contents of Testosteron-Depotum in Serum of blood

29. A 52 y.o. patient with previously functional Class II angina complains of 5 days of intensified and prolonged retrosternal pains, decreased exercise tolerance. Angina is less responsive to Nitroglycerinum. Which of the following diagnosis is most likely?
a. Myocarditis
b. Cardialgia due to spine problem
c. Myocardial dystrophy
*d. IHD. Unstable angina
e. IHD. Functional Class II angina

30. A 42 y.o. patient complains of weakness, heartbeat, nasal hemorrhages, cutaneous hemorrhages. His condition has been worsening progressively for a month. Objectively: grave condition, the extremities and body skin has spotted and petechial hemorrhages, lymph nodes are not palpable, Ps- 116/min, liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not palpable. Blood has evident pancytopenia. What disease should you think about first of all?
a. Acute agranulocytosis
b. Acute leukosis
c. Hemorrhagic vasculitis
d. Werlhofs disease
*e. Hypoplastic anemia

31. A patient who has been contacting with benzol for 6 years has a non evident leukopenia, moderate reticulocytosis, gingival hemorrhage, dizziness, asthenovegetative syndrome. What a severity degree of chronic intoxication with benzol corresponds with described symptoms?
a. Severe
b. Disease is not connected with work conditions
*c. Minor
d. Moderate
e. -

32. The patients has sustained blunt trauma to the chest. Which of the following would most likely be the cause of acute cardiopulmonary collapse?
a. Rib fractures
b. Acute adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
c. Pulmonary contusion
*d. Pneumothorax
e. Hemothorax

33. Laparotomy was performed to a 54 y.o. woman on account of big formation in pelvis that turned out to be one-sided ovarian tumor along with considerable omental metastases. The most appropriate intraoperative tactics involves:
a. Ablation of an ovary and omental metastases
b. Ablation of omentum and both ovaries with tubes
c. Biopsy of omentum
d. Biopsy of an ovary
*e. Ablation of omentum, uterus and both ovaries with tubes

34. A 74 y.o. patient has been suffering from hypertension for 20 years. He complains of frequent headache, dizziness, he takes enalapril. Objectively: accent of the SII above aorta, Ps- 84 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 180/120 mm Hg. What group of hypotensive medications could be additionally prescribed under consideration of the patients age?
a. Central sympatholytics
b. alpha-adrenoceptor blockers
*c. Thiazide diuretics
d. beta-adrenoceptor blockers
e. Loop diuretics

35. A woman was hospitalised with full-term pregnancy. In survey: the uterus is morbid, the abdomen is tense, heart sounds of the fetus are not auscultated. What is the most probable complication of pregnancy?
a. Preterm labour
b. Hydramnion
c. Acute hypoxia of a fetus
*d. Premature detachment of the normally posed placenta
e. Back occipital presentation

36. X-ray pattern of thorax organs revealed a large intensive inhomogeneous opacity with indistinct outlines on the right side at the level of the 4-th rib. In the centre of this opacity there is a horizontal level and clearing of lung tissue above it. What disease does this X-ray pattern correspond with?
*a. Abscess of the right lung
b. Right-sided pneumothorax
c. Tuberculoma of the right lung
d. -
e. Peripheral cancer

37. A 44 y.o. man has acute disarthria, right-sided Horners syndrome, hiccup, right-sided ataxia, loss of pain sensation of his face to the right and of his body to the left. The man is conscious. Computer tomography of brain is normal. The most reasonable measure will be:
a. Out-patient observation
b. Endarterectomy of the right carotid artery
c. Surgical cerebral decompression
d. Endarterectomy of the left carotid artery
*e. Introduction of direct coagulants and observation

38. A 40 weeks pregnant woman in intrinsic obstetric investigation: the cervix of a uterus is undeveloped. The oxytocin test is negative. Upon inspection at 32 weeks it is revealed: AP- 140/90 mm Hg, proteinuria 1 g/l, peripheric edemata. Reflexes are normal. Choose the most correct tactics of guiding the pregnant:
a. Strict bed regimen for 1 month
b. Complex therapy of gestosis for 7 days
c. Cesarean section immediately
*d. Laborstimulation after preparation
e. Complex therapy of gestosis for 2 days

39. A patient consulted a doctor about acure respiratory viral infection. The patient was acknowledged to be off work. The doctor issued him a medical certificate for 5 days. The patient is not recovering. What measures should the doctor take in order to legalize the further disability of patient?
a. To prolong the medical certificate at his own discretion but no more than for 6 days in total
b. To prolong the medical certificate together with department superintendent
c. To send the patient to the medical consultative commission
*d. To prolong the medical certificate at his own discretion but no more than for 10 days in total
e. To send the patient to the medical social expert comission

40. A full-term child survived antenatal and intranatal hypoxia, it was born in asphyxia (2-5 points on Apgar score). After birth the child has progressing excitability, there are also vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, strabismus, spontaneous Moros and Babinskys reflexes. What localization of intracranial hemorrhage is the most probable?
a. Periventricular hemorrhages
b. Hemorrhages into the brain ventricles
*c. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
d. Small cerebral tissue hemorrhages
e. Subdural hemorrhage

41. A 21 y.o. man complains of having morning pains in his back for the last three months. The pain can be relieved during the day and after physical exercises. Physical examination revealed reduced mobility in the lumbar part of his spine, increase of muscle tonus in the lumbar area and sluch during moving. X-ray pattern of spine revealed bilateral sclerotic changes in the sacrolumbal part. What test will be the most necessary for confirming a diagnosis?
*a. HLA-B27
b. ESR
c. Antinuclear antibodies
d. Uric acid in blood plasma
e. Rheumatoid factor

42. The 10 y.o. boy has complains on headache, weakness, fever 40°С, vomiting, expressed dyspnea, pale skin with flush on right cheek, lag of right hemithorax respiratory movement, dullness on percussion over low lobe of right lung, weakness of vesicular respiration in this zone. The abdomen is painless and soft at palpation. Which disease lead to these symptoms and signs?
a. Flu
b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Intestinal infection
*d. Pneumonia croupousa
e. Acute appendicitis

43. A woman had the rise of temperature up to 39°С on the first day after labour. The rupture of fetal membranes took place 36 hours before labour. The investigation of the bacterial flora of cervix of the uterus revealed hemocatheretic streptococcus of groupa. The uterus body is soft, tender. Discharges are bloody, mixed with pus. Specify the most probable postnatal complication:
*a. Metroendometritis
b. Infection of the urinary system
c. Infected hematoma
d. Thrombophlebitis of pelvic veins
e. Apostatis of junctures after the episiotomy

44. A 30 y.o. man complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39°С. There was acute onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic without definite borders and without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectional arthritis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Erysipelatous inflammation
*d. Gout
e. Osteoarthritis

45. A 25 y.o. patient complains of pain in the I finger on the right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain is getting worse. Acute pain appears during the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Subcutaneous panaritium
b. Articular (joint) panaritium
*c. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)
d. Bone panaritium
e. Paronychia

46. Poorly refined wastes of an industrial plant are usually thrown into the river that supplies drinking water. It causes perishing of some microorganisms, disturbs processes of water self-purification and worsens its quality that can have negative influence upon peoples health. How is this effect of environmental factors called?
a. Direct
b. Combined
c. Complex
*d. Indirect
e. Associated

47. A 32 y.o. woman consulted a gynecologist about having abundant long menses within 3 months. Bimanual investigation: the body of the uterus is enlarged according to about 12 weeks of pregnancy, distorted, tuberous, of dense consistence. Appendages are not palpated. Histological test of the uterus body mucosa: adenocystous hyperplasia of endometrium. Optimal medical tactics:
a. Phase by phase vitamin therapy
b. Radial therapy
*c. Surgical treatment
d. Phytotherapy
e. Hormonetherapy

48. A 70 y.o. man is ill with ischemic heart disease. His mood is evidently depressed, anxious. As a result of continious sleeplessness he has got fears, suicidal thoughts. He would sit for a long time in the same pose, answer after a pause, in a low, monotonous voice. His face has a look of suffering, pain, fear. What is the main psychopathologic syndrome?
a. Obsessive syndrome
*b. Depressive syndrome
c. Phobic syndrome
d. Asthenic syndrome
e. Paranoid syndrome

49. A 14 y.o. girl got a bad mark at the lesson of math as well as teachers reprimand that made her cry for a long time. At the end of the lesson she suddenly lost consciousness and fell down. Objectively: skin is of pale pink colour, Ps- 100 bpm, satisfactory, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Eyelids are closed and dont give away to the tries of their opening. There are no evident injuries. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Hysteric syncope
b. Epilepsy
c. Long QT syndrome
d. Vagotonic syncope
e. Sympathicotonic collapse

50. A 32 y.o. patient has been suffering from systematic scleroderma for 14 years. She was repeatedly exposed to treatment in the in-patient department. Complains of periodical dull cardiac pain, dyspnea, headache, eyelid edemata, weight loss, pain and deformation of extremities joints. What organs lesion deteriorates the prognosis for the disease?
*a. Kidneys
b. Gastrointestinal tract
c. Lungs
d. Skin and joints
e. Heart

51. A 7 d.o. boy is admitted to the hospital for evaluation of vomiting and dehydration. Physical examination is otherwise normal except for minimal hyperpigmentation of the nipples. Serum sodium and potassium concentrations are 120 meq/L and 9 meq/L respectively. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Pyloric stenosis
*b. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
c. Panhypopituitarism
d. Hyperaldosteronism
e. Secondary hypothyroidism

52. An aircraft factory processes materials with use of lasers. It is determined that the device radiates in the light spectrum and that levels of laser radiation at the workplaces exceed the alarm level. Specify, what organs will be affected in the first place?
a. Kidneys
b. Liver
c. Skin
d. Spleen
*e. Eyes

53. A 70 y.o. patient complains of weakness, dizziness, short periods of unconsciousness, pain in the cardiac area. Objectively: HR- 40 bpm, heart sounds are rhythmic, the S1 is dull, periodically amplified. AP is 180/90 mm Hg. What is the most probable cause of hemodynamic disturbances?
*a. Atrioventricular block type III
b. Bradysystolic form of ciliary arrhythmia
c. Atrioventricular block type I
d. Complete left bandle-branch block
e. Sinus bradycardia

54. A 38 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in pain in the lumbar part of spine irradiating to the posterior surface of his left leg. The pain increases during changing body position and also in the upright position. Examination revealed positive symptoms of tension. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Arachnomyelitis
b. Myelopathy
*c. Pathology of intercostal disks
d. Polyneuritis
e. Spinal cord tumor

55. A 25 y.o. woman complained of fatigue, hair loss and brittle nails. The examination revealed pallor of skin, Ps- 94/min, BP- 110/70 mm Hg. On blood count: Hb- 90 g/L, RBC- 3,5×1012/L,c.I.- 0,7; ESR- 20 mm/h. Serum iron level was 8,7 mcmol/l. What treatment would you initiate?
a. Packed RBCs transfusion
b. Vitamin B12 intramuscularly
c. Blood transfusion
*d. Ferrous sulfate orally
e. Iron dextrin injections

56. A 60 y.o. asthmatic man comes for a check up and complains that he is having some difficulty in "starting to urinate". Physical examination indicates that the man has blood pressure of 160/100 mm Hg, and a slight enlarged prostate. Which of the following medications would be useful in treating both of these conditions:
a. Propranolol
*b. Doxazosin
c. Labetalol
d. Phentolamine
e. Isoproterenol

57. The 7 m.o. infant is suffering from acute pneumonia which was complicated by cardiovascular insufficiency and respiratory failure of II degree. The accompanied diagnosis is malnutrition of II degree. Choose the best variant of therapy:
*a. Ampiox and Amicacin
b. Gentamycin and Macropen
c. Macropen and Penicillin
d. Penicillin and Ampiox
e. Ampiox and Polymixin

58. A 43 y.o. woman complains of contact hemorrhages during the last 6 months. Bimanual examination: cervix of the uterus is enlarged, its mobility is reduced. Mirrors showed the following: cervix of the uterus is in the form of cauliflower. Chrobak and Schiller tests are positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Leukoplakia
b. Polypus of the cervis of the uterus
c. Cervical pregnancy
*d. Cancer of cervix of the uterus
e. Nascent fibroid

59. A 30 y.o. victim of fire has thermal burns of III-A and III-B degree that amount 20% of total skin coverlet. AP is 110/70 mm Hg, HR- 120/min. What transfusion means shoul be used for blind infusion correction during transportation?
a. Albumin
b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Polyglucine
d. 10% glucose solution
*e. Salines

60. A 42 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in acute pain in the right half of his chest, increased dyspnea. The patients condition is grave: cyanosis of lips and mucous membranes, RR is 28 pm, Ps- 122 bpm. On percussion there is tympanitis above the right half of chest, on auscultation - stongly diminished breath sounds; accent of the II heart sound above the pulmonary artery. AP is 80/40 mm Hg. What is the main emergency action at the pre-admission stage?
a. Calling a cardiological brigade
b. Aminophylline introduction
c. Oxygen inhalation
*d. Air aspiration from the pleural cavity
e. Adrenaline introduction

61. A 23 y.o. woman who suffers from insulin-dependent diabetes was admitted to the acute care department with mental confusion, inadequate anxious behaviour, hyperhidrosis, excessive salivation, tachycardia. What examination will be a primary task?
a. Clinical blood analysis
b. Gaseous composition of arterial blood
c. Blood urea and creatinine test
*d. Blood test for sugar
e. Plasma electrolytes test

62. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: t°- 37,3°С, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lung cancer
b. Macrofocal pneumonia
c. Bronchoectatic disease
d. Exudative pleuritis
e. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis

63. An anestesiologist gives narcosis to the patient, he uses a non-reversive contour. Anesthetic is halothane. Air temperature in the operation room is 21°С, humidity 50%, level of noise 30 db. What occupational hazard is the principal one under these conditions?
a. High level of noise
b. Mental overfatigue
*c. Air pollution with anesthetic
d. Improper occupational microclimate
e. Compelled working pose

64. Prevalence of a disease in region N amounted 1156 occurences per 1000 of inhabitants. What of the mentioned indices characterizes the disease prevalence?
a. Visual index
b. Standardized
*c. Intensive
d. Extensive
e. Ratio

65. A 15 y.o. patient has developmental lag, periodical skin yellowing. Objectively: spleen is 16х12х10 cm large, holecistolithiasis, skin ulcer on the lower third of his left crus. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,0×1012/L, Hb- 90 g/L,c.I.- 1,0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Blood bilirubin - 56 mmole/L, indirect bilirubin - 38 mmole/L. Choose the way of treatment:
a. Omentohepatopexy
b. Portocaval anastomosis
c. Spleen transplantation
d. Omentosplenopexy
*e. Splenectomy

66. A 75 y.o. woman with coronary heart disease constantly takes warfarin. She was taken to the acute care department with complaints of sudden sensation of weakness in the left half of her body and eyeball deviation to the left. What examination of the patient will be a primary task?
a. Spinal punction
b. Electroencephalogram
c. Magnetic resonance tomography of brain
d. Ultrasonic examination of carotid arteries
*e. Computer tomography of brain

67. A girl 13 y.o. consulted the school doctor on account of moderate bloody discharge from the genital tracts, which appeared 2 days ago. Secondary sexual characters are developed. What is the most probable cause of bloody discharge?
*a. Menarche
b. Juvenile hemorrhage
c. Werlhofs disease
d. Endometrium cancer
e. Haemophilia

68. A 14 y.o. child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for atack reduction?
a. Amisyl
b. Corglicone
c. Euphyline
*d. Obsidan
e. No-shpa

69. A worker at a porcelain factory who has been in service for 10 years complains of cough, dyspnea, ache in his chest. What occupational disease are these complaints most typical for?
*a. Silicosis
b. Occupational bronchial asthma
c. Chronic dust bronchitis
d. Multiple bronchiectasis
e. Chronic cor pulmonale

70. Name a statistical observation unit for determination of influence amount of bloodsugar on the healing of wounds surface in a postoperative period:
a. An amount of bloodsugar
b. The patient who was discharged on an after-care
c. Blood analysis
d. The patient who has a wound surface
*e. The patient in a postoperative period

71. A 58 y.o. man complaines of severe inspiratory dyspnea and expectoration of frothy and blood-tinged sputum. He has been suffering from essential hypertension and ischemic heart disease. On examination: acrocyanosis, "bubbling" breathing, Ps- 30/min, BP- 230/130 mm Hg, bilateral rales. Choose medicines for treatment
a. Theophylline, prednisolon
*b. Morphine, furosemide, nitroprusside sodium
c. Cordiamine, isoproterenol
d. Strophanthine, potassium chloride, plathyphylline
e. Albuterol, atropine, papaverine

72. For the persons who live in a hot area after an accident at a nuclear object, the greatest risk within the first decade is represented by cancer of:
*a. Thyroid gland
b. Lungs
c. Skin
d. Reproduction system organs
e. Breast

73. A 7 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital. He complains of unpleasant sensations in the heart region, pain in the epigastrium, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: evident paleness of skin, dyspnea, jugular pulse. Heart borders are within the normal range. Heart sounds are clear, HR- 170/min, small pulse. AP- 90/50 mm Hg. EKG showed: paroxysm of ventricular tachycardia. The paroxysm can be suppressed by:
a. Strophanthine
b. Enalapril
c. Nifedipine
*d. Lidocain
e. Morphine

74. At a machine-building plant the casts are cleaned by means of abrasion machines that are a source of local vibration. What are the most efficient preventive measures for preventing harmful effect of vibration on workers organisms?
a. Warm hand baths
*b. Use of gloves that reduce vibration
c. Preliminary and periodical medical examinations
d. Hand massaging
e. Giving sanitary instructions to the workers

75. A number of viable fetuses per 1000 women at the age between 15 and 44 is determined by:
*a. Genital index
b. Obstetric rate
c. Birth rate
d. Reproductive level
e. Perinatal rate

76. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with stopped repeated ulcerative bleeding. He was pale and exhausted. Blood count: Нb- 77 g/l, Нt- 0,25. In view of anemia there were made two attempts of blood transfusion of the same group - А(ІІ) Rh+. In both cases the transfusion had to be stopped because of development of anaphylactic reaction. What transfusion medium would be advisable in this case?
*a. Washed erythrocytes
b. Fresh citrate blood
c. Erythrocytic suspension
d. Erythrocytic mass (native)
e. Erythrocytic mass poor in leukocytes and thrombocytes

77. Medical examination of a 43 y.o. man revealed objectively pailness of skin and mucous membranes, smoothness of lingual papillas, transverse striation of nails, fissures in the mouth corners, tachycardia. Hemoglobin content amounts 90 g/l; there are anisocytosis, poikilocytosis. The most probable causative agent of this condition is deficiency of the following microelement:
*a. Iron
b. Selenium
c. Zinc
d. Magnesium
e. Copper

78. A woman in her 39-th week of pregnancy, the second labor, has regular birth activity. Uterine contractions take place every 3 minutes. What criteria describe the beginning of the II labor stage the most precisely?
*a. Cervical dilatation no less than 4 cm
b. Rupture of membranes
c. Cervical smoothing over 90%
d. Presenting part is in the lower region of small pelvis
e. Duration of uterine contractions more than 30 seconds

79. A patient complains of nycturia, constant boring pain in perineum and suprapubic region, weak urine jet, frequent, obstructed and painful urination. He has been ill for several months, pain in perineum appeared after getting problems with urination. Rectal examination revealed that prostate is enlarged (mostly owing to the right lobe), dense, asymmetric, its central sulcus is flattened, the right lobe is dense, painless, tuberous. What disease can it be?
*a. Cancer of prostate
b. Chronic congestive prostatitis
c. Prostate sclerosis
d. Prostate tuberculosis
e. Urolithiasis, stone of the right lobe of prostate

80. A 19 y.o. girl admitted to the hospital complained of pain in the knee and fever of 38,6°С. She is ill for 2 weeks after acute tonsillitis. On exam, hyperemia and swelling of both knees, temperature is 37,4°С, HR- 94/min, BP- 120/80 mm Hg, and heart border is displaced to the left; S1 is weak, systolic murmur is present. Total blood count shows the following: Hb- 120 g/L, WBC- 9,8×109/L, ESR of 30 mm/L. ECG findings: the rhythm is regular, PQ = 0,24 sec. What is a causative agent of the disease?
a. Autoimmune disorder
b. Viral-bacterial association
*c. Beta-hemolytic streptococci
d. Staphylococci
e. Ricchetsia

81. A 39 y.o. patient complains of having dyspnea during physical activity, crus edemata, palpitation, heart intermissions. Objectively: HR is 150 bpm, atrial fibrillation. Heart is both ways enlarged. Heart sounds are muted. Liver is 6 cm below the costal margin. Echocardiogram reveals dilatation of heart chambers (end diastolic volume of left ventricle is 6,8 cm) is 29% EF, valve apparatus is unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Dilated cardiomyopathy
b. Restrictive cardiomyopathy
c. Thyreotoxic cardiomyopathy
d. Exudative pericarditis
e. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

82. A 65 y.o. man who has problems with urination as a result of benign prostate gland adenoma dveloped fever and chill, hypotension, sinus tachycardia. Skin is warm and dry. Clinical blood analysis revealed absolute granulocytopenia. These hemodynamic changes are most likely to be caused by:
a. Secondary reflex vasodilatation as a result of lowered cardiac output
*b. Endotoxemia with activation of complement system
c. Secondary circulation insufficiency with retained systolic function as a result of peripheral vasoconstriction
d. Reflex vagus stimulation with lowered cardiac output
e. Secondary endothelial changes as a result of bacterial lesion

83. The family doctor examined a patient and diagnosed an acute bleeding of an intestine. What is the doctors professional tactics in this situation?
*a. The urgent hospitalization in to the surgical department
b. The urgent hospitalization in to tthe herapeutic department
c. Treatment at a day time hospital
d. Aminocapronic acid intravenously
e. Treatment at home

84. A 41 y.o. woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis for 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: evident inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous membrane. In blood: WBC- 9,8×109/L, RBC- 3,0×1012/L, sedimentation rate - 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
a. Vikasolum
b. Linex
c. Kreon
d. Motilium
*e. Sulfosalasine

85. A 74 y.o. patient complains of abdomen pain and sweling, nausea. She suffers from ischemic heart disease, postinfarction and atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, abdomen is swollen, abdominal wall doesnt take active part in respiration. Laparoscopy revealed a small amount of muddy effusion in abdominal cavity, one of the loops of small intestine is dark-cyan. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
b. Ischemic abdominal syndrome
c. Erysipelas
d. Acute intestinal obstruction
e. Twisted bowels

86. A 2 y.o. girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
*a. Rubella
b. Measles
c. Pseudotuberculosis
d. Scarlet fever
e. Adenoviral infection

87. A 7 y.o. boy has crampy abdominal pain and a rash on the back of his legs and buttocks as well as on the extensor surfaces of his forearms. Laboratory analysis reveals proteinuria and microhematuria. He is most likely to be affected by:
a. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
*b. Anaphylactoid purpura
c. Dermatomyositis
d. Polyarteritis nodosa
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

88. The patient 25 y.o. was admitted on the 1st day of the disease with complaints of double vision in the eyes, heavy breathing. The day before the patient ate home-made mushrooms. On objective examination: paleness, widened pupils, disorder of swallowing, bradycardia, constipation are marked. What is the diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis, gastrointestinal form
*b. Botulism
c. Yersiniosis
d. Leptospirosis
e. Lambliasis

89. An 18 y.o. woman consulted a gynecologist about the pain in the lower part of abdomen, fever up to 37,5°С, considerable mucopurulent discharges from the genital tracts, painful urination. Vaginal examination with mirrors: the urethra is infiltrated, cervix of the uterus is hyperemic, erosive. The uterus is painful, ovaries are painful, thickened; fornixes are free. Bacterioscopy test revealed diplococcus. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Trichomoniasis
b. Chronic gonorrhea
c. Candydomycosis
d. Chlamydiosis
*e. Recent acute ascending gonorrhea

90. A 14 y.o. girl complains of profuse bloody discharges from genital tracts during 10 days after suppresion of menses for 1,5 month. Similiar bleedings recur since 12 years on the background of disordered menstrual cycle. On rectal examination: no pathology of the internal genitalia. In blood: Нb- 70 g/L, RBC- 2,3×1012/L, Ht- 20. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Juvenile bleeding, posthemorrhagic anemia
b. Polycyst ovarian syndrome
c. Hormonoproductive ovary tumor
d. Werlholfs disease
e. Noncomplete spontaneous abortion

91. A 35 y.o. patient was admitted to the local hospital a week after a road accident with clinical picture of clotted hemothorax. What is the most appropriate treatment tactic for prevention of acute pleural empyema?
a. Complex conservative therapy
b. Treatment by pleural punctions
*c. Surgical removal of clotted hemothorax
d. Passive drainage of pleural cavity
e. Active drainage of pleural cavity

92. An 8 y.o. boy complains of constant cough along with discharge of greenish sputum, dyspnea during physical activities. At the age of 1 year and 8 months he fell ill for the first time with bilateral pneumonia that had protracted course. Later on there were recurrences of the disease 5-6 times a year, during the remission periods there was constant productive cough. What examination results will be the most important for making a final diagnosis?
a. Spirography
b. Roentgenography of thorax organs
*c. Bronchography
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Bacterial inoculation of sputum

93. A 42 y.o. woman works at the factory on the fabrication of mercury thermometers, complains of the headache, swoons, reduction of memory, small and frequent flutter of fingers of drawn hands, the eyelids and the tongue, bleeding gums, gingivitis. What preparation is it nessesary to use for the elimination of mercury from the organism?
a. Seduxen
*b. Unithiol
c. Pentoxil
d. Magnesium sulphate
e. Sodium hydrate of carbon

94. A 43 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of high temperature of the body and severe headache. On examination: carbuncle is revealed on the forearm. There are intense edema around it, insignificant pain, regional lymphadenitis. The patient is a worker of cattle-ranch. What disease is it necessary to think about first?
a. Erysipeloid
*b. Anthrax
c. Carcinoma of skin
d. Eczema
e. Erysipelas

95. A 34 y.o. woman in the 10-th week of gestation (the second pregnancy) consulted a doctor of antenatal clinic with purpose of statement on the dyspensary record. In the previous pregnancy there took place hydramnion, the childs birth weight was 4086. What method of examination is necessary for carrying out, first of all?
a. USI of the fetus
b. Bacteriological investigation of discharge from the vagina
c. Determination of the contents of fetoproteinum
*d. The test for tolerance to glucose
e. A cardiophonography of fetus

96. A 60 y.o. patient cpmplains of weakness, dizziness, heaviness in the upper part of abdomen, paresthesia of toes and fingers. Objectively: skin icteritiousness, tongue is crimson, smooth. Hepatomegaly. In blood: Hb- 90 g/l, erythrocytes - 2,3×1012/l, reticulocytes - 0,2%; color index - 1,2, macrocytosis; Jollys bodies, Cabots ring bodies. What medication is the most appropriate for treatment?
a. Dyspherol
b. Feroplex
c. Packed red blood cells
*d. Vitamin В12
e. Prednisolone

97. A doctor of the general practice has registered the following death causes for the previous year: the first place was taken by cardiovascular diseases (60%), the second - by tumors (18%), then - traumas (8,3%) etc. What diagrams will provide the most substantial information about the registered ocurrences?
a. Cartogram
b. Line diagram
c. Circle diagram
*d. Pie diagram
e. Column diagram

98. A 22 y.o. patient complains of having boring pain in the right iliac region for one week, morning sickness, taste change. Delay of menstruation is 3 weeks. Objectively: AP- 110/70 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min, t°- 37,0°С. Bimanual examination revealed that uterus is a little enlarged, soft, movable, painless. Appendages palpation: a painful formation 3х4 cm large on the right, it is dense and elastic, moderately movable. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Cyst of the right ovary
c. Uterine pregnancy
d. Interrupted tubal pregnancy
*e. Progressing tubal pregnancy

99. A 43 y.o. patient complains of periodical pain attacks in the right half of her face. The attack is characterized by spasm of mimetic muscles of the right faces half, reddening of skin on this side. Blood has no pathologies. She was diagnosed with right-sided trifacial neuralgia. What medication should be prescribed?
a. Indometacin
*b. Finlepsin
c. Analgine
d. Prednisolone
e. Actovegine

100. A 41 y.o. patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with hemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
a. Intravenous administration of pituitrin
*b. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube
c. Hemostatic therapy
d. Administration of plasma
e. Operation

101. A 19 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia B-type. What antihemophilic medicine should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Fresh frozen blood
*b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Dried plasma
d. Native plasma
e. Cryoprecipitate

102. A patient with a history of coronary artery disease and atrial fibrillation has the onset of sudden pain and weakness of the left leg. Examination reveals a cool, pale extremity with absent pulses below the groin and normal contralateral leg. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Dissecting aortic aneurysm
*b. Arterial embolism
c. Arterial thrombosis
d. Cerebrovascular accident
e. Acute thrombophlebitis

103. A 25 y.o. man who has been suffering from disseminated sclerosis for 4 years complains of increasing unsteadyness, weakness of his lower extremities, urinary retention. Objectively: central tetraparesis. Cerebellar ataxia. Disturbed function of pelvic organs. What is the most appropriate therapy in this case?
a. Vitamins
*b. Glucocorticoids
c. Nootropics
d. Antibiotics
e. Desensitizing medications

104. A 75 y.o. man has acute pain in the paraumbilical region accompanied by vomiting and feeling of abdominal swelling in approximately 30 minutes after meals. He lost 10 kg during the last months because he doesn't eat in order to avoid pain. Abdomen examination reveals no changes in the periods between pain attacks. Above the right femoral artery a murmur can be auscultated, peripheral pulsation in the lower extrimities is weak. X-ray examination of stomach and colonoscopy reealed no changes. What is the leading factor of this pathogenesis?
a. Neoplastic process
b. Transient obstruction
*c. Ischemia
d. Psychogenic changes
e. Inflammation

105. The parameter of infantile mortality for the last year was - 16,3, in present year - 15,7. Name a kind of the diagram that can be used for a graphic representation of it:
a. Linear
b. Sector
c. Radial
*d. Stylar
e. Intrastylar

106. Elderly people develop tumors more frequently. One of the main causes is:
a. Increased disfunctioning of mitoses
b. Increased intensity of antibodies formation
*c. Decreased activity of cellular immunity
d. Decreased intensity of antibodies formation
e. Increased activity of cellular immunity

107. A patient is staying in the hospital with the diagnosis of abdominal typhus. During the 3-d week from the beginning of the disease the patient stopped keeping diet and confinement to bed. As a result the body temperature and rapid pulse decreased and melena appeared. What kind of complications should we think about first of all?
*a. Intestinal haemorrhage
b. Hepatite
c. Nephroso-nephritis
d. Meningitis
e. Thrombophlebitis

108. A 40 y.o. patient complains of yellowish discharges from the vagina. Bimanual examination: no pathological changes. The smear contains Trichomonas vaginalis and blended flora. Colposcopy: two hazy fields on the front labium, with a negative Iodum test. Your tactics:
*a. Treatment of specific colpitis and with the subsequent biopsy
b. Diathermocoagulation of the cervix of the uterus
c. Cryolysis of cervix of the uterus
d. Cervix ectomy
e. Specific treatment of Trichomonas colpitis

109. Atmospheric air of an industrial centre is polluted with the following wastes of metallurgical plants: sulphuric, nitric, metal, carbon oxides that have negative influence upon the inhabitants health. The effct of these hazards can be characterized as:
a. Complex
b. Associated
c. Adjacent
d. Mixed
*e. Combined

110. A 5 tons milk batch was sampled. The lab analysis revealed: fat content 2%, specific density - 1,04 g/cm3, acidity - 210Т, reductase probe - weak-positive. What way is the product to be used in?
*a. Sell but inform customers about milk quality
b. Sell without limitations
c. Discard for animal feeding
d. Technical utilization
e. Do the product away

111. The disease began acutely. The frequent watery stool developed 6 hours ago. The bodys temperature is normal. Then the vomiting was joined. On examination: his voice is hoarse, eyes are deeply sunken in the orbits. The pulse is frequent. Blood pressure is low. There is no urine. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Typhoid fever
b. Toxic food-borne infection
c. Salmonellosis
*d. Cholera
e. Dysentery

112. A 35 y.o. patient experienced a strong nervous stress that resulted in formation of reddened and edematic areas on the back surface of her hands with further formation of small inflammated nodules, vesicles and then erosions accompanied by profuse discharge of serous liquid. The process is also accompanied by intense itching. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Allergic dermatitis
b. Common contact dermatitis
c. Microbial eczema
*d. Common eczema
e. Toxicodermia

113. 6 m.o. infant was born with bodys mass 3 kg and length 50 cm. He is given natural feeding. How many times per day the infant should be fed?
a. 4
*b. 5
c. 7
d. 6
e. 8

114. The child has complains of the "night" and "hungry" abdominal pains. At fibroscopy in area a bulbus ofa duodenum the ulcerrative defect of 4 mms diameter is found, the floor is obtected with a fibrin, (H.p+). Administer the optimum schemes of treatment:
a. Maalox - Ranitidin
*b. Omeprasole - Trichopolum - Claritromicin
c. Trichopolum
d. De-nol
e. Vicalinum - Ranitidin

115. A 38 y.o. patient has been treated in a hospital. A fever of 39°С, chest pain which is worsened by breathing, cough, brownish sputum appeared on the 7-th day of the treatment. Chest X- ray shows left lower lobe infiltrate. Which of the following is the treatment of choice for this patient?
a. Penicillin
*b. Cephalosporins of the III generation
c. Streptomycin
d. Erythromycin
e. Tetracycline

116. A 19 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can determine the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. A laboratory physician
b. An anaesthesilogist
c. A traumatologist
*d. A doctor of any speciality
e. A surgeon

117. A triad of symptoms ("stearing spot", "terminal film", "blood dew") have been revealed on examination of a patient. What disease should you think about?
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Seborrhea
c. Vasculitis
*d. Psoriasis
e. Ritters disease

118. Medical examination of a man revealed "geographic tongue". This microsymptom is the evidence of the following vitamin deficiency:
*a. Vitamins of B group
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin PP
d. Vitamin D
e. Vitamin A

119. A 20 y.o. man has a stab knife wound in the left half of thorax close to nipple. AP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 130/min, BR- 32/min. During inspiration there is increase of pulse wave in the region of jugular vein, decrease of peripheral arterial pulse and reduction of AP. Respiratory murmurs are unchanged. X-ray pattern of thorax organs has no pecularities. After introduction of 2 l of isotonic solution the AP stayed low, CVP raised up to 32 cm of water column. The first step in further treatment of the patient will be:
a. Catheterization of left pleural cavity while the outer end of catheter is submerged in water
*b. Echocardiogram
c. Introduction of loop diuretics in order to reduce CVP
d. Continued parenteral introduction of fliud in order to raise AP
e. Introduction of peripheral vasodilatators in order to reduce CVP

120. A 30 y.o. woman has the 2-nd labour that has been lasting for 14 hours. Hearbeat of fetus is muffled, arrhythmic, 100/min. Vaginal examination: cervix of uterus is completely opened, fetus head is level with outlet from small pelvis. Saggital suture is in the straight diameter, small crown is near symphysis. What is the further tactics of handling the delivery?
a. Cesarean section
b. Cranio-cutaneous (Ivanovs) forceps
*c. Use of obstetrical forceps
d. Use of cavity forceps
e. Stimulation of labour activity by oxytocin

121. On the 4-th day of injections a 60 y.o. patient felt pain and tissue induration in the left buttock. Objectively: the skin in the superexternal quadrant of the left buttock is red and hot, palpation reveals a painful infiltrate 6х6 cm large with softening in the centre. Body temperature is 37,9°С. What action is necessary to diagnose an abscess?
a. X-ray investigation
b. Biopsy
c. Ultrasonic examination
*d. Punction
e. Clinical blood analysis

122. A patient has been suffering from morning cough accompanied by discharge of small amount of sputum, dyspnea for 8 years. He has been smoking for 10 years. Objectively: cyanosis, prolonged expiration, dry rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Idiopatic fibrosing alveolitis
*b. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
c. Multiple bronchiectasis
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Chronic non-obstructive bronchitis

123. A 56 y.o. patient ill with cholecystectomy suddenly had an intense hemorrhage. She needs blood transfusion. Her blood group is АВ(ІV) Rh-. Hemotransfusion station doesnt dispose of this group. What group of donors can be involved?
*a. Donors of rare blood groups
b. Relatives
c. Reserve donors
d. Emergency donors
e. Donors of active group

124. A 35 y.o. patient who suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis and has been hemodialysis-dependent for the last three years developed intermissions of heart activity, hypotension, increasing weakness, dyspnea. ECG showed bradycardia, atrioventricular block type I, high pointed wavest. The day before the flagrant violation of diet took place. What is the most probable cause of these changes?
a. Hypokaliemia
*b. Hyperkaliemia
c. Hyperhydratation
d. Hypernatriemia
e. Hypocalciemia

125. A 42 y.o. woman complains of dyspnea, edema of the legs, and tachycardia during small physical exertion. Heart borders are displaced to the left and S1 is accentuated, there is diastolic murmur on apex. The liver is enlarged by 5 cm. What is the cause of heart failure?
a. Tricuspid regurgitation
b. Aortic stenosis
c. Tricuspid stenosis
*d. Mitral stenosis
e. Mitral regurgitation

126. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for drinking water in the field conditions
a. Spring water
b. River water
c. Rain water
d. Water from melted snow
*e. Artesian well water

127. A healthy 75 y.o. woman who leads a moderately active way of life went through a preventive examination that revealed serum concentration of common cholesterol at the rate of 5,1 mmol/l and HDL (high-density lipoproteins) cholesterol at the rate of 70 mg/dl. ECG reveals no pathology. What dietary recommendation is the most adequate?
a. Increase of cellulose consumption
b. Decrease of saturated fats consumption
c. Decrease of carbohydrates consumption
d. Decrease of cholesterol consumption
*e. Any dietary changes are necessary

128. A 50 y.o. woman who suffers from chronic pyelonephritis was prescribed a combination of antibiotics for the period of exacerbation - gentamicin (80 mg 3 times a day) and biseptol (960 mg twice a day). What consequences may be caused by such a combination of antibiotics?
a. Chronic renal insufficiency
b. Glomerulosclerosis
*c. Acute renal insufficiency
d. Acute suprarenal insufficiency
e. Antibiotic combination is optimal and absolutely safe

129. A woman consulted a doctor on the 14-th day after labor about sudden pain, hyperemy and induration of the left mammary gland, body temperature rise up to 39°С, headache, indisposition. Objectively: fissure of nipple, enlargement of the left mammary gland, pain on palpation. What pathology would you think about in this case?
a. Lacteal cyst with suppuration
b. Fibrous adenoma of the left mammary gland
c. Phlegmon of mammary gland
*d. Lactational mastitis
e. Breast cancer

130. A 7 y.o. girl fell ill abruptly: fever, headache, severe sore throat, vomiting. Minute bright red rash appear in her reddened skin in 3 hours. It is more intensive in axillae and groin. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is hyperemic. Greyish patches is on the tonsills. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. What is your diagnosis?
a. Measles
*b. Scarlet fever
c. Pseudotuberculosis
d. Rubella
e. Enteroviral infection

131. A 45 y.o. man complains of having intensive pain in the epigastric region 1,5-2 hours later after food intake. He has been suffering from ulcer for 11 years. Objectively: t°- 36,5°С, RR- 16/min, Ps- 70 bpm, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. On palpation: local painfulness in the right epigastric region. What parameters of intragastric Ph-meter in the region of stomach body are the most typical for this patients disease?
a. рН = 5,0-6,0
b. рН = 3,0-4,0
*c. рН = 1,0-2,0
d. рН = 4,0-5,0
e. рН = 6,0-7,0

132. A 62 y.o. patient suffers from DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. Patient has to undergo an operation on inguinal hernia. What tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be used?
a. Prescribe long-acting insulin
b. Continue with the current therapy
c. Prescribe guanyl guanidines
*d. Prescribe fast-acting insulin
e. Give Glurenorm in place of Maninilum

133. Fluorography of a 45 y.o. man revealed some little intensive foci with indistinct outlines on the top of his right lung for the first time. The patient doesnt feel worse. He has been smoking for many years. Objectively: pulmonary sound above lungs on percussion, respiration is vesicular, no rales. Blood count is unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Peripheral cancer of lung
*b. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis
d. Eosinophilic pneumonia
e. Bronchopneumonia

134. A 28 y.o. woman comes to the Emergency Room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot", 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Superficial venous thrombosis
b. Cellulitis
c. Subcutaneous hematoma
d. Early deep vein thrombosis
e. Insect bite

135. A 58 y.o. patient developed acute myocardium infarction 4 hours ago, now he is in the acute care department. ECG registers short paroxysms of ventricular tachycardia. The most appropriate measure will be to introduct:
a. Veropamil
b. Propafenone
*c. Lidocain
d. Amyodaron
e. Flecainid

136. The total area of ground intended for building of a regional hospital is 2,0 hectare. What is the highest possible capacity of the in-patient hospital that can be built upon this ground?
a. 800 beds
b. 400 beds
c. Over 1000 beds
*d. 100 beds
e. 200 beds

137. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Kidneys abruption
b. Subcapsular kidneys rupture
*c. Kidneys contusion
d. Multiple kidneys ruptures
e. Paranephral hematoma

138. A 46 y.o. patient complains of colicky pain in the right lumbar region that is irradiating to the lower part of abdomen, nausea. She didnt have such pains before. Survey radiograph of abdominal cavity organs didnt reveal any pathological stains. Ultrasonic sonogram revealed in the enlarged right renal pelvis a hyperechoic mass approximately 1,5 cm large that gives rise to an "ultrasonic track". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Renal tuberculosis
b. Malignant tumor of kidney
c. Benign tumor of kidney
*d. Renal calculus
e. Renal cyst

139. A patient of 32 y.o. complains of severe weakness, tremor of extremities. Objective examination: body weight loss, wet and warm skin. The thyroid gland is enlarged up to the 3-rd degree, painless, elastic. Ps- 108/min. BP- 160/55 mm Hg. There are no other abnormalties. The diagnosis is:
a. Chronic fibrous thyroiditis
b. Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, hypertrophic type
*c. Diffuse toxic goiter of the 3-rd degree, thyrotoxicosis of the average degree
d. Toxiferous adenoma of the thyroid gland
e. Diffuse euthyroid goiter of the 3-rd degree

140. A 9 y.o. child with diagnosis "chronic tonsillitis" stands dispanserization control. Within 1 year of observation there was one exacerbation of disease. Physical condition is satisfactory. The general state is not infringed. Define group of health:
a. I-st
b. III (b)
c. III (c)
*d. III (a)
e. II-d

141. What guarantees against the preconceived attitude to the physician in cases of professional law violations do you know?
a. Conduct an inquiry by preliminary investigator of police department
b. Draw up a statement about forensic medical examination
c. Conduct forensic medical examination by district forensic medicine expert
d. Utilisation copy of medical documents
*e. Sanction of public prosecutor, inquiry by preliminary investigator of prosecutors office, committee of experts

142. A 10 y.o. child has average indices of body length and her chest circumference exceeds average indices, body weight index is heightened due to lipopexia. Functional characteristics of physical development are below average. Physical development of this child can be estimated as:
a. Harmonic
*b. Disharmonic
c. Average
d. Below average
e. Deeply disharmonic

143. Patient 27 y.o. was hospitalized to the psychiatric hospital for the 4-th time during 2 years. Heard voices commenting on his actions, had delusions of persecution (was sure that the Mafia wanted to kill him). After a course of treatment with neuroleptics was discharged from hospital with the diagnosis of schizophrenia, state of remission. The secondary prevention of the relapses of schizophrenia requires:
a. Psychoanalytic treatment
*b. Supportive treatment with neuroleptics of prolonged action
c. Psychiatric observation
d. Participation in a self-help group
e. Long-term hospitalization

144. An engineer-chemist at the age of 47 often fells ill with an occupational skin disease. Who makes a decision to transfer him to other job accepts?
a. The chief of shop
*b. DCC
c. The attending physician
d. MSEC
e. A head physician

145. A 2 m.o. child with birth weight 5100 g has jaundice, hoarse cry, umbilical hernia, physical development lag. Liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not enlarged. In anamnesis: delayed falling-away of umbilical cord rest. In blood: Hb- 120 g/L, erythrocytes - 4,5×1012/L, ESR- 3 mm/h. Whole serum bilirubin is 28 mcmole/L, indirect - 20 mcmole/L, direct - 8 mcmole/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemolitic anemia
b. Congenital hepatitis
c. Conjugated jaundice
d. Cytomegalovirus infection
*e. Congenital hypothyreosis

146. A 20 y.o. patient complains of amenorrhea. Objectively: hirsutism, obesity with fat tissue prevailing on the face, neck, upper part of body. On the face there are acne vulgaris, on the skin - striae cutis distense. Psychological and intellectual development is normal. Gynecological condition: external genitals are moderately hairy, acute vaginal and uterine hypoplasia. What diagnosis is the most probable?
*a. Itsenko-Cushing syndrome
b. Babinski-Froehlich syndrome
c. Stein-Leventals syndrome
d. Turners syndrome
e. Shichans syndrome

147. A 54 y.o. woman has been ill with osteomyelitis of femoral bone for over 20 years. During the last month there appeared and have been steadily increasing edemata of lower extremities. Urine analysis revealed: proteinuria - 6,6 g/l. Blood analysis: disproteinemia in form of hypoalbuminemia, raise of ?2- and ?-globulines, ESR- 50 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
*b. Secondary renal amyloidosis
c. Chronic glomerulonephritis
d. Systematic lupus erythematosus
e. Myelomatosis

148. An infant is 2 d.o. It was full-term born with signs of intrauterine infection, thats why it was prescribed antibiotics. Specify, why the gap between antibiotic introductions to the new-born children is longer and dosage is smaller compared to the older children and adults?
a. The newborns have reduced activity of glucuronil transferase
b. The newborns have lower concentration of protein and albumins in blood
*c. The newborns have a lower level of glomerular filtration
d. The newborns have bigger hematocrit
e. The newborns have diminished blood pH

149. A 4 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with complaints of dyspnea, rapid fatigability. His anamnesis registers frequent respiratory diseases. On percussion: heart borders are dilatated to the left and upwards. On auscultation: amplification of the SII above pulmonary artery, a harsh systolodyastolic "machine" murmur is auscultated between the II and the III rib to the left of breast bone, this murmur is conducted to all other points including back. AP is 100/20 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Opened arterial duct
b. Interventricular septal defect
c. Interatrial septal defect
d. Valvar aortic stenosis
e. Isolated stenosis of pulmonary arterial orifice

150. A 27 y.o. patient has been having for almost a year fatigue, hyperhidrosis, heaviness in the left hypochondrium, especially after meals. Objectively: spleen and liver enlargement. In blood: erythrocytes - 3,2*10^12/l, Hb- 100 g/l, colour index - 0,87, leukocutes - 100*10^9/l, basophils - 7%, eosinophils - 5%, myelocytes - 15%, juveniles - 16%, stab neutrophils - 10%, segmentonuclear leukocytes - 45%, lymphocytes - 2%, monocytes - 0%, reticulocytes - 0,3%, thrombocytes - 400*10^9/l, ESR- 25 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chronic myeloleukosis
b. Acute leukosis
c. Hepatocirrhosis
d. Chronic lympholeukosis
e. Erythremia

151. A worker diagnosed with "acute dysentery" was sent to the infectious department by a doctor of aid post. What document should be used for registration of this disease?
*a. Urgent report on infectious disease
b. Outpatients card
c. Inpatients card
d. Statistic coupon for registration of final diagnoses
e. Statistic card of the patient who left in-patient hospital

152. The major repair of a hospital included renewal of colour design of hospital premises because it is of great psychological and aesthetical importance; and so the walls of patient wards will be painted under consideration of:
a. Hospital profile
b. Creation of cozy atmosphere
c. Diseases of patients who will be staying in these wards
d. Wall reflection coefficient
*e. Windows orientation

153. A patient complains of feeling heaviness behind his breast bone, periodical sensation of food stoppage, dysphagy. During the X-ray examination barium contrast revealed a single saccular outpouching of anterodextral esophagus wall with regular contours and rigidly outlined neck. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Esophageal polyp
b. Hiatal hernia
c. Varix dilatation of esophageal veins
*d. Esophageal diverticulum
e. Cancer of esophagus

154. A 51 y.o. women was taken to the emergency department in convulsive status epilepticus. The first means of medical management should be:
a. Inserting a tongue blade
b. Injecting 5 mg of diazepam followed by a loading dose of phenytoin
c. Inducing pentobarbital coma
d. Administering an instravenous bolus of 50% dextrose
*e. Ensuring that the airway is open and the patient is oxygenating

155. A 34 y.o. woman in her 29-th week of pregnancy, that is her 4-th labor to come, was admitted to the obstetric department with complaints of sudden and painful bloody discharges from vagina that appeared 2 hours ago. The discharges are profuse and contain grumes. Cardiac funnction of the fetus is rhytmic, 150 strokes in the minute, uterus tone is normal. The most probable provisional diagnosis will be:
a. Vasa previa
b. Bloody discharges
c. Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndrome
*d. Placental presentation
e. Detachment of normally located placenta

156. A 7 y.o. girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
a. Meningitis
b. Neurotoxic syndrome
c. Meningoencephalitis
*d. Encephalitis
e. Myelitis

157. A 41 y.o. woman complains of weakness, fatigue, fever up to 38°С, rash on the face skin, pain in the wrists and the elbows. On physical examination: erythematous rash on the cheeks with "butterfly" look, the wrists and elbow joints are involved symmetrically, swollen, sensitive, friction rub over the lungs, the heart sounds are weak, regular, HR- 88/min, BP- 160/95 mm Hg. Hematology shows anemia, leucopenia, lymphopenia; on urinalysis: proteinuria, leukocyturia, casts. What is the main mechanism of disease development?
a. Production of antibodies to endothelial cells
b. Production of antimitochondrial antibodies
c. Production of myocytes antibodies
d. Production of myosin antibodies
*e. Production of antibodies to double-stranded DNA

158. The highest risk of congenital anomalies probably occurs when human embryos or fetuses are exposed to ionizing radiation. During which part of gestational period does it occur?
a. The first 7 days
*b. 18-45 days after conception
c. 10-14 days after conception
d. The third trimester
e. 90-120 days after conception

159. A 16 y.o. female presents with abdominal pain and purpuric spots on the skin. Laboratory investigations reveals a normal platelet count, with haematuria and proteinuria.The most likely diagnosis:
a. Heavy metal poisoning
*b. Schonlein-Henoch purpura
c. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Sub acute bacterial endocarditis
e. Haemolytic uraemic syndrome

160. By the end of the 1st period of physiological labour the clear amniotic waters were given vent. Contractions lasted 35-40 sec every 4-5 min. Palpitation of the fetus is 100 bpm. The AP is 140/90 mm Hg. Diagnosis:
a. Labors before term
b. Back occipital presentation
*c. Acute hypoxia of the fetus
d. Hydramnion
e. Premature detachment of normally posed placenta

161. A 3 y.o. child with weight defficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 mmol/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary hypoplasia
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
d. Recurrent bronchitis
e. Bronchiectasis

162. A patient suffers from chronic recurrent pancreatitis with evident disturbance of exocrinous function. After intake of rich spicy food and spirits his stool becomes fatty. Reduced production of what factor is the most probable cause of steatorrhea?
*a. Lipase
b. Alkaline phosphatase
c. Tripsin
d. Amylase
e. Acidity of gastric juice

163. A patient with hepatic cirrhosis drank some spirits that resulted in headache, vomiting, aversion to food, insomnia, jaundice, fetor hepaticus, abdominal swelling. What complication of hepatic cirrhosis is meant?
a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
b. Hemorrhage from varicosely dilatated veins of esophagus
*c. Hepatocellular insufficiency
d. Portal hypertension
e. Acute stomach ulcer

164. A 33 y.o. woman survived two operations on account of extrauterine pregnancy, both uterine tubes were removed. She consulted a doctor with a question about possibility of having a child. What can be advised in this case?
a. Induction of ovulation
b. Substitutional maternity
c. Insemination with her husbands semen
*d. Extracorporal fertilization
e. Artifical fertilization with donors semen

165. A patient with nosocomial pneumonia presents signs of collapse. Which of the following pneumonia complications is most likely to be accompanied with collapse?
a. Emphysema
b. Toxic hepatitis
c. Exudative pleuritis
d. Bronchial obstruction
*e. Septic shock

166. A 30 y.o. man presents with a history of recurrent pneumonias and a chronic cough production of foul smelling, pirulent sputum, ocassionally glood tinged, which is worse in the morning and on lying down. On physical examination, the patient appears chronically ill with clubbing of fingers, inspiratory rales at the base of lungs posteriorly. Most likely diagnosis:
*a. Bronchoectasis
b. Pulmonary neoplasm
c. Chronic bronchitis
d. Disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Chronic obstructive emphysema

167. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine and vomiting. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease is suspected?
*a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Renal colic
c. Perforative gastric ulcer
d. Acute enterocolitis
e. Acute appendicitis

168. After delivery and revision of placenta there was found the defect of placental lobe. General condition of woman is normal, uterus is firm, there is moderate bloody discharge. Inspection of birth canal with mirrors shows absence of lacerations and raptures. What action is nesessary?
a. Use of uterine contracting agents
b. Use of hemostatic medications
c. Urine drainage, cold on the lower abdomen
*d. Manual exploration of the uterine cavity
e. External massage of uterus

169. A male, 50 y.o., has a black flat mole on the skin of the leg for 10 years. Since 4 months ago the shapes of the mole become irregular. What diagnostic methods should be used?
a. Thermography
*b. Excision biopsy
c. Incision biopsy
d. Fine needle biopsy
e. Smear for microscopic examination

170. Which gestational age gives the most accurate estimation of weeks of pregnancy by uterine size?
a. Between 12 and 20 weeks
b. Between 31 and 40 weeks
c. Over 40 weeks
d. Between 21 and 30 weeks
*e. Less that 12 weeks

171. A patient is 65 y.o. He has been a smoker for 40 years. He has lost 10 kg during the last 3 months. Complains of pain in the epigastric area after taking meals, diarrhea, jaundice. Physical examination revealed enlarged, painless gallbladder. Feces are light-coloured and clay-like. Blood analysis revealed increased level of whole and direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphotase and glutaminepyruvate transferase. Clinical urine analysis showed positive bilirubin reaction and negative urobilinogene reaction. Where is the initial process that caused these changes?
a. In common bile duct
b. In gallbladder
*c. In pancreas
d. In liver
e. In duodenum

172. A 28 y.o. man fell seriously ill, he feels chill, has got a fever, body temperature raised up to 38,5°С, paroxysmal pain in the left iliac region, frequent defecation in form of fluid bloody and mucous mass. Abdomen palpation reveals painfulness in its left half, sigmoid colon is spasmed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Colibacillosis
b. Amebiasis
*c. Acute dysentery
d. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
e. Malignant tumors of large intestine

173. On the 15-th day after a minor trauma of the right foot a patient felt malaise, fatigability, irritability, headache, high body temperature, feeling of compression, tension and muscular twitching of his right crus. What disease can it be?
*a. Tetanus
b. Anaerobic gas gangrene
c. Thromboembolism of popliteal artery
d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Erysipelas

174. A 56 y.o. woman has an acute onset of fever up to 39°С with chills, cough, and pain on respiration in the right side of her chest. On physical examination: HR- 90/min, BP- 95/60 mm Hg, RR- 26/min. There is dullness over the right lung on percussion. On X-ray: infiltrate in the right middle lobe of the lung. What is the diagnosis?
*a. Community-acquired lobar pneumonia with moderate severity
b. Community-acquired bronchopneumonia
c. Hospital-acquired lobar pneumonia
d. Acute pleurisy
e. Acute lung abscess

175. A 22 y.o. man complains of acute throat pain, increasing upon swallowing during 3 days. Body temperature 38,3°С, neck lymph nodules are slightly enlarged and painful. Pharyngoscopically - tonsilar hyperemia, enlargement and edema, tonsils are covered by round yellow fibrinous patches around crypts openings. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus in swab analysis. What is the diagnosis?
a. Pharyngeal diphtheria
b. Іnfectious mononucleosis
c. Pharyngeal candidosis
*d. Acute membranous tonsilitis
e. Acute follicular tonsilitis

176. A 10 y.o. boy with hemophilia has signs of acute respiratory viral infection with fever. What of the mentioned antifebrile medications are contraindicated to this patient?
a. Panadol extra
*b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Paracetamol
d. Analgin
e. Pipolphen

177. In treatment and prevention establishments, regardless of their organisational and proprietary form, the rights of patients should be observed. Which of these rights are the most significant?
a. The right to the protection from incompetence
b. The right to the information
c. The right to be heard
d. The right to the free choice
*e. The right to the protection of the patients interests

178. Mother of a newborn child suffers from chronic pyelonephritis. She survived acute respiratory viral infection directly before labour. Delivery was at term, the period before discharge of waters was prolonged. On the 2-nd day the child got erythematous rash, later on - vesicles about 1 cm large with seropurulent content. Nikolskys symptom is positive. Dissection of vesicles results in erosions. The child is inert, body temperature is subfebrile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Sepsis
b. Vesicular pustulosis
*c. Impetigo neonatorum
d. Pseudofurunculosis
e. Ritters dermatitis

179. A 30 y.o. primigravida woman has got intensive labor pain every 1-2 minutes that lasts 50 seconds. The disengagement has started. The perineum with the height of 4 cm has grown pale. What actions are necessary in this situation?
a. Perineum protection
b. Vacuum extraction of fetus
c. Expectant management
*d. Episiotomy
e. Perineotomy

180. A 63 y.o. patient was operated on account of big multinodular euthyroid goiter. Despite of techical difficulties a forced subtotal resection of both parts of the thyroid gland was performed. On the 4-th day after the operation the woman had cramps of face muscles and upper extremities, stomach ache. Positive Chvosteks and Trousseaus signs. What is the most probable cause of such condition?
a. Tracheomalacia
*b. Insufficiency of parathyroid glands
c. Injury of recurrent nerve
d. Thyrotoxic crisis
e. Postoperative hypothyroidism

181. A 43 y.o. patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenoutic papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
a. To perform external choledoch drainage
b. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs
*c. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
d. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
e. To perform choledochoduodenostomy

182. A 34 y.o. patient 3 hours ago was bitten by a dog. He has got a non-bleeding wound in his left arm caused by the dogs bite. What surgical care would you provide to the patient?
a. Cream bandage
b. Complete suturing of the wound
c. Aseptic bandage
*d. Wound bathing with detergent water and antiseptic application
e. Incomplete suturing of the wound

183. A 34 y.o. patient has been suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis for 7 years; he complains of muscle feebleness, weight loss, diarrheas, increased frequency of urination. Objectively: hyperpigmentation of skin, gums, internal cheek surfaces. AP is 90/58 mm Hg. Blood count: erythrocutes - 3,1*10^12/L, Hb- 95 g/L,c.I.- 0,92; leukocytes - 9,4*10^9/L, eosinophils - 7, segmentonuclear leukocytes - 45, stab neutrophils - 1, lymphocytes - 40, monocytes - 7, Na+- 115 mmole/L, К+- 7,3 mmole/L. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Primary hyperaldosteronism
b. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
c. Diabetes insipidus
d. Pheochromocytoma
*e. Primary insufficiency of adrenal cortex

184. 10 years ago a patient had a fracture in the middle one-third of his left femoral bone, and during the last 7 years he has been having acute inflammation in the area of old fracture accompanied by formation of a fistula through which some pus with small fragments of bone tissue is discharged. After a time the fistula closes. What complication of the fracture is it?
a. False joint
*b. Chronic osteomyelitis
c. Trophic ulcer
d. Soft tissue phlegmon
e. Bone tuberculosis

185. A 56 y.o. patient has worked at the aluminium plant over 20 years. Within 3 last years he has got loosening of teeth, bone and joint pains, piercing pains in heart region, vomiting. The provisional diagnosis is:
a. Phosphorus intoxication
*b. Fluorine intoxication
c. Manganese intoxication
d. Lead intoxication
e. Mercury intoxication

186. A 65 y.o. patient has acute pain, paresthesia, paleness of his left extremity. Pulse in thea. dorsalis pedis is absent. There is skin coldness and paleness that gradually spreads upwards. These symptoms are most likely to be the evidence of:
a. Thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
b. Hernia of lumbar disc
*c. Arterial occlusion
d. -
e. Thrombophelebitis of deep veins

187. Patient 22 y.o., was admitted to trauma center with complains of pain in the left ankle joint, which increased while movements and weight bearing. On the clinical examination it was found, that the patient had the closed fracture of medial malleolus without displacement. In which position the foot has to be fixed in plaster cast?
a. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
b. In position of planter flexion of foot
*c. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot
d. In position of pronation
e. In position of supination

188. A 39 y.o. woman complaines of squeezed epigastric pain 1 hour after meal and heartburn. She had been ill for 2 years. On palpation, there was moderate tenderness in pyloroduodenal area. Antral gastritis was revealed on gastroscopy. What study can establish genesis of the disease?
a. Examination of stomach secretion
*b. Revealing of Helicobacter infection in gastric mucosa
c. Gastrin level in blood
d. Detection of autoantibodies in the serum
e. Examination of stomach motor function

189. A 40 y.o. patient with rheumatic heart disease complains of anorexia, weakness and loss of weight, breathlessness and swelling of feet. The patient had tooth extraction one month ago. On examination: t°- 39°С, Ps- 100/min. Auscultation: diastolic murmur in the mitral area. Petechial lesion around the clavicle; spleen was palpable
a. Thrombocytopenia purpura
b. Recurrence of rheumatic fever
c. Aortic stenosis
d. Mitral stenosis
*e. Subacute bacteria endocarditis

190. After a long periode of subfebrility a patient registered increase of dyspnea, pain in the right hypochondrium, leg edemata. Objectively: neck veins are edematic. Ps is 120 bpm, sometimes it disappears during inspiration. Heart sounds are very weakened. ECG showed low-voltage waves of ventricular complex. A month ago there was raise of ST V1-V4 segment. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged, roundish. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Exudative pericarditis
b. Metabolic postinfection myocardiopathy
c. Small-focal myocardial infarction
d. Postinfarction cardiosclerosis
e. Primary rheumatic carditis

191. A child is 1 y.o. Within the last months after the begining of supplemental feeding the child has appetite loss, diarrhea with massive defecation, sometimes vomiting. Objectively: body temperature is normal. Body weight is 7 kg. Evident pallor of skin, leg edemata, enlarged abdomen. Coprogram shows a lot of fatty acids and soaps. The child was diagnosed with celiac disease and prescribed gluten-free diet. What shoul be excluded from the dietary intake in this case?
a. Animal protein
b. Milk and dairy produce
c. Fruit
*d. Cereals - wheat, oats
e. Digestible carbohydrates

192. A 13 y.o. teenager who suffers from hemophilia A was taken to the hospital after a fight at school. His diagnosis is right-sided hemarthros of knee joint, retroperitoneal hematoma. What should be primarily prescribed?
*a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Aminocapronic acid
c. Placental albumin
d. Dry plasma
e. Washed thrombocytes

193. A full-term newborn child has a diagnosis newborns Rh-factor hemolytic disease. Bilirubin rate is critical. The childs blood group is B(III), his mothers blood group - A(II). The child has indication for hemotransfusion. What donor blood must be chosen?
a. Blood group A(II) Rh-
b. Blood group O(I) Rh-
*c. Blood group B(III) Rh-
d. Blood group B(III) Rh+
e. Blood group A(II) Rh+

194. A 30 y.o. parturient woman was taken to the maternity house with complaints of having acute, regular labour pains that last 25-30 seconds every 1,5-2 minutes. Labour activity began 6 hours ago. Uterus is in higher tonus, head of the fetus is above the opening into the small pelvis. Fetal heartbeat is 136/min. P.V: cervical dilatation is 4 cm, uterine fauces is spasming at a height of parodynia. Head is level with opening into the small pelvis, it is being pushed off. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Primary powerless labour activity
b. Pathological preliminary period
*c. Discoordinated labour activity
d. Secondary powerless labour activity
e. Normal labour activity

195. A 38 y.o. woman is seriously ill. She complains of frequent paroxysms of expiratory dyspnea. The last paroxysm lasted over 12 hours and failed to respond to theophylline. The skin is palish gray, moist, RR of 26/min. On auscultation, breath sounds are absent over some areas. Your preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Bronchial asthma, status asthmaticus
b. Atopic bronchial asthma, respiratory failure of the III degree
c. Bronchiectasis, respiratory failure of the II-III degree
d. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
e. Ischemic heart disease, pulmonary edema

196. A newborn child has purulent discharges from the umbilical wound, skin around the umbilicus is swollen. Objectively: the childs skin is pale, of yellow-greyish colour, generalized hemorrhagic rash. Body temperature is of hectic nature. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic disease of newborn
*b. Sepsis
c. Hemolytic disease of newborn
d. Omphalitis
e. Thrombocytopathy

197. A 2 m.o. child was delivered in time with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
a. Hypotrophy of the II grade
*b. Corresponding to the age
c. 150 g less than necessary
d. Paratrophy of the I grade
e. Hypotrophy of the I grade

198. The patient with acute respiratory viral infection (3-rd day of disease) has complaints on pain in lumbar region, nausea, dysuria, oliguria. Urinalysis - hematuria (100-200 RBC in eyeshot spot), specific gravity - 1002. The blood creatinin level is 0,18 mmol/L, potassium level - 6,4 mmol/L. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute glomerylonephritis
b. Acute renal colic
*c. Acute interstitial nephritis
d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute cystitis

199. A 13 y.o. girl complains of having temperature rises up to febrile figures for a month, joint ache, periodical skin rash. Examination revealed steady enhancing of ESR, LE-cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphoblast leukosis
*b. Systematic lupus erythematosus
c. Rheumatics
d. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
e. Systematic scleroderma

200. A 30 y.o. man was always reserved by nature. He never consulted psychiatrists. He complains of headache, sensation "as if something bursts, moves, bubbles under his skin". Objectively: no pathology was revealed. What is the most probable psychopathologic symptom in this case?
*a. Cenestopathy
b. Dysmorphopsia
c. Paresthesia
d. Hallucination
e. Hypersthesia

