1. A 24 year old patient complains about general weakness, dizziness, body temperature rise up to 37,5oC, sore throat, neck edema, enlargement of submaxillary lymph nodes. Objectively: mucous membrane of oropharynx is edematic and cyanotic, tonsils are enlarged and covered with films that spread beyond the tonsils and cannot be easily removed. What is the leading mechanism of this illness development?
*a. Action of bacterial exotoxin
b. Action of bacterial endotoxin
c. Bacteriemia
d. Allergic
e. Accumulation of suboxidated products

2. A 28 year old woman was admitted to the emergency room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot" 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Early deep vein thrombosis
b. Subcutaneous hematoma
c. Insect bite
d. Cellulitis
*e. Superficial venous thrombosis

3. If a child has adherent fingers on his right hand, then what will be your diagnosis?
*a. Syndactyly
b. Ectromelia
c. Macrodactyly
d. Ectrodactyly
e. Polydactyly

4. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
*a. A doctor of any speciality
b. A laboratory physician
c. A traumatologist
d. A surgeon
e. An anaesthesilogist

5. A 40 year old patient complains of yellowish discharges from the vagina. Bimanual examination revealed no pathological changes. The smear contains Trichomonas vaginalis and blended flora. Colposcopy revealed two hazy fields on the frontal labium, with a negative Iodine test. Your tactics:
a. Cryolysis of cervix of the uterus
b. Cervix ectomy
c. Specific treatment of Trichomonas colpitis
*d. Treatment of specific colpitis and subsequent biopsy
e. Diathermocoagulation of the cervix of the uterus

6. A patient with acute respiratory viral infection (3rd day of disease) complains of pain in lumbar region, nausea, dysuria, oliguria. Urinalysis - hematuria (100-200 RBC in eyeshot spot), specific gravity - 1002. The blood creatinin level is 0,18 millimole/l, potassium level - 6,4 millimole/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute cystitis
b. Acute glomerylonephritis
c. Acute renal failure
d. Acute renal colic
*e. Acute interstitial nephritis

7. A patient who takes diuretics has developed arrhythmia as a result of cardiac glycoside overdose. What is the treatment tactics in this case?
a. Increased sodium consentration in blood
b. Reduced magnesium concentration in blood
c. -
*d. Increased potassium concentration in blood
e. Increased calcium concentration in blood

8. A 26 year old woman had the second labour within the last 2 years with oxytocin application. The childs weight is 4080 gr. After the placent birth there were massive bleeding, signs of hemorrhagic shock. Despite the introduction of contractive agents, good contraction of the uterus and absence of any cervical and vaginal disorders, the bleeding proceeds. Choose the most probable cause of bleeding:
a. Injury of cervix of the uterus
b. Hysterorrhexis
c. Delay of the part of placenta
d. Hypotonia of the uterus
*e. Atony of the uterus

9. A 30 year old patient undergoes treatment because of Werlhofs disease. Objectively: the patient is pale, there are petechial haemorrhages on the extension surfaces of forearms. Ps is 92 bpm, AP is 100/60 mm Hg. The lower edge of spleen is at a level with umbilicus. Blood count: erythrocytes: 2,8×1012/l, Hb - 90 g/l, Ht - 0,38, thrombocytes – 30×109/l. The patient is being prepared for splenectomy. What transfusion medium should be chosen in the first place for the preoperational preparation?
*a. Thrombocytic mass
b. Native erythrocytic mass
c. Stored blood
d. Erythrocytic suspension
e. Washed erythrocytes

10. A 30 year old man complains of acute pain in his right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 mm, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
a. Acute mastoiditis
b. Eustachian tube disfunction
c. Chronic secretory otitis media
d. Chronic purulent otitis media
*e. Acute purulent otitis media

11. A patient has got pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is evident, the tongue is coated with white deposit. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodes are revealed in the axillary area. The skin over the lymph nodes is erythematous and glistering. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tularemia
b. Acute purulent lymphadenitis
c. Anthrax
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
*e. Bubonic plague

12. A woman complains of having slight dark bloody discharges and mild pains in the lower part of abdomen for several days. Last menses were 7 weeks ago. The pregnancy test is positive. Bimanual investigation: the body of the uterus indicates for about 5-6 weeks of pregnancy, it is soft, painless. In the left appendage there is a retort-like formation, 7 х 5 cm large, mobile, painless. What examination is necessary for detection of fetus localization?
a. Cystoscopy
b. Colposcopy
*c. Ultrasound
d. Hromohydrotubation
e. Hysteroscopy

13. An 18 year old woman consulted a gynecologist about the pain in the lower part of abdomen, fever up to 37,5oC, considerable mucopurulent discharges from the genital tracts, painful urination. Vaginal and speculum examination results: the urethra is infiltrated, cervix of the uterus is hyperemic, erosive. The uterus is painful, ovaries are painful, thickened; fornixes are free. Bacterioscopy test revealed diplococcus. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Chronic gonorrhea
*b. Recent acute ascending gonorrhea
c. Trichomoniasis
d. Chlamydiosis
e. Candydomycosis

14. A patient complained about problems with pain and tactile sensitivity, pain in the nail bones at the end of the working day. He works at a plant with mechanical devices. What pathology can be suspected?
a. Hypovitaminosis of B1
*b. Vibration disease
c. Overwork symptoms
d. Caisson disease
e. Noise disease

15. Internal obstetric examination of a parturient woman revealed that the sacrum hollow was totally occupied with fetus head, ischiadic spines couldnt be detected. Sagittal suture is in the straight diameter, occipital fontanel is directed towards symphysis. In what plane of small pelvis is the presenting part of the fetus?
*a. Plane of pelvic outlet
b. Narrow pelvic plane
c. Wide pelvic plane
d. Plane of pelvic inlet
e. Over the pelvic inlet

16. Clinical and statistical study was devoted to the effect of a new pharmacological medication upon the patients with coronary heart disease. What parametric criterion (coefficient) can be used for estimation of results validity?
a. Wilcoxons t-criterion
b. Kolmogorov-Smirnovs criterion
c. Conformity coefficient
*d. Students coefficient (t)
e. Sign criterion

17. Prophylactic photoroentgenography examination of a 25 year old man revealed focal shadowings of small and medium intensity with irregular contours in the 1st and 2nd segments of the right lung. Which clinical form can be suspected?
a. Miliary
b. Disseminated
c. Fibro-cavernous
*d. Focal
e. Tuberculoma

18. A 24 years old primipara was hospitalised with complaints about discharge of the amniotic waters. The uterus is tonic on palpation. The position of the fetus is longitudinal, it is pressed with the head to pelvic outlet. Palpitation of the fetus is rhythmical, 140 bpm, auscultated on the left below the navel. Internal examination: cervix of the uterus is 2,5 cm long, dense, the external os is closed, light amniotic waters out of it. Point a correct component of the diagnosis:
a. Pathological preterm labour
*b. Antenatal discharge of the amniotic waters
c. The beginning of the 1st stage of labour
d. Early discharge of the amniotic waters
e. The end of the 1st stage of labour

19. A 50 year old woman with a 2-year history of mild, diffuse, tender thyroid enlargement complains of 10 pound weight gain and fatigue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Papillary thyroid carcinoma
b. Subacute thyroiditis
c. Riedels thyroiditis
d. Suppurative thyroiditis
*e. Hashimotos thyroiditis

20. A parturient woman is 27 year old, it was her second labour, delivery was at term, normal course. On the 3rd day of postpartum period body temperature is 36,8oC, Ps - 72/min, AP - 120/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are moderately swollen, nipples are clean. Abdomen is soft and painless. Fundus of uterus is 3 fingers below the umbilicus. Lochia are bloody, moderate. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subinvolution of uterus
b. Lactostasis
c. Remnants of placental tissue after labour
d. Postpartum metroendometritis
*e. Physiological course of postpartum period

21. A pregnant woman may be diagnosed with hepatitis if it is confirmed by the presence of elevated:
a. BUN
b. Sedimentation rates
*c. SGOT (ALT)
d. Alkaline phosphatase
e. WBCs

22. A patient complained about general weakness, fever, painful rash on his trunk skin . He has been suffering from this for 3 days. Objectively: lateral surface of trunk on the left is hyperemic and edematic, there are some groups of vesicles with serous and haemorrhagic contents. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatosis
b. Microbial eczema
c. Contact dermatitis simplex
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Contact allergic dermatitis

23. A 14 year old patient complains of chest pain, temperature up to 38,5oC, breathlessness. He had acute tonsillitis 2 weeks ago. He is in grave condition. The skin is pale. Heart borders are dilated, heart sounds are quiet. Above total heart area you can hear pericardium friction sound. Electrocardiogram: the descent of QRS voltage, the inversion T. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm. ESR - 4 mm/h, ASL - 0 - 1260, C-reactive protein +++. Your diagnosis:
a. Rheumatic myocarditis
b. Septic endocarditis
c. Rheumatic pericarditis
d. Rheumatic endocarditis
*e. Rheumatic pancarditis

24. A 3 year old child fell acutely ill, body temperature rose up to 39,5oC, the child became inert, there appeared recurrent vomiting, headache. Examination revealed positive meningeal symptoms, after this lumbal puncture was performed. Spinal fluid is turbid, runs out under pressure, protein concentration is 1,8 g/l; Pandy reaction is +++, sugar concentration is 2,2 millimole/l, chloride concentration - 123 millimole/l, cytosis is 2,35×109 (80% of neutrophils, 20% of lymphocytes). What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Purulent meningitis
b. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
c. Brain tumour
d. Serous viral meningitis
e. Serous tuberculous meningitis

25. An 8 year old child has low-grade fever, arthritis, colicky abdominal pain and a purpuric rash llocalized on the lower extremities. laboratory studies reveal a guaiac-positive stool, urinalysis with red blood cell (RBC) casts and mild proteinuria, and a normal platelet count. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
c. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
*e. Henoch-Schonleins vasculitis

26. A pregnant woman in her 40th week of pregnancy undergoes obstetric examination: the cervix of uterus is undeveloped. The oxytocin test is negative. Examination at 32 weeks revealed: AP 140/90 mm Hg, proteinuria 1 g/l, peripheral edemata. Reflexes are normal. Choose the most correct tactics:
a. Absolute bed rest for 1 month
b. Complex therapy of gestosis for 2 days
c. Caesarian section immediately
d. Complex therapy of gestosis for 7 days
*e. Labour stimulation after preparation

27. At year-end hospital administration has obtained the following data: annual number of treated patients and average annual number of beds used for patients treatment. What index of hospital work can be calculated on the base of this data?
*a. Bed turnover
b. Average bed idle time
c. Average annual bed occupancy
d. Average duration of patients presence in the hospital
e. Bed resources of the hospital

28. A 40 year old woman has a self-detected hard breast mass. The procedure of choice for confirming the diagnosis is:
a. Thermography
b. Aspiration biopsy with cytology
c. Mammography
*d. Excision biopsy
e. Ultrasonography

29. A 30 year old patient complains about inability to become pregnant over 3 years of married life. The patient is of supernutrition type, she has hair along the median abdominal line, on the internal thigh surface and in the peripapillary area. Menses started at the age of 16, they are infrequent and non-profuse. US revealed that the uterus was of normal size, ovaries were 4х5х5 cm large and had a lot of cystic inclusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic oophoritis
b. Menstrual irregularity
c. Bilateral ovarian tumours
d. Ovarian cystoma
*e. Polycystic ovaries

30. A 3 year old child has been suffering from fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis for 4 days. He has been taking sulfadimethoxine. Today it has fever up to 39oC and maculopapular rash on its face. Except of rash the childs skin has no changes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Rubella
*b. Measles
c. Allergic rash
d. Scarlet fever
e. Pseudotuberculosis

31. A 3 year old child with weight defficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 millimol/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Recurrent bronchitis
c. Pulmonary hypoplasia
*d. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
e. Bronchiectasis

32. A 28 year old patient was admitted to the clinic with complaints of the temperature rise up to 39,0oC, headache, weakness, constipation on the 9th day of the disease. On examination: single roseolas on the skin of the abdomen are present. The pulse rate is 78 bpm. The liver is enlarged by 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Typhoid fever
b. Leptospirosis
c. Brucellosis
d. Malaria
e. Sepsis

33. A fitter of a metallurgic factory with occupational exposure to high concentrations of mercury fumes for 16 years presents instability of pulse and blood pressure, general hyperhydrosis, asymmetric innervations of facial muscles and tongue, positive subcortical reflexes, hand tremor on physical examination. A dentist revealed paradontosis and chronic stomatitis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mercury encephalopathy
b. Parkinson syndrome
c. Neuroinfection
d. Acute mercury intoxication
*e. Chronic mercury intoxication

34. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in an inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for drinking water in the field conditions:
a. Spring water
b. Melt snow water
*c. Artesian well water
d. Rain water
e. River water

35. A 52 year old woman complains about face distortion. It appeared 2 days ago after supercooling. Objectively: body temperature is 38,2oC. Face asymmetry is present. Frontal folds are flattened. Left eye is wider than right one and doesnt close. Left nasolabial fold is flattened, mouth corner is lowered. Examination revealed no other pathology. Blood count: leukocytes – 10×109/l, ESR - 20 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemicrania (migraine)
b. Brain tumour
*c. Facial neuritis
d. Ischemic stroke
e. Trigeminus neuralgia

36. A patient has a stab wound on his right foot. On the fourth day after injury the patients body temperature rose up to 38oC, inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and painful, skin over them reddened. What complication might be suspected?
a. Phlegmon
b. Tetanus
*c. Lymphadenitis
d. Erysipelas
e. Lymphangitis

37. A 9 year old girl with a history of intermittent wheezing for several years is brought to the pediatrician. The child has been taking no medications for some time. Physical examination reveals agitation and perioral cyanosis. Intercostal and suprasternal retractions are present. The breath sounds are quiet, and wheezing is audible bilaterally. The child is admitted to the hospital. Appropriate interventions might include all of the following EXCEPT:
a. Administer supplemental oxygen
*b. Prescribe nebulized cromolyn sodium
c. Prescribe intravenous aminophylline
d. Prescribe nebulized metaproterenol
e. Prescribe intravenous corticosteroids

38. A woman in her 39th week of pregnancy, the second labour, has regular birth activity. Uterine contractions take place every 3 minutes. What criteria describe the beginning of the II labor stage the most precisely?
a. Rupture of fetal bladder
*b. Cervical dilatation by no less than 4 cm
c. Duration of uterine contractions over 30 seconds
d. Presenting part is in the lower region of small pelvis
e. Cervical smoothing over 90%

39. In order to study impact of microclimate upon the human organism it is necessary to make systematic observation of air temperature over 3 days. Choose a device that will allow to make the most precise temperature records:
*a. Thermograph
b. Augusts psychrometer
c. Assmann psychrometer
d. Mercury thermometer
e. Alcohol thermometer

40. A child was born with body weight 3250 g and body length 52 cm. At the age of 1,5 month the actual weight is sufficient (4350 g), psychophysical development corresponds with the age. The child is breast-fed, occasionally there are regurgitations. What is the cause of regurgitations?
*a. Aerophagia
b. Acute gastroenteritis
c. Pylorostenosis
d. Pylorospasm
e. Esophageal atresia

41. During inspection of sanitary conditions of studying at a technical university it was necessary to evaluate the visual regimen of students, who study from 9a.m to 3 p.m. What index of natural light will be the most informative?
a. Time of the room insolation
*b. Natural light coefficient
c. Light coefficient
d. Depth of study room
e. Presence of mixed (superolateral) light

42. A child is 6 years old. Within one year of observation he had URI that lasted 8 days. Physical state is satisfactory. Specify his health group:
a. III (a)
b. II
c. III (c)
*d. I
e. III (b)

43. A 68 year old patient complains about acute pain in his right foot, toe edema and darkening of skin of the IV toe. He has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years, doesnt receive regular treatment. What complication of diabetes mellitus is it?
a. Haematoma
b. Panaritium
*c. Gangrene of the IV toe on the right foot
d. Erysipelas
e. Fracture of the IV toe on the right foot

44. Three weeks after acute angina the patient is still weak, inert, subfebrile, his retromaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged. Tonsils are flabby, stick together with arches, there are purulent plugs in lacunae. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Paratonsillitis
b. Acute lacunar tonsillitis
c. Chronic pharyngitis
*d. Chronic tonsillitis
e. Tonsillar tumour

45. A 43 year old patient had right-sided deep vein thrombosis of iliofemoral segment 3 years ago. Now he is suffering from the sense of heaviness, edema of the lower right extremity. Objectively: moderate edema of shin, brown induration of skin in the lower third of shin, varix dilatation of superficial shin veins are present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Parkes-Weber syndrome
b. Acute thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
c. Acute thrombosis of right veins
*d. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome, varicose form
e. Lymphedema of lower right extremity

46. The observed patients movements are retarded, she answers no questions. Sometimes she spontaneously stays in strange postures. It is possible to set her body and limbs into different positions artificially. If the psychiatrist lifts her arm or leg, so that she remains standing on the other leg, the patient can stay in such a position for quite a long time. Name the probable disorder:
a. Dissociative stupor, dissociative psychosis
*b. Catatonic stupor, schizophrenia
c. Depressive stupor, bipolar disorder
d. Psychogenic stupor, stress disorder
e. Apathetic stupor, schizophrenia

47. Among the following causes of acute renal failure, the one that would be classified as "postrenal" is:
a. Septicemia
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Cardiac failure
d. Rhabdomyolysis
*e. Calculi

48. A 7 year old girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
*a. Encephalitis
b. Meningitis
c. Neurotoxic syndrome
d. Myelitis
e. Meningoencephalitis

49. A 7 year old boy has periods of loss of attention that last 10-15 seconds and occur several times a day. During these periods he stands still in one position, doesnt answer the questions or react when he is called by his name. Neurological examination revealed no changes. What diagnostic method should be applied to specify his diagnosis?
a. Examination of evoked potentials
*b. Electroencephalography
c. Computer tomogram
d. Skull roentgenogram
e. Echoencephalography

50. In order to improve organism tolerance of boarding-school pupils a doctor developed a program. The program is based upon the following principles: graduality, consistency, individuality, coomplexity. What of the main principles of organism tempering wasnt taken into account?
a. Increase of influence force
*b. Systematicness
c. Increase of influence intensity
d. Autodefense increase
e. Increase of resistance

51. A 19 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia of B type. What antihemophilic medications should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Dried plasma
*b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Cryoprecipitate
d. Fresh frozen blood
e. Native plasma

52. A 37 year old farmer complains about general weakness, spastic pain in the lower parts of his abdomen, mainly in the left iliac area, frequent defecations up to 18 times a day, feces contain admixtures of mucus and blood. The illness began abruptly 3 days ago with chill, fever, headache. General condition is moderately severe, body temperature is 37,8oC. Sigmoid colon is spasmed and painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Yersiniosis
b. Salmonellosis
*c. Dysentery
d. Amebiasis
e. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis

53. The average body lenth of newborn boys is 50,9 cm at a sigma 1,66; and average mass - 3432 at a sigma 5,00. What criterion is necessary to compare degree of variability of these signs?
a. Sigma
b. Limit
*c. Coefficient of variation
d. Coefficient of association
e. Amplitude

54. An outpatient hospital made record of 11600 diseases within one year. Among them influenza and ARD make up 5800, circulatory system diseases - 3480, digestion diseases - 1300, other diseases - 1020. What relative index can be calculated according this data?
a. -
b. Intensive
c. Correlation
d. Visualization
*e. Extensive

55. A rounded well-defined shadow was found in the costo-vertebral angle on the chest roentgenogram of an otherwise healthy 9 year old girl. Make a preliminary diagnosis:
a. Sympatoblastoma
*b. Ganglioneuroma
c. Sarcoma of the vertebra
d. Sympatogonioma
e. Ganglioneuroblastoma

56. A 23 year old man complains about face edemata, headache, dizziness, reduced urination, change of urine colour (dark-red). These presentations appeared after pharyngitis. Objectively: face edemata, pale skin, temperature - 37,4oC; heart rate - 86/min, AP - 170/110 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, the II sound is accentuated above aorta. What etiological factor is probable in this case?
*a. ?-hemolytic streptococcus
b. Pyogenic streptococcus
c. Saprophytic staphylococcus
d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Alpha-hemolytic streptococcus

57. A 3 month old child has occiput alopecia, anxious sleep, excessive sweating. What disease might be suspected?
*a. Rachitis
b. Phosphate diabetes
c. Spasmophilia
d. Anemia
e. Chondrodystrophy

58. A 25 year old pediatrician fell ill a week ago: body temperature rose up to 37,6oC, there appeared a slight swelling on his neck. His illness was diagnosed as ARD, cervical lymphadenitis. Treatment course included erythromycin, hot compress on the neck. In course of treatment body tempearture rose up to 39oC, there appeared headache, repeated vomiting, meningeal syndrome. What studies are necessary for the final diagnosis?
a. Sputum test for secondary flora
b. Roentgenological examination of lungs
c. Puncture of cervical lymph node
*d. Cerebrospinal puncture
e. Complete blood count

59. A 23 year old patient fell ill 3 weeks ago when she noticed a very painful induration in her axillary crease. 4-5 days later it burst and discharged a lot of pus. After that some new infiltrations appeared around the affected area. The patient has never suffered from skin diseases before. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mycosis
b. Herpes zoster
c. Furuncle
d. Streptococcal impetigo
*e. Hydradenitis

60. A man in grave condition was delivered to the admission ward of a hospital on the 2nd day of illness. Examination revealed body temperature of 36,1oC, sharpened features of face, dry skin that makes a fold, aphonia, convulsive twitching of some muscle groups. Acrocyanosis is present. Heart sounds are muffled, Ps is 102 bpm, AP is 50/20 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, drawn-in, painless. Anuria is presnt. Stool is liquid in form of rice water. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Cholera
b. Escherichiosis
c. Salmonellosis
d. Acute dysentery
e. Intestinal amebiasis

61. A 50 year old patient has been admitted to the clinics with atrophic gastritis. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,8×1012/l, Hb - 68 g/l,c.i. - 1, macroanisocytosis, poikilocytosis. There is megaloblastic type of haemopoesis. A number of leukocytes, reticulocytes and thrombocytes is lreduced. Which pathology is suspected?
a. Thalassaemia
b. Post-hemorrhagic anemia
c. Irondeficiency anemia
d. Hemolytic anemia
*e. B12-deficiency anemia

62. During preventive examination a 16 year old patient presented no problems. Objectively: the patient has signs of malnutrition, he is asthenic, AP is 110/70 mm Hg, Ps is 80 bpm, cardiac border is normal, auscultation above the cardiac apex reveals three sounds, cardiac murmur is absent. ECG shows no pathological changes, phonocardiogram shows that the third sound comes 0,15 s after the second one above the apex. How are these changes called?
a. IV physiological sound
b. Protodiastolic gallop rhythm
*c. III physiological sound
d. Atrial gallop rhythm
e. Fout-ta-ta-rou (reduplication of the 2nd sound)

63. A 48 year old woman complains about weakness, weight loss, appetite loss, headache. The patient had acute glomerulonephritis when she was young. She has been suffering from arterial hypertension since she was 25. She didnt undergo systematic treatment, consulted a doctor rarely. Examination revealed signs of chronic renal insufficiency of the I stage (creatinine - 0,43 millimole/l). What dietary recommendations are the most reasonable?
a. Restriction of carbohydrate consumption
b. Diet with high content of "alkaline" dishes
c. Restriction of fat consumption
d. Consumption of higher amounts of liquid
*e. Restriction of protein consumption

64. A 75 year old man who has been suffering from diabetes for the last six months was found to be jaundiced. He was asymptomatic except for weight loss at the rate of 10 pounds in 6 months. Physical examination revealed a hard, globular, right upper quadrant mass that moves during respiration. A CT scan shows enlargement of the head of the pancreas, with no filling defects in the liver. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Metastatic disease of liver
b. Infectious hepatitis
*c. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
d. Haemolytic jaundice
e. Malignant biliary stricture

65. A 26 year old man was admitted to the hospital because of stabbing back pain on inspiration and dyspnea. Examination results: BT of 37oC, Ps of 24/min, HR of 92/min, vesicular breath sounds. There is a dry, grating, low-pitched sound heard on both expiration and inspiration in the left inferior lateral part of the chest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocarditis
b. Pneumonia
c. Pneumothorax
d. Acute bronchitis
*e. Acute fibrinous pleuritis

66. A 9 year old boy has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for a year. He gets insulin injections (humulin R, NPH), the dose makes up 0,4 units per 1 kg of body weight a day. Insulin is untroduced subcutaneously (into the shoulder) by means of a syringe. What measures should be taken in order to prevent lipodystrophy?
a. To administer antioxidants
b. To reduce insulin dose
*c. To change point of introduction
d. To apply periodically other types of insulin
e. To limit fats in the boys diet

67. A patient with acute purulent otitis media complicated by mastoiditis was admitted to a hospital. Roentgenogram of mastoid processes showed the shadiowing of the cellular system on the lesion, absence of bone septa was present. What are the necessary therapeutic +actions at the second stage of mastoiditis?
a. Cateterization of the Eustachian tube
b. Paracentesis of the drum
*c. Mastoidotomy
d. Radical operation on the middle ear
e. Tympanoplasty

68. A 3 year old boy fell ill abruptly: fever up to 39oC, weakness, vomitng. Haemorrhagic rash of various size appeared on his lower limbs in 5 hours. Meningococcemia with infective - toxic shock of the 1 degree was diagnosed. What medications should be administered?
a. Chloramphenicol succinate and interferon
b. Ampicillin and immunoglobulin
c. Penicillin and immunoglobulin
*d. Chloramphenicol succinate and prednisone
e. Penicillin and prednisone

69. A 46 year old woman who has been suffering from hypertension for 5 years was diagnosed with hypertensive crisis. She complains about palpitation, sense of head pulsation; heart rate is 100/min, AP is 190/100 mm Hg (haemodynamics is of hyperkinetic type). What medication should be the medication of choice?
a. Dihydropyridine calcium antagonist
b. Diuretic
c. Adenosine pyrophosphate inhibitor
*d. beta-adrenoceptor blocker
e. alpha-adrenoceptor blocker

70. Preventive examination of a 55 year old patient revealed diabetes mellitus. The patient hasnt received treatment for it. Objectively: height is 170 cm, weight is 106 kg, skin humidity is normal. Ps is 76 bpm, rhythmic, left border of relative heart dullness is deviated by 1 cm to the left from the middle clavicular line, heart sounds are quiet, AP is 140/80 mm Hg. Glycemia on an empty stomach is 6,9 millimole/l. Glucose rate in the daily urine is 0,5%, diuresis makes up 2,5 l. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
*a. To administer dietotherapy
b. To administer metformin
c. To administer glibenclamid
d. To administer repaglinide
e. To administer insulin

71. A 33 year old male patient was brought to Emergency Department with the signs of cardiovascular collapse: BP - 60/30 mm Hg, Ps - 140 bpm, the skin is pale and moist, diuresis 20 ml/h, Hb - 80 g/l, red blood cell count - 2,5*10^12/l. The reduction of blood volume averages:
a. 25-30%
b. 10-15%
c. 15-20%
*d. 30-40%
e. 20-25%

72. An onset of severe preeclampsia at 16 weeks gestation might be caused by:
a. Anencephaly
b. Maternal renal disease
c. Interventricular defect of the fetus
*d. Hydatidiform mole
e. Twin gestation

73. A 50 year old woman complained of attacks of right subcostal pain after fatty meal she has been suffering from for a year. Last week the attacks repeated every day and became more painful. What diagnostic study would you recommend?
a. Blood cell count
b. X-ray examination of the gastrointestinal tract
*c. Ultrasound examination of the gallbladder
d. Ultrasound study of the pancreas
e. Liver function tests

74. During examination a patient is unconscious, his skin is dry and hot, face hyperemia is present. The patient has Kussmauls respiration, there is also smell of acetone in the air. Symptoms of peritoneum irritation are positive. Blood sugar is at the rate of 33 millimole/l. What emergency actions should be taken?
a. Intravenous infusion of sodium chloride saline
*b. Intravenous infusion of short-acting insulin
c. Introduction of long-acting insulin
d. Intravenous infusion of neohaemodesum along with glutamic acid
e. Intravenous infusion of glucose along with insulin

75. A 56 year old man complains of fatigue, dyspnea on exertion and palpitations. He has had a murmur since childhood. Examination reveals a lift at the left sternal border, split S1, and fixed splitting of S2. There is a grade 3/6 midsystolic pulmonic murmur and a 1/6 middiastolic tricuspid murmur at the lower left sternal border. Chest x-ray shows right ventricular enlargement and prominent pulmonary arteries. ECG demonstrates atrial fibrillation with a right bundle branch block. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Coarctation of the aorta
b. Ventricular septal defect
*c. Arterial septal defect
d. Tetralogy of Fallot
e. Patent ductus arteriosus

76. A 6 week old child is admitted because of tachypnea. Birth had been uneventful, although conjunctivitis developed on the third day of life and lasted for about 2 weeks. Physical examination reveals tachypnea, bilateral inspiratory crackles and single expiratory wheezing. Bilateral pneumonia is evident on chest X-ray. The child is afebrile and has no history of fever. White blood cell count is 15×109/l, with 28% of eosinophils. The most likely cause of this childs symptoms is:
*a. Clamydia trachomanis
b. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
c. Varicella
d. Pneumocystis carinii
e. Visceral larva migrans

77. A severely traumatized patient who has been receiving prolonged parenteral alimentation develops diarrhea, mental depression, alopecia and perioral and periorbital dermatitis. Administration of which of the following trace elements is most likely to reverse these complications?
a. Copper
*b. Zinc
c. Iodine
d. Silicon
e. Selenium

78. A 2 month old full-term child was born with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
*a. Corresponding to the age
b. Hypotrophy of the II grade
c. Hypotrophy of the I grade
d. 150 g less than necessary
e. Paratrophy of the I grade

79. A 60 year old man complains of fever, significant weight loss, bone and joint pain, bleeding gums. Examination revealed paleness, lymphadenopathy, hepato- and splenomegaly. CBC: WBC – 270*10^9/l with 13% lymphocytes, 1% monocytes, 21% basophiles, 29% neutrophils, 9% blasts, 12% promyelocytes, 12% myelocytes, 2% metamyelocytes, 1% eosinophils. ESR - 22 mm/h. Name the drug for treatment:
a. Prednisolone
*b. Myelosan
c. Vinblastine
d. Cytosar
e. Blood transfusion

80. A 35 year old woman consulted a doctor about affection of arm skin and lower third of forearm in form of a large edema, hyperemia, vesiculation and maceration. The disease developed after using a laundry detergent "Lotos". The patient has been using it for a month. She hasnt suffered from dermatological diseases before. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Allergic dermatitis
b. Localized neurodermatitis
c. Dermatitis simplex
d. Microbial eczema
e. Toxicoallergic dermatitis

81. Examination of a 4 month old child revealed some lemon-yellow squamae with fatty crusts on the scalp. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Milk crust
b. Infantile eczema
c. Pseudofurunculosis
*d. Gneiss
e. Strophulus

82. A patient, aged 48, complains of heaviness in the right hypochondrium, itching of the skin. Repeatedly he had been treated in infectious diseases hospital because of icterus and itch. Objectively: meteorism, ascitis, dilation of abdominal wall veins, protruding navel, spleen enlargement. Diagnosis is:
*a. Liver cirrhosis
b. Gallstones
c. Cancer of the liver
d. Viral hepatitis B
e. Cancer of the head of pancreas

83. A 52 year old patient with history of functional Class II angina complains of having intense and prolonged retrosternal pains, decreased exercise tolerance for 5 days. Angina is less responsive to nitroglycerine. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Myocarditis
b. Cardialgia due to spine problem
*c. IHd. Unstable angina
d. IHd. Functional Class II angina
e. Myocardial dystrophy

84. A 52 year old patient complains about pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with a lot of foul-smelling albuminoid sputum in form of "meat slops". Objectively: the patients condition is grave, cyanosis is present, breathing rate is 31/min, percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed different rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung abscess
b. Pleura empyema
c. Chronic pneumonia
*d. Lung gangrene
e. Multiple bronchiectasis

85. A 35 year old patient who suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis and has been hemodialysis-dependent for the last three years developed intermissions of heart activity, hypotension, progressing weakness, dyspnea. ECG showed bradycardia, atrioventricular block type I, high pointed waves T. The day before the flagrant violation of diet took place. What is the most probable cause of these changes?
a. Hyperhydratation
b. Hypernatriemia
c. Hypokaliemia
d. Hypocalciemia
*e. Hyperkaliemia

86. Esophagus wall of a 72 year old patient with severe concomitant pathology was injured during urgent fibroesophagogastroscopy. This resulted in progressing of acute respiratory failure and collapse of the left lung. What aid should be rendered?
a. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus and mediastinum wound
b. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus wound
c. Buelaus drainage of pleural cavity, antibacterial therapy
d. Endoscopic closure of esophagus wound, drainage
*e. Drainage of pleural cavity by Bullaux method, mediastinum drainage, antibacterial therapy

87. A 12 year old girl complains about abrupt weakness, nausea, dizziness, vision impairment. The day before she ate home-made stockfish, bee Examination revealed skin pallor, a scratch on the left knee, dryness of mucous membranes of oral pharynx, bilateral ptosis, mydriatic pupils. The girl is unable to read a simple text (mist over the eyes). What therapy would be the most adequate in this case?
a. Parenteral introduction of antibiotics
b. Gastric lavage
c. Parenteral disintoxication
d. Parenteral introduction of antitetanus serum
*e. Parenteral introduction of polyvalent antibotulinic serum

88. An 18 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with complaints of headache, weakness, high temperature, sore throat. Objectively: enlargement of all groups of lymph nodes was revealed. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm, spleen - by 1 cm. In blood: leukocytosis, atypical lymphocytes - 15%. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Angina
b. Diphtheria
*c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Acute lymphoid leukosis
e. Adenoviral infection

89. A 62 year old patient suffers from DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. The patient has to undergo an operation on inguinal hernia. What tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be chosen?
a. Give Glurenorm instead of Maninilum
b. Prescribe guanyl guanidines
*c. Prescribe fast-acting insulin
d. Prescribe long-acting insulin
e. Continue with the current therapy

90. A 49 year old female patient was admitted to a hospital with acute attacks of headache accompanied by pulsation in temples, AP rose up to 280/140 mm Hg. Pheochromocytoma is suspected. What mechanism of hypertensive atack does this patient have?
a. Increase of thyroxine secretion
b. Increase of aldosterone level in blood
c. Increase of plasma renin activity
d. Increase of vasopressin secretion
*e. Increase of catecholamine concentration

91. A 5 month old boy was born prematurely, he didnt suffer from any disease at the infant age and later on. Examination at an outpatients hospital revealed paleness of skin, sleepiness. Blood count: Hb - 95 g/l, erythrocytes - 3,5×1012/l, reticulocytes - 90/00, colour index - 0,7, osmotic stability of erythrocytes - 0,44-0,33%, serum iron - 4,9 micromole/l. What is the most probable cause of anemia?
a. Infectious process
*b. Iron deficit
c. Erythrocyte hemolysis
d. Hemogenesis immaturity
e. B12 deficit

92. A 56 year old patient has worked at the aluminium plant over 20 years. Within 3 last years he has been experiencing loosening of teeth, bone and joint pains, piercing pains in heart region, vomiting. The provisional diagnosis is:
a. Phosphorus intoxication
b. Lead intoxication
*c. Fluorine intoxication
d. Mercury intoxication
e. Manganese intoxication

93. A woman consulted a therapeutist about fatigability, significant weight loss, weakness, loss of appetite. She has been having amenorrhea for 8 months. A year ago she born a full-term child. Haemorrhage during labour made up 2 l. She got blood and blood substitute transfusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Sheehans syndrome
b. Vegetovascular dystonia
c. Shereshevsky-Turners syndrome
d. Homological blood syndrome
e. Stein-Leventhal syndrome

94. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax, it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made in:
a. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line
b. In the projection of pleural sinus
c. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
*d. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
e. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion

95. A woman consulted a doctor on the 14th day after labour about sudden pain, hyperemy and induration of the left mammary gland, body temperature rise up to 39oC, headache, indisposition. Objectively: fissure of nipple, enlargement of the left mammary gland, pain on palpation. What pathology would you think about in this case?
a. Breast cancer
b. Lacteal cyst with suppuration
*c. Lactational mastitis
d. Phlegmon of mammary gland
e. Fibrous adenoma of the left mammary gland

96. A 52 year old patient was admitted to a hospital because of high hemorrhagic diathesis of mucous membranes, massive skin haemorrhages in form of ecchymoses and spots, nasal and stomachal haemorrhages. After clinical examinations her illness was diagnosed as thrombocytopenic purpura. What is the most probable cause of this disease?
*a. Generation of antithrombocytic antibodies
b. Disturbed hemostasis
c. Inherited insufficiency of plasm factors of blood coagulation
d. Iron deficit in blood serum, bone marrow and depot
e. Deficit of the VIII factor of blood coagulation

97. A 28 year old woman had the second labour and born a girl with manifestations of anemia and progressing jaundice. The childs weight was 3 400 g, the length was 52 cm. The womans blood group is B (III) Rh-, the fathers blood group is A (III) Rh+, the childs blood group is B (III) Rh+. What is the cause of anemia?
a. Intrauterine infection
b. Antigen AB incompatibility
*c. Rhesus incompatibility
d. Antigen B incompatibility
e. Antigen A incompatibility

98. A 52 year old man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detected murmur. What diagnostic method is to be applied in the first place?
*a. Ultrasound dopplerography
b. Cerebral angiography
c. Electroencephalography
d. MRI of the brain
e. CT of the brain

99. An excited patient constantly tries to look into the next room because he is sure of his friends presence. He claims to hear his friends and other people talking although no-one is there. He tries to persuade his doctor that people in the next room are disputing about "his punishment", repeats aloud phrases he has allegedly heard from the next room. What state is it?
a. Verbal illusions
b. Confabulations
*c. Acute hallucinosis
d. Obsessional ideas
e. Delusion

100. A 14 year old girl complains of profuse bloody discharges from genital tracts during 10 days after suppresion of menses for 1,5 month. Similiar bleedings recur since 12 years on the background of disordered menstrual cycle. On rectal examination: no pathology of the internal genitalia. In blood: Нb - 70 g/l, RBC- 2,31012/l, Ht - 20. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Incomplete spontaneous abortion
*b. Juvenile bleeding, posthemorrhagic anemia
c. Polycyst ovarian syndrome
d. Hormonoproductive ovary tumor
e. Werlholfs disease

101. A 2 year old girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Adenoviral infection
*b. Rubella
c. Pseudotuberculosis
d. Measles
e. Scarlet fever

102. A 2 year old child has been ill with acute respiratory viral infection of upper thrice a year - in February, in April and in December. How should these occurences be recorded?
a. It is necessary to fill in 3 statistic talons signed (-)
*b. It is necessary to fill in 3 statistic talons signed (+)
c. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (+)
d. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (+) and 2 statistic talons signed (-)
e. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (-)

103. A 54 year old woman complains of increasing fatigue and easy bruising of 3 weeks duration. Physical findings included pale, scattered ecchymoses and petechiae and mild hepatosplenomegaly. Blood count: RBC- 2,5×1012/l; Hb - 73 g/l; Ht - 20%; PLT- 23×109/l; and WBC- 162×109/l with 82% blasts, that contained Auric rods; peroxidase stain was positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Hemolytic anemia
*c. Acute leukemia
d. Chronic leukemia
e. Megaloblastic anemia

104. After delivery and revision of placenta there was found the defect of placental lobule. General condition of woman is normal, uterus is firm, there is moderate bloody discharge. Speculum inspection of birth canal shows absence of lacerations and raptures. What action is nesessary?
a. Introduction of hemostatic medications
b. External massage of uterus
c. Introduction of uterine contracting agents
d. Urine drainage, cold on the lower abdomen
*e. Manual exploration of the uterine cavity

105. Routine examination of an otherwise healthy child with a history of bronchial asthma reveals AP of 140/90 mm Hg. The most likely cause of the hypertension is:
a. Obesity
b. Chronic lung disease
c. Theophylline toxicity
d. Coarctation of the aorta
*e. Renal disease

106. An outbreak of food poisoning was recorded in an urban settlement. The illness was diagnosed as botulism on the grounds of clinical presentations. What foodstuffs should be chosen for analysis in the first place in order to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Tinned food
b. Potatoes
c. Cabbage
d. Pasteurized milk
e. Boiled meat

107. A 25 year old patient complains about weakness, dizziness, appearance of haemorrhagic skin rash. She has been suffering from this for a month. Blood count: erythrocytes: 1,0×1012/l, Hb- 37 g/l, colour index - 0,9, leukocytes - 1,2×109/l, thrombocytes – 42×109/l. What diagnostic method will be the most effective?
a. Abdominal ultrasound
b. Coagulogram
c. Spleen biopsy
d. Liver biopsy
*e. Sternal puncture

108. A patient with frostbite of both feet was delivered to the admission ward. What actions should be taken?
a. To apply an alcohol compress
b. To put feet into hot water
*c. To apply a bandage, to introduce vasodilating medications
d. To administer cardiac medications
e. To rub feet with snow

109. A 34 year old woman in the 10th week of gestation (the second pregnancy) consulted a doctor of antenatal clinic in order to be registered there. In the previous pregnancy hydramnion was observed, the childs birth weight was 4086 g. What examination method should be applied in the first place?
a. Bacteriological examination of discharges from vagina
*b. The test for tolerance to glucose
c. A cardiophonography of fetus
d. Determination of the contents of fetoproteinum
e. US of fetus

110. A woman born a child. It was her fith pregnancy but the first delivery. Mothers blood group is A[II] Rh-, newborns -A[II] Rh+. The level of indirect bilirubin in umbilical blood was 58 micromole/l, hemoglobin - 140 g/l, RBC- 3,8×1012/l. In 2 hours the level of indirect bilirubin turned 82 micromole/l. The hemolytic disease of newborn (icteric-anemic type, Rh-incompatibility) was diagnosed. Choose the therapeutic tactics:
a. Blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
*b. Replacement blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
c. Conservative therapy
d. Symptomatic therapy
e. Antibiotics

111. What guarantees against the preconceived attitude to the physician in cases of professional law violations do you know?
a. Utilisation copy of medical documents
b. Conduct forensic medical examination by district forensic medicine expert
*c. Sanction of public prosecutor, inquiry by preliminary investigator of prosecutors office, committee of experts
d. Draw up a statement about forensic medical examination
e. Conduct an inquiry by preliminary investigator of police department

112. A 57 year old patient abruptly lost the sight of one eye. Examination revealed that his sight made up 0,02 excentrically, eye fundus has haemorrhages of different forms and sizes ("squashed tomato" symptom). Disc of optic nerve is hyperemic. In anamnesis general vascular pathology is recorded. Direct-acting anticoagulants were administered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Embolism of central artery of retina
b. Diabetic retinopathy
*c. Thrombosis of central vein of retina
d. Hypertensive angioneuropathy
e. Hypertensive angiopathy

113. Study of actual diet of an adult revealed the following: proteins make up 16% of energy value of daily ration, fats - 25%, carbohydrates - 59%. Evaluate compliance of protein, fat and carbohydrate share in the energy value of daily ration with the recommended shares of these nutrients?
a. Carbohydrate share is insufficicent
b. Carbohydrate share is excessive
*c. Carbohydrate share is insufficient, there is excess of proteins
d. Fat share is insufficient
e. Nutrient content complies with the recommended shares of energy value

114. During hygienic examination of a hospital it was established that the area for each bed in a double ward was: in the infectious department for children - 7м2, in the infectious department for adults - 8м2, in the burns department - 9м2, in the radiological department - 10м2, in the critical care department - 13м2. In which wards the area for each bed doesnt correspond with hygienic requirements?
a. In infectious wards for adults
b. In radiological wards
c. In infectious wards for children
d. In critical care wards
*e. In burns wards

115. A healthy 75 year old woman who leads a moderately active way of life went through a preventive examination that revealed serum concentration of common cholesterol at the rate of 5,1 millimol/l and HDL (high-density lipoproteins) cholesterol at the rate of 70 mg/dl. ECG reveals no pathology. What dietary recommendation is the most adequate?
a. Decrease of cholesterol consumption
b. Increase of cellulose consumption
*c. Any dietary changes are necessary
d. Decrease of carbohydrates consumption
e. Decrease of saturated fats consumption

116. A 25 year old patient complains of pain in the I finger on his right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain is getting worse. Acute pain appears during the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Bone panaritium
b. Subcutaneous panaritium
c. Paronychia
d. Articular (joint) panaritium
*e. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)

117. A 24 year old patient complained about putting on weight, limosis. Objectively: the patients constitution is of hypersthenic type, body weight index is 33,2 kg/m2, waist circumference is 100 cm. Correlation of waist circumference to the thigh circumference is 0,95. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the I stage, abdominal type
b. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the II stage, gynoid type
c. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the I stage, abdominal type
d. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the III stage, gynoid type
e. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the II stage, abdominal type

118. Generalized low voltage on an ECG (QRS deflection < 5 mm in limb leads and < 10 mm in precordial leads) may be a marker for all of the following disorders EXCEPT:
a. Amyloidosis
*b. Hyperthyroidism
c. Coronary artery disease
d. Cardiac transplant rejection
e. Pericardial effusion

119. A patient has been in a hospital. The beginning of the disease was gradual: nausea, vomiting, dark urine, аcholic stools, yellowness of the skin and scleras. The liver is protruded by 3 cm. Jaundice progressed on the 14th day of the disease. The liver diminished in size. What complication of viral hepatitis caused deterioration of the patients condition?
a. Meningitis
*b. Hepatic encephlopathy
c. Infectious-toxic shock
d. Relapse of viral hepatitis
e. Cholangitis

120. A female 28 years old patient became depressed, her mood is melancholic; this state is accompanied by hypobulia, hypokinesia, slow speed of thinking. Her attitude towards her past, present and future is pessimistic. The pathogenetic mechanism of this state is supposed to involve dysfunction in the:
a. Frontal lobes
b. Corpus callosum
c. Pituitary
*d. Hypothalamus
e. Hippocampus

121. A 34 year old coal miner who has been in service for 10 years was discharged from an occupational disease clinic after examination and treatment. He was diagnosed with the I stage of anthracosilicosis, peribronchitis, 0 stage of respiratory failure. What expert decision should be taken about his working capacity?
a. He can continue working as coal miner provided that sanitary and hygienic conditions are observed
b. He should be referred to the local medical expert comission for determination of percentage of working capacity loss
c. He should stay on the sick-list to consolidate treatment results
d. He should be given medical certificate for the further out-patient treatment
*e. He should be referred to the local medical expert comission for determination of his disability group for the period of re-training

122. A mother consulted a pediatrician about her son. Her son was born with body mass of 3 kg and length of 48 cm. Hes 1 year old now. What is the required normal mass?
a. 9,0 kg
b. 11,0 kg
c. 12,0 kg
*d. 10,5 kg
e. 15,0 kg

123. A 39 year old patient suffering from hypertension felt suddenly intense headache in the region of occiput; there appeared recurrent vomiting. These presentations has been lasting for 5 hours. Objectively: Ps - 88 bpm, AP - 205/100 mm Hg, painfulness of occipital points, rigidity of occipital muscles are present. Kernigs symptom is bilaterally positive. Subarachnoid haemorrhage is also suspected. What diagnostic method will be of the greatest importance for confirmation of provisional diagnosis?
a. Computer tomography
*b. Lumbar puncture
c. Examination of eye fundus
d. Ultrasonic dopplerography
e. EEG

124. A 42 year old woman complains of dyspnea, edema of the legs and tachycardia during minor physical exertion. Heart borders are displaced to the left and S1 is accentuated, there is diastolic murmur on apex. The liver is enlarged by 5 cm. What is the cause of heart failure?
a. Tricuspid stenosis
*b. Mitral stenosis
c. Mitral regurgitation
d. Tricuspid regurgitation
e. Aortic stenosis

125. A 32 year old patient complains about pain in small joints of her hands, paresthesia at the tips of fingers, weakness, difficult diglutition. She has been suffering from this for 13 years. Objectively: face amimia, shortening of nail bones, skin indurations in the area of shoulder girdle are present. Roentgenological examination of lungs revealed basal pneumosclerosis. Fibrogastroscopy revealed esophagus constriction in its cardial part. Blood count: leukocytes - 9,8×109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h, ?-globulin - 22%. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*b. Systemic scleroderma
c. Myxedema
d. Dermatomyositis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

126. Periodical survey of a worker of a chemicals plant revealed a malignant neoplasm on the urinary bladder. This occupational disease was the most probably caused by contact with the following industrial poison:
*a. Benzidine
b. Vinyl chloride
c. Asbestos
d. Nickel carbonyl
e. Arsenic

127. A 52 year old patient has hypervolaemic type of essential hypertension. Which of the following medications is to be prescribed either as monotherapy or in complex with other antihypertensive drugs?
a. Kapoten
b. Nifedipin
*c. Hypothiazid
d. Clonidine
e. Dibazol

128. An 8 year old girl complains about joint pain, temperature rise up to 38oC, dyspnea. Objectively: the left cardiac border is deviated by 2,5 cm to the left, tachycardia, systolic murmur on the apex and in the V point are present. Blood count: leukocytes - 20,0×109/l, ESR - 18 mm/h. What sign gives the most substantial proof for rheumatism diagnosis?
a. Fever
b. Leukocytosis
c. Arthralgia
*d. Carditis
e. Accelerated ESR

129. A primagravida with pregnancy of 37-38 weeks complains of headache, nausea, pain in epigastrium. Objective: the skin is acyanotic. Face is hydropic, there is short fibrillar twitching of blepharons, muscles of the face and the inferior extremities. The look is fixed. AP- 200/110 mm Hg; sphygmus of 92 bpm, intense. Respiration rate is 32/min. Heart activity is rhythmical. Appreciable edemata of the inferior extremities are present. Urine is cloudy. What medication should be administered?
a. Hexenalum of 1% - 2,0 ml
b. Papaverine hydrochloride of 2% - 4,0 ml
c. Dibazolum of 1% - 6,0 ml
d. Pentaminum of 5% - 4,0 ml
*e. Droperidolum of 0,25% - 2,0 ml

130. A 41 year old woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis for 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: evident inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous membrane. In blood: WBC- 9,8×109/l, RBC- 3,0×1012/l, ESR - 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
a. Vikasolum
b. Kreon
c. Motilium
*d. Sulfosalasine
e. Linex

131. A 60 year old patient has been suffering from arterial hypertension for 15 years. After recurrent stroke she started complaining about amotivational bad mood, problems with attention concentration; she forgets to close the entrance door, cannot recall events of the last day. Computer tomography shows areas of postinfarction changes in the cortical postfrontal regions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dissociative amnesia
b. Picks disease
c. Alzheimers disease
*d. Vascular dementia
e. Huntingtons chorea

132. During investigation for chronic, severe, epigastric pain, a 40 year old alcoholic man is found to have multiple areas of narrowing alternating with dilatation ("chain of lakes" appearance) of the main pancreatic duct. The operation of choice is:
a. Total pancreatectomy
b. Sphincterotomy
c. Distal pancreatectomy
d. Distal pancreaticojejunostomy
*e. Lateral pancreaticojejunostomy

133. A 22 year old patient was admitted to trauma center with complaints of pain in the left ankle joint that was getting worse during moving and weight bearing. On the clinical examination it was found that the patient had the closed fracture of medial malleolus without displacement. In which position should the foot be fixed in plaster cast?
a. In position of supination
*b. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot
c. In position of planter flexion of foot
d. In position of pronation
e. In position of dorsal flexion of foot

134. What method is applied to establish rate of correlation between age of men and their mortality due to myocardial infarction?
a. The Indirect method (Student)
b. Method of graduated correlation (Armler)
*c. Method of grade correlation (Spirman)
d. The quadrate method (Pirson)
e. Correlation ratio

135. A 15 year old patient suffers from headache, nasal haemorrhages, sense of lower extremity coldness. Objectively: muscles of shoulder girdle are developed, lower extremities are hypotrophie d. Pulsation on the pedal and femoral arteries is sharply dampened. AP is 150/90 mm Hg, 90/60 on the legs. Systolic murmur can be auscultated above carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Coarctation of pulmonary artery
*b. Aorta coarctation
c. Aorta aneurism
d. Aortal stenosis
e. Aortal insufficiency

136. A 43 year old patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenosing papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
*a. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
b. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
c. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
d. To perform external choledoch drainage
e. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs

137. A patient complains about strong dyspnea that is getting worse during physical activity. Presentations appeared suddenly 2 hours ago at work: acute chest pain on the left, cough. The pain was abating, but dyspnea, dizziness, pallor, cold sweat and cyanosis were progressing. Vesicular respiration is absent, X-ray picture shows a shadow on the left. What pathology might be suspected?
*a. Spontaneous left-sided pneumothorax
b. Left-sided pneumonia
c. Pulmonary infarction
d. Pleuritis
e. Pulmonary abscess

138. A nine year old child is at a hospital with acute glomerulonephritis. Clinical and laboratory examinations show acute condition. What nutrients must not be limited during the acute period of glomerulonephritis?
*a. Carbohydrates
b. Proteins
c. Fats
d. Liquid
e. Salt

139. A 40 year old woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Painless movable induration
b. Pure discharges from the nipple
*c. Skin induration with inverted nipple
d. Painful movable induration
e. Bloody discharges from the nipple

140. An endometrial adenocarcinoma that has extended to the uterine serosa would be classified as stage:
*a. IIIA
b. IIA
c. IVAB
d. IC
e. IIB

141. A 16 year old patient with complaints of frequent pain in the abdomen was diagnosed with melanoma, examination revealed also pigmentation of the mucosa and skin, polyp in the stomach and large intestine. It is know that the patients mother has an analogous pigmentation and has been often treated for anemia. What disease is suspected?
*a. Peytz-Egerss polyposis
b. Chrons disease
c. Adolescent polyposis
d. Hirschprungs disease
e. Tuberculosis of the intestine

142. A 25 year old patient was admitted on the 1st day of the disease with complaints of double vision in the eyes, heavy breathing. The day before the patient ate home-made mushrooms. On objective examination: paleness, mydriatic pupils, difficult diglutition, bradycardia, constipation. What is the diagnosis?
a. Leptospirosis
b. Salmonellosis, gastrointestinal form
c. Lambliasis
*d. Botulism
e. Yersiniosis

143. A triad of symptoms ("stearing spot", "terminal film", "blood dew") has been revealed on examination of a patient. What disease should you think about?
*a. Psoriasis
b. Ritters disease
c. Vasculitis
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Seborrhea

144. A patient with nosocomial pneumonia presents signs of collapse. Which of the following pneumonia complications is most likely to be accompanied by collapse?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Toxic hepatitis
c. Emphysema
*d. Septic shock
e. Bronchial obstruction

145. A child is 1 day old. During delivery there had been problems with extraction of shoulders. Body weight is 4300,0. Right arm hangs down along the body, hand is pronated, movement in the arm is absent. "Scarf" symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tetraparesis
b. Hemiparesis
c. Proximal right-sided obstetric paralysis
*d. Total right-sided obstetric paralysis
e. Distal right-sided obstetric paralysis

146. A 5 tons milk batch was sampled. The lab analysis revealed: fat content 2%, specific density - 1,04 g/cm3, acidity - 210, reductase probe - weak-positive. What way is the product to be used in?
a. Discard for animal feeding
*b. Sell but inform customers about milk quality
c. Sell without limitations
d. Technical utilization
e. Do the product away

147. Adenosine triphosphate may be expected to convert which of the following arrhythmias to sinus rhythm?
*a. Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
b. Ventricular fibrillation
c. Atrial fibrillation
d. Atrial flutter
e. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia

148. A 55 year old patient felt suddenly sick in a hospital corridor, he was immediately examined by a doctor. Examination revealed that the patients skin was pale, autonomous respiration was absent, pulse on carotid arteries couldnt be felt, pupils were mydriatic. What action should be taken at the beginning of cardiac resuscitation?
a. Restoration of airway patency
b. Closed-chest cardiac massage
*c. Precordial thump
d. Defibrillation
e. Mouth-to-mouth ventilation

149. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Leftsided renal colic
b. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
c. Herpes zoster
d. Torsion of the left testicle
e. Sigmoid diverticulitis

150. Five days after a total hip replacement a 72 year old woman becomes acutely short of breath, diaphoretic and hypotensive. Both lung fields are clear to auscultation and percussion, but examination of the neck reveals mild jugular venous distension with prominent A waves. Heart sounds are normal. ECG shows sinus tachycardia with a new right bundle branch block and minor nonspecific ST-T wave changes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Pericarditis
c. Aortic dissection
d. Aspiration
*e. Pulmonary thromboembolism

151. A 70 year old man is suffering from coronary heart disease. His mood is evidently depressed, anxious. As a result of continious sleeplessness he has got fears, suicidal thoughts. He would sit for a long time in the same pose, answer after a pause, in a low, monotonous voice. His face has a look of suffering, pain, fear. What is the main psychopathologic syndrome?
a. Asthenic syndrome
b. Obsessive syndrome
*c. Depressive syndrome
d. Paranoid syndrome
e. Phobic syndrome

152. On the first day after labour a woman had the rise of temperature up to 39oC. Rupture of fetal membranes took place 36 hours before labour. Examination of the bacterial flora of cervix of the uterus revealed hemocatheretic streptococcus of A group. The uterus body is soft, tender. Discharges are bloody, with admixtures of pus. Specify the most probable postnatal complication:
*a. Metroendometritis
b. Apostasis of sutures after the episiotomy
c. Infective contamination of the urinary system
d. Thrombophlebitis of veins of the pelvis
e. Infectious hematoma

153. A 13 year old girl consulted the school doctor on account of moderate bloody discharge from the genital tracts, which appeared 2 days ago. Secondary sexual characters are developed. What is the most probable cause of bloody discharge?
a. Endometrium cancer
b. Werlhofs disease
c. Haemophilia
d. Juvenile hemorrhage
*e. Menarche

154. A 42 year old metalworker has been working at the turning machine for production of heavy large-size parts for 5 years. His work requires using of hand and pedal levers that involves considerable physical force. What means for osteoarthrosis prevention should be recommended?
*a. To limit physical work
b. To improve health at the Black sea coast
c. To go in for weightlifting
d. To administer protein-and-carbohydrate diet
e. To administer protein-and-vitamin diet

155. A full-term infant is 3 days old. On the different parts of skin there are erythemas, erosive spots, cracks, areas of epidermis peeling. The infant has scalded skin syndrome. Nikolskys symptom is positive. General condition of the infant is grave. Anxiety, hyperesthesia, febrile temperature are evident. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of newborn
b. Mycotic erythema
*c. Exfoliative dermatitis
d. Impetigo neonatorum
e. Fingers pseudofurunculosis

156. It is planned to make complete isolation boxes in the infectious department in order to prevent nosocomial airborne infections. The boxes consist of a tambour, a ward and a lock chamber. What structure should be also included in a complete isolation box?
a. Nursing room
b. Doctors consulting room
c. Patients examination room
d. Manipulation room
*e. Bathroom unit

157. A 38 year old man complains about mild pain and muscle weakness of shoulder and pelvic girdles and back that has been progressing for the last 3 weeks. He has also significant problems with getting up, going up and down the stairs and shaving. It is suspected that the patient is suffering from dermatomyositis. Blood count: Hb - 114 g/l, leukocytes - 10,8*10^9/l, eosin - 9%, ESR - 22 mm/h, C-reactive protein (++). Change of the following laboratory factor will be of the greatest diagnostic importance:
a. Sialic acids
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Antibodies to the native DNA
*d. Creatine phosphokinase
e. gamma-globulins

158. A 52 year old patient with disseminated vertebral osteochondrosis lifted a significant load that resulted in lumbar pain and pain along the sciatic nerve. Objectively: positive Lasegues sign on the left, reduced Achilles reflex. What drug would be the most effective from the pathogenetic point of view?
*a. Diclofenac
b. Novocaine
c. Aspirin
d. Spasmalgon
e. Analgin

159. A 25 year old woman complained of edema on her face and legs, rise of blood pressure up to 160/100 mm Hg and weakness. She fell ill 3 weeks after recovering from angina. Urinalysis data: protein of 0,5 g/l, erythrocytes of 17-20/field, leukocytes of 2-3/field, erythrocyte casts. What treatment should be initiated after specifying the diagnosis?
a. Heparin
b. Ciprofloxacine
*c. Penicillin OS
d. Dipyridamole
e. Ceftriaxone

160. Which of the following IS NOT TYPICAL for Addisons disease?
a. Elevated BUN
*b. High serum Na+
c. Dilute urine
d. Elevated hematocrit
e. High serum K+

161. A 48 year old man complains of fatique and shortness of breath. His Ht is 32%, and Hb - 103 g/l. Peripheral blood smear reveals macrocytosis. Serum vitamin B12 level is 90 pg/ml (normal is 170 to 940); serum folate level is 6 ng/ml (normal is 2 to 14). Possible causes to consider include all of the following EXCEPT:
a. Regional enteritis
b. Pancreatitis
c. Vegetarianism
*d. Colonic diverticulitis
e. Fish tapeworm infection

162. The treatment of choice for duodenal obstruction caused by secondary duodenal hematoma that developed a few days after blunt abdominal injury is:
a. Immediate exploration
b. Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy
*c. Nasogastric decompression and parenteral alimentation
d. Tube duodenostomy
e. Duodenojejunostomy

163. A 3 month old infant suffering from acute segmental pneumonia has dyspnea (respiration rate - 80 per minute), paradoxical breathing, tachycardia, total cyanosis. Respiration / pulse ratio is 1:2. The heart dullness under normal size. Such signs characterise:
a. Myocarditis
b. Respiratory failure of I degree
*c. Respiratory failure of III degree
d. Congenital heart malformation
e. Respiratory failure of II degree

164. The highest risk of congenital anomalies probably occurs when human embryos or fetuses are exposed to ionizing radiation. At what stage of gestational period does it occur?
*a. 18-45 days after conception
b. The first 7 days
c. 10-14 days after conception
d. 90-120 days after conception
e. The third trimester

165. Preventive examination of an 11 year old boy helped to determine his habitus type. It was established that the childs shoulders were deviated and brought forward, with forward flexion of head, the thorax was flattened, abdomen was convex. The childs backbone had signs of deepened cervical and lumbar curvatures. What habitus is it?
*a. Kyphosis
b. Round-shouldered
c. Lordosis
d. Corrected
e. Normal

166. Survey radiograph of chest of a 62 year old smoker who often suffers from "pneumonias" showed a triangle shadow in the right lung, its vertex is pointing towards the lung root. It also showed deviation of heart and mediastinum shadows towards the lesion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung cyst
b. Lung abscess
c. Peripheral cancer of lung
*d. Cenral cancer of lung
e. Atelectasis

167. A 10 year old girl complains about abdominal pain that is arising and getting worse after eating rough or spicy food. She complains also about sour eructation, heartburn, frequent constipations, headache, irritability. She has been suffering from this for 12 months. Objectively: the girls diet is adequate. Tongue is moist with white deposit at the root. Abdomen is soft, painful in its epigastric part. What study method will help to make a diagnosis?
*a. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
b. Biochemical blood analysis
c. Contrast roentgenoscopy
d. Fractional examination of gastric juice
e. Intragastral pH-metry

168. A 25 year old man has a sudden onset of chest pain on the right and dyspnea. His trachea is deviated to the left. All of the following would be anticipated EXCEPT:
*a. Pleural friction rub on the left
b. Absence of rhonchi
c. Hyperresonance over the right chest
d. Distant breath sounds on the right
e. Absence of rales

169. A 29 year old patient underwent surgical treatment because of the benign serous epithelial tumour of an ovary. The postoperative period has elapsed without complications. What is it necessary to prescribe for the rehabilitational period:
a. The patient does not require further care
*b. Hormonotherapy and proteolytic enzymes
c. Lasertherapy and enzymotherapy
d. Antibacterial therapy and adaptogens
e. Magnitotherapy and vitamin therapy

170. A 39 year old patient complained about morning headache, appetite loss, nausea, morning vomiting, periodic nasal haemorrhages. The patient had acute glomerulonephritis at the age of 15. Examination revealed rise of arterial pressure up to 220/130 mm Hg, skin haemorrhages on his arms and legs, pallor of skin and mucous membranes. What biochemical index is of the greatest diagnostic importance in this case?
a. Blood sodium
b. Blood bilirubin
c. Uric acid
d. Fibrinogen
*e. Blood creatinine

171. A 19 year old girl was admitted to emergency department: unconsciousness, cyanosis, myotic pupils are present, superficial breathing is 12/min. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action necessary in this clinical situation:
a. Cordiamine injection
b. Gastric lavage
c. Oxygen inhalation
d. Caffeine injection
*e. Controlled respiration

172. A 26 year old woman who delivered a child 7 months ago has been suffering from nausea, morning vomiting, sleepiness for the last 2 weeks. She suckles the child, menstruation is absent. She hasnt applied any contraceptives. What method should be applied in order to specify her diagnosis?
a. Roentgenography of small pelvis organs
b. Speculum examination
*c. Ultrasonic examination
d. Palpation of mammary glands and pressing-out of colostrum
e. Bimanual vaginal examination

173. A 32 year old patient complains about heartburn and dull pain in the epigastrium that appear 2-3 hours after meal. Exacerbations happen in spring and in autumn. The patient has food intolerance of eggs and fish. Objectively: stomach palpation reveals painfulness in the gastroduodenal area. Electrophasoduodenoscopy revealed a 5 mm ulcer on the anterior wall of duodenum. Urease test is positive. What is the most probable leading mechanism of disease development?
a. Disorder of gastric motor activity
b. Reduced prostaglandin synthesis
c. Dietary allergy
d. Autoantibody production
*e. Chelicobacterial infection

174. Examination of a 3-month-old child revealed scrotum growth on the right. This formation has elastic consistency, its size decreases during sleep and increases when the child is crying. What examination will be helpful for making a correct diagnosis?
a. Palpation of the external inguinal ring
b. Examination of the formation in Trendelenburgs position
c. Puncture of the scrotum
d. Diaphanoscоpy
*e. Palpation of the thickened cord crossing the pubical tubercule (sign of the silk glove)

175. In treatment and prevention establishments, regardless of their organisational and proprietary form, the rights of patients should be observed. Which of these rights is the most significant?
a. The right to the protection from incompetence
*b. The right to the protection of the patients interests
c. The right to the information
d. The right to the free choice
e. The right to be heard

176. Researchers studied disease incidence of influenza and acute respiratory viral infection within the last 5 years. What kind of graphic presentation should be used for the best visualization of this data?
*a. Linear diagram
b. Bar diagram
c. Radial diagram
d. Histogram
e. Pie diagram

177. A woman of a high-risk group (chronic pyelonephritis in anamnesis) had vaginal delivery. The day after labour she complained of fever and loin pains, frequent urodynia. Specify the most probable complication:
a. Apostasis of sutures after episiotomy
b. Endometritis
c. Thrombophlebitis of veins of the pelvis
d. Infectious hematoma
*e. Infectious contamination of the urinary system

178. A patient, aged 49, complains of fever of 37,5oC, heart pain, dyspnea. S1 is clapping; S2 is accentuated in the aortic area; opening snap, presystolic murmur can be auscultated. What is the most efficient examination for valvular disorder assessment?
a. Chest X-ray
b. Ballistocardiogram
*c. Echocardiography+Doppler-Echocardiography
d. Phonocardiography
e. ECG

179. A 52 year old patient complains about headache, weakness of his upper left extremity. Neurological symptoms become more intense during physical stress of the left extremity. Pulsation on the arteries of the left extremity is sharply dampened but it remains unchanged on the carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Occlusion of brachiocephalic trunk
*b. Occlusion of the left subclavicular artery, steal syndrome
c. Takayasus disease
d. Raynauds syndrome
e. Thoracal outlet syndrome

180. A 62 year old patient complains of rest dyspnea, heart pains. 3 years ago he had myocardial infarction. Physical examination: orthopnea, acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins. Ps - 92, total heart enlargement, the liver is enlarged by 7 cm, shin edema. What is the stage of chronic heart failure (CHF)?
*a. CHF- 2 B
b. CHF- 0
c. CHF- 1
d. CHF- 3
e. CHF- 2 А

181. A 27 year old man complains of pains in epigastrium which are relieved by food intake. EGDFS shows antral erosive gastritis, biopsy of antral mucous presents Hеlicobacter Pylori. Diagnosis is:
a. Rigid antral gastritis
b. Menetriers gastritis
c. Reflux-gastritis
*d. Gastritis of type B
e. Gastritis of type A

182. The results of 5 year monitoring allowed to estimate the level of environmental influence upon health indices of popultaion. What statistic method should be chosen?
a. Calculation of coefficient of difference validity
b. Calculation of regression coefficient
c. Calculation of conformity coefficient
*d. Calculation of correlation coefficient
e. Calculation of dynamic indices

183. Maximum permissible concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is considered to be a sanitary index of air purity in a classroom. What concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is accepted as maximum permissible?
a. 0,2%
b. 0,05%
*c. 0,1%
d. 0,3%
e. 0,15%

184. A 2 month old healthy infant with good appetite is given artificial feeding since he turned 1 month old. When is it recommended to start the corrective feeding (fruit juice)?
a. 2,0 months
b. 3,0 months
c. 1,0 months
*d. 4,0 months
e. 1,5 months

185. A 50 year old woman complains about dull cardiac pain, asphyxia, body temperature rise up to 38°C. She had influenza a week ago. Objectively: Ps - 100 bpm, dropped-beat pulse during inspiration. AP - 100/70 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. ECG: reduced voltage, ST segment is above the isoline in all leads. X-ray picture shows extensively enlarged cardiac silhouette. Palmus is of small amplitude. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Exudative pericarditis
b. Myocardium infarction
c. Dilatation cardiomyopathy
d. Stenocardia
e. Myocarditis

186. A child with tetralogy of Fallot is most likely to exhibit:
a. Increased pulmonary blood flow
b. Normal oxygen tension (PaO2) in the left ventricle
*c. Increased pressure in the right ventricle
d. Normal pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve
e. Increased pulse pressure

187. A 34 year old woman fell ill 3 months ago after cold exposure. She complained of pain in her hand and knee joints, morning stiffness and fever up to 38oC. Interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal and knee joints are swollen, hot, with reduced ranges of motions; ESR of 45 mm/h, CRP (+++), Vaaler-Rouse test of 1:128. What group of medicines would you recommend the patient?
*a. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
b. Sulfonamides
c. Fluorchinolones
d. Tetracyclines
e. Cephalosporines

188. A 38 year old man was admitted to a hospital from his working place on July 19 because of hip fracture. He was invalid till November 19. Requires prolongation of treatment. Who decides on the issue of further temporary invalidity?
a. Regional MSEC
b. Interregional general MSEC
*c. Specialized (traumatologic) MSEC
d. The head physician of a polyclinic
e. DCC

189. A 30 year old woman ill with influenza felt palpitation and dull cardiac pain during moderate physical exercise. Objectively: Ps - 96 bpm, AP - 100/60 mm Hg. The first sound is quiet above the apex, soft systolic murmur is present. What complication is indicated by these clinical presentations?
a. Idiopathic myocarditis
b. Neurocirculatory dystonia
c. Myocardiopathy
*d. Acute viral myocarditis
e. Acute allergic infectious myocarditis

190. A 68 year old patient has been suffering from chronic pancreatitis for 35 years. During the last 5 years he has been observing abatement of pain syndrome, abdominal swelling, frequent defecations up to 3-4 times a day (feces are greyish, glossy, with admixtures of undigested food), progressing weight loss. Change of symptom set is caused by joining of:
a. Endocrine pancreatic insufficiency
b. Irritable bowels syndrome
*c. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
d. Chronic enterocolitis
e. Syndrome of lactase deficiency

191. It is suspected that a 34 year old patient has an abscess of Douglas pouches. What diagnostic method is to be chosen?
a. Rectoromanoscopy
b. Percussion and auscultation of stomach
c. R-scopy of abdominal cavity
*d. Digital examination of rectum
e. Laparoscopy

192. A 30 year old man complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39oC. There was an acute onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic and ill-defined, without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Gout
b. Infectious arthritis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Erysipelatous inflammation
e. Osteoarthritis

193. 15 minutes after the second vaccination with diphteria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine a 4 month old boy manifested symptoms of Quinckes edema. What medication should be applied for emergency aid?
a. Seduxen
b. Adrenalin
c. Furosemide
*d. Prednisolone
e. Heparin

194. A patient complains about pyrosis and permanent pain behind his breastbone. When he bends forward after eating there appears regurgitation. Roentgenological examination revealed extrasaccular cardiofunctional hernia of esophageal opening of diaphragm. Esophagoscopy revealed signs of reflux-esophagitis. What is the necessary tretment tactics?
a. Conservative treatment in a surgical department
b. Conservative treatment in an outpatients clinic
c. Conservative treatment in the therapeutic hospital
*d. Operation in a surgical department
e. Treatment at a health resort

195. A 28 year old patient complained about prolongation of intermenstrual periods up to 2 months, hirsutism. Gynaecological examination revealed that the ovaries were enlarged, painless, compact, uterus had no pecularities. Pelvic ultrasound revealed that the ovaries were 4-5 cm in diameter and had multiple enlarged follicles on periphery. Roentgenography of skull base showed that sellar region was dilated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
b. Sheehans syndrome
c. Premenstrual syndrome
d. Morgagni-Stewart syndrome
e. Algodismenorrhea

196. A 4 month old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, there was also one-time vomiting. Objectively: the childs condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctors finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
*b. Ileocecal invagination
c. Helminthic invasion
d. Wilms tumour
e. Pylorostenosis

197. A 14 year old child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for attack reduction?
*a. Obsidan
b. Amysyl
c. No-shpa
d. Aminophylline
e. Corglicone

198. A 56 year old woman has an acute onset of fever up to 39oC with chills, cough, and pain on respiration in the right side of her chest. On physical examination: HR - 90/min, BP- 95/60 mm Hg, RR- 26/min. There is dullness over the right lung on percussion. On X-ray: infiltrate in the right middle lobe of the lung. What is the diagnosis?
a. Acute lung abscess
b. Nosocomial lobar pneumonia
c. Acute pleuritis
d. Community-acquired bronchopneumonia
*e. Community-acquired lobar pneumonia of moderate severity

199. A 41 year old patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with haemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
a. Hemostatic therapy
b. Operation
c. Administration of plasma
d. Intravenous administration of pituitrin
*e. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube

200. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Perforated Meckels diverticulum
b. Ulcerative colitis
c. Ileocecal tuberculosis
*d. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum
e. Acute ileitis

