1. A heat station working on solid fuel is located in a residential district. On cloudy foggy days in december there was an increase in diseases with upper airway affection and signs of general intoxication. There were also mortal cases among the elderly people. What is the most likely factor that provoked toxic effect?
a. Calm
*b. Suspended materials
c. Low air temperature
d. Temperature gradient
e. High air humidity

2. Over a current year among workers of an institution 10% havent been ill a single time, 30% have been ill once, 15% - twice, 5% - 4 times, the rest - 5 and more times. What is the percentage of workers relating to the I health group?
a. 60%
*b. 55%
c. 22%
d. 10%
e. 40%

3. A 25-year-old woman came to a maternity welfare clinic and complained about being unable to conceive within 3 years of regular sexual life. Examination revealed weight gain, male pattern of hair distribution on the pubis, excessive pilosis of thighs. Ovaries were dense and enlarged, basal temperature was monophase. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tubo-ovaritis
*b. Sclerocystosis of ovaries
c. Adrenogenital syndrome
d. Gonadal dysgenesis
e. Premenstrual syndrome

4. A patient was delivered to the admission ward 40 minutes after a minor trauma with complaints of pain in the thoracic spine. He has a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. Roentgenography results: suspected compression fracture of the VIII and IX thoracic vertebrae. What pathological process in spine might have stimulated pathological fracture of vertebral bodies?
*a. Tuberculous spondylitis
b. Traumatic fracture
c. Osteomyelitis
d. Malignant tumour metastasis
e. Syphilis

5. 2 days ago a patient presented with acute pain in the left half of chest, gneral weakness, fever and headache. Objectively: between the 4 and 5 rib on the left the skin is erythematous, there are multiple groups of vesicles 2-4 mm in diameter filled with transparent liquid. What diease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatosis
b. Streptococcal impetigo
c. Pemphigus
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Herpes simplex

6. 350 workers of a mettalurgical plant had to undergo a yearly preventive examination. A territorial polyclinic carried out preventive examination of 325 workers. As a result of it, 1 worker was recognized as temporarily disabled, 15 workers underwent further rehabilitation at an after-work sanatorium, 10 workers were provided with diet meal. What index characterizing the preventive work of the polyclinic should be applied in this case?
*a. Coverage of preventive medical examinations
b. Frequency of case detection during examinations
c. Percentage of people who were provided with diet meal
d. Percentage of temporarily disabled people
e. Percentage of people who underwent rehabilitation at an after-work sanatorium

7. A 3-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
*a. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
b. Suture sinus
c. Wound abscess
d. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
e. Posttraumatic phlegmon

8. A patient suffering from gastroesophageal reflux has taken from time to time a certain drug that "reduces acidity" over 5 years. This drug was recommended by a pharmaceutist. The following side effects are observed: osteoporosis, muscle asthenia, indisposition. What drug has such following effects?
a. Inhibitor of proton pump
*b. Aluminium-bearing antacid
c. Metoclopramide
d. Gastrozepin
e. H2-blocker

9. A childrens health camp received a party of tinned food. External examination of the tins revealed that they had deep dents; formed a concavity when pressed and didnt immediately return to the initial state; rust was absent; the tins were greased with inedible fat. Specify the bloat type:
*a. Physical
b. Chemical
c. Combined
d. Physicochemical
e. Biological

10. A 52-year-old patient works as a secretary and has 30 year record of service. She complains of spasms in her right hand during working and inability to type and write. Up to 80% of her work involves hand load. The patient has been presenting with these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: the right hand is tense, there is an increase in muscle tone, attempts to write cause spasms. Examination revealed no pathological changes of CNS. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuralgic form of coordination neurosis
*b. Spastic form of coordination neurosis
c. Hysteric neurosis
d. Paretic form of coordination neurosis
e. Chronic manganese intoxication

11. 1 day ago a 19-year old male patient got a trauma after a fall from 1,5 m height when he "bestrode" a wooden beam. Urination is extremely difficult, there is macrohematuria, urethrorrhagia. There is a hematoma in the perineum and on the scrotum. Urethrography revealed flowing of contrast medium into the membranous part of urethra. What is the treatment tactics of choice?
*a. Epicystostomy
b. Urine bladder catheterization for urine diversion
c. Primary suturing of urethra
d. Urethra bougienage
e. Cold to the perineum, hemostatic therapy

12. A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to a hospital for acute transmural infarction. An hour ago the patients contition got worse. She developed progressing dyspnea, dry cough. Respiratory rate - 30/min, heart rate - 130/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, diastolic shock on the pulmonary artery. There are medium moist rales in the lower parts of lungs on the right and on the left. Body temperature - 36,4°C. What drug should be given in the first place?
a. Aminophylline
b. Dopamine
c. Digoxin
*d. Promedole
e. Heparin

13. A 16-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital for the reason of intractable nasal haemorrhage and intolerable pain in the right cubital articulation. Objectively: the affected articulation is enlarged and exhibits defiguration and skin hyperaemia. There are manifestations of arthropathy in the other articulations. Ps- 90 bpm; colour index -1,0, WBC - 5,6×1012/l, thrombocytes- 220×1012/l, ESR - 6 mm/h. Lee-White coagulation time: start - 24, finish - 2710. What drug will be the most effective for this patient treatment?
a. Calcium chloride
b. Erythromass
c. Vicasol
*d. Cryoprecipitate
e. Aminocapronic acid

14. On the next day after being taken by influenza a 46-year-old woman presented with intensified headache, dizziness, nausea. Objectively: the patient is conscious, psychomotor excitement is present; there is general hyperesthesia, moderate meningeal syndrome, nystagmus. Tendon teflexes are higher on the right, right extremities display muscle weakness, right-sided pathological Babinskis sign is present. Liquor is transparent, pressure is 220 mm of water column; cytosis is 46/3 with prevailing lymphocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Influenzal meningoencephalitis
b. Subarachnoidal haemorrhage
c. Bacterial meningoencephalitis
d. Ischemic stroke
e. Parenchymatous subarachnoidal haemorrhage

15. A 28-year-old parturient complains about headache, vision impairment, psychic inhibition. Objectively: AP- 200/110 mm Hg, evident edemata of legs and anterior abdominal wall. Fetus head is in the area of small pelvis. Fetal heartbeats is clear, rhythmic, 190/min. Internal examination revealed complete cervical dilatation, fetus head was in the area of small pelvis. What tactics of labor management should be chosen?
*a. Forceps operation
b. Cesarean
c. Stimulation of labor activity
d. Conservative labor management with episiotomy
e. Embryotomy

16. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38°C, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Putrid phlegmon
*b. Sepsis
c. Allergic reaction
d. Erysipelas
e. Erysipeloid

17. A 3-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital because of ostealgia and body temperature rise up to 39°C. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, unable to stand for ostealgia, there is apparent intoxication, lymph nodesare enlarged up to 1,5 cm. Liver can be palpated 3 cm below the costal margin, spleen - 2 cm below the costal margin. In blood: RBCs - 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, colour index - 0,9, thrombocytes – 190×1012/l, WBCs - 3,2×1012/l, eosinophils - 1, stab neutrophils - 1, segmented neutrophils - 0, lymphocytes - 87, monocytes - 2, ESR - 36 mm/h. What examination should be conducted in order to specify the diagnosis?
a. Lymph node puncture
b. Ultrasound
*c. Sternal puncture
d. Computer tomography
e. Lymph node biopsy

18. On the 5th day after labor body temperature of a 24-year-old parturient suddenly rose up to 38,7°C. She complains about weakness, headache, abdominal pain, irritability. Objectively: AP- 120/70 mm Hg, Ps- 92 bpm, t°38,7°C. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged up to 12 weeks of pregnancy, it was dense, slightly painful on palpation. Cervical canal lets in 2 transverse fingers, discharges are moderate, turbid, with foul smell. In blood: skeocytosis, lymphopenia, ESR - 30 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lochiometra
b. Pelviperitonitis
c. Parametritis
d. Metrophlebitis
*e. Endometritis

19. A 40-year-old patient complains of colic pains in the lower abdomen and profuse bloody discharges from the genital tracts. Over the last 2 years she has been having menses for 15-16 days, profuse, with clots, painful. In anamnesis there are 2 medical abortions. On bimanual investigation: in the canal of the uterine cervix some fibromatous nodes are palpable, they are 3 cm in diameter, on the thin crus. Discharges are bloody, moderate. Choose the correct treatment tactics:
a. Hormonal hemostasis
b. Hysterectomy without appendages
c. Step-by-step vitamin therapy
*d. Operation: untwisting of the nodes
e. Supravaginal ablation of the uterus without appendages

20. A 30-year-old woman with a long history of chronic pyelonephritis complains about considerable weakness, sleepiness, decrease in diuresis down to 100 ml per day. AP- 200/120 mm Hg. In blood: creatinine - 0,62 millimole/l, hypoproteinemia, albumines - 32 g/l, potassium - 6,8 millimole/l, hypochromic anemia, increased ESR. What is the first step in the patient treatment tactics?
a. Haemosorption
b. Enterosorption
*c. Haemodialysis
d. Antibacterial therapy
e. Blood transfusion

21. Statistic of patients of common medical practice displays constant increase in elderly and old people number. What kind of pathology is expected to prevail in the morbidity structure of population in question?
a. Acute pathology
*b. Chronic pathology
c. Occupational pathology
d. Infectious pathology
e. Non-epidemic pathology

22. A 9-year-old boy has been suffering from bronchoectasis since he was 3. Exacerbations occur quite often, 3-4 times a year. Conservative therapy results in short periods of remission. The disease is progressing, the child has physical retardation. The childs skin is pale, acrocyanotic, he has "watch glass" nail deformation. Bronchography revealed saccular bronchiectases of the lower lobe of his right lung. What is the further treatment tactics?
*a. Surgical treatment
b. Tempering of the childs organism
c. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
d. Further conservative therapy
e. Physiotherapeutic treatment

23. A 32-year-old patient consulted a doctor about being inable to get pregnant for 5-6 years. 5 ago the primipregnancy ended in artificial abortion. After the vaginal examination and USI the patient was diagnosed with endometrioid cyst of the right ovary. What is the optimal treatment method?
a. Hormonal therapy with androgenic hormones
b. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Conservative therapy with estrogen-gestagenic drugs
*e. Surgical laparoscopy

24. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
*a. Bronchography
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Pleural puncture
d. Survey radiograph of lungs
e. Bacteriological analysis of sputum

25. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, t°35,0°C. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Frostbite of trunk and extremities
b. -
*c. Hypothermia
d. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
e. Apparent death

26. A 28-year-old patient was delivered to the admission ward in the unconscious state with generalized epileptic attacks taking place every 15-20 minutes. During transportation the patient was given two injections of diazepam, magnesia sulphate, but they failed to bring the patient to consciousness. What department should render emergency aid?
*a. Resuscitation department
b. Surgcal department
c. Therapeutic department
d. Psychiatric department
e. Neurological department

27. A baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation. Delivery was normal, by natural way. The baby has a large cephalohematoma. The results of blood count are: Hb- 120g/l, Er- 3,5×1012/l, total serum bilirubin - 123 mmol/l, direct bilirubin - 11 mmol/l, indirect - 112 mmol/l. What are causes of hyperbilirubinemia in this case?
a. Mechanical obstruction of the bile outflow
b. Bile condensing
c. Disturbance of the conjugative function of liver
d. Intravascular hemolysis
*e. Erythrocyte hemolysis

28. A 36-year-old alcoholic patient has cirrhosis and pancreatic insufficiency due to recurrent pancreatitis. He complains of night blindness, decreased ability to taste food, and dry skin with hyperpigmentation. These complaints suggest deficiency of:
a. Copper
b. Manganese
c. Selenium
*d. Zinc
e. Chromium

29. On the second day after preventive vaccination a 2-year-old boy presented with abdominal pain without clear localization, body temperature rose up to 38°C. On the third day the child got red papular haemorrhagic eruption on the extensor surfaces of limbs and around the joints. Knee joints were edematic and slightly painful. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Urticaria
b. Thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Meningococcemia
*d. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
e. DIC syndrome

30. A 49-year-old patient undergoes regular medical check-up for uterine fibromyoma. Within the last year the uterus has enlarged up to 20 weeks of gestation. What is the rational way of treatment?
a. Embolization of uterine arteries
*b. Surgical treatment
c. Further surveillance
d. Hormonal therapy
e. Treatment with prostaglandin inhibitors

31. A worker who undergoes regular medical check-up for duodenal ulcer received a subsidized 24-day sanatorium voucher from his plant. The term of annual leave of a worker is 24 calender days, it will take 4 days more to get to the sanatorium and back home. What is the procedure of obtaining a 4-day sick-leave?
a. Medical Expert Commission issues a 28-day sick list
b. The doctor in charge issues a 4-day sick list
*c. Medical Expert Commission issues a 4-day sick list
d. Medical Expert Commission issues a 4-day health certificate
e. The doctor in charge issues a health certificate and sanatorium patients file for 28 days

32. Surgical department admitted a 37-year-old patient with a big crushed wound of his left thigh 4 hours after he got this trauma. What is the main provision for successful prevention of gaseous gangrene?
a. Infiltration of soft tissues around the wound with antibiotic solution
b. Injection of specific serum 3 000 U
c. Wound lavage with 6% solution of hydrogen peroxide
d. Injection of specific serum 30 000 U
*e. Removal of necrotic tissues and timely surgical processing of the wound

33. A 60-year-old patient complains about asphyxia, palpitation, rapid fatiguability. He has 8 year history of essential hypertension. Objectively: the left cardiac border is 2 cm deviated to the left from the medioclavicular line, heart sounds are rhythmic and weak; there is diastolic shock above aorta. AP- 170/100 mm Hg. Liver - +2 cm; shin pastosity is present. ECG shows deviation of cardiac axis to the left, left ventricle hypertrophy. Ejection fraction - 63%. What type of cardiac insufficiency is observed?
a. Systolic
b. Unspecified
c. Its a norm
d. Combined
*e. Diastolic

34. A 65-year-old patient complains about pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). Prostate- specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
b. Bone scintigraphy
c. Excretory urography
*d. Computer tomography of pelvis
e. Roentgenography of chest

35. A 47-year-old obese man complained of periodic attacks of acute arthritis in the st left tarsophalangeal joint. Lab exam revealed increased serum rate of uric acid. What is the diagnosis?
a. Osteoarthritis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Rheumatic arthritis
*d. Gout arthritis
e. Reiters disease

36. A 25-year-old man was admitted to a hospital with a 2 month history of cough and fever. A chest x-ray showed extensive left upper lobe disease with a 2 cm cavity. All three points were strongly positive on direct smear and grew M. Tuberculosis, fully sensitive to all first-line drugs. Patient must be treated with:
a. Kanamycin + ethambutol + pyrazinamide
b. Streptomycin + isoniazid
c. P-aminosalicylic acid + streptomycin
*d. Isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide
e. Isoniazid + ethambutol

37. On the 4th day after suturing the perforative stomach ulcer a patient with pulmonary emphysema developed spontaneous pneumothorax. What is the best place for pleural drainage?
*a. The second intercostal space along the medioclavicular line
b. The fifth intercostal space along the medioclavicular line
c. The sixth intercostal space along the anterior axillary furrow
d. The eighth intercostal space along the posterior axillary furrow
e. The seventh intercostal space along the anterior axillary furrow

38. A 14-year-old boy has rheumatism. Over the last 2 years he has had 3 rheumatic attacks. What course of rheumatism does the patient have?
a. Latent
*b. Prolonged
c. Subacute
d. Acute
e. Persistent-reccurent

39. Head of a department and a trade-union group have appealed to the head of a hospital about dismissal of the senior nurse who has 17 year record of service. The facts of charge were confirmed and recognized by the nurse hersel This nurse lives with a daughter (who is divorced and unemployed) and a 9-month-old grandson. Make an administrative decision:
*a. To continue the worker in office with a warning of dismissal in case of repeated violation of labor discipline
b. To shift the solution of this problem on other officials or public organizations
c. To discharge the worker, i.e. to satisfy demands of the collective
d. To issue the sick list
e. -

40. HIV displays the highest tropism towards the following blood cells:
a. T-killers
b. Thrombocytes
c. T-suppressors
d. Erythrocytes
*e. T-helpers

41. A 22-year-old girl has been complaining of having itching rash on her face for 2 days. She associates this disease with application of cosmetic face cream. Objectively: apparent reddening and edema of skin in the region of cheeks, chin and forehead; fine papulovesicular rash. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Neurodermatitis
c. Eczema
d. Dermatitis simplex
*e. Allergic dermatitis

42. A 62-year-old patient has DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. Pаtient has to undergo an operation for inguinal hernia. What tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be chosen?
*a. Prescribe the short-acting insulin
b. To continue with the current therapy
c. Prescribe guanylguanidine
d. Give Glurenorm in place of Maninilum
e. Prescribe thelong-acting insulin

43. A 67-year-old female patient suffering from the essential hypertension suddenly at night developed headache, dyspnea that quickly progressed to asphyxia. Objectively: the patient is pale, with sweaty forehead, AP- 210/140 mm Hg, heart rate - 120/min, auscultation revealed solitary dry rales and moist rales in the lower parts. The shins are pastose. What kind of emergency aid would be the most efficient in this case?
a. Digoxin and nitroglycerin intravenously
b. Enalapril and furosemide intravenously
c. Nitroglycerin intravenously and capoten internally
*d. Nitroglycerin and furosemide intravenously
e. Labetalol and furosemide intravenously

44. A 46-year-old patient once took part in elimination of breakdown at an atomic power plant. Currently he is being treated at an in-patient hospital. He was diagnosed with progressing vegetative insufficiency. This disease relates to the following group of ionizing radiation effects:
a. Somatic
b. Genetic
*c. Somato-stochastic
d. Heterosis
e. Hormesis

45. A 35-year-old man complains about intense lumbar pain irradiating to the inguinal area, external genitalia, thigh; frequent urination, chill, nausea, vomiting. Objectively: positive Pasternatskys symptom. Urine analysis revealed that RBCs and WBCs covered the total field of microscope; the urine exhibited high protein concentration. These clinical presentations were most likely caused by the following pathology:
a. Cholelithiasis, biliary colic
b. Intestinal obstruction
*c. Urolithiasis, renal colic
d. Renal infarct
e. Osteochondrosis, acute radicular syndrome

46. A 45-year-old driver was admitted to the hospital with 5 hour substernal pain. Nitroglycerin is not effective. He is pale, heart sounds are regular but weak. HR - 96 per minute, BP of 100/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Acute myocarditis
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Stable angina
e. Acute left ventricular failure

47. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. To use an inhalation of β2-adrenoceptor agonist
b. To make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone
*c. To perform the Heimlich manoever
d. To perform conicotomy immediately
e. To send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him

48. A patient, aged 52, works as a street cleaner. He has been suffering from pneumoconiosis for 2 years. What treatment should be recommended?
a. Sulfonilamides
b. Broncholitics
c. Antibiotics
d. Oil inhalations
*e. Alkaline inhalations

49. After supercooling a 38-year-old woman developed muscle pain, body temperature rise up to 39°C, headache, dysuria, positive Pasternatskys symptome. In the urine: leukocyturia, bacteriuria. In blood: Decrease in Hb rate down to 103 g/l, left shift leukocytosis, ESR acceleration up to 32 mm/h. Blood urea - 6,0 millimole/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Renal tuberclosis
b. Acute cystitis
c. Urolithiasis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
*e. Acute pyelonephritis

50. After examination a 46-year-old patient was diagnosed with left breast cancer T2N2M0, cl. gr. II-a. What will be the treatment plan for this patient?
a. Operation + radiation therapy
b. Radiation therapy only
c. Chemotherapy only
d. Operation only
*e. Radiation therapy + operation + chemotherapy

51. A 30-year-old patient consulted a doctor about menstruation absence for 2 years after labour, loss of hair, body weight loss. The labour was complicated by a haemorrhage caused by uterus hypotonia. Objectively: the patient is asthenic, external genitals are hypoplastic, the uterus body is small and painless. The appendages are not palpaple. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exhausted overy syndrome
b. Galactorrhea-amenorrhea syndrome
c. Ovarian amenorrhea
*d. Sheehans syndrome
e. Turners syndrome

52. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6°C. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5х2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Liver abscess
b. Paravesical liver abscesses
c. Liver cancer
*d. Alveolar echinococcus of liver
e. Cystous liver cancer

53. A 50-year-old locksmith was diagnosed with typhoid fever. The patient lives in a separate apartment with all facilities. Apart of him there are also 2 adults in his family. What actions should be taken about persons communicating with the patient?
a. Isolation
*b. Bacteriological study
c. Vaccination
d. Antibiotic prophylaxis
e. Dispensary surveillance

54. A 16-year-old female patient underwent an operation on account of diffuse toxic goiter of the III-IV degree 12 years ago. Now she has recurrence of thyrotoxicosis. The patient was offered operative intervention, but it is necessary first to localize the functioning gland tissue. What method should be applied for this purpose?
a. USI
*b. Gland scanning
c. Puncture aspiration biopsy
d. Roentgenography of neck
e. Roentgenography of esophagus

55. A child is 4 years old, has been ill for 5 days. There are complaints of cough, skin rash, t°38,2°C, face puffiness, photophobia, conjunctivitis. Objectively: there is bright, maculo-papulous, in some areas confluent rash on the face, neck, upper chest. The pharynx is hyperemic. There are seropurulent discharges from the nose. Auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enterovirus exanthema
b. Scarlet fever
*c. Measles
d. Rubella
e. Adenoviral infection

56. An 18-month-old child was taken to a hospital on the 4-th day of the disease. The disease began acutely with temperature 39, weakness, cough, breathlessness. He is pale, cyanotic, has had febrile temperature for over 3 days. There are crepitative fine bubbling rales on auscultation. Percussion sound is shortened in the right infrascapular region. X-ray picture shows non-homogeneous segment infiltration 8-10 mm on the right, the intensification of lung pattern. Your diagnosis:
a. Grippe
*b. Segmentary pneumonia
c. Bronchiolitis
d. Bronchitis
e. Interstitial pneumonia

57. Forensic medical expertise of corpse of a newborn revealed: body weight 3500 g, body length 50 cm, the umbilical cord was smooth, moist, glossy, without any signs of drying. Hydrostatic tests were positive. The test results are the evidence of:
a. Secondary atelectasis
b. Primary atelectasis
c. Stillbirth
d. Hyaline membrane disease
*e. Live birth

58. A 36-year-old female patient complains of general weakness, edemata of her face and hands, rapid fatiguability during walking, difficult diglutition, cardiac irregularities. These symptoms turned up 11 days after a holiday at the seaside. Objectively: face erythema, edema of shin muscles. Heart sounds are muffled, AP is 100/70 mm Hg. In blood: ASAT activity is 0,95 millimole/h×l, ALAT - 1,3 millimole/h×l, aldolase - 9,2 IU/l, creatine phosphokinase - 2,5 millimole Р/g×l. What method of study would be the most specific?
a. Echocardiogram
*b. Muscle biopsy
c. Electromyography
d. Determination of cortisol concentration in blood and urine
e. ECG

59. A 24-year-old law student is brought to the emergency room complaining of severe abdominal pain of 6-8 hours duration. He had been to a party the night before. The pain is in the epigastrium radiating to the back and is accompanied by nausea. The patient had vomited twice prior to coming to the emergency room. Clinical examination revealed that the young man was anxious, with acute condition, with a regular pulse rate of 100/min, blood pressure of 100/68 mm Hg, and body temperature of 38,1°C. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Mesenteric adenitis
b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Acute appendicitis
*d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Acute diverticulitis

60. A patient is active, lively, fussy. He opposes the examination. His speech is fast and loud, his statements are spontaneous and inconsequent. Specify the psychopathological state of this patient:
a. Paranoid syndrome
b. Delirium
c. Behavioral disorder
d. Catatonic agitation
*e. Psychomotor agitation

61. A 26-year-old patient complains about considerable muscle weakness, dizziness, extended abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting giving no relie The disease has been gradually developing within 6 months. There was progress of general weakness, skin darkening. The patient fell into grave condition after an ARD: there appeared abdominal pain and frequent vomiting. Objectively: the skin is dry with diffuse pigmentation. Heart sounds are significantly weakened, heart rate - 60/min, AP- 80/40 mm Hg. The abdomen is slightly painful in the epigastrial region. In blood: WBCs - 8,1×1012/l, glucose - 3,0 millimole/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic adrenal insufficiency. Addisonian crisis
b. Toxic infectious shock
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Acute food poisoning

62. 13 months after the first labor a 24-year-old patient complained of amenorrhea. Pregnancy ended in Caesarian section because of premature detachment of normally positioned placenta which resulted in blood loss at the rate of 2000 ml owing to disturbance of blood clotting. Choose the most suitable investigation:
*a. Estimation of gonadotropin rate
b. Estimation of testosteron rate in blood serum
c. USI of small pelvis organs
d. Computer tomography of head
e. Progesteron assay

63. A 32-year-old gravida complains about episodes of unconsciousness, spontaneous syncopes that are quickly over after a change of body position. A syncope can be accompanied byquickly elapsing bradycardia. There are no other complications of gestation. What is the most likely reason for such condition?
a. Vegetative-vascular dystonia (cardial type)
*b. Postcava compresseion by the gravid uterus
c. Psychosomatic disorders
d. Pressure rise in the veins of extremities
e. Pressure fall in the veins of extremities

64. A 5-grade pupil complains about extensive skin rash accompanied by intensive itch, especially at night. Objectively: there are small red papules set mostly in pairs in the region of interdigital folds on both hands, on the flexor surface of radicarpal articulations, abdomen and buttock skin as well as internal surface of thighs. In the centre of some papules vesicles or serohaemorrhagic crusts can be seen. There are multiple excoriations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatitis
b. Ringworm of body
*c. Scabies
d. Eczema
e. Toxicoderma

65. A 4-month-old girl with blond hair and blue eyes has "mousy" odor of sweat and urine, delayed psychomotoric development. The most typical laboratory data for this disorder is:
a. High concentration of chlorides in sweat
b. High level of oxyproline in urine
*c. Positive urine ferric chloride test
d. High level of glycosaminoglycanes in urine
e. Low level of thyroid gland hormones in blood

66. A 35-year-old patient complains about pain and morning stiffness of hand joints and temporomandibular joints that lasts over 30 minutes. She has had these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: edema of proximal interphalangeal digital joints and limited motions of joints. What examination should be administered?
a. Immunogram
b. Proteinogram
c. Rose-Waaler reaction
d. Complete blood count
*e. Roentgenography of hands

67. A 43-year-old female patiet complains of eruption on her right leg skin, pain, weakness, body temperature rise up to 38°C. The disease is acute. Objectively: there is an edema on the right leg skin in the region of foot, a well-defined bright red spot in form of flame tips which feels hot. There are isolated vesicles in focus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Microbial eczema
b. Toxicoderma
c. Contact dermatitis
d. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
*e. Erysipelas

68. A 27-year-old patient with a history of ronchial asthma was stung by a bee. He had a sensation of chest compression, breath shortage, difficult expiration, sense of heat in the upper half of body, dizziness, apparent itch, convulsions. Objectively: noisy wheezing breath, AP - 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 110 bpm. Auscultation revealed weak rhythmic heart sounds, rough respiration above lungs, sibilant rales. What drug group should be administered in the first place?
*a. Glucocorticoids
b. Analgetics
c. Anticonvulsive
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Methylxanthines

69. A 30-year-old patient complains of breathlessness, pain in the right rib arc region, dry cough and the edema of legs. He is ill for 2 months. He had been treated for rheumatic fever without any effect. On exam: cyanosis, edema of legs, BT of 36,6°C, RR of 28/min, HR of 90/min, BP of 110/80 mm Hg, crackles above low parts of both lungs, heart borders are displaced to the left and to the right, weak sounds, systolic murmur above the apex. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Acute myocarditis
b. Rheumatic fever, mitral stenosis
*c. Dilated cardiomyopathy
d. Infectious endocarditis
e. Acute pericarditis

70. A 36-year-old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
a. Mediastinitis
*b. Valvular pneumothorax
c. Open pneumothorax
d. Subcutaneous emphysema
e. Closed pneumothorax

71. A 40-year-old woman who has worked in weaving branch for 10 years complains of frequent headache, sleeplessness, irritability, fatigue, tiredness. Physical examination revealed instability of blood pressure, internal organs are without changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Encephalopathy
*b. Noise-induced disease
c. Hypertension
d. Asthenovegetative syndrome
e. Atopic bronchial asthma

72. The correlation between the service record and eosinophil concentration in blood was studied in workers at dyeing shops of textile factories. What index will be the most informative for the analysis of this data?
a. Fitting criterion
b. Standardized index
c. Sign index
*d. Correlation factor
e. Students criterion

73. A 33-year-old patient has acute blood loss: erythrocytes - 2,2*10^12/l, Hb- 55 g/l, blood group is A(II)Rh+. Accidentally the patient got a transfusion of donor erythrocyte mass of AB(IV)Rh+ group. An hour later the patient became anxious, got abdominal and lumbar pain. Ps- 134 bpm, AP- 100/65 mm Hg, body temperature - 38,6°C. After catheterization of urinary bladder 12 ml/h of dark-brown urine were obtained. What complication is it?
a. Citrate intoxication
b. Allergic reaction to the donor erythrocyte mass
*c. Acute renal insufficiency
d. Cardial shock
e. Toxic infectious shock

74. A pediatrician had a conversation with a mother of a 7-month-old breast-fed boy and found out that the child was fed 7 times a day. How many times should the child of such age be fed?
*a. 5 times
b. 4 times
c. 3 times
d. 6 times
e. 7 times

75. A 50-year-old patient complains about having pain attacks in the right subcostal area for about a year. He pain arises mainly after taking fattening food. Over the last week the attacks occurred daily and became more painful. On the 3rd day of hospitalization the patient presented with icteritiousness of skin and scleras, light- colored feces and dark urine. In blood: neutrophilic leukocytosis - 13,1×1012/l, ESR - 28 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive dyskinesia of gallbladder
b. Chronic recurrent pancreatitis
c. Chronic cholangitis, exacerbation stage
d. Fatty degeneration of liver
*e. Chronic calculous cholecystitis

76. A 45-year-old male patient was admitted to the intensive care unit because of myocardial infarction. An hour later the ventricular facilitation occurred. Which of the following should be administered?
a. Lidocaine injection
*b. Defibrillation
c. Cardiac pacing
d. External chest compression
e. Adrenalin injection

77. 2 weeks after recovering from angina an 8-year-old boy developed edemata of face and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Urine is of dark brown colour. Oliguria is present. On urine analysis: relative density - 1,015, protein - 1,2 g/l, RBCs are leached and cover the whole vision field, granular casts - 1-2 in the vision field, salts are represented by urates (big number). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome
b. Nephrolithiasis
*c. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephritic syndrome
d. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome, hematuria and hypertension
e. Acute glomerulonephritis with isolated urinary syndrome

78. A 35-year-old patient was admitted to the in-patient psychiatric facility for the first time. He was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. What is the most rational treatment method?
a. Vitamin therapy
*b. Neuroleptic therapy
c. Reflex therapy
d. Physiotherapy
e. Psychotherapy

79. A 30-year-old woman complains of nasal blockage, sneezing, watery nasal discharges. The body temperature is normal. Objectively - edema of nasal mucous membrane on both sides, especially of the lower turbinate (with cyanosis). Blood test data - mild leukocytosis and eosinophilia. What is the diagnosis?
a. Infective rhinitis
b. Acute sinusitis
*c. Allergic rhinitis
d. Foreign body in the nose
e. Atrophic rhinitis

80. An 18-year-old primigravida in her 27-28 week of gestation underwent an operation on account of acute phlegmonous appendicitis. In the postoperative period it is necessary to take measures for prevention of the following pegnancy complication:
a. Late gestosis
b. Fetus hypotrophy
c. Intestinal obstruction
d. Premature placenta detachment
*e. Noncarrying of pregnancy

81. A 46-year-old patient is to be prepared to the operation on account of stomach cancer. Preoperative preparation involves infusion therapy. It was injected up to 3,0 l of solutions into his right lunar vein. On the next day he got tensive pain in the region of his right shoulder. Examination of interior brachial surface revealed a stripe of hyperemia, skin edema and a painful cord. What complication is it?
a. Necrosis of paravenous cellular tissue
b. Vein puncture and edema of paravenous cellular tissue
c. Acute lymphangitis
*d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Phlegmon of paravenous cellular tissue

82. A 60-year-old woman, mother of 6 children, developed a sudden onset of upper abdominal pain radiating to the back, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, fever and chills. Subsequently, she noticed yellow discoloration of her sclera and skin. On physical examination the patient was found to be febrile with temp. of 38,9°C, along with right upper quadrant tenderness. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Malignant biliary stricture
*b. Choledocholithiasis
c. Choledochal cyst
d. Benign biliary stricture
e. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas

83. A full term infant was born after a normal pregnancy, delivery, however, was complicated by marginal placental detachment. At 12 hours of age the child, although appearing to be in good health, passes a bloody meconium stool. For determining the cause of the bleeding, which of the following diagnostic procedures should be performed first?
a. An upper gastrointestinal series
b. Platelet count, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time
c. Gastric lavage with normal saline
d. An Apt test
*e. Barium enema

84. In autumn a 25-year-old patient developed stomach ache that arose 1,5-2 hours after having meals and at night. He complains about pyrosis and constipation. The pain is getting worse after consuming spicy, salty and sour food, it can be relieved by means of soda and hot-water bag. The patient has been suffering from this disease for a year. Objectively: furred moist tongue. Abdomen palpation reveals epigastrial pain on the right, resistance of abdominal muscles in the same region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic cholecystitis
*b. Duodenal ulcer
c. Chronic pancreatitis
d. Diaphragmatic hernia
e. Stomach ulcer

85. A 30-year old woman taken by influenza has empty stomach glycemia at the rate of 11,3 millimole/l, glucosuria at the rate of 25 g/l. The patient is 168 cm tall and weighs 67 kg. What test would be the most informative for the diagnosis specification?
*a. Insulinemia on an empty stomach
b. Daily glycemia variability
c. Glycemia test an hour after taking meals
d. Daily glucosuria variability
e. Glucose tolerance test

86. A 22-year-old patient is a clerk. His working day runs in a conditioned room. In summer he was taken by an acute disease with the following symptoms: fever, dyspnea, dry cough, pleural pain, myalgia, arthralgia. Objectively: moist rales on the right, pleural friction ru B. X-ray picture showed infiltration of the inferior lobe. In blood: WBC – 11×1012/l, stab neutrophils - 6%, segmented neutrophils - 70%, lymphocytes - 8%, ESR - 42 mm/h. What is the ethiological factor pneumonia?
*a. Legionella
b. Streptococcus
c. Mycoplasm
d. Staphylococcus
e. Pneumococcus

87. Study of morbidity rate in a city N revealed that population of different administrative districts differed in age structure. What statistic method allows to eliminate influence of this factor upon morbidity indices?
*a. Standardization
b. Analysis of dynamic series
c. Wilcoxons t-criterion
d. Correlative regressive analysis
e. Calculation of average values

88. A 40-year-old female patient has a history of rheumatism. She complains about acute pain in her left eye, especially at night, vision impairment, photophobia, lacrimation. The patient cannot suggest any reasons for the disease. Objectively: weak pericorneal injection, flattening of iris relief, iris discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Choroiditis
*b. Iridocyclitis
c. Keratitis
d. Iritis
e. Acute attack of glaucoma

89. Workers of a laboratory producing measuring devices (manometers, thermometers etc) complain about a mettalic taste in mouth, stomatitis, dyspepsia, sleep disturbance, unsteady walk, abrupt decrease in cardiac activity. These presentations must have been caused by the intoxication with the following substance:
*a. Mercury
b. Toluol
c. Manganese
d. Tetraethyl lead
e. Lead

90. A 32-year-old patient complains of cardiac irregularities, dizziness, dyspnea at physical stress. He has never suffered from this before. Objectively: Ps- 74 bpm, rhythmic. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolic murmur above aorta, the first heart sound was normal. ECG showed hypertrophy of the left ventricle, signs of repolarization disturbance in the I, V5 and V6 leads. Echocardiogram revealed that interventricular septum was 2 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Coarctation of aorta
b. Aortic stenosis
*c. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
d. Essential hypertension
e. Myocardium infarction

91. A 50-year-old man was examined in the clinic for persistent cavitation and sputum. He was treated with rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambuthol. The most common toxic effect of ethambutol is:
*a. Optic neuritis
b. Mental symptoms
c. Hepatic enzyme elevation
d. Eighth cranial nerve damage
e. Peripheral neuropathy

92. A man, aged 25, presents with facial edema, moderate back pains, body temperature of 37,5°C, BP- 180/100 mm Hg, hematuria (up to 100 in v/f), proteinuria (2,0 g/l), hyaline casts - 10 in v/f, specific gravity - 1020. The onset of the disease is probably connected with acute tonsillitis 2 weeks ago. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Cancer of the kidney
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

93. Examination of placenta revealed a defect. An obstetrician performed manual investigation of uterine cavity, uterine massage. Prophylaxis of endometritis in the postpartum period should involve following actions:
a. Instrumental revision of uterine cavity
b. Haemostatic therapy
c. Intrauterine instillation of dioxine
*d. Antibacterial therapy
e. Contracting agents

94. A 54-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with evident acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins, enlarged liver, ascites. Cardiac borders are dilated. Heart sounds cannot be auscultated, apical beat is undetectable. AP is 100/50 mm Hg. X-ray picture of chest shows enlarged heart shadow in form of a trapezium. What pathology might have caused these symptoms?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Acute cardiac insufficiency
c. Hiatal hernia
d. Complex heart defect
*e. Cardiac tamponade

95. A 44-year-old man has been working in coke industry for 16 years. Dust concentration at his workplace is 5-10 times higher than maximum permissible concentration. Roentgenography of lungs revealed changes that are typical for pneumoconiosis. What is the most probable type of pneumoconiosis in this case?
a. Asbestosis
b. Silicatosis
c. Siderosis
d. Anthracosilicosis
*e. Anthracosis

96. A 45-year-old woman, mother of four children, comes to the emergency room complaining of a sudden onset of the epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, radiating to the back, accompanied by vomiting. On examination, tenderness is elicited in the right upper quadrant, bowel sounds are decreased, and laboratory data shows leukocytosis, normal serum levels of amylase, lipase, and bilirubin. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Sigmoid diverticulitis
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Perforated peptic ulcer disease
e. Acute pancreatitis

97. A 52-year-old male patient has an 18 year history of diabetes mellitus. One year ago he had cystitis. The patient takes 0,005 g of maninil thrice a day. Objectively: height - 176 cm, weight - 82 kg. Glycemia variability on an empy stomach is at the rate of 10,3- 12,4 millimole/l. Analyses revealed proteinuria at the rate of 0,033 g/l. The most efficient way to prevent diabetic nephropathy progress will be:
a. To administer antibacterial therapy
b. To decrease daily caloric content
*c. To replace maninil with insulin
d. To supplement the present therapy with insulin
e. To increase maninil dosage

98. A 33-year-old man with a history of rheumatic fever complains of fever up to 38- 39°C, abdominal pain, dyspnea, tachycardia. Heart borders are displaced to the left by 2 cm, systolic and diastolic murmurs above aorta, BP of 160/30 mm Hg. Petechial rash occurs after measurement of blood pressure. Liver is enlarged by 3 cm, spleen is palpable. Urine is brown-yellow. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute hepatitis
b. Aortic regurgitation
*c. Infectious endocarditis
d. Acute nephritis
e. Rheumatic fever

99. A boy is 8 year old. His physical development is compliant with his age. The child has had cardiac murmur since birth. Objectively: skin and visible mucous membranes are of normal colour. AP- 100/70 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolo- diastolic murmur and diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery. ECG shows overload of the left heart. Roentgenoscopy shows coarsening of the lung pattern, heart shadow of normal form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aorta coarctation
b. Patent ductus arteriosus
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
*d. Atrioseptal defect
e. Fallots tetrad

100. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patients condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min, Ps- 96 bpm, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are moist rales of different types above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exudative pleuritis
*b. Acute pulmonary abscess
c. Pyopneumothorax
d. Acute focal pneumonia
e. Pleural empyema

101. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
a. Impetigo
b. Impetigo neonatorum
c. Epidermolysis bullosa
*d. Vesiculopustulosis
e. Miliaria

102. A 34-year-old male patient was delivered to the neurological department with complaints of intense headache, double vision, light and noise intolerance. The attack came suddenly while load lifting. Objectively: torpor, moderate divergent strabismus, diplonia. Bilateral Kernigs symptoms. No paresises. Bloody liquor. What medication should be administered in the first line?
a. Acetylsalicilic acid
b. Glutamic acid
*c. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
d. Nicotinic acid
e. Heparin

103. A patient with high temperature came to a first-aid post in the evening. The fact of temporary disability was established. Indicate the order of examination in this case:
a. The sick list for up to 3 days should be issued
b. Any document shouldnt be issued
c. The sick list for 1 day should be issued
*d. The night duty doctor should issue a medical certificate, which will be subsequently used for issuing a sick list from the date of the previous day
e. The sick list for 3 days should be issued

104. A nurse of the kindergarten was taken to the hospital with complaints of accute pain in parumbilical region, convulsions of lower limbs, multiple bile vomiting, frequent watery foul feces of green colour in huge amounts. At the same time all the staff in the kindergarden got ill. Two days ago all of them ate cottage cheese with sour cream. General condition of patients is of moderate severity. Temperature 38,2°C. Heart tones: rhythmic and muted. Heart rate 95/min, arterial pressure: 160 mm/Hg. Abdomen is slightly swollen, painful. Liver +2 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Salmonellosis
b. Cholera
c. Enterovirus infection
d. Food toxic infection
e. Dysentery

105. A maternity house has admitted a primagravida complaining of irregular, intense labour pains that have been lasting for 36 hours. The woman is tired, failed to fall asleep at night. The fetus is in longitudinal lie, with cephalic presentation. The fetus heartbeat is clear and rhythmic, 145/min. Vaginal examination revealed that the uterine cervix was up to 3 cm long, dense, with retroflexion; the external orifice was closed; the discharges were of mucous nature. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Secondary uterine inertia
b. Primary uterine inertia
*c. Pathological preliminary period
d. Physiological preliminary period
e. Uterine cervix dystocia

106. A painter working at a motorcar plant was diagnosed with acute intoxication with amide compounds of benzene, moderate severity grade. The in-patient treatment resulted in considerable health improvement. What expert decision should be made in this case?
a. The patient should be referred to the Medical and Social Expert Commission for determination of percentage of work capicty loss
b. -
c. The patient may get back to work providing he will keep to hygiene and sanitary regulations
*d. The patient should be issued a sick list for out-patient treatment
e. The patient should be referred to the Medical and Social Expert Commission for assigning the disability group because of an occupational disease

107. The patient with aquired heart failure has diastolic pressure of 0 mm Hg. What heart failure does the child have?
a. Mitral insufficiency
*b. Aortal insufficiency
c. Rheumatism
d. Mitral stenosis
e. Aortal stenosis

108. A 58-year-old patient complains about sensation of numbness, sudden paleness of II-IV fingers, muscle rigidness, intermittent pulse. The patient presents also with polyarthralgia, dysphagia, constipations. The patients face is masklike, solid edema of hands is present. The heart is enlarged; auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. In blood: ESR - 20 mm/h, crude protein - 85/l, -globulines - 25%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatomyositis
b. Raynauds disease
*c. Systemic scleroderma
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

109. A 30-year-old patient with complaints of occipital headache, disturbed sleep with nightmares came to a policlinic. BP was 150/95 mm Hg. He was diagnosed with hypertensic crisis. The patient should be registered in the following dispensary group for arterial hypertension surveillance:
a. In the fifth
b. In the third
c. In the fourth
*d. In the second
e. In the first

110. A 1,5-year-old child was taken by an acute disease: body temperature up to 39°C, frequent vomiting up to 5 times. Nervous system tests revealed positive Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs. The given symptoms relate to:
a. Encephalic syndrome
b. Motor disorder syndrome
*c. Meningeal signs
d. Discoordination syndrome
e. Infectious toxicosis signs

111. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in its volume and composition. Muscle tone is within norm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meningitis
*b. Pylorospasm
c. Craniostenosis
d. Microcephaly
e. Pylorostenosis

112. Bacterial analysis of air in a living space in winter period by means of Krotovs apparatus revealed that total number of microorganisms in 1m3 of air was 7200. What is the allowed number of microorganisms for the air to be characterized as "pure"?
a. Up to 5500
b. Up to 7500
c. Up to 3500
*d. Up to 4500
e. Up to 2500

113. A 28-year-old patient underwent endometrectomy as a result of incomplete abortion. Blood loss was at the rate of 900 ml. It was necessary to start hemotransfusion. After transfusion of 60 ml of erythrocytic mass the patient presented with lumbar pain and fever which resulted in hemotransfusion stoppage. 20 minutes later the patients condition got worse: she developed adynamia, apparent skin pallor, acrocyanosis, profuse perspiration. t°38,5°C, Ps- 110/min, AP- 70/40 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic shock
b. Septic shock
c. DIC syndrome
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Hemotransfusion shock

114. A patient who has been consuming refined foodstuffs for a long time complains about headache, fatiguability, depression, insomnia, irritability. Objectively: muscle asthenia, pain and cramps in the gastrocnemius muscles, during walking the patient lands onto his heel first, then on the external edge of foot. Cardiovascular system exhibits tachycardia, hypoxia, dystrophic changes of myocardium. There are also gastrointestinal disorders. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypovitaminosis B12
b. Hypovitaminosis B2
c. Hypovitaminosis B15
*d. Hypovitaminosis B1
e. Hypovitaminosis B6

115. A 46-year-old patient was issued a 10-day sick list because of exacerbation of chronic cholecystitis. The patients general condition got better, but the clinical manifestations of the disease are still present. What authority is entitled to extend the sick list?
a. Head doctor
b. Family doctor
c. Deputy head doctor for medical-labour expertise
d. Deputy head doctor for terapeutic management
*e. Medical Expert Commission

116. A patient has got acute macrofocal myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. The latter is progressing under conditions of weak general peripheric resistance and decreased cardiac output. What antihypotensive drug should be injected to the patient in the first place?
a. Adrenaline
b. Mesatonum
c. Prednisolone
d. Noradrenaline
*e. Dopamine

117. A maternity hospital registered 616 live births, 1 stillbirth, 1 death on the 5th day of life over a 1 year period. What index allows the most precise estimation of this situation?
a. Neonatal mortality
*b. Perinatal mortality
c. Crude mortality rate
d. Natural increase
e. Natality

118. A 32-year-old male patient has been suffering from pain in the sacrum and coxofemoral joints, painfulness and stiffness in the lumbar spine for a year. ESR - 56 mm/h. Roentgenography revealed symptoms of bilateral sacroileitis. The patient is the carrier of HLA B27 antigen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Coxarthrosis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Reiters disease
*d. Ankylosing spondylitis
e. Spondylosis

119. A 34-year-old female patient complains about weakness, 12 kg weight loss within 6 months, sweating, palpitation, irritability. Objectively: III grade thyroid gland is elastic, diffuse enlargement is present, there is also a node in the right lobe. Cervical lymph nodes are not enlarged. What treatment tactics would be the most rational?
*a. Operation after antithyroid therapy
b. Immediate surgical intervention
c. Conservative antithyroid therapy
d. Radioactive iodine administration
e. Immediate gamma-ray teletherapy

120. Ten hours before initial observation patient had frequent feces and vomiting. Fecal and vomiting masses looked like rice-water. Nausea and abdominal pain werent observed. Hiccup and convulsions of lower limbs, temperature 35,4°C, hoarse voice, greyish wry face, acrocyanosis were observed. Respiratory rate 40/min, threadlike pulse 120/min, blood pressure 40/0 mm/Hg, abdomen is drawn. What treatment measures should be taken first of all?
a. Disintoxicational therapy
b. Cardiac glycosides
c. Antibotulinic serum injection
*d. Intravenous rehydration
e. Antibiotic therapy

121. A 37-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital in unconscious state. He got a closed abdominal injury. He is suspected to have internal haemorrhage, intraabdominal injury. He is being prepared an emergency operation. By means of standard sera a physician determined his blood group and got the following results: 0(І) - no agglutination, А(ІІ) - no agglutination, В(ІІІ) - no agglutination. What is the patients blood group?
a. АВ(ІV)
b. А(ІІ)
*c. 0(І)
d. -
e. В(ІІІ)

122. A 32-year-old female patient consulted a doctor about a skin affection of her body, face and extremities which turned up after peroral intake of biseptol. The patient was diagnosed with drug toxicoderma. What treatment methods would be the most effective for this patient?
a. Immunotherapy
*b. Extracorporal therapy
c. Antihistamine therapy
d. Anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Disintoxication therapy

123. A patient consulted a venereologist about painful urination, reddening of the external opening of urethra, profuse purulent discharges from the urethra. He considers himself to be ill for 3 days. He also associates the disease with a casual sexual contact that took place for about a week ago. If provisional diagnosis "acute gonorrheal urethritis" is confirmed, then bacteriological study of urethral discharges will reveal:
*a. Gram-negative diplococci
b. Proteus vulgaris
c. Gram-positive diplococci
d. Mycoplasma
e. Spirochaete

124. Estimation of community health level involved analysis of a report on diseases registered among the population of district under charge (reporting form 12). What index is calculated on the grounds of this report?
a. Index of basic non-epidemic morbidity
*b. Common morbidity rate
c. Index of pathological affection
d. Index of hospitalized morbidity
e. Index of morbidity with temporary disability

125. A 19-year-old patient complains about skin rash that appeared 2 days ago after eating smoked fish. The rash disappears after 4-6 hours but then turns up again. It is accompanied by itch. Objectively: trunk and upper limbs are covered with multiple pink blisters as big as a pea or a bean. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic dermatitis
*b. Acute urticaria
c. Purigo
d. Quinckes edema
e. Toxicodermia

126. In terms of megacalorie (1000 kcal = 4184 kJ) the ration of an adult includes 30 g of proteins, 37 g of fats, 137 g of carbohydrates, 15 mg of vitamin C, 0,6 mg of thiamine (vitamin B1). The ration is UNBALANCED as to the contents of:
a. Proteins
b. Thiamine
c. Carbohydrates
d. Fats
*e. Vitamin C

127. A 20-year-old woman has a 3-4 month history of bloody diarrhoea; stool examination proved negative for ova and parasites; stool cultures negative for clostridium, campylobacter and yersinia; normal small bowel series; edema, hyperemia and ulceration of the rectum and sigmoid colon seen on sigmoidoscopic examination. Select the most likely diagnosis:
a. Granulomatous colitis
b. Gastroenteritis
c. Carcinoid syndrome
*d. Ulcerative colitis
e. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome

128. A driver had been fixing a car in a closed garage and afterwards complained about headache, dizziness, nausea, muscle asthenia, sleepiness. Objectively: pulse and respiratory rate elevation, excitement, hypertension, delirium of persecution. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Posttraumatic encephalopathy
*c. Intoxication with carbon oxide
d. Asthenovegetative syndrome
e. Intoxication with ethyl gasoline

129. Examination of a 9-month-old girl revealed skin pallor, cyanosis during excitement. Percussion revealed transverse dilatation of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed continuous systolic murmur on the left from the breastbone in the 3-4 intercostal space. This murmur is conducted above the whole cardiac region to the back. What congenital cardiac pathology can be suspected?
*a. Defect of interventricular septum
b. Pulmonary artery stenosis
c. Coarctation of aorta
d. Fallots tetrad
e. Defect of interatrial septum

130. A child was taken to a hospital with focal changes in the skin folds. The child was anxious during examination, examination revealed dry skin with solitary papulous elements and ill-defined lichenification zones. Skin eruption was accompanied by strong itch. The child usually feels better in summer, his condition is getting worse in winter. The child has been artificially fed since he was 2 months old. He has a history of exudative diathesis. Grandmother by his mothers side has bronchial asthma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Strophulus
b. Urticaria
*c. Atopic dermatitis
d. Contact dermatitis
e. Seborrheal eczema

131. A 45-year-old man has been exhibiting high activity for the last 2 weeks, he became talkative, euphoric, had little sleep, claimed being able "to save the humanity" and solve the problem of cancer and AIDS, gave money the starangers. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Maniacal onset
b. Panic disorder
c. Agitated depression
d. Catatonic excitation
e. Schizo-affective disorder

132. A young patient who came to a policlinic was diagnosed with the 1 stage of hypertension. How often should he undergo the medical check-up?
a. 4 times a year
b. 3 times a year
c. Once a year
*d. Twice a year
e. 5 times a year

133. A puerpera is 25 years old, it is her second day of postpartum period. It was her first labour, it took place at full term. The lochia should be:
a. Serous
b. Mucous
*c. Bloody
d. Sanguino-serous
e. Purulent

134. A 27-year old patient with malaria caused by P. falciparum was treated with Chloroquine (600 mg base followed by 300 mg base in 6 hours, then 300 mg base a day for 2 days) without clinical and parasitologic responses to the treatment. What is the most likely reason for the failure to respond to the therapy?
*a. Chloroquine resistant strain of P. falciparum
b. Hypersensitivity of the patient to Chloroquine
c. Late recognition of infection due to P. falciparum
d. Inappropriate route of administration
e. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in patient

135. A 44-year-old patient complains about difficult urination, sensation of incomplete urinary bladder emptying. Sonographic examination of the urinary bladder near the urethra entrance revealed an oval well-defined hyperechogenic formation 2x3 cm large that was changing its position during the examination. What conclusion can be made?
a. Primary ureter tumour
b. Urinary bladder polyp
c. Malignant tumour of the urinary bladder
d. Prostate adenoma
*e. Concrement

136. A 52-year-old male patient complains about attacks of asphyxia, pain in his right side during respiration. These manifestations turned up all of a sudden. It is known from his anamnesis that he had been treated for thrombophlebitis of the right leg for the last month. In the admission ward the patient suddenly lost consciousness, there was a sudden attack of asphyxia and pain in his side. Objectively: heart rate - 102/min, respiratory rate - 28/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery, gallop rhythm, small bubbling rales above the lungs under the scapula on the right, pleural friction ru B. What examination method will be
a. Echocardioscopy
b. Study of external respiration function
c. Coagulogram
d. ECG
*e. Angiography of pulmonary vessels

137. A 58-year-old female patient complains about periodical headache, dizziness and ear noise. She has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. Objectively: heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 76/min, there is diastolic shock above aorta, AP is 180/110 mm Hg. In urine: OD- 1,014. Daily loss of protein with urine is 1,5 g. What drug should be chosen for treatment of arterial hypertension?
a. Calcium channel antagonist
b. β-blocker
c. Thiazide diuretic
d. α-blocker
*e. Ihibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme

138. Which of the following symptoms is the most typical for the adenoid hypertrophy?
a. Giddiness
b. Olfaction disturbance
c. Headache
d. Deglutition disturbance
*e. Nasal obstruction

139. A 5-year-old boy was progressively getting worse compared to the previous 2 months. A chest x-ray has shown right middle lobe collapse. A tuberculin skin test was strongly positive. What is the most characteristic finding in primary tuberculosis?
a. Atelectasis with obstructive pneumonia
*b. Hilar or paratracheal lymph node enlargement
c. Cavity formation
d. Hematogenous dissemination leading to extrapulmonary tuberculosis
e. Miliary tuberculosis

140. A 38-year-old patient complains about inertness, subfebrile temperature, enlargement of lymph nodes, nasal haemorrhages, ostealgia. Objectively: the patients skin and mucous membranes are pale, palpation revealed enlarged painless lymph nodes; sternalgia; liver was enlarged by 2 cm, spleen - by 5 cm, painless. In blood: erythrocytes - 2,7×1012/l, Hb- 84 g/l, leukocytes – 58×1012/l, eosinophils - 1%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 12%, lymphocytes - 83%, lymphoblasts - 2%, smudge cells; ESR- 57 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphatic leukemia
*b. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
c. Acute myeloleukemia
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Chronic myeloleukemia

141. A 43-year-old man who often contacts with ethyl gasoline was admitted to a hospital with complaints of general weakness, dizziness, memory impairment, sleepiness at daytime and insomnia at night, sense of hair in the mouth, colicky pains in the right subcostal region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic lead intoxication
b. Alcoholic delirium
*c. Chronic tetraethyl lead intoxication
d. Chronic manganese intoxication
e. Chronic mercury intoxication

142. A 68-year-old patient consulted a doctor about a tumour in her left breast. Objectively: in the upper internal quadrant of the left breast there is a neoplasm up to2,5 cm in diameter, dense, uneven, painless on palpation. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cancer
b. Mastopathy
c. Lipoma
d. Fibroadenoma
e. Cyst

143. A 30-year-old gravida consulted a gynecologist about bright red bloody discharges from the vagina in the 32 week of gestation. She was hospitalized with suspicion of placental presentation. Under what conditions is it rational to conduct the internal examination for the diagnosis specification?
a. In the admission ward of maternity hospital
b. In the examination room of antenatal clinic
c. In the delivery room keeping to all the aseptics regulations
*d. In the operating room prepared for the operation
e. The examination is not to be conducted because of risk of profuse haemorrhage

144. Which of the following best summarizes indications for operation on an abdominal aortic aneurysm?
a. Only ruptured aneurysm
b. Only symptomatic aneurysm greater than 5 cm in diameter
c. Any abdominal aortic aneurysm
d. Only symptomatic aneurysm
*e. Any aneurysm greater than 5 cm in diameter

145. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl didnt undergo any treatment. The girls irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl got puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin got a waxen hue. What disease may be assumed?
a. Subacute thyroiditis
*b. Autoimmune thyroiditis
c. Juvenile basophilism
d. Thyroid carcinoma
e. Diffuse toxic goiter

146. A 6-year-old boy was brought to the emergency room with a 3-hour history of fever up to 39,5°C and sore throat. The child looks alert, anxious and has a mild inspiratory stridor. You should immediately:
a. Examine the throat and obtain a culture
*b. Prepare to establish an airway
c. Order a chest x-ray and lateral view of the neck
d. Obtain an arterial blood gas and start an IV line
e. Admit the child and place him in a mist tent

147. A 67-year-old female patient complains about edemata of face and legs, pain in the lumbar area that is getting worse at moving; great weakness, sometimes nasal haemorrhages, rise of body temperature up to 38,4°C. Objectively: painfulness of vertebral column and ribs on palpation. Laboratorial study revealed daily proteinuria of 4,2 g, ESR- 52 mm/h. What changes of laboratory indices are to be expected?
a. Albumins - 65%
b. -globulins - 14%
c. Haemoglobin - 165 g/l
*d. Whole protein of blood serum - 101 g/l
e. Leukocytes - 15,3 g/l

148. A patient is being prepared for the operation on account of varix dilatation of lower extremities veins. Examination of the patients soles revealed flour-like desquamation along the skin folds. All the toenails are greyish-yellow, thickened and partially decayed. What dermatosis should be suspected?
a. Candidosis
b. Microsporia
*c. Rubromycosis
d. Microbial eczema
e. Pityriasis versicolor

149. A patient came to the traumatology centre and complained about a trauma of the lower third of the volar forearm surface caused by cut on a piece of glass. Objectively: flexion of the IV and V fingers is impaired, sensitivity of the interior dorsal and palmar surface of hand as well as of the IV finger is reduced. What nerve is damaged?
a. Musculoskeletal
*b. Ulnar
c. Radial
d. Median
e. Axillary

150. In which of the following disorders does the pathophysiology of portal hypertension involve presinusoidal intrahepatic obstruction?
a. Cavernomatous transformation of the portal vein
b. Alcoholic cirrhosis
c. Budd-Chiari syndrome
*d. Congenital hepatic fibrosis
e. Hemochromatosis

151. A 27-year-old military servant was delivered to the regimental aid post 1,5 hour after getting an abdominal injury with an aerial bomb splinter. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, pale, Ps- 132/min, AP- 80/60 mm Hg. Subcostal area has a bandage on from the first-aid pack, the bandage is soaked with blood. The abdomen is tense. Percussion revealed dullness in flat parts that changes its location with the change of body position. There are symptoms of peritoneal irritation. What department of the regimental aid post should provide medical care?
a. In the manner of self-help
b. Admission-and-sorting tent
c. Isolation ward
d. Evacuation
*e. Dressing ward

152. Clinic of a research instutute for occupational diseases examined a worker who works at a concentration plant and diagnosed him with chronic dust bronchitis. The case is investigated by a commission including the representatives of: the plant, clinic, territorial SES, department of Social Insurance Fund, trade union. According to the "regulation on investigation of…", the commission should be headed by the representative of the following authority:
a. Plant
b. Clinic
*c. Territorial SES
d. Trade union
e. Social Insurance Fund

153. A patient suffering from acute posttraumatic pain received an injection of morphine that brought him a significant relie Which of the following mechanisms of action provided antishock effect of morphine in this patient?
a. Intensification of GABA-ergic reactions
*b. Stimulation of opiate receptors
c. Block of central cholinergic receptors
d. Stimulation of benzodiazepine receptors
e. Inhibition of dopamine mediation

154. On the next day after esophagoscopy and biopsy a 44-year-old female patient developed emphysema of both supraclavicular regions, deglutition pain and pain behind the breastbone, cyanosis. Body temperature - 39°C. In blood: WBCs – 16×1012/l, left shift in the neutrophils. X-ray picture shows a limited shadow of the posterior mediastinum at a level with trachea bifurcation. The patient was diagnosed with esophagus rupture. What treatment tactics would be the most rational?
a. Conservative antibacterial treatment
b. Radical surgical treatment with esophagus suturing
c. Surgical: gastric fistula establishment
d. Surveillance
*e. Surgical: mediastinum drainage, gastric fistula establishment

155. A 25-year-old patient complains of burning and pain during urination, purulent discharges from the urethra that turned up 2 days ago. Objectively: the urethral labia are edematic, hyperemic, there are profuse purulent discharges from the urethra. Provisional diagnosis: recent acute gonorrheal urethritis. What supplemental data of clinical examinations will alow to specify the diagnosis?
a. Coccal cells detection during discharge microscopy
b. Serological blood analysis
*c. Microscopy of the urethral discharges
d. Common urine analysis
e. Yeast cells detection during discharge microscopy

156. Basing upon the data of laboratory assessment of sanitary state of soil in a certain territory, the soil was found to be low-contaminated according to the sanitary indicative value; contaminated according to the coli titer; low-contaminated according to the anaerobe titer (Cl. Perfringens). This is indicative of:
*a. Fresh fecal contamination
b. Insufficient insolation and aeration of soil
c. Insufficient intensity of soil humification
d. Constant entry of organic protein contaminations
e. Old fecal contamination

157. Patient, male, 16 years old was behind other children in development since early childhood and still has moderate mental retardation. He is short, has dismorphic body, his face is round, flattened, his eyes are narrow and slanted, and there are epicantial folds in the corners of his eyes. There is only one transversal flexor line on his palms. What is the probable etiology of this state?
a. Pathological delivery
b. Maternal alcohol abuse during pregnancy
*c. Chromosome abnormality
d. Infection in mother during pregnancy
e. Gene abnormality

158. A primagravida in her 20th week of gestation complains about pain in her lower abdomen, blood smears from the genital tracts. The uterus has an increased tonus, the patient feels the fetus movements. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus size corresponded the term of gestation, the uterine cervix was contracted down to 0,5 cm, the external orifice was open by 2 cm. The discharges were bloody and smeary. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Incipient abortion
b. Abortion in progress
c. Incomplete abortion
d. Missed miscarriage
e. Risk of abortion

159. For a patient with a stab injury to the femoral artery, the treatment of choice is:
a. Ligation of both transected ends
*b. End- to-end anastomosis
c. Interposition of Dacron graft
d. Interposition of homologous arterial graft
e. Interposition of autogenous vein graft

160. A 26-year-old woman complains of having bloody discharges from the genitals for the last 14 days, abdominal pain, general fatiguability, weakness, weight loss, body temperature rise, chest pain, obstructed respiration. 5 weeks ago she underwent induced abortion in the 6-7 week of gestation. Objectively: the patient is pale and inert. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus was enlarges up to 8-9 weeks of gestation. In blood: Hb- 72 g/l. Urine test for chorionic gonadotropin gave the positive result. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Uterine fibromyoma
*b. Chorioepithelioma
c. Uterus perforation
d. Uterine carcinoma
e. Metroendometritis

161. A 20-year-old man complains about pain arising in the lower third of femoral bone under stress and at rest. He denies having a trauma. Objectively: the skin is of normal colour, deep palpation reveals pastosity and pain, knee joint motions are limited. X-ray picture of the meta-epyphisis of distal femur shows a destruction zone and spicules. In blood: immature cell forms, no signs of inflammation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Osteogenic sarcoma
b. Marble-bone disease
c. Hyperparathyroid dystrophy
d. Myelomatosis
e. Chronic osteomyelitis

162. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved application of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
a. 60 minutes
*b. 120 minutes
c. 15 minutes
d. 30 minutes
e. 180 minutes

163. 25 unorganized children in the age 2-3 year will be observed on a pediatric district it in the current year. What scheduled number of initial visitations will make to this group of children?
a. 20
b. 40
c. 100
*d. 50
e. 200

164. The total area of a ward at the therapeutical department is 28 m2. What is the maximum number of beds that can be exploited in this ward?
a. 5
b. 3
c. 1
*d. 4
e. 2

165. A 47-year-old male patient got a flame burn of trunk and upper extremities and was delivered to the hospital. The patient is in grave condition, confused mental state, with fever. AP- 80/50 mm Hg, Ps- 118 bpm. It was locally stated that the patient got III B degree burns with total area of 20%. What medical actions should be taken?
a. Administration of detoxicating blood substitutes
*b. Injection of narcotic analgetics and powdered blood substitutes
c. Initial surgical d-bridement
d. Necrotomy of burn surface, haemotransfusion
e. Antibacterial and detoxicating therapy

166. An 8-year-old boy fell ill acutely: he presents with fever, weakness, headache, abdominal pain, recurrent vomiting, then diarrhea and tenesmus. Stools occur 12 times daily, are scanty, contain a lot of mucus, pus, streaks of blood. His sigmoid gut is tender and hardened. What is your diagnosis?
a. Cholera
b. Staphylococcal gastroenteritis
*c. Dysentery
d. Escherichiosis
e. Salmonellosis

167. A 42-year-old woman has had hyperpolymenorrhea and progressing algodismenorrhea for the last 10 years. Gynecological examination revealed no changes of uterine cervix; discharges are moderate, of chocolate colour, uterus is slightly enlarged and painful, appendages are not palpable, the fornices are deep and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adnexal endmetriosis
b. Endomyometritis
*c. Uterine endometriosis
d. Subserous uterine fibromyoma
e. Uterine carcinoma

168. A 26-year-old male patient complains of piercing pain during breathing, cough, dyspnea. Objectively: t°37,3°C, respiration rate - 19/min, heart rate=Ps - 92/min; AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Vesicular respiration. In the inferolateral parts of chest auscultation in both inspiration and expiration phase revealed noise that was getting stronger at phonendoscope pressing and can be still heard after cough. ECG showed no pathological changes. What is the most likely giagnosis?
a. Intercostal neuralgia
b. Pericarditis sicca
c. Subcutaneous emphysema
d. Spontaneous pneumothorax
*e. Acute pleuritis

169. A department chief of an in-patient hospital is going to inspect resident doctors as to observation of medical-technological standards of patient service. What documentation should be checked for this purpose?
a. Treatment sheets
b. Annual report of a patient care institution
c. Registry of operative interventions
*d. Health cards of in-patients
e. Statistic cards of discharged patients

170. A 30-year-old patient presented with body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, pain in the small articulations of hands; face edemata and erythema. In blood: RBCs - 2,6*10^12/l; Hb- 98 г/л; WBCs – 2*10^12/l; ESR - 58 mm/h. In the urine: protein - 3,1 g/l; RBCs - 10-15 in the vision field. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Sepsis
b. Periarteritis nodosa
*c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Systemic scleroderma
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

171. A newborns head is of dolichocephalic shape, that is front-to-back elongated. Examination of the occipital region of head revealed a labour tumour located in the middle between the prefontanel and posterior fontanel. The delivery tok place with the following type of fetus head presentation:
*a. Posterior vertex presentation
b. Anterior vertex presentation
c. Brow presentation
d. Face presentation
e. Presentation of the bregma

172. A neonate is 5 days old. What vaccination dose of BCG vaccine (in мg) is necessary for vaccination of this child?
*a. 0,05 мg
b. 0,2 мg
c. 0,025 mg
d. 0,1 mg
e. 0,075 mg

173. A full-term infant has respiratory rate of 26/min, heart rate of 90/min, blue skin, muscle hypotonia. During catheter suction of mucus and amniotic fluid from the nose and mouth the child reacted with a grimace. Low reflexes. Auscultation revealed weakened vesicular respiration above lungs. Heart sounds are loud. After 5 minutes the respiration became rhythmic, at the rate of 38/min, heart rate of 120/min. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
b. Birth trauma
c. Respiratory distress syndrome
d. Inborn pneumonia
*e. Asphyxia

174. A 28-year-old patient has been admitted to the gynecological department three days after a casual coitus. She complains about pain in her lower abdomen and during urination, profuse purulent discharges from the vagina, body temperature rise up to 37,8°C. The patient was diagnosed with acute bilateral adnexitis. Supplemental examination revealed: the 4th degree of purity of the vaginal secretion, leukocytes within the whole visual field, diplococcal bacteria located both intra- and extracellularly. What is the etiology of acute adnexitis in this patient?
a. Colibacterial
*b. Gonorrheal
c. Staphylococcal
d. Chlamydial
e. Trichomonadal

175. A 10-year-old girl was admitted to a hospital with carditis presentations. It is known from the anamnesis that two weeks ago she had exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. What is the most likely etiological factor in this case?
a. Pneumococcus
*b. Streptococcus
c. Proteus
d. Klebsiella
e. Staphylococcus

176. A 45-year-old patient with urolithiasis had an attack of renal colic. What is the mechanism of the attack development?
a. Ureteric twists
*b. Disturbed urine outflow from the kidney
c. Renal artery spasm
d. Increase in relative density of urine
e. Destruction of glomerules

177. As a result of load lifting a 68-year-old female felt acute pain in the lumbar region, in a buttock, posterolateral surface of her right thigh, external surface of the right shin and dorsal surface of foot. Objectively: weakness of the anterior tibial muscle, long extensor muscle of the right toes, short extensor muscle of the right toes. Low Achilles reflex on the right. Positive Lasegues sign. What examination method would be the most effective for specification of the diagnosis of discogenic compression of L5 root?
a. Spinal column X-ray
*b. Magnetic resonance scan
c. Angiography
d. Lumbar puncture
e. Electromyography

178. An 11-yearold girl was taken by an acute disease: she got pain in the lumbar region, nausea, vomiting, frequent urination, body temperature 39°C. Objectively: the abdomen is soft, painful on palpation in the lumbar region. Common urine analysis revealed considerable leukocyturia, bacteriuria. The urine contained colibacilli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Acute vulvovaginitis

179. A sergeant got injured with a shell splinter in the left subcostal region. He was bandaged by his fellow soldiers with an individual field dressing. Afterwards he was delivered to the regimental medical station. The patient complains of dizziness, weakness, thirst, abdominal pain. His general condition is grave, he is pale, Ps- 120 bpm. The abdomen is painful, soft on palpation. The dressing is well-fixed but slightly soaked with blood. The victim should be evacuated to the collecting battalion with the following type of transport and in the following turn:
a. With a passing vehicle in the 2nd turn
b. With a passing vehicle in the 3rd turn
c. With a passing vehicle in the 1st turnd
d. With ambulance vehicle in the 2nd turn
*e. With ambulance vehicle in the 1st turne

180. A 72-year-old male patient complains about itch in his left shin, especially around a trophic ulcer. Skin is reddened and edematic, there are some oozing lesions, single yellowish crusts. The focus of affection is well-defined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
b. Allergic dermatitis
c. Seborrheic eczema
d. Cutaneous tuberculosis
*e. Microbial eczema

181. A 68-year-old female patient complains about temperature rise up to 38,3°C, haematuria. ESR- 55 mm/h. Antibacterial therapy turned out to be ineffective. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Chronic glomerulonephritis
b. Renal amyloidosis
c. Polycystic renal disease
*d. Renal cancer
e. Urolithiasis

182. A 43-year-old female patient was delivered to the hospital in grave condition. She suffers from Addisons disease. The patient had been regularly taking prednisolone but a week before she stopped taking this drug. Objectively: sopor, skin and visible mucous membranes are pigmented, skin and muscle turgor is decreased. Heart sounds are muffled, rapid. AP- 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 96/min. In blood: Na - 120 millimole/l, K - 5,8 millimole/l. Development of this complication is primarily caused by the deficit of the following hormone:
*a. Cortisol
b. Noradrenaline
c. Adrostendion
d. Corticotropin (ACTH)
e. Adrenaline

183. On the 21 day after appearance of vesiculous chickenpox rash a 7-year-old child developed ataxia, nystagmus, intention tremor, muscle hypotonia. Liquor analysis shows insignificant lymphocytic pleocytosis, slightly increased protein rate. What complication is it?
a. Acute nephritis
b. Purulent meningitis
c. Postherpetic neuralgia
*d. Encephalitis
e. Pneumonitis

184. The diagnostics of the AIDS epidemic initially was made in the USA by means of:
a. The virological method
b. The viroscopic method
c. The bacteriological method
d. The serological method
*e. The epidemiological method

185. A surgeon examined a 42-year-old patient and diagnosed him with right forearm furuncle, purulo-necrotic stage. The furuncle was lanced. At the hydration stage the wound dressing should enclose the following medication:
a. Chloramine
b. Vishnevsky ointment
c. Dimexide
*d. Hypertonic solution
e. Ichthyol ointment

186. A 50-year-old man comes to the emergency room with a history of vomiting of 3 days duration. His past history examination reveals that for about 20 years he has been suffering from epigasric pain lasting for 2 to 3 weeks, during early spring and autumn. He remembers getting relief from pain by taking milk and antacids. Physical examination showed a fullness in the epigastric area with visible peristalsis, absence of tenderness, and normal active bowel sounds. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Volvulus of the colon
*b. Gastric outlet obstruction
c. Small bowel obstruction
d. Cholecystitis
e. Incarcerated umbilical hernia

187. A 28-year-old patient was hospitalized with preliminary diagnosis influenza. Roseolous-petechial rash appeared on the 5th day of disease on the trunk. The temperature is 41 degree C. Hyperemia of face, reddening of scleras, tremor of tongue, tachycardia, splenomegaly are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leptospirosis
b. Measles
c. Typhoid fever
d. Alcohol delirium
*e. Epidemic typhus

188. An infant was born with body mass 3 kg and body length 50 cm. Now he is 3 years old. His brother is 7 years old, suffers from rheumatic fever. Mother asked the doctor for a cardiac check up of the 3-year-old son. Where is the left relative heart border located?
*a. 1 cm left from the left medioclavicular line
b. 1 cm right from the left medioclavicular line
c. 1 cm left from he left parasternal line
d. Along the left medioclavicular line
e. 1 cm right from the left parasternal line

189. During examination at a military commissariat a 15-year-old teenager was found to have interval sysolic murmur on the cardiac apex, diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery, tachycardia. Which of the suuplemental examination methods will be the most informative for the diagnosis specification?
a. Phonocardiography
b. Rheography
*c. Echocardiography
d. Roengenography
e. Electrocardigraphy

190. Three days ago a boy underwent removal of a foreign body from under a nail plate. 2 days later he felt acute pulsating pain at the end of the nail bone which was getting worse at pressing. Nail fold became hyperemic, body temperature rose up to 37,5°C, there was a change in nail plate colour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Abscess
*c. Subungual panaritium
d. Erysipeloid
e. Paronychia

191. Apgar test done on a newborn girl at 1st and 5th minute after birth gave the result of 7-8 scores. During the delivery there was a short-term difficulty with extraction of shoulder girdle. After birth the child had the proximal extremity dysfunction and the arm couldnt be raised from the side. The shoulder was turned inwards, the elbow was flexed, there was also forearm pronation, obstetric palsy of brachial plexus. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Trauma of thoracic spine
b. Trauma of right hand soft tissues
c. Right hand osteomyelitis
*d. Duchenne-Erb palsy
e. Intracranial haemorrhage

192. A 49-year-old woman complains about headache, head and neck going hot, increased perspiration, palpitation, arterial pressure rise up to 170/100 mm Hg, irritability, insomnia, tearfulness, memory impairment, rare and scarce menses, body weight increase by 5 kg over the last half a year. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vegetative-vascular dystonia
*b. Climacteric syndrome
c. Postcastration syndrome
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Premenstrual syndrome

193. A 40-year-old female patient has been observing profuse menses accompanied by spasmodic pain in the lower abdomen for a year. Bimanual examination performed during menstruation revealed a dense formation up to 5 cm in diameter in the cervical canal. Uterus is enlarged up to 5-6 weeks of pregnancy, movable, painful, of normal consistency. Appendages are not palpable. Bloody discharges are profuse. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Algodismenorrhea
*b. Nascent submucous fibromatous node
c. Cervical carcinoma
d. Abortion in progress
e. Cervical myoma

194. A patient who works as a nightman was diagnosed with of chronic arsenious intoxication. What form of anemia is characteristic for this disease?
*a. Haemolytic anemia
b. Hyper sideric anemia
c. Iron deficiency anemia
d. Normochromic anemia
e. Aplastic anemia

195. A 10-year-old girl consulted a doctor about thirst, frequent urination, weight loss. She has been observing these symptoms for about a month. Objectively: no pathology of internal organs was revealed. What laboratory analysis should be carried out in the first place?
a. Glucosuric profile
*b. Blood glucose analysis on an empty stomach
c. Acetone in urine test
d. Glucose tolerance test
e. Glucose in urine test on the base of daily diuresis

196. A 56-year-old patient with diffuse toxic goiter has ciliary arrhythmia with pulse rate 110 bpm, arterial hypertension, AP- 165/90 mm Hg. What preparation should be administered along with mercazolil?
a. Radioactive iodine
b. Procaine hydrochloride
c. Corinfar
*d. Propranolol
e. Verapamil

197. A 30-year-old patient presents with sudden loss of consciousness, tonoclonic spasms, AP- 150/100 mm Hg, heart rate - 100/min. Before the attack he felt dizziness, sense of irreality, inexplicable fear. After the attack the patient failed to remember it. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Transitory ischemic attack
b. Vestibular syncope
*c. Epilepsy
d. Hyperventilation ischemic attack
e. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome

198. A newborn infant has mild cyanosis, diaphoresis, poor peripheral pule, hepatomegaly and cardiomegaly. Respiratory rate is 60 breaths per minute, and heart rate is 230 beats per minute. The child most likely has congestive heart failure caused by:
*a. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
b. A large atrial septal defect and valvular pulmonary stenosis
c. A ventricular septal defect and transposition of the great vessels
d. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
e. Atrial flutter and partial atrioventricular block

199. A 42-year-old woman complains about bruises on her both legs and prolonged menstruation; general weakness, tinnitus cerebri. Objectively: multiple macular haemorrhages on the legs and body. The patient presents with tachypnoe, tachycardia, systolic murmur in all auscultatory points. AP- 75/50 mm Hg. Blood count: RBC - 1,9*10*12/l, Нb- 60 g/l, colour index - 0,9, WBC - 6,5*10*12/l, thrombocytes – 20*10*12/l, ESR- 12 mm/h. Duke bleeding time - 12 minutes. Bone marrow analysis revealed plenty of juvenile immature forms of megacaryocytes without signs of thrombocyte pinch-of. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute megacaryoblastic leukemia
b. Willebrands disease
c. Type A haemophilia
d. Type B haemophilia
*e. True thrombocytopenic purpura

200. On the tenth day after discharge from the maternity house a 2-year-old patient consulted a doctor about body temperature rise up to 39°C, pain in the right breast. Objectively: the mammary gland is enlarged, there is a hyperemized area in the upper external quadrant, in the same place there is an ill-defined induration, lactostasis, fluctuation is absent. Lymph nodes of the right axillary region are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess
b. Erysipelas
c. Tumour
d. Dermatitis
*e. Lactational mastitis

