1. During microbiological inspection of crude drugs encapsulated bacteria were revealed. What method was applied for capsule detection?
a. Gram
b. Ozheshko
c. Ziehl-Neelsen
d. Neisser
*e. Burry-Gins

2. In order to keep eubiotics viable and stable, frozen microorganisms are dried out under the conditions of high vacuum. This method is called:
a. Inactivation
b. Hybridization
c. Pasteurization
d. Tyndallization
*e. Lyophilization

3. It is known that infectious type B hepatitis is a systemic disease caused by the type B hepatitis virus and characterized by a predominant liver affection. Choose from the below given list the drugs for the etiotropic therapy of this infection:
a. Penicillin
b. Sulfanilamides
c. Fluoroquinolones
*d. Acyclovir
e. Tetracycline

4. In compliance with the requirements of National Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the following drugs should be sterile: eye drops, parenteral drugs as well as substances and additives used in their production. What method is applied for control of their sterility?
a. Two-phase fermentative
*b. Membrane filtration
c. Serial dilution
d. Filter paper discs
e. Agar diffusion

5. According to the requirements of WHO and Pharmacopoeia different drug dosage forms of unsterile preparations are allowed to have a certain quantity of bacteria and fungi. What quantity of saprophytic bacteria and fungi in 1 g (ml) of a peroral preparation will ensure its safety?
a. 1500 bacteria and 150 mold fungi
*b. 1000 bacteria and 100 mold fungi
c. 250 bacteria and 25 mold fungi
d. 500 bacteria and 50 mold fungi
e. 500 bacteria and 200 mold fungi

6. Antibiotics can be classified according to various principles. According to the action mechanism cephalosporins relate to the following group:
a. Inhibitors of oxidative phosphorilation
b. Inhibitors of cytoplasmic membrane synthesis
c. Inhibitors of protein synthesis
d. Inhibitors of respiratory processes
*e. Inhibitors of cell wall synthesis

7. Plant pathogenic microorganisms relate to various groups. Which of them causes diseases of medicinal plants most often?
a. Bacteria
b. Viruses
*c. Fungi
d. Actinomycetes
e. Micoplasma

8. Bacteritic preparations are subdivided into groups according to their purpose and production principles. What group do the preparations for initiation of active immunity relate to?
*a. Vaccines
b. Immunoglobulins
c. Bacteriophages
d. Monoclonal antibodies
e. Immune sera

9. During sanitary and bacteriological examination of air in a drugstore it was revealed that the air had high concentration of sanitary meaningful microorganisms. What microorganisms are these?
a. Enterococci and Citrobacter
*b. Staphylococcus aureus and hemolytic streptococcus
c. Colibacilli and blue pus bacilli
d. Diphtheritic and tuberculous bacilli
e. Epidermal staphylococcus and Sarcina

10. Bacteriological control of unsterile drugs allows presence of small quantity of some microorganism groups. What group is meant?
a. Colon bacillus
b. Staphylococcus aureus
c. Hemolytic streptococcus
*d. Sarcina
e. Bacillus pynocyaneus

11. For tuberculosis prevention the newborns got an injection of a vaccine. What vaccine was used?
a. Mantoux
b. Anatoxin
c. Oral polio vaccine (Sabin vaccine)
*d. BCG
e. DTaP vaccine

12. In compliance with the requirements of WHO and Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the number of microorganisms in 1 ml of ear drops shoud not exceed the following number of microbial cells (bacteria and fungi):
a. 1000
b. 10
*c. 100
d. 10 000
e. 100 000

13. Drug quality is estimated by a number of factors including the "microbiologic purity". What drugs are allowed to include a greater number of saprophytic bacteria as compared to other drug forms?
a. Aerosols
b. Eye drops
c. Injection solutions
*d. Tinctures
e. Suppositories

14. Bacteriological examination for bacteria carrying of drugstore workers revealed that one of the pharmacists had bacteria of genus Staphylococcus. What morphological pecularities of microbal cell arrangement are typical for this genus?
a. They are arranged isolatedly
b. They are arranged in form of a chain
*c. They are arranged in form of bunch of grapes
d. They are arranged in pairs
e. They are arranged in tetrads

15. Crude herbal drugs must be examined for yeastlike fungi. What agar can ensure development of these microorganisms so that associating microflora will grow very slowly or won't grow at all?
a. Blood agar
*b. Sabouraud's peptone agar
c. Meat infusion agar
d. Endo agar
e. Milk-salt agar

16. A smear from frothy and purulent vaginal discharges of a 42 y.o. woman was stained by Romanovsky-Giemsa method. Its analysis revealed some microorganisms of flagellates class. What microorganims were the most probably revealed?
*a. Trihomonas vaginaslis
b. Trypanosoma gambiense
c. Lamblia intestinalis
d. Trihomonas hominis
e. Leishmania donovani

17. A female patient bitten by a stray dog came to a surgery. Wide lacerated wounds were localized on the patient’s face. What treatment-and prevention aid should be rendered in order to prevent rabies?
a. Combined antibiotic therapy
b. Hospitalization, medical surveillance
c. Urgent injection of normal gamma-globulin
*d. Immunization with the antirabic vaccine
e. Hospitalization, injection of diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine

18. During bacteriological examination of sputum of a child with choking cough and fever there were revealed glossy smooth colonies growing on casein-charcoal agar and reminding of mercury drops. Microscopic examination revealed short Gram-negative bacteria. What microorganism was secured from the sputum?
a. Haemophylus influenzae
b. Klebsiella pneumoniae
c. Streptococcus pyogenes
*d. Bordetella pertussis
e. Corynebacterium dyphtheriae

19. It is suspected that the workers of a serum drugs plant at a regional hemotransfusion station are carriers of pathogenic staphylococcus aureus. In order to detect staphylococcus carriage, the material from the nasopharynx of the workers should be inoculated into the following medium:
a. Endo agar
b. Kessler medium
c. Blood agar
*d. Egg-yolk-salt agar
e. Meat infusion broth

20. Analysis of sputum obtained from a patient with suspected pneumonia revealed gram-positive diplococci. They were slightly elongated, with the pointed opposite ends. What microorganisms were revealed in the sputum?
a. Klebsiella pneumoniae
b. Staphylococcus aureus
*c. Streptococcus pneumoniae
d. Neisseria meningitidis
e. Streptococcus pyogenes

21. Examination of air state in drugstore premises for preparation of injection drugs was done by method of sedimentation. It revealed 5 small roundish colonies with zone of hemolysis around them. Inoculations were made on the following cultural medium:
a. Lewin's agar
*b. Blood agar
c. Meat infusion agar
d. Endo agar
e. Egg yolk and salt agar

22. According to the Pharmacopoeia requirements, all drugs for topical administration should be tested for “microbiological purity”. Inapplicability of this drug group in the medical practice is indicated by presence of the following microorganisms:
a. Yeast fungi
b. Mold fungi
c. Sarcinae
*d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Saprophytic staphylococci

23. A pharmacy produced a batch of vials with glucose diluent for injections. What is the best way for their sterilization?
a. UV exposure
*b. Autoclave sterilization by flowing steam (fractional method)
c. Dry-heat sterilization
d. Autoclave sterilization under 2 atmosphere pressure
e. X-ray exposure

24. During studying a medicinal herbal mixture a culture in form of black fluffy film grew on the nutrient medium. Examination of specimen smears revealed non-septate mycelium threads with globular thickenings at the tips. Name these microorganisms:
a. Aspergill
b. Ray fungi
c. Black molds fungus
d. Candida
*e. Mucor

25. During bacteriological analysis of solutions prepared in a pharmacy some red colonies with metallic glitter have grown on Endo agar. What microbes were revealed?
a. Salmonella
*b. Escherichia
c. Staphylococci
d. Shigella
e. Streptococci

26. From a patient with the symptoms of acute meningitis the spinal fluid was taken. Its smears contained gram-negative diplococci within the leukocytes and outside them. Which microorganism is the most likely cause of the disease?
a. Candida albicans
b. Escherichia coli
c. Haemophilus influenzae
d. Streptococcus pneumoniae
*e. Neisseria meningitidis

27. Microbiological assay of a peppermint tincture established its discrepancy with the Pharmacopoeia requirements. It was found to contain pathogenic microflora. The reason for such a conclusion was the presence of the following microflora:
a. Mold fungi
b. Micrococci
c. Yeast fungi
d. Epidermal staphylococcus
*e. Blue pus bacillus

28. The causative agent of botulism causes severe food poisoning. Specify the most characteristic morphological feature of botulism causative agent:
*a. Gram-positive bacillus with subterminal spore
b. Gram-positive bacillus with terminal spore
c. Thick gram-positive bacillus without spores and flagella
d. Thin mobile bacillus with central spore
e. Thick gram-positive non-spore-forming bacillus

29. Medicinal plants collected at a plantation included a lot of plants with mosaic-coloured leaves. What is the most likely causative agent of such infection?
*a. Phytopathogenic viruses
b. Toxic substances of the soil
c. Nematode worms
d. Microscopic mites
e. Phytopathogenic bacteria

30. A pharmaceutic factory received a batch of crude herbal drugs for phytomedicines production. To evaluate quality of these crude drugs it is necessary to determine:
a. Antimicrobial
b. Pyrogens
c. Coli titer
d. Coli index
*e. Total number of microorganisms pro 1 g of thecrude drug

31. Study of the antibioticogram of the pure salmonella culture revealed multiple antibiotic resistance. What factor might have caused this effect?
*a. R-plasmids
b. F-plasmids
c. Transposons
d. Temperate phages
e. Chromosomal mutations

32. Staphylococci were isolated in pure culture from a patient with sepsis. These were staphylococci producing betalactamase. Such property should be taken into account when:
a. Differentiating specific types of staphylococci
b. Choosing optimal conditions for cultivation
c. Determining biiochemical properties
d. Determining the strain pathogenicity
*e. Choosing an antibiotic for treatment

33. A female patient has been treated with antibiotics for a long time. Thereafter examination of smears form vaginal secretion revealed oval cells with well-defined nucleus, some cells gemmate. What preparations can help to confirm the diagnosis "candidosis"?
a. Antichlamydial
b. Antibacterial
*c. Antifungal
d. Antiviral
e. Antiprotozoal

34. One of mass production drugs is produced by inactivation of bacterial exotoxin by formalin. What is this drug for?
a. For passive immunization
b. For serodiagnostic assay
*c. For active immunization
d. For toxinemia treatment
e. For immunocorrection

35. A patient diagnosed with botulism was admitted to the infectious disease hospital. What medication should be applied in the first place?
a. Sulfanilamides
b. Nitrofurans
c. Anatoxin
d. Antibiotics
*e. Antitoxic serum

36. A patient is suspected to have the typhoid fever. What method of laboratory diagnostics would be the most appropriate for confirmation of this diagnosis in the first week of disease?
a. Biliculture identification
b. Coproculture identification
c. Urine culture identification
d. Myeloculture identification
*e. Hemoculture identification

37. Inoculation of hen's embryos is the main method of detection of influenza virus. In order to neutralize associated bacterial flora in the material under examination (nasopharyngeal lavage) it is necessary to add beforehand:
*a. Antibiotics
b. Fluorescent serum
c. Ant-influenza gamma globulin
d. Leukocytic interferon
e. Eubiotics

38. Quite often, the soil may contain a number of pathogenic microorganisms. The causative agents of the following disease may exist in the soil for a long time:
a. Pertussis
b. Dysentery
c. Diphtheria
d. Viral hepatitis
*e. Anthrax

39. Pathogenic microorganisms are characterized by presence of aggression enzymes that determine their virulence. Select an aggression enzyme:
a. Lyase
*b. Hyaluronidase
c. Transferase
d. Carbohydrase
e. Oxidase

40. Presence of the pathogenic microorganisms in the air can be prognosticated according to the content of sanitary-indicative bacteria. Which bacteria indicate immediate epidemiologic danger?
a. Micrococci
*b. Haemolytic streptococci
c. Mold fungi
d. Sarcinae
e. Yeast fungi

41. Bacteria may contain not only chromosomal but also nonchromosomal hereditary elements called plasmids. Presence of plasmid genes can show itself by:
a. Mobility
*b. Multiple drug resistance
c. Physical factor resistance
d. Stain resistance
e. Sporogenesis ability

42. Which of the following sterilization methods ensures total death of microorganisms and their spores during one-time thermal processing of an object?
a. Pasteurization
b. -
c. Boiling
d. Tyndallization
*e. Autoclaving

43. Aetiological factors for the infectious diseases are often microorganisms with various ultrastructure. Which of the following microorganism groups relates to the eucariots?
a. Viroids
b. Viruses
*c. Protozoa
d. Prions
e. Scotobacteria

44. A 13 year old child complains about poor appetite, pain in the right subcostal area. Microscopical examination of duodenal contents revealed big pyriform cells with two nuclei. What microorganism was revealed?
*a. Lamblia
b. Amoeba
c. Toxoplasma
d. Trypanosoma
e. Trichomonad

45. A plantation of medicinal plants was affected by a disease that caused yellow spots and necrotic areas on leaves. Juice of affected plants remains infectious even after bacterial filtration but after its inoculation on cultural medium growth of causative agent wasn't observed. Causative agent of this disease relates most probably to the following group of plant pathogenic microorganisms:
a. Mycoplasma
*b. Viruses
c. Actinomycetes
d. Fungi
e. Bacteria

46. After a bacteriological analysis a tableted medication has been found to be inapplicable, though its general microbial contamination was within the norm. The reason for such a conclusion was the presence of the following microorganisms:
a. Actinomycetes
b. Mold fungi
*c. Enterobacteria
d. Micrococci
e. Sarcinae

47. It is known that a peroral drug contains over 1 billion of living microbal cells per 1 millilitre. Nonetheless the drug was accepted as applicable. What drug group does it relate to?
a. Antibiotics
b. Sulfanilamides
c. Immunostimulants
*d. Eubiotics
e. Vitamins

48. From a medicinal herb a certain phytopathogenic microorganism was secured. In the nutrient medium it forms "fried egg" colonies. What is the most likely agent?
a. Actinomycetes
b. Yeast fungi
*c. Mycoplasma
d. Nocardia
e. Pseudomonades

49. Bacteriological inspection of disinfection quality at a pharmacy revealed a microorganism in an utility room (in the sink). The microorganism has the following properties: mobile nonspore-forming gram-negative bacteria that form capsular substance, grow well on ordinary nutrient media, secrete the blue-green pigment. This microorganism is most likely to be of the following genus:
a. Clostridium
b. Proteus
*c. Pseudomonas
d. Shigella
e. Vibrio

50. Microbiological analysis of medicinal raw materials revealed capsular bacteria. What stain method was used to detect the capsules?
a. Ziehl-Neelsen's
b. Gram's
c. Ozheshko's
*d. Gin's
e. Neisser's

51. A patient was admitted to the infectious department of a hospital. His provisional diagnosis was "acute gastroenteritis". Inoculation of feces on bismuth-sulfite agar induced growth of black colonies with metallic glitter. What microorganisms should you think of?
a. Brucella
*b. Salmonellae
c. Shigella
d. Escherichia
e. Yersinia

52. Antibiotics are classified by sources of production. Name an antibiotic of bacterial origin:
*a. Gramicidin
b. Tetracycline
c. Gentamycin
d. Lysozyme
e. Penicillin

53. In accordance with the requirements of the pharmacopoeia, the non-sterile medicinal preparations may include microorganisms. What micro-organisms MUST NOT be present in them?
a. Sarcinae
*b. Enterobacteria
c. Micrococci
d. Ascomycetes
e. Mold fungi

54. Production of a number of drugs requires sterile isotonic solution. Choose the optimal method of its sterilization:
a. Dry heat sterilization
b. Direct flame sterilization
c. Pasteurization
*d. Steam under pressure sterilization
e. Boiling

55. A pharmaceutical company received from a laboratory a delivery order of diagnostic medications used for studying antigenic properties of causative agent. Name these preparations:
a. Diagnosticums
b. Allergens
*c. Diagnostic sera
d. Immunoglobulins
e. Bacteriophages

56. When a smear is stained by Burry-Gins method a mucous structure that is tightly bound with the cellular wall of bacteria and has well-defined outer boundaries can be detected. This element of a bacteria cell is called:
a. Spore
b. Ribosomes
c. Episomes
*d. Capsule
e. Filaments

57. Sanitary-biologic examination of air in a drugstore revealed a sanitary-indicative microorganism. Name it:
a. Citrobacter
*b. Staphylococcus aureus
c. Fecal enterococcus
d. Colon bacillus
e. Alpha-haemolytic streptococcus

58. A bacterial cell obtains nutrients by different ways. One of them is the facilitated diffusion that is realized by special membrane carrier proteins. What are these proteins called?
*a. Permeases
b. Oxidoreductases
c. Ligases
d. Isomerizing enzymes
e. Lyases

59. Medical examination of a dairymaid revealed affection of the locomotive system, vision impairment, disorder of the nervous and other systems. To confirm the diagnosis the patient was referred for a serological assay (Wright’s reaction) and Burnet's skin allergy test. What was the provisional diagnosis?
a. Rheumatism
b. Leptospirosis
c. Tularemia
d. Anthrax
*e. Brucellosis

60. A patient presents with fever, chill and cough. From his sputum the ovoid Gram-negative bipolar-stained bacilli with a delicate capsule were isolated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Plague
b. Leptospirosis
c. Toxoplasmosis
d. Brucellosis
e. Tuberculosis

61. A patient was prescribed with an antitumoral antibiotic that inhibits synthesis of nucleic acids in the cells. What of the following antibiotics has such a mechanism of action?
a. Tetracycline
b. Lincomycin
c. Erythromycin
*d. Actinomycin
e. Nystatin

62. A drugstore received a supply of a drug that is widely used for treatment of many virus diseases since it is not virus specific. What drug is it?
a. Immunoglobulin
b. Vaccine
c. Remantadin
d. Metisazone
*e. Interferon

63. A patient was administered an antibiotic of animal origin for the corneal ulcer treatment. What is it called?
a. Nystatin
b. Chlorophyllipt
*c. Lysozyme
d. Imanin
e. Gramicidin

64. Epidemic of influenza was announced in a town. Which drug can be recommended for the nonspecific prophylaxis of influenza?
a. Anti-influenza serum
*b. Leukocytic interferon
c. Antibiotics
d. Anti-influenza vaccine
e. Anti-influenza immunoglobulin

65. What method ensures reliable sterilization of biological fluids (sera, solutions, enzymes, vitamines etc.) that can't stand high temperatures?
*a. Tyndallization
b. Flowing steam
c. Flaming
d. Moist steam under pressure
e. Dry-heat sterilization

66. Bacterioscopic examination of chancre material revealed some mobile, long, convoluted microorganisms with 8-12 regular coils. These features are typical for:
a. Vibrios
b. Campylobacter
c. Borrellia
d. Leptospira
*e. Treponema

67. Before a surgical operation, a surgeon treated his hands with an alcohol-containing solution. Which group of drugs does this solution relate to?
a. Disinfectants
b. Detergents
c. Surface-active substances
*d. Antiseptics
e. Sterilizing solutions

68. A 6-month old child has been administered a peroral drug. What is the maximal number of bacteria and fungi that is permissible in 1 g of this drug in compliance with the requirements of WHO and Pharmacopoeia?
a. No more than 500 bacteria and fungi in total
b. No more than 1000 bacteria and 100 fungi
c. No more than 500 bacteria and 50 fungi
*d. No more than 50 bacteria and fungi in total
e. No more than 1000 bacteria and fungi in total

69. In order to establish the possible contamination of a medication with fungi, a nutrient medium was inoculated, which resulted in growth of large cream-like colonies. What nutrient medium was used in this case?
a. Finn-2
*b. Sabouraud
c. Roux
d. Lowenstein-Jensen
e. Loeffler

70. Dysbiosis can be treated with drugs that contain living representatives of normal microflora as well as their metabolic products. Select the microorganisms that are used for the production of such drugs:
a. Proteus
b. Staphylococcus aureus
*c. Bifidus bacteria
d. Providencia
e. Yersinia

71. Medicinal plants infected by microorganisms cannot be used in the pharmaceutical industry. Invasive properties of phytopathogenic micro-organisms are due to the following enzymes:
a. Transferase
b. Isomerase
*c. Hydrolytic
d. Oxidoreductase
e. Lyase

72. The medicinal plants growing on a plantations were found to have mosaic patterns on leaves. What microorganisms caused this affection?
a. Phytopathogenic bacteria
b. Protozoa
c. Rickettsiae
*d. Phytopathogenic viruses
e. Phytopathogenic fungi

73. Bacteria eventually become resistant to antibacterial agents. Resistance of gram-positive bacteria to penicillin antibiotics is caused by:
*a. Beta-lactamase production
b. Active synthesis of peptidoglycan
c. Protein synthesis
d. Active transport of antibiotic
e. Permeability of the cell wall

74. A laboratory received a sample of water used in drug production for sanitary and virological analysis. What group of viruses will indicate faecal contamination of water and thus the need for its additional purification?
a. Retroviridae
b. Flaviviridae
c. Herpesviridae
d. Orthomyxoviridae
*e. Picornaviridae

75. A patient with tuberculosis has been prescribed some anti-TB preparations. Which of the following chemotherapeutic drugs has an effect on the tuberculosis pathogen?
a. Phthalylsulfathiazole
*b. Ftivazide
c. Methisazonum
d. Furacilinum
e. Sulfadimezinum

76. The causative agents of intestinal infections can grow at refrigerator temperatures, which may cause infection in people. What type of temperature optimum do these microorganisms relate to?
a. Necrophilic
*b. Psychrophilic
c. Thermophilic
d. Mesophilic
e. Anthropophilic

77. A patient was taken to a hospital with acute food poisoning caused by home-made canned mushrooms. The product analysis revealed some microorganisms that develop only in the absence of oxygen. What microorganisms caused the poisoning?
a. Capnophiles
*b. Obligate anaerobes
c. Microaerophiles
d. Facultative anaerobes
e. Obligate aerobes

78. During a survey of the sanitary state of an environment object perfringens titre was determined. What object was studied?
a. Outdoor air
b. Tap water
c. Indoor pharmacy air
*d. Soil
e. Water from an open water reservoir

79. Seroprophylaxis and serotherapy of infectious diseases involves using immune sera. What type of immunity is thus acquired?
a. Passively acquired natural immunity
b. -
c. Actively acquired artificial immunity
d. Actively acquired natural immunity
*e. Passively acquired artificial immunity

80. Antibiotics prodused by fungi belonging to Penicillium and Aspergillus genera are widely used in medicine. What class do these genera belong to?
a. Basidiomycetes
b. Deuteromycetes
c. Chytridiomycetes
*d. Ascomycetes
e. Zygomycetes

81. Infectious agents of various ultrastructures can be etiological agents of infectious diseases. Which of the groups named below HAS NO cellular structure, protein synthesizing, enzyme and energy systems?
a. Rickettsia
*b. Viruses
c. Bacteria
d. Fungi
e. Protozoa

82. Pathogenic microorganisms produce various enzymes in order to penetrate body tissues and spread there. Point out these enzymes among those named below.
*a. Hyaluronidase, lecithinase
b. Transferase, nuclease
c. Esterase, protease
d. Oxydase, catalase
e. Lyase, ligase

83. The patient has been prescribed oral drug to treat diarrhea. In accordance with WHO and Pharmacopoeia demands 1 g (ml) of drug has to contain the following number of microorganisms:
a. 1000 bacteria and 200 mold fungi
*b. 1000 bacteria and 100 mold fungi
c. 10 bacteria and no mold fungi
d. 100 bacteria and 10 mold fungi
e. No bacteria and no mold fungi

84. Pharmacy has received viricides. Choose the viricide used for influenza treatment from the list given below.
a. Acyclovir
*b. Rimantadine
c. Levamisole
d. Metisazone
e. Azidothimidine

85. The following have been detected in hand lavage of the kindergarten chef: colibacilli, ray fungi, staphylococci, bacilli, mold fungi. What microbes are evidential of fecal contamination of hands?
a. Mold fungi
*b. Colibacilli
c. Staphylococci
d. Ray fungi
e. Bacilli

86. A person has been in contact with influenza patient. What drug should be administered for specific passive influenza prophylaxis?
a. Leukocytic interferon
b. Vaccine influenza virus inactivated
*c. Antigrippal immunoglobulin
d. Amizon
e. Anaferon

