1. A patient with stenocardia has been administered acetylsalicylic acid for:
a. Aggregate effect
b. Inhibition of blood fibrinolytic activity
*c. Antiplatelet effect
d. Anti-inflammatory effect
e. Increase in blood fibrinolytic activity

2. A patient with hypertensive crisis has been given an intravenous injection of clonidine. What mechanism underlies the antihypertensive effect of clonidine?
a. Blockade of peripheral α1-adrenoceptors
b. Blockade of N-cholinergic receptors
c. Direct myotropic effect on blood vessels
*d. Stimulation of presynaptic central α2 adrenoceptors
e. Blockade of beta-adrenoceptors

3. A patient with hypertensive crisis should be administered a diuretic as a part of complex therapy. What drug should be given the patient?
*a. Furosemide
b. Spironolactone
c. Amiloride
d. Triamterene
e. Diacarb

4. Consult a patient on which antihistamine drug DOES NOT have sedative and hypnotic effect:
a. Suprastinum
b. Tavegil (Clemastine)
c. Diphenhydramine
d. Promethazine
*e. Loradatine

5. A patient with hypertension has been prescribed a drug that blocks angiotensin receptors. Specify this drug:
a. Nifedipine
b. Captopril
c. Apressin
*d. Losartan
e. Prazosin

6. A patient with gastric ulcer has been administered omeprazole. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Neutralization of HCl
b. Stimulation of mucus production
c. Blockade of histamine H2-receptors
d. M-cholinergic receptor blockade
*e. Inhibition of H+, K+-ATPase

7. A patient with a heart rhythm disorder has been given lidocaine. Apart from the local anesthetic effect, this drug has the following pharmacological effect:
a. Antipyretic
b. Hypnotic
*c. Antiarrhythmic
d. Antidepressant
e. Nootropic

8. A patient with acute heart failure and cardiac glycosides intolerance was given an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
*a. Stimulation of β1-adrenoceptors
b. Blockade of K+-, Na+-ATPase
c. Stimulation of M-cholinergic receptors
d. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase activity
e. Stimulation of α1-adrenoceptors

9. A patient with renal colic has been administered a spasmolytic from the group of M-cholinergic antagonists as a part of the complex therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Proserin
b. Dithylinum
c. Benzohexonium
*d. Atropine
e. Galantamine

10. A pharmacy dispenses glaucine hydrochloride to a patient with chronic bronchitis. The patient must be warned about the following typical side effect of the drug:
a. Excitation of the central nervous system
b. Rise of intraocular pressure
c. Allergic skin rash
*d. Blood pressure fall
e. Arrhythmia

11. A 40-year-old patient has a history of bronchial asthma and bradyarrhythmia. In order to eliminate bronchospasm, the drugs of the following pharmacological group should be administered:
*a. M-anticholinergics
b. M-cholinergic agents
c. Muscle relaxants
d. Anticholinesterase agents
e. β-adrenergic blocking agents

12. Dobutamine has been administered to the 49-year-old-patient with acute cardiac failure and cardiac glycoside intolerance. What is this drug's mechanism of action?
a. Stimulation of M-cholinergic receptors
*b. Stimulation of β1-adrenoreceptors
c. Blockade of K+-, Na+-adenosinetriphosphatase
d. Stimulation of α1-adrenoreceptors
e. Suppression of phosphodiesterase activity

13. The patient with hepatic colic has been prescribed spasmolytic of muscarinic receptor antagonists group as a part of his complex therapy. What drug is it?
*a. Atropine
b. Galantamine
c. Benzohexonium
d. Dithylin
e. Proserin

14. Epinephrine is used to prolong the effect of novocaine during infiltration anesthesia. What epinephrine action is this effect caused by?
a. Suppression of tissue esterases
*b. Vasoconstriction
c. Suppression of nerve endings and conductors functioning
d. Potentiation of novocaine action at CNS level
e. Vasodilatation

15. What naloxone indications are there?
a. Heavy metals poisoning
b. Ergot alkaloids poisoning
c. Atropine sulphate poisoning
*d. Narcotic analgetics acute poisoning
e. Cardiac glycosides poisoning

16. Pharmacy sells glaucine hydrochloride to the patient with chronic bronchitis. What common side effect should he be warned about?
a. Allergic skin rashes
*b. Decrease of arterial pressure
c. Disruption of cardiac rate
d. Excitation of central nervous system
e. Increase of intraocular pressure

17. Name the drug that causes miosis and lowers intraocular pressure.
a. Fenofibrate
b. Atropine sulphate
c. Suxamethonium chloride
*d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Nitrazepam

18. The student with cold has been prescribed antipyretic medicine. Name this medicine.
a. Cyanocobalamin
*b. Paracetamol
c. Oxytocin
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Famotidine

19. The 32-year-old patient has been taking antituberculosis drugs. Later he noticed that his urine had become red-orange in color. What drug is conductive to this phenomenon?
a. Isoniazid
b. Ethambutol
c. Streptomycin sulphate
*d. Rifampicin
e. Pyrazinamide

20. The patient with acute poisoning needs forced diuresis. What drug can be used for this purpose?
a. Piracetam
*b. Furosemide
c. Galantamine hydrobromide
d. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
e. Enalapril

21. What drug is more advisable for the patient with amebic dysentery?
a. Pyrantel
b. Bicillin-5
c. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt (Penicillin G sodium salt)
*d. Metronidazole
e. Levamisole

22. The 33-year-old female patient, who undergoes long-term treatment due to her chronic polyarthritis, complains of increased arterial pressure, adipose tissue redistribution and menstrual irregularities. What drug does the patient take?
a. Indometacin
b. Fluocinolone acetonide
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Prednisolone
e. Phenylbutazone

23. The student asks the pharmacist to recommend him the drug to relieve allergic rhinitis symptoms he suffers from when lime tree is in bloom. What drug can be recommended in this case?
a. Propranolol
b. Epinephrine
*c. Loratadine
d. Ambroxol
e. Losartan

24. The patient with neurosis has been prescribed anxiolytic derivative of benzodiazepine. Name this drug.
*a. Diazepam
b. Piroxicam
c. Trihexyphenidyl
d. Nandrolone
e. Atropine sulphate

25. What chemotherapeutic agent is a drug of choice for treatment of herpes?
*a. Acyclovir
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
c. Metronidazole
d. Chingamin
e. Rifampicin

