1. 6 months after treatment a patient with coronary heart disease developed tolerance to the prolonged-action nitrates. What drug with nitrate-similar effect should be recommended in this case?
a. Prazosin
b. Nifedipine
*c. Molsidomine
d. Verapamil
e. Metoprolol

2. Which of the following drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
*a. Streptokinase
b. Phenylinum
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Ticlopidine
e. Heparin

3. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
*a. Deferoxamium
b. Bemegridum
c. Penicillamine
d. Atropinum
e. Protamine sulfate

4. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. Which of these antimicrobials should be administered to this patient?
a. Gentamicin sulfate
b. Ofloxacin
c. Biseptol
*d. Cefotaxime
e. Tetracycline hydrochloride

5. One of the major indicator of drug elimination from the human body is:
a. Highest concentration in blood
*b. Effective halfbeak
c. Bioavailability
d. Volume of distribution
e. Bioequivalence

6. Mother of a 2-month-old child came to a pharmacy and asked for a febrifuge. What drug should be recommended for the child?
*a. Paracetamolum
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Indometacinum
e. Nimesulide

7. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia has been administered an antibiotic. After treatment the child lost his hearing. What group of antibiotics might have caused this complication?
a. Macrolides
b. Cephalosporins
*c. Aminoglycosides
d. Natural penicillins
e. Semi-synthetic penicillins

8. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
*a. 100 mg
b. 1000 mg
c. 50 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 500 mg

9. A patient with hypertension has been administered one of antihypertensive drugs. Blood pressure dropped back to normal, but the patient has developed a persistent dry cough. Which of the following drugs has such a side effect?
*a. Enalapril maleate
b. Clonidine
c. Nifedipine
d. Furosemide
e. Propranolol

10. Name the reason for the reduction of anticoagulant effect of syncumar when it is applied in combination with phenobarbital:
a. These drugs are antagonists
b. Mutual inactivation
c. Phenobarbital inhibits microsomal liver enzymes
d. Development of syncumar allergy
*e. Phenobarbital activates microsomal liver enzymes

11. Choose an optimal antibacterial drug for the mycoplasmal pneumonia treatment:
*a. Rovamycine
b. Penicillin
c. Amoksiklav
d. Ampicillin
e. Gentamycinum

12. Which of the listed preparations should be used as antidote and included into the first-aid kit required at factories where acute intoxications with arsenic, mercury, chrome and bismuth compounds are possible?
a. Droperidolum
*b. Unithiolum
c. Аtropinum
d. Аdrenalinum
e. Morphinum

13. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent presentations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Dе-Nоl
b. Drotaverine
*c. Раncreatinum
d. Оmерrаzоlе
e. Acidin pepsinum

14. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
*a. Immediate allergy
b. Local irritation
c. Abstinence syndrome
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Delayed allergy

15. A 15-year-old patient has been first diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus. Which antihyperglycemic drug should be administered in this case?
*a. Insulin
b. Diabetone
c. Glibenclamide
d. Glurenorm
e. Metformin

16. Which of the following non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents has the least harmful effect on the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Nimesulide
c. Indomethacin
d. Diclofenac
e. Piroxicam

17. Examination of a patient who has been treated for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time revealed hyperglycemia. What drug might have caused it?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Chloroquine
c. Levamisole
*d. Dexamethasone
e. Ibuprofen

18. Which drug is used for thrombolysis in case of acute myocardial infarction?
a. Pentoxifylline
b. Fraxiparine
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Heparin
*e. Alteplase

19. A 54-year-old patient who has been suffering from hyperacidic gastritis for several years was prescribed almagel. What pharmacotherapeutical complications on the part of digestive organs may be expected in the first place?
*a. Constipation
b. Anorexia
c. Diarrhea
d. Emesis
e. Nausea

20. A 26-year-old patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia provoked by mycoplasma. Choose the appropriate antimicrobial preparation for the patient treatment:
a. Amoxicillin
b. Веnzylpenicillinum
c. Amoxiklav
*d. Rovamycine
e. Gentamycinum

21. A 60-year-old patient has essential hypertension stage II, coronary disease, bronchial asthma. After pharmacotherapy correction the patient exhibited a bronchospastic attack, intensified dyspnea. What drug provoked this complication?
a. Salbutamolum
*b. Propranolol
c. Еuphyllinum
d. Nifedipinе
e. Мucaltinum

22. After an emotional stress a 60-year-old patient presented with chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Specify a drug that relieves pain in this case:
a. Metoprolol
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Diltiazem
d. Nifedipine
e. Propranolol

23. A woman asked a pharmaceutist to dispense an antipyretic for an 8-month-old child. Which drug should be recommended?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Piroxicam
*d. Paracetamol
e. Indomethacin

24. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
*a. Doxazosin
b. Propranolol
c. Losartan
d. Diltiazem
e. Еnаlаpril

25. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of such side effect?
a. Isoniazid
b. Rifampicin
c. Ethionamidum
*d. Streptomycin
e. Ethambutol

26. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should NOT be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
a. Benzylpenicillinum
b. Doxycycline
c. Midecamycin
d. Gentamycinum
*e. Co-trimoxazolum

27. Which of the listed pharmacolgical groups of antihypertensive drugs is contra-indicated the patients with bronchial asthma?
a. Angiotensin receptors blockers
b. Diuretics
c. ACE inhibitor
d. Calcium channel blockers
*e. Beta-adrenergic blocking agent

28. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
a. Panangin
b. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages
c. Furosemide
d. Trimetazidine
*e. Verapamil

29. A patient with cholelithiasis should be administered the following drug for the dissolution of cholesterol gallstones:
a. Citric acid
b. Mefenamic acid
c. Gamma-aminobutyric acid
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
*e. Ursodeoxycholic acid

30. A 68-year-old female patient has been continuously taking furosemide for heart failure treatment. What drug should be used to prevent hypokalemia in patients taking furosemide?
a. Mildronatum
b. Atp-long
*c. Panangin
d. Trimetazidine
e. Sustac forte

31. A 52-year-old patient complains of having increased arterial pressure for a month. She has a 5-year history of bronchial asthma. What group of hypotensive drugs should NOT be recommended this patient?
a. Tranquilizers
b. Calcium channel blockers
*c. ?-adrenoreceptor blockers
d. Angiotensin receptor blockers
e. Diuretics

32. An 18-year-old patient was diagnosed with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug will provide etiotropic pharmacotherapy?
a. Metronidazole
*b. Isoniazid
c. Trimethoprim
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
e. Lincomycin

33. A woman in the III trimester of pregnancy has an acute respiratory viral disease accompanied with body temperature rise up to 39°C. Which of the drugs should be recommended?
a. Indomethacin
b. Celecoxib
*c. Paracetamol
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Diclofenac sodium

34. Benzathine benzylpenicillin is the drug of choice for treating the following disease:
a. Angina
b. Furunculosis
c. Intestinal infection
d. Pneumonia
*e. Syphilis

35. A patient consults a pharmaceutist about taking acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. What is the daily dose that should be recommended for continuous use?
a. 1,0-2,0 g
b. 0,5-1,0 g
*c. 0,1-0,3 g
d. 2,0-3,0
e. Over 4,0 g

36. A patient suffering from arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Body temperature remained unchanged. It is known that the patient takes captopril. These symptoms can be explained by increased generation of:
a. Natriuretic peptide
*b. Bradyquinine
c. Renin
d. Angiotensin-1
e. Aldosterone

37. Which preparation from the group of laxative agents IS NOT to be administered in case of intoxication with CNS-inhibiting substances?
a. Guttalax
*b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Vaseline oil
d. Sodium sulfate
e. Bisacodyl

38. Treatment of poisonings with inorganic mercury compounds includes the use of the following antidote:
a. Tetacinum-calcium
b. Naloxone
*c. Unithiol
d. Desferal
e. Dexamethasone

39. During the treatment of chronic heart failure with digoxin in a patient having bradycardia, nausea, vomiting, blurred vision. Which drug is the antidote in this case?
a. Dipiroximum
b. Tetacinum calcium
*c. Unithiol
d. Amyl nitrite
e. Atropine sulphate

40. A 46-year-old patient suffering from chronic bronchitis came to a pharmacy. What expectorative drug may be recommended?
a. Falimint
b. Glauvent
c. Salbutamol
*d. Ambroxol
e. Libexin

41. A 26-year-old pregnant woman (III trimester of pregnancy) complains about body temperature rise up to 39°C. What febrifuge may be recommended in this case?
a. Indometacin
*b. Paracetamol
c. Diclofenac
d. Aspirin
e. Analgin

42. During the combined pharmacotherapy a patient with peptic ulcer presented with black-coloured feces. What drug might have caused such change?
a. Metronidazole
b. Ranitidine
c. Omeprazole
d. Actovegin
*e. Bismuth subcitrate

43. A patient who has been undergoing combined drug therapy for peptic ulcer presents with black feces. Specify a drug that might have caused such a change:
a. Omeprazole
b. Metronidazole
c. Ranitidine
*d. Bismuth subcitrate
e. Actovegin

44. A female patient in the first trimester of pregnancy has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What is the antibiotic drug of choice for treating this patient?
a. Amikacin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Gentamicin
d. Norfloxacin
e. Chloramphenicol

45. A man with a long history of chronic hepatitis has been diagnosed with pneumonia. Which of the following antibacterial drugs can be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Vancomycin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Biseptol
d. Tetracycline
e. Rifampicin

46. A 25-year-old patient has been taking antibiotics for 7 days. Antibiotic therapy has caused a complication in form of bowel dysbacteriosis. This complication should be treated with drugs of the following pharmacological group:
*a. Probiotics
b. Cholagogic
c. Adaptogens
d. Antacids
e. Spasmolytics

47. A 57-year-old female patient was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis; she has also a history of stomach ulcer. What drug from the group of nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs may be recommended this patient?
*a. Celecoxib
b. Aspirin
c. Mefenamic acid
d. Indometacin
e. Diclofenac

48. An internship doctor prescribed his patient nifuroxazid from the group of nitrofurans for the treatment of urinary tracts infection. The doctor made a mistake because:
*a. It cannot be absorbed from the digestive tract
b. It has nephrotoxic effect
c. It is excreted from the organism very slowly
d. It has bacteriostatic effect
e. It is excreted with urine in the inactive state

49. A patient fell ill with severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day connected with the fact that the drug:
a. Pluripotential
b. Has bactericidal effect
*c. Slowly eliminated from the body
d. Accumulates in the lungs
e. Poorly absorbed from the injection site

50. A patient with moderately severe pneumonia has been administered ceftriaxone 1 time per day. The drug should be taken once a day due to the following properties:
a. Wide range of action
b. Presence of bactericidal action
*c. Slow excretion
d. Cumulative ability
e. Poor absorption from the injection site

51. Which of the following is the drug of choice for bronchial asthma attacks prevention?
a. Salbutamol
b. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
c. Ambroxol
*d. Cromolyn sodium
e. Drotaverine

52. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed an antiulcer drug that also reduces secretion of hydrochloric acid and inhibits Chelicobacter pylori. What drug is it?
a. Almagel
*b. Omeprazole
c. Maalox
d. Gastrocepine
e. Famotidine

53. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
*a. Enalapril
b. Clonidine
c. Dichlothiazide
d. Dibazol
e. Propranolol

54. A patient with arterial hypertension was administered a non-prescription drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis. What pharmaceutical form should be recommended the patient in order to reduce as much as possible the likelihood of development of undesirable systemic vasoconstriction?
a. Aerosol
b. Tablets
c. Gel
d. Drops
*e. Ointment

55. A 56-year-old patient suffering from essential hypertension was prescribed an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and a potassium-sparing diuretic. Such combination is:
a. Reasonable because it decreases risk of hyperkaliemia development
b. Unreasonable because it reduces hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
c. Unreasonable because it increases risk of orthostatic collapse development
*d. Unreasonable because it increases risk of hyperkaliemia development
e. Reasonable because it potentiates hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor

56. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic does not need to be combined with potassium preparations?
a. Dichlothiazide
b. Clopamide
*c. Triamteren
d. Furosemide
e. Ethacrynic acid

57. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
a. Taste violation
b. Diarrhea
c. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome
d. Central nervous system depression effect
*e. Orthostatic hypotension

58. A 67-year-old patient who undergoes treatment for bronchial asthma presents with limb tremor, headache, insomnia, extrasystole. What drug might have caused such symptoms?
*a. Theophylline
b. Tavegyl
c. Acetylcysteine
d. Intal
e. Prednisolone

