1. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
a. Bureaucratic
b. Centralized
c. Decentralized
*d. Divisional
e. Functional

2. A pharmaceutical enterprise widely applies technical and technological media of information use in order to increase efficiency of managing productive and administrative activity of an organization, to enhance labour productivity, to improve methods of planning and regulating management processes. All this is realized by means of:
*a. Automated management system
b. Automated instruction and control system
c. Automated data retrieval system
d. Information-management system
e. Automation equipped working place

3. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Market penetration
b. Decrease
c. Development
*d. Maturity
e. Growth

4. Marketing research of certain pharmaceutical groups involves collection and analysis of primary information. This is the following type of marketing research:
*a. Field research
b. Research of drug market
c. Research of marketing network of pharmaceutical market
d. Research of drug consumers
e. Armchair research

5. The market is characterized by the following conditions: a big number of salespersons and customers who dont make any influence upon the level of current prices; availability of uniform and interchangeable competing products; lack of price restrictions. What type of market is it?
a. Market of pure monopoly
b. -
c. Market of monopolistic competition
d. Oligopolistic market
*e. Market of pure competition

6. A pharmaceutist and a pharmacy manager were involved into the labour dispute about carry over of vacation time. The pharmaceutist applied to the council of conciliation. The council should consider his application within the following period:
a. 3 days
b. 5 days
*c. 10 days
d. 1 week
e. 1 month

7. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
a. Dealer
b. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
c. -
*d. Bonus
e. Seasonal

8. Development of advertising strategy for promotion of nonprescription drugs includes identification of the target audience. The highest selectivity of consumer audience can be achieved by means of the following advertisment type:
a. On transport
b. On the radio
*c. At sales outlet
d. In the printed publication
e. On TV

9. Theory of management currently marks out four the most important approaches to the management. Choose the approach that textbfis NOT applied in the theory of management:
a. Situational
b. Different schools dedication approach
c. Process approach
d. Systemic
*e. Structured

10. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
*a. Counteractive
b. Remarketing
c. Stimulating
d. Synchromarketing
e. Conversion

11. On the initiative of the manufacturing company some amendments to a drug information leaflet are to be made for the restriction of the drug use. What type of marketing is applied in this case?
a. Incentive
*b. Opposed
c. Remarketing
d. Conversion
e. Synchromarketing

12. When developing a new drug a manufacturer may apply different strategies of brand use. If a company uses one brand name for all of its products, such strategy is called:
*a. Group brands
b. Brands for individual drugs
c. Multi-brand approach
d. The combination of brand name with an individual drug brand
e. Individual brands

13. At the initial stage of establishing a pharmaceutical enterprise the internal disciplinary regulations should be adopted. One of the primary matters is the duration of the lunch break for the employees. According to the Labour Code of Ukraine, the break duration must be as follows:
a. 2,5 hours
b. -
c. Up to 1 hour
d. Not less than 3 hours
*e. Up to 2 hours

14. A large and well-known company has granted a small independent firm the right to use its trademark and technology so that it could take advantage of authority and customer trust to the well-known brand. Such concept is called:
a. Merchandising
b. Use of trademark
c. Use of manufacturers brand
*d. Franchising
e. Use of dealers brand

15. Management of a pharmaceutical company involves American and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
a. Group forms of control
b. Slow career development
c. Heightened attention to the human factor
*d. Quick evaluation and career development
e. Corporate liability

16. A pharmaceutical company conducted an age-specific segment analysis of the regional antihistamine market. It revealed the lack of antihistamines for children. The company will consider this segment as:
a. Unattractive segment
b. Segment requiring further research
c. Market door
*d. Market niche
e. Market share

17. The manufacturing pharmaceutical company " Elema" set up its own corporate pharmacy. In this case, it uses the following distribution channel:
a. First level
b. Third level
c. Fourth level
*d. Zero level
e. Second level

18. An employee of a pharmaceutical company has been commissioned with marketing research on the regional market of antiarrhythmic drugs. What stage of research would he prefer in the first place?
*a. Collection and analysis of secondary information
b. Analysis of primary information
c. Submission of report
d. Preparation of report
e. Collection of primary information

19. A pharmaceutical company "Pfizer" is focused on offering the best quality goods at a high price which should cover the costs of research and development as well as production of high quality products. Despite the high price, the product is still in demand. What are the goals of the companys price policy?
a. Maintaining status quo
b. Ensuring the companys survival
*c. Winning the market leadership in respect of product quality
d. Increasing the market share
e. Increasing the companys assortment

20. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own sales departments, affiliated sales companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Four-level
*b. Zero level
c. Two-level
d. One-level
e. Three-level

21. Three founders set up a business entity for the wholesale distribution of medicines and healthcare products. Specify the form of such company:
a. Public
b. Unitary
*c. Corporate
d. Utility
e. Individual

22. A pharmaceutist plans voluntary termination of the open-ended employment contract for the reason of her husbands transfer to another area. Specify the form and term of notice that should be given to the pharmacy director:
a. Five-day notice in written form
b. Two-day notice in written form
c. One-week notice in written form
d. One-month notice in written form
*e. Two-week notice in written form

23. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Pure competition market
b. Oligopolistic market
c. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market
*d. Pure monopoly market
e. Monopolistic competitive market

24. A pharmaceutical company "Adonis" promotes its new products by means of advertisement that informs the customers about the product, highlights its advantages, typical features and properties. What kind of advertisment is it?
a. Supporting
b. Aggressive
*c. Informational
d. Indirect
e. Direct

25. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
*a. Licence-based
b. Free
c. Without preliminary licencing or registration
d. Limited
e. Normative

26. A pharmacy makes wholesale purchases of health and hygiene products. An agent works under the contract with the manufacturer and makes deals at the manufacturers cost. The agent may be entitled to exclusive distribution in some regions. What kind of agent is it?
*a. Wholesale agent
b. Commission agent
c. Dealer
d. Broker
e. Consignee

27. Activity of an organization depends on various factors. What factors refer to the internal environment of the organization?
a. Economy status
b. Public authorities
c. Consumers
*d. Abilities, skills and talent of staff
e. Infrastructure

28. The planning of marketing strategy involves two successive stages. What are the stages of the strategic planning process?
a. Describing the current marketing situation
b. Developing a program of activities
c. Budgeting
*d. Defining the mission and goals of a pharmaceutical company
e. Making the list of tasks and problems

29. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Labour loss
b. Loss of property
*c. Business risk
d. Loss of time
e. Financial loss

30. Inventory of human resources at pharmaceutical companies is based on keeping of work record books, employees files, personal data sheets T-2. What parameter CANNOT be estimated by the analysis of the above-mentioned date?
*a. Labour market state
b. Average staffing number
c. Data on the staff turnover
d. Staff categories
e. Average payroll strength

31. Pharmacy activities are commonly operated by different types of managers. The function of direct control over drug preparation by a pharmaceutist refers to the following type of management:
a. Bureaucratic
*b. Technical
c. Managerial
d. Institutional
e. Administrative

32. As a pharmaceutist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient didnt apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the recipient:
a. Nonverbal barriers
b. Neglect of facts
*c. Semantic barriers
d. Failure to understand the importance of information
e. Stereotype mentation

33. A pharmaceutist has applied for a job of a stockkeeper at a wholesale pharmaceutical enterprise. What trial period doesnt require agreement with the trade-union committee?
*a. Up to three monthes
b. Up to two monthes
c. Up to six monthes
d. Up to four monthes
e. Up to one month

34. A pharmacy analyst is going to take a part of his holiday in spring and a part in summer. Holiday dividing is allowed provided that its main part will be no less than:
a. 12 days
b. 10 days
*c. 14 days
d. 16 days
e. 18 days

35. Marketing manager at a pharmaceutical factory is planning its communication policy. Which component of the marketing communication systems has the highest value for one contact?
*a. Personal sale
b. TV advertising
c. Sales promotion
d. Periodical advertising
e. "Public relations"

36. TV periodically conducts campaigns for young people aimed at popularization of mechanical contraceptives (not indicating concrete trademarks). Such actions are a kind of the following marketing communication:
a. Personal sale
b. Advertising
*c. Publicity
d. Sale promotion
e. Sponsorship

37. A joint-stock company involved into production and selling of drug preparations has developed a structure for working with various consuming organizations. Such organizational structure is called:
a. Bureaucratic structure
*b. Divisional structure
c. Departmentalization
d. Functional structure
e. Array (matrix) structure

38. The relationships between the demand, supply and price level is studied within the following field of complex market research:
*a. Studies of economic environment
b. Analysis of market segmentation
c. Analysis of sociopsychological features of buyers
d. Studies of market structure of companies
e. Studies of market and product requirements

39. What management style is characterized by managers particular compliance, when manager initiates goals formation by his subordinate and is ready to accept it without reservations?
a. Collective style
b. Combined style
c. Democratic management style
d. Bureaucratic style
*e. Laissez-faire management style

40. Which component of the marketing communication system focuses on creating a positive image of a company?
a. Merchandising
*b. Public relations
c. Personal sales
d. Advertising
e. Retail logistics

41. Companys activity aimed at planning, organization and control of physical movement of materials and finished goods from the production site to the place of their utilization for the purpose of covering the consumer needs and gaining profit, is called:
a. Supply
b. Advertising
c. Management
*d. Marketing
e. Demand

42. Public health services attach great importance to the drug quality, for this reason a pharmaceutic enterprise has concentrated its efforts upon the improvement of qualitative characteristics of its products. What concept of marketing management is applied in this company?
a. Production improvement
b. All answers are correct
c. There is no correct answer
*d. Product improvement
e. Modern marketing

43. When a graduate becomes employed on a certain position he should be first familiarized with his rights and duties. What document regulates rights and duties of pharmacy employees?
*a. Job description
b. Labour code
c. All the answers are false
d. All the answers are correct
e. Internal employment policies and procedures

44. Product assortment is the whole set of product assortment groups offered by an enterprise. The index representing number of positions in each product assortment group is called:
*a. Product assortment depth
b. Product assortment saturation
c. Assortment comparability
d. Product assortment
e. Product assortment width

45. Functioning of a pharmacy is realized on different levels of management. Function of direct control of employees fulfilling concrete tasks relates to the following level of management:
a. Administrative
b. Bureaucratic
c. Institutional
d. Managerial
*e. Technical

