1. According to the supply contract with joint-stock company "Darnitsa", a pharmacy warehouse accepted some inventory items. Which department of the warehouse is directly responsible for the goods acceptance?
*a. Reception division
b. Configuration division
c. Operations division
d. Stores division
e. Expedition division

2. In order to fill a burrette a pharmaceutist prepared 2 l of 10% benzoate solution. This operation should be recorded in the following register:
a. Packaging
b. Prescription
c. Spot (cash)
*d. Laboratory
e. Commodity report

3. A pharmacy supplies the population with drugs for cash. Specify the VAT on drugs:
a. 15%
b. 10%
*c. 0%
d. 20%
e. 30%

4. A pharmacy produces compounded drugs. What kinds of internal control of drugs production are required?
a. Written and sell control
*b. Written, organoleptic, sell control
c. Written, qualitative and quantitative analysis
d. Written, interrogatory, sell control
e. Written, physics and chemical

5. Balance is a part of financial accounting of pharmacies. What index is reflected in the assets of the balance sheet?
a. Proceeds of a pharmacy
b. Salary costs
c. Retail turnover
d. Wholesale turnover
*e. Residual value of fixed assets

6. A pharmacy manager is working out a schedule for a pharmaceutist who is responsible for prescription reception and drug serving out. What is the weekly working time for one employee?
a. 30 hours
b. Irregular working week
c. 38 hours
d. 40 hours
*e. 36 hours

7. A pharmaceutist was on a business trip. What is the deadline for submitting a travel expense report?
a. Four working days after returning from a trip
b. A week after returning from a trip
c. There is no deadline
*d. Three working days after returning from a trip
e. Ten working days after returning from a trip

8. An advance holder (accountant) was given some money from the cash fund of an enterprise for purchase of office accessories. After the cash advance the advance holder must submit the complete application of funds statement no later than:
a. Such term isnt established
*b. Third banking day
c. Ten working days
d. Five working days
e. One week

9. Ukraine has a valid list of drugs whose price is subject to the governmental regulation. What is the way of retail price formation for Corvalol 25,0 (produced by "Pharmac") providing that this drug is included in the above-mentioned list?
a. Setting a 40% mark up on the wholesale price
b. Setting common consumer price
c. Setting a 35% markup on the customs price
d. Setting a 35% markup on the mediators price
*e. Setting a 35% markup on the manufacturers price

10. A pharmacy selling officinal drugs is a successful participant of the pharmaceutical market. Specify the business transaction which is qualified as pharmacy revenue:
a. Writing-off of the cost of goods sold
b. Tax charge
c. Salary accounting
*d. Proceeds of a structural subdivision of a pharmacy
e. Receipt of advance payment made by a customer

11. A pharmacy provides its customers with officinal medicines. Specify the business transaction which is qualified as pharmacy expenses:
a. Proceeds of a structural subdivision
b. Pharmacy proceeds
*c. Write-off of cost of goods sold
d. Personal income tax
e. Posting of goods

12. All the medications require special storage conditions according to their physical and physicochemical properties. Ampouled solution of sodium adenosine triphosphate (ATP) should be stored under the following temperature:
*a. 3-5°C
b. 7-10°C
c. 12-15°C
d. 10°C
e. 0-2°C

13. Before accepting the goods by a pharmacy, they should be checked for quantity and quality. If there is no discrepancy, the pharmacy issues a warrant for receipt of goods. This warrant is valid for:
a. 15 days
b. 20 days
c. 3 months
d. 1 year
*e. 10 days

14. A pharmacy manager is writing the monthly "Inventory report". What business transactions should be represented in the expenditure item of the report?
a. Herbal raw material purchases
b. Amortization charged to operation
c. Extra-evaluation of laboratory-packaging works
*d. Drug sales
e. Payroll payment

15. Therapeutic department of a municipal hospital purchases medical products in a pharmacy. The wares will be dispensed from the stores department on presentation of the following document:
*a. Delivery order
b. Prescription register
c. Register of laboratory packing works
d. Inventory report
e. Cash book

16. During inventory of a pharmacy the surplus of inventory holdings was revealed. What actions concerning the surplus should be taken by the inventory comission?
a. Writing-off
*b. Take on charge
c. Abolishment
d. Confiscation by superior organization
e. Immediate realization

17. A pharmacy has a license for selling narcotic drugs. The warrant for the receipt of these drugs from the pharmacy warehouse is valid for:
*a. No longer than 10 calendar days from the date of issue
b. No longer than 1 calendar days from the date of issue
c. No longer than 5 calendar days from the date of issue
d. No longer than 1 year from the date of issue
e. No longer than 3 months from the date of issue

18. Which of the pharmacy departments is responsible for checking the quantity and quality of received goods, their storage and dispensing to other departments?
a. Compounding and production department
b. Department of over-the-counter drugs
c. Department of curative cosmetics
*d. Inventory department
e. Department of finished dosage forms

19. In Ukraine the out-patients are supplied with narcotic and psychotropic drugs only by prescription. Medicoprophylactic institutions receive prescription blanks (Form 3) from the following source:
a. Pharmaceutical corporation
*b. Pharmacy storehouse
c. Wholesale companies
d. Citys health department
e. Typography

20. The central district pharmacy functions in a district centre and supplies local population with drugs and medical products. What pharmaceutical institutions are allowed to settle accounts with the customers without a cash register by way of check issuing?
a. Central district pharmacy
b. Pharmaceutical kiosk at a market
c. Pharmaceutical kiosk at a railway station
*d. Pharmacies, pharmaceutical outlets and kiosks
e. Pharmaceutical outlet at a hospital

21. Two pharmaceutical enterprises simultaneously applied to a bank for establishing a running account. The bank refused the application to one of the enterprises. The reason for the refusal is that the enterprise:
*a. Has not registrated a statute
b. Has no stamp
c. Has not provided the report on financial results
d. Has not provided the balance
e. Is located in another administrative area

22. When doing calculations to determine the limit of the cash balance, an accountant must specify the actual amount of cash receipts. What time period should be taken into account?
a. 10 days prior to calculation
b. 7 days prior to calculation
c. Six months prior to calculation
d. 1 year prior to calculation
*e. Three months prior to calculation

23. In order to get registered in state authorities pharmacies as legal persons must possess authorized capital stock. What amount is identified as the authorized capital stock?
a. The amount of debts of an enterprise
*b. The amount recorded in constituent documents
c. The amount of fund formation sources
d. The amount of noncurrent assets
e. Total assets

24. According to the current legislation, pharmaceutists get the sickness benefit in case of temporary disability. Specify the source of payment for the first 5 days of being on the sick leave:
a. Pension fund
b. Pharmacy revenues
*c. Pharmacy expenditures
d. Environment stimulation fund
e. Reserve fund

25. Accounting of pharmaceutical institutions includes control accounts of nine classes. What accounting units are represented in the accounts of the 4-6 classes?
*a. Liability
b. Element costs
c. Incomings and business results
d. Material costs
e. Pharmacy assets

26. A pharmacy plans to purchase and retail goods of different stock record units. Which group of goods does VAT reduction apply to?
a. Baby food
b. Curative cosmetics
c. Perfumes
*d. Medicaments
e. Optics

27. At the end of each month a pharmacy manager writes an Inventory report. This document relates to the following type of accounting:
a. Accountancy
b. Statistical
c. Taxation
*d. Intraeconomic
e. Financial

28. When filling the "Inventory report", a pharmacy manager represented a number of business transactions in the receipts section of report. Such transactions include:
a. Markdown on account of laboratory packing works
*b. Purchase of drugs and pharmaceutical merchandise
c. Products consumption for business needs
d. Total of realized trade mark-up
e. Total of sale

29. A pharmacy received a batch of medicines from a pharmacy depot. Specify the drug subject to the controlled substance inventory in pharmacies:
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Dicaine
c. Analgin
d. Paracetamol
e. Novocaine

30. A pharmacy received some medicines from the warehouse. What medicine is subject to the stocktaking in the pharmaceutical institutions?
a. Corvalolum
b. Aminalonum
*c. Codeine
d. Analginum
e. Butadionum

31. A licensed state-owned pharmacy obtains and retails narcotic drugs. Which state authority develops and revises the list of the drugs allowed in Ukraine?
a. Public Joint Stock Company "Medicaments of Ukraine"
b. -
c. State Inspectorate for Quality Control of Drugs
d. State Pharmacological Centre
*e. State servise on Narcotic Drugs Control of Ukraine

32. A pharmaceutist with over 8 years of service got a medical certificate in accordance with the established procedure. What is the size of temporary disability allowance the pharmaceutist is entitled to?
a. 90% of average salary
b. 60% of average salary
c. 50% of average salary
*d. 100% of average salary
e. 80% of average salary

33. A pharmacy functions on the base of collective financial liability. The financial liability agreement may be re-executed in the following case:
a. Dismissal of one staff member
b. Dismissal of 10% of staff
c. Employment of new employees
*d. Dismissal of over 50% of staff
e. Dismissal of 5% of staff

34. A pharmacy sells drugs by retail. Omnopon relates to the following group of controlled drugs:
a. General sale list
*b. Narcotic
c. Toxic
d. Psychtropic
e. Potent

35. A pharmacy is engaged in retail sales of drugs. What group of drugs does atropine sulphate relate to?
*a. Toxic
b. Over-the-counter
c. Psychotropic
d. Narcotic
e. Drastic

36. At the end of each month accountant of a pharmacy calculates amount of realized price markup. Which index IS NOT USED for such calculation?
*a. Total of cash in vault
b. In-stock balance at the beginning of month in retail prices
c. Total sales proceeds
d. In-stock balance at the beginning of month in wholesale prices
e. Total value of received goods in retail and wholesale prices

37. Comparative analysis of the performance of two pharmacies showed that the trade stock in terms of days was 20 and 30 days respectively. Which of these indicators is NOT USED for calculating the trade stock?
a. The left-over goods in terms of settlement prices
*b. Wage fund
c. Sales volume
d. The rate of trade mark-up
e. Turnover

38. A pharmacy received drugs that are included in the National List of Essential Medicines. When supplying these drugs to the public hospitals, pharmacies are entitled to mark-up the drug charges at the rate of:
a. 30%
b. 20%
c. 50%
d. 40%
*e. 10%

39. A pharmacy received a batch of drugs from a wholesale firm. What document signed by an authorized person is the basis for further sale of drugs?
a. Quality certificates
b. National register of medicinal products
c. Opinion letter of the territorial inspectorate
*d. Register of medicinal products accepted for sale
e. Information on state registration

40. Sales of medical cosmetics retailed in pharmacies are taxable at the VAT rate of 20%. Who is charged with it?
a. Wholesale intermediator company firm
b. Product manufacturer
*c. End consumer
d. Pharmacy
e. Customs service

41. Compulsory deductions from employees salary are made by the accounting department independently. Specify a deduction which can be made only on the grounds of written permit of an employee:
*a. Charitable contributions
b. Contributions to the Social insurance fund for unemployment
c. Superannuation contributions
d. Contributions to the Social insurance fund for temporary disability
e. Alimony

42. Financial accountability of pharmacies consists of separate account forms. Which form presents accounts payable for the goods purchased?
a. Balance assets, form 1
*b. Balance sheet, form 1
c. Financial performance report, form 2m
d. Financial performance report, form 2
e. Net worth statement, form 3

43. In Ukraine natural persons as small business entities are allowed to use the simplified tax system. What limit on the number of employees is established for such enterprises?
a. No more than 20 persons
b. No more than 40 persons
c. No more than 50 persons
*d. No more than 10 persons
e. No more than 30 persons

44. Natural persons registered as small business entities with simplified taxation scheme (2 group) have the limit for the annual amount of sales proceeds. Specify the proceeds limit:
a. 750 thousand UAH
b. 3 million UAH
c. 5 million UAH
*d. 1 million UAH
e. 100 thousand UAH

45. Simplified tax system implies replacement of several taxes by a single one. What limit on the number of employees is established for the legal persons to implement the simplified tax system?
a. 100 persons
b. 75 persons
c. 10 persons
d. 25 persons
*e. 50 persons

46. A pharmacy as a legal person being the small enterprise plans to move to a simplified taxation system from 1 January. What is the limitation of the amount of sales revenue for such companies?
*a. Up to 1 million UAH
b. Up to 250 thousand UAH
c. Up to 100 thousand UAH
d. Up to 750 thousand UAH
e. Up to 500 thousand UAH

47. For the natural persons being small business subjects the simplified tax system is effective. But there is a limit of annual proceeds upon sale. What is the boundary amount of proceeds?
a. Up to 100 thousand UAH
b. Up to 750 thousand UAH
*c. Up to 500 thousand UAH
d. Up to 1 million UAH
e. Up to 5 million UAH

48. Medications in the storing rooms of a medicoprophylactic institution should be placed on the shelves, in the cases, refrigerators or on the pallets or rickers. Toxic medications should be kept in:
a. In a refrigerator
b. In the internal safe partition
c. In a safe
d. In a wooden case
*e. In a locked metal case

49. An accountant is calculating financial performance of a pharmacy. What item will be represented in the liabilities of the accounting report 791 called "Operational result"?
*a. Net profit (sales proceeds)
b. Administration expenses
c. Profits tax
d. Sales expenses
e. Cost of goods sold

50. The equity capital of a pharmacy is 7500 UAH, the liabilities make 2500 UAH. According to the formula of balance calculation given in the Statement of Standard Accounting Practice 2 the amount of pharmacy assets will be as follows:
a. 7 500 UAH
b. 4 000 UAH
*c. 10 000 UAH
d. 2 500 UAH
e. 12 000 UAH

51. The total of business transaction records of assets and liabilities in the accounting statement for a certain period is called:
a. Debit
b. Amount of balance
*c. Turnover
d. Credit
e. Balance

52. Water for injections is derived from the drinking or distilled water. It can be either used freshly made or stored under the required temperature conditions. Water for injections is produced in the following premises:
a. In the prescription department
b. In the sales area
c. In the assistant room
d. In the washing room
*e. In a separate room of aseptic department

53. Incoming control is conducted in the course of wholesale and retail trade, such control is carried out during receipt of goods by visual inspection or analysis of drug. Incoming control is carried out by authorized person, which is assigned by:
a. The order of head of territorial inspection
*b. Managers order
c. Head of regional structure
d. State inspection of drugs quality control
e. Proprietor of an enterprise

54. When a pharmacy records goods as received, it normally specifies the amount of the markup intended for expenditure coverage and profit gaining. Give the definition for the markup:
a. The difference between the sales price and the customs price
b. The difference between the sales price and markup
*c. The difference between the sale price and purchase price of goods
d. The amount of goods sold
e. Rummage (goods remains) at the end of the month

55. A pharmacy received a batch of goods from a supplier. What is the main financial document for posting the goods at the pharmacy?
a. Requisition
b. Goods delivery note
*c. Receipts note
d. Cash order
e. Aquittance

56. Before the raw plant material is taken over from the supplier, it must be checked for compliance. Which document is the ground for recording raw plant material as received in the pharmacy in case of its approval?
a. Write-off certificate
b. Consignation note
*c. Acceptance certificate
d. Invoice
e. -

57. Department of finished drug products of the pharmacy №1 got a prescription for nasal drops "Farmazolin" intended for a 2,8-year-old child. This drug will be dispensed at the following price:
a. 70% of price
*b. At no cost
c. Full price
d. 50% of price
e. 30% of price

58. According to the Labour Code, compulsory deductions from the salaries of pharmacy employees include:
a. Alimony
b. Amounts to be withheld under writs of execution
c. Trade union contributions
*d. Pension contributions
e. Excess payments

59. According to the basic regulations for supply of medical products, pharmacies should be supplied with medicaments with a remaining shelf life of no less than ….%, and bacterial preparations of no less than ….%:
a. 40%, 20%
b. 60%, 30%
c. 80%, 60%
d. 50%, 40%
*e. 60%, 40%

60. The amount of temporary disability benefit for pharmacy employees depends on the time in employment: employees with 5 years of service record receive ….%, 5 to 8 years - ….%, over 8 years - ….%
a. 40%, 50%, 90% of the average wage
b. 20%, 40%, 50% of the average wage
*c. 60%, 80%, 100% of the average wage
d. 10%, 30%, 50% of the averagewage
e. 25%, 45%, 65% of the average wage

61. An accountant is recording business transactions of a pharmacy. Which transaction is to be entered on the credit side of the cash-account?
a. Small retail network revenue
b. Pharmacies revenue
*c. Payroll
d. Money receipt for salaries
e. Accountable person repayment

62. Compulsory financial reporting of pharmacies includes the balance sheet. Changes in value, composition and structure of the capital stock are estimated on the base of:
a. І section of liabilities
b. ІV section of liabilities
c. I section of liabilities + ІV section of liabilities
*d. І section of assets
e. ІI section of assets + III section of assets

63. A pharmacy received a prescription for powders with a too high single dose of phenobarbital not justified by proper documentation. What actions should a pharmaceutist take?
a. Supply the maximum single dose, multiplied by the number of powders
b. Supply ⅓ of the maximum single dose
*c. Put the stamp "invalid" and return the prescription to the patient
d. Supply the highest single dose
e. Supply ⅓ of the maximum single dose, multiplied by the number of powders

64. One of the account forms of a pharmacy is the statement of balance (Form 1) which consists of the assets and liabilities. What are the elements of the assets of a pharmacy?
a. Borrowed funds
b. -
c. Own and borrowed funds
d. Own capital
*e. Current and non-current assets

65. Prescriptions for drugs being subject to the stocktaking and supplied on favourable terms or free of charge except for narcotic (psychotropic) drugs and tramadol are written out:
*a. In 2 copies of form F-1
b. On the form F-3
c. On the forms F-3 and F-1
d. On the form F-1
e. On the pink form

66. Activity of pharmaceutical institutions is subject to licensing. What is the duration of licencse for drugs and healthcare products sale?
a. Two years
b. One year
*c. Five years
d. Four years
e. Three years

67. In case of loss of license a pharmaceutist should address an application for a duplicate to a licensing authority. The licensing authority is obliged to issue the duplicate to the applicant no later than:
a. One month from the date of application receipt
b. Three monthes from the date of application receipt
c. The duplicate isnt issued
*d. Three working days from the date of application receipt
e. Two monthes from the date of application receipt

68. A business entity carrying on the wholesale trade of drugs must be keeping documents concerning purchase and sale for a certain period. Specify this period:
a. No less than one year
b. No less than five years
c. No less than ten years
*d. No less than three years
e. No less than two years

69. A routine inventory revealed a cash shortage. Who must reimburse the sum of the identified shortage?
a. Pharmacy director
b. Department head
c. Deputy head of Department
*d. Cashier
e. Deputy director of pharmacy

70. According to the applicable legislation of Ukraine, prices for some drugs and medical products are subject to governmental regulation. What is the maximal trade markup established for the drugs that are purchased by public and municipal institutions using budgetary funds?
a. 35% of manufacturers wholesale price
b. 25% of manufacturers wholesale price
c. 15% of manufacturers wholesale price
d. 30% of manufacturers wholesale price
*e. 10% of manufacturers wholesale price

71. A pharmacy sells drugs. What is the rate of value-added tax for drugs sold by a pharmacy?
a. 30%
b. 25%
c. 10%
d. 20%
*e. 0%

72. Inventory in a pharmacy revealed a shortage within the range of natural loss. This shortage will be rated as expenses at the following price:
a. Сontractual prices
b. Consumer prices
*c. Wholesale prices
d. Quota purchase prices
e. Negotiated price

73. On the wage of pharmacy employees the personal income tax is levied. What pays are NOT included into the total monthly income being subject to this kind of taxation?
a. The amount of in-kind benefit
*b. The amount of maternity support
c. Dividends
d. The amount of leaf of invalidity
e. The amount of assistance for the care of patients

74. Pharmacy №5 cleared its indebtedness to a supplier in the amount of 3000 uah by drawing this sum from its current account. What changes in the sum total of the balance will be observed?
a. Total assets increase, while liabilities decreased by 3000 UAH
*b. Total assets and liabilities will decrease by 3000 UAH
c. Total assets and liabilities will increase by 3000 UAH
d. Total assets and liabilities will not change
e. Total assets decreased, while liabilities increased by 3000 UAH

75. A pharmacy store was supplied with 100 packs of a product listed as Nitroglycerine. With regard to its physicochemical properties this preparation should be rated among the following drug group?
a. Highly inflammable substances
b. Explosion hazardous substances
*c. Explosive substances
d. Combustible substances
e. Volatile substances

76. For accounting business transactions carried out in a pharmacy the synthetic accounts are used. Their list is given in the Chart of Accounts. Balances of the I, II and III account classes are used for completion of the following document:
a. Liabilities
b. Profit and Loss Account
*c. Assets
d. First section of the liabilities balance sheet
e. Fourth section of the liabilities balance sheet

