1. During local anaesthetization novocaine solution is usually compounded with solution of adrenaline hydrochloride. What is the purpose of this action?
a. Vasodilatation
b. Decrease in smooth muscle tone
c. Algesthesia reduction
*d. Vasoconstriction
e. Increase in smooth muscle tone

2. A 32-year-old patient takes antituberculous drugs. Some time later he has noticed that his urine turned orange. What preparation is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Streptomycin sulfate
*b. Rifampicin
c. Pyrazinamide
d. Isoniazid
e. Ethambutol

3. On the 4th day of treatment with indomethacin a 55-year-old patient developed gastric bleeding as a result of ulceration of the gastric mucosa. Ulcerogenic effect of this drug is due to a decrease in activity of the following enzyme:
a. Prostacyclin synthetase
*b. Cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1)
c. Lipoxygenase (LOX)
d. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
e. Thromboxane synthetase

4. A 45-year-old patient has been taking neodicumarinum for thrombophlebitis for two weeks. The regular blood test revealed a decrease in prothrombin concentration, microhematuria. Which drug should be used as neodicumarinum antagonist?
a. Sodium citrate
b. Protamine sulfate
*c. Vicasol
d. Heparin
e. Aminocaproic acid

5. A patient complaining of dry mouth, photophobia and blurred vision has been delivered to the admission ward. Objectively: the skin is hyperaemic, dry; mydriatic pupils and tachycardia are present. He has been diagnosed with belladonna alkaloids intoxication. Which of the drugs should be given as an antidote?
a. Aceclidine
b. Arminum
c. Dipiroximum
*d. Neostigmine
e. Pylocarpine

6. A patient suffering from peptic ulcer was administered ranitidine. Gastric juice acidity has reduced considerably. What mechanism underlies the action of this drug?
a. Autonomic ganglion N-cholinergic receptors blockade
*b. H2-histamine receptors blockade
c. M-cholinergic receptors blockade
d. H1-histamine receptors blockade
e. H,K-ATPase activity inhibition

7. To stop the delusions and hallucinations in a schizophrenic patient a doctor administered aminazine. What is the mechanism of antihypoxic action of this drug?
a. Inhibition of adrenergic processes in the CNS
*b. Inhibition of dopaminergic processes in the CNS
c. Stimulation of cholinergic processes in the CNS
d. Stimulation of adrenergic and dopaminergic processes in the CNS
e. Inhibition of cholinergic processes in the CNS

8. A 52-year-old patient was diagnosed with systemic amebiasis accompanied by bowels, liver and lungs affection. What preparation should be administered?
a. Chingamin
b. Phthalazol
c. Chiniofon
d. Tetracycline
*e. Metronidazole

9. A 33-year-old woman who has been treated for chronic polyarthritis for a long time complains about arterial pressure rise, change of adipose tissue distribution, menstrual cycle disorder. What preparation has she taken?
a. Butadion
b. Indometacin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Synaflan
e. Diclofenac sodium

10. A gravida in her 20th week of gestation got ill with pneumonia. What chemotherapeutical drug may be administered with no risk for the fetus development?
*a. Веnzylpenicillinum
b. Sulfalenum
c. Ofloxacinum
d. Laevomycetinum
e. Gentamycin

11. During a surgical operation the muscle relaxant tubocurarine chloride was used. What antagonist drug should be injected in order to allow the patient to breathe independently?
a. Веnzohexonium
*b. Neostigmine
c. Cytitonum
d. Dithylinum
e. Aethimizolum

12. A child has accidentally drunk a solution that was used by his grandmother for glaucoma treatment. The solution turned out to be pilocarpine hydrochloride. What drug can be used as an antidote?
a. Aceclidinum
b. Carbacholinum
*c. Аtropinum
d. Веnzohexonium
e. Реntaminum

13. Choose an antiseptic from the group of halogen containing drugs that can be included into the first-aid kit for a child going to a summer camp:
a. Copper sulfate solution
b. Brilliant green solution
*c. Alcoholic iodine solution
d. Methylene blue solution
e. Formaldehyde solution

14. A pharmacy received a new-generation nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drug "meloxicam" that mainly blocks cyclooxygenase-2. What advantages does this preparation have in comparison with other nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs?
a. Evident myospasmolytic action
b. Minimal side effect on hematogenesis
c. Significant inhibition of protease activity
*d. Minimal side effect on alimentary tract
e. Interferonogenic properties

15. When fenoterolum for inhalations is not available in a pharmacy, it can be substituted by the following drug from the group of bronchoselective beta-2-adrenomimetics:
a. Isadrinum
b. Ephedrinum
c. Еuphyllinum
*d. Salbutamolum
e. Metacinum

16. A patient consulted an ophthalmologist about scotopic vision impairment, cornea dryness. What drug was prescribed?
a. Тосоpherol
b. Pyridoxine
*c. Retinolum
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Сосаrboxylasum

17. A patient suffering from essential hypertension has increased concentration of renin in blood plasma. Which pharmacological group should be preferred for this patient treatment?
a. Blockers of calcium channels
b. Sympatholytics
c. ?-adrenoblockers
d. Diuretics
*e. ACE inhibitors

18. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed almagel. Which of its pharmacological properties is intended for treatment of this pathology?
a. Local anaesthetization
b. Blocking the muscarinic cholinoreceptors
c. Anti-inflammatory action
*d. HCl neutralization
e. Blocking the H2-histamine receptors

19. A patient with depression has been administered a drug from the group of tricyclic antidepressants. Specify this drug:
*a. Amitriptyline
b. Droperidol
c. Caffeine
d. Aminalonum
e. Phenazepam

20. A patient suffering from hypertension consulted a doctor about dry cough that was presumably provoked by antihypertensive therapy. What antihypertensive drug had she been taking?
a. Аtеnоlоl
b. Furosemidum
c. Hydrochlorthiazide
*d. Lisinopril
e. Nifedipinе

21. A patient suffering from ulcer disease was prescribed famotidine. What is the mechanism of its action?
*a. Block of Н2-histamine receptors
b. Block of muscarinic cholinoreceptors
c. Block of cholinoreceptors of sympathetic ganglions
d. Inhibition of adenosine triphosphatase activity
e. Block of Н1-histamine receptors

22. A patient with gastric ulcer has been administered omeprazole. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Blockade of M-cholinergic receptors
b. Blockade of histamine H2 receptors
*c. Inhibition of H+K+-ATPase
d. HCl neutralization
e. Stimulation of mucus production

23. Which antiseptic preparation has bactericidal effect due to the formation of atomic oxygen?
a. Silver nitrate
*b. Potassium permanganate
c. Furacilinum
d. Chloraminum
e. Aethonium

24. During digitoxin therapy for chronic cardiac insufficiency, a patient developed signs of intoxication with this preparation. The patient was prescribed unithiol. What is the mechanism of unithiol action in case of intoxication with cardiac glycosides?
a. Binding of glycoside into the complex compound
*b. Reduction of К+-Na+-adenosine triphosphatase
c. Increase of sodium concentration in the cardiomyocytes
d. Binding of calcium ions
e. Increased potassium permeability in the cardiomyocytes

25. A 67-year-old patient with chronic heart failure takes digoxin. In order to reduce its side effects the patients doctor recommended to combine it with the followig drug:
a. Еuphyllinum
b. Calcium gluconate
*c. Раnangin
d. Hydrochlorthiazide
e. Calcium chloride

26. A patient suffering from neurosis accompanied by anxiety and fear development was prescribed diazepam. What pharmacological effect makes it possible to apply the drug for this disease treatment?
a. Antianginal
*b. Anxiolytic
c. Anti-inflammatory
d. Antiarrhythmic
e. Hypotensive

27. After a craniocerebral trauma a patient was administered pyracetam. This drug relates to the following pharmacological group:
*a. Nootropic agent
b. Tranquilizers
c. Neuroleptic
d. Anesthetic agent
e. Nonnarcotic (nonopioid) analgetic

28. In order to arrest stenocardia attacks a patient takes nitroglycerin capsules. What is the rational way of the drug introduction?
a. Peroral
b. Inhalation
c. Hypodermic
*d. Sublingual
e. Rectal

29. A hospital admitted a child with signs of poisoning with belladonna alkaloids. What drug should be applied as an antidote?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Paracetamol
c. Sodium valproate
*d. Proserin
e. Sodium caffeine benzoate

30. Recommend a patient with acute bronchitis a mucolytic drug that facilitates expectoration:
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Drotaverine hydrochloride
c. Glaucine
d. Loratadine
*e. Acetylcysteine

31. You are employed in a pharmaceutical storehouse. When adding newly received preparations to the computerized database, specify the pharmacological group of paracetamol:
a. Hypnotic
b. Hypotensive drug
c. Antianginal drug
*d. Nonnarcotic analgetic
e. Diuretic

32. A patient with atopic dermatitis presented at the hospital. Which drug with anti-inflammatory and antiallergic effect should be administered to this patient?
a. Aethamidum
b. Insulin
c. Retabolil
*d. Prednisolone
e. Oxytocin

33. A patient with atherosclerosis has been administered an anti-atherosclerotic agent. Specify this drug:
a. Dexamethasone
b. Phenylbutazone
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Pyracetam
*e. Phenofibrate

34. A patient after bees stings has angioedema (Quinckes edema). Which drug should be immediately inject to eliminate this condition?
a. Platyphyllini hydrotartras
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Epinephrine hydrochloride
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Аnарrilinum

35. A patient with hypertension was administered metoprolol for the arterial pressure reduction. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Indirect adrenomimetic action
b. Alpha adrenoceptor blockade
*c. Beta adrenoreceptor blockade
d. Antispasmodic
e. Angiotensinic receptors blockade

36. A 34-year-old patient suffering from bronchitis was prescribed an antitussive drug of central action. What drug is it?
*a. Glaucine
b. Enalapril
c. Fercoven
d. Furosemide
e. Corglycon

37. Continuous taking of a drug results in reduction of its efficiency. This phenomenon is called:
a. Sensibilization
b. Dependence
c. Tachyphylaxis
*d. Habituation
e. Cumulation

38. A patient was warned that taking the prescribed preparation might cause cough. What drug is it?
a. Phenihidine
b. Clonidine
*c. Lisinopril
d. Dichlothiazide
e. Metoprolol

39. A patient with acute heart failure and intolerance of cardiac glycosides has been given an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Stimulation of M-cholinergic receptors
*b. Stimulation of beta1-adrenoceptors
c. Blockade of K+-, Na+-ATPase
d. Stimulation of alpha1- adrenoceptors
e. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase

40. For thrombosis treatment a patient was prescribed a drug from the group of direct anticoagulants. What drug is it?
*a. Heparin
b. Syncumar
c. Vikasol
d. Neodicumarin
e. Fenilin (phenylinum)

41. A patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency was prescribed a cardiac glycoside from the foxglove (Digitalis) group. What drug is it?
a. Corglycon
b. Cordiamin
c. Strophanthine
d. Corvalol
*e. Digoxin

42. An elderly patient has constipation caused by hypotonia of colon. What drug should be administered to this patient?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Novocaine amide
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Castor oil
*e. Bisacodyl

43. A patient presents with morphine intoxication. Which drug should be injected as an antidote?
a. Lobeline hydrochloride
b. Atropine sulphate
c. Unithiol
*d. Naloxone
e. Bemegride

44. In course of pharmacotherapy of bronchitis a patient was found to have dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis, liver dysfunction. Which of the prescribed drugs might have caused these manifestations?
a. Paracetamolum
b. Асеtуlсуsteinum
c. Codeine phosphate
*d. Doxycyсlin
e. Ascorbic acid

45. From the pharmaceutical stock select an anticholinesterase drug to be administered to the patients with atony of the intestine and urinary bladder in the postoperative period:
*a. Proserin
b. Benzohexonium
c. Dithylinum
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Phosphacolum

46. A patient who has been suffering from gastric diseases for a long time is found to have hyperchromic anemia. Which of the following drugs is applied for this pathology treatment?
*a. Сyanocobalamine
b. Unitiol
c. Охуferriscorbone
d. Ferrum Lek
e. Ascorbic acid

47. A 25-year-old woman presenting with acute morphine intoxication was given an injection of naloxone that caused rapid improvement of her condition. The mechanism of action of this preparation is based on the block of the following receptors:
*a. Opioid receptors
b. Serotonin receptors
c. Benzodiazepine receptors
d. Dopamine
e. GABA-receptors

48. A patient with schizophrenia has been administered a neuroleptic. Which of the listed drugs falls into this group?
a. Propranolol
b. Celecoxib
*c. Aminazine
d. Morphine
e. Pyracetam

49. A man came to a pharmacy and asked to recommend him a drug for treatment of allergic rhinitis that occurs in the period of linden flowering. What drug may be applied?
*a. Loratadine
b. Anapriline
c. Losartan
d. Ambroxol
e. Adrenaline

50. It is necessary to prescribe non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug for patient with rheumatoid arthritis and concomitant duodenal ulcer. Which drug is the drug of choice in this case?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Analgin
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Celecoxib
e. Paracetamol

51. During the sensitifity test for benzylpenicillin a patient developed anaphylactic shock. The following preparation must be injected around the spot of antibiotic injection:
a. Ceftriaxon
*b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
e. Propranolol

52. When a certain drug reduces the effect of another drug, such phenomenon is called:
a. Sensibilization
b. Habituation
*c. Antagonism
d. Potentiation
e. Tachyphylaxis

53. A patient with bronchial asthma has been administered a drug from the group of beta-adrenergic agonists. Specify this drug:
a. Doxycycline hydrochloride
b. Diazepam
*c. Salbutamol
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Digoxin

54. The ability of drugs to accumulate in the patients body is called:
a. Synergism
b. Antagonism
*c. Cumulation
d. Habituation
e. Allergy

55. A patient has been administered a spasmolytic from the group of muscarinic receptor antagonists as a part of the complex treatment for renal colic. Specify this drug:
a. Dithylinum
b. Benzohexonium
c. Neostigmine
d. Galantamine
*e. Atropine

56. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed salbutamol that has led to relief of bronchospasm symptoms. This is associated with stimulation of:
a. beta1-adrenoreceptors
b. Acetylcholine synthesis
c. alpha1-adrenoreceptors
*d. beta2-adrenoreceptors
e. Muscarinic cholinoreceptors

57. A patient has been taking isosorbide for stenocardia prevention for quite a long time. Now he notes a significant decrease in the effect of the drug. What is this phenomenon called?
*a. Tolerance
b. Physical dependence
c. Potentiation
d. Allergy
e. Cumulation

58. A patient with myocardial infarction has been given an intravenous injection of a direct-acting anticoagulant. Select it among the listed drugs:
a. Calcium gluconate
*b. Heparin
c. Vikasolum
d. Neodicumarinum
e. Thrombin

59. A patient with chronic bronchitis wants to buy glaucine hydrochloride at a pharmacy. What typical side effect of the drug should the patient be warned against?
a. Allergic skin rash
*b. Drop of arterial pressure
c. Irregular heartbeat
d. Excitation of the central nervous system
e. Rise of intraocular pressure

60. A patient with chronic bronchitis gets glaucine hydrochloride at a pharmacy. The patient must be warned about the following typical side effect of this drug:
a. Increased intraocular pressure
b. Allergic skin rash
c. Excitation of the central nervous system
d. Irregular heartbeat
*e. Arterial pressure drop

61. A 30-year-old patient with a sleep disorder and psychoemotional disbalance has been administered diazepam. What is the mechanism of its psychosedative action?
a. Inhibition of the limbic system
b. Reduction of noradrenaline amount in the CNS
c. Inhibition of opioid receptors
*d. Activation of GABAergic system
e. Inhibition of the reticular formation

62. Benzylpenicillin sodium is not used per os, because this drug:
a. Poorly absorbed in the intestine
b. Reduces formation of gastric HCl
c. Is destroyed by penicillinase
*d. Destroys gastric HCl
e. Irritates gastric mucosa

63. Which drug with antagonistic effect can be used to stop bleeding caused by prolonged use of neodicumarinum?
a. Etamsylate
b. Aminocapronic acid
*c. Vikasolum
d. Fibrinogen
e. Ascorbic acid

64. A female has prolonged labour. Select a drug that stimulates labour activity due to its physiological effect from the listed below:
a. Pachycarpine
b. Neostigmine
*c. Oxytocin
d. Progesterone
e. Estrone

65. A 48-year-old patient was given an intravenous injection of prednisolone in order to arrest a severe attack of bronchial asthma. Prednisolone relates to the following group of hormonal drugs:
a. Gestagenic drugs
b. Mineral corticoids
c. Anabolic steroids
*d. Glucocorticoids
e. Estrogens

66. A patient who has been taking phenazepam for a month came to a pharmacy. He insisted on buying another two packs of this drug. According to the patient, he feels unwell without phenazepam. What is the mechanism of the developed side effect?
a. Cumulation
b. Addiction
c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Aftereffect syndrome
*e. Drug dependence

67. A patient suffering from allergic rhinitis was prescribed ephedrine in form of nasal drops. The patient has significantly benefited from nasal instillation, and this stimulated him to use the drug every 2 hours. But under these conditions the drug appeared to be ineffective. What is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Cumulation
*b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Drug dependence
e. Allergy

68. Which anaesthetic, anti-inflammatory, the least harmful for the stomach preparation can be recommended to a patient with exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Ibuprofenum
c. Indometacinum
*d. Celecoxib
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

69. Select a loop diuretic of strong, emergency and short-term action from the listed below:
a. Triamterene
*b. Furosemide
c. Acetazolamide
d. Clopamide
e. Spironolactone

70. A patient suffering from epilepsy has taken Phenobarbital for a long time and developed drug tolerance. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon development?
a. Receptors sensitivity enhancement
b. Absorption process reduction
*c. Acceleration of biotransformation
d. Inhibition of biotransformation
e. Substances accumulation in the body

71. Absorption of tetracycline preparations will be reduced when they are administered simultaneously with antacids. This is an example for:
a. Drugs synergism
b. Functional drugs antagonism
c. Pharmaceutical incompatibility
d. Pharmacodynamic incompatibility
*e. Pharmacokinetic incompatibility

72. A patient being treated in the infectious disease ward for dysentery is administered phthalazol. What is the reason for phthalazol being used only for treatment of enteric infections?
a. Slowly eliminated from the body
b. The high degree of reabsorption in the kidneys
*c. The drug is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
d. Rapidly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract
e. Rapidly excreted in unchanged form

73. During an operation a dentist needs to reduce salivation in a patient. The dentist has to use a drug of the following pharmacological group:
a. Muscarinic and nicotinic cholinomimetics
*b. Muscarinic receptor blockers
c. Adrenomimetics
d. Muscarinic cholinomimetics
e. Adrenoceptor blocker

74. A consulting pharmacist informed a patient about possible side effect of metronidazole that is normally provoked by alcohol intake. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
a. Enzyme acetylcholinesterase activation
b. Enzyme glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase activation
c. Enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase activation
d. Enzyme acetylcholinesterase blocking
*e. Enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase blocking

75. An anaesthesiologist has to perform an operation under neuroleptanalgesia. Which of the following drug combinations should be used in this case?
a. Droperidol with prednisolone
b. Diazepam with aminazine
c. Promedol with amitriptillin
*d. Fentanyl with droperidol
e. Fentanyl with diazepam

76. A 40-year-old patient suffers from bronchial asthma and cardiac rhythm disturbance in form of bradyarrhythmia. Drugs of which pharmacological group should be administered for bronchospasm suppression?
a. Cholinesterase inhibitors
b. Muscle relaxant
c. Beta-blockers
d. M-cholinomimetics
*e. M-cholinergic antagonists

77. An interhospital pharmacy got an order from a surgical department for a depolarizing muscle relaxant for surgical interventions. What drug was ordered?
a. Methacin
b. Hygronium
c. Nicotine
d. Atropine sulfate
*e. Dithylinum

78. A patient who has taken phenobarbital for a long time was prescribed diclofenac sodium. However the anti-inflammatory effect of diclofenac appeared to be less than expected due to the pharmacokinetic interaction of these drugs. Such interaction might be the result of the following processes:
a. Increased drug dosage
*b. Accelerated drug metabolism in liver
c. Reduced protein concentration in plasma
d. Decelerated drug metabolism in liver
e. Change of receptor sensibility

