1. A pharmaceutist prepared powders including extract of belladonna in the amount of 0,015 per dose. For ten doses he had to take the following amount of dry extract:
a. 0,03 g
b. 0,015 g
c. 0,15 g
d. 1,5 g
*e. 0,3 g

2. A pharmaceutist has prepared a tincture of althaea root. What is the proportion of herbal raw material and extractant?
a. 1:400
*b. 1:20
c. 1:30
d. 1:10
e. 1:100

3. A pharmaceutist revealed incompatibility in the formulation.Rp.: Sol. Collargoli 1% - 10 mlSol. Adrenalini hydrochloridi 0,1% - 1 mlM.D.S. Nasal drops.What chemical process underlies this incompatibility?
a. Neutralization
b. Hydrolysis
c. Adsorption
*d. Oxidization
e. Precipitation

4. A pharmaceutist prepared solution of ethacrydine lactate. What is the peculiarity of this substance dissolving?
a. Grinding in a mortar with water
b. Dissolving in potassium iodide solution
c. Dissolving in freshly distilled water
d. Dissolving in cold water
*e. Dissolving in hot water

5. A pharmaceutist prepared an oil emulsion containing zinc oxide. Specify the rational method of substance incorporation:
*a. Suspension-type icorporation into the prepared emulsion
b. Grinding with water for dilution of the primary emulsion
c. Dissolution in the finished emulsion
d. Dissolution in water for preparation of the primary emulsion
e. Dissolution in oil

6. A pharmaceutist made a tincture of Adonis herb. A peculiarity of its preparation is that the active substances are derived in:
*a. In the neutral medium
b. In the alkaline medium
c. In the acid medium
d. In the subacid medium
e. In the alkalescent medium

7. A pharmaceutist is preparing fat-based suppositories by method of pouring. What base is to be used for this purpose?
a. Vaseline (petrolatum)
b. Wax
c. Spermaceti
*d. Butirol
e. Cocoa butter

8. A pharmacist-technologist received an ointment formulation. Rp.: Unguentum Resorcini 1,5% - 10,0 Da. Signa. To be applied on the affected skin areas. The pharmaceutist incorporated dry medical substance into the ointment by the following way:
a. Triturated with a few water drops
b. Triturated with a few ethanol drops
*c. Triturated with a few vaseline oil drops
d. Added to molten vaseline
e. Triturated with a part of vaseline

9. A pharmacy got an order for eye drops containing 1% solution of pilocarpine hydrochloride. What substance was used in order to ensure isotonicity?
a. Boric acid
b. Sodium nitrate
c. Sodium sulfate
*d. Sodium chloride
e. Glucose

10. A pharmaceutist prepared some powders whose composition includes camphor. What capsules are required for their packaging?
a. Cellophane
*b. Parchment
c. Waxed
d. Paper
e. Paraffin

11. A pharmaceutist prepared suppository mass with novocaine and cocoa butter, but it turned out to be crumbling. What substance to be added to form a plastic mass:
*a. Anhydrous lanolin
b. Paraffin
c. Wax
d. Vaseline
e. Hydrous lanolin

12. A pharmaceutist has to sterilize 400 ml of calcium gluconate solution for injections. Specify the time of autoclave sterilization of the solution at 120°C:
a. 10 minutes
b. 30 minutes
c. 20 minutes
d. 15 minutes
*e. 12 minutes

13. Ophthalmic drops are produced on the base of concentrated riboflavin solution (1:5000). How much solution should be taken if the formulation says "0,001 of riboflavin"?
a. 3 ml
b. 2 ml
*c. 5 ml
d. 4 ml
e. 1 ml

14. A pharmacist made eye drops of pilocarpine hydrochloride and adrenaline hydrochloride solution. A peculiarity of the incorporation of the adrenaline hydrochloride solution is that it is added:
a. To the half dose of solvent
b. After dissolving of solids
*c. After sterilization, aseptic
d. In the first place
e. After isotoning

15. A doctor prescribed a patient 100 ml of tincture made out of 0,25 of Herba Thermopsidis. How much dried concentrated extract of Herba Thermopsidis should be weighed by a pharmaceutist?
a. 0,1 g
*b. 0,25 g
c. 0,3 g
d. 0,5 g
e. 0,2 g

16. A patient acquired mint leaves at a pharmacy. What recommendations regarding infusion of this herbal raw material must be given by the pharmaceutist?
a. The extract is to be immediately filtered after infusing
b. The extract is to be artificially cooled 15 minutes after infusing
c. The infusion is to be prepared on an open fire
d. The infusion is to be prepared at room temperature
*e. The infusion is to be prepared in a tightly closed vessel

17. A patient has ordered 50 g of zinc ointment. How much zinc and Vaseline should be weighed by a pharmaceutist?
a. 10,0 g and 40,0 g
b. 1,0 g and 49,0 g
c. 0,5 g and 49,5 g
*d. 5,0 g and 45,0 g
e. 2,5 g and 47,5 g

18. A patient has been administered a solution containing boric acid and camphor. What solvent should his doctor prescribe in order to prevent physical incompatibility?
a. Ethyl alcohol 40%
*b. Ethyl alcohol 70%
c. Sunflower oil
d. Purified water
e. Glycerol

19. A patient has been administered powders containing menthol. What is the best way to achieve the required extent of menthol comminution?
a. To triturate it with glycerine or chloroform
b. To triturate it with other components of the formulation
c. To triturate it thoroughly with sugar
*d. To triturate it with alcohol or ether
e. To triturate it with purified water

20. Stability of suspensions can be enhanced by substances which increase the viscosity of the dispersion medium. Specify the substance that exhibits such properties:
a. Dimexid
b. Ether
c. Purified water
d. Ethanol
*e. Glycerol

21. A doctor prescribed his patient an emulsion of olive oil which includes anesthesin. To incorporate anesthesin into the emulsion it must be dissolved:
a. In the alcohol, and then added to the primary emulsion
*b. In oil before preparing the emulsion
c. In the purified water
d. In the finished emulsion
e. In the primary emulsion

22. The patient has been prescribed Linimentum Rosentali. It is composed of:
a. Castor oil, calcium chloride, alcohol
b. Iodine, potassium chloride, glycerin
c. Sunflower oil, ammonia, oleic acid
*d. Paraffin, alcohol, chloroform, iodine
e. Chloroform, methyl salicylate, turpentine

23. 100 ml of 0,9% sodium chloride solution were prepared according to the doctor’s prescription. What sterilization schedule is required for this solution?
a. 100°C - 15 minutes
*b. 120°C - 8 minutes
c. 120°C - 15 minutes
d. 120°C - 12 minutes
e. 180°C - 30 minutes

24. A pharmaceutist-technologist has to prepare a medication with the following formulation:Rp.: Mentholi 0,1Glycerini 10,0M.D.S. Nasal drops.What is the reason for their incompatibility?
*a. Insolubility of ingredients
b. Adsorption of the medicinal agent
c. Coagulation of colloidal system
d. Eutectic alloy formation
e. Separation of the mixture

25. A pharmacy got an order for a mixture containing manzanita decoction and belladonna extract. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Coagulation of colloidal systems
*b. Sedimentation
c. Redox (oxidation-reduction) processes
d. Hydrolysis
e. Liberation of gaseous substances

26. A pharmaceutist prepares a suspension ointment. What substance is soluble in water, but should be incorporated into the dermatological ointments as a suspension?
*a. Resorcinol
b. Sulfacyl sodium
c. Potassium iodide
d. Furacilin
e. Zinc oxide

27. A pharmaceutist prepared eyedrops with boric acid. What sterilization method was applied?
*a. Sterilization by saturation vapor pressure
b. Sterilization by dry heat
c. By high-frequency current
d. Sterilization by gases
e. Tyndallization

28. A pharmaceutist refused preparation of nasal drops to a patient because of incompatibility between collargol and dimedrol written in the prescription. What is the reason for incompatibility between these ingredients?
a. Adsorption
b. Immiscibility
*c. Coagulation
d. Dissection
e. Eutectic formation

29. Preparation of multicomponent powders with phenyl salicylate and camphor is accompanied by generation of some fluid. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Gases separation
*b. Eutectic alloy formation
c. Crystallization water exudation
d. Adsorption
e. Hygroscopic components

30. A pharmaceutist was preparing an ointment with ricin oil and Vaseline but failed to get homogenous system. What is the most likely cause of incompatibility between these components?
*a. Component immiscibility
b. Release of water of crystallization
c. Adsorption
d. Coagulation
e. Restricted solubility

31. A doctor gave a prescription for the tincture of digitalis with hydrochloric acid. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Change in colour
b. Change in odour
c. Precipitation
d. Gassing
*e. Hydrolysis (with no visible changes)

32. A pharmaceutist revealed incompatibility in a prescription for powders with ascorbic acid and hexamethylene tetramine. What process takes place when these components are combined?
*a. Mixture dampening
b. Immiscibility
c. Isolation of crystallization water
d. Adsorption
e. Eutectic

33. A pharmaceutist revealed physical incompatibility caused by coagulation. This process takes place in a solution if the combination of the following substances is present:
a. Dimedrol and novocaine
b. Dimedrol and diazoline
c. Dimedrol and glucose
*d. Dimedrol and collargol
e. Dimedrol and sodium chloride

34. A pharmaceutist made a medicinal preparation according to the following formulation:  Rp.: ChloroformiiOlei HelianthiMethylii salicylatis ana 10,0M.D.S. For infriction.Specify the kind of disperse system:
a. Liniment - emulsion
b. Liniment - combined
*c. Liniment - solution
d. Liniment suspension
e. Liniment - extractional

35. A pharmaceutist revealed physical incompatibility in a recipe. Specify the combination of drug substances demonstrating eutectic when blended:
a. Streptocid and antipyrine
b. Glucose and phenyl salicylate
*c. Camphor and menthol
d. Ascorbic acid and hydrocarbonate sodium
e. Basic bismuth nitrate and magnesium oxide

36. A pharmaceutist prepared a surface action ointment. What ointment base was used?
a. Polyethylene oxide basis
*b. Vaseline (petrolatum)
c. Kutumovas basis
d. Lanoline
e. Gelatin-glycerol base

37. A pharmacy received the following prescription: 0,0002 g of scopolamine hydrobromide per 1 powder. How much of 1:100 trituration is required for the preparation of 10 powders?
a. 0,04
b. 0,4
c. 2,0
*d. 0,2
e. 4,0

38. A pharmacy received a prescription for 3% alcohol solution of boric acid. What concentration of ethyl alcohol is required for preparing the drug form?
*a. 70%
b. 40%
c. 96%
d. 90%
e. 60%

39. Eye drops are prepared with an ointment base which is an alloy of vaseline and lanolin. Specify the method of its sterilization:
a. Flowing steam
b. Ethylene oxide
*c. Dry heat
d. Pasteurization
e. Tyndallization

40. A pharmacy received a prescription for preparation of dermatological ointment with benzylpenicillin. Specify the type of ointment that necessary to prepare:
a. Liquid ointment
b. Alloy ointment
c. Combined
*d. Suspension ointment
e. Hydrophilic ointment

41. A pharmacy received a prescription for powders with doctors instruction to dispense powders in gelatin capsules. Which of the following substances is included in the composition of these powders?
a. Streptocide
b. Magnesium oxide
*c. Ethacridine lactate
d. Diphenhydramine
e. Glucose

42. During production of powders in a pharmacy physiochemical properties of certain ingredients should be taken into consideration. What pharmaceutical substance can be incorporated into the powder mass without additional grinding?
a. Menthol
b. Camphor
*c. Starch
d. Salicylic acid
e. Streptocid

43. Suspensions as heterogenous systems can be characterized by kinetic and sedimentary instability. What substance is used for increasing suspension stability with hydrophobic substances?
a. Glucose
*b. Gelatose
c. Boric acid
d. Sodium chloride
e. Sodium sulphate

44. Liquid dosage forms are prepared with concentrated solutions of pharmacetical substances or under consideration of volume increase factor during substance dissolution when the following substance is used as a solvent:
*a. Treated water
b. Glycerol
c. Polyethylene glycol-400
d. Ethanol (ethyl alcohol)
e. Aromatic water

45. A pharmaceutist prepared 150 ml of Adonis vernalis infusion using dry extract concentrate [1:1] that had to be weighed in the amount of:
a. 10,0
b. 7,5
*c. 5,0
d. 15,0
e. 22,5

46. While preparing decoctions in volume from 1000 to 3000 ml time of processing in boiling water bath should be:
*a. 40 minutes
b. 30 minutes
c. 15 minutes
d. 45 minutes
e. 25 minutes

47. How much water should be taken in order to prepare 200 ml of aqueous extract of motherwort (water absorption coefficient = 2 ml/g)?
*a. 240 ml
b. 200 ml
c. 210 ml
d. 160 ml
e. 220 ml

48. A pharmacy received a prescription:Rp.: Dibazoli 0,05Papaverini hydrochloridi 0,15Sacchari 2,5M. fiat pulv.Divide in partes aequales №10Specify the weight of a single powder dose:
a. 0,30
*b. 0,27
c. 0,25
d. 2,7
e. 0,26

49. Dispersion degree of drug substances is of great importance for the preparation of ophtalmic ointments. What drug substance should be thoroughly triturated with sterile vaseline oil before incorporating it into the pharmacopoeia-recommended ointment base?
a. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
b. Resorcin
*c. Mercuric oxide yellow
d. Zinc sulfate
e. Ethyl morphine hydrochloride

50. A pharmaceutist has prepared an ointment intended for application on the open wound surface. Such kind of ointment should meet the following additional requirement:
*a. Sterility
b. Isoviscosity
c. Prolonged action
d. Isoionicity
e. Isotonicity

51. In course of preparation of suppositories by the pumping method the suppository mass became viscous and fluid after the incorporation of chloral hydrate into the cocoa butter. What substance should be added to the suppository mass in order to restore its density and plasticity?
a. Purified water
b. Glycerine
*c. Wax
d. Dimexid
e. Starch

52. Powders make up an important group among the extemporal medicinal preparations. Which of the following components can be incorporated into a powder without being preliminarily ground?
a. Xeroform
b. Calcium gluconate
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Camphor
*e. Basic Bismuth nitrate

53. A pharmaceutist is preparing powders according to the following formulation:
Rp.: Scopolamini hydrobromidi 0,0003  
Ephedrini hydrochlorodi 0,05  
Sachari 0,15  
M.f. pulvis  
D.t.d. № 10  
S. 1 powder thrice a day.  
Calculate the mass of 1 powder providing that the trituration (1:100) is used:
a. 0,203
*b. 0,20
c. 0,23
d. 0,15
e. 0,17

54. A pharmaceutist is preparing powders by the way of triturating one of the components with ethyl alcohol. Such technology of preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Bolus alba
*b. Streptocid
c. Talc
d. Starch
e. Zinc oxide

55. A pharmaceutist prepares several different solutions with antibiotics under aseptic conditions. He can sterilize the solution of the following substance:
a. Polymyxin sulphate
*b. Chloramphenicol
c. Neomycin sulphate
d. Benzylpenicillin-sodium
e. Benzylpenicillin-potassium

56. A pharmaceutist prepared a suspension. It must contain the following amount of fluid in order to comply with Deriagins rule:
a. 0,1-1,0 millilitre for 1,0 substance
*b. 0,4-0,6 millilitre for 1,0 substance
c. 1,5-0,7 millilitre for 1,0 substance
d. 1-0,8 millilitre of 1,0 substance
e. 0,9-2 millilitres for 1,0 substance

57. A pharmaceutist has prepared an emulsion. Specify the way of incorporation of the fat-soluble substances:
a. They are incorporated in undissolved form
b. They are dissolved in purified water
*c. They are dissolved in oil
d. They are added to the finished emulsion
e. They are added to the emulsifier

58. A pharmaceutist has revealed an incompatibility in the prescription. What drug substances form an eutectic mixture?
*a. Chloral hydrate + camphor
b. Calcium chloride + sodium chloride
c. Sodium hydrocarbonate + hexamethylenetetramine
d. Ephedrine hydrochloride + glucose
e. Antipyrine + analgin

59. A pharmacy received a prescription for a mixture. What drug substances are incompatible?
*a. Papaverine hydrochloride + aminophylline
b. Sodium bromide + sodium chloride
c. Phenobarbital + glucose
d. Codeine phosphate + extract of Thermopsis
e. Novocaine + diphenhydramine

60. A pharmacy got an order for powders containing ascorbic acid and sodium hydrocarbonate. What process takes place between the ingredients?
*a. Dampening
b. Absorption
c. Stratification
d. Sedimentation
e. Oxidization

61. A pharmacy got the following recipe:Rp.: Mucilaginis Amyli 50,0Da. Signa. For the enema purposes.How much starch and distilled water did the pharmaceutist use in order to make this preparation?
a. 1,0 g of starch; 50 ml of distilled water
b. 5,0 g of starch; 45 ml of distilled water
c. 10,0 g of starch; 40 ml of distilled water
*d. 1,0 g of starch; 49 ml of distilled water
e. 2,0 g of starch; 48 ml of distilled water

62. A pharmacy produces some injection solutions that have to be apyrogenic. Solution of the following substance can be depyrogenized by method of adsorption with activated carbon?
a. Scopolamine hydrobromide
b. Platyphyllini hydrotartras
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Glucose

63. A pharmacy has to prepare a soft drug based on the gel made from inorganic substances. Which of these high-molecular compounds can be used for preparing such a base?
a. Polyethylene oxides
b. Collagen
c. Cellulose ethers
d. Starch
*e. Bentonites

64. A pharmacy received a prescription for a topical powder including a substance that is hard to disperse. Which of the listed fluids may be used for dispersing the substance?
a. Purified water
b. Dimexid
c. Isopropyl alcohol
*d. Diethyl ether
e. Water for injections

65. A pharmaceutist has to prepare suppositories with a glycerine gelatin base by the molding method. What is the ratio of gelatin, water and glycerine required for the base?
a. 2:1:5
b. 3:2:3
c. 2:2:4
d. 1:3:4
*e. 1:2:5

66. A pharmacy received an order for 2500 ml of isotonic sodium chloride solution. How much sodium chloride and water for injections should be taken to prepare this dosage form?
a. 25,0 g of sodium chloride and 2500 ml of water for injections
b. 50,0 g of sodium chloride and 2450 ml of water for injections
*c. 22,5 g of sodium chloride and 2500 ml of water for injections
d. 30,0 g of sodium chloride and 2500 ml of water for injections
e. 100,0 g of sodium chloride and 2400 ml of water for injections

67. Powders that quickly enter into a reaction in presence of water and emit carbon dioxide relate to the following group:
a. Nasal powders
b. Powders for external use
c. Soluble powder
d. Powders for oral use
*e. Effervescent powder

68. Calculate the quantity of dried belladonna extract (1:2) required for preparing the following drug formulation:Rp.: Extraсti Belladоnnae 0,015Magnesii oxydi 0,5Natrii hydrocarbonatis 0,2Misce ut fiat pulvis Da tales doses №10Signa. 1 powder thrice a day
a. 0,15
b. 0,6
c. 0,015
*d. 0,3
e. 0,4

69. Spesify the type of the following liniment: Ol. Helianthi 7,4Sol. Ammonii caustici 25 mlAc. Oleinici 0,1M.f. linimentumD.S. To be rubbed in
a. Liniment, emulsion w/o
*b. Liniment, emulsion o/w
c. Liniment-solution
d. Combined liniment
e. Liniment-suspension

70. A pharmaceutist is preparing rectal suppositories based on cocoa butter and containing dimedrol with mass concentartion less than 5%. For rational incorporation of dimedrol into the base it should be solved:
a. In alcohol
*b. In the minimum amount of treated water
c. In the melted cocoa butter
d. In olive oil
e. In vaseline oil

71. A pharmaceutist needs to sterilize 250 ml of glucose solution for injections. How many minutes should the solution undergo sterilization in the autoclave under the temperature of 120°C?
a. 30
*b. 12
c. 15
d. 8
e. 25

72. A pharmaceutist is preparing an ointment under aseptic conditions on the sterile ointment base - composition of vaseline and lanoline at a ratio 6:4. The drug substance is incorporated by suspension type. Such technology of ointment preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Sodium sulfate
*b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
c. Thiamine chloride
d. Sodium chloride
e. Pilocarpine hydrochloride

73. This substance is of blue colour but unlike the colouring substances it doesn’t leave any stain. The powders prepared out of it are made according to the general rules. What substance is it?
a. Acrichine
b. Furacilin
c. Ethacridine lactate
d. Riboflavin
*e. Copper sulfate

74. A pharmaceutist brews an aqueous extract out of medicinal raw material in the tightly closed infusion vessel for 15 minutes and stirs it without opening the lid. Such technology of infusion preparation is typical for the following medicinal raw material:
*a. Mint leaves
b. Senna leaves
c. Cowberry leaves
d. Manzanita leaves
e. Bilberry leaves

75. A pharmaceutist made 10 powders containing atropine sulfate at a rate of 0,00005 pro dose. What trituration did he use?
*a. 1:100
b. 1:1000
c. 1:20
d. 1:50
e. 1:10

76. A pharmacy got an order for manzanita decoction and hexamethylenetetramine. A pharmacist cancelled it with a stamp "Invalid prescription". What is the reason for the incompatibility?
a. Moisture-repellant
b. Insolubility
c. Eutectic
d. Oxidization
*e. Deposition

77. A pharmaceutist prepares internal drops with the following formulation: 5 ml of adoniside, 10 ml of valerian and lily-of-the-valley tincture each, 0,1 g of menthol, 2,0 g of potassium bromide. It will be efficient to dissolve potassium bromide in the following substance:
a. In the valerian tincture
b. In the lily-of-the-valley tincture
*c. In the adoniside
d. In the mixture of tinctures
e. Potassium bromide should be added into the selling vial last of all

78. A pharmacist technologist revealed incompatibility in the following prescription:Rp.: Mentholi 0,5Natrii hydrocarbonatisNatrii tetraboratis aa 1,5Aquae purificatae 100 mlM.D.S. 1 tablespoon twice a day.In order to prepare this drug form the pharmacist should apply the following techniques:
a. Change dosage form
*b. Add stabilizer
c. Apply another solvent
d. Apply fractional dissolution
e. Change one of the component

79. A pharmaceutist is preparing vaginal suppositories by method of pouring. Which hydrophilic base can he use for this purpose?
a. Hard fat
b. Butyrol
c. Cocoa butter
d. Vitepsol
*e. Polyethylene oxide

80. An edema can be relieved by means of hypertonic solutions. What phenomenon takes place in the blood cells after injection of such solution?
a. Hydrolysis
b. Lipolysis
c. Electrolysis
*d. Plasmolysis
e. Hemolysis

