1. A patient with heart failure induced by a long-term coronary vessel disorder can be administered a drug produced out of the following herbal raw material:
a. Ginseng roots
b. Calendula flowers
*c. Hawthorn
d. Aralia roots
e. Berberis roots

2. A patient came to a drugstore and ordered cowberry leaves. Which of the available herbal raw materials can be offered as a substitute?
a. Radix Taraxaci officinalis
*b. Folium Uvae ursi
c. Rizoma et radix Sanquisorbae officinalis
d. Rizoma Calami
e. Herba Achilleae millefolii

3. A pharmacy depot received a batch of common plantain leaves. According to the requirements of the Pharmacopoeia, this herbal raw matrial is of adequate quality if it contains the following active substances:
a. Tannins
b. Flavonoids
*c. Polysaccharides
d. Anthracene derivatives
e. Essential oils

4. Preparations on the basis of dandelion roots are recommended for better digestion and as a choleretic because this herbal raw material contains:
a. Balsams
b. Essential oil
*c. Bitters
d. Saponins
e. Flavonoids

5. Preparations made of ginseng roots have tonic and adaptogenic properties, improve mental and physical performance. If the ginseng tincture cannot be found in a pharmacy, it can be substituted by the analogous preparations made of the following raw material:
a. Radices Inulae
b. Radices Valerianae
*c. Radices Eleutherococci
d. Radices Ononidis
e. Radices Rhei

6. Coltsfoot preparations are used for upper airways treatment. During procurement of this herbal raw material the following admixture may appear:
a. Spring adonis (Adonis vernalis)
b. Common plantain (Plantago major)
*c. Great bur (Arctium lappa)
d. Marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis)
e. Pot marjoram (Origanum vulgare)

7. If the internal surface of buckthorn rind is moistened with 5% alkaline solution, it becomes cherry-red colouring. This is the evidence of presence of the following substance:
a. Tannins
*b. Anthracene derivatives
c. Saponins
d. Alkaloids
e. Flavonoids

8. Medicinal plant Rhamnus cathartica is used as a laxative. What part of this plant is used as herbal raw material?
a. Shoots
*b. Fruits
c. Rind
d. Leaves
e. Roots

9. Leaves of belladonna, henbane and datura containing tropane alkaloids must be stored according to the following list requirements:
a. Essential oil materials list
b. List of substances equivalent to narcotics
c. A list (poisonous drug substances)
d. General sales list
*e. B list (these drug substances require caution in handling, storage or use)

10. Specify the herbal raw material with high concentration of carotinoids which is used for production of phytopreparations:
a. Caseweed grass
b. Currant leaflets
*c. Sea-buckthorn fruits
d. Wild strawberry leaves
e. Parsley roots

11. One of the ways to derive essential oil is enfleurage, or maceration. Essential oil can be derived by enfleurage from the following herbal raw material:
a. Coriander fruits
b. Lemon skin
*c. Petals of Damascus rose
d. Mint leaves
e. Camomile flowers

12. Select a reagent that should be applied by an analytical chemist in order to detect alkaloids in the herbal raw material:
a. Alkaline solution
b. Bromine water
*c. Dragendorff reagent
d. Stahls reagent
e. Trim-Hill reagent

13. Preparations of sorrel roots can have both a laxative and astringent effect. This is due to the presence of the following biologically active substances:
a. Coumarins and phenol glycosides
b. Iridoids and vitamins
c. Flavonoids and essential oils
d. Essential and fatty oils
*e. Anthracene derivatives and tannins

14. Calamus rhizome is likely to be confused with some other plant rhizome that can be found as an admixture in the herbal raw material. Specify the most likely admixture:
a. Valerian rhizome
b. Althaea roots
c. Phlojodicarpus roots
*d. Iris rhizome
e. Elecampane roots

15. Tannins can be used as an antidote for alkaloid poisoning. What herbal remedy should be applied in case of such intoxication:
a. Calamus rhizome
b. Rhizome and roots of madder
c. Elecampane root
*d. Cinquefoil root
e. Althaea root

16. Tannins have astringent effect and are used for treatment of colitis, enterocolitis, diarrhea. What herbal raw material contains a lot of tannins?
a. Fructus Frangulae
*b. Fructus Myrtilli
c. Fructus Ribes nigri
d. Fructus Sambucci nigri
e. Fructus Rhamni catharticae

17. Emodin, an anthracene derivative, has purgative effect. Large quantities of anthracene-derived groups of emodin are contained in the fruits of the following plant:
a. Elder (Sambucus)
b. Blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus)
c. Alder buckthorn (Frangula alnus)
*d. Buckthorn
e. Blackcurrant

18. Cardioglycosides of Adonis vernalis are used for heart failure treatment. This plant raw material should be stored:
a. Under normal conditions
b. According to the list A
*c. According to the list B
d. Protected from CO2
e. In metal containers

19. The possible admixture in the crop of raw coltsfoot leaves (Tussilago farfara) is the leaf of:
a. Common plantain
b. Marshmallow (Althaea officinalis)
c. Primula officinalis
*d. Cotton burdock (Arctium tomentosum)
e. Nettle

20. In order to determine the purity a drop of lavender essential oil was applied on a strip of filter paper and warmed up in the stream of warm air. Some time later the stain increased in diameter. What impurity substance was found in the lavender oil?
a. Phenol
b. Acetone
c. Diethyl ether
*d. Fatty or mineral oil
e. Ethanol

21. A pharmacy received a batch of raw material - chamomile flowers. How should this material be stored?
a. According to the list A requirements
b. According to the list B requirements
*c. Separately from all other kinds of raw material
d. As a narcotic raw material
e. In a light room

22. Underground organs of medicinal plants that accumulate the most of active substances should be collected:
*a. After the seeds have ripened and the overground parts died off
b. During the green fruiting
c. At the stem extension stage
d. At the budding stage
e. At the flowering stage

23. Styles of maize with stigmata containing fatty acids, vitamins, essential oils, saponins and other substances are used as:
a. Sedative and anticonvulsant
b. Expectorant and antibechic
c. Bactericidal and astringent
*d. Diuretic and choleretic
e. Cardiotonic and antiarrhythmic

24. Yellow gentian contains bitter glycosides. Raw material of this plant is reccomended for production of drugs with the following effect:
a. Venotonic
*b. Stimulates appetite
c. Diuretic
d. Tonic
e. Hepatoprotective

25. It is necessary to analyze herbal raw material in form of black glossy drupes 6-8 mm in diameter, with a large, firm, globular, light brown kernel containing one seed. The drupes have sweet and slightly astringent taste. This herbal raw material should be identified as fruits of:
a. Blueberry
b. Buckthorn
c. Hawthorn
*d. Bird cherry
e. Black chokeberry

26. Having ascertained that the quality of raw material meets the requirements of the analytical normative documentation the quality control department should issue a document. Specify this document:
a. Order
b. Pharmacopoeia entry
*c. Certificate of analysis
d. Request
e. Standard

27. Preparations of common valerian are used in medical practice as sedative drugs. The main feature that allows to distinguish valerian from the admixtures is:
*a. Specific odor
b. Specific taste
c. Stems remains
d. Specific color of raw materials
e. No specific odor

28. One of the methods of quantitative analysis of active substances in the raw material is the biological standardization. It can be applied with the following group of biologically active substances:
a. Fatty oils
b. Alkaloids
*c. Cardiac gliycosides
d. Tannins
e. Mucilages

29. A phytopreparation "Flacarbinum" has spasmolytic, anti-inflammatory and antiulcer effect. This preparation is produced out of the following plant:
a. Mountain angelica (Aralia mandshurica)
b. Pot marigold (Calendula officinalis)
c. Jacobs ladder blue (Polemonium caeruleum)
d. Buckeye (Aesculus)
*e. Licorice (Glycyrrhiza)

30. Essential oil of rose is used as an anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic agent. It is localized in the following excretory organs:
a. Secretory cells
b. Glandular hairs
c. Essential oil glandules
d. Essential oil conceptacles
*e. Glandular spots

31. Styles of maize with stigmata containing fatty acids, vitamins, essential oils, saponins and other substances are used as:
a. Bactericidal and astringent drug
b. Expectorant and antitussive drug
*c. Diuretic and choleretic drug
d. Sedative and anticonvulsive drug
e. Cardiotonic and antiarrhythmic drug

32. The main active components of hawthorn berries are flavonoids. What is their pharmacological effect?
a. Antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory
*b. Hypotensive and sedative
c. Tonic and antispasmodic
d. Laxative and sedative
e. Diuretic and styptic

33. Fatty oil containing unsaturated fatty acids are used for atherosclerosis prevention. What herbal raw material contains such fatty oil?
a. Parsnip fruitages
b. Scurfy pea (Psoralea) fruitages
c. Buckhorn plantain (Plantago lanceolata) seeds
d. Chestnut (Castanea) seeds
*e. Cucurbit seeds

34. Fatty oil containing unsaturated fatty acids is used for the prevention of atherosclerosis. Specify the herbal raw material used for oil production:
a. Fruits of black chokeberry
b. Hawthorn berries
c. Seeds of fennelflower
d. Fruits of dill
*e. Seeds of flax

35. A storehouse received a batch of althaea roots. For its verification a drop of ammonia solution was applied upon the root section; the spot of section turned yellow. This is the evidence of presence of the following substance:
a. Tannins
b. Pectins
c. Vitamin C
*d. Mucilages
e. Gum

36. Upper airways diseases can be treated by means of herbal raw materials containing mucilages. The plant source of this compound class is:
a. Radix Ipecacuanhae
b. Radix Inulae
*c. Radix Althaeae
d. Radix Rhodiolae
e. Radix Belladonnae

37. The main active components of senna leaves and fruits are sennosides A, B, C, D. They relate to the following class of biologically active substances:
a. Flavonoids
b. Phenolic acids
*c. Anthracene derivatives
d. Iridoids
e. Thioglycosides

38. Preparations containing cardiosteroids are produced out of the following herbal raw material:
a. Cortex Quercus
b. Folia Ficusi Caricae
c. Folia Sennae
*d. Herba Convallariae
e. Radix Taraxaci

39. A laboratory received some herbal raw material for analysis. It is a composition of ovoid-pointed leaves up to 25 cm long and 20 cm wide; the leaf base is cuneate, the leaf edge is emarginate, The cutting is long and cylindric. The leaf venation is pinnatisect; the midrib and the first-order veins project significantly on the inferior surface of the leaf. The superior leaf surface is dark green, the inferior surface is light green. The plant has a weak narcotic smell. The taste cannot be determined. The plant is poisonous! The described herbal raw material relates to the following plant:
a. Chelidonium majus
b. Passiflora incarnata
*c. Datura stramonium
d. Vinca minor
e. -

40. Tanning agents of silverweed roots and rhizomes are used as an astringent. What species of silverweed is pharmacopoeial?
a. Potentilla pilosa
b. Potentilla argentea
*c. Potentilla erecta
d. Potentilla impolita
e. Potentilla anserina

41. Admixtures can get into the herbal raw material during harvesting, drying and primary processing. Mineral admixtures include:
a. Metal objects
b. Droppings of birds and rodents
c. Other organs of the same plant
*d. Sand, earth, stones
e. Other similar plants

42. Some domestic and foreign hepatoprotective activity preparation are made of holy thistle bearing. Purity of this material is determined by the content of:
*a. Flavolignan
b. Alkaloids
c. Terpenoids
d. Vitamins
e. Coumarins

43. Preparations made out of eleutherococcus roots and rhizomes are administered as a tonic and adaptogenic drug. If these preparations cannot be found in a pharmacy, they can be substituted by the analogous preparations made of the following raw material:
a. Rhizomes and roots of valerian
b. Elecampane roots
*c. Ginseng roots
d. Polemonium roots
e. Acorus calamus roots

44. A biennial or perennial plant from the Apiaceae family has a blue-grey stem branching in its lower part. Its leaves are also blue-grey, finely dissected, with the ultimate filiform segments. The flowers are yellow, in compound umbels. Its fruit is used for production of "dill water". What plant is it?
a. Coriandrum sativum
b. Conium maculatum
c. Carum carvi
d. Petroselium crispum
*e. Foeniculum vulgare

45. On the base of licorice root different drug dosage forms are produced, notably tablets, powders, syrups, teas. The only unused form is injection solution. Licorice roots exhibit haemolytic properties typical for the following active substances:
a. Essential oils
b. Alkaloids
*c. Saponins
d. Iridoids
e. Polysaccharides

46. A teenager with hyporexia has been recommended to drink medicinal herbal tea of the following composition: Herba Absinthii, Herba Millefolii. Specify the characteristic microscopic features of Artemisia absinthium, which indicate its presence in the herb mixture:
a. Retor-shaped hairs
b. Branched and capitate hairs
c. Simple and capitate hairs
d. Branched, simple and ciliated hairs
*e. T-shaped hairs along the leaf edge

47. Tincture of what medicinal plant can be applied as a tonic?
a. Achillea millefolium
b. Digitalis purpurea
c. Robinia pseudacacia
*d. Rhodiola rosea
e. Orthosiphon stamineus

48. A laboratory received some herbal raw material for analysis. The plant had flowerheads up to 4 cm in diameter, the marginal flowers were agamic, blue, funnel-shaped; the inner flowers were bisexual, purple, tubular. What plant are these features typical for?
a. Viola tricolor
*b. Centaurea cyanus
c. Polygonum persicaria
d. Solidago virgaurea
e. Scutellaria baicalensis

49. Restharrow (Ononis) root is used for production of a tincture applied for treatment of haemorrhoidal haemorrhages. Isoflavonoids can be identified in the raw material by means of:
*a. Chromatographic method
b. Hemolytic index
c. Foam number
d. Biological standardization
e. Cyanidin test

50. Hawthorn flowers are used for production of cardiotonic drugs. During procurement of this crude drug the flowers of the following plant can appear in it:
a. Elder
*b. Blackthorn
c. Bird-cherry
d. Buckthorn
e. Brier

51. Common juniper is applied as a diuretic, anti-inflammatory and cholagogic agent. This plant gives the following medicinal raw material:
a. Seeds
*b. Fruits
c. Leaves
d. Sprouts
e. Roots

52. A pharmacy procured common origanum. What drying conditions should be applied for producing high quality crude drug?
a. 80-90°C
b. 50-60°C
c. 70-80°C
*d. 35-40°C
e. 60-70°C

