1. A syrup contains 82 parts of sugar syrup; 1 part of KJ (KBr); 12 parts of liquid thyme extract and 5 parts of 96% ethanol. What is this medicine called?
a. Cholosasum
b. Broncholytin
c. Licorice syrup
*d. Pertussinum
e. Ambroxol

2. A tablet production unit produces press-coated tablets. What equipment is used for this purpose?
a. Triturating machine
*b. Double pressing tabletting machine
c. Marmerizer
d. Dragee pan
e. Eccentric tabletting machine

3. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces a dense extract with 0,25% ammonia solution used as an extractant. This dense extract is:
a. Valerian
b. Sagebrush (Artemisia)
*c. Licorice
d. Male fern
e. Motherwort (Leonurus)

4. A pharmaceutic plant producing ointments can use the following equipment at the packing stage:
a. Rezepin automatic machine
b. Eccentric machines
c. Disc machines
*d. Screw and piston dosing machines
e. Rotary machines

5. Aerosol workshop of a pharmaceutic plant uses propellents of different groups. What propellents relate to the group of compressed gases?
a. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride
*b. Nitrogen, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide
c. Propane, butane, isobutane
d. Freons
e. Vinyl and methyl chloride

6. For granule drying different types of dryers are used. The dryer SP-30 relates to the following type:
*a. With fluidized bed
b. Infrared
c. With a forced air circulation
d. With silica gel column
e. Sublimation

7. One of the quality indicators for finished ampoules is lack of residual stress in the glass. Which operation at the stage "Preparation of ampoules to be filled" eliminates this imperfection?
*a. Ampoule annealing
b. Ampoule washing
c. Ampoule sterilization
d. Ampoule drying
e. Capillary opening

8. Companies producing injectable dosage forms apply different methods of ampoule sealing. Sealing against a jet of inert gases (nitrogen, argon, carbon dioxide) is suitable for the following injection solutions:
*a. Easily oxidable
b. Thermostable
c. Photosensitive
d. Hydrolytically unstable
e. Viscous

9. Quality control of tablets produced at a pharmaceutical enterprise involves quantitative determination of such subsidiary substances as talc and aerosil. What method is applied for such determination?
a. Photocolorimetric
b. Titrimetric
*c. Gravimetric
d. Spectrophotometric
e. Chromatographic

10. Pharmaceutical plants produce enteric-coated tablets. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the coating mustnt disintegrate in the acidic medium within the following period:
*a. 1 hour
b. 4 hours
c. 5 hours
d. 3 hours
e. 2 hours

11. While producing phytopreparations and organotherapeutic preparations different kinds of dryers are used. What dryer would be the most effective for drying thermolabile compounds?
a. Drying oven
b. Drum dryer
c. Roller dryer
d. Band dryer
*e. Freeze-dryer

12. Injection solutions of salts derived from weak acids and strong bases require stabilization. What stabilizers are used for these solutions?
a. Buthylhydroxytoluene
*b. 0,1 M sodium hydroxide solution
c. Trilon B
d. 0,1 M acid chloride solution
e. Ascorbic acid

13. A pharmaceutical plant produces suppositories. What is the best method for their manufacturing in industrial quantities?
a. Lyophilization
*b. Outpouring
c. Pressing
d. Pumping-out
e. Stamping

14. One of the tablet coatings is enterosoluble capsule. They get solved in:
a. -
*b. Bowels
c. Oral cavity
d. Stomach
e. Rectum

15. Aerosol composition includes active substances, solvents and propellents. Which of the following substances is used as propellent?
a. Propylen glycol monostearate, argon, helium
b. Isopropyl myristate, neon, sulfur oxide
*c. Freon-11, carbon oxide, propane-butane
d. Linethol, myristic acid, benzocaine
e. Hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen, triethanolamine

16. Efficiency of aerosol therapy is to a considerable extent determined by the size of disperse particles. What factor determines the size of aerosol particles during dispersion of an aerosol?
a. System homogeneity, dispersion velocity
b. Reduction range, container quantity
*c. Exit port diameter, propellent vapour pressure
d. Percentage of phase, filling temperature
e. Fractional composition, containers filling method

17. A department producing sterile pharmaceutical forms needs a method of eye drops sterilization applicable for drugs derived from thermolabile substances. What is the optimal method of sterilization?
a. Thermal sterilization
b. Filling in the inert gas medium
c. Use of polymeric packings
*d. Sterile filtration
e. Addition of ascorbic acid

18. In the production of injection solutions the activated carbon is used as:
a. Buffer system creation
b. Chemical resistance of ampoules glass increasing
c. Ampoules residual stress relaxation
*d. Purification
e. Antioxidant properties increasing

19. Lipophilic bases for suppositories include:
a. Glycerol soap base
*b. Mixtures of hydrogenatedd fats
c. Gelatin-glycerol base
d. Polyethylene oxide base
e. Collagen base

20. In the process of pressing the tablets adhere to the pressing tool. The technological error is the lack of:
a. Dyes
*b. Lubricants
c. Disintegrants
d. Adhesive substances
e. Diluents

21. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces nitroglycerine tablets. What is the method of their production?
a. Pressing with preliminary wet granulation
b. Pressing with preliminary dry granulation
c. Direct pressing, without adjuvants
d. Direct pressing with addition of adjuvants
*e. Extrusion

22. Which of the listed methods of filling ampoules with injectable solutions can protect the capillaries from contamination with thick and viscous solutions?
a. Turbo-vacuum method
b. Vacuum method
*c. Syringe method
d. Steam condensing method
e. Solution squeezing method

23. Production of injection solutions involves an operation of solution filtration. What filters are used for sterile filtration?
a. Nutsch filters
b. Pressure filters
c. Mushroom filter
*d. Filter candles
e. Filter developed by the Kharkiv Chemo-pharmaceutic Research Institute

24. Quality of injection solutions supplied in ampoules can be assessed according to different indices. How many ampoules should be checked while determining quality of sealing (leaktightness of an ampoule)?
a. 75%
b. 50%
c. 97%
d. 80%
*e. 100%

25. A chemical department produces alcohol solution of boric acid. What filters are used for filtration of this solution?
a. Bag filter
b. Membrane filter
c. Paper filter
d. Nutsch filter
*e. Pressure filters

26. A tablet shop produces trituration tablets. What quality indicators ARE NOT relevant for these tablets?
a. Homogeneity of content
b. Microbiological purity
c. Disintegration and dissolution
d. Homogeneity of dosage
*e. Abrasion, resistance to crushing

27. An ampule production unit produces glucose solution. If the special sort of glucose "for injections" is not available, then the glucose should be separated from the following admixtures:
a. Sulfates and iron (Fe)
b. Pyretogenetic and proteic substances
c. Proteic substances and dyes
*d. Pyretogenetic and dyes
e. Manganese and iron (Fe)

28. A department of a pharmaceutical plant produces injection solutions. Ascorbic acid solution for injections relates to the following group of solutions:
a. Solutions of salts derived from weak bases and strong acids
b. Solutions of substances that should be subjected to thermal sterilization
*c. Easily oxidized solutions
d. Solutions of salts derived from strong bases and weak acids
e. Solutions of substances requiring special rectification

29. The ampoule workshop produces solutions for injections. The aminophylline solution for injections relates to the following group of solutions:
a. Solutions of salts composed of weak bases and strong acids
b. Solutions of easily oxidizable substances
*c. Solutions are not subject to heat sterilization
d. Solutions of salts composed of strong bases and weak acids
e. Solutions of substances requiring special purification

30. A phytochemical production unit produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the biogenic stimulators of organo-mineral origin:
a. Vitreous body, Placenta injection, Рlasmolum, Solcoseryl
b. Extractum Aloes fluidum, Linimentum Aloes, Succus Aloes, Biosedum
*c. Peloidinum, Humisolum, Torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
d. Extractum Aloes fluidum, Linimentum Aloes, Рlasmolum
e. Peloidinum, Humisolum, Torfotum, Рlasmolum, Solcoseryl

31. Phytochemical workshop of a pharmaceutical plant produces biogenic stimulators from different raw materials. Specify the biogenic stimulators of animal origin:
a. Liquid aloe extract, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biossedum
b. Liquid aloe extract, aloe liniment, plasmolum
c. Реloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmolum, solcoseryl
*d. Vitreous body, placental suspension for injections, plasmolum, solcoseryl
e. Реloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs рro injectionibus

32. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the plant-derived biogenic stimulators:
*a. Liquid extract of aloe, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biosedum
b. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
c. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmol, solcoseryl
d. Vitreous body, Suspesio Рlacetae prо injectionibus, aloe juice, biosedum
e. Liquid extract of aloe, peloidinum, biosedum juice

33. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces water solutions. The solution of the following substance is produced by method of chemical interaction and electrochemically:
a. Calcium gluconate
b. Plumbum hydroxide acetate
*c. Aluminum hydroxide acetate
d. Polyvinyl alcohol
e. Potassium arsenite

34. According to the pharmacopoeia requirements of liquid extract production, the extractant and the raw material should be taken in the following proportion:
a. 1:10
b. 1:4
c. 1:3
d. 1:5
*e. 1:1

35. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces neogalenic preparations. Which preparation is produced by the use of Soxhlet circulation apparatus?
*a. Аdonisidum
b. Corglyconum
c. Сеlanidum
d. Lantosidum
e. Digoxin

36. Aerosol production involves usage of propellents relating to different groups. Choose the propellants that relate to the group of volatile organic solvents:
a. Vinyl chloride and methyl chloride
b. Carbon dioxide
c. Freons
d. Propane, butane, isobutane
*e. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride

37. Which of the following drug forms is produced in granules?
a. Мucaltinum
b. Diazolinum
*c. Plantaglucide
d. Rеvitum
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride

38. A pharmaceutical factory produces camphor oil for topical application. What oil is to be used as a solvent?
a. Vaseline
b. Peach
*c. Sunflower seed
d. Olive
e. Plum

39. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces ointments. What base is applied for production of sulfur ointment simple?
*a. Emulsion
b. Base For ophthalmic ointments
c. Polyethylene glycol
d. Lanolin
e. Vaseline

40. Adjuvant substances in the production of tablets give the tableted mass all necessary technological properties, ensure dosage precision, mechanical strength and stability of tablets during their storage. What adjuvant substances facilitate disintegration or solution of the tablets in the organism?
*a. Disintegrants
b. Lubricants
c. Flavors
d. Filling agents
e. Antifriction agents

41. While filling hard gelatin capsules such glidants as 0,1% - 0,3% aerosil or magnesium stearate along with 0,5% - 1% talc are often added to the filling agent in order to improve the following properties:
a. Ability to contact molding
*b. Flowability
c. Regulation of moisture content
d. Homogeneity
e. Homogeneity of mixing

42. A pharmaceutic plant producing aerosol forms uses liquefied gases as propellents. Which of the following substances relates to the group of liquefied gases?
a. Nitrogen
b. Methylene chloride
c. Ethylene chloride
*d. Freons
e. Nitrous oxide

43. Grinding equipment is classified by the way of grinding. What kind of machines does a roller crusher relate to?
*a. Crushing
b. Abrasive
c. Impact-centrifugal
d. Impact
e. Cutting

44. Antacid gastritis can be treated with plantain juice. What is the way of its extraction?
a. Maceration with aqueous ethanol solution
b. Extraction with condensed gases
*c. High-pressure compression
d. Dissolution of concentrates
e. Repercolation

45. A pharmaceutical factory produces herbal juice out of fresh raw material. What operation should be performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Adsorption
b. Sedimentation
*c. Heating followed by quick cooling
d. Filtration
e. Crystallization

46. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces valerian tincture of fresh material. Technological peculiarity of its production is that it should be produced on the base of:
a. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
b. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
c. 95% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
*d. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:5
e. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:5

