1. For isolation of alkaloids from biological material by Kramarenkos method extract is cleaned. For what operation ammonium sulphate is added to extract?
a. Centrifugation
b. Infusion
*c. Salting-out
d. Ether extraction
e. Chloroform extraction

2. Analysis of an extract by chromatographic method revealed presence of phenyl prapanolamine. It is the metabolite of the following alkaloid:
a. Aconitine
b. Pyrocatechin
*c. Ephedrine
d. Securinin
e. Reserpine

3. It is necessary to make rapid analysis of opiates in urine. Which of the following methods is the most sensitive?
a. Chromatographic
b. Spectrochemical in the UV region
c. Extraction photometric
*d. Immunoenzyme
e. Photometric

4. TLC-screening is used for omnidirectional investigation of "acid" chloroform extract. For detection of barbiturates following developers are used:
*a. Diphenylcarbazide and mercury sulfate
b. Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate
c. Isopropylamine
d. Ditizone
e. Diphenylamine

5. A patient got intoxicated with an unknown substance. Test of biological material revealed pH=2,0-3,0. The chemico-toxicological analysis should be carried out for the following group of substances:
a. Weak organic acids and heavy metal salts
b. Alkali metal salts
c. Alkalis
d. Ammonia
*e. Mineral acids or large amounts of organic acids

6. A woman died from pesticide poisoning as a result of processing of agricultural crops. Measurement of organophosphorous compounds in the extracts of biological material should be started with the following test:
a. Test for the presence of a sulfur atom
*b. Biochemical assay
c. Test for methoxy or ethoxy groups
d. Test for the phosphate ion
e. Test for the presence of chlorine atom

7. In the medical practice this compound is used as a disinfectant. In case of intoxication with this compound the patients urine turns olive or olive-black. Specify the compound:
a. Ethyl ether
b. Ethyl benzoate
c. Isoamyl alcohol
d. Iodoform
*e. Phenol

8. О-methylation is an important way of biotransformation of organic substances in the body. Compounds subject to О-methylation should contain:
a. Nitro groups
b. Carboxyl groups
c. Amino groups
d. Thiol groups
*e. Phenol groups

9. Method of gas-liquid chromatography is often applied for identification and quantitative determination of toxicologically meaningful substances. Substances can be placed into the chromatograph dispenser in the following aggregate states:
a. Gaseous and solid
b. Liquid and solid
*c. Liquid and gaseous
d. Liquid
e. Gaseous

10. Preliminary tests involve using various kinds of indicator paper. Blackening of the indicator paper treated with plumbum acetate indicates that the biological object contains:
a. Sodium hydroxide
*b. Hydrogen sulphide
c. Ammonium hydroxide
d. Hydrogen chloride
e. Sulphuric acid

11. An obtained mineralisate contains sulphates of lead, barium and strontium in form of white precipitation. What procedure will allow to separate the lead sulphate?
a. Conversion into diethyldithiocarbamate
b. Conversion into arsine
c. Dissolution in concentrated sulphuric acid
d. Conversion into carbonate
*e. Dissolution in ammonium acetate

12. It is necessary to analyse incrustation of reducing tube after Marsh test for arsenicum to exclude in biological materials compounds of:
*a. Stibiy
b. Waist
c. Zinc
d. Cadmium
e. Argentum

13. Substances that enter the body subject to various transformations under enzymes influence. What is the direction of mono- and polyatomic alcohol metabolism has the largest toxicological value?
*a. Oxidization
b. Dealkylation
c. -
d. Conjugation
e. Hydroxylation

14. A chemotoxicological laboratory received a biological material. A toxicologist carries out uncontrollable analysis aimed at detection of the following group of toxic substances:
a. Medical use toxins
b. Pesticides
c. Mineral acids, alkali, inorganic salts
*d. Volatile toxins
e. Metal toxins

15. A forensic medicine laboratory received some biological material. It should be analyzed for the presence of trichlorfon and dichlorvos. For their isolation a toxicologist infuses them with:
a. Propanol acidified with oxalic acid
b. Water alkalized with ammonia solution
*c. Chloroform
d. Ethanol acidified with oxalic acid
e. Water acidified with sulfuric acid

16. During the chemico-toxicological study of the dialysate of an aqueous extract, the ammonia test IS NOT carried out if the dialysate includes the following substance:
a. Sulphurous acid
b. Nitric acid
c. Nitrous acid
*d. Hydrogen sulphide
e. Sulphuric acid

17. A forensic chemical laboratory received an object for analysis. The analysis involves quantitative determination of mercury by means of a reaction with dithizone. What physical-chemical method is used within this analysis?
a. UV spectrophotometry
b. Gas-liquid chromatography
*c. Extraction photocolorimetry
d. IR spectrophotometry
e. Thin layer chromatography

18. Most alkaloids are isolated from the biological material by means of polar solvents. Which of the listed alkaloids is isolated by the way of distillation with water vapour?
a. Quinine
*b. Coniine
c. Cocaine
d. Strychnine
e. Atropine

19. A patient has accidentally taken a barium-containing salt. All of the following salts have toxic effect upon the human organism EXCEPT for:
a. Barium nitrate
b. Barium carbonate
*c. Barium sulfate
d. Barium acetate
e. Barium chloride

20. A mineralizate under examination contains precipitates of barium sulfate and plumbum sulfate. These salts can be separated by means of:
a. Solution of ammonium nitrate
*b. Solution of ammonium acetate
c. Acetic acid
d. Sulfuric acid
e. Solution of sodium acetate

21. Name a "metal poison" which is isolated from the biological material by the method of destruction:
a. Cadmium
b. Stibium
*c. Mercury
d. Silver
e. Arsenic

22. Toxic substances can be isolated from the objects of biological origin by different methods. In case of intoxication with pesticides - derivatives of phosphoric acids - the following method is applied:
a. Distillation with water steam from the alkaline medium
b. Infusion with water acidified with chloric acid
c. Dialysis from alkalized solutions
*d. Infusion with organic solvents
e. Infusion with alkalized water

23. Reaction with KI solution which is called "Golden Rain Reaction" helps to detect presence of the followingg toxic metal:
*a. Pb
b. Cu
c. Mn
d. Ag
e. Ba

24. Urine of an intoxicated person was found to contain ecgonine. This indicates poisoning with the following substance:
*a. Cocaine
b. Caffeine
c. Heroin
d. Phenol
e. Phenacetin

25. Presence of ethanol in a biological sample can be demonstrated by the following reaction:
a. With iron (III) chloride
*b. Iodoform test
c. With Fredes reagent
d. With sodium nitroprusside
e. Libermans reaction

26. Novocaine metabolism in the organism results in generation of p-amino-benzoic acid. What metabolic process underlies this conversion?
a. Rehabilitation
b. Conjugation
c. Dealkylation
d. Oxidization
*e. Hydrolysis

27. Forensic toxicological analysis of a mineralizate revealed copper. For preliminary determination of copper ions the following substance is used:
a. Dithizone
b. Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate
*c. Plumbum diethyldithiocarbamate
d. Diphenylcarbazide
e. Diphenylamine

28. While studying the reaction of an "acid" chloroform extraction in acidic medium with sodium nitrite, a forensic toxicologist got a compound stained emerald green. Which of the substances is capable of forming the mentioned nitrose compound?
*a. Antipyrine
b. Amidopyrine
c. Salicylic acid
d. Noxiron
e. Analgin

29. A patient got intoxicated with nitrites. Nitrites can be detected by means of the reaction of azo-dye formation with the following acid:
a. Salicylic
*b. Sulfanilic
c. Phosphoric
d. Sulfuric
e. Hydrochloric

30. When heroin comes into an an organism, it metabolizes chiefly to:
*a. Morphine and 6-monoacetylmorphine
b. Morphine
c. 3-acetylmorphine and morphine
d. 6-acetylmorphine
e. Codeine

31. Forensic toxicological analysis is often done for the metabolism products of toxic substances. Amino benzophenones are generated during biotrasformation of:
a. Phenothiazines
b. Butyrophenones
c. Opiates
*d. 1,4-benzodiazepines
e. Barbiturates

32. Determination of pH of a biological material by means of indicator paper is applied for the preliminary conclusion about substances that might have caused intoxication. The indicator paper moistened with plumbum acetate solution was exposed to the evaporations of the material under examination and turned black. This indicates that the material under examination contains:
a. Methane
b. Ammonia
*c. Hydrogen sulfide
d. Carbon monoxide
e. Carbonic gas

33. Lapkina-Lazarenko method of ethylene glycol separation enables to isolate it effectively from the objects of chemotoxicological analysis. What is the selective transporter of ethylene glycol from the objects to the distillate?
a. Ethanol
b. Water
*c. Benzol
d. Chloroform
e. Acetone

34. Oxidation of some toxins within the body results in generation of compounds that increase their toxicity. Thus, due to the oxidation of heptachlor in the body the folowing compound is formed:
a. Hexachlorocyclohexane
*b. Heptachlor epoxide
c. Carbon dioxide
d. Carbon monoxide
e. Heptachlor oxide

35. What substance will impede reaction of iodoform test aimed at detection of ethyl alcohol in the biological material?
a. Phenol
b. Formaldehyde
c. Methanol
d. Isoamyl alcohol
*e. Acetone

36. Ions of some metal make it difficult to detect zinc ions in the mineralizate. For this reason zinc is separated from mineralizate by converting it into:
a. Hexacyanoferrate (II)
b. Dithizone
*c. Diethyldithiocarbamate
d. Sulfide
e. Tetrarodanomerkuroat

