1. The Population Vaccination Control Department calculates the need for vaccines required for vaccination of children under one year of age according to the Vaccination Calendar for the coming year. What demographic value must be used in these calculations?
a. The number of vaccinated people last year
b. Population size
c. Natural population growth
*d. Number of newborns
e. The number of vaccination refusals per year

2. The maximum benefit for the health of young children is achieved by following all recommendations regarding physical activity and duration of sleep during the day. Specify the duration of sleep recommended by the World Health Organization for children 3-4 years old.
*a. 10-13 hours
b. 8-11 hours
c. 7-10 hours
d. -
e. 12-15 hours

3. What type of research studies long-term the health of one population of individuals using for this purpose repeated recording of certain parameters at set intervals to determine the dynamics of their changes and their mutual influence?
a. Operations research
*b. Longitudinal study
c. Trend analysis
d. Repeated measures design
e. Cohort study

4. The number of immigrants in Ukraine (foreigners with residence permits) is 250000 people, among which 75200 foreigners have temporary residence permits. They are mostly foreign students, who study in Ukraine for 5-6 years. What type of migration is it, based on its duration?
*a. Temporary
b. Seasonal
c. Pendulum
d. Internal
e. Permanent

5. A 45-year-old man came to the family doctor, who studied the patient's medical history and determined that the patient was affected by controllable endogenous risk factors. What factors are controllable endogenous?
a. Environmental conditions, lifestyle
*b. Arterial hypertension, dyslipidosis
c. Climate, natural conditions
d. Age, gender
e. Medical errors, heredity

6. During the visit, the doctor, having the data on the lifestyle of a 37-year-old patient, noted that the patient's body was being affected by various groups of risk factors. What is the proportion of a person's lifestyle within the structure of risk factors that affect the health of the population?
a. 40%
b. 20%
c. 10%
*d. 50%
e. 30%

7. A primary healthcare facility has purchased a system for measuring glycosylated hemoglobin, which makes it possible to detect occult diabetes mellitus (prediabetes) and allows developing a diabetes prevention program for each patient. Who needs to undergo such screening?
*a. Pregnant women
b. All women
c. All teenagers from 15 to 18 years of age
d. All men
e. Newborn children

8. Scientific studies (A) I. Robbins, 1980) identified four groups of leading determinants that have an effect on the health of the population. What ratio was established by the author of the research between different groups of leading health determinants?
a. Lifestyle - 40%; genetics - 10%; environment - 30%; healthcare - 20%
*b. Lifestyle - 50%; genetics - 20%; environment - 20%; healthcare - 10%
c. Lifestyle - 35%; genetics - 20%; environment - 15%; healthcare - 25%
d. Lifestyle - 45%; genetics - 25%; environment - 25%; healthcare - 5%
e. Lifestyle - 30%; genetics - 20%; environment - 20%; healthcare - 30%

9. According to the law of Ukraine "On measures to prevent and reduce the use of tobacco products and their harmful effects on the health of the population" adopted in 2009, the city has raised prices for tobacco products, smoking was prohibited in public places, visual information was placed on the streets of the city, and awareness campaign has been carried out to inform the people about the harmful effect of smoking. What level of strategic planning was used the development of this project?
a. Interregional
*b. Municipal
c. Regional
d. International
e. National

10. The emergency (urgent) medical aid station of the city received a call about a significant traffic accident. As a result of the accident, 2 cars collided and the bus overturned. At the time of the call, there is information about 15 victims with injuries of various degrees of severity. What is the optimal number of emergency (ambulance) medical teams that should be sent to the scene?
a. 6 emergency medical aid teams
b. 12 emergency medical aid teams
c. 5 emergency medical aid teams
*d. 9 emergency medical aid teams
e. 15 emergency medical aid teams

11. A regional healthcare department analyzes the infant mortality rate in the region and determines what portion of it results from preventable causes, associated with deficiencies in the organization of healthcare for children. What value reflects it most accurately?
a. Perinatal mortality rate per different periods of time
b. Mortality rate of children under one year of age
c. Infant mortality rate per one calendar month
*d. Proportion of neonatal mortality in total infant mortality
e. Proportion of postnatal mortality in total infant mortality

12. The territory of the port in the vicinity of an accident that occurred with a tanker and resulted in the spill of toxic chemical industry waste is being constantly monitored by the service for elimination of the consequences of the accident. The persons injured during the accident were hospitalized. The healthy population of the port, living within the 3 km zone from the water line, was moved to other areas. The delivery of water, food, and warm clothes was organized. The chemical substances are being degassed at the disaster site, dead fish and animals are being collected. Morbidity of the population is within the range of seasonal fluctuations. What is the nature of this emergency situation?
a. Political
b. Natural
c. Sociopolitical
d. Military
*e. Technogenic

13. In the industrial zone of a city, a study of emissions to air caused by the local factories was conducted. At the same time, the doctors employed at the workshops of these factories studied the obstructive bronchitis and bronchial asthma morbidity in the workers. What parameter allows establishing a connection between these phenomena?
*a. Correlation coefficient
b. Student's criterion
c. Ratio criterion
d. Standardized rate
e. Coefficient of variation

14. A special study conducted among young people has detected a correlation between the incidence of arterial hypertension and a history of a craniocerebral injury. The calculated correlation coefficient is +0.85. What is the strength and direction of this correlation?
a. No correlation
b. Medium-strength inverse correlation
*c. Strong direct correlation
d. Medium-strength direct correlation
e. Strong inverse correlation

15. A public health specialist was commissioned to conduct an analysis of the incidence of HIV infection over a 10-year period. What type of graphic image is the most appropriate to use for high-quality visualization of statistical data?
a. Radial diagram
b. Pie chart
c. Card diagram
*d. Line diagram
e. Scatter diagram

16. An emergency situation occurred in the primary medical care facility during the realization of professional duties: a nurse stuck herself with a needle after performing a venipuncture on a patient with a potential positive HIV status. After conducting emergency post-exposure prophylaxis, the nurse is recommended to start a 28-day course of antiretroviral therapy (ART). During what period from the moment of the emergency situation is it advisable to start the specified course of ART in order to prevent HIV infection?
a. 80 hours
*b. 72 hours
c. 120 hours
d. 96 hours
e. 92 hours

17. In one of the regions of Ukraine, the spread of a contagious animal disease within a short period of time, significantly exceeding the usual incidence of this disease in this territory, was registered. Such an adverse event can be classified as:
a. Epidemic
b. Epiphytoty
c. Disaster
d. Accident
*e. Epizooty

18. At a factory, the workshop doctor notes that the labor productivity of the group of workers, who abuse alcohol and are heavy smokers, has significantly decreased. A decrease in labor productivity in an industrial environment belongs to the following type of social losses:
a. Social
b. Legal and regulatory
*c. Economic
d. Exogenous
e. Medical and biological

19. New Zealand has declared a state of emergency after Cyclone Gabrielle has caused widespread flooding, mudslides, and huge ocean waves and forced the people to evacuate. As a result of the cataclysms, 225 thousand residents of New Zealand were left without electricity, the roads were closed. What type of emergency is it?
a. Military
b. Technogenic
c. Social
*d. Natural
e. Societal

20. Choose the correct characteristic of the indicator of average salt consumption by residents of Ukraine, which is 12.6 g per day, according to the results of the STEPS study conducted in 2019.
a. It is more than three times higher than the norm recommended by WHO
b. It is a relatively low indicator for ensuring the necessary amount of trace elements in the daily diet
*c. It is more than two times higher than the norm recommended by WHO
d. It does not exceed the maximum allowable norms of the content of microelements in the daily diet
e. It is a normal (historically and culturally determined) level of salt consumption for residents of this region

21. The Center for Public Health of Ukraine proposed creating a national program named "Healthy Lifestyle". What state authority should consider the concept of such a state target program and make a decision on its approval?
*a. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine
b. The Parliament of Ukraine
c. The Ministry of Health of Ukraine
d. The Constitutional Court of Ukraine
e. Healthcare self-governance authorities

22. Because of the modern rhythm of life, people often complain of sleep disturbances and insufficient sleep duration. What is the optimal duration of sleep that ensures the health of a person?
a. 4-5 hours
b. 9-10 hours
*c. 7-8 hours
d. 5-6 hours
e. 10-11 hours

23. To identify the health inequality among the population, a decision was made to study the social gradient. What does the social gradient in health mean?
a. The level of health is in inverse correlation with the level of income
*b. The level of health is in direct correlation with the level of income
c. -
d. Correlation or absence of correlation between the level of health and the level of income could not be determined
e. No correlation between the level of health and the level of income

24. During the assessment of the academic performance of unemployed university students and those who combine studying with work, it was determined that the average score of unemployed students was 8.7±0.09, while working students had the average score of 6.8±0.05. What coefficient (criterion) should be calculated to assess the significance of the difference in the results in this case?
*a. Probability coefficient (Student's t-test)
b. Sign test (Z-test)
c. Wilcoxon T-test
d. Correspondence criterion (chi^2 test)
e. Kolmogorov-Smirnov test

25. The mean height of a sample of first-year students is 170 cm with a standard deviation of 8 cm. Define what additional data you need to know to calculate a confidence interval for the mean height of first-year students.
a. Number of all 1st year students
b. Number of students of all courses
c. The data provided in the condition are sufficient, additional ones are not required
d. The number of 1st-year students with a height of 170 cm
*e. The number of students of the researched sample

26. To create the most representative sample, it is recommended to select research participants randomly. Name the process of randomly selecting participants and dividing them into experimental and control groups.
a. Delimitation
b. Sorting
c. Normal distribution
*d. Randomization
e. Selection

27. Historically, social insurance funds were receiving two-thirds of their contributions directly from workers and one-third from employers. These funds were used to pay for treatment, pensions, and unemployment benefits. Later, these funds turned into hospital funds, and then into insurance companies. What system uses such a mechanism for the formation of social insurance funds?
a. George
b. Semashko
*c. Bismarck
d. Beveridge
e. Thatcher

28. A 48-year-old patient, who lives in the area affected by the Chornobyl Nuclear Power Plant accident, came to a doctor with complaints of nausea, vomiting, headache, fever, and gastrointestinal disorders. What group of risk factors had the greatest impact on the patient's health?
a. Genetic factors
b. Healthcare quality
*c. Environment
d. Physiological factors
e. Lifestyle

29. As a result of prolonged heavy rains in the territory of the region, the protective dam was destroyed. As a result of the emergency situation, several settlements were flooded in two districts of this region, 67 people were injured, and 3 residents died. 271 residential buildings were flooded, in which about 1,000 residents lived. Determine the level of a natural emergency.
a. World
b. State
*c. Regional
d. Local
e. Object

30. Insufficient physical activity is one of the important risk factors that cause death globally. The World Health Organization has developed Global Physical Activity Guidelines for Health. Define the recommended duration of moderate-intensity physical activity for the adult population in the age group 18-64 years during the week.
a. -
b. Not less than 120 minutes
c. Not less than 90 minutes
d. Not less than 60 minutes
*e. Not less than 150 minutes

31. Define the international document that states that health cannot be achieved without primary health care, which must be available to everybody.
*a. WHO Alma-Ata Declaration
b. International medical and sanitary regulations
c. Ottawa Charter
d. WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
e. Declaration of Helsinki on health in all policies

32. A patient came to the family doctor (with whom the declaration has been signed) complaining of pain in the lumbar region. After a thorough examination, the doctor decided to refer the patient to a nephrologist. Who among the healthcare workers has access to the personalized patient data (all patient data contained in the declaration and - after the introduction of electronic prescriptions and electronic medical records - medical information and appointments), stored within the electronic healthcare system?
a. Only the doctor, with whom the declaration has been signed
b. Only the doctor, to whom the patient was referred
c. Only the patient can decide, who may be granted access
*d. Only the doctor, with whom the declaration has been signed, and the doctor, to whom the patient was referred
e. Any medical worker at the healthcare facility

33. During the last 5 years, there has been a constant increase in the incidence of diphtheria among the population of the community. What preventive measures should be planned and organized in the community in order to stabilize the incidence rates?
a. Treatment of patients with diphtheria
*b. Diphtheria vaccination
c. Treatment of contacts
d. Detection of diphtheria carriers
e. Medical prevention of diphtheria

34. Performance metrics of a new diagnostic test are evaluated. Which of the methods should be used to visualize the data in this case?
*a. ROC curve
b. Forest diagram (forest plot)
c. Kaplan-Meier curve
d. Radial diagram
e. Sector diagram

35. A study of the effectiveness of the arterial hypertension treatment using a new drug in comparison with traditional therapy was conducted. The study participants were 3000 people. They were divided into two identical groups, taking into account the participants' age, sex, stage of the disease, etc. One group was receiving treatment with the new drug, while the other was receiving traditional therapy and was designated to be the control group. The trial participants did not know which therapy they were receiving. What type of study was used in this case?
a. Prospective cohort study
b. Case-control study
c. Cross-sectional study
d. Double-blind controlled randomized study
*e. Blind controlled randomized study

36. The age structure of the population has a significant effect on the population health and determines the need for healthcare services. What is characteristic of the age structure of the population of Ukraine?
a. Smaller proportion of children and elderly people
b. Larger proportion of young people and working people
*c. Larger proportion of elderly people and smaller proportion of young people
d. Larger proportion of children and elderly people
e. Smaller proportion of elderly people and larger proportion of young people

37. According to the data of the State Statistics Service of the country, it was established that 83% of healthcare workers are women. Among doctors, the share of women is 62% of the total number, middle medical personnel - 94%. According to the national census, the number of male doctors was 57,600, female doctors - 99,300, female nurses - 294,000, male nurses - 19,000. Describe the state of the country's medical industry most accurately, taking into account the gender aspect.
a. Vertical segregation is defined
b. There are signs of gender imbalance
*c. There is gender imbalance and sectoral gender segregation
d. Only sectoral gender segregation is defined
e. -

38. Potentially dangerous factors increase the likelihood of disease development, progression and adverse outcome. Indicate which factors are exogenous uncontrollable.
a. The state of medical care of the population
*b. Solar radiation, geological features of the soil
c. Age, gender
d. Pollution of water, soil, air
e. Arterial hypertension, increased level of glucose in the blood

39. What is a mandatory component of emergency preparedness in healthcare?
a. Conducting research
*b. Making or revising the action plan for emergency situations
c. Consulting
d. Information exchange
e. Monitoring the situation

40. Residents of Zakarpattia Region have been experiencing iodine deficiency and the spread of diseases related to it for many years. What is the name of this phenomenon?
a. Pandemic
b. Epidemic
*c. Endemic
d. Cluster
e. Disease outbreak

41. A pilot study of the effectiveness of the new drug, in comparison with the standard one, is being conducted. The researcher found a statistically significant difference between the effects of the drugs, which was confirmed in further studies. How can you describe the conclusions made by the researcher in this case?
a. The alternative hypothesis is incorrectly accepted
*b. The alternative hypothesis is accepted correctly
c. The null hypothesis is accepted correctly
d. The null hypothesis is incorrectly accepted
e. -

42. Due to an outbreak of hepatitis A in a nearby settlement, a public health specialist was instructed to develop a plan of measures to prevent this disease in the community. What specific preventive measures should be included in the plan?
*a. Active immunoprophylaxis using inactivated vaccines
b. Control over compliance with norms at public catering facilities
c. -
d. Screening of the population for the presence of the hepatitis A virus
e. Sanitary and educational work among the population regarding the ways of infection

43. Determine the most effective method of prevention at the individual level, based on the values of the contribution to the risk of developing noninfectional diseases of each type of determinant.
a. Make a declaration with a family doctor in the best family outpatient clinic in the city
b. Moving to live in more favorable region from an ecological point of view
*c. Leading a healthy lifestyle
d. Re-register for service at a private healthcare facility
e. Have a full medical examination every year

44. In a separate area, a regional public health program for combating non-communicable diseases has been developed. Determine the structure that has the right to approve the draft concept of the regional program.
a. Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine
b. WHO
*c. The executive committee of the regional or local council
d. Ministry of Health of Ukraine
e. Public Health Center of the Ministry of Health of Ukraine

45. Over the last year, a large number of cases of HIV infection at the fourth stage (AIDS stage) have been detected among the population in the community, which significantly exceeds the number of people at other stages. This situation indicates insufficient organization of which process?
a. Treatment of persons with an established diagnosis of HIV-infection
b. Involvement in pre-contact prevention of HIV-infection
c. Informational and educational work on infection among young people
d. Monitoring the condition of patients with HIV-infection
*e. Involvement in voluntary HIV counseling and testing

46. It is being studied how the use of new treatment tactics will affect the survival of patients, in comparison with the standard method. Which method should be used to visually compare patient survival in both groups?
*a. Kaplan-Meier curve
b. Forest diagram (forest plot)
c. Sector diagram
d. Radial diagram
e. ROC curve

47. Due to the significant prevalence of obesity and excess body weight among the population of the region, it was decided to develop informational materials on rational nutrition. What is the recommended limit of consumption in the structure of the energy value of the food ration should be included in these materials?
*a. Fat up to 30%
b. -
c. Protein up to 10%
d. Fiber up to 40%
e. Carbohydrates up to 50%

48. A research is being conducted to assess the impact of smoking on systolic blood pressure (SBP). Two homogeneous samples of 100 people each were selected, the first group - smokers, the second - non-smokers. What statistical test should be used to assess the reliability of the differences in the obtained results, if the distribution of SBP values differs from normal?
a. Student's test for related samples
b. Wilcoxon's t-test
*c. Mann-Whitney U-test
d. Student's criterion for independent samples
e. -

49. Due to difficult weather conditions, a truck and a bus collided on the highway. As a result of the traffic accident, 6 people died, 20 people were injured. To what type, depending on the nature of the origin, does this situation belong?
*a. Emergency situation of man-made nature
b. This situation is not emergency
c. An emergency situation of a social nature
d. A natural emergency
e. A military emergency

50. A 29-year-old pregnant woman with the gestation period of 35 weeks was registered for regular check-ups due to insulin-dependent type 1 diabetes mellitus complicated by nephropathy. The patient developed severe eclampsia. Intensive therapy was carried out in the inpatient department of the maternity hospital, but it was ineffective and the patient died. What type of mortality is it?
a. Neonatal mortality
b. Perinatal mortality
c. Early neonatal mortality
d. Total mortality
*e. Maternal mortality

51. There are no international health and sanitary regulations drawn up for the following type of socially dangerous phenomena:
*a. International spread of terrorism
b. Fighting diseases
c. Response measures to the spread of diseases taken at the level of public healthcare, corresponding to the health risks among the population, and limited by them
d. Protection against the spread of diseases
e. International spread of diseases

52. When studying the effect of passive smoking on the lung cancer morbidity in the population, it was determined that the odds ratio was 1.0. What conclusion would be correct in this case?
*a. No effect - the frequency of exposure to the factor was the same in the group of patients and in the group of healthy people
b. Increased risk - the frequency of exposure to the factor was higher in the group of healthy people than in the group of patients
c. Reduced risk - the frequency of exposure to the factor was higher in the group of patients than in the group of healthy people
d. Increased risk - the frequency of exposure to the factor was higher in the group of patients than in the group of healthy people
e. Reduced risk - the frequency of exposure to the factor was higher in the group of healthy people than in the group of patients

53. A 59-year-old man smokes up to 8-9 cigarettes a day for a long time and is overweight. After significant physical exertion, he suddenly developed a headache, dizziness, and short-term loss of consciousness. He cannot pronounce words clearly and cannot raise his right hand or move his right leg. What disease can be suspected in this man?
*a. Cerebral stroke
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Acute tonsillitis
d. Myocardial infarction
e. Depression

54. In one of the regions, an increased incidence of melanoma is observed. To reduce it, the analysis of risk factors for the development of melanoma, including the external factors, was carried out. What factor is considered to be a physical carcinogen?
a. Infrared radiation
*b. Ultraviolet radiation
c. Ultrasonic waves
d. Electromagnetic field
e. Electric current

55. A study of the impact of additional psychotherapeutic methods on the treatment of patients with anxiety disorders was conducted. Forty people with anxiety disorders were included in the study. In addition to drug therapy, all patients were treated with stress-relieving psychotherapy sessions twice a week for three months. Which of the answer options describes this research design?
a. Case-control
b. Cohort
c. Randomized clinical
*d. A series of cases
e. Crosswise

56. "City Polyclinic" Municipal Non-commercial Enterprise has submitted its application for accreditation to the Main Accreditation Commission. What document must be considered by the Commission within 2 months from the date of the submission of the application to determine step-by-step its compliance with the list of the requirements, provided by the established procedure?
*a. Results of the institution's self-analysis regarding the quality of the healthcare provided
b. Report on the medical services provided at the healthcare facility service area (Form 12)
c. Facility equipment list
d. Three-year accreditation certificate
e. General characteristics of the healthcare facility service area

57. During internship in Africa, a doctor was providing care for Ebola fever patients. After completing the internship and returning home, 21 days later, the doctor was diagnosed with Ebola hemorrhagic fever. What measures should be taken in this case by the head physician of the healthcare facility?
a. Prescribe immunomodulators for prevention
b. Prescribe immunoglobulin to the personnel who were in contact with the sick doctor
c. Isolate for 10 days all department personnel who were in direct contact with the sick doctor
*d. Isolate for 21 days all department personnel who were in direct contact with the sick doctor
e. Isolate for 3 days all department personnel who were in direct contact with the sick doctor

58. A program for the prevention of injuries and its consequences is being implemented in the community. Which target group of the population needs to implement measures of tertiary prevention of traffic and domestic injuries?
a. Employees of enterprises
b. Pedestrians
*c. Persons with consequences of injuries
d. Drivers of vehicles
e. General population

59. A family doctor assesses the health status of the patients who are at risk of developing diseases of the cardiovascular system. What scale is used to calculate the total risk of developing a fatal cardiovascular disease?
a. ASIST
b. EPIC
*c. SCORE
d. МАВР
e. STATA

60. In a certain region, the infant mortality rate for the reporting period was 13.8 cases per 1000 newborns, while in another region this rate was 12.4. What statistical method should be used to compare these values?
*a. Standardization
b. Dynamic analysis
c. Standardization of intensity values
d. Determining the reliability of the difference between the values
e. Correlation analysis

61. A certain method of pharmacoeconomic analysis is used to assess and compare alternatives, when clinical and preventive effectiveness of medical technologies, programs, and pharmaceuticals are identical (same), as well as when medical products or preventive and medical technologies with the same therapeutic effect have different forms of administering or are used in different conditions. Name this method of analysis.
a. Cost-benefit
b. Cost-utility
*c. Cost minimization
d. Cost-effectiveness
e. Total cost of illness

62. What is characteristic of a blind study?
a. All participants (doctors, patients, organizers) know what drug is used in treatment of a specific patient
b. Neither the patient nor the doctor knows what treatment the patient is receiving
c. The collected data are processed not at the trial site, but by an independent party
*d. The doctor knows and the patient does not know what treatment the patient is receiving
e. The collected data are processed at the trial site

63. A research of the impact of smoking on the occurrence of lung cancer is being conducted. For this, two groups of people were selected: participants of the first group have a history of lung cancer, participants of the second do not. After that, they find out which of the participants was affected by the factor, and who was not. Then the necessary statistical indicators are calculated and conclusions are drawn about the influence of the factor on the result. What research design is described?
a. Clinical experiment
b. Cohort
c. Description of the case series
*d. Case-control
e. Ecological

64. A research of the impact of smoking on the occurrence of lung cancer is being conducted. For this, population-level data on the number of smokers and the number of lung cancer cases in 50 cities were obtained. Then the correlation coefficient between the phenomena was calculated and appropriate conclusions were drawn. What research design is described?
*a. Ecological
b. Clinical experiment
c. Case-control
d. Description of the case series
e. Cohort

65. Representatives of a non-governmental organization have decided to hold an advocacy campaign to reduce the prevalence of non-communicable diseases among the community residents. How should this intervention begin according to the principles of advocacy?
a. Analysis of the impact on the manageable risk factors
b. Analysis of the regulatory framework
c. Analysis of the target audience
*d. Analysis of local needs and people's demands
e. Analysis of the unmanageable risk factors

66. Identify the resources that can be additionally used to achieve an acceptable level of health of the world population in accordance with the Alma-Ata Declaration of WHO.
a. World resources spent on tourism development
b. Resources of countries aimed at economic development
*c. World resources spent on weapons and military conflicts
d. World resources spent on the development of countries' medicine
e. -

67. The state takes anti-epidemic measures, directly influencing the epidemic process and reducing the infectious morbidity, which subsequently leads to the elimination of the epidemic course of some infectious diseases. One such anti-epidemic measure is immunoprophylaxis. However, no means of immunoprophylaxis currently exist for the following disease:
a. Epidemic parotitis
b. Measles
*c. Shigellosis
d. Rubella
e. Pertussis

68. A population of 46,500 people permanently lives on the territory of the united community, of which: 7,500 are children under the age of 14; 26,500 are people aged 15 to 49, and the rest are 50 and older. What type of age structure of the population is typical for this community?
a. Progressive
b. Stationary
c. Dynamic
d. Static
*e. Regressive

69. What management strategy is determined as the main policy of the World Health Organization in the field of public health in the ХХІ century?
a. The leading role of local administrations
b. Improving the management of the healthcare system
c. Work of the Ministry of Health
d. Development of governmental administration
*e. Interdisciplinary collaboration

70. The region is characterized by a high incidence of endemic goiter. What food products should be recommended to the population for use in order to prevent the occurrence of this disease?
a. Milk and dairy products
b. Cereal products
*c. Fish and seafood
d. Vegetables and fruits
e. Meat and meat products

71. The patient consulted a family doctor. During the appointment, the doctor held an educational conversation with her about the principles of a rational balanced diet, alcohol consumption, and recommended physical activity. Indicate what type of prevention was carried out in this case?
a. Populational
b. Tertiary
c. Secondary
d. -
*e. Primary

72. A patient visited a family practice doctor with complaints of gastrointestinal tract disorders. Collecting the medical history, the doctor established that the patient does not engage in physical activity, since adolescence his diet has been dominated by an average of 500 g of carbohydrates per day, the patient consumes 60 g of protein, and only 30 g of fat per day. What group of negative determinants is determined in this patient?
a. Hereditary
b. Social and economic
c. Biological
d. Food
*e. Behavioral

73. During the examination of a 55-year-old woman, the presence of the following risk factors was established: heavy hereditary anamnesis; infertility; postmenopausal obesity; alcohol consumption; smoking. What is the primary management action for this patient?
*a. Referral to mammography
b. Referral to inpatient treatment
c. Referral for a rapid HIV-test
d. Referral to sanatorium-resort treatment
e. Poll

74. To check the hypotensive effect of the drug, 100 people with arterial hypertension, who were prescribed this drug, were selected. To assess the statistical significance of the results, the value of systolic blood pressure (SBP) before the start of treatment and one week after the start will be compared. What statistical method should be used if the distribution of SBP values is different from normal?
a. Mann-Whitney U-test
*b. Wilcoxon's t-test
c. -
d. Student's test for related samples
e. Student's criterion for independent samples

75. A private ophthalmology clinic has decreased the prices for its healthcare services and goods, resulting in an increased purchasing power of the population. What quantitative parameter reflects the quantitative changes in the amount of proposed goods and services in response to their changed price?
*a. Coefficient of elasticity of supply
b. Summation
c. Elasticity of supply
d. Capitation
e. Elasticity of demand

76. The general director of the communal non-profit enterprise "City Hospital" held a meeting with the hospital staff. At this meeting, reports on the results of the hospital's work and evaluation of the quality of medical services for the previous year were heard, and the work program for the next year was presented. What function of the manager is presented?
a. Adjustment
b. Control
*c. Planning
d. Leadership
e. Organization

77. Define which of the listed persons is subject to the preservation of medical secrecy?
a. A member of the patient's family
*b. Treating doctor
c. -
d. A close relative of the patient
e. Patient

78. A doctor is correcting the behavior of an obese patient, adjusting the patient's diet to reduce the body weight and prevent the development of diabetes mellitus. What type of prevention is it?
a. Group prevention
b. Tertiary prevention
c. Individual prevention
d. Primary prevention
*e. Secondary prevention

79. A research of the impact of smoking on the occurrence of lung cancer is being conducted. For this, two groups were selected: the participants of the first are smokers, the participants of the second are non-smokers. For a long time, cases of the researched disease will be recorded in the participants of the study. At the end of the observation period, the necessary statistical indicators are calculated and conclusions are drawn about the effect of the factor on the result. What research design is described?
*a. Cohort
b. Description of the case series
c. Clinical experiment
d. Case-control
e. Ecological

80. When studying how health inequality manifests among the population of various regions, differences were detected in the impact that individual factors have on the people's health. What factors cause health inequality?
a. -
*b. Economical
c. Climatic
d. Biological
e. Behavioral

81. A public health specialist was invited to hold an informative session for high school students on safe sex life. What contraceptive methods should be emphasized during the class to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted infections among young people?
*a. Condoms
b. Postcoital contraceptives
c. Hormonal pills
d. Spermicides
e. Intrauterine spirals

82. 230 men living in the countryside work at a metallurgical plant in a large industrial city, who spend 2 hours a day travelling to and from the plant. Determine what kind of migration the workers make in terms of duration.
a. Daily
b. Constant
*c. Pendular
d. Industrial
e. Seasonal

83. In order to optimize the system of tuberculosis prevention measures and increase their efficiency, group interviews (6-8 people) were conducted with family doctors of various general practice - family medicine clinics to determine and discuss their opinion on this issue. What qualitative research method was used?
a. Longitudinal research
b. Case-control
*c. Focus group
d. Сross-sectional research
e. Cohort research

84. What value can be assessed using the National Health Accounts (NHA)?
a. Price
b. -
c. Income
*d. Expenses
e. Cost

85. Oncological pathology plays a major role in the structure of total morbidity and mortality of the population. What is the most significant risk factor for the development of cancer?
*a. Smoking tobacco
b. Excess body weight
c. Measles virus
d. Stress
e. Aging

86. A 35-year-old woman came to the family doctor. Her anthropometric measurements are as follows: body mass index - 18.2 kg/m^2, waist circumference - 75 cm. Give an estimate of her body mass index and her risk of developing a cardiovascular pathology.
*a. Insufficient weight, low risk of developing a cardiovascular pathology
b. Insufficient weight, high risk of developing a cardiovascular pathology
c. Insufficient weight, increased risk of developing a cardiovascular pathology
d. Excess weight, low risk of developing a cardiovascular pathology
e. Normal body weight, low risk of developing a cardiovascular pathology

87. Seasonal fluctuations in the incidence of SARS during the year are being researched. Which method should be used to visualize the data in this case?
a. Forest diagram (forest plot)
b. Sector diagram
*c. Radial diagram
d. ROC curve
e. Kaplan-Meier curve

88. The health of a man with diabetes mellitus has significantly deteriorated and he developed complications. After a course of treatment at a hospital, he was sent to a local health resort. What type of healthcare measures is it?
a. Morbidity screening
b. Secondary prevention
c. Primary prevention
d. Morbidity monitoring
*e. Tertiary prevention

89. A researcher was comparing the effectiveness of a new method of treating hypertension using a placebo in an experimental group consisting of 10 people and a control group, also consisting of 10 people. What is the most likely cause that the obtained results were statistically unreliable (P>0.05)?
a. Heterogeneous groups
*b. Small number of observations
c. Short duration of treatment
d. Insignificant relative difference of the values
e. Insignificant absolute difference of the values

90. What infectious disease is not included in the "List of nosological forms of infectious diseases of international significance"?
a. Cholera
*b. Measles
c. Malaria
d. COVID-19
e. Smallpox (variola)

91. The Human Development Index is an integral indicator of the social progress in different countries of the world. It combines population's health, education, and standard of living. What health parameter is a component of the Human Development Index?
a. Disability index of the population
b. Total morbidity of the population
c. Mortality rate of the population
d. Morbidity that involves the main socially significant diseases
*e. Average life expectancy

92. In 2022, a decrease in the level of vaccination of children according to the vaccination calendar was registered in the region, in connection with which it was decided to organize a program to support immunoprophylaxis in society. What should be the first step to establish effective immunoprophylaxis support among the population of the region?
a. Conducting informational and educational work among parents
b. Involvement of mass media
c. Improving the qualifications of healthcare workers
d. Establishing friendly relations with the population
*e. Carrying out a situational analysis in the region

93. What is the purpose of the DALY index?
a. To measure the impact of morbidity on a certain nosology in the region
*b. To quantify the total burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors
c. To determine the causes of child mortality
d. To assess the quality of life of the population
e. To determine the years of life lost due to disability

94. In one of the regions of Ukraine, the spread of a contagious plant disease, significantly exceeding the usual incidence of this disease in this territory, was registered. Such an adverse event can be classified as:
a. Epizooty
b. Accident
c. Epidemic
*d. Epiphytoty
e. Disaster

95. When assessing the relationship between age and obesity, a direct medium-strength correlation is observed. Within what range should the value of the correlation coefficient be located?
a. From (+0.70) to (+0.99)
*b. From (+0.30) to (+0.69)
c. From (-0.70) to (-0.99)
d. From (-0.30) to (-0.99)
e. From (-0.70) to (+0.70)

96. A young woman lives near a 100-kilometer zone around an active nuclear power plant and smokes one pack of cigarettes daily. She is worried about her risk of cancer. What would primarily reduce the risk of cancer in this case?
*a. Quitting smoking
b. Undergoing annually an occult blood test
c. Annual examination by a gynecologist
d. Annual mammography
e. Moving to different location

97. The correlation between the level of blood glucose and the level of systolic blood pressure is studied. Which of the methods should be used to visualize the data in this case?
a. Dendrogram (tree diagram)
b. Kaplan-Meier curve
c. Forest diagram (forest plot)
d. ROC curve
*e. Scatter diagram

98. In one of the city districts, a statistical research was organized to study the incidence of myocardial infarction in the outpatient department of a local hospital. Each resident of the district who attended the hospital was considered to be an object of research. What type of statistical research will be used in this case?
*a. Continuous observation
b. Monographic description
c. Selective observation
d. Combined research
e. Bulk analysis

99. A public healthcare specialist develops measures to reduce the impact of risk factors on community health. What type of nutrition unites the following group of factors: insufficient daily consumption of fruits and vegetables, lack of control over the content of fats and carbohydrates in food products, excessive intake of salt and sugar?
a. Rational nutrition
b. Adequate nutrition
*c. Irrational nutrition
d. Specialized nutrition
e. Fitness nutrition

100. Educational work brings significant results in persuading people to give up their bad habits, such as smoking. What type of marketing is it?
a. Conversion marketing
b. Synchromarketing
*c. Counter-marketing
d. Remarketing
e. Demarketing

101. After receiving distressing news, a man developed general weakness, a feeling of lack of air, anxiety, and an intense burning pain in his cardiac region that radiated into his left arm and shoulder blade. What pathological condition has likely developed in this man?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Alcohol poisoning
*c. Myocardial infarction
d. Depression
e. Stroke

102. What effect does a developed healthcare services market have on the increase of life expectancy, improvement of health, and preservation of the nation's gene pool?
a. Direct
b. Detrimental
*c. Indirect
d. No effect
e. Improvement

103. In two regions with a similar population structure, the integrated health parameters were close in value for a long time. However, in recent years the differences in the prevalence of diseases appeared and are increasing in these territories, leading to the search for their causes, in particular, medical and demographic causes. What data are necessary to assess the natural movement of the population?
a. Total mortality, gross reproduction rate
*b. Birth rate, mortality rate, natural increase
c. Disease-specific mortality, average life expectancy
d. Specific fertility rate, net reproduction rate
e. Infant mortality

104. In order to assess the demographic situation in the region, a public health specialist was instructed to determine the levels of birth, death and natural growth for the past year. What indicators should be used to determine the specified levels?
a. Standardization
*b. Intensive
c. Visibility
d. Extensive
e. Correlation

105. A public health specialist, at the request of a family doctor, conducted informational and explanatory work with the aim of involving the population in a screening examination for the presence of cardiovascular diseases. During the conversation, the specialist helped determine the body mass index (BMI) of those present, the indicators of which were in the range of 18.5-28.9 kg/m^2. Individuals with which BMI indicators were recommended to consult a family doctor for an examination regarding the presence of a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases?
a. 20.0-22.9 kg/m^2
b. 18.5-19.9 kg/m^2
c. -
d. 23.0-24.9 kg/m^2
*e. 25.0-28.9 kg/m^2

106. The Human Development Index is an integral indicator, calculated annually for international comparison and measurement of the standard of living, literacy, education, and longevity as the main characteristics of the human potential at the studied territory. During its calculation, 3 types of indicators are taken into account. What indicator is used to calculate the Human Potential Index?
a. Lifestyle
b. Quality of life
c. Real income of the population
*d. Predicted life expectancy of the country's population
e. Living conditions

107. A public association participates in the project competition, the goal of which is to reduce the burden of non-communicable diseases, prevent premature mortality, and increase the life expectancy of the population. What should be taken into account first, when making a communication plan?
a. Demographic situation
*b. Target audience
c. Prevalence of diseases
d. Amount of expenses
e. Population size

108. The commission of the territorial community on improvement recorded the unsatisfactory living conditions of the citizens of a certain settlement. To which group of determinants does this factor belong?
a. Genetic
b. Behavioral
c. Ecological
*d. Social and economic
e. Access to medical services

109. As a result of an emergency situation in one of the regions of Ukraine, over 100 people were injured and normal living conditions of over 10000 people were disrupted for more than 3 days. What is the level of the emergency?
a. Object level
b. Local level
c. Regional level
d. International level
*e. State level

110. The mother of a 10-year-old girl has brought her to a doctor to assess the child's health. The doctor explains that the health of a person depends on various determinants. Among them, biological factors play an important role. What belongs to biological factors?
*a. Heredity, body type, level of sexual maturity, age
b. Genetic factor, level of sexual maturity, large family
c. Growth rate, mother's health, one-parent family
d. Physical activity, lifestyle
e. Heredity, physical development, hypodynamia

111. In a certain region, the stroke-induced mortality rate is increasing. The situation requires an assessment of the effectiveness of inpatient neurological departments at the regional hospitals. What will be the unit of observation in this case?
a. Staffing of inpatient departments by neurologists
b. Equipping inpatient neurological departments with diagnostic equipment
*c. An inpatient neurological department
d. Providing the population with beds at neurological profile departments
e. Timely referral to an inpatient neurological department

112. What are the main objects of epidemiological monotoring in case of an anthrax epidemic?
a. Organizations providing the population with sanitary and hygienic services
b. Sources of water supply
c. Food storage warehouses, granaries
*d. Farms, livestock farms
e. Treatment and prevention facilities

113. What management approaches are needed to combat health inequalities?
a. Impact on behavioral determinants
b. Impact on environmental determinants
c. -
d. Impact on psychological determinants
*e. Impact on social determinants

114. The study of population birth rates is necessary for creating the system of epidemiologic monitoring of the demographic status of the population and ensuring its functioning. What accounting document is a source of information for studying fertility rates?
a. Neonatal record
b. Birth certificate
c. Delivery record
d. Maternity record
*e. Medical birth certificate

115. An official of the state supervision (control) body for compliance with the requirements of sanitary legislation in the relevant field has the right to make a decision on the temporary suspension of production and/or circulation of products, performance of work, provision of services that pose a threat to human health and/or life. Please indicate the maximum period of temporary suspension of production and/or circulation of products, performance of works, provision of services that pose a threat to human health and/or life.
a. For a period of no more than 30 calendar days
*b. For a period of no more than 10 calendar days
c. For a period of no more than 3 years
d. For a period of no more than 10 working days
e. For a period of no more than 1 year

116. During the earthquake, a large number of high-rise buildings were destroyed, fires broke out in some places, and a huge number of victims, including the dead, appeared. Emergency (ambulance) medical aid and disaster medicine teams provided emergency medical aid in conditions of shortage of personnel and resources, dividing the victims into certain groups depending on the condition, medical indications and the urgency of the need for evacuation. What is the name of the process of distribution of victims according to such principles?
*a. Medical triage
b. Medical evacuation
c. Medical grouping
d. Distribution of patients
e. Emergency sorting

117. A certain population group (without ischemic heart disease) was monitored for 5 years in order to identify new cases of this disease, caused by endo- and exogenous factors. What type of epidemiological study was used in this case?
a. Case-control study
b. Descriptive study
c. Experimental study
d. Cross-sectional study
*e. Prospective study

118. The World Health Organization (WHO) provides Ukraine with instructions and methodological recommendations on introduction of modern treatment technologies, on reforming the national healthcare system, and on introduction of new methods and forms of disease prevention. What function is performed by WHO in this case?
a. Intermediary function
*b. Scientific support
c. Organization
d. Motivation
e. Planning

119. When conducting a meta-analysis, it is studied how much the researched indicator fluctuates in different studies. Which method should be used to visualize the fluctuations and average the data in this case?
*a. Forest diagram (forest plot)
b. Kaplan-Meier curve
c. Sector diagram
d. Radial diagram
e. ROC curve

120. The structure of primary morbidity in the region is being researched. Which method should be used to visualize the data in this case?
a. Radial diagram
b. Kaplan-Meier curve
c. Forest diagram (forest plot)
*d. Sector diagram
e. ROC curve

121. Identify the main international document that ensures the right to the highest attainable standard of health.
a. The UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
*b. Constitution of the World Health Organization
c. Ottawa Charter
d. Constitution of Ukraine
e. WHO Alma-Ata Declaration

122. What is the first stage of developing health promotion programs?
a. Intervention design
*b. Needs assessment
c. Goal setting
d. -
e. Development of the assessment and monitoring system

123. A public health specialist was instructed to form a target group for vaccination against papillomavirus infection. Which population category should be primarily included in the specified target group?
a. Children up to 1 year
b. Pregnant women
c. Teenage boys
d. Persons with a detected virus
*e. Teenage girls

124. As a result of the economic crisis, a 45-year-old man lost his job, has only occasional part-time income, later got divorced and started abusing alcohol, which had a negative effect on his health. What characterizes his current situation?
a. The way of life
b. Standard of living
c. Traditions, everyday life
*d. Lifestyle
e. Quality of life

125. Soil is an environment that can cause the spread of infectious diseases among the population. What infectious disease can affect a person after a contact with contaminated soil?
a. Hepatitis A
b. Salmonellosis
c. Leptospirosis
*d. Botulism
e. Tuberculosis

126. Due to the significant spread among the population of the territorial community of chronic diseases of the cardiovascular system, the management decided to prepare a communication strategy for the primary prevention of chronic non-infectious diseases. What should be the first step in the preparation and implementation of this strategy?
a. Selection of channels and implementation mechanisms
b. Definition of goals
c. Program planning
*d. Assessment of the situation
e. Selection of target groups

127. The quality and safety of potable water based on its chemical composition depends on its content of individual chemical elements. What chemical element can cause water-induced intoxication in consumers?
a. Aluminum
b. Manganese
*c. Lead
d. Calcium
e. Iron

128. What type of epidemiological surveillance is the conduct of an integrated biobehavioral study among people who use drugs by injection?
a. Retrospective
*b. Observant
c. Passive
d. Routine
e. First generation

129. A spontaneous burial of the remains of sheep was discovered on the territory of the Sumy region. According to the results of the examination, it was established that the death was related to anthrax in the animals. To what type, depending on the nature of the origin, does this emergency belong?
a. Social
*b. Natural
c. -
d. Technogenic
e. Military

130. A high-quality, balanced diet promotes good health, reduces the risk of unhealthy weight gain and the development of non-infectious diseases. Indicate the recommended daily intake of vegetables and fruits for adults by the World Health Organization.
a. -
b. At least 500 grams
c. At least 200 grams
d. At least 300 grams
*e. At least 400 grams

131. Today, in connection with the emergency situation that arose due to the destruction of the Kakhovska HPP, the flooding of large areas, and the migration of the population, there is a threat of the spread of infectious diseases common to humans and animals. Define one of these diseases.
a. Cholera
b. Tuberculosis
c. Hepatitis B
d. HIV-infection
*e. Leptospirosis

132. During the sociological research, a survey of a certain category of the population was conducted regarding their awareness of behavioral risk factors for developing non-infectious diseases. Select a behavioral risk factor from the list.
a. Environmental pollution
b. Psychological environment in the team
c. Income level
d. Age and gender
*e. Insufficient amount of vegetables and fruits in the diet

133. The head of unit invited to the meeting the most authoritative employees with the purpose of discussing possible options for the work schedule in the summer period. Specify the style of management in the given situation.
a. Combined
b. -
*c. Democratic
d. Authoritarian
e. Liberal

134. Potentially dangerous factors increase the likelihood of disease development, progression and adverse outcome. Indicate which factors belong to endogenous uncontrollable ones.
a. The state of medical care of the population
*b. Age, gender
c. Solar radiation, geological features of the soil
d. Pollution of water, soil, air
e. Arterial hypertension, high blood sugar

135. Based on the results of the monitoring, environmental data and population health data were collected throughout a year. What method of statistical data processing should be used to assess the degree to which environmental factors have an effect on the health of the population?
*a. Correlation analysis
b. Calculation of relative and average values
c. A method of assessing the reliability of differences
d. Standardization method
e. Time series analysis

136. In the team of the health care institution, it is customary to be late for work, there are cases of inconsistency in the actions of employees, there is a lack of clarity regarding the control of the actions of subordinates by the manager. Specify the management style in this situation.
a. Democratic
*b. Liberal
c. Authoritarian
d. -
e. Combined

137. What legal document regulates the protection of the population in emergency situations?
a. Law of Ukraine "On the protection of the population from infectious diseases"
b. Fundamentals of Ukrainian legislation on healthcare
c. Law of Ukraine "On environmental protection"
d. Law of Ukraine "On ensuring sanitary and epidemic safety of the population"
*e. Code of civil protection of the population

138. In a developing country, an improvement of the population's standard of living is observed as a result of the implementation of an effective interregional national program. Name the main parameter of the country's economic development that is the most comprehensive indicator of the total volume of goods and services produced over a certain period of time and characterizes the state of the country's economy.
a. Gross national product (GNP)
*b. Gross domestic product (GDP)
c. State investments
d. Gross private domestic investments (GPDI)
e. Primary income balance

139. A system in which the money followed the patient, who had the right to freely choose a doctor; the doctor received a fee for the number of patients treated, as well as an increased fee for certain categories of patients, such as children or the elderly, as well as residents of poor areas; the treatment of inpatients was carried out at the expense of the funds allocated to the doctor, so the doctor was interested in preventive measures, because the less sick the patients were, the more money he had left. What system is characterized by the above description?
a. Bismarck systems
b. Thatcher systems
c. George's systems
d. Semashko systems
*e. Beveridge systems

140. The Ishikawa diagram, known as the "Fishbone Diagram", is one of the seven main tools for measuring, evaluating, controlling and improving the quality of production processes, including in the medical field. What questions can be solved by constructing this diagram in the process of solving the problem?
a. Allows you to determine the trends of changes in the spread of diseases
b. Demonstrates the success of production processes in the institution
c. Demonstrates the vector of production processes in the institution
d. Illustrates the activities of the institution
*e. It helps to establish cause and effect (causal) relationships

141. A regional public health center decided to conduct a survey among the population about the effect of territorial risk factors on the level of health. What criterion allows excluding certain persons from the sample used in this study?
*a. Living at the territory of the studied region for less than one year
b. Lack of official employment for over a year
c. Failure to attend healthcare facilities for a year
d. Lack of higher education
e. No signed declaration with a family doctor

142. A pharmaceutical company conducts a clinical trial of a new drug with human participation. All individuals who expressed a desire to participate in the study were properly informed about the nature and significance of the clinical trial, the effects and risks, after which they were asked to sign a document confirming this informed voluntary decision. What document is it about?
a. Clinical agreement
b. Information sheet
c. Research agreement
*d. Informed consent
e. Research contract

143. Changes in the structure of mortality over the past 5 years are being studied. Which of the methods should be used to visualize the data in this case?
a. Forest diagram (forest plot)
*b. Inside column chart
c. ROC curve
d. Dendrogram (tree diagram)
e. Kaplan-Meier curve

144. To assess the nature and trends of the HIV/AIDS epidemics, the clinic at the Institute of Epidemiology and Infectious Diseases has implemented in-depth epidemiological surveillance that includes a serological component among different population groups. What type of epidemiological surveillance is being used in this case?
a. Risk factor-oriented surveillance
*b. Sentinel surveillance
c. Demographic surveillance
d. Biological factor-oriented surveillance
e. Disease outbreak-oriented surveillance

145. A general physician, who is a family doctor, has analyzed the age structure of his clients and was surprised by the fact that elderly people made up for the highest percentage (35%). What morbidity characteristic must a doctor take into account, when providing medical care for the elderly?
a. Increased morbidity, with diseases typically having a mild course
b. Numerous uncomplicated diseases
*c. Numerous long-term chronic diseases
d. Seasonal nature of the diseases
e. Increased acute infectious diseases morbidity

146. Creation and maintenance of the epidemiological surveillance system that monitors the demographic status of the population requires the study of mortality rates by age, gender, and cause of death. What accounting document is a source of information for studying mortality rates?
a. Outpatient medical record
*b. Medical death certificate
c. Medical history
d. Extract from a death register
e. Death certificate

147. A community has decided to make an annual plan for the secondary prevention of chronic non-infectious diseases. What measures should be included in such a plan for the community's residents?
a. Providing information about rational nutrition
b. Carrying out tuberculin diagnostics
*c. Organizing screening for detection of arterial hypertension
d. Organizing rehabilitation after a myocardial infarction
e. Intensifying informational and educational work that promotes a healthy lifestyle

148. Indicate how much time healthy adults of all ages should be physically active according to WHO recommendations.
a. 15-20 minutes a day
b. 180 or more minutes a day
c. 2 hours every day
d. 3 hours every other day
*e. 30 or more minutes a day

149. What main population groups are subject to mandatory HIV testing?
a. Commercial sex workers
b. Persons in contact with HIV/AIDS patients
*c. Blood donors
d. Persons with non-traditional sexual orientation
e. Persons with drug addiction

150. The diabetic patient's blood glucose indications for the past 2 weeks ranged from 7 to 7.4 mmol/L, except for two measurements of 19 and 21 mmol/L during the last episode of ketoacidosis. Taking into account this data set, which of the presented metrics would be most significantly affected by these 2 additional extreme values?
*a. Arithmetic mean
b. Mode
c. First quartile
d. The third quartile
e. Median

