1. A 50-year-old man was diagnosed with sialolithiasis with the salivary gland stone located deep within the salivary gland. Choose the optimal treatment tactics:
a. Conservative pharmacotherapy
b. Sclerotherapy
*c. Submandibular gland excision
d. Removal of the sialolith while retaining the gland
e. Radiation therapy

2. A 49-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect, speech disorders, and problems with eating. Objectively, his teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 and 23 are missing, while teeth 17, 16, 15, 14, 24, 25, 26 and 27 are intact, but have a pathological mobility of the I-II degree. The lower dentition is preserved. Generalized periodontitis of the I degree, chronic progression, is observed. What denture can be used to eliminate the defect in the frontal maxillary region and stabilize the remaining teeth?
a. Clasp (bugel) denture with beam  fixation system
*b. Clasp (bugel) denture with continuous  clammers
c. Crown splint for the lateral teeth and a  partial removable laminar denture
d. Partial removable laminar denture
e. Clasp (bugel) denture with telescopic fixation system

3. A 45-year-old man came to a dental clinic to have dentures made for him. Objectively, his lower teeth 36, 35, 34, 31,41, 44, 45, and 47 are missing. The abutment teeth are stable, their roots are not exposed. Teeth 46 and 37 have low clinical crowns, their cusps and equator are not well-defined. What denture design would be optimal in this case?
a. -
b. Swaged-soldered dental bridge
*c. Arch denture with telescopic crowns
d. Partial removable laminar denture
e. Arch denture with abutment and  retaining clasps

4. A 57-year-old man presents with habitual mandibular dislocation. To reduce mouth opening, Yadrova apparatus was made. How long should the treatment last in this case?
a. 12 months
*b. 3 months
c. 9 months
d. 6 months
e. 18 months

5. A 10-year-old child complains of pain, dryness, enlargement, and peeling of the lips. Exaination detected hyperemic labial mucosa and enlarged lips; when the lips are pulled taut, secretion resembling ''dewdrops'' is being produced from minor salivary glands. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
*a. Cheilitis glandularis
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
d. Actinic cheilitis
e. Meteorological cheilitis

6. A dentist diagnosed chronic gangrenous pulpitis of tooth 36 in an 11-year-old girl. Choose the optimal drug for antiseptic treatment of root canals in this case.
a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
c. Aethonium
d. Hydrogen peroxide
*e. Sodium hypochlorite

7. A 30-year-old man came to the dental orthopedist's office. He complains of an included defect of the lower dentition. On examination there are no pathologies of periodontal tissues. It is planned to make a dental bridge for this patient. What should be the ratio of the summary coefficient of masticatory efficiency of abutment teeth to the summary coefficient of masticatory efficiency of  lost teeth?
a. 1:2.5
b. 1:1
c. 1:2
d. 1:1.5
*e. 1:0.8

8. A 47-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 43, 44, and 45 are missing. What class of mandibular dentition defect is it according to Kennedy?
a. 4
b. 1
c. -
*d. 3
e. 2

9. A 9-year-old boy complains of a spontaneous pulsing and irradiating pain in his lower right teeth that slightly abates when cold is applied. Objectively, tooth 46 has a deep carious cavity with soft floor, located within the parapulpar dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is acutely painful. Percussion of the tooth is painful. The boy was diagnosed with acute purulent pulpitis of tooth 46. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Vital pulp amputation
*b. Vital pulp extirpation
c. Devital pulp extirpation
d. Devital pulp amputation
e. Biological treatment

10. A 29-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect in the form of a pigmented spot on his upper front tooth. Objectively, tooth 21 is slightly rotated along its axis and has a brown spot with clear boundaries on its mesial contact surface. The surface of the spot is slightly rough when probed. Thermal stimuli provoke no pain response. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Endemic fluorosis
d. Enamel necrosis
*e. Chronic initial caries

11. What causes formation of Hunter-Schreger bands on longitudinal sections of enamel?
a. Non-homogeneous arrangement of enamel bundles
b. Cyclic disturbances in the formation of enamel prisms
*c. Alternation of longitudinal and transverse sections of enamel prisms
d. Non-homogeneous mineralization of enamel prisms
e. Mineralization of interprismatic spaces

12. A 24-year-old man has a painless oval neoplasm with a smooth surface on his upper neck, on the anterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The neoplasm is 2x3.5 cm in size, dense-elastic, with limited mobility, not fused to the skin. Puncture has yielded a yellow liquid with cholesterol crystals. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Cyst of the submandibular salivary gland
*b. Lateral cervical cyst
c. Chronic lymphadenitis
d. Dermoid cervical cyst
e. Median cervical cyst

13. A 5-year-old child presents with infantile swallow pattern. What structural element must be present in the orthodontic appliance for correction of this pathology?
a. Buccal shields
*b. Rudolph loops
c. Labial bandages
d. Inclined plane
e. Bite plane

14. A 42-year-old woman complains of acute lip enlargement, itching, and bursting sensation. She ascribes her condition to introduction of a new lipstick. On examination the lips are significantly enlarged and turgid, on palpation they are firm, elastic, and painless. Regional lymph nodes are without changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exfoliative cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
*d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Glandular cheilitis

15. A 58-year-old man came to a dentist for orthopedic treatment after the extraction of his right upper lateral incisor four weeks ago. For two years, he has been using a partial removable laminar denture for the upper jaw that replaces missing teeth 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. The patient has a history of a myocardial infarction that occurred 6 months ago. Objectively, the socket of tooth 12 has healed, there are no signs of inflammation, the relief of the alveolar process is preserved. What tactics should the doctor choose to replace missing tooth 12?
a. Perform dental implantation and make a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
b. Make a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge
c. Make a new partial removable laminar denture
d. Wait two months before making a denture
*e. Reconstruct the partial removable laminar denture by welding an artificial tooth to it

16. A 43-year-old man complains of bleeding gums when he brushes his teeth and sore gums around some of his teeth. The patient was diagnosed with localized periodontitis. An occlusogram shows the points of extreme occlusal contact. What tactics should the doctor choose in this case?
*a. File down the occlusal surfaces
b. Make mouthguard splints
c. Conduct functional tests
d. Make porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns
e. Make metal crowns

17. A 35-year-old man suffered a facial injury 3 days ago. Objectively, his face is asymmetrical due to a soft tissue edema in the left parotid masticatory region and in the submandibular region. Palpation detects a <<step sign>> in the left gonial angle. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Anterior unilateral dislocation of the  mandible
b. Fracture of the mandibular body
c. Hematoma in the left parotid masticatory region
d. Bilateral mandibular fracture
*e. Fracture of the left gonial angle

18. During examination the child presents with retracted mucosa on the soft palate and uvula. The child was diagnosed with congenital submucous cleft soft palate. What surgical operation is necessary in this case?
*a. Veloplasty
b. Cheiloplasty
c. Uranostaphyloplasty
d. Uranoplasty
e. Rhinocheiloplasty

19. The maxillofacial surgery unit received a patient with complaints of inability to close his mouth. This condition occurred when the patient was biting an apple. Objectively there is a frightened expression on the patient's face, the mouth is open wide, the chin is displaced to the left, salivation is observed. Palpation through the external acoustic meatus detected no movements of the right articular head. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bilateral temporomandibular joint dislocation
b. Fracture of the mandibular process
*c. Right temporomandibular joint dislocation
d. Acute temporomandibular arthritis
e. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome

20. A 38-year-old man, an arc welder, is a chain smoker. He came to the dentist to have a denture made for him. Howerver, in the middle of his lower lip against the background of unchanged vermillion border there is a gray-white polygonal lesion 6x4 mm with clear margins. The lesion is covered with tightly attached small scales and is level with the vermillion border (neither protruding nor retracted). Palpation of the lesion focus is painless, the lesion has no thickened base; lateral palpation detects thickened surface of the lesion. Regional lymph nodes are unchanged. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Verrucous precancer
b. Cancer of the lower lip
c. Lichen ruber planus, hyperkeratotic form
d. Lupus erythematosus
*e. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis

21. A regular check-up of a 7-year-old girl detected chalk-like spots on the vestibular surface of her teeth 11 and 21. The surface of the spots is matt, smooth when probed, and can be stained with methylene blue. What treatment method would be rational in this case?
*a. Deep fluoridation of teeth 11 and 21
b. Impregnation therapy of teeth 11 and 21
c. Regular check-ups to monitor the  child's condition
d. Filing down the defects of teeth 11 and 21
e. Filling of teeth 11 and 21

22. 9.5-year-old child complains of destruction of an upper right lateral tooth. Objectively, the crown part of tooth 16 is destroyed and its dental cavity is exposed. Probing at the level of root canal entrances is slightly painful and provokes intensive hemorrhage. Percussion of the tooth is painless. Alveolar mucosa in the projection of the roots of tooth 16 has a fistula. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
*e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

23. A 49-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of his gums bleeding when he eats solid foods or brushes his teeth. The complaints arose several months ago. Objectively, his maxillary and mandibular gingiva is congestively hyperemic, epithelial attachment loss is 2-3 mm. X-ray shows uneven resorption of the alveolar processes of the jaws up to 1/3 of the dental root length. Make the diagnosis.
a. Generalized parodontitis, II degree, chronic course
b. Generalized parodontitis, II degree, exacerbation
c. Generalized parodontitis, I degree, exacerbation
*d. Generalized parodontitis, I degree, chronic course
e. Generalized parodontitis, initial stage

24. A 50-year-old man complains of painful defect that manifests as a crack in his lower lip. The defect appeared one month ago. Objectively the lower lip is dry, intactness of the vermillion border of the lower lip is linearly disturbed by a lesion that is located in the middle of the lip, is covered in dried blood, and extends to the labial mucosa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Chronic lymphedema of lips
*c. Chronic lip fissure
d. Miescher cheilitis granulomatosa
e. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome

25. A 67-year-old woman during an appointment with a dentist complained of an acute vision deterioration, visual snow, nausea, headache, and dizziness. Objectively, the skin of her face is hyperemic, her blood pressure is 200/110 mm Hg, her pulse is rhythmic, 80/min., tense. What is the most likely cause of the patient's condition?
a. Acute cerebrovascular accident
*b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Rupture of an aortic aneurysm
e. Angina pectoris attack

26. A 47-year-old man complains of partial loss of his upper teeth. The patient's medical history states loss of teeth due to trauma sustained 3 months ago. 11 and 12 are lost. 13, 21, and 22 are destroyed by 2/3 and restored with fillings. Occlusion is orthognathic. What denture construction would be optimal for this patient, considering his occupation as a lecturer?
a. Swaged-soldered metal dental bridge with faceted intermediate part
*b. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge
c. Plastic dental bridge
d. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture with attachments
e. Removable partial laminar denture for the upper jaw

27. A 14-year-old child complains of an aesthetic defect of the front teeth. Objectively, the enamel of teeth 11, 12, 21, 22, 31, 32, 41, and 42 on their cutting edge is thin and has a groove parallel to the cutting edge. The groove encircles the teeth and is 1.5 mm wide. The cusps of teeth 16, 26, 36, and 46 are underdeveloped and conical. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
b. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
d. Local enamel hypoplasia
e. Dentinogenesis imperfecta

28. A 25-year-old man complains of pain in the area of tooth 16, heavy bursting sensation in the right upper jaw, headache, and body temperature of 38^oC) Objectively, the right cheek is swollen, palpation of the maxillary alveolar process is painful, percussion of tooth 16 is painful. Anterior rhinoscopy shows hyperemia and edema of the mucosa in the right nasal passage. The middle nasal passage contains mucopurulent discharge. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Acute rhinogenous maxillary sinusitis
d. Acute maxillary periostitis
*e. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis

29. The mother of a 3-year-old girl brought her to a dentist with complaints of destruction of the child's front teeth. Objectively, teeth 51, 52, 54, 61, 62, 65, 71, 72, 74, 75, 81, 82, 85 are affected by caries of superficial and medium depth and varying localization. Additional examination methods allowed diagnosing the child with multiple caries. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Preparation and filling using zinc phosphate cements
b. Preparation and filling using glass ionomer cements
*c. Silver impregnation
d. Deep fluoridation of enamel
e. Preparation and filling using photopolymer materials

30. Removable partial dentures for upper and lower teeth are being made for a 45-year-old man. Complete anatomical impressions were made using ''Ypeen'' alginate material. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
a. -
b. 0.1% desoxone solution
*c. 2.5% glutaraldehyde with рH- 7.0 - 8.7
d. Phenol solution in proportion 1:20
e. 6% hydrogen peroxide solution

31. A 15-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums and pain during eating. These signs have been observed for the last year. Objectively the interdental papillae in the area of teeth 31, 32, 33, 41, 42, and 43 are enlarged and cover the tooth crowns by 1/2 of their height. The gums present with bright-red granulations and are painful on palpation. Mineralized dental plaque is observed on the teeth. X-ray shows no changes of the alveolar process. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Ulcerative gingivitis
c. Catarrhal gingivitis
d. Localized periodontitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

32. An 18-year-old girl complains of pain in her parotid regions and general indisposition. Examination shows bilateral swelling of the parotid regions, painful mouth opening. In the oral cavity, mucosa near the openings of parotid salivary glands is hyperemic and swollen. There are signs of general intoxication: body temperature of 38^oC and myalgia. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Phlegmon of the parotid-masseteric region
b. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
c. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
d. Acute suppurative lymphadenitis
*e. Acute epidemic parotitis

33. A 30-year-old man complains of aching toothache that radiates to the ear and intensifies when he eats hot or cold foods. Previously, spontaneous night pain was observed in this tooth. Objectively, tooth 37 has a deep carious cavity on its masticatory surface. The carious cavity communicates with the dental cavity at one point. The response to probing at the communication point and to cold stimuli is sharply painful, with pain not subsiding for a long time. Electric pulp testing - 55 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

34. A 19-year-old young man complains of the presence of a spherical thickening on his lower tooth. Objectively, on the oral surface of tooth 46, in its cervical region, there is a teardrop-shaped thickening 2-3 mm in diameter covered with enamel. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Marble disease
b. Fluorosis
c. Local hypoplasia
*d. Hyperplasia
e. Supernumerary tooth

35. During examination the child presents with micrognathia and open bite. X-ray shows no joint space, the right branch of the lower jaw immediately continues as the temporal bone. Make the diagnosis:
a. Right-sided fibrous ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
b. First and second branchial arch syndrome
*c. Right-sided bony ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
d. Right-sided sclerosing arthrosis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Chronic right-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint

36. A 15-year-old girl complains of discolored upper front teeth. Examination by a dentist detected signs of acute initial caries in the pericervical areas of teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23. What treatment technique would be most effective in this case?
*a. Infiltration
b. Filing down
c. Remineralization
d. Impregnation
e. Preparation and filling

37. A man with an occupational face trauma on the right has been brought into the first-aid center. The trauma was received approximately 3 hours ago, the man is conscious. Objectively, on his right cheek there is an irregularly-shaped wound 5x3 cm in size with uneven edges. Parting of the wound edges exposes immobile teeth. In the oral cavity, there is a breach in the buccal mucosa. The bite is not affected. What type of surgical debridement is necessary for this patient?
a. Secondary surgical debridement
b. -
c. Delayed primary surgical debridement
d. Late primary surgical debridement
*e. Early primary surgical debridement

38. A patient is undergoing a plastic surgery to correct a soft tissues defect of the face caused by a domestic injury. What appliances must be used in this case to make the bed for the denture that will be installed in the future?
*a. Formation appliances
b. Combined appliances
c. Reponation appliances
d. Fixation appliances
e. Replacement appliances

39. A 43-year-old man complains of an intense unbearable pain in the area of the upper jaw; his general condition has been disturbed for 5 days. Objectively, his face is asymmetrical due to a swelling of the buccal and zygomatic regions. In the oral cavity, tooth 26 is destroyed, mucosa of the alveolar bone is hyperemic and edematous; there is a cuff-shaped thickening of the alveolar bone in the area of teeth 25, 26, 27; teeth 25, 26, and 27 exhibit I degree mobility. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Odontogenic buccal abscess
b. Odontogenic zygomatic abscess
*c. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
d. Odontogenic palatal abscess
e. Acute odontogenic maxillary periostitis

40. A 28-year-old woman complains of dull pain when biting on tooth 16. Upon examination she was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. She is prescribed extaction of tooth 16. What forceps should be used for tooth extraction in this case?
a. Beak-shaped curved forceps
b. Straight forceps
c. S-shaped left forceps
d. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps
*e. S-shaped right forceps

41. The mother of a 3-year-old boy complains of an increase in his body temperature to 39^oC, sharply painful small wounds in his mouth, and excessive salivation. Objectively, the gums are hyperemic, edematous, and bleeding. On the hard palate and mucosa of the cheeks and lips, there are numerous small oval erosions up to 2 mm in diameter with whitish coating. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, soft-elastic, and painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
b. Chickenpox
c. Acute candidal stomatitis
*d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

42. A patient needs a clasp (bugel) denture for the upper jaw. The working impression was obtained using a silicone material, while the auxiliary impression was obtained using an alginate material. How many casts need to be produced to make one clasp (bugel) denture?
*a. Two working casts and one auxiliary cast
b. Two working casts and two auxiliary casts
c. One working cast and one auxiliary cast
d. One working cast and two auxiliary casts
e. One working cast

43. A 30-year-old woman complains of pain in the area of an incised cheek wound. She received a domestic injury 4 days ago, but did not seek medical aid. Objectively, the healing occurs by granulation tissue gradually filling the pus-filled wound cavity with its subsequent epithelization and scar formation. What type of healing is it?
*a. Secondary intention healing
b. -
c. Combined healing
d. Healing under the scab
e. Primary intention healing

44. A serviceman has received a shrapnel wound to the oropharynx. As a result of the tongue sinking and blocking the upper respiratory tracts, the patient developed the signs of asphyxia. What type of asphyxia is it?
a. Stenotic asphyxia
b. Aspiration asphyxia
*c. Dislocation asphyxia
d. Obstructive asphyxia
e. Valve asphyxia

45. Implant-supported removable dentures are being made for a 60-year-old woman. Objectively, gingiva formers have been installed on her edentulous maxilla. It is planned to obtain impressions using a silicone material with transfers. What impression technique should be used in this case?
a. Dual arch impression
b. Functional impression
c. Compression impression
d. Decompressive impression
*e. Open tray impression

46. Examination of a 5-year-old child by a dentist detected multiple bright-yellow chalky dots that affect the enamel of most upper and lower teeth of the child. When dried, the spots becomes matte-colored and glossy. Treatment with 2% methylene blue solution produces no staining. The child lives in an area, where water fluorine content is 2.0 mg/L. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Dental fluorosis
b. Marble disease
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
d. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
e. Systemic enamel hypoplasia

47. The parents of a 5-month-old child complain of white plaque in the child's mouth and child's refusal to feed. Objectively, the child's general condition is satisfactory, the body temperature is 37.1^oC) White caseous deposits are detected on the mucosa of the cheeks, lips, and hard palate. The deposits can be easily removed, the underlying mucosa is hyperemic. What additional examination method can confirm the diagnosis in this case?
*a. Microbiology
b. Cytology
c. Immunofluorescence
d. Immunology
e. Virology

48. A 28-year-old man was diagnosed with a non-displaced median mandibular fracture. The continuity of the dentition is preserved. What splint should be used in this case for permanent immobilization?
*a. Smooth splint-brace
b. Two-jaw splint with anchoring loops
c. Ivy splint
d. Two-jaw splint with a spreader arch
e. Splint with an inclined plane

49. A 7-year-old child needs mandibular vestibuloplasty. What pathology is most often caused by a shallow vestibule of the mouth?
a. Parafunction of the facial muscles
b. Mandibular growth retardation
*c. Diseases of periodontal tissues
d. Crowded front teeth
e. Deep bite

50. In the orthopedic dental clinic a 26-year-old man undergoes preparation to have a denture made for him. Objectively, teeth 45 and 46 are lost; teeth 44 and 47 are intact and stable. Dentoalveolar elongation by 1/3 of the crown length is observed in the area of teeth 15 and 16. What method should be used to correct the deformation of the occlusal surfaces?
a. Occlusal correction
b. Teeth shortening
c. Surgical
d. Teeth extraction
*e. Orthodontic

51. A 67-year-old man complains of a painless neoplasm that appeared on his lower lip several months ago and is rapidly growing. Examination detects a demarkated hemispherical neoplasm up to 1.0 cm in size on the vermilion border of the lower lip on the left. The neoplasm is covered in small scales and is darker in color than the surrounding tissues. During palpation, the base of the neoplasm is not indurated. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Papilloma
b. Keratoacanthoma
*c. Verrucous precancer
d. Verrucous leukoplakia
e. Cutaneous horns

52. The parents of a 5-year-old child complain of the destruction of the child's lower lateral teeth on the left. Objectively, the contact surfaces of teeth 74 and 75 have carious cavities within the pigmented softened mantle dentin. The response to cold stimuli is painful and brief. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Chronic median caries
*b. Acute median caries
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Pulpal hyperemia
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

53. Removable complete dentures are being made for a 70-year-old man with completely edentulous jaws and marked progenia. What artificial teeth are not placed in such dentures?
a. Second premolars on the lower jaw
*b. Second premolars on the upper jaw
c. First premolars on the lower jaw
d. Second molars on the upper jaw
e. Second molars on the lower jaw

54. A 35-year-old man has an open unilateral non-dispalced fracture of the mandibular body on the left. The fracture line passes between the missing teeth 33 and 34. The fragments need to be immobilized. What splint would be the most advisable for this purpose?
a. Splint with an inclined plane
b. Two-jaw splint with wire loops
c. Port splint
*d. Tigerstedt splint with a spreader bar
e. Smooth splint-bracket

55. A 32-year-old man was hit in the face with a blunt object. He lost his consciousness for a short time. The patient complains of dizziness, double vision, and pain in the area of the upper jaw. Objectively, his face is asymmetric because of edema in the infraorbital region, palpation detects a bony "step-off" and pathological mobility along the zygomaticomaxillary suture. What fracture can be suspected in this case?
a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
*b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
d. Nasal fracture
e. Zygomatic fracture

56. A 48-year-old man complains of a dull pain in the area of his tooth 48 that intensifies when biting, worsening of his general condition, and high body temperature of 38^oC) Objectively, the retromolar mucosa is edematous and hyperemic. The distal surface of tooth 48 is covered with a mucosal flap, palpation of which provokes a sharp pain and discharge of purulent exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute purulent periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. -
d. Phlegmon of the submandibular region
*e. Acute purulent pericoronitis

57. A 67-year-old woman complains of an ulcer on her oral mucosa and pain when eating. She has a history of decompensated valvular heart diseases. Examination detected in the posterior portion of her left buccal region an irregularly shaped ulcer with white-gray coating. Surrounding mucosa is not inflamed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Decubitus ulcer
*b. Trophic ulcer
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Tuberculous ulcer

58. A 41-year-old patient came to a dentist with complaints of loosened fixation of his porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge for the upper jaw with teeth 13 and 16 as the abutment. Objectively, the abutment teeth are stable, without defects, restored with a composite material, the size of the crown part of the tooth is average, the conicity of the approximal surfaces of the abutment teeth is approximately 30°, the relief of the masticatory surface is preserved. What is the cause of the denture fixation becoming loose in this case?
*a. The conicity of the appproximal surfaces of the abutment teeth has significantly increased
b. Wrong denture design choice
c. Preservation of the relief of the masticatory surfaces of the abutment teeth
d. No inlays in the stumps
e. Secondary caries in the abutment teeth

59. What period of bite formation in a child can be normally characterized by physiological tremata and diastemata?
a. It is always a sign of pathology
b. Formation of milk occlusion (6 months - 3 years)
c. Changing occlusion
*d. Preparation for the change of dentition (4.5-6 years)
e. Permanent occlusion

60. Complete removable dentures are being made for the upper and lower jaws of a 75-year-old man. At the stage of checking the wax cast of the denture with artificial teeth in the oral cavity, a contact between the lateral teeth is observed, while there is no contact between the front teeth. What mistake was made in this case?
a. No contact between the bite rims in the  lateral regions
b. Mistake during the teeth placement
c. No contact between the bite rims in the  frontal region
d. Deformation of the working cast
*e. Fixation of anterior occlusion

61. Removable partial dentures for both jaws are being made for a 70-year-old man. To make diagnostic models, alginate impressions of both jaws need to be obtained. To prepare the alginate mass, the doctor mixes the powder with water in a rubber flask. Within what interval should the doctor apply the impression mass to the tray and place the tray in the patient's oral cavity?
a. 5-10 minutes
b. Less than 1 minute
c. Less than 3 minutes
*d. 3-5 minutes
e. Over 10 minutes

62. A 42-year-old man, a teacher, came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his upper front teeth exhibit a mobility of the III degree. It is planned to make him a direct denture. How soon after the tooth extraction should such dentures be installed?
a. In one month
b. In one week
*c. Immediately after the extraction
d. In three days
e. In one day

63. A 15-year-old boy fell from a bicycle and hit his face. He came to a doctor for medical aid. After examination, the doctor established that the patient had a closed mechanical injury of the soft tissues without any visible violation of their anatomical integrity. Make the diagnosis.
a. Bruise
b. Wound
c. Hematoma
*d. Contusion
e. Abrasion

64. A 28-year-old man is referred for oral cavity sanation. On examination there is a filling on the masticatory surface of tooth 17, percussion is painless. Mucosa in the root apex projection of 17 is cyanotic, vasoparesis symptom is positive. X-ray shows foci of bone tissue destruction with fuzzy margins in the area of root apices, root canals are not filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Radicular cyst
*d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

65. A 53-year-old woman complains of pain and clicking in her left temporomandibular joint. Objectively, her face is symmetrical, palpation of the lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left. The mouth opening is reduced. Tomography shows smooth bone contours of the joint surfaces. This clinical presentation is characteristic of:
*a. Temporomandibular joint dysfunction
b. Joint ankylosis
c. Deforming arthrosis
d. Acute posttraumatic arthritis
e. Rheumatic arthritis

66. A 36-year-old woman complains of dryness and peeling of her lower lip vermillion border. Both dryness and peeling have been observed for a month. Application of indifferent ointments was ineffective. Objectively the vermillion border of the lower lip is bright red, moderately infiltrated, and densely covered in white-gray scales, that cannot be removed without pain and bleeding. The lesion focus contains concave areas, while on the periphery there are patches of dull epithelium that look like irregular white stripes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leukoplakia
b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
*d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Candidal cheilitis

67. A woman complains of spontaneous attacks of acute pain, with practically no intermissions and irradiation into the temple; cold water slightly mitigates the pain. In tooth 26 examiantion revealed deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity bottom is acutely painful, the tooth is tender on vertical percussion. Make the provisional diagnosis regarding tooth 26:
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute suppurative pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Pulpal hyperemia

68. A patient is diagnosed with mandibular ameloblastoma. What type of surgery is recommended for this patient?
a. Cystectomy
b. Tumor curettage within healthy tissue
c. Tumor cryodestruction
*d. Mandibular resection at the distance of 1.5 cm from the lesion focus
e. Only conservative treatment

69. A 45-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of bad breath and gums that bleed when she brushes her teeth. Objectively, she has a significant amount of hard and soft dental plaque; her gums are dough-like, they have a cyanotic tinge and bleed when probed. X-ray shows resorption of the cortical plate at the apices of the interalveolar septa. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage,  chronic progression
b. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage,  acute progression
c. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  chronic progression
d. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  exacerbated progression
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

70. The parents of a 6-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints that their child has a swelling in the right parotid-masticatory region, dry mouth, and fever of 37.6^oC) Similar complaints took place about 6 months ago. Objectively, there is a lumpy and mildly painful infiltrate in the child's right parotid-masticatory region. The child's saliva is viscous. A small amount of secretion with whitish inclusions is being produced from the duct of the right salivary gland. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Mixed salivary gland tumor
b. Epidemic parotitis
c. Acute purulent parotitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
e. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis

71. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with ulcerative gingivitis. After processing the patient's oral cavity with an antiseptic, the doctor applied anesthesia and removed dental plaque and necrotic coating. Final part of the medical appointment is the application of gingival dressing. What etiotropic drug should this dressing contain?
*a. Metronidazole
b. Methyluracil
c. Pimafucin (Natamycin)
d. Terrilytin
e. Contrykal (Aprotinin)

72. A 25-year-old woman complains of an intense pain in her upper jaw. The pain increases when she eats hot food or drinks hot beverages, while cold liquid relieves the pain. Objectively, in tooth 24 there is a carious cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is sharply painful, percussion is positive. Electric pulp test - 50 microamperes. What method of treatment would be the most advisable?
a. Biological method
b. Devital extirpation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Vital amputation

73. A 14-year-old girl, while conducting experiments during a chemistry class, received a burn on her face. Objectively, the skin at the site of the damage is dehydrated and covered with a dense dry scab with clear boundaries and a band of hyperemia on the periphery, the scab is embedded into the skin. Name the most likely type of the traumatic agent in this case.
a. Thermal
b. Electric
c. Radiation
*d. Acidic
e. Alkaline

74. A 37-year-old man complains of facial asymmetry due to an edema of the right parotid-masticatory region, which developed 6 months ago. Palpation detects a painful dense formation without clear margins. The mouth and eye angles are drooping. When the patient tries to puff up his cheeks, the right cheek wavers. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Peripheral paresis of the facial nerve
b. Trigeminal neuralgia
c. Central paresis of the facial nerve
d. Phlegmon of the parotid-masticatory  region
*e. Malignant tumor of a parotid salivary  gland

75. A draft-age young man undergoes an examination in the orthopedic dental clinic. Objectively, teeth 46 and 16 are missing. What would be the loss of masticatory efficiency, according to Agapov's classification?
a. 24%
*b. 12%
c. 10%
d. 6%
e. 5%

76. A 29-year-old man complains of pain in the oral cavity, inability to eat, and a fever of 38°С. According to the patient's medical history, several days ago the patient had acute food poisoning. Objectively, the complexion is pale, hypersalivation is observed, there are sharply painful ulcers with a dirty-gray coating on the mucosa of the lips, cheeks, gums, and floor of the mouth. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful to palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
b. Acantholytic pemphigus
c. Miliary ulcerative tuberculosis
d. Sutton's stomatitis
*e. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

77. A 28-year-old man came to a dentist for the purpose of sanation. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 47 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity is painless, the tooth is non-responsive to thermal stimuli, its percussion is painless. Electric pulp testing - 108 microamperes. X-ray shows traces of filling material in the root canals of tooth 47, the periodontal fissure is widened and deformed in the apical region. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 47
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis of  tooth 47
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of tooth 47
d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of tooth 47
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis of tooth 47

78. A 48-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of acute short-term toothache provoked by thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli. After stimulation stops, the pain ceases immediately. Examination of tooth 36 reveals a deep carious cavity (Black's class V) with a narrow opening, filled with a large amount of softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful. The carious cavity and the dental cavity do not communicate. Percussion of tooth 36 is painless. Electric pulp testing - 11 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Acute limited pulpitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Pulpal hyperemia
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

79. A 62-year-old woman complains of intense pain attacks in the area of her left lower jaw that last 1-3 minutes. The pain occurs during talking, washing her face, and touching the skin. Mandibular X-ray shows no destruction of bone tissue. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Neuralgia of the 3rd branch of the  trigeminal nerve
b. Neuritis of the 3rd branch of the  trigeminal nerve
c. Neuralgia of the 2nd branch of the  trigeminal nerve
d. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
e. Facial nerve neuritis

80. A 28-year-old patient complains of aesthetical defect. Objectively the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 are destroyed by caries by over 2/3 of their heights. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. X-ray shows the root canals of these teeth to be completely filled; no pathologic changes detected in the periapical tissues. What approach to teeth restoration would be optimal in this case?
a. Combined swaged crowns, made in Borodiuk technique
*b. Stump inlays and porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns
c. Immediate denture with posts
d. Plastic-faced stump inlays
e. Crown restoration with photopolymer fillings

81. Parents of a 4-year-old child complain of a discolored upper front teeth in their child. Objectively, white spots were detected on the vestibular surfaces of teeth 52, 51, 61 and 62 in their cervical areas. The enamel above the spots has lost its luster and is rough when probed. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. -
*b. Deep fluoridation
c. ART method
d. Surgical treatment
e. Filing down the defects

82. A 45-year-old man complains of a pain in his upper jaw. Two days ago he had a trauma. Objectively, he has a disturbed occlusion. On palpation, the maxillary alveolar process is mobile. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Zygomatic fracture
b. Le Fort maxillary fracture, type II
c. Maxillary contusion
d. Le Fort maxillary fracture, type III
*e. Le Fort maxillary fracture, type I

83. A 22-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a neoplasm that appeared on the mucosa of his lower lip one week ago and is slowly growing. Examination detects a soft and elastic, demarkated, translucent, painless formation up to 1 cm in diameter, located deep within the lower lip. The formation protrudes from the surface of the thinned-out mucosa and is attached to it. Make the provisional diagnosis.
*a. Retention cyst
b. Papilloma
c. Glandular cheilitis
d. Hemangioma
e. Lipoma

84. A dentist makes complete removable laminar dentures for the upper and lower jaw of a 58-year-old completely edentulous patient. Placement of the artificial teeth is carried out on glass, using the Vasiliev's technique. The greatest convexity of the transverse occlusal curve will be observed in this case at the level of the following artificial upper lateral teeth:
a. First premolars
*b. Second molars
c. First molars
d. Second premolars
e. -

85. A 28-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of an ulcer on his tongue. Objectively, on the left lateral surface of his tongue there is a painless red erosion about 1.5 cm in diameter. The erosion has a smooth shiny floor, smooth clear margins, and a dense infiltrate in its base. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Decubital ulcer
c. Actinomycosis of the tongue
*d. Primary syphilis
e. Tuberculous ulcer

86. According to the professional standards, a dental orthopedist with work experience of 7 years and 6 months received qualification category I. How long must be the dentist's record of service, to be eligible for the next certification?
a. 8 years
*b. 10 years
c. 15 years
d. 9 years
e. 12 years

87. An 8-year-old girl complains of tooth 21 discoloration and pain response to hot stimulus. Several months ago tooth 21 was treated for acute diffuse pulpitis by means of vital amputation. Objectively tooth 21 is filled, percussion is painless. X-ray shows the rooth to be formed by 2/3, cortical plate of the tooth socket remains intact in the area of root radix. What material should be used for root canal filling in this case?
a. Zinc phosphate cement
b. -
*c. Calcium hydroxide paste
d. Resorcinol-formalin paste
e. Glass ionomer cement

88. A 10-year-old girl complains of pain in the area of her upper front teeth, observed when she eats cold food. The pain appeared one month ago after an injury. Examination detects a missing mesial corner of the crown of tooth 21 and a broken off cutting edge of tooth 11 within the mantle dentin. Probing of teeth 11 and 21 is mildly painful, the response to a cold stimulus is painful and brief. Electric pulp testing - 7 microamperes. What filling material should be used in treatment in this case?
*a. Microhybrid composite
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Amalgam
d. Compomer
e. Macro-filled composite

89. The jaws of a newborn are in direct relation to each other. The baby is full term, healthy, and breastfed. What bite can be prognosed in this case?
a. Deep bite
b. Distal bite
c. Open bite
d. Direct bite
*e. Mesial bite

90. A 35-year-old woman came to a dentist for treatment of caries in her tooth 37. After local anesthesia, she felt fear and anxiety, developed tingling skin on her hands and face, tinnitus, headache, nausea, abdominal pain, marked skin pallor, acrocyanosis, a sharp decrease in blood pressure, and broke out in cold sticky sweat. Then convulsions started and the patient lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Acute cerebrovascular accident
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Collapse
e. Fainting

91. A dental bridge needs to be made for the lower jaw of a 48-year-old man,  with teeth 45 and 47 used as an abutment. Objectively, tooth 47 is distally inclined (diverges). What surface of tooth 47 must be filed down more during the preparation of abutment teeth?
a. Lingual
*b. Distal
c. Buccal
d. Masticatory
e. Mesial

92. The mother of a 6-year-old girl complains of the child's body temperature increasing to 37.5°С and general weakness in her child. Examination revealed multiple sharply painful erosions 1-3 mm in diameter with a whitish coating on the mucosa of the lower lip, closer to its middle, against the background of hyperemia. Such rashes occur several times a year. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Recurrent herpetic stomatitis
b. Shingles (herpes zoster)
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

93. A patient has a tumor on the upper lip. The tumor is 1.5x2.0 cm in size, cyanotic. The ''compression-filling'' sign is positive. What is the likely diagnosis?
a. Pigment spot
b. Hematoma
c. Epulis
*d. Cavernous hemangioma
e. Fibroma

94. The parents of a 4-year-old boy came to a dentist complaining that their child suffers from pain in an area of his right upper jaw and a fever of 37.5°С. Objectively, there is edema of soft facial tissues in the right buccal and suborbital regions, the crown of tooth 54 is destroyed, the tooth was previously treated and is mobile. The mucogingival junction is hyperemic on the vestibular side in the area of tooth 54, palpation detects there a painful infiltrate with a focus of fluctuation. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 54
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*c. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis
d. Giant-cell tumor of bone in the right upper jaw
e. Acute odontogenic purulent lymphadenitis

95. A 28-year-old man complains of an ulcer on his tongue. Objectively, he has a painless red erosion with a smooth glossy floor, approximately 1 cm in diameter. The erosion has clear smooth margins and a dense infiltrate at its base. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painless on palpation. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Decubital ulcer
*b. Syphilitic ulcer
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Actinomycotic ulcer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

96. On the second day after the fixation of partial laminar dentures, the patient complained of a burning sensation in the oral cavity and an unpleasant taste when using the dentures. Examination detects hyperemic mucosa and hypersalivation. According to the patient's history, before the new dentures were made, the patient had been using removable dentures for 5 years and had no such complaints back then. What is the most likely cause of the patient's complaints?
a. Bacterial stomatitis
b. Mechanical injury of the mucosa by the denture base
c. Poor oral hygiene
*d. Residual monomer remaining in the denture base
e. Allergic reaction to the components of the base plastic

97. A 6-year-old girl fell ill 2 days ago. She complains of an increase in body temperature up to 37.3°C, weakness, photophobia, lacrimation, low appetite, and disturbed sleep. Objectively, her face is pale, there are no rashes on her skin, an enanthema was detected on the mucosa of the soft palate. There are punctate whitish spots of varying size on the buccal mucosa in the area of molars. The spots resemble lime splashes, are scattered on the mucosa and slightly rise above its surface. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Infectious mononucleosis
*b. Measles
c. Scarlet fever
d. Chickenpox
e. Shingles

98. An 18-year-old young man complains of a cavity in 27 and pain when eating solid food. He has a history of severe pain in 27 one year ago; he requested no medical help at the time. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 27 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. The cavity is nearly completely filled with overgrown granulation tissue. Probing of the granulations leads to mild pain and bleeding. Percussion is painless. EPT is 45 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

99. A man complains of gingival bleeding that has been persisting for the last 2 years. Objectively he presents with chronic diffuse catarrhal gingivitis, teeth mobility is of the I degree, periodontal pockets are 2-3 mm deep with small amount of serous exudate, occlusion is markedly traumatic. X-ray shows damaged cortical plate, enlarged periodontal fissure in the apical areas of the interalveolar septa, osteoporosis, and interalveolar septa resorption by 1/3 of their height. Make the diagnosis:
a. Generalized periodontitis, early stage, chronic development
b. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, exacerbated development
c. Parodontosis, stage I
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*e. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, chronic development

100. A 30-year-old patient is diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic periostitis of the upper left jaw originating from tooth 23. The crown of 23 on the left is destroyed with caries by 1/3. Teeth 22 and 24 are intact. Spot-film X-ray shows widening of the periodontal fissure of 23. What treatment would be the most advisable in this case?
*a. Periosteotomy and pharmacotherapy followed by treatment of the causative tooth
b. -
c. Extraction of the causative tooth, pharmacotherapy
d. Extraction of the causative tooth, periosteotomy
e. Extraction of the causative tooth, physiotherapy

101. An 18-year-old young man complains of a painful submandibular edema on the left that developed after shaving and has been troubling him for the last 4 days. Objectively, there is an inflammatory infiltrate 1.5-1.0 cm in size in the left submandibular area with a purulonecrotic rod in its center. The skin around the infiltrate is hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Pyoderma
*b. Furuncle
c. Lymphadenitis
d. Actinomycosis
e. Carbuncle

102. A 54-year-old woman complains of pain and clicking in her temporomandibular joint during movements of the lower jaw. This condition has been observed for several years. Objectively, her face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with a slight mandibular displacement to the left. The dentition is intact. What type of X-ray examination would be most informative for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Axiography
b. Teleradiography
*c. Computed tomography of the  temporomandibular joint
d. Electromyography
e. Orthopantomography

103. A 27-year-old man received a trauma of the lower jaw. After X-ray examination he was diagnosed with a displaced unilateral open mandibular fracture at the level of the mental foramen. The patient has retained all his teeth. The fracture line passes between teeth 34 and 35. What splint should be used in this case?
a. Splint with an inclined plane
b. Splint with a corrective loop
c. Smooth dental brace
d. Two-jaw splint with a spreader arch
*e. Two-jaw splint with wire loops

104. A full removable denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 65-year-old man. Currently, the individual tray is being fitted in the patient's oral cavity. When the patient swallows saliva, the tray falls off. In what area should its edge be shortened in this case?
a. In the premolar area on the lingual side
b. Along the mylohyoid line
c. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
d. From canine to canine on the lingual side
*e. From the place behind the retromolar  tubercle to the mylohyoid line

105. An implant-supported removable denture is planned to be made for a 70-year-old patient to replace a complete defect in the lower dentition. Objectively, the alveolar processes of both jaws are significantly atrophied, the edentulous jaws are positioned in an orthognathic bite. What minimum number of implants is required for fixation of the denture in this case?
a. 1
*b. 2
c. 8
d. 6
e. 4

106. A 28-year-old woman complains of persisting pain in tooth 34, which intensifies on biting. Four days ago arsenic paste was left in the 34. The patient missed her appointment with the dentist. Objective examination detected occlusive dressing on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 34, percussion is acutely painful. What treatment tactics would be the most advisable in this case?
a. -
*b. Arsenic antidote is placed into the root canal under occlusive dressing
c. Dentin dressing is removed, electrophoresis with antidote along the mucogingival fold is prescribed
d. The root canal is lavaged with antidote, the tooth remains uncovered
e. The root canal is lavaged with antidote and filled

107. The sum of the transverse dimensions of certain teeth is used to build the Hawley-Herber-Herbst diagram and is taken as the radius AB. What teeth are measured for this purpose?
a. 31, 32, 41, 42
b. 51, 52, 61, 62
c. 31, 32, 33
d. 11, 12, 21, 22
*e. 11, 12, 13

108. A 28-year-old man has received a hit to the chin. He complains of pain in the right side of his face. Examination shows asymmetrical face due to tissue swelling in the upper right parotid area, mouth opening is painful, limited, the jaw is displaced to the right, right-sided crossbite is observed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Displaced traumatic unilateral fracture of the body of the mandible
b. Displaced traumatic central fracture of the mandible
c. Displaced traumatic double fracture of the body of the mandible
d. Displaced traumatic mental fracture of the mandible
*e. Displaced traumatic fracture of the cervix of the mandibular articular process

109. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his left lower jaw and limited mouth opening. Objectively, his mouth opens by 2 cm, the retromolar mucosa on the left is slightly edematous, hyperemic, and painful on palpation. An orthopantomogram shows the dystopia of tooth 38 in the mesiodistal position. What surgery is indicated in this case?
a. Bicuspidization
b. Operculectomy
c. Resection of the dental root apex
*d. Atypical tooth extraction
e. Hemisection

110. A child under 1 year of age with a congenital facial defect was hospitalized into the maxillofacial department. Objectively, there is a midline cleft of the soft and hard palate that reaches the incisive foramen, the vomer is located in the middle. The alveolar process and tissues of the upper lip are without deformities. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Isolated complete cleft of the hard and  soft palate
b. Complete cleft of the soft palate and  incomplete cleft of the hard palate
c. Hidden cleft of the hard and soft palate
d. Combined cleft palate
e. Isolated incomplete cleft of the hard and soft palate

111. A removable partial laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for the patient. The central occlusion is determined and fixed. What stage is next?
a. Measuring the interalveolar height
b. Determining the edges of the base
c. Replacing wax with plastic
*d. Fitting the wax model of the denture in the oral cavity
e. Arrangement of artificial teeth

112. A 47-year-old woman has been diagnosed with chronic generalized parodontitis, II degree of severity, chronic course. Complex therapy included splinting her front lower teeth using a fiber adhesive splint. What was the first stage of the local treatment in this case?
a. Orthopedic dental treatment
b. Closed curettage
c. Pharmacotherapy
d. Physiotherapy
*e. Professional oral hygiene

113. A 17-year-old girl complains of involuntary pain in her upper tooth, which occurred for the first time this morning. The pain lasted for up to 2 minutes. Objectively, her tooth 15 has a deep carious cavity on its masticatory surface. A cold stimulus provokes a pain attack. The cavity floor is tender when probed. Percussion is painless. Electric pulp testing - 12 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
b. Acute periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
*d. Pulpal hyperemia
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

114. A 50-year-old woman complains of pain and creaking in her temporomandibular joint. Objectively there are multiple premature occlusal contacts and localized pathologic tooth wear. The teeth are stable, with exposed cervices; the gingival margin is hyperemic. Selective teeth shaving is planned. How many visits to the dentist are necessary for the full procedure?
*a. 3-4 visits at one-week intervals
b. 1-2 visits within a year
c. 2-3 visits at one-day intervals
d. 2-3 visits at one-month intervals
e. A single visit

115. A 70-year-old man came to a dental orthopedist complaining of all his teeth missing. Objectively, he has a slight uniform atrophy of the mandibular alveolar process that is covered with a moderately pliable mucosa. What type of edentulous jaw according to the Keller's classification is it, as indicated by these characteristics?
a. Fourth
*b. First
c. -
d. Third
e. Second

116. A ceramic dental bridge is being made for a 38-year-old man. Vital teeth 33 and 35 are used as the abutment in this case. The patient is at the stage of tooth preparation. What type of anesthesia should he be provided?
a. Infiltration anesthesia
b. Inhalation anesthesia
*c. Conduction anesthesia
d. Topical anesthesia
e. Cooling anesthesia

117. A 48-year-old man presents with verruciform, dense, gray-white growths on the buccal mucosa. The growths protrude above the neighbouring tissues and are surrounded by keratinized gray-white spots that cannot be scraped off. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Erosive leukoplakia
b. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
c. Papillomatosis
d. Bowen's disease
*e. Verrucous leukoplakia

118. A 45-year-old woman complains of stiffness of movements in her temporomandibular joints, especially in the morning, and creaking when she opens her mouth. No external changes were detected in the area of the joints. X-ray shows deformation of the articular head, articular tubercle, and joint space with the joint space narrowing. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Habitual dislocation
b. Chronic arthritis
c. Neuromuscular syndrome
*d. Arthrosis
e. False joint (pseudoarthrosis)

119. A 13-year-old girl complains of painful bleeding gums and bad breath. The signs appeared approximately six months ago. Objectively, the gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of her lower front teeth are hypertrophied, edematous, cyanotic, and bleed easily when touched. There is soft plaque in the paracervical region of the teeth. Hygiene index - 3. The dentist performed a local anti-inflammatory therapy to relieve the exacerbation. What further tactics should the doctor choose during the follow-up visit?
*a. Complete professional oral hygiene
b. Pocket curettage
c. Gingivotomy
d. Vestibuloplasty
e. Physiotherapy

120. A patient diagnosed with phlegmon of the root of the tongue has been hospitalized into the maxillofacial surgery department. What incision would be optimal for creating a surgical access during treatment of phlegmon of the root of the tongue?
*a. Midline
b. Intraoral
c. Near the gonial angle
d. Submandibular
e. Collar-like

121. A 48-year-old woman complains of problems with chewing, caused by missing teeth. Objectively, her teeth 31, 32, 33, and 41, 42, 43 have tall crowns and the I degree of mobility. The decision was reached to make a clasp denture splint for her. What type of clasps (clammers) will ensure the splinting function of this construction?
a. Dentoalveolar
b. Abutment
*c. Continuous
d. Retaining
e. Vestibular

122. A 45-year-old man complains of a discomfort in his tooth 27 and aching pain when biting on this tooth. He has a history of a gingival fistula that opens after an overexposure to cold. Objectively, the crown of tooth 27 is discolored; there is a filling on its masticatory surface; there is a fistula scar on the mucosa in the area of this tooth. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

123. A 54-year-old man developed a pustule on the skin of his chin. The pustule rapidly progressed into a hard and sharply painful infiltration 3x3.5 cm in size. The skin over the infiltration is bluish-red. In its center there are three necrotic foci surrounding the hair follicles. Palpation detects enlarged and painful submental lymph nodes. The body temperature is 38.5^oC) Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Allergic dermatitis
b. Erysipelas
c. Festering atheroma
d. Furuncle
*e. Carbuncle

124. A patient has been diagnosed with acute purulent pulpitis of tooth 48. What type of anesthesia must be used in the treatment of this tooth?
a. General anesthesia
b. Intrapulpal anesthesia
c. Topical anesthesia
*d. Conduction anesthesia
e. Infiltration anesthesia

125. A group of experts conducts epidemiologic investigation of certain age groups by severity of signs of periodontal damage and their need for treatment. What index allows to study these criteria?
a. PDІ (Ramfjord)
b. OHІ-S (Green-Vermillion)
c. PІ (Russel)
d. PMA (Parma)
*e. CPITN (WHO)

126. A 6-year-old child was referred for extraction of the temporary lower central incisors due to changes in the occlusion. The teeth exhibit the III degree of mobility. What type of anesthesia would be optimal in this case?
a. Infiltration anesthesia
b. Conduction anesthesia
*c. Application anesthesia
d. Inhalation narcosis
e. Intraosseous anesthesia

127. A 25-year-old man complains of genelal malaise, high body temperature, acute gingival bleeding, and gingival enlargement. He has a history of nosebleeds. Objectively the patient presents with systemic lymphoid hyperplasia, pallor of skin and mucosa, II-III degree hyperplasia of the gingival mucosa, hemorrhages into the buccal mucosa, and ulcers covered with gray deposit. What examination method would be optimal for diagnosis-making in this case?
*a. Complete blood test panel
b. Bacterioscopy
c. Blood glucose test
d. Yasynsky test
e. Immunoassay

128. A 16-year-old girl came to a dentist to check the quality of fissure sealing that had been performed one year ago. Objectively, the sealant is completely retained in teeth 17 and 27, while in teeth 37 and 47 the sealant is only partially retained and the enamel in the longitudinal fissures of these teeth is softened and chalk-like, when probed. Fedorov-Volodkina Hygiene Index is 2.5. What tactics should the dentist choose regarding teeth 37 and 47 in this case?
a. Electrophoresis with a calcium-containing solution
b. Repeat noninvasive sealing
*c. Preventive filling
d. Invasive sealing
e. Applications with a fluorine-containing  gel

129. A 46-year-old man, a teacher, complains of lower teeth mobility that impedes the process of biting. Objectively the dentition is uninterrupted, front teeth demonstrate the II degree of mobility. X-ray shows straight and filled root canals of 32, 31, 41, and 42. What appliance will stabilize front teeth while retaining their aesthetic appearance?
a. Cap splint
b. Splint with embrasure clasps
*c. Mamlok's dental splint
d. Removable segmented splint for the front teeth
e. Semicrown splint

130. A 27-year-old man complains of a periodical pain in the frontal area of the upper jaw. Maxillary X-ray shows a round focus of bone tissue destruction 0.5 cm in diameter near the apex of tooth 12. The root canal of tooth 12 is filled to the apex. The patient is diagnosed with chronic granulomatous periodontitis of tooth 12. What method of surgical treatment should be chosen in this case?
a. Extraction of tooth 12
b. Periostotomy
c. Cystectomy
*d. Resection of the root apex of tooth 12
e. Replantation of tooth 12

131. Tooth 21 of a 25-year-old woman is being restored with a zirconium dioxide-based crown fixed on an implant. After installation of the individual abutment, the distance between the abutment and its antagonist is being measured. What minimum distance must be observed in this case?
a. 0.5 mm
*b. 1.5 mm
c. 3.0 mm
d. 1.0 mm
e. 2.0 mm

132. A 6-year-old boy with congenital heart disease (pulmonary artery stenosis) presents with suppurative periostitis of the maxilla. The child needs surgical treatment. What unit should he be referred to?
*a. The pediatric maxillofacial unit
b. The cardiology unit
c. The out-patient unit after preliminary cardiological treatment
d. The out-patient unit, no precautions are necessary
e. The out-patient or in-patient unit at the discretion of the child's parents

133. A 35-year-old woman complains of marked pain, a submucosal nodule that appeared on the vestibular surface of the lower jaw in the area of her teeth 44 and 45, and lower lip numbness on one side. The first complaints developed after a surgery in this area. Palpation detects a limited painful nodule approximately 1 cm in diameter. The nodule is dense, elastic, with a smooth round surface. Its overlying mucosa is unchanged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Traumatic neuroma
b. Lipoma
c. Papilloma
d. Epulis
e. Fibroma

134. A woman came to a dentist with complaints of periodically occurring pain in the area of the gonial angle on the right and difficulty opening her mouth. Extraction of tooth 48 is indicated. What forceps should be used to extract the tooth in this case?
*a. Forceps curved along the plane
b. Beak-shaped converging forceps
c. Bayonet forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps with spikes
e. Beak-shaped non-converging forceps

135. An 8-year-old boy complains of toothache during eating. Objectively, the proximal surface of tooth 55 has a deep carious cavity that communicates with the dental cavity. Probing of the communication point  is sharply painful. Moderate bleeding is observed. Tooth percussion is painless. What paste must be applied during the first visit to a dentist?
*a. Paraformaldehyde
b. Arsenic
c. Calcium-containing
d. Thymol
e. Resorcinol-formaldehyde

136. A porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge is being made for a 31-year-old woman. Vital teeth 33, 36, and 37 will function as the abutment teeth. The teeth preparation is planned to be done under anesthesia. What type of anesthesia will be the most effective in this case?
a. Conduction (tuberal and palatal)
b. Application
c. Intraligamentary
*d. Conduction (torusal)
e. Infiltration

137. A 27-year-old man presents with missing crown of 11. Objectively teeth 21 and 12 are intact; intraoral spot film X-ray shows the root of 11 to be filled to the apex, no changes in the periapical tissues, no pathologic mobility. What construction of the denture should be recommended for this patient?
a. Stump inlay with overlaying swaged crown
b. Remove the root of 11 and perform implantation
c. Stump inlay with overlaying full cast metal crown
d. Stump inlay with overlaying plastic crown
*e. Metal stump inlay with overlaying porcelain-fused-to-metal crown

138. A 45-year-old man came to an orthopedic dentistry clinic complaining of inability to close his mouth. Computed tomography detects no contact between the articular surfaces of the temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic arthritis
*b. Complete dislocation of the articular head
c. Deforming arthrosis
d. Ankylosis
e. Subluxation of the articular head

139. X-ray of the lower jaw of a 14-year-old boy shows a round homogeneous  lucency with clear margins. This neoplasm is located within the body of the mandible in the area of tooth 36 that was extracted 7 months ago. A puncture of the neoplasm yielded a yellowish liquid with cholesterol crystals. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Residual cyst
b. Follicular cyst
c. Paradental cyst
d. Cementoma
e. Radicular cyst

140. A 60-year-old woman complains of pain in her ears and in the area of her temporomandibular joint and her teeth clacking when she talks. Her removable complete dentures were made two weeks ago. Objectively, her nasolabial folds are smoothed out, her masticatory muscles are strained. What tactics shoud be chosen by a dental orthopedist in this case?
a. Make a new denture for the upper jaw
b. Correct the occlusal surfaces of the both dentures
c. Correct the occlusal surface of the lower denture
*d. Make new dentures
e. Correct the occlusal surface of the upper denture

141. A 43-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgeon with complaints of aesthetic defect. Examination revealed excessive accumulation of adipose tissue in the patient's neck and upper torso, which resembles collar with unclear magins; neck mobility is reduced. Family history shows the same symptoms to be present in the patient's father. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Lipoma
b. Neurofibromatosis
c. Lymphangioma
*d. Madelung's deformity
e. Fibroma

142. A 12-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of spontaneous, paroxysmal pain with short painless intervals. The pain radiates to the temple in the area of her upper right teeth and intensifies at night. The pain first occurred 2 days ago. Objective examination reveals a deep carious cavity in tooth 16, filled with softened dentin. Probing is painful all over the cavity floor. Vertical percussion is slightly painful. The pain intensifies in response to thermal stimuli. Pulp electrical excitability is 15-20 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
*b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute limited pulpitis

143. A 44-year-old patient underwent a surgery to close a soft tissue defect in the submental region using a Filatov stem. Will the sensitivity in the postoperative site be restored?
a. Tactile sensitivity and partially pain sensitivity will be restored
b. Only temperature sensitivity will be restored
c. Only pain sensitivity will be restored
*d. Pain sensitivity, tactile sensitivity, and temperature sensitivity will be restored
e. Sensitivity will not be restored

144. A doctor has received a removable partial denture from the laboratory. On examination of the denture, the following defect is observed: the denture has a marble-like appearance (white streaks). What mistake has been made by a dental technician, when replacing wax with plastic?
a. Packing during the ''sand-like'' phase
b. Excessive monomer
c. Inadequate stirring of the plastic dough
*d. Non-compliance with the polymerization regimen
e. Packing during the ''rubber-like'' phase

145. A 63-year-old man complains of fever and multiple painful rashes in his oral cavity and on his face and torso. 3-4 days before the rashes appeared he had noticed a burning sensation followed by sharp shooting pain resembling that which occurs during lumbago. The patient takes cytotoxic drugs for leukemia treatment. On examination there are multiple aphthae located in a row on the vermillion border and labial, lingual, and buccal mucosa on the right. The aphthae have hyperemic borders, they are not fused together and are sharply painful on palpation. The right side of the face presents with erythematous spots, vesicles, and erosions. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Toxic allergic dermatostomatitis
b. Secondary syphilis
*c. Herpes zoster
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Chronic recurrent herpes

146. A 30-year-old woman complains of mild burning sensation in her lower lip and its dryness. She peels skin scales off with her teeth. She has been presenting with this condition for 10 years. On examination the skin scales are gray and located on the lip from the Klein's line to the center of the vermillion border from angle to angle of the mouth. The scales are firmly attached in the center and are loose on the periphery. Their forcible removal does not result in erosions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Eczematous cheilitis
*e. Exfoliative cheilitis

147. The parents of a 3-year-old girl complain of the mobility of the child's teeth. Objectively, her teeth are mobile; the gingival papillae are edematous and cyanotic; there are pathological pockets with purulent discharge. Skin keratinization is increased, especially on the child's palms and soles of the feet. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Gaucher disease
b. Niemann-Pick disease
c. Taratinov disease
*d. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
e. Takahara disease

148. A 75-year-old man was diagnosed with a right-sided mandibular fracture in the area of the mental foramen. Objectively, all his upper and lower teeth are missing. The fragments are not displaced. The mouth opening is free up to 3.5 cm. What splint should be used in this case?
a. Vankevich splint
*b. Port splint
c. Vasiliev splint
d. Zbarzh appliance
e. Rudko appliance

149. A 51-year-old woman has been diagnosed with chronic interstitial parotitis of the right parotid salivary gland, a clinically manifested stage. What changes will be detected by X-ray during sialography in this case?
a. Uneven widening of the II-IV order ducts
b. Numerous small cavities in the parenchyma of the gland
c. Uneven intermittent borders of the ducts
*d. Sharp narrowing of the II-IV order ducts
e. Clearly demarkated filling defect in the acini and ducts of the gland

150. An 11-year-old boy complains of his gums bleeding when he brushes his teeth. Examination by a dentist detected significant deposits of soft dental plaque. The Greene-Vermillion index is 1.8. What teeth must be examined when determining this hygienic index?
a. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33
*b. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 11, 31, 16, 26 and lingual surfaces of teeth 36, 46
c. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 11, 31, 24, 14 and lingual surfaces of teeth 36, 46
d. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 11, 21, 16, 26 and lingual surfaces of teeth 31, 41, 34, 44
e. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 23, 22, 21, 11, 12, 13

151. When inspecting the finished full removable laminar denture received from the dental laboratory, the dentist discovered a characteristic "marble" pattern in the form of whitish lines on the surface and in the thick of the base plastic, from which the denture was made. What is the likely cause of these lines appearing on the denture?
a. Insufficient amount of plastic dough during packing
b. Insufficient polishing of the denture
c. Incorrect temperature during polymerization
d. Insufficient pressure applied to the plastic dough during polymerization
e. Insufficient amount of monomer in the plastic dough during packing

152. A 33-year-old man complains of a fever of 37.5°С and pain in the area of the socket of tooth 47 that was extracted three days ago due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively, the following is observed: mucosa of the alveolar process in the area of the extracted tooth is edematous and hyperemic, the tooth socket is partially filled with food debris and necrotic masses and covered with a dirty-gray foul-smelling coating. Palpation of the alveolar process in this area is sharply painful. Submandibular lymph nodes on the right are enlarged, mobile, and painful. Moderate edema of the adjacent soft tissues is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Dental alveolitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis of the mandible
c. Neuritis of the inferior alveolar nerve
d. Acute serous lymphadenitis
e. Acute limited osteomyelitis of the mandible

153. The parents of a 10-year-old boy complain of a slight deformity in the area of the child's gonial angles and nocturnal pain attacks observed for the last several months. Examination reveals facial asymmetry caused by increased volume of the bone in the area of the gonial angles. The formations are dense, tubercular, and painless to paplation. X-ray shows uneven thinning of the cortical layer with spherical and oval areas of lucency, resembling a honeycomb and separated by dense bony septa. There is no clear border between the lesion and the healthy bone. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Ameloblastoma
b. Odontoma
c. Osteoid osteoma
d. Fibrous dysplasia
e. Osteosarcoma

154. After the complex examination of a 44-year-old man, the dentist made a diagnosis of generalized periodontitis, II degree, exacerbated progression. Lately the patient has been noticing a deterioration of his general condition, thirst, dryness in the oral cavity, itching skin. What additional examination needs to be performed first in this case?
a. Blood iron levels
b. Immunologic blood test
c. Complete comprehensive blood count
d. Blood sugar levels
e. Vitamin C levels in blood

155. A 14-year-old teenager complains of dry and chapped lips especially in autumn and winter. Objetively the vermillion border is dry, infiltrated, and covered in numerous scales. Skin of the lips is dense, pigmented, with pronounced pattern, peeling, and radial cracks. At the same time the skin of the face is dry, lichenified, and excoriated. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Actinic cheilitis
b. Atopic cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

156. The parents of a 5-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of pain in the area of the child's upper front teeth due to an injury, obtained when the child fell the day before. Objectively, the upper lip is edematous, teeth 51 and 61 have mobility of the II degree. X-ray shows partial resorption of the roots of teeth 51 and 61. What is the most reasonable doctor's tactics regarding the injured teeth?
a. Splinting with a dentogingival splint
b. Ligature fixation of teeth 51 and 61
c. Extraction of teeth 51 and 61
d. Replantation of teeth 51 and 61
e. Splinting with a smooth splint-brace

157. A 65-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of bleeding gums, mobility of her teeth, and exposure of their necks. At the examination stage, the depth of the periodontal pockets was measured and the degree of tooth root bifurcation involvement in the periodontal pocket was determined. How many degrees of tooth root bifurcation involvement in the periodontal pocket are there?
a. Three
b. Five
c. Four
d. One
e. Two

158. A 48-year-old man complains of a tumor-like formation on the hard palate. Examination detected a semi-spherical protrusion with clear margins in the anterior portion of the palate. Teeth 11 and 21 are intact. X-ray shows a homogeneous focus of bone tissue rarefaction. The focus is 3.5x2.5 cm and has clear margins. Against the background of rarefied bone tissue there are projections of intact teeth 11 and 21; periodontal fissure is visible. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Nasopalatine duct cyst
b. Radicular cyst of the maxilla
c. Giant-cell tumor of the maxilla
d. Maxillary ameloblastoma
e. Follicular cyst of the maxilla

159. A 43-year-old man complains of an intensifying painful <<redness>> of his face and increasing edema in the area of his cheekbones and eyelashes. The onset of his condition was 10 hours ago, when he received burns during firefighting. Objectively, the mouth opening is painful, the mucosa is not discolored, the skin of the face is very painful to the touch and covered in blisters with clear contents, the depth of the lesion does not reach the subcutaneous adipose tissue. Name the burn degree observed in this patient:
a. IV
b. I
c. IIIa
d. II
e. IIIb

160. The dental therapist accidentally exposed the pulp horn, when treating deep caries of tooth 26. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Biological method
b. Non-vital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Non-vital extirpation

161. A 32-year-old man complains of pain and heaviness in the right half of his face, stuffed nose with thick discharge on the right, pain in his right upper teeth, and a fever of 38 °C) Objectively, the front surface of the right upper jaw is edematous and painful to palpation. In the oral cavity, tooth 15 is destroyed, its percussion is painful. X-ray shows an area of bone tissue destruction with unclear contours in the projection of the root apex of tooth 15 and darkened right maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute rhinogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
e. Acute purulent periostitis of the maxilla

162. A 45-year-old man complains of persisting dull pain in 46 that occurs in response to thermal and chemical stimuli. Examination of 46 detected in the precervical area of its vestibular surace a deep carious cavity filled with soft pigmented dentin. Probing is sharply painful at one point. Cold water stimulus induces a dull pain that gradually intensifies. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

163. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a filling fallen out of the lower right tooth that had been previously treated for caries. Objectively, tooth 45 is slightly discolored and has a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber on its masticatory surface. Probing and percussion are painless. Thermodiagnostics results are negative. X-ray shows uniform widening of the periodontal fissure in the area of the root apex of tooth 45. Electric pulp testing - 100 microamperes. Make the diagnosis.
a. Chronic fibrotic periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

164. A 25-year-old correspondent complains of involuntary paroxysmal pain in his left temple. The pain occurs spontaneously in the evening. Sometimes the pain occurs, when he tilts his head or during the takeoff of an aircraft. Objectively, all his teeth are intact; the necks of teeth 24 and 36 are exposed. Percussion of tooth 24 is mildly painful. X-ray of tooth 24 detects an induration of dentin-like density in the central part of the coronary cavity. This formation is 0.5x0.5 mm in size. What method of treatment would you suggest?
a. Reminalization therapy of the cervical  areas of teeth 24 and 36
b. Vital extirpation of the pulp of tooth 24
c. Electrophoresis with potassium iodide in the projection of the apex of tooth 24
d. Vital amputation of tooth 24
e. A course of novocaine (procaine)  blockade with vitamin B_1

165. An adolescent complains of reduced and painful mouth opening, difficulties when eating, and swelling in the left mandibular angle that developed after tooth 37 was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue swelling in the area of the left mandibular angle. Mouth opening is painful and reduced to 2.0 cm. Disturbed occlusion is observed. Palpation of the left mandibular angle is painful, the tissues are soft, bone crepitus is detected. ''Indirect load to the chin'' symptom is positive in the area of the left mandibular angle. The socket of the extracted tooth is packed with iodoform gauze. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mandibular periostitis on the left
b. Odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Anterior mandibular fracture
d. Mandibular alveolar fracture
e. Left mandibular angle fracture

166. A partial removable laminar denture is being made for a 57-year-old patient with missing upper lateral teeth. The patient has the orthognathic type of occlusion. To what height should the denture base overlap the crowns of the front teeth on the palatal side?
a. 2/3 of the height of the crown
b. The entire height of the crown
c. 1/3 of the height of the crown
d. 1/2 the height of the crown
e. Reaching the level of the necks of the teeth

167. A 55-year-old woman complains of erosions in her mouth, pain during eating, and hoarse voice. The disease onset was 3 months ago. Local treatment was uncuccessful. Objectively, on the unchanged mucosa of the gums and soft palate there are large bright red erosions. The mucosa can be easily injured and exfoliates with the development of new erosions. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic herpetic stomatitis
b. Pemphigus
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

168. During examination of a 17-year-old patient, a targeted intraoral X-ray of the frontal region of the maxilla shows a round area of homogeneous rarefaction of bone tissue with clear borders, 2 cm in size. In the projection of the rarefaction, the roots of the intact central upper incisors with preserved periodontal fissures are located. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Follicular cyst
b. Globulomaxillary cyst
c. Nasoalveolar cyst
d. Nasopalatine cyst
e. Radicular cyst

169. A complete removable laminar denture needs to be made for the lower jaw of an 82-year-old man. Slight atrophy of the alveolar process is observed. At the stage of fitting a custom tray using the Herbst method, it falls off when the tip of the tongue touches the left cheek with the mouth half closed. Name the area where the edge of the tray should be shortened.
a. Along the mylohyoid line on the left
b. At the distance of 1 cm from the midline on the sublingual edge of the tray on the left
c. Near the lingual frenulum
d. At the distance of 1 cm from the midline on the sublingual edge of the tray on the right
e. From canine to canine on the vestibular side

170. A 45-year-old man was hospitalized with the following diagnosis: a non-displaced closed midline fracture of the mandible in the area of teeth 41 and 31. Objectively, the integrity of the upper and lower dentition is preserved, teeth are intact, bone tissue atrophy in the alveolar process of the mandible reaches 1/3 of the dental root length, teeth mobility of the I-II degree is observed. What type of splint would be optimal in treatment of this fracture?
a. Tigerstedt splint with hooks
b. Vankevich splint
c. Vasiliev splint
d. Weber dentogingival splint
e. Smooth splint-bracket

171. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of the mobility of his lower front teeth. Objectively, his dentition is preserved, the lower front teeth exhibit the II degree mobility. The loose teeth are depulped. What design of a fixed splint is necessary in this case as a part of complex treatment of periodontitis to prevent a secondary deformity?
a. -
b. Van Thiel splint
c. Mamlock splint
d. Elbrecht splint
e. Denture splint with a multilink clasp  (clammer)

172. A 13-year-old child complains of periodical gingival bleeding during teeth brushing, which has been observed for half a year. Objectively the gingival mucosa in the frontal mandibular area presents with congestive hyperemia and edema. Decay-missing-filled (DMF) index equals 4. Oral cavity hygiene is unsatisfactory. In this case it is necessary to recommend the patient the toothpastes with:
a. Zinc citrate
b. Amine fluorides
c. Salt additives
d. Calcium glycerophosphate
e. Herbal extracts

173. A 28-year-old woman came to the dentist for oral cavity sanation. She was diagnosed with acute deep caries of tooth 24. She has a history of seasonal allergic rhinitis and drug allergy that manifests as a skin rash and Quincke edema. She does not remember whether she has been given local anesthesia at the dentist's office previously. What tactics should the dentist choose regarding the anesthesia in this case?
a. Use amide local anesthetic
b. Use ether anesthetic
c. Referral to the allergologist for consultation and anesthetic allergy testing
d. Perform a cutaneous anesthetic allergy test in the dental chair immediately before giving anesthesia
e. Perform an anesthetic scratch test in the dental chair immediately before giving anesthesia

174. A 35-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic with complaints of teeth mobility on his lower jaw. What type of occlusion stabilization is recommended in this case?
a. Frontal
b. Sagittal
c. Parasagittal
d. Frontosagittal
e. Arch

175. A 60-year-old patient came to the maxillofacial inpatient department. He complains of pain, bleeding, and chewing problems. He has a history of mandibular trauma at the level of the central incisors. Objectively the traumatized place is swollen, mouth opening is unrestricted. He was diagnosed with medial mandibular fracture. Both jaws are edentulous. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Port gingival splint
b. Vankevych dentogingival splint
c. Gunning gingival splint
d. Rudko appliance
e. Limberg gingival splint

176. An 18-year-old young man complains of tooth sensitivity in his lower left jaw when eating sweet food. Examination shows enamel defects in the fissures on the masticatory surface of tooth 37. The enamel there is dull white and fragile when (chips off) probed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries of tooth 37
b. Acute initial caries of tooth 37
c. Chronic median caries of tooth 37
d. Acute superficial caries of tooth 37
e. Chronic initial caries of tooth 37

177. A 30-year-old man presents with fresh median mandibular fracture without visible displacement of the fragments. What will be the function of the dental apparatus to be prescribed in this case?
a. Fixation
b. Formation
c. Setting
d. Replacement
e. Directing

178. A 40-year-old woman came to a dentist to have dentures made for her teeth 12 and 13. These teeth are pink and were previously treated. After examination, a porcelain-fused-to-metal design of crowns was selected. No contraindications were found for the use of such dentures by the patient. What material must be used to obtain a working cast?
a. Stomalgin
b. Plaster
c. Speedex
d. Repin
e. Orthocor

179. A 36-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Objectively there is a carious cavity on the mesial masticatory surface of tooth 46, interdental contact is disturbed. Dental inlay is to be made for this patient. According to Black's classification of dental caries this cavity is class:
a. 5
b. 1
c. 4
d. 2
e. 3

180. The parents of a 6-year-old boy complain of an edema on the right side of the child's face, a fever of 39^oC, and a deterioration of his general condition. Objectively, the child's face is asymmetrical because of a soft tissue edema in the buccal and submandibular areas on the right. In the oral cavity, the crown of tooth 84 is destroyed, percussion of teeth 83, 84 and 85 is painful, the teeth have the mbox{I-II degree of mobility, the alveolar mucosa of the right lower jaw is hyperemic and edematous on its lingual and vestibular sides. Vincent's sign is positive. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Phlegmon of the right submandibular  region
b. Acute odontogenic purulent  lymphadenitis
c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis  of tooth 84
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

181. A dentist treats chronic gangrenous pulpitis of tooth 47 in a 28-year-old man. What results of electric pulp testing confirmed the diagnosis of chronic gangrenous pulpitis?
a. Electric pulp testing - 110 microamperes
b. Electric pulp testing - 10-12  microamperes
c. Electric pulp testing - 60 microamperes
d. Electric pulp testing - 2-6 microamperes
e. Electric pulp testing - 20 microamperes

182. A 42-year-old woman came to a dentist. The doctor noted that her respiration became deep and noisy. Objectively, she presents with pallor, dry skin and mucosa, decreased skin turgor, soft eyeballs, weak pupillary response to light, deep and loud breathing, acetone smell from the mouth, weak pulse (70/min.), and blood pressure of 80/40 mm Hg. The patient has a history of diabetes mellitus. What emergency condition did she develop in this case?
a. Bronchial asthma attack
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Epileptic seizure
e. Hyperglycemic coma

183. The parents of a 3-year-old girl complain of the destruction of the child's upper teeth. Objectively, there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the masticatory surfaces of teeth 54 and 55. Enamel and dentin in the affected area are softened and can be easily removed with an excavator. The child refuses to undergo teeth prteparation and is in a psychoemotionallly unstable condition. What method of treatment should be used in this case?
a. Non-invasive sealing
b. Remineralization therapy
c. ICON treatment
d. Invasive sealing
e. Atraumatic restorative treatment

184. A 21-year-old man 3 hours ago received a knife wound to the right cheek; the wound was initially bleeding, but by the time of examination the bleeding has already stopped. Objectively in the area of the right cheek there was a wound 4x1 cm with even margins that does not penetrate into the oral cavity and is filled with clotted blood. What sutures should be applied to the wound in this case?
a. Late secondary suture
b. Primary apposition suture
c. Primary blind suture
d. Primary approximation suture
e. Early secondary suture

185. Decay-missing-filled index of a 6.5-year-old child is DMF+df=7. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.5. Fissures in the permanent molars are intact, deep, and open. What method of caries prevention would be advisable in this case?
a. Invasive fissure sealing
b. Application of remineralization solution
c. Noninvasive fissure sealing
d. Electrophoresis-aided application of remineralization solution
e. Application of fluoride varnish

186. A patient is undergoing treatment for chronic granulating periodontitis of tooth 26. The root canals were irrigated with an antiseptic that can penetrate into the structures of biofilms, destroy them, and dissolve organic tissues. What antiseptic was used by the doctor?
a. Physiological saline
b. Chlorhexidine solution
c. Hypochlorite sodium solution
d. Hydrogen peroxide solution
e. Furacilin (nitrofurazone) solution

187. A 28-year-old woman complains of general weakness and pain during eating and swallowing. The disease onset was acute and manifested as elevated body temperature of 37.9^oC and muscle pain. Objectively, against the background of edematous and hyperemic mucosa of the soft palate, anterior arches, and posterior pharyngeal wall there are single vesicles and their clusters filled with serohemorrhagic content, as well as mildly painful to touch eroded areas of varying size with scalloped edges and fibrine coating. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Foot-and-mouth disease
b. Influenza-associated stomatitis
c. Shingles
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Herpangina

