1. Analysis of an extract by chromatographic method revealed presence of phenyl prapanolamine. It is the metabolite of the following alkaloid:
a. Aconitine
b. Pyrocatechin
*c. Ephedrine
d. Securinin
e. Reserpine

2. During local anaesthetization novocaine solution is usually compounded with solution of adrenaline hydrochloride. What is the purpose of this action?
a. Vasodilatation
b. Decrease in smooth muscle tone
c. Algesthesia reduction
*d. Vasoconstriction
e. Increase in smooth muscle tone

3. A 32-year-old patient takes antituberculous drugs. Some time later he has noticed that his urine turned orange.What preparation is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
*a. Rifampicin
b. Pyrazinamide
c. Streptomycin sulfate
d. Ethambutol
e. Isoniazid

4. months after treatment a patient with coronary heart disease developed tolerance to the nitrates with prolonged action. What drug with nitrate-similar effect should be recommended in this case?
a. Verapamil
b. Metoprolol
c. Nifedipine
d. Prasosine
*e. Molsidomine

5. A 52-year-old patient was diagnosed with systemic amebiasis accompanied by bowels, liver and lungs affection. What preparation should be administered?
a. Chingamin
b. Phthalazol
c. Chiniofon
d. Tetracycline
*e. Metronidazole

6. A 33-year-old woman who has been treated for chronic polyarthritis for a long time complains about arterial pressure rise, change of adipose tissue distribution, menstrual cycle disorder. What preparation has she taken?
a. Butadion
b. Indometacin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Synaflan
e. Diclofenac sodium

7. A pharmaceutist made a tincture of althaea root. What is the proportion of herbal crude drug and extractant?
a. 1:400
*b. 1:20
c. 1:30
d. 1:10
e. 1:100

8. A pharmaceutical enterprise widely applies technical and technological media of information use in order to increase efficiency of managing productive and administrative activity of an organization, to enhance labour productivity, to improve methods of planning and regulating management processes.All this is realized by means of:
a. Automated data retrieval system
*b. Automated management system
c. Automated instruction and control system
d. Automation equipped working place
e. Information-management system

9. Marketing research of certain pharmaceutical groups involves collection and analysis of primary information. This is the following type of marketing research:
a. Research of drug market
b. Armchair research
*c. Field research
d. Research of drug consumers
e. Research of marketing network of pharmaceutical market

10. An analytical laboratory carries out quantitative analysis of sodium citrate by method of ion-exchanging chromatography on a cationite. What titrated solution is to be used for the following titration of generated citric acid?
a. Potassium iodate
b. Iodine
*c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Trilon B

11. A pharmaceutist prepared an oil 2 emulsion containing zinc oxide. Specify the rational method of substance incorporation:
a. Dissolution in the finished emulsion
*b. Suspension-type icorporation into the prepared emulsion
c. Grinding with water for dilution of the primary emulsion
d. Dissolution in oil
e. Dissolution in water for preparation of the primary emulsion

12. A pharmaceutist made a tincture of Adonis herb. A peculiarity of its preparation is that the active substances are derived in:
a. In the acid medium
*b. In the neutral medium
c. In the alkaline medium
d. In the alkalescent medium
e. In the subacid medium

13. Preparations made of ginseng roots have tonic and adaptogenic properties, improve mental and physical performance. If the ginseng tincture cannot be found in a pharmacy, it can be substituted by the analogous preparations made of the following raw material:
a. Radices Inulae
b. Radices Valerianae
*c. Radices Eleutherococci
d. Radices Ononidis
e. Radices Rhei

14. Balance is a part of financial accounting of pharmacies. What index is reflected in the assets of the balance sheet?
*a. Residual value of fixed assets
b. Wholesale turnover
c. Salary costs
d. Proceeds of a pharmacy
e. Retail turnover

15. The market is characterized by the following conditions: a big number of salespersons and customers who don’t make any influence upon the level of current prices; availability of uniform and interchangeable competing products; lack of price restrictions. What type of market is it?
a. Oligopolistic market
b. Market of monopolistic competition
*c. Market of pure competition
d. Market of pure monopoly
e. -

16. If the internal surface of buckthorn rind is moistened with 5% alkaline solution, it becomes cherry-red colouring. This is the evidence of presence of the following substance:
a. Alkaloids
b. Flavonoids
c. Tannins
*d. Anthracene derivatives
e. Saponins

17. A pharmacy technologist received an ointment formulation: Rp.: Unguentum Resorcini 1,5% - 10,0 Da. Signa. To be applied on the affected skin areas. The pharmaceutist incorporated dry medical substance into the ointment by the following way:
a. Adding to the fused vaseline
b. Trituration with a part of vaseline
c. Trituration with a few drops of ethyl alcohol
d. Trituration with a few drops of water
*e. Trituration with a few drops of vaseline oil

18. A pharmacy analyst can verify presence of iron cation (II) in a drug formulation by means of the following solution:
a. Sodium phosphate
*b. Ammonium sulfide
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Potassium bromide

19. An advance holder (accountant) received money from the cash fund of an enterprise for purchase of office accessories. After the cash advance the advance holder must submit the statement of application of funds no later than:
a. In three working days
b. In a week
c. There is no deadline
*d. On the next working day
e. In ten working days

20. Choose an antiseptic from the group of halogen containing drugs that can be included into the first-aid kit for a child going to a summer camp: 3
a. Copper sulfate solution
b. Brilliant green solution
*c. Alcoholic iodine solution
d. Methylene blue solution
e. Formaldehyde solution

21. A pharmacy received a newgeneration nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drug "meloxicam" that mainly blocks cyclooxygenase-2. What advantages does this preparation have in comparison with other nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs?
a. Evident myospasmolytic action
b. Minimal side effect on hematogenesis
c. Significant inhibition of protease activity
*d. Minimal side effect on alimentary tract
e. Interferonogenic properties

22. Leaves of belladonna, henbane and datura containing tropane alkaloids must be stored according to the following list requirements:
a. List of substances equivalent to narcotics
*b. B list (these drug substances require caution in handling, storage or use)
c. General sales list
d. A list (poisonous drug substances)
e. Essential oil materials list

23. A patient suffering from essential hypertension has increased concentration of renin in blood plasma. Which pharmacological group should be preferred for this patient treatment?
a. alpha-adrenoblockers
b. Blockers of calcium channels
c. Sympatholytics
*d. ACE inhibitors
e. Diuretics

24. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed almagel. Which of its pharmacological properties is intended for treatment of this pathology?
a. Local anaesthetization
b. Blocking the muscarinic cholinoreceptors
c. Anti-inflammatory action
*d. HCl neutralization
e. Blocking the H2-histamine receptors

25. One of the ways to derive essential oil is enfleurage, or maceration. Essential oil can be derived by enfleurage from the following herbal raw material:
a. Lemon skin
b. Mint leaves
c. Camomile flowers
*d. Petals of Damascus rose
e. Coriander fruits

26. A pharmaceutist and a pharmacy manager were involved into the labour dispute about carry over of vacation time. The pharmaceutist applied to the council of conciliation. The council should consider his application within the following period:
a. 1 month
*b. 10 days
c. 3 days
d. 5 days
e. 1 week

27. All the medications require special storage conditions according to their physical and physicochemical properties. Ampouled solution of sodium adenosine triphosphate (ATP) should be stored under the following temperature:
a. 12 ? 15°C
*b. 3 ? 5°C
c. 7 ? 10°C
d. 0 ? 2°C
e. 10°C

28. Quality control of tablets produced at a pharmaceutical enterprise involves quantitative determination of such subsidiary substances as talc and aerosil. What method is applied for such determination?
a. Chromatographic
*b. Gravimetric
c. Photocolorimetric
d. Titrimetric
e. Spectrophotometric

29. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
a. 200 mg
b. 50 mg
c. 500 mg
d. 1000 mg
*e. 100 mg

30. An analyst of a pharmaceutical storehouse received the substance of hydrogen peroxide for analysis. Quantitative determination of this drug should be performed by permanganatometric 4 method. According to the analytical normative document, titration should be carried out till the solution turns:
a. Yellow
b. Green
*c. Pink
d. Dark blue
e. Colourless

31. A patient suffering from ulcer disease was prescribed famotidine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Inhibition of adenosine triphosphatase activity
b. Block of cholinoreceptors of sympathetic ganglions
c. Block of 1-histamine receptors
d. Block of muscarinic cholinoreceptors
*e. Block of 2-histamine receptors

32. Ophthalmic drops are produced on the base of concentrated riboflavin solution (1:5000). How much solution should be taken if the formulation says "0,001 of riboflavin" ?
a. 4 ml
b. 1 ml
c. 2 ml
d. 3 ml
*e. 5 ml

33. While producing phytopreparations and organotherapeutic preparations different kinds of dryers are used. What dryer would be the most effective for drying thermolabile compounds?
a. Roller dryer
b. Drying oven
c. Drum dryer
*d. Freeze-dryer
e. Band dryer

34. Choose an optimal antibacterial drug for the mycoplasmal pneumonia treatment:
a. Amoxyclav
*b. Rovamycin
c. Penicillin
d. Gentamycin
e. Ampicillin

35. An analytical laboratory received substance of citric acid for the analysis. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, citric acid can be determined by method of:
a. Acidimetry
b. Iodometry
*c. Alkalimetry
d. Bromatometry
e. Iodochlorometry

36. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, the amount of calcium gluconate can be determined by the chelatometric method. What solution should be used as a titrant?
a. Potassium permanganate
b. Argentum nitrate
c. Hydrochloric acid
*d. Sodium edetate
e. Iodine monochloride

37. Tannins have astringent effect and are used for treatment of colitis, enterocolitis, diarrhea. What herbal raw material contains a lot of tannins?
a. Fructus Sambucci nigri
b. Fructus Rhamni catharticae
c. Fructus Frangulae
*d. Fructus Myrtilli
e. Fructus Ribes nigri

38. Anthracene derivatives of emodine group exhibit purgative effect. What herbal raw material contains large quantity of anthracene derivatives of emodine group?
a. Bilberry fruits
b. Alder buckthorn fruits
c. Elder fruits
d. Currants fruits
*e. Buckthorn fruits

39. Codeine can be derived for medical purposes out of a plant alkaloid by means of semisynthetic method. Name this alkaloid:
a. Berberine
b. Papaverine
*c. Morphine
d. Protopine
e. Chelidonine

40. Theory of management currently marks out four the most important approaches to the management. Choose the approach that is NOT USED in the theory of management: 5
a. Situational
b. Approach from the position of different schools identification
c. Process
d. Systemic
*e. Structural

41. Therapeutic department of a municipal hospital purchases medical products in a pharmacy. The wares will be dispensed from the stores department on presentation of the following document:
a. Register of laboratory packing works
*b. Delivery order
c. Prescription register
d. Cash book
e. Inventory report

42. In order to determine the purity a drop of lavender essential oil was applied on a strip of filter paper and warmed up in the stream of warm air. Some time later the stain increased in diameter. What impurity substance was found in the lavender oil?
a. Ethanol
b. Phenol
*c. Fatty or mineral oil
d. Acetone
e. Diethyl ether

43. A doctor prescribed a patient 100 ml of tincture made out of 0,25 of Herba Thermopsidis. How much dried concentrated extract of Herba Thermopsidis should be weighed by a pharmaceutist?
*a. 0,25 g
b. 0,3 g
c. 0,1 g
d. 0,2 g
e. 0,5 g

44. A patient has ordered 50 g of zinc ointment. How much zinc and Vaseline should be weighed by a pharmaceutist?
*a. 5,0 g and 45,0 g
b. 2,5 g and 47,5 g
c. 0,5 g and 49,5 g
d. 1,0 g and 49,0 g
e. 10,0 g and 40,0 g

45. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Local irritation
b. Delayed allergy
*c. Immediate allergy
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Abstinence syndrome

46. In Ukraine the out-patients are supplied with narcotic and psychotropic drugs only by prescription. Medicoprophylactic institutions receive prescription blanks (Form 3) from the following source:
a. Pharmaceutical corporation
*b. Pharmacy storehouse
c. Wholesale companies
d. City’s health department
e. Typography

47. Injection solutions of salts derived from weak acids and strong bases require stabilization.What stabilizers are used for these solutions?
a. Trilon B
b. 0,1 М solution of perchloric acid
*c. 0,1 М solution of sodium hydroxide
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Buthylhydroxytoluene

48. ml of 0,9% sodium chloride solution were prepared according to the doctor’s prescription. What sterilization schedule is required for this solution?
a. 120°C - 15 minutes
b. 120°C - 12 minutes
*c. 120°C - 8 minutes
d. 180°C - 30 minutes
e. 100°C - 15 minutes

49. During digitoxin therapy for chronic cardiac insufficiency, a patient developed signs of intoxication with this preparation. The patient was prescribed unithiol. What is the mechanism of unithiol action in case of intoxication with cardiac glycosides?
a. Increase of sodium concentration in the cardiomyocytes
b. Binding of calcium ions
*c. Reduction of K+-Na+-adenosine triphosphatase
d. Increased potassium permeability in the cardiomyocytes
e. Binding of glycoside into the complex compound

50. A pharmacy got a formulation of a mixture containing manzanita decoction and belladonna extract. What is the reason for incompatibility between these components?
*a. Precipitation
b. Oxidation-reduction processes
c. Coagulation of colloid systems
d. Emission of gaseous substances
e. Hydrolysis

51. The central district pharmacy functions in a district centre and supplies local population with drugs and medical products. What pharmaceutical institutions are allowed to settle accounts with the customers without a cash register by way of check issuing?
*a. Pharmacies, pharmaceutical outlets and kiosks
b. Pharmaceutical outlet at a hospital
c. Pharmaceutical kiosk at a railway station
d. Pharmaceutical kiosk at a market
e. Central district pharmacy

52. Method of gas-liquid chromatography is often applied for identification and quantitative determination of toxicologically meaningful substances. Substances can be placed into the chromatograph dispenser in the following aggregate states:
a. Liquid and solid
b. Liquid
c. Gaseous
*d. Liquid and gaseous
e. Gaseous and solid

53. Examination of a patient who has been treated for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time revealed hyperglycemia. It might have been caused by the following drug:
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Delagil
c. Levamisole
*d. Dexamethasone
e. Ibuprofen

54. A pharmaceutist was preparing an ointment with ricin oil and Vaseline but failed to get homogenous system. What is the most likely cause of incompatibility between these components?
a. Release of water of crystallization
b. Restricted solubility
*c. Component immiscibility
d. Coagulation
e. Adsorption

55. A large and well-known company has granted a small independent firm the right to use its trademark and technology so that it could take advantage of authority and customer trust to the well-known brand. Such concept is called:
a. Use of trademark
b. Use of manufacturer’s brand
c. Merchandising
d. Use of dealer’s brand
*e. Franchising

56. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of such side effect?
a. Isoniazid
b. Rifampicin
c. Ethionamide
*d. Streptomycin
e. Ethambutol

57. A pharmaceutist revealed physical incompatibility caused by coagulation. This process takes place in a solution if the combination of the following substances is present:
a. Dimedrol and sodium chloride
b. Dimedrol and novocaine
*c. Dimedrol and collargol
d. Dimedrol and diazoline
e. Dimedrol and glucose

58. A pharmaceutist made a medicinal preparation according to the following formulation: Rp.: Chloroformii Olei Helianthi Methylii salicylatis ana 10,0 M.D.S. For infriction. Specify the kind of disperse system:
a. Liniment - combined
b. Liniment suspension
c. Liniment - extractional
*d. Liniment - solution
e. Liniment - emulsion

59. Aerosol composition includes active substances, solvents and propellents.Which of the following substances is used as propellent?
a. Propylen glycol monostearate, argon, helium
b. Isopropyl myristate, neon, sulfur oxide
*c. Freon-11,carbon oxide, propanebutane
d. Linethol, myristic acid, benzocaine
e. Hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen, triethanolamine

60. A department producing sterile 7 pharmaceutical forms needs a method of eye drops sterilization applicable for drugs derived from thermolabile substances. What is the optimal method of sterilization?
a. Use of polymeric packings
*b. Sterile filtration
c. Addition of ascorbic acid
d. Thermal sterilization
e. Filling in the inert gas medium

61. Accounting of pharmaceutical institutions includes control accounts of nine classes. What accounting units are represented in the accounts of the 4-6 classes?
a. Pharmacy assets
b. Material costs
c. Incomings and business results
*d. Liability
e. Element costs

62. A pharmaceutist revealed physical incompatibility in a recipe. Specify the combination of drug substances demonstrating eutectic when blended:
a. Ascorbic acid and hydrocarbonate sodium
b. Basic bismuth nitrate and magnesium oxide
c. Glucose and phenyl salicylate
d. Streptocid and antipyrine
*e. Camphor and menthol

63. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
a. Panangin
b. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages
c. Furosemide
d. Trimetazidine
*e. Verapamil

64. Management of a pharmaceutical company involvesAmerican and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
a. Slow career development
b. Heightened attention to the human factor
c. Group forms of control
d. Corporate liability
*e. Quick evaluation and career development

65. Quantitative analysis of drugs containing primary aromatic amine can be performed by means of nitritometric method.Which of the following preparations can be determined by the nitritometric method without preliminary acid hydrolysis?
a. Phthazin
b. Phthalazol
*c. Sulfadimine
d. Paracetamol
e. Soluble streptocid

66. When filling the "Inventory report" , a pharmacy manager represented a number of business transactions in the receipts section of report. Such transactions include:
a. Markdown on account of laboratory packing works
*b. Purchase of drugs and pharmaceutical merchandise
c. Products consumption for business needs
d. Total of realized trade mark-up
e. Total of sale

67. A patient suffering from neurosis accompanied by anxiety and fear development was prescribed diazepam. What pharmacological effect makes it possible to apply the drug for this disease treatment?
a. Anti-inflammatory
b. Antiarrhythmic
*c. Anxiolytic
d. Hypotensive
e. Antianginal

68. A hospital admitted a child with signs of poisoning with belladonna alkaloids. What drug should be applied as an antidote?
a. Sodium caffeine benzoate
b. Magnesium sulfate
*c. Proserin
d. Paracetamol
e. Sodium valproate

69. You are employed in a pharmaceutical storehouse. When adding newly received preparations to the computerized database, specify the pharmacological group of paracetamol:
a. Hypnotic
b. Hypotensive drug
c. Antianginal drug
*d. Nonnarcotic analgetic
e. Diuretic

70. A 34-year-old patient suffering from 8 bronchitis was prescribed an antitussive drug of central action. What drug is it?
a. Corglycon
b. Furosemide
c. Fercoven
*d. Glaucine
e. Enalapril

71. Continuous taking of a drug results in reduction of its efficiency. This phenomenon is called:
a. Tachyphylaxis
*b. Habituation
c. Cumulation
d. Sensibilization
e. Dependence

72. A patient was warned that taking the prescribed preparation might cause cough. What drug is it?
a. Dichlothiazide
b. Metoprolol
c. Clonidine
d. Phenihidine
*e. Lisinopril

73. A pharmaceutist with over 8 years of service got a medical certificate in accordance with the established procedure. What is the size of temporary disability allowance the pharmaceutist is entitled to?
a. 80% of average salary
b. 90% of average salary
*c. 100% of average salary
d. 60% of average salary
e. 50% of average salary

74. A pharmacy functions on the base of collective financial liability. The financial liability agreement may be re-executed in the following case:
*a. Dismissal of over 50% of staff
b. Dismissal of 5% of staff
c. Employment of new employees
d. Dismissal of 10% of staff
e. Dismissal of one staff member

75. A pharmacy sells drugs by retail. Omnopon relates to the following group of controlled drugs:
*a. Narcotic
b. Toxic
c. General sale list
d. Potent
e. Psychtropic

76. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own marketing departments, affiliated marketing companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Three-level
b. Four-level
c. One-level
d. Two-level
*e. Zero level

77. A patient with acute cardiac insufficiency and cardiac glycoside intolerance got an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Stimulation of ?1-adrenoreceptors
b. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase activity
c. Stimulation of muscarinic cholinoreceptors
*d. Stimulation of ?1-adrenoreceptors
e. Block of K+-, Na+-adenosine triphosphatase

78. A patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency was prescribed a cardiac glycoside from the foxglove (Digitalis) group. What drug is it?
a. Corglycon
b. Cordiamin
c. Strophanthine
d. Corvalol
*e. Digoxin

79. One of the methods of quantitative analysis of active substances in the raw material is the biological standardization. It can be applied with the following group of biologically active substances:
a. Mucilages
*b. Cardiac gliycosides
c. Fatty oils
d. Alkaloids
e. Tannins

80. Lipophilic bases for suppositories include:
a. Gelatin-glycerol base
b. Polyethylene oxide base
*c. Mixtures of hydrogenatedd fats
d. Collagen base
e. Glycerol soap base

81. An expert of an analytical laboratory is determining Nitrofural. What quantitative titrimetric method can be applied?
*a. Iodometry
b. Alkalimetry
c. Nitritometry
d. Argentometry
e. Permanganatometry

82. A 52-year-old patient complains of having increased arterial pressure for a month. She has a 5-year history of bronchial asthma. What group of hypotensive drugs should NOT be recommended this patient?
a. Calcium channel blockers
b. Angiotensin receptor blockers
c. Diuretics
*d. β-adrenoreceptor blockers
e. Tranquilizers

83. A pharmacy analyst is determining one of the following drugs by the nintritometric method. What drug is it?
a. Ammonium chloride
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Ftivazide
d. Analgin
*e. Norsulfazole

84. A chemotoxicological laboratory received a biological material. A toxicologist carries out uncontrollable analysis aimed at detection of the following group of toxic substances:
a. Pesticides
b. Mineral acids, alkali, inorganic salts
c. Medical use toxins
d. Metal toxins
*e. Volatile toxins

85. Quality of injection solutions supplied in ampoules can be assessed according to different indices. How many ampoules should be checked while determining quality of sealing (leaktightness of an ampoule)?
a. 97%
b. 75%
c. 50%
*d. 100%
e. 80%

86. A chemical department produces alcohol solution of boric acid.What filters are used for filtration of this solution?
*a. Pressure filters
b. Nutsch filter
c. Membrane filter
d. Bag filter
e. Paper filter

87. An 18-year-old patient was diagnosed with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug will provide etiotropic pharmacotherapy?
a. Trimethoprim
b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
*c. Isoniazid
d. Lincomycin
e. Metronidazole

88. At the end of each month accountant of a pharmacy calculates amount of realized price markup. Which index IS NOT USED for such calculation?
*a. Total of cash in vault
b. In-stock balance at the beginning of month in retail prices
c. Total sales proceeds
d. In-stock balance at the beginning of month in wholesale prices
e. Total value of received goods in retail and wholesale prices

89. Suspensions as heterogenous systems can be characterized by kinetic and sedimentary instability. What substance is used for increasing suspension stability with hydrophobic substances?
a. Sodium sulfate
b. Glucose
c. Sodium chloride
d. Boric acid
*e. Gelatose

90. A pharmacy analyst is determining adrenaline tartrate by method of acidbase titration in the anhydrous solvents. What indicator is to be used according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia?
a. Thymolphthalein
b. Eriochrome black
c. Methyl orange
d. Phenolphthalein
*e. Crystal violet

91. A patient has accidentally taken a barium-containing salt. All of the following salts have toxic effect upon the human organism EXCEPT for:
a. Barium nitrate
b. Barium carbonate
*c. Barium sulfate
d. Barium acetate
e. Barium chloride

92. A mineralizate under examination contains precipitates of barium sulfate and plumbum sulfate. These salts can be separated by means of:
a. Solution of ammonium nitrate
*b. Solution of ammonium acetate
c. Acetic acid
d. Sulfuric acid
e. Solution of sodium acetate

93. A pharmaceutical company "Adonis" promotes its new products by means of advertisement that informs the customers about the product, highlights its advantages, typical features and properties. What kind of advertisement is it?
a. Direct
*b. Informational
c. Sustaining
d. Aggressive
e. Indirect

94. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
a. Free
b. Normative
*c. Licence-based
d. Limited
e. Without preliminary licencing or registration

95. While preparing decoctions in volume from 1000 to 3000 ml time of processing in boiling water bath should be:
a. 25 minutes
b. 45 minutes
c. 15 minutes
*d. 40 minutes
e. 30 minutes

96. A pharmacy analyst is measuring a drug by method of indirect bromatometry. Which of the following titrated solutions is to be used?
a. Argentum nitrate
*b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Sodium edetate
d. Potassium bromate
e. Sodium nitrite

97. An expert of an analytical laboratory is determining Ca2+ in the substance of calcium pantothenate. Specify the method of analysis:
a. Permanganatometry
b. Iodometry
c. Nitritometry
d. Argentometry
*e. Chelatometry

98. Styles of maize with stigmata containing fatty acids, vitamins, essential oils, saponins and other substances are used as:
a. Bactericidal and astringent drug
b. Expectorant and antitussive drug
*c. Diuretic and choleretic drug
d. Sedative and anticonvulsive drug
e. Cardiotonic and antiarrhythmic drug

99. Toxic substances can be isolated from the objects of biological origin by different methods. In case of poisoning with pesticides - derivatives of phosphoric acids the following method is applied:
*a. Infusion with organic solvents
b. Infusion with alkalized water
c. Dialysis aout of alkalized solutions
d. Infusion with water acidified with chloric acid
e. Distillation with water steam from the alkaline medium

100. Dispersion degree of drug substances is of great importance for the preparation of ophtalmic ointments. What drug substance should be thoroughly triturated with sterile vaseline oil before incorporating it into the pharmacopoeiarecommended ointment base?
*a. Mercuric oxide yellow
b. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
c. Ethyl morphine hydrochloride
d. Zinc sulfate
e. Resorcin

101. Financial accountability of pharmacies consists of separate account forms. Which form presents accounts payable for the goods purchased?
*a. Balance sheet, form 1
b. Financial performance report, form 2m
c. Balance assets, form 1
d. Net worth statement, form 3
e. Financial performance report, form 2

102. In Ukraine natural persons and small business entities are allowed to use the simplified tax system. What limit on the number of employees is established for 11 such enterprises?
a. No more than 20 persons
b. No more than 40 persons
c. No more than 50 persons
*d. No more than 10 persons
e. No more than 30 persons

103. Fatty oil containing saturated fatty acids is used for atherosclerosis prevention. Specify the medicinal plant that is used for oil production:
a. Black chokeberry fruits
b. Hawthorn fruits
c. Fennelflower seeds
d. Dill seeds
*e. Flax seeds

104. A department of a pharmaceutical plant produces injection solutions. Ascorbic acid solution for injections relates to the following group of solutions:
a. Solutions of substances requiring special rectification
*b. Easily oxidized solutions
c. Solutions of salts derived from weak bases and strong acids
d. Solutions of substances that should be subjected to thermal sterilization
e. Solutions of salts derived from strong bases and weak acids

105. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the plant-derived biogenic stimulators:
a. Liquid extract of aloe, peloidinum, biosedum juice
b. Vitreous body, Suspesio Рlacetae prо injectionibus, aloe juice, biosedum
c. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmol, solcoseryl
*d. Liquid extract of aloe, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biosedum
e. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus

106. A pharmaceutist has prepared an ointment intended for application on the open wound surface. Such kind of ointment should meet the following additional requirement:
a. Isoionicity
b. Prolonged action
c. Isotonicity
d. Isoviscosity
*e. Sterility

107. Powders represent an important group among the extemporal medicinal preparations. Which of the following components can be incorporated into a powder without preliminary grinding?
*a. Basic bismuth nitrate
b. Camphor
c. Calcium gluconate
d. Xeroform
e. Ascorbic acid

108. Medications in the storing rooms of a medicoprophylactic institution should be placed on the shelves, in the cases, refrigerators or on the pallets or rickers. Toxic medications should be kept in:
a. In the internal safe partition
*b. In a locked metal case
c. In a wooden case
d. In a safe
e. In a refrigerator

109. A storehouse received a batch of althaea roots. For its verification a drop of ammonia solution was applied upon the root section; the spot of section turned yellow. This is the evidence of presence of the following substance:
a. Gum
b. Tannins
*c. Mucilages
d. Pectins
e. Vitamin C

110. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a pharmacy analyst is determining procaine hydrochloride by nitritometric method. What indicator should be used for this purpose?
a. Crystal violet
b. Methyl red
*c. Neutral red
d. Xylenol orange
e. Acid chrome blue

111. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a pharmacy analyst is determining fluorouracil by method of nonaqueous titration. What titrated solution is to be used?
a. Sodium nitrite
b. Ammonium thiocyanate
c. Sodium edetate 12
*d. Tetrabutyl ammonium hydroxide
e. Potassium bromate

112. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a pharmacy analyst is determining calcium gluconate by method of complexometric titration. What indicator is to be used?
a. Methyl red
b. Thymolphthalein
c. Tropeolin 00
*d. Calconcarbon acid
e. Crystal violet

113. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a certain drug is being measured by method of chelatometric titration.What drug is it?
a. Potassium chloride
b. Potassium citrate
*c. Calcium chloride
d. Sodium benzoate
e. Sodium thiosulfate

114. An analytical laboratory carries out an analysis of ferrum sulphate heptohydrate according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia. The test portion of the substance should be titrated with the following solution:
a. Potassium bromate
*b. Ammonium cerium sulfate
c. Ammonium thiocyanate
d. Argentum nitrate
e. Sodium edetate

115. A patient suffering from arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Body temperature remained unchanged. It is known that the patient takes captopril. These symptoms can be explained by increased generation of:
a. Renin
b. Angiotensin-1
*c. Bradyquinine
d. Aldosterone
e. Natriuretic peptide

116. Aman came to a pharmacy and asked to recommend him a drug for treatment of allergic rhinitis that occurs in the period of linden flowering.What drug may be applied?
a. Adrenaline
b. Ambroxol
c. Losartan
*d. Loratadine
e. Anapriline

117. During the sensitifity test for benzylpenicillin a patient developed anaphylactic shock. The following preparation must be injected around the spot of antibiotic injection:
a. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
b. Propranolol
c. Ceftriaxon
*d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
e. Atropine sulfate

118. A pharmaceutist is preparing powders by the way of triturating one of the components with ethyl alcohol. Such technology of preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Bolus alba
*b. Streptocid
c. Talc
d. Starch
e. Zinc oxide

119. An accountant is calculating financial performance of a pharmacy. What item will be represented in the liabilities of the accounting report 791 called "Operational result" ?
a. Profits tax
*b. Net profit (sales proceeds)
c. Administration expenses
d. Cost of goods sold
e. Sales expenses

120. The equity capital of a pharmacy is 7500 UAH, the liabilities make 2500 UAH. According to the formula of balance calculation given in the Statement of Standard Accounting Practice 2 the amount of pharmacy assets will be as follows:
a. 7 500UAH
b. 4 000 UAH
*c. 10 000 UAH
d. 2 500UAH
e. 12 000 UAH

121. Novocaine metabolism in the organism results in generation of p-aminobenzoic acid. What metabolic process underlies this conversion?
a. Reduction
b. Conjugation
c. Dealkylation
d. Oxidation
*e. Hydrolysis

122. A patient got poisoned with nitrites. Nitrite detection by means of azo dye 13 reaction involves using such acid:
a. Salicylic
*b. Sulfanilic
c. Phosphoric
d. Sulfuric
e. Hydrochloric

123. Fruits of holy thistle (Silybum) are used for production of a number of domestic and foreign hepatoprotective drugs. Factor of merit of this raw material is content of:
*a. Flavolignans
b. Alkaloids
c. Terpenoids
d. Vitamins
e. Cumarins

124. According to the pharmacopoeia requirements of liquid extract production, the extractant and the raw material should be taken in the following proportion:
a. 1:3
b. 1:10
c. 1:4
*d. 1:1
e. 1:5

125. Apharmacy got an order for powders containing ascorbic acid and sodium hydrocarbonate.What process takes place between the ingredients?
a. Stratification
*b. Dampening
c. Adsorption
d. Oxidation
e. Precipitation

126. An analyst is measuring sodium benzoate in the anhydrous medium by the acidimetric method according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia. What reagent had to be used as a solvent?
a. Water
b. Pyridine
*c. Anhydrous acetic acid
d. Dimethyl formamide
e. Methanol

127. A pharmacy analyst is measuring mercury dichloride by method of indirect chelatometry. Excess of titrated solution of sodium edetate can be titrated by means of the following titrated solution:
a. Potassium bromate
b. Sodium methylate
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Sodium thiosulfate
*e. Zinc sulfate

128. Calcium lactate can be quantitatively determined by chelatometric method. According to the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, the following substance should be used as indicator:
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Tropeolin 00
c. Diphenylcarbazone
d. Naphthol benzein
*e. Calconcarbon acid

129. A pharmacy analyst of an analytical laboratory is studying procaine hydrochloride according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia. What method is recommended by the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia for the quantitative analysis of this preparation?
*a. Nitritometry
b. Acidimetry
c. Chelatometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Bromatometry

130. A pharmacy got the following recipe: Rp.: Mucilaginis Amyli 50,0 Da. Signa. For the enema purposes. How much starch and distilled water did the pharmaceutist use in order to make this preparation?
a. 10,0 g of starch; 40 ml of distilled water
*b. 1,0 g of starch; 49 ml of distilled water
c. 2,0 g of starch; 48 ml of distilled water
d. 1,0 g of starch; 50 ml of distilled water
e. 5,0 g of starch; 45 ml of distilled water

131. Aerosol production involves usage of propellents relating to different groups. Choose the propellants that relate to the group of volatile organic solvents:
a. Freons
b. Vinyl chloride and methyl chloride
c. Carbon dioxide
*d. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride
e. Propane, butane, isobutane

132. Which preparation from the group of laxative agents IS NOT to be administered in case of intoxication with CNSinhibiting substances? 14
a. Bisacodyl
b. Guttalax
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Vaseline oil
*e. Magnesium sulfate

133. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed salbutamol that has led to relief of bronchospasm symptoms. This is associated with stimulation of:
*a. beta2-adrenoreceptors
b. Muscarinic cholinoreceptors
c. alpha1-adrenoreceptors
d. Acetylcholine synthesis
e. beta1-adrenoreceptors

134. A pharmacy analyst is going to take a part of his holiday in spring and a part in summer. Holiday dividing is allowed provided that its main part will be no less than:
a. 18 days
*b. 14 days
c. 12 days
d. 10 days
e. 16 days

135. TV periodically conducts campaigns for young people aimed at popularization of mechanical contraceptives (not indicating concrete trademarks). Such actions are a kind of the following marketing communication:
a. Advertising
b. Sale promotion
c. Sponsorship
*d. Publicity
e. Personal sale

136. A biennial or perennial plant from the Apiaceae family has a blue-grey stem branching in its lower part. Its leaves are also blue-grey, finely dissected, with the ultimate filiform segments. The flowers are yellow, in compound umbels. Its fruit is used for production of "dill water" . What plant is it?
a. Conium maculatum
*b. Foeniculum vulgare
c. Petroselium crispum
d. Carum carvi
e. Coriandrum sativum

137. Water for injections is derived from the drinking or distilled water. It can be either used freshlymade or stored under the required temperature conditions. Water for injections is produced in the following premises:
a. In the prescription department
b. In the sales area
c. In the assistant room
d. In the washing room
*e. In a separate room of aseptic department

138. Department of finished drug products of the pharmacy №1 got a prescription for nasal drops "Farmazolin" intended for a 2,8-year-old child. This drug will be dispensed at the following price:
*a. At no cost
b. Full price
c. 70% of price
d. 30%of price
e. 50%of price

139. On the base of licorice root different drug dosage forms are produced, notably tablets, powders, syrups, teas. The only unused form is injection solution. Licorice roots exhibit haemolytic properties since they contain the following active substances:
a. Essential oils
b. Alkaloids
*c. Saponins
d. Iridoids
e. Polysaccharides

140. A pharmaceutical factory produces camphor oil for topical application. What oil is to be used as a solvent?
a. Olive
b. Plum
c. Peach
d. Vaseline
*e. Sunflower seed

141. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces ointments. What base is applied for production of sulfur ointment simple?
*a. Emulsion
b. Base "For ophthalmic ointments"
c. Polyethylene glycol
d. Lanolin
e. Vaseline

142. One of the accounting documents of a pharmacy is the balance sheet (Form 1) consisting of assets and liabilities. Name the elements of the asset of a pharmacy: 15
a. Owned and borrowed assets
b. Non-current and borrowed assets
c. Circulating and borrowed assets
*d. Circulating assets and non-current assets
e. Circulating assets and owned capital

143. A 46-year-old patient suffering from chronic bronchitis came to a pharmacy. What expectorative drug may be recommended?
a. Glauvent
b. Salbutamol
c. Falimint
d. Libexin
*e. Ambroxol

144. A 26-year-old pregnant woman (III trimester of pregnancy) complains about body temperature rise up to 39°C. What febrifuge may be recommended in this case?
a. Analgin
b. Indometacin
c. Aspirin
d. Diclofenac
*e. Paracetamol

145. Forensic toxicological analysis is often done for the metabolism products of toxic substances. Amino benzophenones are generated during biotrasformation of:
a. Butyrophenones
b. Opiates
c. Phenothiazines
d. Barbiturates
*e. 1,4-benzodiazepines

146. A 48-year-old patient was given an intravenous injection of prednisolone in order to arrest a severe attack of bronchial asthma. Prednisolone relates to the following group of hormonal drugs:
a. Estrogens
b. Gestagenic drugs
*c. Glucocorticoids
d. Mineral corticoids
e. Anabolic steroids

147. A patient who has been taking phenazepam for a month came to a pharmacy. He insisted on buying another two packs of this drug. According to the patient, he feels unwell without phenazepam. What is the mechanism of the developed side effect?
*a. Drug dependence
b. Aftereffect syndrome
c. Addiction
d. Cumulation
e. Idiosyncrasy

148. A patient suffering from allergic rhinitis was prescribed ephedrine in form of nasal drops. The patient has significantly benefited from nasal instillation, and this stimulated him to use the drug every 2 hours. But under these conditions the drug appeared to be ineffective. What is themost likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Drug dependence
*c. Tachyphylaxis
d. Allergy
e. Cumulation

149. Adjuvant substances in the production of tablets give the tableted mass all necessary technological properties, ensure dosage precision, mechanical strength and stability of tablets during their storage. What adjuvant substances facilitate disintegration or solution of the tablets in the organism?
a. Lubricants
b. Antifriction agents
*c. Disintegrants
d. Filling agents
e. Flavors

150. In case of loss of license a pharmaceutist should address an application for a duplicate to a licensing authority. The licensing authority is obliged to issue the duplicate to the applicant no later than in:
*a. Three working days after application receipt
b. Two months after application receipt
c. The duplicate is not to be issued
d. Three months after application receipt
e. One month after application receipt

151. Determination of pH of a biological material by means of indicator paper is applied for the preliminary conclusion about substances that might have caused intoxication. The indicator paper moistened with plumbumacetate solution was exposed to the evaporations of thematerial under examination and turned black. This indicates that the material under examination contains: 16
a. Ammonia
b. Carbon monoxide
c. Carbonic gas
*d. Hydrogen sulfide
e. Methane

152. Lapkina-Lazarenko method of ethylene glycol separation enables to isolate it effectively from the objects of chemotoxicological analysis. What is the selective transporter of ethylene glycol from the objects to the distillate?
a. Ethyl alcohol
b. Water
*c. Benzol
d. Chloroform
e. Acetone

153. Tincture of what medicinal plant can be applied as a tonic?
a. Orthosiphon stamineus
b. Achillea millefolium
*c. Rhodiola rosea
d. Digitalis purpurea
e. Robinia pseudacacia

154. Theobromine and theophylline can be determined by alkalimetric method according to the substituent. What acid is to be titrated with sodium hydroxide?
a. Phosphoric
*b. Nitric
c. Sulfuric
d. Chydrochloric
e. Acetic

155. Calculate the quantity of dried belladonna extract (1:2) required for preparing the following drug formulation: Extraсti Belladоnnae 0,015 Magnesii oxydi 0,5 Natrii hydrocarbonatis 0,2 Misce ut fiat pulvis Da tales doses №10 Signa. 1 powder thrice a day.
a. 0,15
b. 0,6
c. 0,015
*d. 0,3
e. 0,4

156. A25-year-old patient has been taking antibiotics for 7 days. Antibiotic therapy has caused a complication in form of bowel dysbacteriosis. This complication should be treated with drugs of the following pharmacological group:
a. Adaptogens
*b. Probiotics
c. Cholagogic
d. Spasmolytics
e. Antacids

157. A 57-year-old female patient was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis; she has also a history of stomach ulcer. What drug from the group of nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugsmay be recommended this patient?
a. Diclofenac
b. Indometacin
c. Mefenamic acid
*d. Celecoxib
e. Aspirin

158. Aerosol department of a pharmaceutical factory uses condensed gases in the capacity of propellants. Which of the following substances relates to the group of condensed gases?
a. Nitrous oxide
b. Nitrogen
*c. Freon
d. Methylene chloride
e. Ethylene chloride

159. An internship doctor prescribed his patient nifuroxazid from the group of nitrofurans for treatment of urinary tracts infection. The doctor made a mistake because:
a. It has bacteriostatic effect
b. It is excreted from the orghanism very slowly
c. It is excreted with urine in the inactive state
d. It has nephrotoxic effect
*e. It cannot be absorbed from the digestive tract

160. A pharmaceutist is preparing an ointment under aseptic conditions on the sterile ointment base - composition of vaseline and lanoline with the ratio 6:4. The drug substance is incorporated by suspension type. Such technology of ointment preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Sodium chloride
b. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
c. Sodium sulfate
*d. Benzylpenicillin sodium
e. Thiamine chloride

161. A business entity carrying on the wholesale trade of drugs must be keeping documents concerning purchase and sale for a certain period. Specify this period:
a. No less than ten years
*b. No less than three years
c. No less than two years
d. No less than one year
e. No less than five years

162. This substance is of blue colour but unlike the colouring substances it doesn’t leave any stain. The powders prepared out of it are made according to the general rules.What substance is it?
*a. Copper sulfate
b. Riboflavin
c. Furacilin
d. Acrichine
e. Ethacridine lactate

163. A pharmaceutist brews an aqueous extract out of medicinal raw material in the tightly closed infusion vessel for 15 minutes and stirs it without opening the lid. Such technology of infusion preparation is typical for the following medicinal raw material:
a. Bilberry leaves
b. Manzanita leaves
c. Cowberry leaves
*d. Mint leaves
e. Senna leaves

164. A pharmaceutist made 10 powders containing atropine sulfate at a rate of 0,00005 pro dose. What trituration did he use?
a. 1:10
b. 1:50
c. 1:20
*d. 1:100
e. 1:1000

165. Public health services attach great importance to the drug quality, that’s why a pharmaceutic enterprise has concentrated its efforts upon the improvement of qualitative characteristics of its products. What concept of marketing management is applied in this company?
a. All the answers are correct
b. All the answers are false
c. Production enhancement
d. Modern marketing
*e. Product enhancement

166. When a graduate becomes employed on a certain position he should be first familiarized with his rights and duties. What document regulates rights and duties of pharmacy employees?
a. All the answers are correct
b. All the answers are false
c. Internal employment policies and procedures
d. Labour code
*e. Job description

167. In order to verify identity of tropan derivatives, Vitali’s reaction is applied. For that purpose the medications should be first decomposed with nitric acid and then treated with alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide and acetone. What effect will be observed?
a. Setting of black precipitate
b. Setting of white precipitate
c. The solution will turn green
d. Emission of gas bubbles
*e. The solution will turn purple

168. A patient suffering from epilepsy has taken Phenobarbital for a long time and developed drug tolerance. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon development?
*a. Acceleration of biotransformation
b. Increase of receptor sensibility
c. Accumulation of the drug in the organism
d. Inhibition of biotransformation
e. Weakening of absorption

169. According to the applicable legislation of Ukraine, prices for some drugs and medical products are subject to governmental regulation. What is the maximal trade markup established for the drugs that are purchased by public and municipal institutions using budgetary funds?
a. 15%of manufacturer’s wholesale price
b. 35% of manufacturer’s wholesale price
c. 25% of manufacturer’s wholesale price
*d. 10% of manufacturer’s wholesale price
e. 30% of manufacturer’s wholesale price

170. A pharmacy sells drugs. What is the rate of value-added tax for drugs sold by a pharmacy?
a. 25% 18
*b. 0%
c. 20%
d. 10%
e. 30%

171. A pharmaceutical factory produces herbal juice out of fresh raw material. What operation should be performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Filtration
b. Crystallization
c. Settling
d. Adsorption
*e. Heating with following quenching

172. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces valerian tincture of fresh material. Technological peculiarity of its production is that it should be produced on the base of:
a. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
b. 95% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
c. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
d. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:5
*e. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:5

173. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed an antiulcer drug that also reduces secretion of hydrochloric acid and inhibits Chelicobacter pylori. What drug is it?
a. Almagel
*b. Omeprazole
c. Maalox
d. Gastrocepine
e. Famotidine

174. Quantitative determination of nitrofural (furacilin) can be done by method of spectrophotometry. A pharmacy analyst can calculate quantity by measuring:
a. Rotation angle
b. Refractive index
*c. Optical density
d. pH of solution
e. Fusion temperature

175. Inventory in a pharmacy revealed a shortage within the range of natural loss. This shortage will be rated as expenses at the following price:
a. Contract
b. Retail
*c. Wholesale
d. Procurement
e. Negotiated

176. What substance will impede reaction of iodoform test aimed at detection of ethyl alcohol in the biological material?
a. Phenol
b. Formaldehyde
c. Methanol
d. Isoamyl alcohol
*e. Acetone

177. On the wage of pharmacy employees the personal income tax is levied. What pays ARE NOT INCLUDED into the total monthly income being subject to this kind of taxation?
a. Sick care benefit
b. Income in kind
c. Sick leave benefit
d. Dividends
*e. Maternity pay

178. Analgin substance was sent for analysis. What method allows to evaluate quantitative content of analgin?
a. Alkalimetry
b. Acidimetry
*c. Iodometry
d. Chelatometry
e. Permanganatometry

179. A pharmaceutist prepares internal drops with the following formulation: 5 ml of adoniside, 10 ml of valerian and lily-ofthevalley tincture each, 0,1 g of menthol, 2,0 g of potassium bromide. It will be efficient to dissolve potassium bromide in the following substance:
*a. In the adoniside
b. In the valerian tincture
c. Potassium bromide should be added into the selling vial last of all
d. In the mixture of tinctures
e. In the lily-of-the-valley tincture

180. A pharmacy technologist revealed incompatibility of a formulation: Rp.: Mentholi 0,5 Natrii hydrocarbonatis Natrii tetraboratis aa 1,5 Aquae purificatae 100 ml M.D.S. 1 tablespoon twice a day. What action should the pharmaceutist take in order to make this pharmaceutical form?
a. Perform fractional dissolution
b. Substitute one of the components
c. Change pharmaceutical form
*d. Add stabilizer
e. Substitute the solvent

181. A pharmaceutist is preparing vaginal suppositories by method of pouring. Which hydrophilic base can he use for this 19 purpose?
a. Butyrol
*b. Polyethylene oxide
c. Vitepsol
d. Cocoa butter
e. Hard fat

182. A patient with arterial hypertension was administered a non-prescription drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis. What pharmaceutical form should be recommended the patient in order to reduce as much as possible the likelihood of development of undesirable systemic vasoconstriction?
a. Tablets
*b. Ointment
c. Drops
d. Gel
e. Aerosol

183. A 56-year-old patient suffering from essential hypertension was prescribed an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and a potassium-sparing diuretic. Such combination is:
a. Unreasonable because it increases risk of orthostatic collapse development
*b. Unreasonable because it increases risk of hyperkaliemia development
c. Reasonable because it potentiates hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
d. Reasonable because it decreases risk of hyperkaliemia development
e. Unreasonable because it reduces hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor

184. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics.Which diuretic DOES NOT NEED to be combined with potassium preparations?
a. Dichlothiazide
b. Clopamide
*c. Triamteren
d. Furosemide
e. Ethacrynic acid

185. Restharrow (Ononis) root is used for production of a tincture for treating haemorrhoidal haemorrhages. Isoflavonoids can be identified in the raw material by means of:
a. Foam index test
*b. Chromatographic method
c. Hemolytic index
d. Cyanidin test
e. Biological standardization

186. Hawthorn flowers are used for production of cardiotonic drugs. During procurement of this crude drug the flowers of the following plant can appear in it:
a. Elder
*b. Blackthorn
c. Bird cherry
d. Buckthorn
e. Brier

187. A pharmacy store was supplied with 100 packs of a product listed as Nitroglycerine. With regard to its physicochemical properties this preparation should be rated among the following drug group?
a. Combustible substances
b. Volatile substances
c. Explosion hazardous substances
d. Highly inflammable substances
*e. Explosive substances

188. An edema can be relieved by means of hypertonic solutions. What phenomenon takes place in the blood cells after injection of such solution?
a. Lipolysis
b. Electrolysis
c. Hydrolysis
d. Hemolysis
*e. Plasmolysis

189. During an operation a dentist needs to reduce salivation in a patient. The dentist has to use a drug of the following pharmacological group:
a. Adrenomimetics
b. Muscarinic cholinomimetics
*c. Muscarinic receptor blockers
d. Adrenoceptor blocker
e. Muscarinic and nicotinic cholinomimetics

190. Product assortment is the whole set of product assortment groups offered by an enterprise. The index representing number of positions in each product assortment group is called:
a. Product assortment saturation
b. Product assortment width
*c. Product assortment depth
d. Product assortment
e. Assortment comparability

191. A pharmacy analyst of the laboratory at the National drug quality control inspection is conducting quantitative 20 determination of caffeine by method of acid-base titration in the anhydrous solvents according to the requirements of National Pharmacopeia of Ukraine.What titrated solution is to be used?
a. Sodium edetate
b. Potassium bromate
c. Sodium methylate
d. Sodium hydroxide
*e. Perchloric acid

192. Common juniper is applied as a diuretic, anti-inflammatory and cholagogic agent. This plant gives the following medicinal raw material:
a. Sprouts
b. Roots
c. Seeds
*d. Fruits
e. Leaves

193. Functioning of a pharmacy is realized on different levels of management. Function of direct control of employees fulfilling concrete tasks relates to the following level of management:
*a. Technical
b. Managerial
c. Bureaucratic
d. Administrative
e. Institutional

194. Pharmaceutical chemistry studies methods of drug synthesis. Interaction of anesthesin with beta-diethylaminoethanol in presence of sodium alcoholate with following acidation with hydrochloric acid results in origination of:
a. Procainamide hydrochloride
b. Xycain
c. Trimecaine hydrochloride
*d. Procaine hydrochloride
e. Tetracaine hydrochloride

195. After a sulfamide preparation was heated with salicylic acid in presence of concentrated sulfuric acid, it turned crimson. What drug is analyzed?
a. Ethazol
b. Phtalazol
c. Streptocid
d. Sulfaguine
*e. Soluble streptocid

196. A pharmacy procured common origanum. What drying conditions should be applied for producing high quality crude drug?
a. 80 ? 90°C
b. 50 ? 60°C
c. 70 ? 80°C
*d. 35 ? 40°C
e. 60 ? 70°C

197. A 67-year-old patient who undergoes treatment for bronchial asthma presents with limb tremor, headache, insomnia, extrasystole. What drug might have caused such symptoms?
a. Intal
b. Acetylcysteine
c. Prednisolone
d. Tavegyl
*e. Theophylline

198. For accounting business transactions carried out in a pharmacy the synthetic accounts are used. Their list is given in the Chart of Accounts. Balances of the I, II and III account classes are used for completion of the following document:
a. First section of the liabilities balance sheet
b. Fourth section of the liabilities balance sheet
c. Profit and Loss Account
d. Liabilities
*e. Assets

199. A 40-year-old patient suffers from bronchial asthma and cardiac rhythm disturbance in form of bradyarrhythmia. Drugs of which pharmacological group should be administered for bronchospasm elimination?
a. Muscarinic cholinomimetics
b. Beta-adrenoceptor blockers
*c. Muscarinic receptor blockers
d. Anticholinesterase drugs
e. Muscle relaxants

200. A patient who has taken phenobarbital for a long time was prescribed diclofenac sodium. However the anti-inflammatory effect of diclofenac appeared to be less than expected due to the pharmacokinetic interaction of these drugs. Such interaction might be the result of the following processes:
a. Decelerated drug metabolism in liver
b. Change of receptor sensibility
c. Increased drug dosage
*d. Accelerated drug metabolism in liver
e. Reduced protein concentration in plasma

