1. Absorption of tetracycline preparations will be reduced when they are administered simultaneously with antacids. This is an example for:
a. Pharmacodynamic incompatibility
b. Functional drugs antagonism
*c. Pharmacokinetic incompatibility
d. Drugs synergism
e. Pharmaceutical incompatibility

2. Marketing manager at a pharmaceutical factory is planning its communication policy. Which component of the marketing communication systems has the highest value for one contact?
a. Public relations
b. Sales promotion
c. TV advertising
*d. Personal sale
e. Periodical advertising

3. A patient has been taking isosorbide for stenocardia prevention for quite a long time. Now he notes a significant decrease in the effect of the drug. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Allergy
*b. Tolerance
c. Potentiation
d. Cumulation
e. Physical dependence

4. A pharmaceutist prepares internal drops with the following formulation: 5 ml of adoniside, 10 ml of valerian and lily-of-the-valley tincture each, 0,1 g of menthol, 2,0 g of potassium bromide. It will be efficient to dissolve potassium bromide in the following substance:
a. In the lily-of-the-valley tincture
*b. In the adoniside
c. Potassium bromide should be added into the selling vial last of all
d. In the mixture of tinctures
e. In the valerian tincture

5. Which of the following non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents has the least harmful effect on the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract?
*a. Nimesulide
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Diclofenac
d. Piroxicam
e. Indomethacin

6. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
*a. Doxazosin
b. Diltiazem
c. Losartan
d. Propranolol
e. ?n?l?pril

7. When a pharmacy records goods as received, it normally specifies the amount of the markup intended for expenditure coverage and profit gaining. Give the definition for the markup:
a. Rummage (goods remains) at the end of the month
*b. The difference between the sale price and purchase price of goods
c. The amount of goods sold
d. The difference between the sales price and markup
e. The difference between the sales price and the customs price

8. At the initial stage of establishing a pharmaceutical enterprise the internal disciplinary regulations should be adopted. One of the primary matters is the duration of the lunch break for the employees. According to the Labour Code of Ukraine, the break duration must be as follows:
a. Not less than 3 hours
b. -
c. 2,5 hours
d. Up to 1 hour
*e. Up to 2 hours

9. One of the quality indicators for finished ampoules is lack of residual stress in the glass. Which operation at the stage "Preparation of ampoules to be filled" eliminates this imperfection?
a. Ampoule sterilization
*b. Ampoule annealing
c. Ampoule drying
d. Ampoule washing
e. Capillary opening

10. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
a. Stimulating
b. Remarketing
c. Synchromarketing
d. Conversion
*e. Counteractive

11. A woman died from pesticide poisoning as a result of processing of agricultural crops. Measurement of organophosphorous compounds in the extracts of biological material should be started with the following test:
a. Test for the presence of a sulfur atom
*b. Biochemical assay
c. Test for methoxy or ethoxy groups
d. Test for the phosphate ion
e. Test for the presence of chlorine atom

12. A laboratory received some herbal raw material for analysis. The plant had flowerheads up to 4 cm in diameter, the marginal flowers were agamic, blue, funnel-shaped; the inner flowers were bisexual, purple, tubular. What plant are these features typical for?
a. Scutellaria baicalensis
b. Polygonum persicaria
c. Viola tricolor
d. Solidago virgaurea
*e. Centaurea cyanus

13. Diethyl ether relates to simple ethers. Prior to its identification by using the boiling temperature an analytical chemist must ensure that there are no:
*a. Peroxides
b. Carboxylic acids
c. Alcohols
d. Non-volatile residue
e. Reducing substances

14. The amount of temporary disability benefit for pharmacy employees depends on the time in employment: employees with 5 years of service record receive ?%, 5 to 8 years - ?%, over 8 years - ?%
a. 10%, 30%, 50% of the averagewage
b. 25%, 45%, 65% of the average wage
*c. 60%, 80%, 100% of the average wage
d. 20%, 40%, 50% of the average wage
e. 40%, 50%, 90% of the average wage

15. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Local irritation
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Delayed allergy
*d. Immediate allergy
e. Abstinence syndrome

16. Benzathine benzylpenicillin is the drug of choice for treating the following disease:
*a. Syphilis
b. Angina
c. Furunculosis
d. Intestinal infection
e. Pneumonia

17. A patient with atopic dermatitis presented at the hospital. Which drug with anti-inflammatory and antiallergic effect should be administered to this patient?
a. Aethamidum
b. Retabolil
c. Oxytocin
*d. Prednisolone
e. Insulin

18. A patient with gastric ulcer has been administered omeprazole. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Blockade of M-cholinergic receptors
b. Blockade of histamine H2 receptors
c. Stimulation of mucus production
d. HCl neutralization
*e. Inhibition of H+K+-ATPase

19. In order to identify ouabain (strophanthine G), a drug from the group of cardiac glycosides, an analytical chemist must prove the presence of a steroid cycle. What acid should be used as a reagent?
*a. Sulfuric
b. Citric
c. Oxalic
d. Formic
e. Chromotropic

20. Which anaesthetic, anti-inflammatory, the least harmful for the stomach preparation can be recommended to a patient with exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis?
a. Indometacinum
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Ibuprofenum
d. Diclofenac sodium
*e. Celecoxib

21. A pharmaceutist has prepared an emulsion. Specify the way of incorporation of the fat-soluble substances:
a. They are dissolved in purified water
b. They are added to the finished emulsion
c. They are added to the emulsifier
*d. They are dissolved in oil
e. They are incorporated in undissolved form

22. A pharmaceutic plant producing ointments can use the following equipment at the packing stage:
a. Rezepin automatic machine
b. Rotary machines
*c. Screw and piston dosing machines
d. Eccentric machines
e. Disc machines

23. A pharmaceutist is preparing an ointment under aseptic conditions on the sterile ointment base - composition of vaseline and lanoline at a ratio 6:4. The drug substance is incorporated by suspension type. Such technology of ointment preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Sodium sulfate
*b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
c. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
d. Sodium chloride
e. Thiamine chloride

24. A pharmacy provides its customers with officinal medicines. Specify the business transaction which is qualified as pharmacy expenses:
a. Posting of goods
*b. Write-off of cost of goods sold
c. Personal income tax
d. Pharmacy proceeds
e. Proceeds of a structural subdivision

25. As main reagent in test for phosphates admixtures the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia recommends to use:
a. Acetylacetone
*b. Sulfomolybdenum
c. Cupric tartrate
d. Thioacetamide
e. Hypophosphite

26. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Decrease
*b. Maturity
c. Market penetration
d. Development
e. Growth

27. A patient with atherosclerosis has been administered an anti-atherosclerotic agent. Specify this drug:
a. Pyracetam
b. Ascorbic acid
*c. Phenofibrate
d. Dexamethasone
e. Phenylbutazone

28. According to the basic regulations for supply of medical products, pharmacies should be supplied with medicaments with a remaining shelf life of no less than ?%, and bacterial preparations of no less than ?%:
a. 50%, 40%
*b. 60%, 40%
c. 40%, 20%
d. 80%, 60%
e. 60%, 30%

29. A pharmacy sells drugs by retail. Omnopon relates to the following group of controlled drugs:
*a. Narcotic
b. Potent
c. General sale list
d. Toxic
e. Psychtropic

30. A patient with acute heart failure and intolerance of cardiac glycosides has been given an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Blockade of K+-, Na+-ATPase
*b. Stimulation of beta1-adrenoceptors
c. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase
d. Stimulation of M-cholinergic receptors
e. Stimulation of alpha1- adrenoceptors

31. A patient has been administered a spasmolytic from the group of muscarinic receptor antagonists as a part of the complex treatment for renal colic. Specify this drug:
a. Dithylinum
b. Neostigmine
*c. Atropine
d. Benzohexonium
e. Galantamine

32. A pharmaceutical company conducted an age-specific segment analysis of the regional antihistamine market. It revealed the lack of antihistamines for children. The company will consider this segment as:
a. Segment requiring further research
b. Market door
c. Unattractive segment
d. Market share
*e. Market niche

33. A patient after bees stings has angioedema (Quinckes edema). Which drug should be immediately inject to eliminate this condition?
a. ?n??rilinum
b. Atropine sulfate
*c. Epinephrine hydrochloride
d. Sodium chloride
e. Platyphyllini hydrotartras

34. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia has been administered an antibiotic. After treatment the child lost his hearing. What group of antibiotics might have caused this complication?
a. Macrolides
b. Natural penicillins
*c. Aminoglycosides
d. Semi-synthetic penicillins
e. Cephalosporins

35. A patient who has taken phenobarbital for a long time was prescribed diclofenac sodium. However the anti-inflammatory effect of diclofenac appeared to be less than expected due to the pharmacokinetic interaction of these drugs. Such interaction might be the result of the following processes:
a. Increased drug dosage
b. Reduced protein concentration in plasma
c. Decelerated drug metabolism in liver
*d. Accelerated drug metabolism in liver
e. Change of receptor sensibility

36. Oxidation of some toxins within the body results in generation of compounds that increase their toxicity. Thus, due to the oxidation of heptachlor in the body the folowing compound is formed:
a. Carbon dioxide
b. Heptachlor oxide
*c. Heptachlor epoxide
d. Carbon monoxide
e. Hexachlorocyclohexane

37. In order to verify identity of tropan derivatives, Vitalis reaction is applied. For that purpose the medications should be first decomposed with nitric acid and then treated with alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide and acetone. What effect will be observed?
a. Emission of gas bubbles
b. The solution will turn green
c. Setting of black precipitate
*d. The solution will turn purple
e. Setting of white precipitate

38. A patient who has been suffering from gastric diseases for a long time is found to have hyperchromic anemia. Which of the following drugs is applied for this pathology treatment?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Oxyferriscorbone
c. Unitiol
*d. Cyanocobalamine
e. Ferrum Lek

39. A forensic medicine laboratory received some biological material. It should be analyzed for the presence of trichlorfon and dichlorvos. For their isolation a toxicologist infuses them with:
a. Propanol acidified with oxalic acid
*b. Chloroform
c. Ethanol acidified with oxalic acid
d. Water acidified with sulfuric acid
e. Water alkalized with ammonia solution

40. For accounting business transactions carried out in a pharmacy the synthetic accounts are used. Their list is given in the Chart of Accounts. Balances of the I, II and III account classes are used for completion of the following document:
a. Fourth section of the liabilities balance sheet
b. First section of the liabilities balance sheet
c. Profit and Loss Account
*d. Assets
e. Liabilities

41. Phytochemical workshop of a pharmaceutical plant produces biogenic stimulators from different raw materials. Specify the biogenic stimulators of animal origin:
a. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
b. Liquid aloe extract, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biossedum
c. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmolum, solcoseryl
*d. Vitreous body, placental suspension for injections, plasmolum, solcoseryl
e. Liquid aloe extract, aloe liniment, plasmolum

42. An analytical chemist determines the quantity of a drug by the method of indirect bromatometry. Which of the following titrated solutions is to be used?
a. Calcium bromate
*b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Sodium nitrite
d. Silver nitrate
e. Sodium edetate

43. Specify the reaction to the ester-type drugs that is tolerated by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine:
*a. Formation of iron hydroxamates
b. Formation of 3-bromphenol
c. Formation of azo dye
d. -
e. Formation of indophenol

44. A pharmacy received a batch of raw material - chamomile flowers. How should this material be stored?
a. As a narcotic raw material
b. According to the list A requirements
c. In a light room
d. According to the list B requirements
*e. Separately from all other kinds of raw material

45. Injection solutions of salts derived from weak acids and strong bases require stabilization. What stabilizers are used for these solutions?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Buthylhydroxytoluene
c. 0,1 M acid chloride solution
*d. 0,1 M sodium hydroxide solution
e. Trilon B

46. A female patient in the first trimester of pregnancy has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What is the antibiotic drug of choice for treating this patient?
a. Gentamicin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Amikacin
d. Chloramphenicol
e. Norfloxacin

47. An analytical laboratory has to analyze ferrous sulfate heptahydrate according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. A test portion of the substance should be titrated with the following solution:
a. Potassium bromate
b. Silver nitrate
c. Ammonium thiocyanate
*d. Ammonium cerium sulfate
e. Sodium edetate

48. One of the account forms of a pharmacy is the statement of balance (Form 1) which consists of the assets and liabilities. What are the elements of the assets of a pharmacy?
a. Own and borrowed funds
b. Borrowed funds
c. -
d. Own capital
*e. Current and non-current assets

49. Admixtures can get into the herbal raw material during harvesting, drying and primary processing. Mineral admixtures include:
a. Metal objects
b. Other similar plants
c. Other organs of the same plant
d. Droppings of birds and rodents
*e. Sand, earth, stones

50. Companies producing injectable dosage forms apply different methods of ampoule sealing. Sealing against a jet of inert gases (nitrogen, argon, carbon dioxide) is suitable for the following injection solutions:
a. Hydrolytically unstable
b. Photosensitive
c. Viscous
*d. Easily oxidable
e. Thermostable

51. A pharmaceutist revealed incompatibility in a prescription for powders with ascorbic acid and hexamethylene tetramine. What process takes place when these components are combined?
a. Isolation of crystallization water
*b. Mixture dampening
c. Eutectic
d. Adsorption
e. Immiscibility

52. A pharmaceutist is preparing vaginal suppositories by method of pouring. Which hydrophilic base can he use for this purpose?
*a. Polyethylene oxide
b. Hard fat
c. Cocoa butter
d. Butyrol
e. Vitepsol

53. Analgin substance has been sent for analysis. What method allows to evaluate quantitative content of analgin?
a. Permanganatometry
b. Chelatometry
c. Acidimetry
d. Alkalimetry
*e. Iodometry

54. A pharmacy selling officinal drugs is a successful participant of the pharmaceutical market. Specify the business transaction which is qualified as pharmacy revenue:
a. Writing-off of the cost of goods sold
*b. Proceeds of a structural subdivision of a pharmacy
c. Receipt of advance payment made by a customer
d. Salary accounting
e. Tax charge

55. When doing calculations to determine the limit of the cash balance, an accountant must specify the actual amount of cash receipts. What time period should be taken into account?
a. Six months prior to calculation
*b. Three months prior to calculation
c. 7 days prior to calculation
d. 1 year prior to calculation
e. 10 days prior to calculation

56. During a surgical operation the muscle relaxant tubocurarine chloride was used. What antagonist drug should be injected in order to allow the patient to breathe independently?
*a. Neostigmine
b. Aethimizolum
c. Dithylinum
d. ??nzohexonium
e. Cytitonum

57. Which of the following drugs can be quantified by an analytical chemist by ceriometry method?
a. Sodium benzoate
b. Phenyl salycylate
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Vicasolum
e. Phenobarbital

58. A woman asked a pharmaceutist to dispense an antipyretic for an 8-month-old child. Which drug should be recommended?
*a. Paracetamol
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Piroxicam
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Indomethacin

59. A pharmacy store was supplied with 100 packs of a product listed as Nitroglycerine. With regard to its physicochemical properties this preparation should be rated among the following drug group?
*a. Explosive substances
b. Combustible substances
c. Volatile substances
d. Explosion hazardous substances
e. Highly inflammable substances

60. Most alkaloids are isolated from the biological material by means of polar solvents. Which of the listed alkaloids is isolated by the way of distillation with water vapour?
a. Atropine
*b. Coniine
c. Strychnine
d. Quinine
e. Cocaine

61. An analytical chemist working at a pharmacy identifies oxacillin sodium salt. As a reagent he uses hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution in presence of sodium hydroxide solution and copper nitrate solution. What structural fragment of a drug molecule can be detected by means of these reagents?
*a. Beta-lactam cycle
b. Thiazolidine cycle
c. Isoxazole cycle
d. Furan cycle
e. Thiadiazole cycle

62. A pharmaceutist prepared solution of ethacrydine lactate. What is the peculiarity of this substance dissolving?
a. Dissolving in potassium iodide solution
b. Dissolving in cold water
c. Grinding in a mortar with water
d. Dissolving in freshly distilled water
*e. Dissolving in hot water

63. In order to identify a drug an analytical chemist of the State Inspectorate for Quality Control performs a lignin test. Specify this drug:
*a. Streptocid
b. Methionine
c. Analgin
d. Cortisone acetate
e. Ascorbic acid

64. Which drug is used for thrombolysis in case of acute myocardial infarction?
a. Fraxiparine
b. Pentoxifylline
c. Heparin
*d. Alteplase
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

65. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, in order to test a substance for the highest level of magnesium impurities an analytical chemist must use the following solution:
a. Pyridine
b. Formaldehyde
*c. Hydroxyquinoline
d. Resorcin
e. Benzaldehyde

66. A pharmacy analyst can verify presence of iron cation (II) in a drug formulation by means of the following solution:
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Sodium phosphate
c. Sodium chloride
d. Potassium bromide
*e. Ammonium sulfide

67. The ampoule workshop produces solutions for injections. The aminophylline solution for injections relates to the following group of solutions:
a. Solutions of easily oxidizable substances
b. Solutions of substances requiring special purification
*c. Solutions are not subject to heat sterilization
d. Solutions of salts composed of weak bases and strong acids
e. Solutions of salts composed of strong bases and weak acids

68. In order to identify a drug an analytical chemist of the State Inspectorate for Quality Control of Medicines carries out the reaction with ninhydrin solution. Specify the drug to be identified:
a. Paracetamol
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Cortisone acetate
d. Streptocide
*e. Methionine

69. Having ascertained that the quality of raw material meets the requirements of the analytical normative documentation the quality control department should issue a document. Specify this document:
a. Standard
b. Pharmacopoeia entry
c. Order
*d. Certificate of analysis
e. Request

70. A pharmacy received a prescription:Rp.: Dibazoli 0,05Papaverini hydrochloridi 0,15Sacchari 2,5M. fiat pulv.Divide in partes aequales ?10Specify the weight of a single powder dose:
a. 2,7
b. 0,26
*c. 0,27
d. 0,30
e. 0,25

71. In order to determine the purity a drop of lavender essential oil was applied on a strip of filter paper and warmed up in the stream of warm air. Some time later the stain increased in diameter. What impurity substance was found in the lavender oil?
a. Diethyl ether
b. Ethanol
c. Acetone
d. Phenol
*e. Fatty or mineral oil

72. A patient complaining of dry mouth, photophobia and blurred vision has been delivered to the admission ward. Objectively: the skin is hyperaemic, dry; mydriatic pupils and tachycardia are present. He has been diagnosed with belladonna alkaloids intoxication. Which of the drugs should be given as an antidote?
a. Dipiroximum
*b. Neostigmine
c. Arminum
d. Pylocarpine
e. Aceclidine

73. A man with a long history of chronic hepatitis has been diagnosed with pneumonia. Which of the following antibacterial drugs can be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Vancomycin
b. Rifampicin
c. Tetracycline
*d. Amoxicillin
e. Biseptol

74. A pharmaceutist prepares a suspension ointment. What substance is soluble in water, but should be incorporated into the dermatological ointments as a suspension?
a. Furacilin
b. Sulfacyl sodium
*c. Resorcinol
d. Potassium iodide
e. Zinc oxide

75. In course of isoniazid identification a pharmacy analyst boiled thoroughly the substance with 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene. The substance turned yellow, after adding alkaline solution it turned first violet and then brownish-red. As a result of this reaction the following aldehyde derivative is produced:
a. Glyoxylic
b. Hexanic
c. Glutamic
*d. Glutaconic
e. Gluconic

76. Recommend a patient with acute bronchitis a mucolytic drug that facilitates expectoration:
a. Loratadine
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Glaucine
*d. Acetylcysteine
e. Drotaverine hydrochloride

77. A pharmacy got an order for manzanita decoction and hexamethylenetetramine. A pharmacist cancelled it with a stamp "Invalid prescription". What is the reason for the incompatibility?
*a. Deposition
b. Eutectic
c. Oxidization
d. Insolubility
e. Moisture-repellant

78. On the 4th day of treatment with indomethacin a 55-year-old patient developed gastric bleeding as a result of ulceration of the gastric mucosa. Ulcerogenic effect of this drug is due to a decrease in activity of the following enzyme:
a. Lipoxygenase (LOX)
b. Prostacyclin synthetase
c. Thromboxane synthetase
d. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
*e. Cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1)

79. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
a. Bureaucratic
b. Functional
c. Centralized
d. Decentralized
*e. Divisional

80. The patient has been prescribed Linimentum Rosentali. It is composed of:
*a. Paraffin, alcohol, chloroform, iodine
b. Sunflower oil, ammonia, oleic acid
c. Chloroform, methyl salicylate, turpentine
d. Castor oil, calcium chloride, alcohol
e. Iodine, potassium chloride, glycerin

81. Companys activity aimed at planning, organization and control of physical movement of materials and finished goods from the production site to the place of their utilization for the purpose of covering the consumer needs and gaining profit, is called:
*a. Marketing
b. Advertising
c. Management
d. Supply
e. Demand

82. Which of the pharmacy departments is responsible for checking the quantity and quality of received goods, their storage and dispensing to other departments?
a. Compounding and production department
b. Department of finished dosage forms
c. Department of curative cosmetics
*d. Inventory department
e. Department of over-the-counter drugs

83. Prior hydrolysis is necessary in case of quantitative determination of the following drug by the nitritometric titration:
a. Sodium p-aminosalicylate
b. Procaine hydrochloride
c. Anesthesin
*d. Paracetamol
e. Dicaine

84. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
a. Taste violation
b. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome
*c. Orthostatic hypotension
d. Diarrhea
e. Central nervous system depression effect

85. A patient with moderately severe pneumonia has been administered ceftriaxone 1 time per day. The drug should be taken once a day due to the following properties:
*a. Slow excretion
b. Wide range of action
c. Poor absorption from the injection site
d. Cumulative ability
e. Presence of bactericidal action

86. In the medical practice this compound is used as a disinfectant. In case of intoxication with this compound the patients urine turns olive or olive-black. Specify the compound:
a. Ethyl benzoate
*b. Phenol
c. Isoamyl alcohol
d. Iodoform
e. Ethyl ether

87. A pharmaceutist has prepared a tincture of althaea root. What is the proportion of herbal raw material and extractant?
a. 1:30
*b. 1:20
c. 1:10
d. 1:100
e. 1:400

88. The equity capital of a pharmacy is 7500 UAH, the liabilities make 2500 UAH. According to the formula of balance calculation given in the Statement of Standard Accounting Practice 2 the amount of pharmacy assets will be as follows:
*a. 10 000 UAH
b. 2 500 UAH
c. 4 000 UAH
d. 7 500 UAH
e. 12 000 UAH

89. Inventory of human resources at pharmaceutical companies is based on keeping of work record books, employees files, personal data sheets T-2. What parameter CANNOT be estimated by the analysis of the above-mentioned date?
a. Staff categories
*b. Labour market state
c. Data on the staff turnover
d. Average staffing number
e. Average payroll strength

90. Medicinal plant Rhamnus cathartica is used as a laxative. What part of this plant is used as herbal raw material?
*a. Fruits
b. Shoots
c. Rind
d. Leaves
e. Roots

91. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Oligopolistic market
*b. Pure monopoly market
c. Pure competition market
d. Monopolistic competitive market
e. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market

92. Aerosol workshop of a pharmaceutic plant uses propellents of different groups. What propellents relate to the group of compressed gases?
a. Propane, butane, isobutane
b. Freons
c. Vinyl and methyl chloride
d. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride
*e. Nitrogen, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide

93. A pharmaceutist was on a business trip. What is the deadline for submitting a travel expense report?
a. Four working days after returning from a trip
b. Ten working days after returning from a trip
c. There is no deadline
*d. Three working days after returning from a trip
e. A week after returning from a trip

94. A patient fell ill with severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day connected with the fact that the drug:
*a. Slowly eliminated from the body
b. Poorly absorbed from the injection site
c. Has bactericidal effect
d. Pluripotential
e. Accumulates in the lungs

95. The possible admixture in the crop of raw coltsfoot leaves (Tussilago farfara) is the leaf of:
a. Nettle
b. Common plantain
c. Primula officinalis
d. Marshmallow (Althaea officinalis)
*e. Cotton burdock (Arctium tomentosum)

96. Anesthesin relates to substances with local anesthetic activity and is a derivative of the following acid:
*a. Para-aminobenzoic
b. Para-aminosalicylic
c. Para-chlorbenzoic
d. Para-aminobenzolsulfonic
e. Para-aminophthalic

97. To stop the delusions and hallucinations in a schizophrenic patient a doctor administered aminazine. What is the mechanism of antihypoxic action of this drug?
a. Inhibition of adrenergic processes in the CNS
b. Stimulation of cholinergic processes in the CNS
c. Stimulation of adrenergic and dopaminergic processes in the CNS
*d. Inhibition of dopaminergic processes in the CNS
e. Inhibition of cholinergic processes in the CNS

98. A patient got intoxicated with nitrites. Nitrites can be detected by means of the reaction of azo-dye formation with the following acid:
a. Sulfuric
*b. Sulfanilic
c. Salicylic
d. Phosphoric
e. Hydrochloric

99. From the pharmaceutical stock select an anticholinesterase drug to be administered to the patients with atony of the intestine and urinary bladder in the postoperative period:
a. Atropine sulfate
*b. Proserin
c. Benzohexonium
d. Phosphacolum
e. Dithylinum

100. The planning of marketing strategy involves two successive stages. What are the stages of the strategic planning process?
a. Describing the current marketing situation
*b. Defining the mission and goals of a pharmaceutical company
c. Developing a program of activities
d. Making the list of tasks and problems
e. Budgeting

101. A pharmacy received an order for 2500 ml of isotonic sodium chloride solution. How much sodium chloride and water for injections should be taken to prepare this dosage form?
a. 100,0 g of sodium chloride and 2400 ml of water for injections
b. 30,0 g of sodium chloride and 2500 ml of water for injections
c. 25,0 g of sodium chloride and 2500 ml of water for injections
d. 50,0 g of sodium chloride and 2450 ml of water for injections
*e. 22,5 g of sodium chloride and 2500 ml of water for injections

102. Spesify the type of the following liniment: Ol. Helianthi 7,4Sol. Ammonii caustici 25 mlAC. Oleinici 0,1M. linimentumD.S. To be rubbed in
a. Liniment-suspension
b. Liniment, emulsion w/o
c. Combined liniment
d. Liniment-solution
*e. Liniment, emulsion o/w

103. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
a. -
*b. Bonus
c. Dealer
d. Seasonal
e. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods

104. Select the reductant required for the determination of arsenic impurity in drugs (method 2):
a. Hydrochloric acid solution
b. Sodium hydroxide solution
c. Sodium sulfite solution
d. Potassium iodide solution
*e. Sodium hypophosphite

105. During an operation a dentist needs to reduce salivation in a patient. The dentist has to use a drug of the following pharmacological group:
a. Muscarinic cholinomimetics
b. Adrenomimetics
*c. Muscarinic receptor blockers
d. Muscarinic and nicotinic cholinomimetics
e. Adrenoceptor blocker

106. Quality control of tablets produced at a pharmaceutical enterprise involves quantitative determination of such subsidiary substances as talc and aerosil. What method is applied for such determination?
*a. Gravimetric
b. Spectrophotometric
c. Chromatographic
d. Titrimetric
e. Photocolorimetric

107. A patient suffering from allergic rhinitis was prescribed ephedrine in form of nasal drops. The patient has significantly benefited from nasal instillation, and this stimulated him to use the drug every 2 hours. But under these conditions the drug appeared to be ineffective. What is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
*a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Drug dependence
c. Cumulation
d. Idiosyncrasy
e. Allergy

108. Pharmaceutical chemistry studies methods of drug synthesis. Interaction of anesthesin with beta-diethylaminoethanol in presence of sodium alcoholate with following acidation with hydrochloric acid results in origination of:
a. Tetracaine hydrochloride
b. Xycain
c. Trimecaine hydrochloride
d. Procainamide hydrochloride
*e. Procaine hydrochloride

109. Method of gas-liquid chromatography is often applied for identification and quantitative determination of toxicologically meaningful substances. Substances can be placed into the chromatograph dispenser in the following aggregate states:
a. Liquid and solid
b. Liquid
*c. Liquid and gaseous
d. Gaseous
e. Gaseous and solid

110. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
a. Clonidine
*b. Enalapril
c. Dichlothiazide
d. Propranolol
e. Dibazol

111. It is necessary to analyze herbal raw material in form of black glossy drupes 6-8 mm in diameter, with a large, firm, globular, light brown kernel containing one seed. The drupes have sweet and slightly astringent taste. This herbal raw material should be identified as fruits of:
a. Buckthorn
b. Black chokeberry
c. Hawthorn
*d. Bird cherry
e. Blueberry

112. A teenager with hyporexia has been recommended to drink medicinal herbal tea of the following composition: Herba Absinthii, Herba Millefolii. Specify the characteristic microscopic features of Artemisia absinthium, which indicate its presence in the herb mixture:
a. Retor-shaped hairs
*b. T-shaped hairs along the leaf edge
c. Branched, simple and ciliated hairs
d. Branched and capitate hairs
e. Simple and capitate hairs

113. During the combined pharmacotherapy a patient with peptic ulcer presented with black-coloured feces. What drug might have caused such change?
a. Ranitidine
b. Omeprazole
c. Actovegin
d. Metronidazole
*e. Bismuth subcitrate

114. What substance will impede reaction of iodoform test aimed at detection of ethyl alcohol in the biological material?
*a. Acetone
b. Phenol
c. Methanol
d. Isoamyl alcohol
e. Formaldehyde

115. An advance holder (accountant) was given some money from the cash fund of an enterprise for purchase of office accessories. After the cash advance the advance holder must submit the complete application of funds statement no later than:
a. Ten working days
*b. Third banking day
c. Such term isnt established
d. One week
e. Five working days

116. When the glucose is heated with the copper-tartrate reagent (Fehlings reagent) the brick-red precipitate settles down. It indicates presence of the following group:
a. Amide
*b. Aldehyde
c. Etherific
d. Ketonic
e. Carboxyl

117. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. Which of these antimicrobials should be administered to this patient?
*a. Cefotaxime
b. Tetracycline hydrochloride
c. Gentamicin sulfate
d. Ofloxacin
e. Biseptol

118. A pharmacy received a prescription for powders with doctors instruction to dispense powders in gelatin capsules. Which of the following substances is included in the composition of these powders?
a. Glucose
*b. Ethacridine lactate
c. Magnesium oxide
d. Diphenhydramine
e. Streptocide

119. One of the methods of quantitative analysis of active substances in the raw material is the biological standardization. It can be applied with the following group of biologically active substances:
a. Tannins
b. Alkaloids
c. Mucilages
d. Fatty oils
*e. Cardiac gliycosides

120. A pharmacy received some medicines from the warehouse. What medicine is subject to the stocktaking in the pharmaceutical institutions?
a. Analginum
*b. Codeine
c. Aminalonum
d. Butadionum
e. Corvalolum

121. A patient has been administered a solution containing boric acid and camphor. What solvent should his doctor prescribe in order to prevent physical incompatibility?
a. Ethyl alcohol 40%
b. Glycerol
c. Purified water
*d. Ethyl alcohol 70%
e. Sunflower oil

122. A pharmaceutist made 10 powders containing atropine sulfate at a rate of 0,00005 pro dose. What trituration did he use?
a. 1:10
b. 1:20
c. 1:50
d. 1:1000
*e. 1:100

123. A laboratory received some herbal raw material for analysis. It is a composition of ovoid-pointed leaves up to 25 cm long and 20 cm wide; the leaf base is cuneate, the leaf edge is emarginate, The cutting is long and cylindric. The leaf venation is pinnatisect; the midrib and the first-order veins project significantly on the inferior surface of the lea the superior leaf surface is dark green, the inferior surface is light green. The plant has a weak narcotic smell. The taste cannot be determined. The plant is poisonous! The described herbal raw material relates to the following plant:
*a. Datura stramonium
b. Passiflora incarnata
c. Vinca minor
d. -
e. Chelidonium majus

124. A pharmaceutical company produces cordiamin solution. During the quality control its quantitative content was determined by means of refractometry. For this purpose an analytical chemist measured:
a. Viscosity
b. Density
*c. Index of refraction
d. Intensity of absorption
e. Angle of rotation

125. A pharmacy procured common origanum. What drying conditions should be applied for producing high quality crude drug?
a. 70-80oC
b. 60-70oC
c. 50-60oC
d. 80-90oC
*e. 35-40oC

126. Treatment of poisonings with inorganic mercury compounds includes the use of the following antidote:
a. Naloxone
b. Tetacinum-calcium
c. Desferal
*d. Unithiol
e. Dexamethasone

127. A patient with schizophrenia has been administered a neuroleptic. Which of the listed drugs falls into this group?
*a. Aminazine
b. Morphine
c. Celecoxib
d. Pyracetam
e. Propranolol

128. A patient with cholelithiasis should be administered the following drug for the dissolution of cholesterol gallstones:
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Gamma-aminobutyric acid
c. Citric acid
*d. Ursodeoxycholic acid
e. Mefenamic acid

129. A patient with myocardial infarction has been given an intravenous injection of a direct-acting anticoagulant. Select it among the listed drugs:
a. Neodicumarinum
b. Calcium gluconate
c. Thrombin
*d. Heparin
e. Vikasolum

130. Fatty oil containing unsaturated fatty acids is used for the prevention of atherosclerosis. Specify the herbal raw material used for oil production:
*a. Seeds of flax
b. Fruits of black chokeberry
c. Hawthorn berries
d. Seeds of fennelflower
e. Fruits of dill

131. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Labour loss
b. Financial loss
c. Loss of property
*d. Business risk
e. Loss of time

132. A pharmacy received a batch of drugs from a wholesale firm. What document signed by an authorized person is the basis for further sale of drugs?
a. National register of medicinal products
*b. Register of medicinal products accepted for sale
c. Information on state registration
d. Quality certificates
e. Opinion letter of the territorial inspectorate

133. A patient with chronic bronchitis gets glaucine hydrochloride at a pharmacy. The patient must be warned about the following typical side effect of this drug:
*a. Arterial pressure drop
b. Increased intraocular pressure
c. Excitation of the central nervous system
d. Allergic skin rash
e. Irregular heartbeat

134. Forensic toxicological analysis of a mineralizate revealed copper. For preliminary determination of copper ions the following substance is used:
a. Diphenylcarbazide
b. Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate
*c. Plumbum diethyldithiocarbamate
d. Diphenylamine
e. Dithizone

135. A pharmacy produces some injection solutions that have to be apyrogenic. Solution of the following substance can be depyrogenized by method of adsorption with activated carbon?
*a. Glucose
b. Scopolamine hydrobromide
c. Papaverine hydrochloride
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Platyphyllini hydrotartras

136. A doctor prescribed his patient an emulsion of olive oil which includes anesthesin. To incorporate anesthesin into the emulsion it must be dissolved:
a. In the finished emulsion
b. In the primary emulsion
c. In the purified water
d. In the alcohol, and then added to the primary emulsion
*e. In oil before preparing the emulsion

137. Efficiency of aerosol therapy is to a considerable extent determined by the size of disperse particles. What factor determines the size of aerosol particles during dispersion of an aerosol?
a. Reduction range, container quantity
b. Fractional composition, containers filling method
c. System homogeneity, dispersion velocity
d. Percentage of phase, filling temperature
*e. Exit port diameter, propellent vapour pressure

138. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
a. Penicillamine
b. Atropinum
*c. Deferoxamium
d. Protamine sulfate
e. Bemegridum

139. An elderly patient has constipation caused by hypotonia of colon. What drug should be administered to this patient?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Castor oil
*c. Bisacodyl
d. Novocaine amide
e. Sodium sulfate

140. A pharmacy received a prescription for preparation of dermatological ointment with benzylpenicillin. Specify the type of ointment that necessary to prepare:
a. Combined
b. Liquid ointment
c. Alloy ointment
*d. Suspension ointment
e. Hydrophilic ointment

141. A chemical department produces alcohol solution of boric acid. What filters are used for filtration of this solution?
a. Membrane filter
b. Nutsch filter
*c. Pressure filters
d. Paper filter
e. Bag filter

142. Which drug with antagonistic effect can be used to stop bleeding caused by prolonged use of neodicumarinum?
*a. Vikasolum
b. Aminocapronic acid
c. Fibrinogen
d. Etamsylate
e. Ascorbic acid

143. Select a reagent that should be applied by an analytical chemist in order to detect alkaloids in the herbal raw material:
a. Stahls reagent
b. Bromine water
c. Trim-Hill reagent
d. Alkaline solution
*e. Dragendorff reagent

144. Preparations of sorrel roots can have both a laxative and astringent effect. This is due to the presence of the following biologically active substances:
a. Essential and fatty oils
b. Coumarins and phenol glycosides
*c. Anthracene derivatives and tannins
d. Iridoids and vitamins
e. Flavonoids and essential oils

145. A syrup contains 82 parts of sugar syrup; 1 part of KJ (KBr); 12 parts of liquid thyme extract and 5 parts of 96% ethanol. What is this medicine called?
a. Ambroxol
b. Broncholytin
c. Cholosasum
d. Licorice syrup
*e. Pertussinum

146. An analytical chemist determines the admixture of sulphates in the boric acid. What is the main reagent to be added?
a. Silver nitrate
b. Sodium sulphide
c. Ammonium oxalate
*d. Barium chloride
e. Potassium ferrocyanide

147. The ability of drugs to accumulate in the patients body is called:
a. Antagonism
b. Habituation
c. Synergism
*d. Cumulation
e. Allergy

148. A pharmacy produces compounded drugs. What kinds of internal control of drugs production are required?
*a. Written, organoleptic, sell control
b. Written and sell control
c. Written, interrogatory, sell control
d. Written, qualitative and quantitative analysis
e. Written, physics and chemical

149. A patient got intoxicated with an unknown substance. Test of biological material revealed pH=2,0-3,0. The chemico-toxicological analysis should be carried out for the following group of substances:
a. Alkali metal salts
b. Ammonia
*c. Mineral acids or large amounts of organic acids
d. Alkalis
e. Weak organic acids and heavy metal salts

150. The main active components of hawthorn berries are flavonoids. What is their pharmacological effect?
*a. Hypotensive and sedative
b. Antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory
c. Diuretic and styptic
d. Laxative and sedative
e. Tonic and antispasmodic

151. A pharmaceutist prepared powders including extract of belladonna in the amount of 0,015 per dose. For ten doses he had to take the following amount of dry extract:
a. 0,15 g
b. 0,015 g
c. 1,5 g
*d. 0,3 g
e. 0,03 g

152. A pharmacy manager is working out a schedule for a pharmaceutist who is responsible for prescription reception and drug serving out. What is the weekly working time for one employee?
a. Irregular working week
b. 40 hours
*c. 36 hours
d. 30 hours
e. 38 hours

153. A pharmacy received a batch of goods from a supplier. What is the main financial document for posting the goods at the pharmacy?
a. Goods delivery note
b. Cash order
c. Aquittance
*d. Receipts note
e. Requisition

154. When developing a new drug a manufacturer may apply different strategies of brand use. If a company uses one brand name for all of its products, such strategy is called:
a. The combination of brand name with an individual drug brand
b. Brands for individual drugs
c. Multi-brand approach
*d. Group brands
e. Individual brands

155. Preparations made out of eleutherococcus roots and rhizomes are administered as a tonic and adaptogenic drug. If these preparations cannot be found in a pharmacy, they can be substituted by the analogous preparations made of the following raw material:
a. Rhizomes and roots of valerian
b. Polemonium roots
c. Elecampane roots
d. Acorus calamus roots
*e. Ginseng roots

156. A pharmacy has to prepare a soft drug based on the gel made from inorganic substances. Which of these high-molecular compounds can be used for preparing such a base?
*a. Bentonites
b. Cellulose ethers
c. Collagen
d. Starch
e. Polyethylene oxides

157. A pharmaceutist prepared 150 ml of Adonis vernalis infusion using dry extract concentrate [1:1] that had to be weighed in the amount of:
*a. 5,0
b. 7,5
c. 10,0
d. 15,0
e. 22,5

158. In the process of pressing the tablets adhere to the pressing tool. The technological error is the lack of:
a. Diluents
b. Disintegrants
c. Dyes
*d. Lubricants
e. Adhesive substances

159. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
a. 500 mg
*b. 100 mg
c. 50 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 1000 mg

160. A patient came to a drugstore and ordered cowberry leaves. Which of the available herbal raw materials can be offered as a substitute?
a. Rizoma et radix Sanquisorbae officinalis
b. Radix Taraxaci officinalis
c. Herba Achilleae millefolii
*d. Folium Uvae ursi
e. Rizoma Calami

161. A 15-year-old patient has been first diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus. Which antihyperglycemic drug should be administered in this case?
*a. Insulin
b. Glurenorm
c. Diabetone
d. Metformin
e. Glibenclamide

162. An analytical laboratory received calcium gluconate for analysis. What method is used for its quantification?
a. Nitritometric determination
b. Iodometry
c. Bromatometry
d. Mercurimetric determination
*e. Chelatometry

163. A pharmacy received a prescription for a mixture. What drug substances are incompatible?
*a. Papaverine hydrochloride + aminophylline
b. Sodium bromide + sodium chloride
c. Novocaine + diphenhydramine
d. Phenobarbital + glucose
e. Codeine phosphate + extract of Thermopsis

164. Which of the following drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
a. Phenylinum
*b. Streptokinase
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Heparin
e. Ticlopidine

165. Before accepting the goods by a pharmacy, they should be checked for quantity and quality. If there is no discrepancy, the pharmacy issues a warrant for receipt of goods. This warrant is valid for:
a. 20 days
b. 1 year
*c. 10 days
d. 3 months
e. 15 days

166. Incoming control is conducted in the course of wholesale and retail trade, such control is carried out during receipt of goods by visual inspection or analysis of drug. Incoming control is carried out by authorized person, which is assigned by:
*a. Managers order
b. Head of regional structure
c. State inspection of drugs quality control
d. The order of head of territorial inspection
e. Proprietor of an enterprise

167. An interhospital pharmacy got an order from a surgical department for a depolarizing muscle relaxant for surgical interventions. What drug was ordered?
a. Hygronium
b. Methacin
*c. Dithylinum
d. Nicotine
e. Atropine sulfate

168. A pharmacy plans to purchase and retail goods of different stock record units. Which group of goods does VAT reduction apply to?
*a. Medicaments
b. Curative cosmetics
c. Optics
d. Perfumes
e. Baby food

169. A pharmaceutist has to sterilize 400 ml of calcium gluconate solution for injections. Specify the time of autoclave sterilization of the solution at 120oC:
a. 15 minutes
b. 10 minutes
c. 20 minutes
d. 30 minutes
*e. 12 minutes

170. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent presentations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Drotaverine
*b. ??ncreatinum
c. Acidin pepsinum
d. ?m??r?z?l?
e. D?-N?l

171. A pharmacy manager is writing the monthly "Inventory report". What business transactions should be represented in the expenditure item of the report?
a. Extra-evaluation of laboratory-packaging works
b. Amortization charged to operation
c. Payroll payment
d. Herbal raw material purchases
*e. Drug sales

172. The manufacturing pharmaceutical company " Elema" set up its own corporate pharmacy. In this case, it uses the following distribution channel:
a. Third level
b. Fourth level
c. Second level
d. First level
*e. Zero level

173. Emodin, an anthracene derivative, has purgative effect. Large quantities of anthracene-derived groups of emodin are contained in the fruits of the following plant:
a. Blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus)
b. Blackcurrant
c. Elder (Sambucus)
*d. Buckthorn
e. Alder buckthorn (Frangula alnus)

174. Urine of an intoxicated person was found to contain ecgonin. This indicates poisoning with the following substance:
*a. Cocaine
b. Phenol
c. Phenacetin
d. Heroin
e. Caffeine

175. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
a. Limited
b. Normative
c. Without preliminary licencing or registration
d. Free
*e. Licence-based

176. A common method for quantitative determination of drugs from the group of alkali metal halogenides is:
a. Chelatometry
b. Permanganatometry
c. Nitritometry
d. Alkalimetry
*e. Argentometry

177. Powders that quickly enter into a reaction in presence of water and emit carbon dioxide relate to the following group:
*a. Effervescent powder
b. Soluble powder
c. Powders for oral use
d. Nasal powders
e. Powders for external use

178. Three founders set up a business entity for the wholesale distribution of medicines and healthcare products. Specify the form of such company:
a. Unitary
b. Utility
c. Individual
*d. Corporate
e. Public

179. Which of the following is the drug of choice for bronchial asthma attacks prevention?
a. Drotaverine
b. Ambroxol
c. Salbutamol
*d. Cromolyn sodium
e. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride

180. An analytical chemist working at an analytical laboratory identifies a drug by the sulfite ions according to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What reagent gets decolorized during this assay?
a. Potassium nitrate solution
b. Iron (III) chloride solution
c. Potassium iodide solution
*d. Iodine solution
e. Ammonia solution

181. An analytical laboratory received "Aether anaestheticus" for analysis. What reagent should be used for detecting acetone and aldehyde impurities according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Ammonium solution of argentum nitrate
b. Hydroxylamine solution
c. Sodium hydrosulfite solution
d. Aqueous solution of potassium iodide
*e. Alkaline solution of potassium tetraiodomercurate

182. A pharmacy received a batch of medicines from a pharmacy depot. Specify the drug subject to the controlled substance inventory in pharmacies:
a. Novocaine
b. Paracetamol
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Dicaine
e. Analgin

183. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic DOES NOT NEED to be combined with potassium preparations?
a. Dichlothiazide
b. Ethacrynic acid
c. Furosemide
*d. Triamteren
e. Clopamide

184. A doctor gave a prescription for the tincture of digitalis with hydrochloric acid. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Gassing
b. Precipitation
*c. Hydrolysis (with no visible changes)
d. Change in colour
e. Change in odour

185. A pharmacy has a license for selling narcotic drugs. The warrant for the receipt of these drugs from the pharmacy warehouse is valid for:
a. No longer than 3 months from the date of issue
b. No longer than 5 calendar days from the date of issue
*c. No longer than 10 calendar days from the date of issue
d. No longer than 1 year from the date of issue
e. No longer than 1 calendar days from the date of issue

186. A pharmaceutist prepared suppository mass with novocaine and cocoa butter, but it turned out to be crumbling. What substance to be added to form a plastic mass:
a. Paraffin
b. Vaseline
c. Hydrous lanolin
*d. Anhydrous lanolin
e. Wax

187. In course of pharmacotherapy of bronchitis a patient was found to have dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis, liver dysfunction. Which of the prescribed drugs might have caused these manifestations?
a. Ascorbic acid
*b. Doxycyclin
c. Paracetamolum
d. Codeine phosphate
e. tlsteinum

188. O-methylation is an important way of biotransformation of organic substances in the body. Compounds subject to O-methylation should contain:
a. Carboxyl groups
*b. Phenol groups
c. Amino groups
d. Nitro groups
e. Thiol groups

189. A phytopreparation "Flacarbinum" has spasmolytic, anti-inflammatory and antiulcer effect. This preparation is produced out of the following plant:
a. Buckeye (Aesculus)
b. Pot marigold (Calendula officinalis)
*c. Licorice (Glycyrrhiza)
d. Jacobs ladder blue (Polemonium caeruleum)
e. Mountain angelica (Aralia mandshurica)

190. A pharmaceutical plant produces suppositories. What is the best method for their manufacturing in industrial quantities?
a. Lyophilization
b. Pressing
c. Stamping
d. Pumping-out
*e. Outpouring

191. A patient acquired mint leaves at a pharmacy. What recommendations regarding infusion of this herbal raw material must be given by the pharmaceutist?
*a. The infusion is to be prepared in a tightly closed vessel
b. The extract is to be immediately filtered after infusing
c. The extract is to be artificially cooled 15 minutes after infusing
d. The infusion is to be prepared at room temperature
e. The infusion is to be prepared on an open fire

192. Comparative analysis of the performance of two pharmacies showed that the trade stock in terms of days was 20 and 30 days respectively. Which of these indicators is NOT USED for calculating the trade stock?
a. The left-over goods in terms of settlement prices
b. The rate of trade mark-up
*c. Wage fund
d. Turnover
e. Sales volume

193. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces ointments. What base is applied for production of sulfur ointment simple?
a. Vaseline
*b. Emulsion
c. Base For ophthalmic ointments
d. Polyethylene glycol
e. Lanolin

194. A pharmaceutical factory produces herbal juice out of fresh raw material. What operation should be performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Filtration
b. Crystallization
*c. Heating followed by quick cooling
d. Adsorption
e. Sedimentation

195. Compulsory deductions from employees salary are made by the accounting department independently. Specify a deduction which can be made only on the grounds of written permit of an employee:
a. Alimony
*b. Charitable contributions
c. Contributions to the Social insurance fund for temporary disability
d. Contributions to the Social insurance fund for unemployment
e. Superannuation contributions

196. In order to detect peroxides in the anesthetic ether an analytical chemist should use the following reagent:
*a. Potassium iodide
b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Potassium chloride
d. Potassium permanganate
e. Sodium hydroxide

197. When a certain drug reduces the effect of another drug, such phenomenon is called:
*a. Antagonism
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Sensibilization
d. Habituation
e. Potentiation

198. Streptocide, sulfacyl sodium, norsulfazole or sulfadimezinum can be identified by means of the reaction to form:
a. Murexide
b. Fluorescein
c. Iodoform
d. -
*e. Azo dye

199. A pharmaceutic plant producing aerosol forms uses liquefied gases as propellents. Which of the following substances relates to the group of liquefied gases?
*a. Freons
b. Nitrous oxide
c. Nitrogen
d. Ethylene chloride
e. Methylene chloride

200. Natural persons registered as small business entities with simplified taxation scheme (2 group) have the limit for the annual amount of sales proceeds. Specify the proceeds limit:
a. 100 thousand UAH
b. 750 thousand UAH
c. 5 million UAH
d. 3 million UAH
*e. 1 million UAH

