1. A pharmacy received a prescription for ethyl alcohol. What amount of alcohol can be dispensed to the patient with diabetes free of charge?
a. 150 g per month
b. 50 g per month
c. There is no standard
d. 200 g per month
*e. 100 g per month

2. Which of the following diuretics SHOULD NOT be administered to patients with impaired hearing?
a. Clopamide
b. Spironolactone
c. Indapamide
*d. Furosemide
e. Chlorthalidone

3. A person got poisoned with salts of manganese. Analysis of the mineral residue revealed manganese ions. What reactions underlie the chemical processes of manganese detection?
*a. Oxidation-reduction
b. Neutralization
c. Metathesis
d. Hydrolysis
e. Dissociation

4. Pharmacies as legal entities must have statutory capital in order to get registered with state authorities. Specify the amount which is identified as the statutory capital:
*a. Amount recorded in the constituent documents
b. Total sources of funds
c. Outstanding amount
d. Total assets
e. Amount of noncurrent assets

5. Plantain leaves are used for production of Plantaglucidum which has antiulcerogenic action. The plant material analysis involves quantitative determination of the following class of compounds:
a. Vitamins
b. Amarines
c. Carotenoids
*d. Polysaccharides
e. Terpenes

6. An analytical laboratory has the task to confirm the presence of ethylenediamine in the aminophylline. Which of the following reagents alows to detect ethylenediamine?
a. Sodium hydroxide
*b. Copper (II) sulfate
c. Barium chloride
d. Silver nitrate
e. Concentrated sulfuric acid

7. Simultaneous use of gentamicin and acyclovir tablets increases the risk of:
a. Cardiotoxicity
b. Hepatotoxicity
c. Likelihood of allergic reactions
d. Neurotoxicity
*e. Nephrotoxicity

8. A pharmaceutist prepared a lipophilic ointment of suspension type. What substance is used for preparing this kind of ointments?
*a. Xeroform
b. Tannin
c. Protargolum
d. Herbal extracts
e. Menthol

9. A pharmaceutist prepared a drug by the prescription:Rp.:StreptocidiDermatoli ana 1,0LanoliniVaselini ana 5,0M.D.S.: Apply to the affected skin.Specify the type of the disperse system:
a. Combined ointment
*b. Suspension ointment
c. Extraction ointment
d. Solution ointment
e. Hydrophilic ointment

10. A person got poisoned with alcohols. What alcohol derivatives are used for the analysis by gas-liquid chromatography?
a. Alkyl sulfites
b. Alkyl sulfates
c. Alkyl nitrates
d. Alkyl acetates
*e. Alkyl nitrites

11. A pharmaceutical analyst analyzes the substance of ascorbic acid in compliance with the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. To identify the oxalic acid impurities he uses the solution of:
*a. Calcium chloride
b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Sodium chloride
d. Sodium hydrocarbonate
e. Sodium sulfate

12. A pharmacy opens a bank account to store funds and conduct ongoing business transactions. What kind of account should be opened?
*a. Current
b. Deposit
c. Letter of credit
d. Investment
e. Provisional

13. Schedule of sanitation actions in pharmacies is regulated by the relevant regulatory acts. Cleaning day at a pharmacy must be scheduled for at least 1 time:
a. In 10 days
*b. In a month
c. In 3 days
d. In a week
e. In 5 days

14. In order to identify deoxycorticosterone acetate a pharmaceutical analyst performed a steroid cycle reaction, which resulted in formation of cherry-red colour and a green fluorescence. What reagent was added?
a. Iron (III) chloride solution
b. Potassium hydroxide solution
c. Chloroform
*d. Concentrated sulfuric acid
e. Iodine solution

15. A pharmacy prepares ointments with extracts. What is the way to incorporate the dry and thick extracts into the ointments?
a. To disperse them with a liquid which is compatible with the base
b. To incorporate them directly into the molten ointment base
c. To disperse them with ethanol
*d. To triturate them first with alcohol-water-glycerol [1:6:3] mixture
e. To dissolve them in water first

16. A pharmaceutist was on a business trip. What is the deadline for submitting a travel expense report?
a. Ten working days after returning from a trip
b. There is no deadline
c. A week after returning from a trip
*d. Three working days after returning from a trip
e. Four working days after returning from a trip

17. What solution is used for the detection of iron (II) ions under the SPhU requirements?
a. Lanthanum nitrate
*b. Potassium ferricyanide
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Ammonia
e. Silver nitrate

18. Salicylic acid and its derivatives may be the cause of acute intoxication. When salicylates are analyzed by TLC method, the chromatographic plate is sprayed with:
a. Solution of mercury (II) sulfate and chloroform solution
b. Dragendorffs reagent
*c. Solution of iron (III) chloride
d. Marquis reagent
e. Forrest reagent

19. Prescriptions for the controlled drugs dispensed under the reimbursement program (except for the narcotic and psychotropic preparations in substance) are issued on the following prescription form:
a. №1, single copy
b. №3, single copy
c. №1 and №3
*d. №1 in duplicate
e. №3 in duplicate

20. A female patient has a sleep disorder after stress. Which of the following hypnotic drugs should be preferred for the treatment of insomnia?
*a. Nitrozepam
b. Barbital
c. Phenobarbital
d. Chloral hydrate
e. Aminazine

21. Alkaloid glaucine has an antitussive effect that is stronger and longer if compared to that of codeine, and exhibits no narcotic side effects. What drug plant contains glaucine?
*a. Yellow hornpoppy
b. Datura
c. Thermopsis lanceolata
d. Henbane bell (Scopolia carniolica)
e. Celandine

22. What final document is used for the preparation of the report on the discrepancies revealed in course of the inventory at the pharmacy?
a. Invoice
b. Commercial report
c. Inventory item description
d. Checklist
*e. Act on the inventory results

23. Help the doctor to select a drug from the group of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which is an inhibitor of COX-2 and does not damage the stomach:
a. Paracetamol
b. Diclofenac sodium
*c. Celecoxib
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Indomethacin

24. Analysis of the drug sales performance revealed market expansion, the absolute increase of the drug in manufacturers stocks, slowdown in the growth rate of sales, intense competition. What stage of the product life cycle is the drug in?
a. Introduction
b. Saturation and decline
*c. Maturity
d. Development
e. Growth

25. The quality of tablets is assessed by various factors. What instrument is used for the tablet disintegration test?
*a. Basket apparatus
b. Paddle
c. -
d. Friabilator
e. Flow-through device

26. A pharmaceutist prepared eye drops containing silver nitrate. What substance must be taken to ensure isotonicity?
a. Glucose
b. Sodium sulfate
*c. Sodium nitrate
d. Boric acid
e. Sodium chloride

27. A patient suffering from epilepsy has taken phenobarbital for a long time and developed drug tolerance. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon development?
*a. Acceleration of biotransformation
b. Receptors sensitivity enhancement
c. Absorption process reduction
d. Accumulation of substances in the body
e. Inhibition of biotransformation

28. A pharmaceutist prepares powders with papaverine hydrochloride. What hand scales should be used for weighing out 0,05 g of substance?
a. BP 5,0
b. BP 10,0
c. BP 20,0
*d. BP 1,0
e. BP 2,0

29. A 70-year-old patient with stenocardia claims that the pharmacy sold him a drug that relieved an attack of stenocardia but instead caused an acute bursting headache. What drug is this side effect typical for?
*a. Nitrosorbid
b. Trimetazidine
c. Nifedipine
d. Amlodipine
e. Metoprolol

30. A 40-year-old patient has a history of bronchial asthma and heart rhythm disorders in form of bradyarrhythmias. Bronchospasm can be eliminated by the drugs of the following pharmacological group:
a. Cholinesterase inhibitors
b. Muscle relaxants
c. M-cholinomimetics
d. beta-blockers
*e. M-cholinergic antagonists

31. A 65-year-old female patient with a fracture of mandible has been prescribed a drug from the group of narcotic analgesics. Specify this drug:
a. Furosemide
*b. Promedol
c. Heparin
d. Piracetam
e. Cinnarizine

32. A pharmaceutist prepares trituration of atropine sulfate. What adjuvant should be used for this purpose?
a. Starch
b. Glucose
c. Saccharose
*d. Lactose
e. Talc

33. A patient with acute intoxication has been administered a loop diuretic in order to cause the forced diuresis. What drug is it?
a. Mannitol
*b. Furosemide
c. Triamterene
d. Hydrochlorothiazide
e. Spironolactone

34. Hydrocyanic acid and its salts are extremely toxic substances. In humans, they are partly neutralized by enzymatic conversion into:
*a. Thiocyanate
b. Acetic acid
c. Ethanol
d. Carbon (IV) oxide
e. Nitrogen (II) oxide

35. Leaves of greater plantain are harvested in summer by mowing or cutting them with a knife or a sickle. There is always one developed plant left per 1 m2. The plant is harvested in the following vegetation period:
a. Ripeness
b. Budding
*c. Blooming
d. Rosetting
e. Beginning of fruiting

36. Precipitation reactions are used to establish the identity of drugs. Cation of sodium in sodium citrate can be identified by the formation of a white precipitate with:
*a. Potassium permanganate
b. Potassium ferrocyanide
c. Silver nitrate
d. Barium chloride
e. Iron (III) chloride

37. Diazepam is used for the treatment of neuroses due to the following pharmacological effect:
a. Antidepressant
*b. Anxiolytic
c. Diuretic
d. Analgesic
e. Antipyretic

38. In order to detect the presence of thiosulfate ions a pharmaceutical analyst added the excess reagent. The resulting reaction produced a white precipitate, which slowly turned yellow, then brown, and black. What solution was added?
a. Lead (II) acetate
b. Barium chloride
c. Ammonium oxalate
d. Diphenylamine
*e. Silver nitrate

39. A pharmaceutist prepares a solution for injections that must be stabilized with 0,1M of hydrochloric acid solution. What solution is to be prepared?
a. Sodium benzoate
b. Potassium chloride
c. Hexamethylenetetramine
d. Calcium chloride
*e. Novocaine

40. Apart from goods sales, there are other business transactions that can be characterized as goods disposal. Which of the following business transactions reduces the stock at pharmacies?
a. Revaluation for the packing and laboratory work
b. Reclassifying other supplies as goods
c. Bringing the oversupply on charge
d. Bringing the glassware on charge
*e. Disposal of products for economic needs

41. Vacation leaves for employees of pharmacies include paid annual, additional, sabbatical, social leaves, as well as unpaid leaves. What is the total duration of the paid basic and additional vacation leave?
a. 65 calendar days
b. 60 calendar days
c. 90 calendar days
*d. 59 calendar days
e. 70 calendar days

42. Ampules are produced of glass with appropriate heat resistance. An ampule would meet the requirements of technical standards if the ampule glass has the following characteristic:
a. Quality ampule sealing
b. Withstanding the stresses during production and transportation
*c. Thermal shock resistance
d. Protection of light-sensitive materials
e. Easy cutting of capillaries

43. A 65-year-old patient complains of nausea, vomiting, lethargy, seeing yellow spots in front of his eyes. The patient daily takes 0,25 mg of digoxin, 100 mg of aspecardum, 50 mg of metoprolol. What pathological condition is this syndrome typical for?
*a. Glycoside intoxication
b. Withdrawal syndrome
c. Food poisoning
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Hypersensitivity reaction

44. Sterilization methods used for the preparation of drugs under aseptic conditions can be differentiated into physical, mechanical, and chemical ones. Specify the chemical method of sterilization:
a. Radiation sterilization
b. Dry heat sterilization
c. UV light sterilization
d. Pressure steam sterilization
*e. Addition of preservatives

45. Specific impurity of thiosulfates in Natrii iodidum and Kalii iodidum is identified by adding starch and iodine solutions. The absence of impurities is proved by:
a. Discolouration of the solution
b. Disappearance of the blue colour
c. Yellow colour
d. White precipitate
*e. Blue colour

46. Medications Passit and Novopassit are used as tranquilizing, sedative and mild hypnotic agents. These medications are produced from the following grass:
a. Garden sage
b. Elecampane
c. Three-lobe beggarticks
*d. Purple passionflower
e. Lesser periwinkle

47. A patient with acute heart failure and cardiac glycoside intolerance was given an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
*a. Stimulation of beta1-adrenoceptors
b. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase
c. Stimulation of M-cholinergic receptors
d. Blockade of K+-, Na+-ATPase
e. Stimulation of alpha1-adrenoceptors

48. Which of the following antibiotics can be identified by means of the maltol test?
a. Kanamycin monosulfate
b. Amoxicillin
c. Lincomycin hydrochloride
d. Doxycycline hydrochloride
*e. Streptomycin sulfate

49. A pharmacy makes bulk purchases of health and hygiene products. The agent works under a contract with the manufacturer and operates on his account. The agent may be given the exclusive right to sell goods in certain regions. Specify this agent:
a. Dealer
b. Commission agent
c. Broker
d. Consignee
*e. Wholesale agent

50. A pharmaceutist prepared 100,0 g of oil emulsion using 5% solution of methyl cellulose as an emulsifier. Specify the required amount of oil and emulsifier for the drug preparation:
a. 10,0 g, 10,0 g
b. 20,0 g, 30,0 g
c. 10,0 g, 30,0 g
d. 20,0 g, 10,0 g
*e. 10,0 g, 20,0 g

51. Field horsetail grass is recommend as a diuretic. What herbal material can be used as a substitute?
*a. Herba Aervae lanatae
b. Herba Adonidis
c. Herba Leonuri
d. Herba Menthae piperitae
e. Herba Convallariae

52. A hypertensive patient has been administered lisinopril. What side effect is typical for this drug?
a. Vomiting
b. Insomnia
*c. Dry cough
d. Increased appetite
e. Constipation

53. A patient has a history of cholelithiasis. What drug should be administered to prevent biliary colic?
a. Bisacodyl
b. Contrycal
*c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Pancreatin
e. Almagel

54. A patient with the symptoms of cardiac glycoside intoxication has been administered unitiol. What is the mechanism of therapeutic action of this drug?
a. Increased penetration of K+ into the cardiac myocytes
b. Binding of the ionized Ca2+
c. Induction of cardiac glycosides metabolism
d. Increase in Na+ level in the myocardium
*e. Reactivation of the membrane K+, Na+-ATPase

55. Pharmaceutical market of Ukraine comprises pharmacies of various forms of ownership. Specify the form of ownership for a community pharmacy:
a. -
b. Private person
*c. Territorial community
d. Group of shareholders
e. Workforce of an enterprise

56. Enrolled in private pharmacies to implement a drug whose active ingredient is the chemical name of 2-chloro-10-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-phenothiazine hydrochloride. Specify this drug:
a. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
b. Trifluoperazine hydrochloride
*c. Chlorpromazine hydrochloride
d. Clonidine hydrochloride
e. Promethazine hydrochloride

57. It is required to prove the presence of bismuth ions in the mineral residue. What preliminary reaction is used for this purpose?
a. With sodium rhodizonate
*b. With 8-hydroxyquinoline
c. With copper acetate
d. With potassium chromate
e. With dithizone

58. A pharmacy prepared a solution of macromolecular substance with limited swelling capacity. What solution was labelled "warm up before use"?
*a. Gelatin
b. Methyl cellulose
c. Pepsin
d. Trypsin
e. Pancreatin

59. A pharmaceutical analyst identifies the substance of potassium acetate. What reagent confirms the presence of potassium cation in the substance?
a. Iron (III) chloride
b. Zinc oxide
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Potassium permanganate
*e. Tartaric acid

60. A pharmaceutical factory produces suspensions and emulsions. Specify the equipment which is used for dispersion and mixing in the liquid medium:
a. Oscillating mixers
b. Drum mixers
c. Gate mixers
d. Anchor mixers
*e. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, colloid mixers

61. Simultaneous use of paracetamol and acetylcysteine causes:
a. Reduction of anti-inflammatory action of paracetamol
b. Increase of mucolytic action of acetylcysteine
c. Increase of paracetamol nephrotoxicity
d. Inhibition of paracetamol absorption
*e. Reduction of paracetamol hepatotoxicity

62. A patient who has been treated for hypertension complains of cough. Objective examination reveals no changes in the lungs. Which of the following drugs might have caused cough?
a. Nebivolol
*b. Captopril
c. Hypothiazide
d. Clonidine
e. Amlodipine

63. Under the SPh of Ukraine, one of the reactions for the detection of calcium cation presence in drugs is the reaction with:
a. Hydroxyquinoline
b. Hydroxylamine
c. Alizarin
d. Sulfuric acid
*e. Glyoxal-hydroxyanil

64. A marketing manager of a pharmaceutical company carries out market research on vitamin preparation market. He takes into account various parameters including the therapeutical effectiveness, supply and demand. What method should be applied?
*a. Delphi method
b. Mathematical statistics method
c. Method of extraction from the original medical records
d. -
e. Graph method

65. Representatives of the family Solanaceae are widely used in medical practice as alkaloid-containing plants. Which representative is the source for production of semi-synthetic steroid hormones?
a. Solanum tuberosum
b. Datura Stramonium
c. Atropa belladonna
*d. Solanum laciniatum
e. Hyoscyamus niger

66. A pharmacy received a prescription for an oil liniment including streptocidum. What is the type of disperse system of this preparation?
a. Combined
b. Solution
c. Emulsion
*d. Suspension
e. Alloy

67. Pharmacies prepare injectable solutions. Which solution is prepared without any stabilizer?
a. Glucose solution
b. Solution of caffeine sodium benzoate
c. Sodium thiosulfate solution
*d. Sodium bicarbonate solution
e. Novocaine solution

68. Stimulation of beta-cells of the pancreas causes the hypoglycemic effect of the following drug:
a. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*b. Glibenclamide
c. Prednisolone
d. Retabolilum
e. Heparin

69. Quarterly evaluation of business and financial performance of a pharmacy involves calculating its profitability. For this purpose the following data is used: turnover - 100 thousands UAH, gross profit - 25 thousands UAH, expenditures - 1 thousand UAH. Calculate the profitability of the pharmacy:
*a. 15%
b. 10%
c. 25%
d. 20%
e. 22%

70. A 12 weeks pregnant patient has been hospitalized with symptoms of acute cystitis. What antibiotic can be recommend in this case?
a. Tetracycline
b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Metronidazole
d. Gentamicin
*e. Amoxicillin

71. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with the enterprise owner on behalf of the workforce. Any collective agreement is worked out in written form. Which article of the Labor Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
a. 41
b. 40
c. 36
*d. 17
e. 38

72. A hypertensive patient has been prescribed a drug from the group of non-selective beta-blockers. Specify this drug:
a. Prazosin
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*c. Anapriline
d. Neostigmine methylsulfate
e. Labetalol

73. A pharmaceutist has to prepare 10% alcohol solution of iodine. What is the required concentration of ethanol for this purpose?
a. 60%
b. 70%
c. 96%
*d. 95%
e. 40%

74. Pharmaceutical analyst working at the laboratory of the State Inspectorate for Quality Control of Medicines identifies the drug substance "Glucose anhydrous" with copper-tartrate solution (Fehlings reagent). What colour precipitate is produced?
a. White
b. Blue
c. Purple
*d. Red
e. Black

75. While preparing marshmallow root extract, a pharmaceutist mistakenly used the water of improper temperature for this extract, and the end product came up turbid. What is the required water temperature for the extraction of this herbal material?
a. 60°C
b. 80°C
*c. Room temperature
d. 40°C
e. 100°C

76. A pharmacy plans to expand the production of medicines. For this purpose it purchased the production equipment at a cost of 7000 UAH. The cost of the equipment will be recorded to the balance of the pharmacy as:
a. Amortization cost
b. Residual
c. Revalued amount
*d. Initial cost
e. Fair value

77. A factrory workshop producing suspensions and emulsions is going to develop the manufacture of new drugs. What mechanisms can be used for the ultrasound processing of drugs?
*a. Liquid whistle, magnetostrictive source
b. Centrifugal mixer with rotating housing
c. Dismembrator, electrical impulse plasmolyzer
d. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, dismembrator
e. Disintegrator, liquid whistle

78. A 38-year-old male patient with mercuric chloride intoxication has been delivered to the admission ward in grave condition. What antidote must be immediately administered the patient?
a. Izonitrozinum
*b. Unithiol
c. Dipyroxime
d. Atropine
e. Nalorphine

79. It is required to prepare furacilin solution (1:5000). What is the dissolution peculiarity of furacilin?
a. It dissolves in the purified water after the trituration
b. It dissolves in a minimal amount of ethyl alcohol
c. It dissolves in the cold purified water
*d. It dissolves in the boiling water purified in the presence of sodium chloride
e. It dissolves in the filtered purified water

80. Help the doctor to select a drug for the replacement therapy after the thyroid gland removal:
a. Parathyroidin
b. Insulin
*c. L-thyroxine
d. Prednisolone
e. Mercazolilum

81. A pharmacy has a license for selling narcotic drugs. The warrant for the receipt of these drugs from the pharmacy warehouse is valid for:
a. No longer than five calendar days from the date of issue
*b. No longer than 10 calendar days from the date of issue
c. No longer than one year from the date of issue
d. No longer than one calendar days from the date of issue
e. No longer than three months from the date of issue

82. After harvesting the calamus rhizomes the received material should be dried. What temperature range is required for obtaining good-quality raw material?
a. 80-90°C
b. 70-80°C
c. 40-60°C
d. 60-70°C
*e. 35-40°C

83. A drug raw material from the family Polygonaceae had been sent to a laboratory for analysis. On macroscopic examination the material was identified as a herbaceous plant with lanceolate leaves with a red spot, and filmy ocreae covered with appressed hairs. The plant had the apical inflorescence in dense spicate panicles. What plant is it?
a. Common knotweed
b. Biting knotweed
*c. Redshank (persicaria)
d. Snakeweed
e. Common buckwheat

84. A 67-year-old patient with chronic heart failure takes digoxin. In order to reduce its side effects the patients doctor recommended to combine it with the followig drug:
*a. Panangin
b. Calcium chloride
c. Hydrochlorthiazide
d. Euphyllinum
e. Calcium gluconate

85. A person got poisoned with an unknown substance. Chemico-toxicological test for the isolated toxin with Dragendorffs, Sonnenscheins, Scheiblers reagents caused setting of sediments. The specific study should be focused on the following group of toxic substances:
*a. Alkaloids and nitrogen-containing compounds
b. Methyl alcohol
c. Hydrocyanic acid
d. Metal toxins
e. Ammonia and its salts

86. The method of suspension preparation depends on the properties of its components. Specify the substances having hydrophobic properties:
*a. Camphor, menthol
b. Sodium bicarbonate, sodium sulfate
c. Boric acid, calcium carbonate
d. White clay, bentonite
e. Zinc oxide, talc

87. A pharmaceutist worked on a holiday, and the time worked was within the normal working hours of the current month. The employee would be entitled to be paid:
*a. Fixed salary + one daily rate
b. Fixed salary + double daily rate
c. According to the standard procedure as for a normal working day
d. There would be no penalty rates
e. Single piecework rate

88. A 43-year-old patient with a severe form of rheumatoid arthritis has been administered a certain drug for background therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Methylprednisolone
b. Prednisolone
*c. Methotrexate
d. Nimesulide
e. Diclofenac sodium

89. Anthracene derivatives of emodin have purgative effect. Large quantities of anthracene-derived groups of emodin are contained in the fruits of the following plant:
a. Alder buckthorn (Frangula alnus)
b. Blackcurrant
c. Blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus)
*d. Buckthorn
e. Elder (Sambucus)

90. From the pharmaceutical stock select a reversible anticholinesterase drug to be administered to the patients with atony of the intestine and urinary bladder in the postoperative period:
a. Phosphacolum
b. Atropine sulfate
*c. Proserin
d. Benzohexonium
e. Dithylinum

91. Issuing prescriptions and orders for drugs and medical products is regulated by the Order № 360 dated 19.07.2005 (as amended). Specify the prescription form for phenobarbital as a part of a combined dosage form:
a. Prescription forms F-1 and F-3 in duplicate
*b. F-1
c. No prescription
d. F-2
e. F-3 in duplicate

92. Drug plant Dioscorea nipponica is the source for production of Роlysponinum drug which is used in the complex treatment of atherosclerosis. Specify the active compounds of dioscorea material:
*a. Steroidal saponins
b. Triterpene saponins
c. Cardiac glycosides
d. Alkaloids
e. Essential oil

93. Theory of management currently points out four the most important approaches to the management. Select the approach that is NOT applied in the theory of management:
*a. Structured
b. Process approach
c. Situational
d. Systemic
e. Different schools dedication approach

94. What herbal drug produced form alkaloid-containing raw materials can be recommended for neurasthenia, insomnia, menopausal disorders?
a. Securinine nitrate
b. Ergotamine
c. Glaucine hydrochloride
*d. Novopassit
e. Vinblastine

95. During transportation, the markings on the packages of theobromine and theophylline were damaged. What solution allows to identify theobromine and theophylline?
a. Potassium permanganate
b. Copper nitrate
c. Potassium dichromate
*d. Cobalt chloride
e. Sodium chloride

96. Specify the base for the preparation of antibiotic ointments:
a. 7 parts of vaseline + 3 part of lanolin
b. 8 parts of vaseline + 2 part of lanolin
c. 5 parts of vaseline + 1 part of lanolin
*d. 6 parts of vaseline + 4 part of lanolin
e. 5 parts of vaseline + 5 part of lanolin

97. Under the SPhU requirements mercury salts are indentified by means of interaction with sodium hydroxide solution. Specify the colour of the precipitate that is produced as a resut of this reaction:
a. White
*b. Yellow
c. Yellow-green
d. Blue
e. Red

98. A regional medical representative of a foreign company uses the data derived from periodicals and reference and statistical materials in order to characterize the territorial pharmaceutical market. What kind of market research is based upon these sources?
a. This method does not apply to research
b. All answers are correct
c. -
d. Field studies
*e. Desk studies

99. White precipitate produced by the reaction of morphine hydrochloride with ammonia solution dissolves in sodium hydroxide solution due to the presence of the following group in the structure of morphine hydrochloride:
*a. Phenolic hydroxyl
b. Aldehyde group
c. Alcoholic hydroxyl
d. Carboxyl group
e. Keto group

100. Paracetamol substance has been sent for analysis. Reaction with the solution of iron (III) chloride gave the blue-purple colour. This indicates the presence of:
a. Ester group
b. Aldehyde group
*c. Phenolic hydroxyl
d. Alcoholic hydroxyl
e. Keto group

101. A retail pharmacy has been purchasing goods within an accounting period. What changes to the balance will result from this business transaction?
a. Changes will be caused to the liabilities only
b. Decrease in assets and liabilities
c. -
*d. Increase in assets and liabilities
e. Changes will be caused to the assets only

102. A 17-year-old patient complains of persistent thirst, dry mouth, frequent urination, increased appetite. Blood glucose is at the rate of 11 mmol/l. The patient has been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type I. What drug is indicated for treatment?
a. Asparcamum
b. Maninil
*c. Insulin
d. Acarbose
e. Glibenclamide

103. During the working day a pharmaceutist prepared five dosage forms. Which of them requires a complete chemical control?
a. Antipruritic ointment
b. Ear drops with levomycitin
c. Mixtura Pavlovi
*d. Eye drops 10 ml of 2% ethylmorphine hydrochloride solution
e. 5% aethonium solution

104. A patient has been prescribed hand-rolled rectal suppositories with 0,1 g of aminophylline. What is the amount of base required for each suppository, provided that the suppository weight is not specified in the formulation?
a. 3,9 g
b. 1,4 g
c. 2,4 g
d. 1,9 g
*e. 2,9 g

105. Activity of a company leader involves managerial decision-making aimed at the achievement of corporate goals. Which of the following decisions are NOT classified by the method of justification?
a. Intuitive
*b. Standard
c. -
d. Decisions based upon judgements
e. Rational

106. The pharmaceutical market is characterized by the seasonal fluctuations in demand for anti-cold medicines. What kind of marketing is used in case of such demand?
a. Remarketing
b. Counteractive
c. Conversive
d. Developing marketing
*e. Synchromarketing

107. Standard herbal material of lily-of-the-valley is obtained by drying it at a temperature of 50-60°C in order to prevent the following possible biochemical process:
a. Volatilization of essential oils
*b. Enzymatic hydrolysis of cardiac glycosides
c. Oxidation of terpenoids
d. Oxidation of phenolic compounds
e. Oxidation of resins

108. Business transactions of pharmacies are reported in the accounts. Specify the account that reports the settlements with debtors and creditors:
a. Negative
*b. Nominal
c. Positive
d. Business
e. Trial balance

109. Pharmaceutical plants produce ointments on various bases. Specify the ointment base having the most pronounced osmotic properties:
a. Silicon
b. Vaseline, lanolin
*c. Polyethylene oxide
d. Methyl cellulose
e. Hydrogenated fat

110. Menthol has anesthetic and antiseptic effect. What plant is the source of menthol?
a. Folia Salviae
b. Folia Uvae ursi
c. Folia Absinthii
*d. Folia Menthae piperitae
e. Folia Eucalypti

111. The thyme grass is used for the production of herbal medical products for the treatment of respiratory tract infections. Under the SPhU, the herbal raw material is subject to chromatographic identification by means of thin layer chromatography. What substances are detected on the chromatographic plate after its treatment with due reagent?
a. Quercetin and rutin
*b. Thymol and carvacrol
c. Arbutin and methyl arbutin
d. Atropine and hyoscyamine
e. Apigenin and luteolin

112. Phenobarbital drug has a sedative, hypnotic and anti-epileptic effect. What is its international nonproprietary name?
a. Nitrofurazone
*b. Luminal
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Salol
e. Diazepam

113. A 35-year-old patient with tachycardia has been administered propranolol. Which of the following reactions may be caused by the use of beta-blockers?
a. Cumulation
b. Constipations
*c. Bronchospasm
d. Blood pressure rise
e. Drug dependence

114. The manufacturing pharmaceutical company Elema set up its own corporate pharmacy. In this case, it uses the following distribution channel:
*a. Zero level
b. Second level
c. Fourth level
d. Third level
e. First level

115. At the end of the reporting period a pharmacy makes an analysis of its commercial and financial activities. What economic index describing the commercial and financial performance is defined as the ratio of the pharmacy profit to the turnover?
a. Distribution costs
b. Wholesale turnover
*c. Profitability
d. Retail turnover
e. Bill of material

116. A patient has been found to have pesticide intoxication. Biochemical (cholinesterase) test was positive. What pesticide is likely to have caused the intoxication?
a. Hexachlorocyclohexane
b. Heptachlor
*c. Dichlorvos
d. DDT
e. Ethyl mercury chloride

117. Which of the following antihypertensive drugs has potassium-sparing action?
*a. Triamterene
b. Furosemide
c. Prazosin
d. Metoprolol
e. Diltiazem

118. A pharmaceutist prepared the massage cream of the following composition:Beeswax 12,0Almond oil 68,5Spermaceti 12,0Anhydrous lanolin 7,5Essential oil of lavender 3 drops.Specify the cream type:
a. Emulsion
*b. Oily
c. Suspension
d. Combined
e. Non-oily

119. A patient with a history of allergic rhinitis has been prescribed ephedrine in form of nasal drops. The patient has significantly benefited from nasal instillation, and this stimulated him to use the drug every two hours. But under these conditions the drug appeared to be ineffective. What is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Drug dependence
*b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Cumulation
d. Idiosyncrasy
e. Allergy

120. What non-narcotic antitussive drug of central action can be used for dry cough?
*a. Glaucine
b. Codeine
c. Ambroxol
d. Mucaltin
e. Acetylcysteine

121. A laboratory for drug quality control checks the quality of the drug substance nitrofural (furacilin). The chemical denomination of this drug is:
*a. 5-Nitro-2-furaldehyde semicarbazone
b. 7-Nitro-5-phenyl-1,3-dihydro-2H-1,4-benzodiazepin-2-one
c. 1-(5-Nitrofurfurilidenamino)imidazolidine-2 ,4-dione
d. N(-(2-Furantdil)-5-fluorouracil
e. 1,2-Diphenyl-4-butylpyrazolidine-dione-3,5

122. In order to analyze marketing opportunities and make a forecast of the market position a pharmaceutical company can use a matrix allowing the company to find new markets (geographical) or identify new areas of using traditional medicines. What matrix is used by a pharmaceutical company to identify its market position?
*a. Ansoff matrix
b. Competitive force models
c. Matrix of competitive advantages
d. Porters matrix
e. Boston Consulting Group matrix

123. Who is responsible for the acceptance of goods and medical products with accompanying incoming quality control?
a. Head of pharmacy
b. Pharmaceutist
*c. Authorized representative
d. Analyst
e. Supplier pharmaceutist

124. Under the SPhU (appendix 2), leaves of ginkgo are standardized by the content of:
a. Chromones
b. Saponins
c. Alkaloids
*d. Flavonoids
e. Coumarins

125. A pharmaceutical factory produces tablets of sodium chloride. What is the method of their poduction?
*a. Direct compression without additional substances
b. Dry granulation prior to compression
c. Moulding
d. Direct compression with the addition of excipients
e. Wet granulation prior to compression

126. Which drug including the beta-lactam cycle in its structure gives a positive reaction with a solution of hydroxylamine hydrochloride in the presence of sodium hydroxide followed by adding the solution of iron (III) chloride?
a. Streptocid
b. Antipyrine
c. Papaverine hydrochloride
*d. Phenoxymethylpenicillin
e. Dibazolum

127. Bronchodilatory effect of short-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist salbutamol develops after:
*a. 5-10 minutes
b. 4-6 hours
c. 20-30 minutes
d. 45-60 minutes
e. 2-3 hours

128. When atropine sulfate is tested for purity, the alkaloids and degradation products are detected by TLc. For this purpose the chromatographic plate is sprayed with a solution of:
*a. Potassium iodobismuthate
b. Ninhydrin
c. Ammonia
d. Acetic-hydrochloric dinitrophenylhydrazine
e. Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide

129. A patient with Parkinsons disease has been prescribed a drug with a predominant effect on the dopaminergic system. What drug is it?
a. Droperidol
b. Lorazepam
c. Aminazine
d. Zopiclone
*e. Levodopa

130. Select a drug for the treatment of bronchial asthma from the group of β2-agonists:
a. Atrovent
b. Ketotifen
c. Beclomethasone
*d. Salbutamol
e. Aminophylline

131. Ampule workshop of a pharmaceutical factory produces the procaine hydrochloride solution. This solution is stabilized by adding:
a. 20,0 of sodium hydrogen carbonate
b. 0,1 mol/l of sodium hydroxide solution
c. 0,1 mol/l of sodium hydrogen carbonate solution
d. 1,5 g of amino-propylene glycol
*e. 0,1 mol/l of hydrochloric acid solution

132. The simple sugar syrup consists of:
a. 45 parts of sugar and 55 parts of water
b. 65 parts of sugar, 33 parts of water, 2 parts of 90% alcohol
c. 73 parts of sugar, 22 parts of water, 5 parts of 90% alcohol
*d. 64 parts of sugar and 36 parts of water
e. 50 parts of sugar and 50 parts of water

133. Some alkaline solution was added to the alcohol solution of ftivazide, causing the solution to change colour from the light yellow to the orange-yellow. Subsequent addition of hydrochloric acid made the solution become again light yellow, and then orange-yellow. What properties of ftivazide are proved by this reaction?
a. Reducing
b. Acid
*c. Amphoteric
d. Base
e. Oxidative

134. A patient has been administered a spasmolytic from the group of muscarinic receptor antagonists as a part of the complex treatment for renal coli. Specify this drug:
a. Dithylinum
b. Galantamine
*c. Atropine
d. Neostigmine
e. Benzohexonium

135. The medicine "Bismuthi subnitras" can be identified after dissolving it in the acid with the following reagent:
a. Potassium chlorate
b. Potassium nitrate
c. Sodium chloride
d. Sodium sulfate
*e. Potassium iodide

136. Pharmacies prepare triturations of toxic and superpotent substances. They can be prepared in a following ratio:
*a. 1:10 and 1:100
b. 1:1000
c. 1:500
d. 1:10 only
e. 1:100 only

137. A pharmaceutical analyst analyzes xeroform. Which of the following reagents can he use to identify bismuth in xeroform?
a. Ammonium hydroxide
*b. Sodium sulfide
c. Copper sulphate
d. Potassium sodium tartrate
e. Barium chloride

138. A pharmaceutist prepared the 2% aqueous solution by dissolving the drug substance triturated in a mortar. What substance is this technology typical for?
a. Potassium bromide
b. Calcium gluconate
c. Boric acid
d. Osarsolum
*e. Potassium permanganate

139. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of this side effect?
a. Ethionamidum
b. Isoniazid
c. Rifampicin
d. Ethambutol
*e. Streptomycin

140. A patient with atopic dermatitis presented to the hospital. Which drug with anti-inflammatory and antiallergic effect should be administered to this patient?
a. Insulin
b. Oxytocin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Retabolilum
e. Aethamidum

141. Production, labour and socio-economic relations between the head of a pharmaceutical company and the workforce are regulated by:
a. Corporate code
b. Labour contract
c. Statute
*d. Collective agreement
e. Contract

142. Losartan for treatment of arterial hypertension is contraindicated in case of:
a. Urine acid diathesis
b. Hyperglycemia
c. Hypokalemia
*d. Pregnancy
e. Hyperlipidemia

143. One of the recent industrial medical forms that is used in pediatric practice and intended for young children unable of swallowing tablets is:
a. Gelatin microcapsules
b. Spansules
c. Granules
*d. Tubatines
e. Dragee

144. A 25-year-old patient with frequent migraine attacks has been prescribed sumatriptan. Specify the mechanism of its action:
a. Selective alpha-blocker
*b. Selective agonist of 5-HT1-serotonin receptors
c. Stimulator of beta-adrenergic receptors
d. Nonselective alpha-blocker
e. Selective antagonist of 5-HT1-serotonin receptors

145. A manufacturing enterprise plans to sell a new drug through the corporate chain of pharmacies. What strategy of drug distribution would be used?
a. Multi-echelon
*b. Direct
c. Horizontal integration
d. Flexible
e. Vertical integration

146. Exacerbation of urolithiasis has caused a renal colic in the patient. What drug must be administered to arrest the colic?
a. Neostigmine methylsulfate
b. Aethimizolum
c. Almagel
d. Siliborum
*e. Drotaverine hydrochloride

147. Simultaneous use of doxycycline hydrochloride and oral contraceptive causes:
a. Increase of oral contraceptives effectiveness
b. Increase of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
*c. Reduction of oral contraceptives effectiveness
d. Reduction of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
e. -

148. What drug acts as a specific antidote in case of iron drug intoxication?
a. Bemegride
b. Protamine sulfate
c. Penicillamine
d. Atropine
*e. Deferoxamine

149. A pharmaceutical plant produces spissum extract with 0,25% ammonia solution used as an extractant. This is a spissum extract of:
a. Valerian
b. Male fern
c. Sagebrush
d. Motherwort
*e. Licorice

150. Flower buds of clove contain the essential oil used for production of herbal antiseptics. Under the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the raw materials are identified by the method of thin layer chromatography. What zones can be identified on the chromatographic plate after their treatment with reagent?
a. Hyoscyamine and scopolamine
b. Apigenin and luteolin
*c. Eugenol and caryophyllene
d. Scopoletin and umbeliferon
e. Quercetin and rutin

151. An accountant of a pharmacy issued a cash receipt voucher for the sales proceeds. What document is used to register cash receipt and cash payment vouchers before the cash arrives to the cashiers?
a. Cash book
b. Cash report
c. Pay list
d. Ledger of cash dispensed and received by the senior teller
*e. Register of receipt and payment cash documents

152. A pharmaceutical company has made a decision to expand its activities. The process of the companys activity expansion by penetration into new fields of the branch is called:
*a. Diversification
b. Segmentation
c. Conglomeration
d. Centralization
e. Integration

153. A pharmaceutist has a labour dispute with the pharmacy administration about rescheduling his annual vacation leave. The employee can appeal against the decision of the pharmacy administration to the following body:
a. MoH of Ukraine
b. Highest management bodies of pharmaceutical service at the regional level
c. Trade union committee
*d. Labour disputes commission (LDC)
e. Commercial court

154. A patient after acute myocardial infarction has been recommended to take acetylsalicylic acid for 3-4 months. What effect of acetylsalicylic acid would be most relevant for this patient?
a. Spasmolytic
b. Analgesic
c. Antipyretic
d. Antiinflammatory
*e. Antiplatelet

155. Economic analysis of pharmacy activity involves a number of absolute indices. What index is determined by the formula: "income from sales - prime cost of goods":
a. Net profit
b. Total balance
c. Level of costs
d. Amount of costs
*e. Gross profit

156. A pharmaceutist prepares an ointment on a hydrophobic base. What substance does he use in order to reduce the melting point of the base?
a. Glycerol
b. PEG-40
*c. Vaseline oil
d. Dimexide
e. Ethanol

157. Phytochemical workshop of a factory manufactures pancreatin. What is the source material for obtaining pancreatin?
a. Gastric mucosa of pigs
b. Egg white
*c. Pancreas of pigs or cattle
d. Heart of cattle
e. Lungs of cattle

158. An accountable person (accountant) has been given some cash from the cash account of the company for the purchase of stationery goods . What is the deadline for submitting a full statement of the accountable person on the cash use after receiving the cash?
a. One week
b. There is no fixed term
c. Five working days
*d. Third banking day
e. Ten working days

159. In case of simultaneous use of metronidazole and oral anticoagulants derived from coumarin patients must be warned about:
a. Higher neurotoxicity
b. Potentiation of metronidazole effect
c. Reduction of anticoagulants effect
d. Reduction of metronidazole effect
*e. Potentiation of anticoagulants effect and the risk of bleeding

160. An analytical laboratory received a sample of alpha-aminobutyric acid for analysis. What reagent should be used by the analyst in order to identify this substance?
a. Benzene
b. Sodium nitrate
*c. Ninhydrin
d. Aniline
e. Calcium bromide

161. A pharmacy sells medicines. Which of the following medicines is on the list of the controlled substances?
a. Postinor
b. Gentamicin sulfate
c. Streptocid
*d. Tramadol
e. Hydrocortisone acetate

162. During steam distillation of voltile poisons the first portion of the distillate is collected in a receiver with 2% solution of sodium hydroxide. It is used to detect:
a. Acetates
b. Formaldehyde
*c. Cyanides
d. Ethanol
e. Phenol

163. According to SPhU, formaldehyde can be identified when a sample is reacted with chromotropic acid solution in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid. What colour is formed by this reaction?
a. Brown
b. Yellow
c. Blue
*d. Violet
e. Green

164. Specify the indicator which measures the total contribution of various solutes to the osmotic pressure of the solution:
a. Apyrogenicity
b. Isoviscosity
c. Isohydricity
*d. Osmolality
e. Isotonicity

165. Treatment of a patient who has developed an attack of bronchial asthma for the first time should be started with:
a. H2-histamine blockers
b. Agonists parenterally
*c. Inhalation of beta2-agonists
d. Inhalation of glucocorticosteroid
e. M-anticholinergic drugs

166. Pharmaceutical depot received a batch of herbal material of cinnamon rose. What substance determines the quality of the raw material?
*a. Ascorbic acid
b. Coumarins
c. Tannins
d. Anthracene derivatives
e. Essential oil

167. Biochemical blood test revealed low level of serum iron. What disease are these changes typical for?
a. Bronchial asthma
*b. Iron-deficiency anemia
c. Pneumonia
d. Bronchiectasis
e. Acute bronchitis

168. Advise an internship doctor on why iron preparations should not be administered along with antacids:
a. This causes increased binding to blood proteins
b. This accelerates elimination of iron preparations
c. This impairs deposition of iron in the body
d. This increases intoxication with iron preparations
*e. This causes malabsorption of iron

169. Production of tablets requires stage-to-stage quality control. What devices are used to determine the particle size distribution (fraction) of granules?
a. Microscope
b. Friabilators
c. Various vibrosieves
d. Laboratory IDs
*e. Standard set of sieves

170. A pharmaceutist prepares an infusion at a ratio of 1:30. What plant material would be used?
a. Marshmallow root
b. Oak bark
*c. Lily of the valley grass
d. Sage leaves
e. Shoots of Marsh Labrador tea

171. What is the function of anhydrous lanolin in the suppository mass used for suppositories prepared by hand rolling?
a. Preservative
*b. Plasticizer
c. Solubilizer
d. Emollient
e. Solvent

172. It is required to perform the extraction of medical poisons isolated from the biological material by the method of V.P. Kramarenko. At the same time, what substance will be extracted from the acidic medium?
a. Papaverine
b. Codeine
c. Ephedrine
d. Aminazine
*e. Benzonal

173. A patient who has been taking acetylsalicylic acid developed hemorrhages of mucous membranes. This phenomenon is associated with:
a. Disorder of protein binding
b. Changed volume of distribution
c. Decreased absorption in the gastrointestinal tract
*d. Inhibition of the prothrombin synthesis
e. Increased absorption in the gastrointestinal tract

174. A pharmacy has no quinquelobate motherwort in stock. It can be substituted by the following herbal material:
*a. Rhizomes and roots of valerian
b. Raspberry fruits
c. Hypericum grass
d. Beggarticks grass
e. Linden flowers

175. A female 49-year-old patient complains of compressing headache in the occipital region, dizziness, increased AP. The patient has a history of diabetes mellitus type II. What diuretic DOES NOT affect the blood glucose level?
a. Urea
b. Furosemide
c. Hypothiazide
d. Ethacrynic acid
*e. Indapamide

176. A pharmaceutist working at an analytical laboratory is engaged into sulfite-ion identification of a drug in compliance with the requirements of SPhU. What reagent becomes colourless in this study?
a. Ammonia solution
*b. Iodine solution
c. Potassium iodide solution
d. Potassium nitrate solution
e. Iron (III) chloride solution

177. Which of the following sublingual drugs quickly relieves an attack of stenocardia?
a. Corglycon
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Amiodarone
d. Lisinopril
e. Digoxin

178. A pharmaceutic plant producing aerosol forms uses liquefied gases as propellents. Which of the following substances relates to the group of liquefied gases?
*a. Freons
b. Nitrous oxide
c. Nitrogen
d. Ethylene chloride
e. Methylene chloride

179. A pharmaceutist has to prepare a drug by the prescription:Rp.: Natrii hydrocarbonatis 2,0Natrii benzoatis 1,5Liquoris Ammonii anisatis 4 mlAquae Mentae 100 mlM.D.S. 1 tablespoon 3 times a day.Specify the component that is added in the first place:
a. Liquoris Ammonii anisatis
*b. Mint water
c. Sugar syrup
d. Sodium benzoate
e. Sodium hydrogen carbonate

180. Chloride of lime is identified by calcium cations after boiling with acetic acid in order to eliminate active chlorine. What reagent is used?
a. Ammonium molybdate
b. Magnesium sulfate
*c. Ammonium oxalate
d. Potassium chloride
e. Sodium nitrite

181. What drug can be recommended for symptomatic treatment of muscle pain in a 5-year-old child?
*a. Paracetamol
b. Celecoxib
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Indomethacin
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

182. Senior nurse of the surgical department of the city hospital applied to the interhospital pharmacy. Specify the supporting document for the dispension of dressing material from this pharmacy:
*a. Requisition
b. Passport
c. Certificate
d. Tax invoice
e. Invoice

183. When setting up a joint-stock company the founders discussed the issues of financial liability. What is the liability of the board members in a joint-stock company?
a. Limited to the contributions to the statutory fund and their property
*b. Limited to the value of their shares
c. Limited to the double amount of deposits
d. Unlimited and solidary
e. Limited to the amount of deposits

184. A forensic medicine laboratory received some biological material. It should be tested for the presence of trichlorfon and dichlorvos. For their isolation a toxicologist infuses them with:
a. Water alkalized with ammonia solution
*b. Chloroform
c. Ethanol acidified with oxalic acid
d. Water acidified with sulfuric acid
e. Propanol acidified with oxalic acid

185. A person got poisoned with the lead compounds. What is the most sensitive method of the quantitative analysis of lead ions?
*a. Atomic absorption spectrometry
b. Chelatometry
c. Photometry
d. Gravimetry
e. Dichromate iodimetry

186. A pharmaceutical analyst working at the laboratory of the State Inspectorate for Quality Control of Medicines identifies "Thiamine hydrobromide" with the solution of potassium ferricyanide in the alkaline medium. When doing this, he observes a light-blue fluorescence of the alcohol layer in UV light. What product is thus formed?
a. Quinoneimine
b. Murexide
*c. Thiochrome
d. Ninhydrin
e. Thalleioquin

187. Ampule quality control involves testing for chemical resistance. What methods are used to test this indicator?
a. Photoelastic method
b. Visual, gravimetric methods
c. Exposing the glass samples to the action of sodium carbonate and sodium hydrocarbonate solutions
*d. Various acid-base indicators, pH meter, gravimetric methods
e. Autoclaving followed by titration with a solution of hydrochloric acid

188. A pharmaceutist has to prepare an aqueous extract of medicinal plants. What can be used as a substitute of plant material in the drug preparation?
a. Aromatic water
*b. Standardized extract concentrate
c. Liquid extract
d. Thick extract
e. Tincture

189. A pharmaceutist has prepared a suspension with a hydrophobic substance. What stabilizer is required for its preparation?
a. Glucose
b. Sodium chloride
*c. 5% solution of methyl cellulose
d. Polyethylene oxide
e. Sodium thiosulfate

190. Rose essential oil is used as an anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic agent. It is localized in the following excretory structures:
a. Essential oil glandules
*b. Glandular spots
c. Glandular hairs
d. Secretory cells
e. Essential oil conceptacles

191. A certain plant is used for production of tinctures and extracts which are the part of complex drugs Bellataminal, Becarbon, Besalol, etc. Specify the grass that is used for this purpose:
a. Celandine
*b. Belladonna
c. Beggarticks
d. Astragalus
e. Lily of the valley

192. Methyl alcohol which is widely used in industry causes severe health disorders when enters the human body even in small amounts. This effect is induced by the action of the following major metabolites of methanol:
*a. Formaldehyde and formate acid
b. Acetic acid and acetaldehyde
c. Ethyl alcohol and ethyl acetate
d. Ethanol and acetaldehyde
e. Methyl acetate and ethyl acetate

193. A patient with hypertensive crisis has been given an intravenous injection of clonidine. What mechanism underlies the antihypertensive effect of clonidine?
a. Blockade of beta-adrenergic receptors
b. Blockade of N-cholinergic receptors
c. Direct myotropic effect on blood vessels
d. Blockade of peripheral alpha1-adrenergic receptors
*e. Stimulation of the central presynaptic alpha2-adrenergic receptors

194. A pharmacy serves the polyclinics of a city district. Specify the bill of materials that shows the number of drugs dispensed on prescriptions of the doctors who work in the polyclinics:
a. Inpatient
b. Polyclinic
*c. Outpatient
d. -
e. Medical

195. Commercial and financial activity of a pharmacy involves using returnable tare. Which of the following containers are returned to the supplier?
a. Glassware
b. Packaging materials
*c. Metal cylinders
d. Paper boxes
e. Glass-stoppered bottles

196. A pharmaceutical manufacturer develops a system of product. The focus is laid on the maximum involvement of agent network. What type of marketing is applied?
a. Combined
b. Exclusive
c. -
*d. Intense
e. Selective

197. Business transactions of a pharmacy are recorded in the control accounts as listed in the chart of accounts. The balance on the ledger and sub-ledger accounts is used to fill out the following document:
a. Profit and loss account
b. Liabilities
c. Fourth section of the liabilities side
d. First section of the liabilities side
*e. Assets

198. 6 months after treatment a patient with coronary heart disease developed tolerance to the prolonged-action nitrates. What drug with nitrate-similar effect should be recommended in this case?
a. Nifedipine
*b. Molsidomine
c. Prazosin
d. Metoprolol
e. Verapamil

199. A pharmacy received a prescription: Rp.:Dibazoli 0,05Papaverini hydrochloridi 0,15Sacchari 2,5M. fiat pulv.Divide in partes aequales №10.Specify the weight of a single powder dose:
a. 2,7
b. 0,26
c. 0,30
*d. 0,27
e. 0,25

200. Galenic preparations are produced by using various extractants. What extractants require pressure as a prior condition for the extraction process?
a. Vegetable oils
b. Dichloroethane, chloroform
c. Ethanol
d. Methyl alcohol, acetone
*e. Liquefied gases

