1. A pharmacist has prepared powders including extract of belladonna in the amount of 0,015 per dose. For ten doses he had to take the following amount of dry extract:
*a. 0,3 g
b. 1,5 g
c. 0,015 g
d. 0,03 g
e. 0,15 g

2. A pharmacy prepared a solution of macromolecular substance with limited swelling capacity.What solution was labelled "warm up before use"?
a. Pepsin
b. Trypsin
*c. Gelatin
d. Methyl cellulose
e. Pancreatin

3. A dispensing chemist can recommend a drug made from seeds of Aesculus hippocastanum to be taken as a veintonic and antithrombotic agent to treat venous congestion and veins dilatation of lower extremities. This drug is:
a. Flamin
b. Phytolysin
*c. Aescusan
d. Marelin
e. Ajmaline

4. Specify the normal spoilage ratio for toxic drugs, which should be taken into account by an inventory committee during stock-taking.
a. 1,9%
*b. 0,95%
c. 7,6%
d. 3,0%
e. No norm defined

5. A schedule of sanitation actions in pharmacies is regulated by the relevant normative documents. Cleaning day at a pharmacy must be scheduled for at least 1 time:
a. In 3 days
b. In a week
*c. In a month
d. In 10 days
e. In 5 days

6. Specify which of the alkaloids given below will react positively to xanthines (murexide test):
a. Quinine sulfate
b. Ephedrine hydrochloride
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
*e. Caffeine

7. Point out the type of labour division structure of management personnel:
a. Upper
*b. Horizontal
c. Technical
d. Institutional
e. Administrative

8. Losartan is contraindicated for treatment of arterial hypertension in case of:
a. Hyperglycemia
b. Hyperlipidemia
c. Hypokalemia
*d. Pregnancy
e. Urine acid diathesis

9. Which of the drugs listed below is used for thrombolytic therapy of myocardial infarction?
a. Heparinum
b. Ticlopidine
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Streptokinase
e. Рhenylinum

10. An organisation has been founded to carry out several interconnected purposes. What type of organisation is it?
*a. Complex
b. Legal
c. Small
d. Budget
e. Private

11. Representatives of pharmaceutical companies have met to discuss urgent issues of their further work. This meeting belongs to the following type of organizational groups (teams):
a. Managed groups
b. Staff
*c. Informal groups
d. Formal groups
e. Role groups

12. Bellasthesin is a spasmolytic drug used in treatment of gastrointestinal diseases. What substance contained in Atropa Belladonna provides such an effect of the drug?
a. Codeine
b. Morphine
*c. Hyoscyamine
d. Reserpine
e. Caffeine

13. Stinging nettle (Urtica dioica) leaves are mostly used as a hemostatic in tinctures and liquid extract to treat lung, intestinal, and uterine hemorrhages. What bioactive substance provides hemostatic effect?
*a. Vitamin K
b. Rutin
c. Digitoxin
d. Reserpine
e. Beta-carotene

14. Vitali-Morin’s reaction is used to identify tropane alkaloids in raw herbal material. Name the alkaloid that can be detected by this specific reaction.
a. Papaverine
*b. Scopolamine
c. Morphine
d. Codeine
e. Platyphyllin

15. Coumarins are natural compounds with their structure based on an benzo-alpha-pyrone skeleton. What reaction allows to detect this group of compounds?
a. Cyanide test
b. Wilson’s reaction
c. Trim-Hill reagent
*d. Lactone test
e. Iron (III) chloride reaction

16. The following raw herbal material was delivered for analysis: capitulum inflorescence is semicircular or conic in shape; no pedicles or only their remains; floral disk is naked, conic, hollow. Semiflorets are white, disk florets are yellow, involucres are yellow-green. The smell is specific, aromatic. The taste is bitter-spicy. What raw herbal material is it?
a. Flores Helichrysi arenarii
b. Flores Millefolii
c. Flores Arnicae
d. Flores Calendulae
*e. Flores Chamomillae

17. Standard raw herbal material of lily-of-the-valley is obtained by drying it at a temperature of 50-60°C in order to prevent the possibility of the following biochemical process:
a. Oxidation of resins
b. Oxidation of terpenoids
c. Oxidation of phenolic compounds
d. Volatilization of essential oils
*e. Enzymatic hydrolysis of cardiac glycosides

18. A patient with heart failure induced by long-term coronary vessel disorder can be administered a drug produced out of the following raw herbal material:
a. Ginseng roots
b. Calendula flowers
*c. Hawthorn berries
d. Aralia roots
e. Berberis roots

19. A patient came to a pharmacy and ordered cowberry leaves.Which of the available raw herbal materials can be offered as a substitute?
*a. Folium Uvae ursi
b. Rizoma et radix Sanquisorbae officinalis
c. Radix Taraxaci officinalis
d. Herba Achilleae millefolii
e. Rizoma Calami

20. Specify the pricing strategy of international market, which foresees establishing relatively low prices to work up the developed countries market.
a. Price leveling strategy
*b. Penetration strategy
c. Differential pricing strategy
d. Premium pricing strategy
e. Price skimming strategy

21. Point out the type of group poll that foresees a single survey of several experts to discuss a certain problem.
*a. Focus group
b. Delphi
c. Interview
d. Panel
e. Omnibus

22. Name the stage of drug life cycle that is characterized by maximal sales and profit, and reminder advertising.
a. Decline
b. Growth
*c. Maturity and saturation
d. Introduction
e. Market exit

23. The following fruit was received for analysis: succulent drupes circular or elongated-ellipsoid in shape, 4-12 mm in length. The colour of fruit varies from yellow to dark orange. The smell is faint. The taste is sour-sweet. What plant is it?
a. Aronia melanocarpa
b. Ammi majus
*c. Hippophae rhamnoides
d. Vaccinium myrtillus
e. Coriandrum sativum

24. Cumulating drugs - Digitoxin and Соrdigitum - are used to treat chronic cardiac insufficiency. What plant is used as a raw material to produce them?
a. Erysimum canescens
*b. Digitalis purpurea
c. Adonis vernalis
d. Strophanthus kombe
e. Convallaria majalis

25. Business trip can be assigned to employees only with their consent, if these employees are:
a. Women with children less than 1 year old
b. Women with children from 1 to 3 years of age
*c. Women with children from 3 to 14 years of age
d. Any employee
e. Women with two children

26. An analytical chemist working at a pharmacy identifies oxacillin sodium salt. As a reagent he uses hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution in presence of sodium hydroxide solution and copper nitrate solution. What structural fragment of the drug molecule can be detected by these reagents?
*a. Beta-lactam cycle
b. Isoxazole cycle
c. Thiadiazole cycle
d. Furan cycle
e. Thiazolidine cycle

27. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers’ recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Development
*b. Maturity
c. Growth
d. Market penetration
e. Decrease

28. A factrory workshop producing suspensions and emulsions is developing manufacture of new drugs. What mechanisms can be used for ultrasound production of drugs?
*a. Liquid whistle, magnetostrictive source
b. Disintegrator, liquid whistle
c. Centrifugal mixer with rotating housing
d. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, dismembrator
e. Dismembrator, electrical impulse plasmolyzer

29. A pharmaceutic factory workshop producing ointments can use the following equipment at the packing stage:
a. Disc machines
*b. Screw and piston dosing machines
c. Rotary machines
d. Rezepin automatic machine
e. Eccentric machines

30. What preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
a. Atropinum
b. Penicillamine
c. Protamine sulfate
d. Bemegridum
*e. Deferoxamium

31. A pharmacist has a labour dispute with the pharmacy administration about rescheduling his annual vacation leave. The employee can appeal against the decision of the pharmacy administration to the following body:
a. Trade union committee
b. MoH of Ukraine
c. Commercial court
*d. Labour disputes commission (LDC)
e. Highest management bodies of pharmaceutical service at the regional level

32. A pharmacist has prepared solution of ethacrydine lactate. Name the peculiarity of this substance dissolution.
a. Grinding in a mortar with water
b. Dissolving in potassium iodide solution
c. Dissolving in freshly distilled water
d. Dissolving in cold water
*e. Dissolving in hot water

33. A pharmacy received a prescription for an extemporaneous compounded drug. Specify the document that is used to set the price for such drug:
a. Cash receipt voucher
b. Certificate of analysis
c. Inventory report
d. Certificate of quality
*e. Retail price list for drugs

34. Medications Passit and Novopassit are used as tranquilizing, sedative and mild soporific agents. These medications are produced from the following grass:
a. Garden sage
b. Three-lobe beggarticks
*c. Purple passionflower
d. Elecampane
e. Lesser periwinkle

35. Thymol is the main component of Thymus serpyllum essential oil. What is the time of harvesting for this raw herbal material?
*a. Peak florescence period
b. During peak of sap movement
c. Beginning of vegetation
d. During fruiting
e. In autumn after above-ground part of a plant dies-off

36. An essential oil is a component of such compound drugs as: Inhalypt, Corvalol, Pinosol, Corvaldin, tooth drops. What raw herbal material is a source of this essential oil?
a. Folia Urticae
b. Folia Betulae
*c. Folia Menthae piperitae
d. Folia Agavae
e. Folia Absinthii

37. When developing the system of marketing communications, a company should consider the characteristics of each market promotion means applied for a drug. Which of the following characteristics is typical for advertising?
a. Non-mass communication
b. All answers are correct
c. There is no correct answer
*d. Depersonalization (non-personal communication)
e. Two-way communication

38. A pharmaceutical factory produces suspensions and emulsions. Specify the equipment that is used for dispersion and mixing in liquid medium:
a. Gate mixers
*b. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, colloid mixers
c. Oscillating mixers
d. Drum mixers
e. Anchor mixers

39. What reagent is used to detect calcium admixture in medicinal substances?
a. Potassium carbonate
b. Barium chloride
*c. Ammonium oxalate
d. Silver nitrate
e. Sodium sulfate

40. A pharmacy received a prescription for vaseline-lanoline based eye ointment.What proportion of vaseline to lanoline should be chosen by a pharmacist to make the ointment base?
a. 1:1
b. 8:2
c. 7:3
*d. 9:1
e. 5:1

41. Pharmacist has made an althaea root tincture.What proportion of raw herbal material to extractant was chosen by the pharmacist to make this tincture?
a. 1:10
b. 1:100
c. 1:400
*d. 1:20
e. 1:30

42. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with an enterprise owner on behalf of the workforce. Any collective agreement is worked out in written form. Which article of the Labor Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
a. 41
*b. 17
c. 38
d. 36
e. 40

43. To stimulate sales a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
a. Dealer
b. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
c. -
*d. Bonus
e. Seasonal

44. One of the quality indicators for finished ampoules is lack of residual stress in the glass. Which operation at the "Preparation of ampoules to be filled"stage eliminates this imperfection?
a. Ampoule drying
b. Ampoule sterilization
c. Capillary opening
d. Ampoule washing
*e. Ampoule annealing

45. Companies producing injectable dosage forms apply different methods of ampoule sealing. Sealing against a jet of inert gases (nitrogen, argon, carbon dioxide) is suitable for the following injection solutions:
*a. Easily oxidable
b. Thermostable
c. Photosensitive
d. Hydrolytically unstable
e. Viscous

46. A pharmacist prepares a solution for injections that must be stabilized with 0,1M of hydrochloric acid solution. What solution is to be prepared?
a. Sodium benzoate
*b. Novocaine
c. Potassium chloride
d. Calcium chloride
e. Hexamethylenetetramine

47. Paracetamol substance has been sent for analysis. Reaction with the solution of iron (III) chloride resulted in blue-purple colouring. This indicates the presence of:
a. Keto group
b. Aldehyde group
*c. Phenolic hydroxyl
d. Ester group
e. Alcoholic hydroxyl

48. Production of tablets requires stage-to-stage quality control. What devices are used to determine the particle size distribution (fraction) of granules?
a. Various vibrosieves
b. Laboratory identifiers
c. Microscope
*d. Standard set of sieves
e. Friabilators

49. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, in order to test a substance for the highest level of magnesium impurities an analytical chemist must use the following solution:
a. Formaldehyde
b. Benzaldehyde
c. Resorcin
d. Pyridine
*e. Hydroxyquinoline

50. Preparations of sorrel roots can have both laxative and astringent effect. Such an effect results from the presence of the following biologically active substances:
a. Flavonoids and essential oils
b. Coumarins and phenol glycosides
c. Iridoids and vitamins
*d. Anthracene derivatives and tannins
e. Essential and fatty oils

51. Theory of management currently specifies the four most important approaches to the management. Select the approach that IS NOT applied in the management theory:
*a. Structured
b. Systemic
c. Different schools dedication approach
d. Situational
e. Process approach

52. A pharmacist worked on a holiday and his work hours were within the norm for the current month. The employee would be entitled to be paid:
a. Fixed salary + double daily rate
b. There would be no extra pay
c. Single piecework rate
*d. Fixed salary + one daily rate
e. According to the standard procedure as for a normal working day

53. A pharmacy has a license for selling narcotic drugs. The warrant for the receipt of these drugs from the pharmacy warehouse is valid for:
a. No longer than 3 months from the date of issue
b. No longer than 1 year from the date of issue
c. No longer than 5 calendar days from the date of issue
*d. No longer than 10 calendar days from the date of issue
e. No longer than 1 calendar days from the date of issue

54. Which of the pharmacy departments is responsible for checking the quantity and quality of received goods, their storage and dispensing to other departments?
a. Compounding and production department
b. Department of over-the-counter drugs
c. Department of curative cosmetics
*d. Inventory department
e. Department of finished dosage forms

55. Chloride of lime is identified by calcium cations after boiling with acetic acid in order to eliminate active chlorine.What reagent is used?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Sodium nitrite
c. Ammonium molybdate
*d. Ammonium oxalate
e. Potassium chloride

56. A set of values, traditions, behavioral norms and views inherent to an organisation characterize its following feature:
a. Success
b. Sapitalization level
c. Self-development capability
*d. Culture
e. Profitability

57. Products differentiation (advantages) pursued by a pharmaceutical company with the aim to surpass its competitors in satisfying customers’s demands is called:
a. Penetration strategy
b. Concentration strategy
c. Benchmarking
d. Porter’s generic strategies model
*e. Product leadership

58. A patient bought mint leaves at a pharmacy. What recommendations regarding infusion of this raw herbal material must be given by a pharmacist?
*a. The infusion is to be prepared in a tightly closed vessel
b. The infusion is to be prepared at room temperature
c. The extract is to be artificially cooled 15 minutes after infusing
d. The extract is to be immediately filtered after infusing
e. The infusion is to be prepared on open fire

59. A patient has been administered a solution containing boric acid and camphor. What solvent should his doctor prescribe to prevent physical incompatibility?
*a. Ethyl alcohol 70%
b. Sunflower oil
c. Ethyl alcohol 40%
d. Glycerol
e. Purified water

60. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent presentations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Оmерrаzоlе
b. Acidin pepsinum
c. Drotaverine
d. Dе-Nоl
*e. Раncreatinum

61. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
*a. Counteractive
b. Remarketing
c. Stimulating
d. Synchromarketing
e. Conversion

62. An ampoule workshop produces injection solutions. What filters are used for sterile filtering of injection solutions?
a. Filter designed at the Kharkiv Chemico-Pharmaceutical Research Institute
b. Pressure leaf filter
c. Druck (pressure) filter
d. Nutsche (vacuum) filter
*e. Membrane and depth filters

63. Injection solutions of weak acids and strong bases must be stabilized. What stabilizers are used for such solutions?
a. Sodium edetate (Disodium EDTA, Trilon B)
b. 0,1 М hydrochloric acid solution
*c. 0,1 М sodium hydroxide solution
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Butyloxytoluene

64. A pharmacy makes infusion solutions. Specify the solution that restores water-salt metabolism.
a. Hydrolysine
b. Dextran
c. Polyglucinum
d. Neohaemodesum
*e. Ringer-Locke’s solution

65. Prior to making a sodium chloride isotonic solution a pharmacist baked the powder in a dry heat box. What substances are removed by this operation?
a. Redox substances
b. Chlorides
c. Moisture
*d. Pyrogenic substances
e. Sulfates

66. Yellow gentian contains bitter glycosides. Raw material of this plant is recommended for production of drugs with the following effect:
a. Hepatoprotective
b. Venotonic
c. Tonic
d. Diuretic
*e. Stimulates appetite

67. A pharmacy received a prescription for tincture. What raw herbal material can be used to make this dosage form?
*a. Valerian rootstock
b. Oak bark
c. Buckthorn bark
d. Arrow-wood bark
e. Rhubarb roots

68. A retail pharmacy has been purchasing goods within an accounting period. What changes to the balance will result from these business transactions?
a. Changes will be caused to the assets only
b. Decrease in assets and liabilities
*c. Increase in assets and liabilities
d. Changes will be caused to the liabilities only
e. -

69. Which of the following nonsteroid anti-inflammatory agents has the least harmful effect on mucosa of gastrointestinal tract?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Nimesulide
c. Indomethacin
d. Diclofenac
e. Piroxicam

70. When doing calculations to determine the limit of the cash balance, an accountant must specify the actual amount of cash receipts. What time period should be taken into account?
*a. Three months prior to calculation
b. 1 year prior to calculation
c. 7 days prior to calculation
d. 10 days prior to calculation
e. Six months prior to calculation

71. A doctor wrote a prescription for the tincture of digitalis with hydrochloric acid. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
*a. Hydrolysis (with no visible change)
b. Gassing
c. Change in odour
d. Change in colour
e. Precipitation

72. During the analysis of diethyl ether (Aether medicinales) you can determine presence of aldehydes as a specific admixture. Which of the following reagents can be used for determining presence of aldehyde admixtures?
*a. Potassium tetraiodomercurate alkaline
b. Iron (III) chloride
c. Potassium sulfate
d. Acetic acid
e. Phenolphtalein

73. A pharmacist prepared a drug according to the following prescription: Rp.: Streptocidi Dermatoli ana 1,0 Lanolini Vaselini ana 5,0 M.D.S.: Apply to the affected skin. Specify the type of disperse system:
*a. Suspension ointment
b. Hydrophilic ointment
c. Extraction ointment
d. Combined ointment
e. Solution ointment

74. Efficiency of aerosol therapy is to considerable extent determined by the size of disperse particles. What factor determines the size of aerosol particles during dispersion of an aerosol?
a. System homogeneity, dispersion velocity
b. Reduction range, container quantity
*c. Exit port diameter, propellent vapour pressure
d. Percentage of phase, filling temperature
e. Fractional composition, containers filling method

75. A pharmacistmakes powders with papaverine hydrochloride. What hand scales should be used for weighing out 0,05 g of substance?
a. BP 20,0 (balance beam scale, capacity 20,0)
b. BP 5,0 (balance beam scale, capacity 5,0)
*c. BP 1,0 (balance beam scale, capacity 1,0)
d. BP 10,0 (balance beam scale, capacity 10,0)
e. BP 2,0 (balance beam scale, capacity 2,0)

76. Raw herbal material with the following features was delivered to a laboratory for analysis: fine flat glossy egg-shaped seeds (one end is sharp, other - rounded). Seed surface is smooth, vary in colour from pale yellow to brown, has pale yellow raphe. No smell is detected. The taste is slimy and oily. Name this raw herbal material.
*a. Flax seeds
b. Plantago psyllium seeds
c. Peanut seeds
d. Strophanthus seeds
e. Pumpkin seeds

77. Activated carbon is used in production of injection solutions for:
a. Buffer system creation
b. Chemical resistance of ampoule’s glass increasing
c. Ampoules residual stress relaxation
*d. Purification
e. Antioxidant properties increasing

78. Intoxication cases were observed during harvesting raw herbalmaterial containing potent and toxic substances.What raw herbal material SHOULD NOT be harvested by underage and pregnant?
a. Valerian rootstock
b. Walnut leaves
*c. Celandine grass
d. Buckthorn bark
e. Blueberries

79. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should NOT be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
a. Midecamycin
b. Benzylpenicillinum
c. Doxycycline
*d. Co-trimoxazolum
e. Gentamycinum

80. Plantaglucide is used to treat peptic ulcer disease of stomach and duodenum with normal acidity and hypoacidity. This drug is obtained from the following plant:
a. Plantago media
b. Plantago psyllium
*c. Plantago major
d. Plantago stepposa
e. Plantago lanceolata

81. Drug A is in the stage of market saturation. In order to push up intensive sales, management of the manufacturing company decided to use the following type of advertising:
a. Informational
b. Sales promotion
c. Public relations
*d. Aggressive
e. Personal sales

82. Which of the penicillins given below can be identified by reaction with ninhydrin?
a. Benzylpenicillin (penicillin G)
b. Oxacillin
c. Carbenicillin
*d. Ampicillin
e. Phenoxymethylpenicillin (penicillin V)

83. Preparations of common valerian are used in medical practice as sedative drugs. The main feature that allows to distinguish valerian from the admixtures is:
a. Specific taste
b. No specific odor
*c. Specific odor
d. Specific color of raw materials
e. Stems remains

84. An analytical chemist determines the admixture of sulphates in boric acid. What is the main reagent to be added?
a. Silver nitrate
b. Ammonium oxalate
c. Sodium sulphide
d. Potassium ferrocyanide
*e. Barium chloride

85. A pharmaceutical company conducted an age-specific segment analysis of the regional antihistamine market. It revealed the lack of antihistamines for children. The company will consider this segment as:
a. A segment requiring further research
b. A market door
c. An unattractive segment
d. Amarket share
*e. Amarket niche

86. Calcium cations present in drugs can be detected with the following solution:
a. Sodium nitrite
b. Sodium chloride
c. Silver nitrate
d. Potassium permanganate
*e. Ammonium oxalate

87. What stage is the last in making injection solutions?
a. Quantitative control
*b. Labeling
c. Filtering
d. Sterilization
e. Qualitative control

88. An analyst of the State Inspectorate for Quality Control identifies "Sulfametoxazol"by adding solutions of hydrochloric acid, sodium nitrite and beta-naphthol to the preparation. As a result intense red colouring is observed. What functional group is identified by this reaction?
a. Sulpho group
b. Secondary aromatic amino group
*c. Primary aromatic amino group
d. Carboxyl group
e. Aldehyde group

89. Pharmaceutical analyst working at the laboratory of the State Inspectorate for Quality Control of Medicines identifies the drug substance "Glucose anhydrous"with copper-tartrate solution (Fehling’s reagent). What is the colour of produced precipitate?
a. Blue
b. Purple
c. White
*d. Red
e. Black

90. Specify the indicator which measures total contribution of various solutes to osmotic pressure of a solution:
a. Isohydricity
b. Isoviscosity
c. Apyrogenicity
*d. Osmolality
e. Isotonicity

91. When setting up a joint-stock company the founders discussed the issues of financial liability. What is the liability of the shareholders in a joint-stock company?
a. Limited to the double amount of deposits
b. Limited to the amount of deposits
c. Unlimited and solidary
*d. Limited to the value of their shares
e. Limited to the contributions to the statutory fund and their property

92. A pharmacy opens a bank account to store funds and conduct ongoing business transactions. What kind of account should be opened?
a. Provisional
b. Letter of credit
c. Investment
*d. Current
e. Deposit

93. Specify the reaction to identify ester-type drugs, which is required by the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine:
a. Formation of indophenol
b. Formation of azo dye
*c. Formation of iron hydroxamates
d. Formation of 3-bromphenol
e. Formation of tayleohin

94. Streptocide, sulfacyl sodium, norsulfazole or sulfadimezinum can be identified by the reaction forming the following substance:
a. Murexide
b. Fluorescein
c. Iodoform
*d. Azo dye
e. Tayleohin

95. A pharmacy makes bulk purchases of health and hygiene products. An agent works under a contract with a manufacturer and operates on his account. The agent may be given exclusive right to sell goods in certain regions. Specify this agent:
a. Commission agent
b. Consignee
*c. Wholesale agent
d. Broker
e. Dealer

96. A pharmaceutical company has made a decision to expand its activities. The process of the company’s activity expansion by penetration into new fields of the branch is called:
a. Integration
b. Centralization
c. Segmentation
d. Conglomeration
*e. Diversification

97. To identify a drug an analytical chemist of the State Inspectorate for Quality Control performs a lignin test. Specify this drug:
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Methionine
c. Analgin
*d. Streptotcid
e. Cortisone acetate

98. The main active components of hawthorn berries are flavonoids. What is their pharmacological effect?
*a. Hypotensive and sedative
b. Tonic and antispasmodic
c. Antispasmodic and antiinflammatory
d. Diuretic and styptic
e. Laxative and sedative

99. An analytical laboratory received "Adrenalini tartras"substance for analysis. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, quantitative analysis of this substance can be carried out by the method of:
a. Iodometry
b. Acidimetry in aqueous medium
*c. Acidimetry in non-aqueous medium
d. Nitritometry
e. Bromatometry

100. Quality of dried extracts is assessed according to several criteria. Specify the highest acceptable amount of moisture in dried extracts according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine.
a. 75%
b. 95%
c. 25%
d. 20%
*e. 5%

101. What is the function of anhydrous lanolin in the suppository mass used for suppositories made by hand rolling?
a. Preservative
b. Solvent
*c. Plasticizer
d. Solubilizer
e. Emollient

102. The basic structure of steroid hormones is hydrocarbon skeleton - cyclopentane perhydrophenanthrene. What natural compound is used for testosterone propionate production?
*a. Cholesterol
b. Naphthalene
c. Anthracene
d. Phenanthrene
e. Indole

103. A dispensing chemist was addressed by a patient with the prescription of acetylsalicylic acid as antiaggregant. What daily dosage in grams should be recommended for him to take on a regular basis?
a. 2,0-3,0
b. Over 4,0
c. 0,5-1,0
d. 1,0-2,0
*e. 0,1—0,3

104. A patient with arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly developed dry cough and dyspnea; his body temperature remained without changes. It is known that the patient takes captopril. This phenomenon can be explained by increased synthesis of:
a. Natriuretic peptide
*b. Bradykinin
c. Renin
d. Angiotensin I
e. Aldosterone

105. Preparations containing cardiosteroids are produced out of the following raw herbal material:
a. Folia Sennae
*b. Herba Convallariae
c. Radix Taraxaci
d. Cortex Quercus
e. Folia Ficusi Caricae

106. A pharmacist has prepared a solution of menthol oil. Specify the dissolution temperature of the active substance:
a. 70-80oC
b. 20-30oC
c. 60-70oC
d. 30-40oC
*e. 40-50oC

107. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition of the following concept:
a. Financial loss
*b. Business risk
c. Labour loss
d. Loss of property
e. Loss of time

108. Admixtures can be accidentally included in raw herbal material in the process of harvesting, drying and primary processing. Mineral admixtures include:
a. Other similar plants
b. Metal objects
*c. Sand, earth, stones
d. Droppings of birds and rodents
e. Other organs of the same plant

109. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces neogalenic preparations. What preparation is produced by the Soxhlet circulation apparatus?
a. Lantosidum
b. Сеlanidum
c. Digoxin
d. Corglyconum
*e. Аdonisidum

110. The common method for quantitative determination of drugs from the group of alkali metal halogenides is:
a. Alkalimetry
b. Nitritometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Chelatometry
*e. Argentometry

111. When a pharmacist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient did not apprehend verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for information sender and recipient:
*a. Semantic barriers
b. Nonverbal barriers
c. Stereotype mentation
d. Failure to understand the importance of information
e. Neglect of facts

112. A pharmacist should make 200 ml of 3%sodium bicarbonate solution for injections.What are the specifics of making this solution?
a. Use water free of redox substances
*b. Vial should be filled to 2/3 of its volume; sterilization at 120 0C for 12 minutes
c. Dissolve by heating; sterilization at 120 0C for 12 minutes
d. No sterilization
e. Use stabilizing agent

113. What technology should be chosen by a pharmacist to make a liquid dosage form, if it contains calcium gluconate?
a. First grind it to powder when it is dry or with small amount of solvent added
b. Add equal amount of sodium chloride
c. Dissolve in alkaline medium
*d. Dissolve it in hot solvent or heat it up to full dissolution
e. Dissolve in water free of redox subsatances

114. Concentrated solutions CANNOT be used in mixturemaking if:
a. Mixture contains syrups
b. Mixture contains tinctures
c. Purified water is solvent
d. Mixture contains a potent agent
*e. Aromatic water is solvent

115. Tyndallization is used at a pharmaceutical factory as one of sterilization methods for thermolabile substances.What is the essence of this method?
a. Sterilization with high-frequency and microwave frequency current
*b. Triple heating of solution to 40-60 0C with 24-hour-long intervals in between for thermostating
c. Sterilization with flowing steam at 100 0C
d. Autoclaving at 119-121 0C with pressure at 1,0-1,1 atm
e. Sterilization with dry heat at 180-200 0C for a lengthy period of time

116. What final document is used for preparation of a report on the discrepancies revealed in the course of inventory taking at a pharmacy?
*a. Act on inventory results
b. Checklist
c. Invoice
d. Commercial report
e. Inventory item description

117. Select the reductant required for determination of arsenic impurity in drugs (method 2):
a. Sodium sulfite solution
b. Hydrochloric acid solution
*c. Sodium hypophosphite
d. Sodium hydroxide solution
e. Potassium iodide solution

118. Choose the substance that is a tropane-derived alkaloid:
a. Platyphyllin
*b. Cocaine
c. Strychnine
d. Caffeine
e. Pilocarpine

119. A pharmacy produces some injection solutions that have to be apyrogenic. Solution of the following substance can be depyrogenized by the method of adsorption with activated carbon:
a. Platyphyllini hydrotartras
*b. Glucose
c. Papaverine hydrochloride
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Scopolamine hydrobromide

120. A pharmacy received a prescription for external use powder containing a substance difficult to pulverize. What liquid can be used by a pharmacist to disperse this substance?
a. Water for injections
b. Purified water
*c. Ethyl alcohol
d. Dimethyl sulfoxide
e. Isopropyl alcohol

121. Specify the amount of raw herbal material necessary to make a dosage form according to the following prescription: Take 200 ml of motherwort herb solution. Dispense. Prescribed dosage is 1 tablespoon 3 times a day.
a. 1,0
b. 10,0
*c. 20,0
d. 5,0
e. 4,0

122. Which of the liquids given below should be measured by volume in making liquid dosage forms?
a. Diethyl ether
b. Vaseline oil
*c. 20% solution of sodium bromide
d. Eucalyptus oil
e. Glycerine

123. A pharmacy received prescriptions for compound powders containing colouring agent. Which of powder components given below is a colouring agent?
a. Bismuth nitrate
b. Silver proteinate (Protargol)
c. Camphor
d. Sulfanilamide
*e. Ethacridine lactate (Rivanol)

124. A teenager with hyporexia has been recommended to drink medicinal herbal tea of the following composition: Herba Absinthii, Herba Millefolii. Specify the characteristic microscopic features of Artemisia absinthium, which indicate its presence in the herbmixture:
a. Branched, simple and ciliated hairs
b. Simple and capitate hairs
*c. T-shaped hairs along the leaf edge
d. Retor-shaped hairs
e. Branched and capitate hairs

125. A laboratory received some raw herbal material for analysis. The plant had flowerheads up to 4 cm in diameter, marginal flowers were agamic, blue, funnel-shaped; the inner flowers were bisexual, purple, tubular.What plant has these features?
a. Viola tricolor
*b. Centaurea cyanus
c. Polygonum persicaria
d. Solidago virgaurea
e. Scutellaria baicalensis

126. Quantitative content of theophylline can be determined by alkalimetric titration of nitric acid that is quantitatively exudated as the result of the following theophylline salt production:
a. Sodium
b. Potassium
*c. Silver
d. Ammonium
e. Lithium

127. Complexometric titration (chelatometry) allows to determine quantitative content of:
a. Potassium chloride
*b. Calcium lactate
c. Potassium iodide
d. Sodium citrate
e. Sodium thiosulfate

128. A patient suffers from peptic ulcer disease. In the process of combined pharmacotherapy his feces became black. Name the drug that could be the cause of this.
a. Ranitidine
*b. Bismuth subcitrate
c. Actovegin
d. Omeprazole
e. Metronidazole

129. A patient suffering from bronchial asthma was diagnosed with essential hypertension.What antihypertensive drug is contraindicated for this patient?
a. Amlodipine
b. Captopril
*c. Propranolol
d. Hypothiazid (Hydrochlorothiazide)
e. Verapamil

130. A man with a long history of chronic hepatitis has been diagnosed with pneumonia. Which of the following antibacterial drugs can be applied in this clinical situation?
*a. Amoxicillin
b. Biseptol
c. Vancomycin
d. Rifampicin
e. Tetracycline

131. A 57-year-old patient is diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis. Anamnesis states peptic ulcer disease. What nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug can be recommended for this patient?
*a. Celecoxib
b. Aspirin
c. Mefenamic acid
d. Indometacin
e. Diclofenac

132. A patient suffering from moderately severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day is due to the fact that the drug:
a. Is poorly absorbed from the injection site
*b. Is slowly eliminated from the body
c. Is pluripotential
d. Has bactericidal effect
e. Accumulates in the lungs

133. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine (Addendum 1) a pharmacy analyst has to apply the following method for quantitative analysis of potassium iodide:
a. Acidimetry
b. Complexonometry
*c. Iodatometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Nitritometry

134. A pharmacy received a prescription for an alcohol solution of methylene blue with unspecified alcohol concentration. In this case a pharmacist must use ethyl alcohol of the following concentration:
a. 70%
b. 90%
*c. 60%
d. 96%
e. 40%

135. Ampoule workshop of a pharmaceutical factory produces procaine hydrochloride solution. This solution is stabilized by adding:
a. 1,5 g of amino-propylene glycol
*b. 0,1 mol/l of hydrochloric acid solution
c. 0,1 mol/l of sodium hydrogen carbonate solution
d. 0,1 mol/l of sodium hydroxide solution
e. 20,0 of sodium hydrogen carbonate

136. What stage of drug life cycle is characterized by quick increase of its sales amount and customers’ recognition?
*a. Growth
b. Maturity
c. Saturation
d. Decline
e. Introduction

137. Prescriptions for controlled drugs dispensed under the reimbursement program (except for narcotic and psychotropic preparations in substance) are issued on the following prescription form:
*a. №1 in duplicate
b. №1 and №3
c. №3, single copy
d. №3 in duplicate
e. №1, single copy

138. Log books of stock-taking records are kept in a pharmacy for:
a. 3 years
b. 2 years
c. 7 years
d. 5 years
*e. 10 years

139. What principle of goods and expenses accounting requires presenting results of business transactions within the same reporting period when the transaction occurs?
a. Periodicity
b. Matching
*c. Accrual
d. Autonomy
e. Continuity

140. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative determination of potassium chloride substance that is used in treatment of hypokalemia?
a. Bromatometry
b. Cerimetry
c. Polarimetry
*d. Argentometry
e. Iodometry

141. Who is responsible for reception of goods and medical products with simultaneous incoming quality control?
a. Pharmacist
b. Supplier pharmacist
*c. Authorized representative
d. Head of pharmacy
e. Analyst

142. A pharmaceutical factory produces herbal juice out of fresh raw herbal material.What operation should be performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Crystallization
*b. Heating followed by quick cooling
c. Adsorption
d. Sedimentation
e. Filtration

143. Cash transactions at a pharmacy are recorded in the cashbook.Which of the following cash transactions IS NOT a receipt transaction?
a. Return of unused disbursement funds
b. Recognizing accrued salaries and advance payable
c. Recognizing cash receipts from sales at a pharmacy
d. Recognizing cash receipts from sales at pharmacy outlets and kiosks
*e. Issuing cash to be accounted for

144. .Which of the following diuretics SHOULD NOT be administered to patients with impaired hearing?
a. Spironolactone
b. Indapamide
c. Chlorthalidone
*d. Furosemide
e. Clopamide

145. A patient, who has been taking acetylsalicylic acid, has developed hemorrhages of mucous membranes. This phenomenon is associated with:
*a. Inhibition of prothrombin synthesis
b. Decreased absorption in gastrointestinal tract
c. Changed volume of distribution
d. Disorder of protein binding
e. Increased absorption in gastrointestinal tract

146. Simultaneous use of paracetamol and acetylcysteine causes:
a. Increase of paracetamol nephrotoxicity
*b. Reduction of paracetamol hepatotoxicity
c. Inhibition of paracetamol absorption
d. Reduction of anti-inflammatory action of paracetamol
e. Increase of mucolytic action of acetylcysteine

147. Simultaneous use of gentamicin and acyclovir tablets increases the risk of:
a. Neurotoxicity
b. Allergic reactions
c. Hepatotoxicity
d. Cardiotoxicity
*e. Nephrotoxicity

148. Simultaneous use of doxycycline hydrochloride and oral contraceptive causes:
a. -
*b. Reduction of oral contraceptives effectiveness
c. Increase of antibacterial effect of doxycycline
d. Increase of oral contraceptives effectiveness
e. Reduction of antibacterial effect of doxycycline

149. In case of simultaneous use of metronidazole and oral anticoagulants derived from coumarin patients must be warned about:
a. Reduction of metronidazole effect
b. Higher neurotoxicity
c. Reduction of anticoagulants effect
d. Potentiation of metronidazole effect
*e. Potentiation of anticoagulants effect and risk of bleeding

150. Apart from goods sales, there are other business transactions that can be characterized as goods disposal. Which of the following business transactions reduces stock at pharmacies?
a. Reclassifying other supplies as goods
b. Revaluation for packing and laboratory work
c. Posting glassware
*d. Disposal of products for business needs
e. Posting oversupply

151. Phenobarbital drug has a sedative, soporific and anti-epileptic effect. What is its international nonpropriКrok 2 Pharmacy (англомовнi студенти) 2015 рiк 19 etary name?
*a. Luminal
b. Chloramphenicol
c. Salol
d. Diazepam
e. Nitrofurazone

152. A 70-year-old patient with stenocardia claims that the pharmacy sold him a drug that relieved an attack of stenocardia but instead caused an acute bursting headache. What antihypertensive drug can be characterized by such a side effect?
a. Amlodipine
b. Trimetazidine
c. Metoprolol
*d. Nitrosorbid
e. Nifedipine

153. Commercial and financial activity of a pharmacy involves using returnable packaging. Which of the following containers are returned to a supplier?
a. Packaging materials
b. Glass-stoppered bottles
c. Glassware
*d. Metal cylinders
e. Paper boxes

154. To make a liquid №2 by Demyanovych prescription hydrochloric acid should be taken in the following concentration:
*a. 24,8 – 25,2%
b. 98%
c. 10%
d. 30%
e. 0,83%

155. Menthol has anesthetic and antiseptic effect. What plant is the source of menthol?
*a. Folia Menthae piperitae
b. Folia Eucalypti
c. Folia Absinthii
d. Folia Salviae
e. Folia Uvae ursi

156. A drug was delivered to a private pharmacy. The chemical name of the drug active ingredient is 2-chloro-10-(3’- dimethylaminopropyl)-phenothiazine hydrochloride. Specify this drug:
a. Promethazine hydrochloride
b. Clonidine hydrochloride
c. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
*d. Chlorpromazine hydrochloride
e. Trifluoperazine hydrochloride

157. A pharmacy performs both cash and non-cash transactions. Financial intermediary in the latter is a:
a. City administration department for pharmacy management
b. Regional control-analytical laboratory
c. Central regional pharmacy
d. City administration
*e. Bank

158. The main method of quantitative determination of corticosteroids is:
*a. Spectrophotometry
b. Cerimetry
c. Acidimetry
d. Argentometry
e. Potentiometry

159. Thyme grass is used for production of herbal medical products for treatment of respiratory tract infections. Under the State Pharmacopoeis of Ukraine, the raw herbal material is subject to chromatographic identification by means of thin-layer chromatography. What substances are detected on the chromatographic plate after its treatment with due reagent?
a. Apigenin and luteolin
b. Arbutin and methyl arbutin
c. Atropine and hyoscyamine
d. Quercetin and rutin
*e. Thymol and carvacrol

160. Specify the base for antibiotic ointments:
a. 5 parts of vaseline + 1 part of lanolin
*b. 6 parts of vaseline + 4 part of lanolin
c. 5 parts of vaseline + 5 part of lanolin
d. 8 parts of vaseline + 2 part of lanolin
e. 7 parts of vaseline + 3 part of lanolin

161. A pharmaceutical company plans to produce hexamethylenetetramine tablets. What production method is optimal for such tablets?
a. Direct compression without adjuvants
b. Forming
*c. Direct compression with adjuvants
d. Compression preceded by wet granulation
e. Compression preceded by dry granulation

162. Granulation is used to increase:
a. Volume density
b. Porosity
c. Breakup
d. Dissolution
*e. Flowability

163. A 46-year-old patient is diagnosed with cardiac infarction. What drug should be prescribed for thrombolytic therapy?
a. Drotaverine hydrochloride
b. Trimeperidine (Promedol)
c. Nitroglycerine
d. Spironolactone (Verospiron)
*e. Streptokinase

164. A patient suffering from trombophlebitis of his lower extremities has developed symptoms of heparin overdosage. What drug can be used as an antidote?
a. Dipiridamol
b. Phenindione (Phenylin)
*c. Protamine sulfate
d. Pentoxifylline
e. Theophylline

165. Which drug of the given below is a first aid antidote for acute poisoning caused by arsenic, mercury, chromium, and bismuth compounds?
*a. Dimercaprol (Unithiol)
b. Atropine
c. Morphine
d. Adrenaline
e. Prednisolone

166. A 59-year-old patient has been using furosemide for a long time to treat his cardiac insufficiency. What drug for hypokalemia prevention should be used in the given case?
a. Enalapril
*b. Panangin (Potassium aspartate and magnesium aspartate)
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Thiotriazolinum
e. Trimetazidine

167. A 32-year-old woman that had been undergoing antibiotic therapy for her pneumonia has developed intestine disbacteriosis. What drugs should she be prescribed?
a. Immune-response modulating agents
b. Antacids
c. Antispasmodics
*d. Probiotics
e. Choleretics

168. A 53-year-old woman suffers from ischemic heart disease and angina pectoris. What drug can be used to stop angina pectoris attacks?
a. Dipiridamol
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Drotaverine hydrochloride
d. Propranolol
*e. Nitroglycerine

169. A patient is 20 years old. After she was stung by a bee the patient developed Quincke’s disease; rash in the form of blisters and papulae appeared on her torso. First aid in this case should start with administering the following drug:
a. Haemodes
*b. Prednisolone
c. Fresh frozen plasma
d. Penicillin
e. Rheopolyglukin (Dextran)

170. A patient with osteoarthritis (gonarthrosis) and peptic gastric ulcer in anamnesis must be prescribed a NSAID (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug). What drug would be the most safe for this patient?
a. Ibuprofen
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
*c. Meloxicam
d. Indometacin
e. Metamizole sodium

171. A 20-year-old man suffers from chronic hyperacid type B gastritis. Choose the antisecretory agent.
a. Clarithromycin
b. Drotaverine hydrochlorid
*c. Omeprazole
d. Levofloxacin
e. Metoclopramide

172. In the course of clinical instrumental examination a 45-yearold patient was diagnosed with chronic helicobacter-associated type B gastritis. What group of drugs should be prescribed first of all?
a. Anti-Muscarinic agents
*b. Anti-Helicobacter pylori agents
c. Antacids
d. Prokinetic agents
e. Reparative drugs

173. What equipment is necessary to make trituration tablets?
a. Dragee pan
b. Rotary tabletting machine
c. Film coater
*d. Special tabletting machine for forming tablets
e. Double sided tabletting press machine

174. To perform transactions with customers it is necessary for a pharmacy to have a cash register. What cash operation is registered by a cash register as a service payment?
a. Per diem costs
b. Merchandise return payments
c. Sales proceeds
d. Encashment
*e. Cash remaining in cash register at the beginning of workday

175. When servicing customers it is necessary to maintain cash desk discipline. A cashier should make records in the cash book:
a. Quarterly
b. Monthly
*c. Immediately after the cash transaction occurred
d. Weekly
e. At the end of workday

176. Appropriate labor hours per week are being set for pharmacy staff. How many hours compose a working week for administrative staff?
*a. 40
b. 35
c. 63
d. 45
e. 30

177. According to the law pharmacies have the right to paid leave. Total duration of main and additional leaves cannot exceed the following number of calendar days:
a. 24
b. 30
*c. 59
d. 45
e. 63

178. According to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the following solution is used to detect potassium admixture in medicinal substances:
a. Silver nitrate
b. Tartaric acid
c. Potassium Tetraiodomercurate Solution Alkaline
d. Hydroxyquinoline
*e. Sodium tetraphenylborate

179. What method is used for quantitative determination of antituberculous drug isoniazid according to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Bromatometry, back titration
b. Iodometry, direct titration
c. Acidimetry, direct titration
*d. Bromatometry, direct titration
e. Iodometry, back titration

180. Nitrofural should be identified by chromatography according to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What type of chromatography is used for such identification?
a. Paper partition
*b. Thin-layer
c. Anion-exchange
d. Cation-exchange
e. Gas-liquid

181. According to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia ofUkraine diphenylamine solution with sulfuric acid present can be used to detect the following admixtures in purified water:
a. Sulfates
*b. Nitrates
c. Heavy metals
d. Chlorides
e. Ammonium salts

182. To increase hydrophobic suspension stability a stabilizer is added. Name this stabilizer.
a. Vaseline oil
*b. Polysorbate 80 (Tween 80)
c. Dimethyl sulfoxide
d. Sodium chloride
e. Glucose

183. A pharmacy performs stocktaking to check its inventory holdings. What is the minimal interval between inventory checks of fixed assets?
a. Twice a year
b. Once a quarter
*c. Once a year
d. Once a month
e. Once in 3 years

184. A pharmacy performs regular stock-taking. What is the minimal interval between inventory checks of monetary funds and documents?
a. Twice a year
b. Once in 3 years
*c. Once a quarter
d. Once a month
e. Once a year

185. What inventory holdings of a pharmacy are included by a committee in a separate inventory during stock-taking?
*a. Medicines delivered to a pharmacy during stock-taking
b. Medicinal herbs
c. Alcoholature
d. Bandaging material
e. Medical products

186. Specify the norms of normal spoilage for medicinal leeches, which should be taken into account by a stock-taking committee.
*a. 7,6%
b. 0,85%
c. 1,9%
d. No norm defined
e. 0,65%

187. A new pharmaceutical enterprise is being founded. Which document of those given below is considered to be founding?
a. Standard act
b. Order
*c. Charter
d. Directive
e. -

188. A pharmaceutical firm uses a set of marketing concepts to manage its interactions with consumers. Point out one of such concepts.
a. Management improvement
b. Staff improvement
*c. Manufacture improvement
d. Creative marketing
e. Interactive marketing

189. What ratio is used in making hawthorn tincture?
a. 1:2
b. 1:20
c. 1:1000
*d. 1:10
e. 1:5

190. Name the way of injectabulettae application.
a. Peroral
b. Vaginal
c. Sublingual
*d. For injection solutions of drugs
e. For implantations

191. What factors affect tablet disintegration?
a. High specific gravity of powders
b. Poor flowability
*c. Amount and nature of disintegrating agents
d. Tablet powder contains lamellar crystals
e. Heterogeneity of granulated material

192. Hexamethylenetetramine solution sterility is achieved by:
*a. Filtering through bacterial filters
b. Gas diffusion sterilization
c. Pressure steam sterilization
d. Tyndallization method of sterilization
e. Preserving agents

193. During qualitative chemical analysis of nicotinic acid substance the reaction was conducted, which resulted in blue colouring. What reagent was used?
a. Sodium hydroxide solution
b. Thiocyanogen bromide reagent
c. Nessler’s reagent
*d. Copper (II) sulfate solution
e. Iron (III) chloride solution

194. What physical constant of a substance can be used to identify diphenhydramine hydrochloride according to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Refractive index
b. Specific rotation
c. Boiling temperature
d. Relative density
*e. Fusion temperature

195. Nitroxoline substance is being analysed for quantitative content of reactant by alkalimetry in non-water medium. What titrant and indicator are used in the given method?
a. Perchloric acid solution, crystal violet
b. Sodium hydrochloride solution, phenolphthalein
c. Potassium hydrochloride solution, methyl orange
*d. Sodium methylate solution, thymol blue
e. Sulfuric acid solution, naphtholbenzein

196. What department of a wholesale firm is tasked with search for and analysis of potential suppliers’ commercial offers, as well as concluding supply contracts and supervision of contract fulfillment?
a. Finance department
*b. Supply department
c. Shipping department
d. Marketing department
e. Stores development

197. Pharmaceutical market subjects that purchase drugs and medical products for further resale to make a profit, are called:
*a. Dealers
b. Consumer organisations
c. Individual consumers
d. Government authorities
e. Manufacturers

198. A pharmaceutical firm is unable to satisfy the demand for a drug. Specify the type of marketing tasked with decrease of excessive demand for a product by raising prices, and stopping advertising and promotion.
a. Creative marketing
b. Synchromarketing
c. Remarketing
*d. Demarketing
e. Promotional marketing

199. What stage of drug life cycle is characterized by a period of slow increase of sales amount, significant expenses for demand making, and absence of profit?
a. Market exit
b. Creation and development
*c. Introduction
d. Maturity and saturation
e. -

200. Grass of yellow hornpoppy (Glaucium flavum) contains alkaloid glaucine. What pharmacological effect does this plant have because of this alkaloid?
a. Expectorant
b. Anti-inflammatory
c. Antipyretic
*d. Antitussive
e. Analgetic

