1. A pharmacist prepares powders with a substance hard to comminute. What substance should be comminuted with a volatile liquid?
*a. Camphor
b. Zinc sulfate
c. Glucose
d. Copper sulfate
e. Magnesium oxide

2. A pharmacist has prepared powders including extract of belladonna in the amount of 0,015 per dose. For ten doses he had to take the following amount of dry extract:
a. 0,015 g
*b. 0,3 g
c. 1,5 g
d. 0,15 g
e. 0,03 g

3. A pharmacy has prepared a solution of macromolecular substance with limited swelling capacity. What solution was labelled ”warm up before use”?
*a. Gelatin
b. Pepsin
c. Pancreatin
d. Methyl cellulose
e. Trypsin

4. A dispensing chemist can recommend a drug made from seeds of Aesculus hippocastanum to be taken as a veintonic and antithrombotic agent to treat venous congestion and veins dilatation of lower extremities. This drug is:
a. Phytolysin
b. Marelin
c. Ajmaline
*d. Aescusan
e. Flamin

5. A pharmacy prepares drugs by individual prescriptions. How often should the floors be mopped down in the prescription department?
a. Once every 10 days
b. Once in a week
*c. Once in a shift
d. Once every 5 days
e. Once every 3 days

6. Schedule of sanitation actions in pharmacies is regulated by the relevant regulatory acts. Cleaning day at a pharmacy must be scheduled for at least 1 time:
a. In 3 days
b. In a week
*c. In a month
d. In 10 days
e. In 5 days

7. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
a. Bureaucratic
b. Centralized
c. Decentralized
*d. Divisional
e. Functional

8. A pharmaceutical company produces cordiamin solution. During the quality control its quantitative content was determined by means of refractometry. For this purpose an analytical chemist measured:
a. Density
b. Viscosity
*c. Index of refraction
d. Intensity of absorption
e. Angle of rotation

9. Specify which of the alkaloids given below will react positively to xanthines (murexide test):
a. Papaverine hydrochloride
b. Atropine sulfate
*c. Caffeine
d. Quinine sulfate
e. Ephedrine hydrochloride

10. Which of the following drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
a. Phenylinum
b. Heparin
*c. Streptokinase
d. Ticlopidine
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

11. A patient, who had a case of cardiac infarction, is recommended to take acetylsalicylic acid to:
a. Dilate coronary vessels
b. Decrease body temperature
*c. Decrease thrombocyte aggregation
d. Decrease inflammation
e. Lower cholesterol rate

12. Stinging nettle (Urtica dioica) leaves are mostly used as a hemostatic in tinctures and liquid extracts to treat lung, intestinal, and uterine hemorrhages. What bioactive substance provides hemostatic effect?
*a. Vitamin K
b. Rutin
c. Digitoxin
d. Reserpine
e. β-carotene

13. What herbal bioactive substances yield a positive reaction with ferric ammonium alum solution?
a. Fatty oils
*b. Tannins
c. Polysaccharides
d. Saponins
e. Bitters

14. Cumulating drugs - Digitoxin and Соrdigitum - are used to treat chronic cardiac insufficiency. What plant is used as the raw material in production of these drugs?
a. Erysimum canescens
*b. Digitalis purpurea
c. Adonis vernalis
d. Strophanthus kombe
e. Convallaria majalis

15. To prepare a syrup the following ingredients are taken: 82 parts of sugar syrup, 1 part of KJ (KBr), 12 parts of liquid thyme extract and 5 parts of 96% ethanol. Name this drug:
a. Broncholytin
b. Licorice syrup
c. Cholosas
d. Ambroxol
*e. Pertussin

16. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers’ recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Market penetration
b. Decrease
c. Development
*d. Maturity
e. Growth

17. A marketing specialist of a retail pharmacy analyzes price lists of wholesale firms and manufacturers. The key factor in the choice of a supplier is:
*a. Selection-price characteristics of production
b. Post-sale service quality
c. Market conditions
d. Supply volume
e. Production multifunctionality

18. Suspension workshop introduces production of new drugs. Specify the optimal approach to suspension production:
a. Drop method
b. Percolation
c. Maceration
*d. Grinding in a liquid medium
e. Repercolation

19. Aerosol workshop of a pharmaceutical plant uses propellants of different groups.What propellants belong to the group of compressed gases?
*a. Nitrogen, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide
b. Propane, butane, isobutane
c. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride
d. Vinyl and methyl chloride
e. Freons

20. An analytical chemist confirms the presence of calcium ions in calcium lactate molecule by means of reaction with ammonium oxalate. The reaction occurs in the medium of:
*a. Acetic acid
b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Potassium chloride
d. Formaldehyde
e. Ammonia

21. A pharmacist has used condensation method to prepare a suspension. Select the substances that make up the precipitate:
*a. Calcium chloride with sodium hydrocarbonate
b. Sodium bromide with camphor
c. Magnesium sulfate with potassium iodide
d. Potassium bromide with sodium benzoate
e. Caffeine and sodium benzoate with zinc oxide

22. A pharmacy received a formula for an extemporaneously compoundedmedication. Specify the document that is used to set the price for such medication:
a. Cash receipt voucher
b. Certificate of analysis
c. Inventory report
d. Certificate of quality
*e. Retail price list for drugs

23. A pharmacist has made polyethylene oxide-based suppositories with Streptocid. Specify the approach to introducing the active ingredient into the vehicle:
*a. Dissolution in the molten vehicle
b. Trituration with small amount of water
c. Blending with vaseline oil
d. Suspending in the vehicle
e. Emulsification and blending with the vehicle

24. Preparations from Althaea officinalis roots are used for treatment of upper airways conditions. During harvesting this herbal raw material the following can become an admixture:
a. Cichorium intybus
b. Taraxacum officinale
c. Plantago major
d. Tanacetum vulgare
*e. Lavatera thuringiaca

25. A Ukrainian pharmaceutical company established a subsidiary company abroad. What organisational form of international business is it?
a. Licensing
b. Direct export
*c. Direct possession
d. Contractual production of drugs
e. Joint venture

26. What product strategy is characterized by introducing to the market a product designed for the largest market segments and maximal amount of customers?
*a. Undifferentiated marketing
b. Concentrated marketing
c. Variation
d. Diversification
e. Differentiated marketing

27. Which of the following antihypertensive drugs has potassiumsparing action?
a. Metoprolol
b. Diltiazem
c. Furosemide
d. Prazosin
*e. Triamterene

28. An essential oil is a component of such compound drugs as: Inhalypt, Corvalol, Pinosol, Corvaldin, tooth drops. What herbal raw material is the source of this essential oil?
a. Folia Absinthii
*b. Folia Menthae piperitae
c. Folia Urticae
d. Folia Betulae
e. Folia Agavae

29. A pharmacist has been on a business trip. What is the deadline for submitting a travel expense report?
*a. Three working days after returning from a trip
b. Ten working days after returning from a trip
c. There is no deadline
d. A week after returning from a trip
e. Four working days after returning from a trip

30. A pharmacy prepares atropine sulfate trituration. What adjuvant should be used to prepare this trituration?
a. Starch
b. Talcum
c. Saccharose
d. Glucose
*e. Lactose

31. To prepare a suspension a medicinal substance should be triturated with a small amount of liquid. Specify the optimal amount of liquid for trituration of 10 g of zinc oxide according to the Deryagin’s rule:
*a. 5 ml
b. 2 ml
c. 0,5 ml
d. 1 ml
e. 10 ml

32. A pharmaceutical factory produces tablets of sodium chloride. What is the method of their production?
a. Moulding
b. Wet granulation prior to compression
c. Dry granulation prior to compression
*d. Direct compression without additional substances
e. Direct compression with the addition of adjuvants

33. Various types of dryers can be used for granule dehumidification. Specify the type of ”СП-30” dryer:
a. Silica gel dryer
b. Forced air dryer
c. Freeze dryer
d. Infrared dryer
*e. Fluidized bed dryer

34. Ampoule workshop of a factory produces injection solution. Name the stabilizer to be added to 1% morphine hydrochloride injection solution:
a. Amino-propylene-glycol
b. 0,1 N solution of sodium chloride
*c. 0,1 N solution of hydrochloric acid
d. Rongalite
e. Sodium metabisulfite

35. An analyst of a chemical laboratory obtained a glucose substance for analysis. To check its quality he used a polarimeter. The analyst measured:
a. Melting point
b. Specific gravity
c. Refractive index
d. Optical density
*e. Angle of rotation

36. Rhamnus cathartica herbal raw material can be used as a laxative. What plant parts are harvested for drug producton?
a. Sprouts
*b. Fruit
c. Bark
d. Leaves
e. Roots

37. Crude drugs CANNOT be tasted if they contain:
a. Bitter glycosides
b. Vitamins
c. Essential oils
d. Polysaccharides
*e. Toxins

38. During microscopy of Althaea root it is necessary to determine the presence of starch granules within the plant cells. What reagent enables such analysis?
a. Thymol solution
*b. Lugol’s solution
c. Concentrated sulfuric acid
d. Ammonium hydroxide
e. Alcohol solution of α-naphthol

39. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with the enterprise owner on behalf of the workforce.Any collective agreement is worked out in written form.Which article of the Labor Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
a. 41
*b. 17
c. 38
d. 36
e. 40

40. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
*a. Bonus
b. Seasonal
c. -
d. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
e. Dealer

41. Before goods are accepted by a pharmacy, they should be checked for quantity and quality. If there is no discrepancy, the pharmacy issues a warrant for receipt of goods. This warrant is valid for:
a. 1 year
b. 3 months
*c. 10 days
d. 15 days
e. 20 days

42. Companies producing injectable dosage forms apply different methods of ampoule sealing. Sealing against a jet of inert gases (nitrogen, argon, carbon dioxide) is suitable for the following injection solutions:
a. Viscous
b. Hydrolytically unstable
c. Photosensitive
*d. Easily oxidable
e. Thermostable

43. An analytical chemist of a central industrial laboratory performs quantitative determination of penicillin sum in benzylpenicillin sodium salt by means of iodometric method. What indicator is used?
*a. Starch
b. Potassium chromate
c. Methyl red
d. Methyl orange
e. Phenolphthalein

44. A pharmacist prepares cocoa butter-based round vaginal suppositories with less than 5%of citric acid. Specify themost rational approach to introduction of the active ingredient into the vehicle:
a. Dissolve in Dimexid (Dimethylsulfoxide)
b. Dissolve in vaseline oil
c. Dissolve in alcohol
*d. Dissolve in minmal quantity of purified water
e. Dissolve in molten cocoa butter

45. Suppositories are prepared by various methods such as rolling, pouring, pressing. What base is used in the pouring method?
a. Paraffin
b. Vaseline
c. Coriander oil
*d. Butyrolum
e. Cocoa butter

46. Apharmacist has made an injection solution with 0,1 M of sodium hydroxide solution as a stabilizer. What substance requires such stabilizer?
a. Sodium hydrocarbonate
b. Dibazol (Bendazol)
*c. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Glucose

47. Anesthesin is a substance with local anesthetic activity and a derivative of the following acid:
a. Para-aminosalicylic
b. Para-chlorbenzoic
c. Para-aminophthalic
*d. Para-aminobenzoic
e. Para-aminobenzolsulfonic

48. Paracetamol substance has been received for analysis. Reaction with the solution of iron (III) chloride resulted in blue-purple color. This indicates the presence of:
a. Aldehyde group
b. Ester group
c. Alcoholic hydroxyl
*d. Phenolic hydroxyl
e. Keto group

49. Production of tablets requires stage-to-stage quality control. What devices are used to determine the particle size distribution (fraction) of granules?
a. Microscope
*b. Standard set of sieves
c. Blade friabilators
d. Various vibrosieves
e. Laboratory identifiers

50. Various dryer types are used in production of herbal and animalderived drugs. What dryer would be optimal for dehumidification of thermolabile compounds?
a. Roller dryer
b. Drying oven
c. Drum dryer
*d. Freeze dryer
e. Band dryer

51. An analytical laboratory has received a procaine hydrochloride substance for analysis. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine limit content of heavy metals should be determined with the following reagent:
a. Hypophosphite
b. Methoxyphenylacetic acid
*c. Thioacetamide
d. Aminomethyl alizarin acetic acid
e. Sulfomolybdenum

52. Select a reagent that should be applied by an analytical chemist to detect alkaloids in the herbal raw material:
*a. Dragendorff reagent
b. Alkaline solution
c. Trim-Hill reagent
d. Stahl’s reagent
e. Bromine water

53. A warehouse received a batch of herbal raw material consisting of peppermint leaves. Specify the storage conditions for this herbal material:
a. At the temperature of -5°C
*b. Separately from other herbal raw materials
c. In metal storage containers
d. Under the regular conditions
e. Protected against CO2

54. For a month a pharmacy has been receiving multiple deliveries from various suppliers. What accrual document is used to record the goods received by the pharmacy?
a. Invoice register
b. Cash book
c. Debit/credit invoice
*d. Merchandise activity report
e. Receipt log book

55. Aset of values, traditions, behavioral norms and views inherent to an organisation characterize its following feature:
a. Self-development capability
*b. Culture
c. Profitability
d. Success
e. Capitalization level

56. Products differentiation (advantages) pursued by a pharmaceutical company with the aim to surpass its competitors in satisfying customers’s demands is called:
a. Porter’s generic strategies model
b. Benchmarking
*c. Product leadership
d. Penetration strategy
e. Concentration strategy

57. Sterilization methods used for the preparation of drugs under aseptic conditions can be differentiated into physical, mechanical, and chemical ones. Specify the chemical method of sterilization:
a. Pressure steam sterilization
b. UV light sterilization
c. Dry heat sterilization
d. Radiation sterilization
*e. Addition of preservatives

58. One of the first stages of business activity is to register an enterprise with public authorities. What documents NEED NOT be submitted to the local authorities for state registration of an enterprise?
a. Payment document for registration fee
b. Record card
*c. Samples of director’s and chief accountant’s signatures
d. Payment document confirming owner’s assessed contribution
e. Constituent documents

59. For better coverage of various markets the Lubnyfarm company sells a portion of its production through its chain of pharmacies, another portion is being sold through distributors, and the third - through pharmacies of another owners.What marketing system of distribution is used by this company?
*a. Multichannel
b. Corporate
c. Administered
d. Contractual
e. Horizontal

60. One of the most important market characteristics is a goods economic trend. What economic trend can be characterized by relative stability of high prices and the highest activity of manufacturers and customers?
a. Subsiding
b. Sluggish
c. Low
*d. High (stable)
e. Downward

61. A patient has been administered powders containing menthol.What is the best way to achieve the required extent of menthol comminution?
*a. To triturate it with alcohol or ether
b. To triturate it with purified water
c. To triturate it thoroughly with sugar
d. To triturate it with other components of the formula
e. To triturate it with glycerine or chloroform

62. An analytical laboratory received a sample of alpha-aminobutyric acid for analysis. What reagent should be used by the analytical chemist to identify this substance?
a. Calcium bromide
*b. Ninhydrin
c. Benzene
d. Sodium nitrate
e. Aniline

63. A retail pharmacy has been purchasing goods within an accounting period. What changes to the balance will result from this business transactions?
*a. Increase in assets and liabilities
b. Changes will affect only the assets
c. -
d. Changes will affect only the liabilities
e. Decrease in assets and liabilities

64. Which of the following nonsteroid anti-inflammatory agents has the least harmful effect on the mucosa of gastrointestinal tract?
a. Diclofenac
b. Piroxicam
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Nimesulide
e. Indomethacin

65. When preparing an ointment with castor oil and vaseline a pharmacist failed to obtain a homogeneous system.What is the most likely cause of incompatibility between these components?
a. Coagulation
b. Adsorption
c. Limited solubility
d. Release of crystallization water
*e. Immiscibility of the ingredients

66. Tablet quality is assessed through various indicators. Name the apparatuses used to measure tablet dissolution:
a. Rotating basket
*b. Paddle, flow-through cell
c. Paddle, rotating basket
d. Rotating basket, flow-through cell
e. Flow-through cell

67. When doing calculations to determine the limit of the cash balance, an accountant must specify the actual amount of cash receipts. What time period should be taken into account?
a. 1 year prior to calculation
b. Six months prior to calculation
*c. Three months prior to calculation
d. 10 days prior to calculation
e. 7 days prior to calculation

68. A certain plant is used for production of tinctures and extracts that are a part of complex drugs, such as Bellataminal, Becarbon, Besalol, etc. Specify the grass that is used for this purpose:
a. Lily of the valley
b. Beggarticks
c. Celandine
*d. Belladonna
e. Astragalus

69. Apharmacist has prepared a drug by the following prescription: Rp.: Streptocidi Dermatoli ana 1,0 Lanolini Vaselini ana 5,0 M.D.S.: Apply to the affected area of skin. Specify the type of the disperse system:
a. Hydrophilic ointment
b. Solution ointment
*c. Suspension ointment
d. Combined ointment
e. Extraction ointment

70. Which of the following antibiotics can be identified by means of maltol test?
a. Lincomycin hydrochloride
b. Kanamycin monosulfate
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
d. Amoxicillin
*e. Streptomycin sulfate

71. What concept can be described as determining the goods specifications, special features that distinguish these goods from their competitormanufactured analogues?
a. Consumer value
*b. Positioning
c. Quality
d. Selection
e. Demand

72. Aerosols contain active ingredients, solvents, propellants. What substances can be used as propellants?
*a. Freon 11, carbon monoxide, propane/butane mixture
b. Glycerine, argon, helium
c. Hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen, triethanolamine
d. Linaetholum, myristinic acid, benzocaine
e. Isopropyl myristate, neon, sulfur oxide

73. White precipitate produced by the reaction of morphine hydrochloride with ammonia solution dissolves in sodium hydroxide solution due to the presence of the following group in the structure of morphine hydrochloride:
a. Keto group
*b. Phenolic hydroxyl
c. Aldehyde group
d. Carboxyl group
e. Alcoholic hydroxyl

74. A pharmacy plans to purchase and retail goods of different stock record units. Which group of goods does VAT reduction apply to?
a. Baby food
b. Curative cosmetics
c. Perfumes
*d. Medicaments
e. Optics

75. During processing, drying and refinement of herbal raw materials containing saponins the dust particles can cause mucosa irritation. Therefore, precautionary measures should be observed when working with:
a. Rhizomata Tormentillae
b. Rhizomata Bistortae
c. Rhizomata et radices Rubiae
*d. Rhizoma et radices Polemonii
e. Radices Araliae

76. An analytical chemist identifies the substance of potassium acetate. What reagent confirms the presence of potassium cation in the substance?
*a. Tartaric acid
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Zinc oxide
d. Iron (III) chloride
e. Sodium hydroxide

77. A pharmacy has received a batch of drugs from a pharmacy depot. Specify the drug subject to the controlled substance inventory in pharmacies:
a. Novocaine
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Paracetamol
d. Analgin
*e. Dicaine

78. A pharmaceutical company conducted an age-specific segment analysis of the regional antihistamine market. It revealed the lack of antihistamines for children. The company will consider this segment as:
a. Amarket share
b. An unattractive segment
*c. Amarket niche
d. A segment requiring further research
e. A market door

79. The manufacturing pharmaceutical company ”Elema” has set up its own corporate pharmacy. In this case, it uses the following distribution channel:
a. Second level
b. First level
*c. Zero level
d. Third level
e. Fourth level

80. What type of market can be characterized by the following conditions: there are many sellers and buyers, who have no influence over current prices; similar and interchangeable competing goods are available; no price limits?
a. Pure monopoly
b. Economic planning
c. Monopolistic competition
d. Oligopoly
*e. Pure competition

81. An analytical laboratory received the task to confirm the presence of ethylenediamine in aminophylline. Which of the following reagents allows to detect ethylenediamine?
a. Barium chloride
*b. Copper (II) sulfate
c. Concentrated sulfuric acid
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Silver nitrate

82. Specify the indicator that measures the total contribution of various solutes to the osmotic pressure of the solution:
a. Isoviscosity
b. Apyrogenicity
c. Isohydricity
d. Isotonicity
*e. Osmolality

83. Quality of viscous extracts is assessed based on a variety of indices. Specify the maximum allowed moisture content of viscous extracts according to the regulations of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine:
a. 5%
b. 100%
c. 20%
d. 10%
*e. 30%

84. Injection solutions in ampoules are assessed through various indicators. What percentage of ampoules should be checked for mechanical impurities?
a. 95%
b. 98%
*c. 100%
d. 90%
e. 50%

85. A pharmacy prepares suspensions. What substance can be used for preparing a suspension without adding a stabilizer?
a. Sulfur
b. Camphor
*c. Magnesium oxide
d. Menthol
e. Phenyl salycylate

86. During planned inventory of cash money in a pharmacy cash register there is an unaccounted surplus discovered. What should a committee do with this surplus?
a. Transfer to authorized capital
b. Transfer to accounts receivable
c. Transfer to emergency fund
*d. Record as received
e. Transfer to accounts payable

87. To confirm the presence of sulfat ions in the medicinal preparation of magnesium sulfate an analytical chemist of a pharmacy uses the following solutions:
a. Diphenylamine
*b. Barium chloride and hydrochloric acid
c. Silver nitrate and nitric acid
d. Ammonium chloride and ammonium hydrate
e. Benzenesulfonic acid

88. Streptocide, sulfacyl sodium, norsulfazole or sulfadimezinum can be identified by means of the reaction that forms:
a. Fluorescein
b. -
c. Murexide
d. Iodoform
*e. Azo dye

89. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Monopolistic competitive market
b. Pure competition market
*c. Pure monopoly market
d. Oligopolistic market
e. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market

90. A pharmaceutical company has made a decision to expand its activities. The process of the company’s activity expansion by penetration into new fields of the branch is called:
a. Integration
b. Centralization
c. Segmentation
d. Conglomeration
*e. Diversification

91. An analytical chemist determines the quantity of a drug by the method of indirect bromatometry. Which of the following titrated solutions is to be used?
a. Sodium edetate
b. Calcium bromate
*c. Sodium thiosulfate
d. Sodium nitrite
e. Silver nitrate

92. A pharmacist working at an analytical laboratory is performing sulfite-ion identification of a drug in compliance with the requirements of State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What reagent becomes colorless in this investigation?
a. Potassium nitrate solution
*b. Iodine solution
c. Ammonia solution
d. Iron (III) chloride solution
e. Potassium iodide solution

93. An analytic laboratory received ”Aether anaestheticus” for analysis. Which reagent should be used for detection of acetone and aldehyde admixtures according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
*a. Alkaline solution of potassium tetraiodomercurate
b. Aqueous solution of potassium iodide
c. Hydroxylamine solution
d. Sodium hydrosulphite
e. Ammonium solution of argentum nitrate

94. Natural persons registered as small business entities with simplified taxation scheme (2 group) are subject to the limit of the annual amount of sales proceeds. Specify the proceeds limit:
*a. 1 million UAH
b. 100 thousand UAH
c. 5 million UAH
d. 3 million UAH
e. 750 thousand UAH

95. Fatty oil containing unsaturated fatty acids is used for the prevention of atherosclerosis. Specify the herbal raw material used in oil production:
a. Seeds of fennelflower
b. Fruits of black chokeberry
c. Hawthorn berries
*d. Seeds of flax
e. Fruits of dill

96. Quality of dried extracts is assessed according to several criteria. Specify the highest acceptable amount of moisture in dried extracts according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine:
a. 95%
*b. 5%
c. 20%
d. 25%
e. 75%

97. When preparing dermatological ointments the following substance should be introduced by suspending:
a. Protargol (silver proteinate)
b. Ephedrine hydrochloride
c. Camphor
d. Menthol
*e. Xeroform

98. Benzathine benzylpenicillin is the drug of choice for treatment of the following disease:
a. Furunculosis
*b. Syphilis
c. Pneumonia
d. Intestinal infection
e. Tonsillitis

99. The main active substances of senna leaves and fruits are sennosides A, B, C, D. They belong to the following class of biologically active substances:
a. Flavonoids
b. Phenolic acids
*c. Anthracene derivatives
d. Iridoids
e. Thioglycosides

100. Codeine is used as a coughdepressant. What herbal raw material contains this alkaloid?
a. Grass of common periwinkle
b. Tea leaves
c. Pods of plume poppy
d. Celandine grass
*e. Pods of opium poppy

101. What herbal drug produced form alkaloid-containing raw materials can be recommended for neurasthenia, insomnia, menopausal disorders?
a. Securinine nitrate
b. Vinblastine
c. Ergotamine
d. Glaucine hydrochloride
*e. Novopassit

102. A pharmacist prepares 3000 ml of valerian root infusion for a hospital department. The given amount of extract should be infused in a water bath for:
a. 30 minutes
*b. 25 minutes
c. 15 minutes
d. 45 minutes
e. 10 minutes

103. A pharmacist has prepared a solution of menthol oil. Specify the dissolution temperature of the active substance:
a. 70-80°C
b. 20-30°C
c. 60-70°C
d. 30-40°C
*e. 40-50°C

104. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition of the following concept:
a. Loss of property
b. Loss of time
c. Financial loss
*d. Business risk
e. Labour loss

105. Althaea roots are used as a mucolytic agent. Underground parts of this plant are harvested:
a. In the period of fruiting
b. In the period of blossoming
*c. After the seeds have ripened, and the above-ground part have died off
d. In the period of budding
e. In the period of stem extension

106. Substance of calcium pangamate is to be studied in an analytical laboratory. Calcium cations form white precipitate with the following reagent:
a. Potassium bromide
b. Sodium cobaltinitrite
c. Sodium chloride
d. Potassium permanganate
*e. Ammonium oxalate

107. In cases of inorganic mercury compounds poisoning the following drug should be used for antidotal therapy:
a. Calcium tetacine
b. Naloxone
*c. Unithiol (Dimercaptopropane sulfonate)
d. Desferal (Deferoxamine)
e. Dexamethasone

108. As a pharmacist was serving a customer, who ordered a nonprecription drug, he realized that the patient did not apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the receiver:
*a. Semantic barriers
b. Nonverbal barriers
c. Stereotypes of thinking
d. Failure to understand the importance of information
e. Neglect of facts

109. Tyndallization is used at a pharmaceutical factory as one of sterilization methods for thermolabile substances. What is the essence of this method?
*a. Triple heating of solution to 40-60°C with 24-hour-long intervals in between for thermostating
b. Sterilization with flowing steam at100°C
c. Sterilization with high-frequency and microwave frequency current
d. Sterilization with dry heat at 180-200°C for a lengthy period of time
e. Autoclaving at 119-121°C with pressure at 1,0-1,1 atm

110. What final document is used for the preparation of the report on the discrepancies revealed in the course of the inventory at a pharmacy?
a. Inventory item description
b. Commercial report
c. Invoice
*d. Act on the inventory results
e. Checklist

111. According to the basic regulations for supply of medical products, pharmacies should be supplied with medicaments that have a remaining shelf life of no less than . . .%, and bacterial preparations of no less than . . .%:
a. 50%, 40%
b. 80%, 60%
*c. 60%, 40%
d. 40%, 20%
e. 60%, 30%

112. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces ointments. What base is used for production of sulfur ointment simple?
a. Lanolin
b. Polyethylene glycol
c. Vaseline
d. Base ”For ophthalmic ointments”
*e. Emulsion

113. Powders that quickly enter into a reaction in presence of water and emit carbon dioxide belong to the following group:
a. Powders for oral use
b. Soluble powder
*c. Effervescent powder
d. Nasal powders
e. Powders for external use

114. While filling hard gelatin capsules such glidants as 0,1% - 0,3% aerosil or magnesium stearate along with 0,5% - 1% talcum are often added to the filling agent in order to improve the following properties:
a. Regulation of moisture content
b. Homogeneity
*c. Flowability
d. Homogeneity of mixing
e. Ability to contact molding

115. A patient suffering from bronchial asthma has been diagnosed with essential hypertension. What antihypertensive drug is contraindicated in this case?
a. Captopril
b. Hypothiazid (Hydrochlorothiazide)
c. Verapamil
*d. Propranolol
e. Amlodipine

116. A female patient in the first trimester of her pregnancy has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What is the antibiotic drug of choice for treatment of this patient?
a. Norfloxacin
b. Chloramphenicol
c. Amikacin
*d. Amoxicillin
e. Gentamicin

117. Which group of adjuvants includes polyvinyl alcohol allowed for use under the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine regulations?
*a. Prolongators
b. pH adjusters
c. Isotonizing agents
d. Antioxidants
e. Preservatives

118. A patient with moderately severe pneumonia has been administered ceftriaxone 1 time per day. The drug should be taken once a day due to its following property:
a. Wide range of action
b. Presence of bactericidal action
*c. Slow excretion
d. Cumulative ability
e. Poor absorption from the injection site

119. A pharmacist is preparing an ointment under aseptic conditions on the sterile ointment base - composition of vaseline and lanoline at a ratio 6:4. The drug substance is incorporated by suspending. Such technology of ointment preparation is typical for the following substance:
*a. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
b. Thiamine chloride
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Sodium chloride

120. Mixers are used to obtain a homogeneous mixture of freeflowing materials. What mixers have no rotating details?
a. Double cone blenders
b. Centrifugal mixers
c. Drum mixers
d. Blade mixers
*e. Fluidized bed mixers

121. In the course of isoniazid identification a pharmacy analyst has thoroughly boiled the substance with 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene. The substance colored yellow, after adding alkaline solution it colored first violet and then brownish-red. As the result of this reaction the following aldehyde derivative is produced:
a. Glutamic
b. Gluconic
*c. Glutaconic
d. Glyoxylic
e. Hexanic

122. A routine inventory revealed a cash shortage. Who has to reimburse the sum of the revealed shortage?
*a. Cashier
b. Deputy director of a pharmacy
c. Deputy head of a department
d. Department head
e. Pharmacy director

123. A 43-year-old patient with a severe form of rheumatoid arthritis has been administered a certain drug for background therapy. Specify this drug:
*a. Methotrexate
b. Nimesulide
c. Methylprednisolone
d. Prednisolone
e. Diclofenac sodium

124. A process dealing with drawing the documents, their processing, circulation and storage is called records management. If all documents circulate through one organisation center, - office desk, - then such system of records management is called:
*a. Centralized
b. Mixed
c. Specialized
d. Referent
e. Decentralized

125. A pharmacy received a formula for an alcohol solution of methylene blue with unspecified alcohol concentration. In this case, a pharmacist should use ethyl alcohol of the following concentration:
a. 40%
*b. 60%
c. 70%
d. 90%
e. 96%

126. A pharmacist needs to prepare10,0 g of eye ointment vehicle. What amounts of lanolin and vaseline should be taken?
a. 12,0 g of anhydrous lanolin and18,0 g of vaseline
b. 1,0 g of anhydrous lanolin and 29,0 g of vaseline
*c. 1,0 g of anhydrous lanolin and 9,0 g of vaseline
d. 27,0 g of anhydrous lanolin and 3,0 g of vaseline
e. 10,0 g of anhydrous lanolin and20,0 g of vaseline

127. Rifampicin is a cytochrome P450 inducer; therefore, its interaction with other chemically active drugs:
a. Has no effect on concentration of other drugs
b. Can increase concentration of other drugs
*c. Can decrease concentration of other drugs
d. Can result in binding with other metabolites
e. Has no effect on toxicity of other drugs

128. Bronchodilatory effect of a short-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist, - salbutamol, - develops after:
a. 45-60 minutes
b. 20-30 minutes
*c. 5-10 minutes
d. 2-3 hours
e. 4-6 hours

129. Representatives of the family Solanaceae are widely used in medical practice as alkaloid-containing plants. Which representative is the source for production of semisynthetic steroid hormones?
a. Atropa belladonna
b. Hyoscyamus niger
c. Solanum tuberosum
*d. Solanum laciniatum
e. Datura Stramonium

130. Grass of Equisetum arvense is recommend as a diuretic. What herbal raw material can be used as a substitute?
a. Herba Menthae piperitae
b. Herba Leonuri
*c. Herba Aervae lanatae
d. Herba Convallariae
e. Herba Adonidis

131. Under the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine (appendix 2) leaves of ginkgo are standardized by the content of:
a. Saponins
b. Coumarins
c. Chromones
*d. Flavonoids
e. Alkaloids

132. During employment a pharmacy manager provides a dispensing chemist with job description. Such communication is called:
*a. Descending
b. External
c. Non-verbal
d. Informal
e. Ascending

133. Some of the local buisnesses has entered into a temporary statutory association to buy medical goods from foreign manufactures. Name such association:
a. Corporation
b. Concern
*c. Consortium
d. Association
e. Syndicate

134. A pharmaceutical manufacturer sets the price for a drug basing on its prime cost with premium. What model of pricing is it?
a. Breakeven
*b. Cost-based
c. Demand-based
d. Competitive
e. Supply-based

135. A dosage form for internal use, which consists of round or irregularshaped uncoated grains containing mixture of active ingredients and adjuvants, is called:
a. Tablets
b. Spansules
c. Dragee
*d. Granules
e. Tea

136. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative determination of potassium chloride substance that is used in treatment of hypokalemia?
a. Polarimetry
*b. Argentometry
c. Iodometry
d. Bromatometry
e. Cerimetry

137. A 35-year-old patient with tachycardia has been administered propranolol. Which of the following reactions may be caused by the use of beta-blockers?
*a. Bronchospasm
b. Cumulation
c. Constipations
d. Blood pressure rise
e. Drug dependence

138. Diazotization reaction with the following azo compound is common for the substances with primary amino groups. What drug DOES NOT yield this reaction?
*a. Barbital
b. Procaine hydrochloride
c. Sulfanilamide
d. Procaineamide hydrochloride
e. Benzocaine

139. Cash receipts and payments at a pharmacy are recorded in a cashbook. Which of the following cash transactions IS NOT REGARDED as a receipt transaction?
a. Recognizing cash receipts from sales at a pharmacy
b. Return of unused disbursement funds
c. Recognizing accrued salaries and advance payable
*d. Issuing funds to be accounted for
e. Recognizing cash receipts from sales at pharmacy stands and outlets

140. Phytochemical workshop of a factory manufactures pancreatin. What is the source material for obtaining pancreatin?
a. Egg white
*b. Pancreas of pigs or cattle
c. Lungs of cattle
d. Gastric mucosa of pigs
e. Heart of cattle

141. The following substance is used as an extractant in production of liquid extracts:
a. Acetone
b. Chloroform
c. Glycerine
*d. Ethanol
e. Dichloroethane

142. A patient with signs of morphine intoxication has been delivered into an admission room. Name the necessary antidote:
a. Ectericidum
b. Trental (Pentoxifylline)
c. Collargol
d. Essentiale
*e. Naloxone

143. A patient, who had been taking acetylsalicylic acid, has developed hemorrhages of mucous membranes. This phenomenon is associated with:
a. Decreased absorption in gastrointestinal tract
b. Increased absorption in gastrointestinal tract
*c. Inhibition of prothrombin synthesis
d. Disorder of protein binding
e. Changed volume of distribution

144. A dispensing chemist with calculated length of service of 7 years has fallen ill. What percent of the sum stated in her sick list would she receive?
a. 100%
b. 60%
c. 50%
*d. 80%
e. 70%

145. Quantitative determination of sodium tetraborate according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine regulations is performed by means of alkalimetry method in the presence of:
a. Mercury (II) acetate
b. Formaldehyde
c. Acetic anhydride
d. 96% ethanol
*e. Mannitol

146. Quantitative content of a certain medicinal substance can be determined by means of nitritometry only if hydrolisis had been performed prior to it. Name this substance:
a. Dicain (Tetracaine)
b. Procaine hydrochloride
c. Norsulfazole
d. Benzocaine
*e. Streptocide soluble

147. Specialists of a pharmaceutical enterprice confirm the identity of Cassia acutifolia herbal raw material. During reaction with alkali it developed cherry-red coloring. What substances were identified?
*a. Anthraquinones
b. Alkaloids
c. Iridoids
d. Glycosides
e. Tannins

148. Menthol has anesthetic and antiseptic effect. What herbal raw material is the source of menthol?
a. Folia Salviae
b. Folia Absinthii
c. Folia Uvae ursi
d. Folia Eucalypti
*e. Folia Menthae piperitae

149. The main method of quantitative determination of corticosteroids is:
a. Acidimetry
*b. Spectrophotometry
c. Cerimetry
d. Potentiometry
e. Argentometry

150. Thyme grass is used for the production of herbal drugs for the treatment of respiratory tract infections. Under the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the herbal raw material is subject to chromatographic identification by means of thin layer chromatography. What substances are detected on the chromatographic plate after its treatment with due reagent?
*a. Thymol and carvacrol
b. Quercetin and rutin
c. Arbutin and methyl arbutin
d. Apigenin and luteolin
e. Atropine and hyoscyamine

151. Eucalyptus leaves contains essential oil and are used in production of bactericidal herbal drugs. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine this herbal raw material can be identified with thin-layer chromatography. After the chromatographic plate is processed with reagent, the following should be identified:
a. Apigenin
b. Glaucine
c. Quercetin
d. Scopoletin
*e. Cineole

152. Yarrow grass is a component of herbal gastrointestinal remedies and is used to make herbal drugs. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the quality of this herbal raw material is assessed by the content of:
*a. Essential oil and proazulenes
b. Polysaccharides
c. Vitamines
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Alkaloids

153. To analyze market activity and determine its place within the market a pharmaceutical company should evaluate its potential: strengths and weaknesses within the company itself (internal factors), as well as opportunities and threats received from the market environment (external factors). It can be done with:
a. Porter’s matrix
b. ABC analysis
c. Ansoff’s matrix
d. Boston Consulting Group
*e. SWOT analysis

154. Mercazolil (Thiamazole) is widely applied in medicine as an antithyroid agent.What heterocycle is its structure based on?
a. Triazole
b. Pyrrole
c. Imidazoline
*d. Imidazole
e. Pyrazole

155. A 48-year-old woman addressed a dispensing chemist with complaints of constipations developing after she had started treatment of her chronic cardiovascular disease. What drug can slow down intestinal peristalsis?
a. Folic acid
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Enalapril
*d. Verapamil
e. Losartan

156. To identify medicinal substances containing calcium an analytical chemist uses solution of:
a. β-naphthol
b. Potassium thiocyanate
*c. Glyoxal-hydroxyanil
d. Hexamethylenetetramine
e. Potassium permanganate

157. Calcium gluconate is tested for presence of saccharose and reducing sugars admixtures with coppertartrate reagent. If these admixtures are present the substance colors:
*a. Red
b. Green
c. White
d. Turquoise
e. Blue

158. A drug has just entered the market and requires considerable investments, while does not return substantial profits, and is currently at the introduction stage. What group of products (strategic economic units) does this drug belong to according to the Boston Consulting Group?
a. -
*b. Problem children
c. Stars
d. Dogs
e. Cash cows

159. A 5-year-old boy suffering from pneumonia has problems with mucus expectoration. A doctor prescribed him a mucolytic drug that stimulates surfactant synthesis. Name this drug:
a. Acetylcysteine
b. Potassium iodide
c. Carbocisteine
d. Mucaltin
*e. Ambroxol

160. A patient with peptic ulcer disease has developed blackcolored feces during combined pharmacotherapy. Name the drug that can be the cause of this development:
a. Lansoprazole
b. Ranitidine
c. Famotidine
d. Omeprazole
*e. Bismuth subcitrate

161. A 43-year-old patient was delivered to an admission room with renal colic attack. What group of drugs would be the most efficient during the attack?
a. Antacids
b. Hepatoprotectors
*c. Antispasmodics
d. Antibiotics
e. Cholagogues

162. A bus driver addressed a pharmacy due to his suffering from allergic rhinitis. What antihistamine with minimal sedative action can you recommend?
a. Astemizole
b. Clemastine
*c. Loratadine
d. Diphenhydramine
e. Chloropyramine

163. What antibiotic has beta-lactam cycle in its structure?
a. Chloramphenicol
b. Doxycycline hyclate
*c. Benzylpenicillin potassium salt
d. Streptomycin sulfate
e. Lincomycin hydrochloride

164. A 36-year-old patient complains of general weakness, somnolence, increased brittleness of nails, loss of hair. The patient was diagnosed with iron-deficiency anemia. What drug should be prescribed for treatment?
*a. Ferric sulfate
b. Folic acid
c. Riboxin (Inosine)
d. Myelosanum (Busulfan)
e. Cyanocobalamin

165. What hypotensive drug is an agent of choice for the patients suffering from arterial hypertension with concomitant type I diabetes mellitus?
a. Atenolol
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
*c. Lisinopril
d. Labetalol
e. Carvedilol

166. To identify ouabain (a cardiac glycoside) an analytical chemist performs a reaction with dinitrobenzene solution in alkaline medium. What molecule fragment can be determined by this reaction?
a. Benzene ring
b. Purine cycle
c. β-lactam cycle
d. Pyridine cycle
*e. Five-membered unsaturated lactone ring

167. A pharmacy employee has to work during night time. What document must be used as a basis for pay rise calculation by an employer in this case?
a. Expense report
b. Income summary
c. Internal memorandum
d. Employee’s application
*e. Collective agreement

168. A pharmacy received a batch of drugs from a supplier. What type of drug quality control should be performed in the pharmacy by an authorized person?
a. Laboratory
b. Complete chemical
c. Chemical
d. Physical
*e. Incoming

169. A patient with essential hypertension complains of infrequent occurrences of dry cough. Clinical and X-ray examination of the respiratory organs revealed no pathologies. What drug from those taken by the patient can cause cough as a side effect?
a. Prestarium (Perindopril)
*b. Captopril
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Diltiazem
e. Nebivolol

170. A business entity working in drug retail trade should keep the documents confirming the fact of a sale, where there are name, date, amount and series of a received drug stated, along with supplier information and license details. These documents are retained for:
a. 1 year
b. 6 months
c. 5 years
*d. 3 years
e. 2 years

171. A private pharmacy received a supply of a drug with 2,3-dihydro-2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone-2- sulfonate sodium as an active ingredient. Name this drug:
*a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Riboflavin
c. Cocarboxylase hydrochloride
d. Ergocalciferol
e. Rutin

172. A 53-year-old woman suffers fromischemic heart disease and angina pectoris.What drug can be used to stop angina pectoris attacks?
*a. Nitroglycerine
b. Propranolol
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Dipiridamol
e. Drotaverine hydrochloride

173. A patient is 20 years old. After she was stung by a bee the patient developed Quincke’s disease; rash in the form of blisters and papulae appeared on her torso. First aid in this case should start with administering the following drug:
a. Haemodes
*b. Prednisolone
c. Fresh frozen plasma
d. Penicillin
e. Rheopolyglukin (Dextran)

174. A patient with osteoarthritis (gonarthrosis) and peptic gastric ulcer in anamnesis should be prescribed a NSAID (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug). What NSAID would be the safest for this patient?
a. Metamizole sodium
*b. Meloxicam
c. Ibuprofen
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Indometacin

175. In the course of clinical instrumental examination a 45-yearold patient has been diagnosed with chronic helicobacter-associated type B gastritis. What group of drugs should be prescribed first of all?
a. Antacids
b. Prokinetic agents
*c. Anti-Helicobacter pylori agents
d. Reparative drugs
e. Anti-muscarinic agents

176. When servicing customers it is necessary to maintain cash desk discipline. A cashier should make records in the cash book:
a. Monthly
b. Weekly
c. At the end of a workday
*d. Immediately after the cash transaction occurred
e. Quarterly

177. Name the way of injectabulettae application:
a. Sublingual
*b. For injection solutions of drugs
c. For implantations
d. Peroral
e. Vaginal

178. What factors affect tablet disintegration?
*a. Amount and nature of disintegrating agents
b. High specific gravity of powders
c. Heterogeneity of granulated material
d. Tablet powder contains lamellar crystals
e. Poor flowability

179. Cytitonum agitates respiratory center during asphyxiation, state of shock, intoxication and respiratory arrest. Seeds of a medicinal herb are the source of this drug. Name this herb:
a. Linum usitаtissimum
b. Cucurbita pepo
c. Ricinus communis
*d. Thermopsis lanceolata
e. Plantago psyllium

180. During qualitative chemical analysis of nicotinic acid substance the reaction was conducted, which resulted in blue coloring. What reagent was used?
a. Sodium hydroxide solution
b. Thiocyanogen bromide reagent
c. Nessler’s reagent
*d. Copper (II) sulfate solution
e. Iron (III) chloride solution

181. Pharmaceutical market subjects that purchase drugs and medical products for further resale to make a profit are called:
a. Individual consumers
*b. Dealers
c. Consumer organisations
d. Manufacturers
e. Government authorities

182. A pharmaceutical firm is unable to satisfy the demand for a drug. Specify the type of marketing tasked with decrease of excessive demand for a product by raising prices and stopping advertising and promotion:
*a. Demarketing
b. Promotional marketing
c. Remarketing
d. Synchromarketing
e. Creative marketing

183. Cephalosporin structure is based on the condensed system containing two cycles - β-lactam and:
a. Pyridine
*b. Dihydrothiazine
c. Pyrrolizidine
d. Thiazolidine
e. Phenothiazine

184. To prepare eyedrops with antibiotic a dispensing chemist has been using flowing steam sterilization under 100°C for 30 minutes. What antibiotic allows for such sterilization?
a. Sodium benzylpenicillin
b. Biomycin
c. Erythromycin
*d. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
e. Streptomycin sulfate

185. A 48-year-old patient has undergone incomplete amputation of the thyroid gland. Choose the drug for replacement therapy in case of hypothyroidism:
*a. L-thyroxin
b. Insulin
c. Prednisolone
d. Metoprolol
e. Hydrocortisone

186. Specify the medicinal substance with pronounced hydrophobic properties:
*a. Sulfur
b. Zinc oxide
c. Magnesium oxide
d. Sodium bromide
e. Basic bismuth nitrate

187. A 34-year-old patient suffering from systemic lupus erythematosus takes methylprednisolone. On examination the patient’s blood calcium is revealed to be low. A doctor suspects osteoporosis development. It is necessary to prescribe the patient calcium preparations and:
*a. Vitamin D3
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin E
d. Vitamin A
e. B-group vitamins

188. A pharmacist has made an oil emulsion with vitamin E oil solution intended for internal use.What is the best approach to vitamin introduction into the emulsion?
a. Dissolve in glycerine
b. Dissolve in water to make primary emulsion
c. Suspend in the prepared emulsion
d. Dissolve in water for emulsion dilution
*e. Dissolve in oil before making primary emulsion

189. Name the professional, who is authorized to check financial and economic activity of an enterprise at the request issued by an enterprise or public authority:
*a. Auditor
b. Pharmacy manager
c. Compliance officer
d. Inspector
e. Chief accountant

190. A 52-year-old patient has been diagnosed with gouty arthritis, phase2. What drug should be basic in treatment of this patient?
*a. Allopurinol
b. Paracetamol
c. Penicillin
d. Furosemide
e. Hydrochlorothiazide

191. Speed of blend powder dampening can be significantly affected by package material. What capsules protect powders from damp air the best?
a. Polyethylene
b. Paper
c. Parchment
d. Soft gelatine
*e. Waxed

192. Anthracene derivatives have two main directions of pharmacological activity: purgative and litholytic. What leads to the difference in pharmacological activity of different anthracene derivatives?
a. Polymerization
*b. Hydroxyl group placement
c. Presence of methyl groups
d. Amount of sugar residues
e. Presence of carboxyl groups

193. A pharmacy manager has calculated a certain indicator of efficiency of pharmacy’s economic activity as percentage ratio of profits to turnover in retail prices. What indicator is it?
a. Turnover growth rate
b. Inflation rate
c. Trade stock standard
*d. Profitability
e. Turnover expenditure

194. A pharmacy sells standard drugs to population. What is a prime cost of sold goods, if the retail price is 300 000 UAH, and the total markup is120 000 UAH?
*a. 180 000 UAH
b. 50 000 UAH
c. 300 000 UAH
d. 120 000 UAH
e. 100 000 UAH

195. Pharmacy employees should meet universal qualification requirements. Who has the right to hold a position of a prescription drugs department manager?
*a. Dispensing chemist
b. Sanitary assistant
c. Manager
d. Packager
e. Pharmacist

196. During the period when a cash register is inoperable and undergoes repairs it is possible to perform payment operations using:
a. Accompanying notes
*b. Transactions logbook and receipts
c. Check book
d. Payment orders
e. Credit and debit cash orders

197. An analytical chemist performs identification of lidocaine hydrochloride. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the presence of chloride ions can be confirmed by means of reaction with silver nitrate solution resulting in:
a. Blue coloring
*b. White caseous precipitate
c. Violet coloring
d. Green fluorescence
e. Yellow precipitate

198. A pharmacist has dissolved a medicinal substance in sterile purified water to make an eye ointment. Specify this medicinal substance:
a. Menthol
b. Xeroform
*c. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
d. Basic bismuth nitrate
e. Purified sulfur

199. What tax is registered as a local one in a pharmacy budget?
a. Income tax
b. Excise tax
c. Corporate income tax
d. Value-added tax
*e. Single tax

200. An important indicator of business activity is profitability of a business. Specify the indices that can be used to measure the profitability:
a. Turnover/income
b. Turnover/cost price
*c. Profit/turnover
d. Income/turnover
e. Liquidity/solvency

