1. A pharmacy prepares drugs by individual prescriptions. How often should the floors be mopped down in the prescription department?
*a. Once in a shift
b. Once every 10 days
c. Once every 3 days
d. Once every 5 days
e. Once in a week

2. Schedule of sanitation actions in pharmacies is regulated by the relevant regulatory acts. Cleaning day at a pharmacy must be scheduled at least once:
a. In 5 days
*b. In a month
c. In 3 days
d. In a week
e. In 10 days

3. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
*a. Divisional
b. Functional
c. Decentralized
d. Centralized
e. Bureaucratic

4. Vitali-Morin’s reaction is used to identify tropane alkaloids in herbal raw material. Name the alkaloid that can be detected by means of this specific reaction:
*a. Scopolamine
b. Morphine
c. Papaverine
d. Platyphyllin
e. Codeine

5. Standard herbal material of lily-ofthevalley is obtained by drying it at a temperature of 50-60°C to prevent the following possible biochemical process:
a. Volatilization of essential oils
b. Oxidation of phenolic compounds
*c. Enzymatic hydrolysis of cardiac glycosides
d. Oxidation of resins
e. Oxidation of terpenoids

6. A factrory workshop producing suspensions and emulsions is going to develop the manufacture of new drugs. What mechanisms can be used for the ultrasound processing of drugs?
a. Dismembrator, electrical impulse plasmolyzer
b. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, dismembrator
c. Centrifugal mixer with rotating housing
*d. Liquid whistle, magnetostrictive source
e. Disintegrator, liquid whistle

7. A pharmacist has made a topical solution with lipophilic vehicle. Specify the substance that produces such a type of solution:
a. Dermatol (bismuth subgallate)
b. Novocaine hydrochloride
*c. Menthol
d. Starch
e. Sulfur

8. A pharmacist has a labour dispute with the pharmacy administration about rescheduling his annual vacation leave. The employee can appeal against the decision of the pharmacy administration to the following body:
*a. Labour disputes committee (LDC)
b. Highest management bodies of pharmaceutical service at the regional level
c. Commercial court
d. The Ministry of Public Health of Ukraine
e. Trade union committee

9. Drugs derived from Rauvolfia serpentina roots are used in hypertension treatment. Authenticity of Rauvolfia serpentina herbal raw material can be confirmed by its content of:
a. Adonitoxin
*b. Reserpine
c. Hyoscyamine
d. Atropine
e. Vinblastine

10. Medications Passit and Novopassit are used as tranquilizing, sedative and mild hypnotic agents. These medications are produced from the following grass:
a. Three-lobe beggarticks
b. Elecampane
c. Lesser periwinkle
*d. Purple passionflower
e. Garden sage

11. What concept can be described as ”... an area of exchange with its characteristic system of economic relations between goods manufacturers and consumers”?
a. Agreement
b. Management
c. Marketing
d. Sales
*e. Market

12. To prepare a suspension a medicinal substance should be triturated with a small amount of liquid. Specify the optimal amount of liquid for trituration of 10 g of zinc oxide according to the Deriagin’s rule:
a. 10 ml
b. 1 ml
c. 0,5 ml
*d. 5 ml
e. 2 ml

13. A pharmaceutical factory produces tablets of sodium chloride. What is the method of their poduction?
a. Dry granulation prior to compression
*b. Direct compression without additional substances
c. Direct compression with the addition of excipients
d. Moulding
e. Wet granulation prior to compression

14. Various types of dryers can be used for granule dehumidification. Specify the type of ”СП-30” dryer:
*a. Fluidized bed dryer
b. Infrared dryer
c. Forced air dryer
d. Silica gel dryer
e. Freeze dryer

15. Ampoule workshop of a factory produces 5% oil solution of tocopherol acetate for injections. What method of filling the ampoules is optimal in this case?
a. Syringe and vacuum
b. Syringe and devaporation
c. Vacuum
d. Devaporation
*e. Syringe

16. An analyst of a chemical laboratory had received a glucose substance for analysis. To check its quality he used a polarimeter. The analyst measured:
*a. Angle of rotation
b. Optical density
c. Specific gravity
d. Melting point
e. Refractive index

17. A doctor has prescribed pessaries of unspecified mass. What mass should be chosen when pessaries are being prepared in a pharmacy?
a. 6,0
*b. 4,0
c. 1,5
d. 3,0
e. 0,5

18. A pharmacist has made an injection solution that contains a salt produced by reaction of a strong base with a weak acid. Specify the necessary stabilizer:
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Sodium sulfate
*c. Sodium hydrochloride
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Cysteine

19. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with the business owner on behalf of the workforce. Any collective agreement is worked out in written form. Which article of the Labour Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
a. 36
b. 40
c. 41
*d. 17
e. 38

20. A pharmacist prepares cocoa butterbased round vaginal suppositories with less than 5% of citric acid. Specify the most rational approach to introduction of the active ingredient into the vehicle:
a. Dissolve in vaseline oil
b. Dissolve in alcohol
c. Dissolve in Dimexid (Dimethylsulfoxide)
d. Dissolve in molten cocoa butter
*e. Dissolve in minimal quantity of purified water

21. A pharmacist prepares an injection solution that must be stabilized with 0,1M of hydrochloric acid solution. What solution is to be prepared?
a. Hexamethylenetetramine
b. Sodium benzoate
c. Calcium chloride
d. Potassium chloride
*e. Novocaine

22. .Apharmacist hasmade a drug by the prescription: Rp.: Sol. Protargoli 0,31,0 D.S. For irrigation. Specify the optimal technology of preparation:
a. Dissolve glycerine in the water, add protargol
b. Measure out protargol into the vial, dissolve it in the water, add glycerine
c. Measure out subsequently glycerine, water, and protargol into the vial
*d. Grind protargol in the mortar with glycerine, add water
e. Dissolve protargol in the water, add glycerine

23. Paracetamol substance has been sent for analysis. Reaction with the solution of iron (III) chloride resilted in the blue-violet coloring. This indicates the presence of:
a. Aldehyde group
b. Ester group
c. Alcoholic hydroxyl
*d. Phenolic hydroxyl
e. Keto group

24. Production of tablets requires stagetostage quality control. What devices are used to determine the particle size distribution (fraction) of granules?
*a. Standard set of sieves
b. Friabilators
c. Microscope
d. Laboratory identifiers
e. Various vibrosieves

25. An analytical laboratory has received a procaine hydrochloride substance for analysis. According to the State Pharmacopoeia ofUkraine limit content of heavy metals should be determined with the following reagent:
a. Hypophosphite
b. Methoxyphenylacetic acid
*c. Thioacetamide
d. Aminomethyl alizarin acetic acid
e. Sulfomolybdenum

26. Preparations of sorrel roots can have both a laxative and astringent effect. This is due to the presence of the following biologically active substances:
*a. Anthracene derivatives and tannins
b. Essential and fatty oils
c. Iridoids and vitamins
d. Coumarins and phenol glycosides
e. Flavonoids and essential oils

27. Which of the pharmacy departments is responsible for checking the quantity and quality of received goods, their storage and dispensing to other departments?
a. Compounding and production department
b. Department of over-the-counter drugs
c. Department of curative cosmetics
*d. Inventory department
e. Department of finished dosage forms

28. Chloride of lime is identified by calcium cations after boiling with acetic acid in order to eliminate active chlorine. What reagent is used?
a. Sodium nitrite
b. Ammonium molybdate
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Potassium chloride
*e. Ammonium oxalate

29. A set of values, traditions, behavioral norms, and views inherent to an organisation characterizes its following feature:
a. Profitability
b. Success
*c. Culture
d. Capitalization level
e. Self-development capability

30. A patient needs the pharmacy to prepare him a camphor ointment. What concentration of camphor should be in the ointment according to the regulatory documents?
a. 15%
b. 20%
*c. 10%
d. 5%
e. 1%

31. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug, which are aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
a. Conversion
b. Synchromarketing
c. Stimulating
*d. Counteractive
e. Remarketing

32. For better coverage of various markets the Lubnyfarm company sells a portion of its production through its chain of pharmacies, another portion is being sold through distributors, and the third - through pharmacies of another owners. What marketing system of distribution is used by this company?
a. Contractual
b. Administered
c. Horizontal
d. Corporate
*e. Multichannel

33. One of the most important market characteristics is a goods economic trend. What economic trend can be characterized by relative stability of high prices and the highest activity of manufacturers and customers?
a. Low
*b. High (stable)
c. Downward
d. Subsiding
e. Sluggish

34. A pharmacy prepares 10% sodium chloride injection solution. What sterilization would be optimal in this case?
a. Gas sterilization
b. Sterile filtration through membrane
*c. Autoclave chamber with highpressure saturated steam
d. Dry-heat sterilization
e. Irradiation sterilization

35. Prior to making a sodium chloride isotonic solution a pharmacist baked the powder in a dry heat box. What substances are removed by this operation?
*a. Pyrogenic substances
b. Sulfates
c. Moisture
d. Chlorides
e. Redox substances

36. A pharmacy has received a prescription for tincture. What herbal raw material can be used tomake this dosage form?
a. Rhubarb roots
b. Arrow-wood bark
c. Buckthorn bark
*d. Valerian rootstock
e. Oak bark

37. A certain type of herbal raw material is being collected in spring during sap flow. Specify this material:
a. Roots
b. Infructescences
c. Flowers
d. Buds
*e. Bark

38. A medical product reaches its final consumer according to the following scheme: manufacturer / wholesale house / pharmacy / final consumer. Determine the level of the distribution channel:
*a. Two-level channel
b. Three-level channel
c. Four-level channel
d. Zero-level channel
e. One-level channel

39. A pharmacist has prepared a drug by the prescription: Rp.: Olei Helianthi 7,4 Solutionis Ammonii caustici 2,5 ml Асidi oleinici 0,1 M. D. S:. Ammoniac liniment. For infriction. Specify the type of disperse system:
a. Combined liniment
b. Liniment-suspension
c. Extractive liniment
*d. Liniment-emulsion
e. Liniment-solution

40. A pharmacist has prepared a drug by the prescription: Rp.: Streptocidi Dermatoli ana 1,0 Lanolini Vaselini ana 5,0M.D.S.: Apply to the affected skin. Specify the type of the disperse system:
a. Solution ointment
b. Combined ointment
c. Extraction ointment
*d. Suspension ointment
e. Hydrophilic ointment

41. Optical rotation angle of substances is determined under the temperature of 20°C, in 1-decimeter-thick layer, with wavelength of sodium spectrum D-lines (λ = 589,3 nm), and is calculated with reference to a solution containing 1 g of the substance per ml. It is called:
*a. Specific optical rotation
b. Refractive index
c. Distribution coefficient
d. Relative density
e. Optical density

42. Which of the following antibiotics can be identified by means of maltol test?
a. Lincomycin hydrochloride
b. Kanamycin monosulfate
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
d. Amoxicillin
*e. Streptomycin sulfate

43. Specify the control methods aimed at detecting mechanical impurities in parenteral solutions:
*a. Visual optical
b. Amperometric
c. NMR and UV-visible spectroscopy
d. Gravitational
e. Limulus test

44. Adonis-derived drugs are popular cardiotonic agents. The stock of adonis herbal raw material is assessed by the method of:
a. Geodesic
b. By eye
c. Model specimen
d. Projective cover
*e. Permanent quadrates

45. A pharmaceutical analyst identifies the substance of potassium acetate. What reagent confirms the presence of potassium cation in the substance?
*a. Tartaric acid
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Zinc oxide
d. Iron (III) chloride
e. Sodium hydroxide

46. An analytical chemist performs the qualitative assessment of mercury (II) chloride.What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative assessment in this case?
a. Bromometry
b. Nitritometric titration
*c. Complexometric titration
d. Alkalimetry
e. Acidimetry

47. The market can be characterized by the following conditions: there are many sellers and buyers, who have no influence over current prices; similar and interchangeable competing goods are available; there are no price limits. What type of market is it?
a. Oligopoly
b. Monopolistic competition
*c. Pure competition
d. Pure monopoly
e. Economic planning

48. Specify the indicator that measures the total contribution of various solutes to the osmotic pressure of the solution:
a. Isotonicity
b. Isohydricity
*c. Osmolality
d. Isoviscosity
e. Apyrogenicity

49. Dosage precision during tabletmaking mainly depends on the following technological property of tablet mass:
a. Compressibility
b. Lyophilic property
c. Relative density
d. Compression ratio
*e. Flowability

50. A pharmacy opens a bank account to store funds and conduct ongoing business transactions. What kind of account should be opened?
a. Provisional
b. Letter of credit
c. Investment
*d. Current
e. Deposit

51. Manufacturer’smarketing department detected negative demand for a certain goods. What would be the marketing task? What type of marketing should be applied?
a. Demand leveling, synchromarketing
b. Demand decrease, demarketing
c. Demand stimulation, promotional marketing
*d. Demand making, conversion marketing
e. Demand increase, remarketing

52. To confirmthe presence of sulfat ions in themedicinal preparation ofmagnesium sulfate an analytical chemist of a pharmacy uses the following solutions:
a. Benzenesulfonic acid
b. Diphenylamine
c. Ammonium chloride and ammonium hydrate
d. Silver nitrate and nitric acid
*e. Barium chloride and hydrochloric acid

53. Natural persons registered as small business entities with simplified taxation scheme are subject to limitation of the annual amount of sales proceeds. Specify the proceeds limit:
a. 3 000 000 UAH
b. 5 000 000 UAH
c. 750 000 UAH
d. 100 000 UAH
*e. 500 000 UAH

54. Quality of dried extracts is assessed according to several criteria. Specify the highest acceptable amount of moisture in dried extracts according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine:
a. 95%
*b. 5%
c. 20%
d. 25%
e. 75%

55. When preparing dermatological ointments the following substance should be introduced by suspending:
a. Ephedrine hydrochloride
*b. Xeroform
c. Menthol
d. Camphor
e. Protargol (silver proteinate)

56. What is the function of anhydrous lanolin in the suppository mass used for suppositories prepared via hand rolling?
a. Solubilizer
b. Emollient
c. Solvent
d. Preservative
*e. Plasticizer

57. An analytical chemist analyses the substance of racemic menthol according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. To identify the drug and determine its purity he uses optical rotation that should occur within the interval:
a. From – 48o to –51o
b. From +10o to +13o
c. From –102o to –105o
*d. From +0, 2o to –0, 2o
e. From +50o to +56o

58. Codeine is used as a coughdepressant. What herbal raw material contains this alkaloid?
a. Grass of common periwinkle
b. Tea leaves
c. Grass of plume poppy
d. Celandine grass
*e. Pods of opium poppy

59. What herbal drug produced form alkaloid-containing raw materials can be recommended for neurasthenia, insomnia, menopausal disorders?
a. Vinblastine
*b. Novopassit
c. Glaucine hydrochloride
d. Ergotamine
e. Securinine nitrate

60. An analytical chemist can quantitatively determine the thiamine bromide content in powders by means of:
a. Bromometry
b. Nitritometric titration
*c. Alkalimetry
d. Permanganatometry
e. Complexometric titration

61. What technology should be chosen by a pharmacist to make a liquid dosage form, if it contains calcium gluconate?
a. Dissolve in alkaline medium
*b. Dissolve it in hot solvent or heat it up to full dissolution
c. Dissolve in the water free of redox subsatances
d. First grind it into powder when it is dry or with small amount of solvent added
e. Add equal amount of sodium chloride

62. Tyndallization is used at a pharmaceutical factory as one of sterilization methods for thermolabile substances. What is the essence of this method?
a. Sterilization with flowing steam at 100°C
b. Autoclaving at 119-121°C with pressure at 1,0-1,1 atm
*c. Triple heating of solution to 40-60°C with 24-hour-long intervals in between for thermostating
d. Sterilization with dry heat at 180200°C for a lengthy period of time
e. Sterilization with high-frequency and microwave frequency current

63. What final document is used for the preparation of the report on the discrepancies revealed in the course of inventory at the pharmacy?
a. Invoice
*b. Act on the inventory results
c. Checklist
d. Inventory item description
e. Commercial report

64. A teenager with hyporexia has been recommended to drink medicinal herbal tea of the following composition: Herba Absinthii, Herba Millefolii. Specify the characteristic microscopic features of Artemisia absinthium, which indicate its presence in the herb mixture:
a. Simple and capitate hairs
b. Retor-shaped hairs
c. Branched and capitate hairs
*d. T-shaped hairs along the leaf edge
e. Branched, simple and ciliated hairs

65. A patient suffering from bronchial asthma was diagnosed with essential hypertension. What antihypertensive drug is contraindicated for this patient?
*a. Propranolol
b. Amlodipine
c. Verapamil
d. Hypothiazid (Hydrochlorothiazide)
e. Captopril

66. In the process of isoniazid identification a pharmacy analyst thoroughly boiled the substance with 2,4dinitrochlorobenzene. The substance turned yellow. After adding alkaline solution the substance turned first violet and then brownish-red. As the result of this reaction the following aldehyde derivative is produced:
a. Gluconic
b. Glyoxylic
c. Hexanic
*d. Glutaconic
e. Glutamic

67. Indometacine is a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. A condensed heterocyclic system is contained within the structure of this drug. What cycles compose the system?
a. Benzene and pyridine
b. Benzene and thiazole
*c. Pyrrole and benzene
d. Two 4-oxycoumarin residues
e. Pyrimidine and imidazole

68. A 43-year-old patient with a severe form of rheumatoid arthritis has been administered a certain drug for background therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Prednisolone
b. Methylprednisolone
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Nimesulide
*e. Methotrexate

69. A process dealing with drawing the documents, their processing, circulation and storage is called records management. If all documents circulate through one organization center, - the Office Desk, - then such system of records management is called:
*a. Centralized
b. Mixed
c. Specialized
d. Referent
e. Decentralized

70. Representatives of the family Solanaceae are widely used in medical practice as alkaloid-containing plants. Which representative is the source for production of semi-synthetic steroid hormones?
a. Atropa belladonna
b. Hyoscyamus niger
c. Solanum tuberosum
*d. Solanum laciniatum
e. Datura Stramonium

71. Birch buds are used as a diuretic. Quality of the herbal raw material is determined by its content of:
a. Vitamins
b. Iridoids
c. Saponins
*d. Essential oil
e. Lipids

72. A pharmaceutical manufacturer sets the price for a drug basing on its prime cost with premium. What model of pricing is it?
a. Supply-based
b. Breakeven
c. Competitive
d. Demand-based
*e. Cost-based

73. At the end of each month a pharmacy accountant draws up a balance. What indicator characterizes liabilities of a pharmaceutical company?
a. Circulating assets
b. Work-in-process inventory
c. Accounts receivable
*d. Equity capital
e. Reserves and expenses

74. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative determination of potassium chloride substance that is used in treatment of hypokalemia?
a. Polarimetry
*b. Argentometry
c. Iodometry
d. Bromatometry
e. Cerimetry

75. Who is responsible for the acceptance of goods and medical products with accompanying incoming quality control?
*a. Authorized representative
b. Dispensing chemist
c. Analyst
d. Pharmacy head manager
e. Supplier pharmacist

76. A 35-year-old patient with tachycardia has been administered propranolol. Which of the following reactions may be caused by the use of ?-blockers?
*a. Bronchospasm
b. Cumulation
c. Constipations
d. Blood pressure rise
e. Drug dependence

77. Infuser apparatus is used by a pharmacy to prepare:
a. Emulsions
b. Ointments
c. Infusion solutions
d. Suspensions
*e. Infusions and decoctions

78. Lately the Phytopharmpharmaceutical company has been forced to decrease its production volume and range of goods. Not only does the company head manager demonstrate no managerial abilities, but he also appears to be completely disinterested in the running of the business and executes no control over it. Determine the leadership type of the head manager in this case:
a. Autocratic
*b. Liberal
c. Directive
d. Democratic
e. Authoritarian

79. Phytochemical workshop of a factory manufactures pancreatin. What is the source material for obtaining pancreatin?
a. Egg white
*b. Pancreas of pigs or cattle
c. Lungs of cattle
d. Gastric mucosa of pigs
e. Heart of cattle

80. The following substance is used as an extractant in production of liquid extracts:
*a. Ethanol
b. Dichloroethane
c. Glycerine
d. Chloroform
e. Acetone

81. Which of the following diuretics SHOULD NOT be given to the patients with impaired hearing?
a. Clopamide
b. Spironolactone
*c. Furosemide
d. Indapamide
e. Chlorthalidone

82. A patient, who has been taking acetylsalicylic acid, developed hemorrhages of mucous membranes. This phenomenon is associated with:
a. Decreased absorption in the gastrointestinal tract
b. Increased absorption in the gastrointestinal tract
*c. Inhibition of the prothrombin synthesis
d. Disorder of protein binding
e. Changed volume of distribution

83. Simultaneous application of doxycycline hydrochloride and oral contraceptive causes:
a. Reduction of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
b. -
c. Increase of oral contraceptives effectiveness
d. Increase of the antibacterial effect of doxycycline
*e. Reduction of oral contraceptives effectiveness

84. To treat iron-deficiency anemia the following drug is usually prescribed:
a. Heparin
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Furagin (Furazidinum)
d. Corticosteroids
*e. Ferroplex

85. A 70-year-old patient with stenocardia claims that the pharmacy had sold him a drug that relieved an attack of stenocardia but instead caused an acute bursting headache. What antihypertensive drug is this side-effect typical of?
*a. Nitrosorbid
b. Nifedipine
c. Metoprolol
d. Trimetazidine
e. Amlodipine

86. Presence of nitrate radical in metronidazole structure can be confirmed by reduction of nitrate radical to amino group with production of:
a. Thiochrome
b. Indophenol
*c. Azo dye
d. Iodoform
e. Murexide

87. Xycaine quantitative content can be determined by means of argentometry (back titration).What indicator is required by this method?
a. Sodium eosinate
b. Starch
c. Potassium chromate
*d. Iron (III) ammonium sulphate
e. Bromphenol blue

88. A dispensing chemist with calculated length of service of 7 years has fallen ill. What percent of the sum stated in her sick list would she receive?
a. 100%
b. 60%
c. 50%
*d. 80%
e. 70%

89. Commercial and financial activity of a pharmacy involves using returnable tare. Which of the following containers are returned to the supplier?
a. Paper boxes
b. Packaging materials
*c. Metal cylinders
d. Glass-stoppered bottles
e. Glassware

90. A pharmacy has received goods from a warehouse, which were delivered by the warehouse transport. Therefore, goods receipt requires the following accompanying document:
a. Financial statement of the supplier
b. Specifications to the contract of delivery
c. All of the listed
*d. Motor waybill
e. Contract of delivery

91. Specialists of a pharmaceutical enterprice confirm the identity of Cassia acutifolia herbal raw material. During reaction with alkali it developed cherryred coloring. What substances were identified?
a. Tannins
b. Glycosides
c. Iridoids
*d. Anthraquinones
e. Alkaloids

92. Number of mediators that pharmaceutical goods pass on their way from manufacturer to consumer is called:
a. Width of distribution channel
b. Level of distribution channel
*c. Length of distribution channel
d. Volume of distribution channel
e. -

93. Menthol has anesthetic and antiseptic effect. What plant is the source of menthol?
a. Folia Salviae
b. Folia Absinthii
c. Folia Uvae ursi
d. Folia Eucalypti
*e. Folia Menthae piperitae

94. The main method of quantitative determination of corticosteroids is:
a. Cerimetry
b. Potentiometry
*c. Spectrophotometry
d. Argentometry
e. Acidimetry

95. The thyme grass is used for the production of herbal medical products for the treatment of respiratory tract infections. Under the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the herbal raw material is subject to chromatographic identification by means of thin layer chromatography. What substances are detected on the chromatographic plate after its treatment with due reagent?
a. Atropine and hyoscyamine
b. Apigenin and luteolin
c. Arbutin and methyl arbutin
*d. Thymol and carvacrol
e. Quercetin and rutin

96. A pharmacy offers to its customers a chance to measure their blood pressure. What type of goods is it?
a. Nondurable goods
b. Convenience goods
*c. Service
d. Specialty goods
e. Unsought goods

97. Several independent mediators work in resale of medical equipment. What group of mediators includes persons and legal entities that specialize in sales of durable goods that require considerabe after-sales service?
a. Commission agent
b. Broker
*c. Dealer
d. Consignee
e. Agent

98. Propellants are used in aerosols production. Specify the function of propellants:
a. Stabilization
b. Action prolongation
*c. Create pressure in the package
d. Emulsification
e. Dispersion

99. The chemical name of 2,2(diphenylmethoxy)-N,N-dimethylethanamine hydrochloride corresponds with the following medicinal substance:
a. Lidocaine hydrochloride
b. Ethylmorphine hydrochloride
*c. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
d. Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride
e. Papaverine hydrochloride

100. An analytical chemist should use the following solution to identify sodium-containing substances:
a. Sodium citrate
b. Potassium permanganate
*c. Potassium pyroantimonate
d. Potassium carbonate
e. Barium hydroxide

101. Calcium gluconate is being tested for presence of admixtures of saccharose and reducing sugars with copper-tartrate reagent. If these admixtures are present the substance colors:
a. White
*b. Red
c. Green
d. Blue
e. Turquoise

102. A 45-year-old man has been taking long-acting nitrates twice a day for a year. Currently the decrease in effectiveness of the pharmacotherapy is being observed. What side-effect can be suspected in the first place?
a. Impairment of coronary circulation
*b. Development of nitrate tolerance
c. Progressing coronary atherosclerosis
d. Progressing ischemic heart disease
e. Myocardial infarction

103. A 43-year-old patient was delivered to an admission room with renal colic attack. What group of drugs would be the most effective during the attack?
a. Antacids
b. Hepatoprotectors
*c. Antispasmodics
d. Antibiotics
e. Cholagogues

104. What antibiotic has beta-lactam cycle in its structure?
a. Lincomycin hydrochloride
*b. Benzylpenicillin potassium salt
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Doxycycline hyclate
e. Streptomycin sulfate

105. Incoming medicines inspection is performed by an authorized employee. What is NOT a part of the responsibilities of this person?
*a. To draw up orders for medicines and medical products, to conclude sales contracts
b. To keep a roster of incoming medicines
c. -
d. To check the pharmacy stock for low-quality or fake medicines
e. To draw up conclusions regarding inspection of incoming medicines

106. A pharmacist has prepared a liquid mixture. What component was added last into the vial?
a. Purified water
b. 20% sodium bromide solution
c. Simple syrup
*d. Tincture of valerian
e. Potassium bromide

107. What hypotensive drug is an agent of choice for the patients suffering from arterial hypertension with concomitant type I diabetes mellitus?
a. Atenolol
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
*c. Lisinopril
d. Labetalol
e. Carvedilol

108. Snake venom-based drugs are widely applied in treatment of locomotor apparatus diseases.Main components of these venoms are:
*a. Toxic proteins
b. Cardiac glycosides
c. Phenol-alcohols
d. Glucosinolates
e. Alkaloids

109. A 25-year-old man is diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis of moderate severity. What drugs should be prescribed for etiotropic therapy?
*a. Antimicrobial agents
b. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
c. Antiarrhythmic drugs
d. Anticholinesterase drugs
e. Glucocorticoids

110. The chemical name of 2benzyl-1H-benzimidazole hydrochloride corresponds with the following medicinal substance:
*a. Dibazol (Bendazolum)
b. Indometacin
c. Vicasol (Menadione)
d. Phenazepam
e. Omeprazole

111. Pharmacy premises can be divided into service rooms and workrooms. Name the workroom for storage of medical products:
*a. Material storage room
b. Washing room
c. Distillation room
d. Aseptic block
e. Shop floor

112. Identification of potassium iodide requires performing an oxidation reaction in acid medium, which produces free iodine that colors chloroform layer. What reagent is used for such a reaction?
*a. Sodium nitrite
b. Barium chloride
c. Ammonium oxalate
d. Sodium carbonate
e. Silver nitrate

113. An analytical chemist determines potassium ions admixture in a medicinal substance with sodium tetraphenylborate according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What analytical effect would confirm the presence of this admixture?
*a. White opalescence
b. Blue coloring
c. Brown coloring
d. Pink coloring
e. Yellow coloring

114. The cholagogue derived from Rosa canina fruit is used in treatment of liver and gallbladder diseases. Name this drug:
a. Allochol
b. Altan
c. Chophytol
d. Phytolyt
*e. Cholosas

115. According to the rules in force, workrooms should regularly undergo humid disinfection. How often should the floors be washed?
a. No less than twice in a month
*b. No less than once in a shift
c. No less than once in a week
d. No less than twice in a week
e. No less than thrice in a week

116. Senna (cassia) foliage contains anthracene derivatives. Their presence can be confirmed by qualitative reaction with:
a. Iron ammonium alum
b. Molisch’s reagent
*c. Alkali
d. Iron (II) sulfate
e. Fehling’s reagent

117. A private pharmacy has received a supply of a drug with 2,3-dihydro-2methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone-2-sulfonate sodium as an active ingredient. Name this drug:
*a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Riboflavin
c. Cocarboxylase hydrochloride
d. Ergocalciferol
e. Rutin

118. A 53-year-old woman suffers from ischemic heart disease and angina pectoris. What drug can be used to stop angina pectoris attacks?
a. Dipiridamol
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Drotaverine hydrochloride
d. Propranolol
*e. Nitroglycerine

119. A patient is 20 years old. After she was stung by a bee the patient developed Quincke’s disease; rash in the form of blisters and papulae appeared on her torso. First aid in this case should start with administering the following drug:
a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Penicillin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Rheopolyglukin (Dextran)
e. Haemodes

120. What department of a wholesale firm is tasked with search for and analysis of potential suppliers’ commercial offers, as well as concluding supply contracts and supervision of contract fulfillment?
a. Shipping department
b. Marketing department
*c. Supply department
d. Stores development
e. Finance department

121. To prepare eyedrops with antibiotic a dispensing chemist has been using flowing steam sterilization under 100°C for 30 minutes. What antibiotic allows for such sterilization?
a. Biomycin
b. Erythromycin
c. Sodium benzylpenicillin
d. Streptomycin sulfate
*e. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)

122. A certain drug explodes when heated to 180°C or upon impact and, therefore, must be handled carefully during receipt and storage. This drug is:
a. Barium chloride
b. Calcium chloride
c. Activated carbon
d. Alcoholic iodine solution
*e. Nitroglycerine solution

123. Gum is a polysaccharide substance that contains calcium and magnesium salts of uronic acids and neutral monosaccharides. By solubility arabin, bassorin, and cerasin derivatives can be distinguished. What gum is insoluble in cold water?
*a. Cherry
b. Tragacanth
c. Plum
d. Apricot
e. Acacia

124. A pharmacy prepares a drug that contains a high-molecular compound with unlimited swelling ability. Name this material:
a. Starch
b. Protargol
c. Methylcellulose
d. Gelatine
*e. Pepsin

125. The Financial Report of a pharmacy for the first quarter of 20XX contains the following entries: goods turnover - 45 000 UAH, production cost of products sold - 30 000 UAH, turnover costs - 10 000 UAH. Determine the income:
a. 40 000 UAH
b. 30 000 UAH
*c. 5 000 UAH
d. 15 000 UAH
e. 35 000 UAH

126. In Ukraine the auditor position eligibility requires the candidate to be a Ukrainian citizen and have the qualification certificate for work as an auditor within the Ukraine’s territory. The certificate is effective for:
a. 1 years
b. Indefinitely
c. 3 years
d. 2 years
*e. 5 years

127. A man with gastric ulcer is prescribed anti-Helicobacter pylori therapy. On the 3rd day the patient developed black coloring of feces.What had caused such changes?
a. Tetracycline
b. Tinidazole
c. Omeprazole
d. Metronidazole
*e. Bismuth subcitrate

128. A certain drug can be quantitatively assessed by means of direct alkalimetry in glycerine, mannitol, or other polyhydric alcohol medium. This drug is:
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Boric acid
c. Salicylic acid
d. Benzoic acid
e. Glutaminic acid

129. Hydrogen sulfide is being produced in the process of dry pyrolysis of a certain sulfanilamide drug. Name this drug:
a. Sulfacil sodium
*b. Norsulfazole
c. Soluble streptocide
d. Streptocide
e. Sulfadimezinum (Sulfadimine)

130. 1,8-cineole is a bactericidal component of essential oil. Specify the medicinal herb that is grown in Ukraine and contains 1,8-cineole in its essential oil:
*a. Salvia officinalis
b. Juniperus communis
c. Origanum vulgare
d. Inula helenium
e. Eucalyptus globulus

131. The Dobropharma pharmacy manager makes plans for standard stock of various groups of goods, based on their purpose. Convenience goods belong to the following group:
a. Seasonal accumulation
b. Single delivery
c. Specific demand
d. Prior delivery
*e. Current demand

132. Accounts receivable develop in the process of pharmaceutical company work. Specify where in the balance book they are recorded:
a. Debit
b. Liabilities
*c. Assets
d. Credit
e. Account

133. A pharmacy has received a prescription for colloid solution. Name this solution:
a. Nonaqueous solution
b. Sodium chloride solution
*c. Collargol solution
d. 5% glucose solution
e. Burow’s solution

134. A technological controller uses Marquis reagent to identify the substance of acetylsalicylic acid after acid hydrolysis. Positive effect of the reaction would be indicated by the following coloring:
a. Green
b. Violet
c. Blue
d. Yellow
*e. Pink

135. A 3-year-old child is intolerant to paracetamol. What antipyretic drug can be taken instead?
a. Naproxen
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Nimesulide
*e. Ibuprofen

136. .Apatient with angina pectoris takes long-acting nitrates. Consult him what side-effect is the most common for these drugs:
a. Nausea
b. Diarrhea
c. Constipation
*d. Headache
e. Vomiting

137. Essential oil of a certain plant contains up to 80% of cineole. Specify the herbal raw material that is collected from this plant:
a. Folia Menthae piperitae
b. Folia Betulae
*c. Folia Eucalypti
d. Folia Мelissae
e. Folia Absinthii

138. .According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine quantitative content of salicylic acid is to be determined by means of:
*a. Alkalimetry
b. Complexometric titration
c. Argentometry
d. Acidimetry
e. Nitritometric titration

139. .Apharmacist prepares a chamomile flowers infusion. Specify the proportion of raw material to infusion:
*a. 1:10
b. 1:50
c. 1:20
d. 1:400
e. 1:30

140. 50 ml of injection solution has been made in a pharmacy. Specify the process of solution sterilization:
*a. 120°C - 8 minutes
b. 160°C - 15 minutes
c. 110°C - 15 minutes
d. 140°C - 12 minutes
e. 180°C - 30 minutes

141. An important indicator of business activity is profitability of a business. Specify the indicators that can be used to measure the profitability:
a. Liquidity/solvency
*b. Profit/turnover
c. Turnover/income
d. Turnover/production cost
e. Income/turnover

142. Genetically induced adverse reaction to a certain drug is caused by various enzyme defects. Name this reaction:
*a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Steal syndrome
c. Dysbiosis
d. Rebound effect
e. Withdrawal syndrome

143. Difference between the retail price of products sold and themargin determines:
a. Income
b. Breakeven
c. Markup
d. Margin
*e. Production cost

144. A pharmaceutical company produces essential oils via a method that consists of essential oil transfer into gas phase followed by its absorption with fats and then its extraction with alcohol. Name this method:
*a. Enfleurage
b. Extraction
c. Dynamic sorption
d. Hydrodistillation
e. Compression

145. To identify cardiac glycosides there are usually three groups of color reactions being performed: for steroid nucleus, for lactonic ring, and for carbohydrate component. Specify the reaction for identification of butenolide ring:
a. Dragendorff’s test
*b. Legal’s test
c. Mayer’s test
d. Stahl’s reaction
e. Reaction of sublimation

146. A 43-year-old woman has come to a pharmacy with complaints of sharp headache in the occipital area, palpitations, ”visual snow” in her eyes, nausea; her BP is 180/110 mm Hg. These symptoms correspond with:
a. Cervical osteochondrosis
b. Acute conjunctivitis
c. Migraine attack
d. Exertional angina pectoris attack
*e. Hypertensic crisis

147. Medicinal substance had been received for chemical analysis. Biuret test was performed for identification. Name this substance:
a. Dipyrone (Metamizole)
b. Diphenhydramine
c. Iodoform
d. Benzoic acid
*e. Bromisoval

148. A patient, who has undergone treatment for community-acquired pneumonia, complains of hearing impairment. What antibacterial drug could result in such a side-effect?
a. Clarithromycin
*b. Gentamicin
c. Cefazolin
d. Amoxicillin/clavulanate
e. Ciprofloxacin

149. A 36-year-old woman with herpetic rash on her lips has come to a pharmacy. Recommend her a drug for topical treatment:
a. Amikacin
*b. Acyclovir
c. Levofloxacin
d. Fluconazole
e. Metronidazole

150. A pharmaceutical company produces mint tincture. Technological process of making this tincture requires it to be made:
a. With 48% alcohol in 1:2 proportion
b. With 70% alcohol in 1:15 proportion
c. With 70% alcohol in 1:5 proportion
d. With 70% alcohol in 1:10 proportion
*e. With 90% alcohol in 1:20 proportion

151. Several species of Polygonum genus are used inmedicine. One of these species has rootstocks rich in tanning agents, which are used to treat diarrrhea. Name this species:
a. Polygonum hydropiper
b. Polygonum aviculare
c. Polygonum alpinum
*d. Polygonum bistorta
e. Polygonum persicaria

152. A 65-year-old man with community-acquired pneumonia was prescribed antibiotic agent amikacin. It should be kept in mind, that amikacin has the following side-effect:
a. Decreased blood pressure
*b. Ototoxicity
c. Vomiting
d. Red coloring of urine
e. Increased blood pressure

153. Considering thermolability of most animal-derived injection preparations, they are sterilized by means of:
*a. Filtration through membrane
b. High frequency current
c. Ultrasound
d. In autoclave chamber with highpressure saturated steam
e. Addition of buffer solutions

154. Sodium and potassium oxides are introduced into the ampoule glass to:
*a. Decrease its melting point
b. Increase its chemical stability
c. Increase its thermal stability
d. Increase its dimming ability
e. Increase its mechanical stability

155. Hierarchic structure of the Agapetus pharmacy management foresees that authority is being passed on directly from the pharmacy manager to the employees. Specify this type of authority:
a. Functional
b. Divisional
c. Matrix
*d. Line
e. Line and staff

156. Several cholesterol gallstones are detected in the gallbladder of a woman. Choose the drug to dissolve and excrete the stones:
a. Loperamide
b. Platyphyllin
c. Papaverine
d. Domperidone
*e. Ursodeoxycholic acid

157. What indicator is used in iodometry for quantitative determination of caffeine in caffeine and sodium benzoate?
*a. Starch
b. Eriochrome black
c. Bromthymol blue
d. Methyl orange
e. Potassium chromate

158. An accountable person has received a sum of money from the pharmacy cash desk to buy a calculator. What document records the cash flow in such a transaction?
a. Invoice
b. Cash income order
*c. Cash expense order
d. Receipt
e. Remains unregistered documentarily

159. A pharmaceutical company produces tablets. Tabletting by means of direct compression requires:
a. Application of hydraulic press
*b. No prior granulation
c. Formation of masses
d. Prior granulation
e. Prior homogenization

160. A pharmaceutical company produces aromatic waters. Peppermint water should be prepared in the following proportion:
*a. 1:1000
b. 1:4000
c. 1:1
d. 1:10
e. 1:2000

161. A young mother has come to a pharmacy to buy an antipyretic drug for her 3-month-old infant.What dosage form would you choose for the infant?
*a. Suppositories
b. Capsules
c. Lozenges
d. Spray
e. Tablets

162. The management plans to open a new pharmacy in one of the local villages. Such activity can be identified as:
a. Conglomerate diversification
b. Horizontal diversification
c. Vertical integration
d. Horizontal integration
*e. Growth strategy

163. To minimize business risks, the board of directors of a pharmaceutical company decides to expand into a market of plant protection products. Such approach to risk management is called:
a. Intensification
b. Insurance
*c. Diversification
d. Integration
e. Consolidation

164. Publicly-owned Isotope factory is the only manufacturer of radiopharmaceuticals inUkraine.What type of distribution is characteristic of radioactive drugs?
a. Sample
b. Bulk
c. Selective
d. Intensive
*e. Exclusive

165. A 28-year-old woman came to a pharmacy complaining of constipation that developed after antacid treatment. What drug could be the cause of this symptom?
a. Ranitidine
*b. Aluminium-containing drugs
c. Calcium carbonate
d. Magnesium-containing drugs
e. Simethicone

166. A 60-year-old man has come to a pharmacy with complaints of impaired twilight vision, dry sclera, cracked and peeling skin. The dispensing chemist suspected hypovitaminosis and recommended the customer to take the following drug after consultation with the physician:
a. Tocopherol acetate
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
c. Ascorbic acid
*d. Retinol acetate
e. Ergocalciferol

167. A pharmaceutical company produces Lugol’s iodine solution. By type of solvent this solution belongs to the following group:
a. Chloroform solutions
*b. Glycerine solutions
c. Oil solutions
d. Alcohol solutions
e. Water solutions

168. A patient was prescribed an oral antibiotic for treatment and an antacid to remove heartburn symptoms. If the drugs are taken simultaneously their interaction can result in the following:
a. Acceleration of metabolism and excretion
*b. Antibiotic malabsorption
c. Inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzymes
d. Relative overdosage
e. Mutual potentiation

169. Medicinal dyes should be stored in a special cabinet. Which of the listed medical products is a dye:
*a. Brilliant green
b. Ethyl alcohol
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Glucose
e. Hydrogen peroxide

170. Calendula Ointment is placed on the shelf next to Dr. Theiss Calendula Ointment. What approach to the shelf layout is used in this pharmacy?
a. Seasonality
*b. Among competitors
c. By package size
d. Corporate block layout
e. Doubling product facings

171. A certain herbal raw material is used to make Flamin cholagogue. Name this material:
a. Cratаegi flores
*b. Helichrysi arenarii flores
c. Violae herba
d. Meliloti herba
e. Tanaceti flores

172. A pharmaceutical warehouse has received a batch of herbal raw material hawthorn flowers. Merchandise analysis revealed in one of the sacks significant amount of bird-cherry flowers besides the hawthorn. What quality assessment of the herbal raw material should be performed?
a. Extractive values
*b. Acceptable admixtures
c. Moisture content
d. Mineral admixtures
e. Ash values (Total ash)

173. A powder containing a substance with specific weight has been prepared in a pharmacy. Name this substance:
a. Sodium bicarbonate
*b. Basic bismuth nitrate
c. Bolus alba
d. Sugar
e. Talcum

174. Buckthorn bark and its derivative drugs are used as laxatives in medicine. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine during chromatographic identification of buckthorn bark it is necessary to detect:
a. Panaxosides
b. Ginkgosides
c. Purpurea glycosides
*d. Glucofrangulins
e. Lanatosides

175. .Weibel’s liquid is necessary to stabilize the solution of a certain substance. Name this substance:
a. Sodium chloride
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Novocaine
d. Potassium chloride
*e. Glucose

176. Strategic planning of pharmaceutical companies consists of several consecutive stages. What stage is the final one?
a. Setting goals and tasks
b. Analysis of organisation’s internal strength and weaknesses
c. Choice of strategy
*d. Strategy assessment
e. Environment assessment and analysis

177. What tablet coating protects stomach from harmful influence of active ingredients?
a. -
*b. Intestinally absorbed
c. Gastrically absorbed
d. Water-soluble
e. Fat-soluble

178. A pharmacy supplies the surgical ward of a hospital. What document enables the dispensing chemist to supply the goods:
a. Receipt log book
*b. Purchase order
c. Report on the movement of packaging
d. Product revaluation notice
e. Consolidated register

179. .A68-year-oldman has been prescribed a hypolipidemic agent as a part of his combination therapy for ischemic heart disease. Name this drug:
*a. Atorvastatin
b. Lisinopril
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Nifedipine
e. Nitroglycerine

180. According to the law regulating labour remuneration, the businesses must establish their compensation plan in the following document:
a. Job description
*b. Collective agreement
c. Decree
d. Contract of delivery
e. Statement

181. If vehicle is not specified, an eye ointment should be prepared with the following sterile vehicle:
a. Lanolin: vaseline - 1:1
*b. 10 parts of anhydrous lanolin - 90 parts of vaseline For Eye Ointments
c. 40 parts of anhydrous lanolin - 60 parts of vaseline For Eye Ointments
d. Vaseline For Eye Ointments
e. 30 parts of lanolin - 70 parts of vaseline

182. What factor enables the extraction of maximum amount of alkaloids from the herbal raw material?
a. Intense heating
*b. Certain value of the solution pH
c. Herbal raw material should be fresh
d. Preliminary processing of raw materials for their saturation with 96% alcohol
e. Slight heating

183. What activity of a pharmaceutical company includes improvement of employees’ working and living conditions, healthcare and medical insurance and other means of social development?
a. Industrial activity
b. Charity
c. Commercial activity
d. Financial activity
*e. Social responsibility

184. Complex drug product Urolesan is a litholytic, antispasmodic, and diuretic agent. It contains ethanolic extract of:
*a. Origanum vulgare
b. Rhododendron tomentosum
c. -
d. Matricaria chamomilla
e. Thymus serpyllum

185. To identify pilocarpine hydrochloride it is necessary to use reaction with sodium nitroprusside in an alkaline medium (Legal’s test). Resulting cherryred coloring confirms presence of the following in the pilocarpine structure:
a. Methyl group
*b. Lactonic ring
c. Methylene group
d. Imidazole ring
e. Chloride ions

186. When dispensing an antacid and ofloxacin in tablets, the dispensing chemist warned the customer that these drugs should be taken separately with 2hour interval in between. Simultaneous taking of both drugs:
a. Increases ofloxacin absorption
b. Decreases antacid effectiveness
c. Increases risk of dysbiosis
*d. Decreases ofloxacin absorption
e. Increases antacid effectiveness

187. A control laboratory needs to analyze streptomycin powder for injections. To identify it according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine sodium hydroxide is added into the dissolved powder, the resulting substance is heated, and then iron (III) chloride solution is added, which results in violet coloring of the substance. This test is known as:
a. Ninhydrin test
b. Biuret test
c. Thiochrome test
*d. Maltol test
e. Vitali-Morin reaction

188. A substance was received for analysis. The substance is a round seed 1-1,8 mm in diameter, yellow with bluish tint. When mashed with water, emits characteristic irritant odor; is sharp and acrid to taste. The raw material can be identified as:
a. Nigella seeds
*b. Mustard seeds
c. Plantago psyllium seeds
d. Flax seeds
e. Fenugreek seeds

189. Bank is a financial mediator in pharmacy’s payments. Payment of taxes withheld from the employees’ salary into budget requires the following document:
a. Check payable in account
b. Cash register receipts
c. Cash order
*d. Payment order
e. Accounting form

190. A powder with a hard to disintegrate substance has been made in a pharmacy. Specify this substance:
a. Sodium chlorides
b. Talcum
c. Sugar
*d. Camphor
e. Osarsolum (Acetarsol)

191. Polyethylene oxide base belongs to the following group:
a. Amphiphilic
b. Hydrophobic
*c. Hydrophilic
d. Emulsion
e. Fat

192. Choose the solvent necessary to prepare concentrated solution of sodium bicarbonate in a pharmacy:
a. Peach-kernel oil
b. Vaseline
c. Ethanol
*d. Purified water
e. Chloroform

193. During storage, suspension instability manifests itself as:
a. Flocculation of particles
b. Caking of particles
c. Change of particles shape
*d. Sedimentation of particles
e. Dissolution of particles

194. Specify the drugs recommended for prevention and correction of dysbiotic problems caused by antibiotic therapy:
a. Choleretics
*b. Probiotics
c. Prokinetics
d. Antacids
e. Uroseptics

195. The documents of a pharmaceutical company are being received and sent in a centralized manner; the documents are stored, drawn-up, registered, and assembled into cases both in the Office Desk of the company and the company’s divisions. Specify this type of records management system:
a. Decentralized
b. Centralized
*c. Mixed
d. Referent
e. -

196. Employees of a wholesale pharmaceutical company have undergone an assessment for their compliance with the requirements of their respective positions. Specify the type of human resources assessment:
a. Concurrent
b. Preliminary
*c. Concluding
d. Financial
e. -

197. In the process of pharmaceutical company entering an offshore market the traditions and customs, religion, system of values, and education level of the local population were analyzed. What factors of international marketing environment were researched?
*a. Sociocultural
b. Economical
c. Technological
d. Legal
e. Political

198. What means of demand stimulation can be applied by pharmacy management among its employees?
a. Coupons
b. -
c. In-store advertising
d. Layout of medical products in shopwindows and on shelves
*e. Bonuses

199. A system of indicators characterizes financial and businesss activity of an organization and the state of its assets and sources on the certain day in the monetary unit. Name this system:
a. Business transactions log book
b. Turnover balance sheet
c. Receipts and expenditures report
*d. Balance sheet
e. Double entry

200. According to the current Ukrainian legislation all drugs are divided into two categories: prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter). Which one of the listed drugs requires no prescription?
a. Ketamine, 5% infusion solution, 2 ml №10
*b. Ascorbic acid, 500 mg №30
c. Clonidine, ampoules, 1 ml of 0,01% solution №10
d. Tramadol, capsules, 0,05 №10
e. Phenobarbital, tablets, 100 mg №6

