1. ?1. To improve iodine solubility in the puri?ed water, iodine must be:
a. Reduced to ?ne powder
b. Dissolved in the boiling water
*c. Dissolved in the saturated solution of potassium iodide
d. Dispersed with glycerine
e. Comminuted with alcohol

2. What herbal bioactive substances yield a positive reaction with ferric ammonium alum solution?
a. Bitters
b. Fatty oils
c. Saponins
d. Polysaccharides
*e. Tannins

3. A pharmaceutical company produces a medicine under the brand name ”Corglyconum”. What herbal raw material is used in preparation of this drug?
a. Wormwood grass
b. Plantain foliage
c. Buckthorn bark
*d. Lily-of-the-valley grass
e. Dandelion roots

4. A pharmacist prepares fat-based suppositories by pouring. Specify the type of fatty vehicle in this case:
a. Wax
b. Spermaceti
c. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
d. Cocoa butter
*e. Butyrol

5. Proper harvesting of Frangula alnus herbal raw material greatly in?uences the quality and quantity of its active substances. Therefore the optimal time for buckthorn bark harvesting is the period of:
a. Dormancy
*b. Sap ?ow
c. Flowering
d. Fruiting
e. Defoliation

6. Drugs derived from Rauvol?a serpentina roots are used in hypertension treatment. Authenticity of Rauvol?a serpentina herbal raw material can be con?rmed by its content of:
a. Hyoscyamine
b. Atropine
*c. Reserpine
d. Vinblastine
e. Adonitoxin

7. What concept can be described as ”...an area of exchange with its characteristic system of economic relations between goods manufacturers and consumers”?
a. Marketing
b. Agreement
c. Management
*d. Market
e. Sales

8. There are various groups of adjuvants used in tablet production. What is the function of excipients?
a. To improve the ?owability of granular material
b. To improve the taste
c. To create necessary adhesive force between particles
d. To improve disintegration
*e. To make pills of a certain weight

9. Various types of dryers can be used for granule dehumidi?cation. Specify the type of ”СП-30” dryer:
*a. Fluidized bed dryer
b. Infrared dryer
c. Forced air dryer
d. Silica gel dryer
e. Freeze dryer

10. During microscopy of althaea root it is necessary to determine the presence of starch granules within the plant cells. What reagent enables such analysis?
a. Alcohol solution of ?-naphthol
b. Thymol solution
c. Ammonium hydroxide
d. Concentrated sulfuric acid
*e. Lugol’s solution

11. A pharmacist has made an injection solution that contains a salt produced by reaction of a strong base with a weak acid. Specify the necessary stabilizer:
*a. Sodium hydrochloride
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Cysteine
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Sodium sulfate

12. The analytical laboratory received calcium chloride. What volumetric solution should be used for quantitative determination of this medicinal substance?
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Potassium bromate
*c. Sodium edetate
d. Potassium permanganate
e. Sodium hydroxide

13. An analytical chemist of a central industrial laboratory performs quantitative determination of penicillin sum in benzylpenicillin sodium salt by means of iodometric method. What indicator is used?
a. Phenolphthalein
b. Methyl orange
c. Methyl red
*d. Starch
e. Potassium chromate

14. A pharmacist prepares cocoa butterbased round vaginal suppositories with less than 5% of citric acid. Specify the most rational approach to introduction of the active ingredient into the vehicle:
a. Dissolve in alcohol
*b. Dissolve in minmal quantity of puri?ed water
c. Dissolve in molten cocoa butter
d. Dissolve in Dimexid (Dimethylsulfoxide)
e. Dissolve in vaseline oil

15. A pharmacist needs to prepare eyedrops with pilocarpine hydrochloride. Specify the optimal isotonic agent in this case:
a. Sodium nitrite
*b. Sodium chloride
c. Glucose
d. Sodium sulfate
e. Boric acid

16. Motherwort grass is a component of hypotensive and sedative drugs. This herbal raw material should be harvested taking into account its renewal rate. Therefore it can be harvested:
a. Every year
*b. Once every 5 years
c. Once every 3 years
d. Once every 2 years
e. Once every 10 years

17. The doctor prescribed a patient 100 ml of thermopsis grass infusion. How much of the dry concentrate of thermopsis grass (1:1) should the pharmacist measure out for this patient?
a. 0.3 g
b. 0.5 g
*c. 0.25 g
d. 0.2 g
e. 0.1 g

18. A patient needs the pharmacy to prepare him a camphor ointment. What concentration of camphor should be in the ointment according to the regulatory documents?
a. 20%
b. 5%
c. 1%
*d. 10%
e. 15%

19. Urethral suppositories are being made for a patient. What parameters should be speci?ed by the doctor in the formulation for the pharmacist to be able to calculate the necessary amount of the vehicle correctly?
*a. Diameter, length, and quantity of the supositories
b. Length and quantity of the supositories
c. Quantity and vehicle of the supositories
d. Diameter and vehicle of the supositories
e. Diameter and quantity of the supositories

20. For better coverage of various markets the ”Lubnyfarm” company sells a portion of its production through its own chain of pharmacies, another portion is being sold through distributors, and the third - through pharmacies of another business owners. What marketing system of distribution is applied by this company?
a. Contractual
b. Administered
c. Horizontal
d. Corporate
*e. Multichannel

21. Prior to making a sodium chloride isotonic solution a pharmacist baked the powder in a dry heat box. What substances are removed by this operation?
a. Moisture
*b. Pyrogenic substances
c. Sulfates
d. Redox substances
e. Chlorides

22. A pharmacy received an infusion formulation. What herbal raw material can be used to make this dosage form?
a. Buckthorn bark
*b. Valerian roots with rhizomes
c. Oak bark
d. Rhubarb roots
e. Arrow-wood bark

23. Among various types of tablet external layers there are enterosoluble coatings. Where in the body are they dissolved?
a. Oral cavity
b. Stomach
*c. Intestine
d. Rectum
e. Esophagus

24. A certain type of herbal raw material is being harvested in spring during sap ?ow. Specify this material:
*a. Bark
b. Buds
c. Infructescences
d. Roots
e. Flowers

25. A pharmacist has prepared an eyedrops vehicle. What method of sterilization should be chosen in this case?
*a. Dry heat
b. Pasteurization
c. Membrane ?ltration
d. Ultraviolet irradiation
e. Flowing steam

26. Optical rotation angle of substances is determined under the temperature of 20°C, in 1-decimeter-thick layer, with wavelength of sodium spectrum D-lines (λ = 589.3 nm), and is calculated with reference to a solution containing 1 g of the substance per ml. It is called:
a. Optical density
b. Relative density
c. Distribution coef?cient
*d. Speci?c optical rotation
e. Refractive index

27. Specify the control methods aimed at detecting mechanical impurities in parenteral solutions:
a. NMR and UV-visible spectroscopy
*b. Visual optical
c. Amperometric
d. Limulus test
e. Gravitational

28. To stabilize the suspension a pharmacist has used potassium soap. What substance does this suspension contain?
a. Basic bismuth nitrate
b. Camphor
c. Phenyl salicylate
d. Menthol
*e. Sulfur

29. An analytical chemist performs the qualitative assessment of mercury (II) chloride. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative assessment in this case?
a. Nitritometric titration
b. Alkalimetry
c. Acidimetry
*d. Complexometric titration
e. Bromatometry

30. An analytical chemist investigates a 3% hydrogen solution. What reagent is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for identi?cation of this substance?
a. Zinc oxide
*b. Potassium chromate
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Calcium chloride

31. A pharmacist has prepared a compound ointment. What is the correct sequence of its preparation?
a. Emulsion - solution - suspension
*b. Suspension - solution - emulsion
c. Emulsion - suspension - solution
d. Solution - emulsion - suspension
e. Solution - suspension - emulsion

32. What stage is the last in making injection solutions?
a. Quantitative control
*b. Labeling
c. Filtering
d. Sterilization
e. Qualitative control

33. Benzoic acid is known to have antiseptic properties. To identify this acid the following should be used:
*a. FeCl3
b. K2[HgI4]
c. KMnO4
d. K2CrO4
e. [NH4]2C2O4

34. Manufacturer’s marketing department detected negative demand for a certain goods. What would be the marketing task? What type of marketing should be applied?
*a. Demand making, conversion marketing
b. Demand increase, remarketing
c. Demand stimulation, promotional marketing
d. Demand decrease, demarketing
e. Demand leveling, synchromarketing

35. To determine the quantity of wildgrowing medicinal plants, it is necessary to know their area of vegetation and yield per unit area. Yield of Thymus serpyllum grass can be determined by the following method:
*a. Projective cover method
b. Visually
c. Geodesically
d. Model sample method
e. Permanent quadrate method

36. To prepare decoctions with the volume of 1000-3000 ml, they should be infused in a boiling water bath for:
*a. 40 minutes
b. 30 minutes
c. 15 minutes
d. 45 minutes
e. 25 minutes

37. What medicinal agents must be manufactured in aseptic conditions followed by thermal sterilization with high-pressure saturated steam?
a. Liquid ingestible antibiotics
b. 2% collargol solution for infants
c. Injection solutions with thermolabile substances
d. Concentrated solutions for burette systems
*e. Injection solutions with thermostable substances

38. When preparing dermatological ointments the following substance should be introduced by suspending:
a. Ephedrine hydrochloride
*b. Xeroform
c. Menthol
d. Camphor
e. Protargol (silver proteinate)

39. An analytical chemist analyses the substance of racemic menthol according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. To identify the drug and determine its purity he measures optical rotation that should occur within the interval:
a. From +10° to +13°
b. From -102° to -105°
c. From -48° to -51°
d. From +50° to +56°
*e. From +0.2° to -0.2°

40. A paharmacist makes powders by grinding one of the formulation components with ethyl alcohol. This technology is typically applied when working with the following substance:
a. Ta l c u m
b. Starch
*c. Streptocid
d. Zinc oxide
e. Bolus alba

41. A pharmacist prepares suppositories by pouring. Name the coef?cient for substitution of fatty vehicle with glycerinated gelatin vehicle:
a. 1.20
b. 1.11
c. 1.25
*d. 1.21
e. 1.31

42. Presence of phenolic hydroxyl in the structure of pyridoxine hydrochloride can be con?rmed by application of the following solution:
a. Silver nitrate
b. Sodium nitrite
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Sodium sulfate
*e. Iron (III) cloride

43. Tyndallization is used at a pharmaceutical factory as a sterilization method for thermolabile substances. Essentially this method consists of:
a. Sterilization with ?owing steam at 100°C
b. Autoclaving at 119-121°C with pressure at 1.0-1.1 atm
*c. Triple heating of solution to 40-60°C with 24-hour-long intervals in between for thermostating
d. Sterilization with dry heat at 180-200°C for a lengthy period of time
e. Sterilization with high-frequency and microwave frequency current

44. A pharmacy received a prescription for compound powders containing a coloring agent. Which of the powder components given below is a colouring agent?
a. Silver proteinate (Protargol)
*b. Ethacridine lactate (Rivanol)
c. Sulfanilamide
d. Camphor
e. Bismuth nitrate

45. Quantitative content of theophylline can be determined by alkalimetric titration of nitric acid that is quantitatively obtained as the result of the following theophylline salt production:
a. Ammonium
b. Lithium
c. Potassium
d. Sodium
*e. Silver

46. Highly convincing approach to informing the population about the company and its products, commercial promotion of high use value of the goods and proper conduct of business by the company, actions intended to prompt purchase of goods by both active and potential customers are all characteristic of:
a. Marketing
b. Trademark
*c. Adverticement
d. Communications
e. Supply

47. What pharmacotherapeutic characteristic of a medicine allows its classi?cation as over-the-counter drug?
a. Medicine is available only by prescription
b. Medicine has entered the pharmaceutical market only resently and actual experience with its practical application is limited
c. Medicine is available only for in-patient treatment
d. Medicine contains substances that require additional research into their activity and side-effects
*e. Medicine can cause no direct or indirect harm to the patient’s health

48. A process dealing with drawing the documents, their processing, circulation and storage is called records management. If all documents circulate through one organisation center, - of?ce desk, - then such system of records management is called:
a. Decentralized
b. Referent
c. Specialized
*d. Centralized
e. Mixed

49. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for quantitative determination of potassium chloride substance that is used in treatment of hypokalemia?
a. Polarimetry
*b. Argentometry
c. Iodometry
d. Bromatometry
e. Cerimetry

50. Standardization of a certain herbal raw material is done by calculating its alkaloid content in terms of hyoscyamine. Name this herbal raw material:
a. Herba Thermopsidis lanceolatae
b. Fructus Capsici
c. Radices Berberidis
d. Herba Chelidonii
*e. Folia Belladonnae

51. A pharmacy receives centralized deliveries of goods from the warehouse. Specify the document that is NOT NECESSARY for accounting of goods receipt by the pharmacy:
a. Financial operating report of the pharmacy
*b. Cash receipt order
c. Goods received record book by groups of goods
d. Goods report (Inventory change report)
e. Goods received record book by item and supplier

52. An accountant conducts necessary calculations for remuneration of labor. Name the type of remuneration that is due for labor carried out according to the work standards and is paid within the amount determined by basic or piece wages for factory workers and salaries for of?ce workers:
a. Bonus
b. One-off payment
c. Financial aid
*d. Basic pay
e. Increment

53. Lately the ”Phytopharm” pharmaceutical company has been forced to decrease its production volume and range of goods. Not only does the company head manager demonstrate no managerial abilities, but he also appears to be completely disinterested in the running of the business and executes no control over it. Determine the leadership type of the head manager in this case:
a. Directive
b. Democratic
*c. Liberal
d. Authoritarian
e. Autocratic

54. The ”Medpharm” wholesale pharmaceutical ?rm employs a system that encourages its managers to achieve better results in sales by assigning them points for surpassing their sale goals. The points then become converted into material remuneration. This way the company management carries out the following management function:
a. Delegation
b. Planning
c. Organization
d. Control
*e. Motivation

55. To retain full control over its trade operations on the regional market, the ”Fitoprom” pharmaceutical company conducts its marketing policy without any intermediate parties. Name the marketing practice that excludes the middleman:
a. Indirect
*b. Direct
c. Mixed
d. Combined
e. Mediated

56. When an extractant is ?ltered through a herbal raw material to obtain an extract of the substances soluble in this extractant, this process is called:
a. Turbo extraction
b. Steeping
c. Maceration
d. Remaceration
*e. Percolation

57. The following substance is used as an extractant in production of liquid extracts:
a. Dichloroethane
b. Acetone
*c. Ethanol
d. Chloroform
e. Glycerine

58. A pharmacy customer complains of constricting retrosternal pain that irradiates into the left arm; he fears that he may die. The pain appeared suddenly after physical exertion. Name the ?rst aid medicine in this case:
a. Panangin
b. Riboxin (Inosine)
c. Metacycline
d. Naphthyzin (Naphazoline)
*e. Nitroglycerine

59. A certain management style can be characterized by the following features: the authority is highly centralized; work duties of the employees are very structured; the ability of employees to make decisions is extremely limited; strict compliance with numerous rules and regulations is prioritized. Name this management style:
a. Democratic
b. Liberal
c. Direct
*d. Authoritarian
e. Collective

60. Valerian roots and rhizomes are processed in the phytochemistry workshop to produce tinctures and thick extracts that are the components of combined sedatives. Name the group of bioactive compounds that includes valerian valepotriates, - valtrate, acevaltrate, and dihydrovaltrate:
a. Alkaloids
b. Essential oils
*c. Iridoids
d. Polysaccharides
e. Saponins

61. During limit test for aluminium admixture, the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine recommends to use the following solution as the basic reagent:
a. Sodium tetraphenylborate
b. Sodium hypophosphite
c. Barium chloride
*d. Hydroxyquinoline
e. Thioglycolic acid

62. Specialists of a pharmaceutical enterprice con?rm the identity of Cassia acutifolia herbal raw material. During reaction with alkali it developed cherryred coloring. What substances were identi?ed?
a. Alkaloids
b. Tannins
*c. Anthraquinones
d. Glycosides
e. Iridoids

63. To increase its sales, the ”Have a good day!” pharmacy introduced a discount system. According to this system if a customer buys 100 UAH worth of medical products, this customer receives 2% discount. What marketing communication has this pharmacy implemented?
*a. Consumer-oriented sales promotion
b. Personal sale
c. Salesmen-oriented sales promotion
d. Public relations, sponsorship
e. Middlemen-oriented sales promotion

64. An analytical chemist performs quantitative analysis of isoniazid by means of direct bromatometry with volumetric solutions of potassium bromate, potassium bromide, hydrochloric acid and methyl red as an indicator. This method is based on the following reaction:
*a. Oxidation of the hydrazine group with bromine
b. Oxidation of the hydrazine residue with potassium bromide
c. Bromination of the pyridine ring
d. Opening of the pyridine ring
e. Reduction of the hydrazine residue with bromine

65. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist determines quantitative content of potassium acetate by means of acidimetry in non-aqueous medium. Name the volumetric solution in this case:
a. Sodium nitrite
*b. Perchloric acid
c. Potassium bromate
d. Iodine
e. Sodium hydroxide

66. Yarrow grass is a component of herbal gastrointestinal remedies and is used to make herbal drugs. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the quality of this herbal raw material is assessed by its content of:
a. Vitamines
*b. Essential oils and proazulenes
c. Polysaccharides
d. Alkaloids
e. Cardiac glycosides

67. Specify the ?uid used to coat the forms for pouring of the suppositories with hydrophilic vehicles:
a. Dimethylsulfoxide
*b. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
c. Puri?ed water
d. Glycerine
e. Glycerine-water solution

68. A pharmacy offers to its customers a chance to measure their blood pressure. What type of goods is it?
a. Nondurable goods
b. Convenience goods
*c. Service
d. Specialty goods
e. Unsought goods

69. How often should a pharmacy make an inventory of its ?xed assets?
a. Once every three years
b. At least twice a year
c. At least thrice a year
d. At least once in a quarter
*e. Once a year

70. An analytical chemist should use the following solution to identify sodiumcontaining substances:
a. Sodium citrate
b. Potassium permanganate
*c. Potassium pyroantimonate
d. Potassium carbonate
e. Barium hydroxide

71. An analytical chemist performs collargol identi?cation by means of ashing. Obtained residue is then dissolved in hydrochloric acid. Specify the analytical effect that is observed in this case:
a. Black precipitate
b. Blue precipitate
c. Light green precipitate
*d. White precipitate
e. Yellow precipitate

72. The analyst determines quantitative content of sodium benzoate by means of acidimetry in non-aqueous medium according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What reagent is used as a solvent in this case?
a. Pyridine
b. Dimethyl formamide
c. Sulfanilic acid
*d. Anhydrous acetic acid
e. Concentrated sulfuric acid

73. Limit cash balance is the maximum amount of monetary funds that can remain in the cash desk of an organization at the end of a workday. This limit is established by the following authorities:
*a. Pharmacy management
b. Local authorities
c. —
d. Tax Inspectorate
e. Chief physician

74. A 45-year-old man has been taking long-acting nitrates twice a day for a year. Currently a decrease in effectiveness of the pharmacotherapy is being observed. What side-effect can be suspected in the ?rst place?
*a. Development of nitrate tolerance
b. Progressing coronary atherosclerosis
c. Impairment of coronary circulation
d. Myocardial infarction
e. Progressing ischemic heart disease

75. A 63-year-old man suffering from ischemic heart disease was diagnosed with angle closure glaucoma. What group of drugs is CONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Statins
*b. Nitrates
c. Calcium antagonists
d. ?-adrenergic blockers
e. Anticoagulants

76. Inspection of received medicines should be performed by an authorized employee. What is NOT apartofthe responsibilities of this person?
a. To keep a record book of received medicines
b. To draw up conclusions regarding inspection of received medicines
*c. To draw up orders for medicines and medical products, to conclude sales contracts
d. To check the pharmacy stock for low-quality or fake medicines
e. —

77. Snake venom-based drugs are widely applied in treatment of locomotor apparatus diseases. Main components of these venoms are:
*a. Toxic proteins
b. Cardiac glycosides
c. Phenol-alcohols
d. Glucosinolates
e. Alkaloids

78. A 25-year-old man is diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis of moderate severity. What drugs should be prescribed for etiotropic therapy?
a. Nonsteroidal anti-in?ammatory drugs
b. Glucocorticoids
*c. Antimicrobial agents
d. Anticholinesterase drugs
e. Antiarrhythmic drugs

79. Doctor’s prescription ful?lls several functions. What function indicates that the doctor bears responsibility for correct prescription of medicines to the patient?
a. Technological
b. Economic
c. Social
d. Informational
*e. Legal

80. Accounting records are classi?ed by the type of asset accounting or by their sources. Active accounts keep record of the following:
a. Equity capital
b. Debt settlement with the creditors
c. Salaries payment
*d. Monetary funds
e. Bank loans

81. An analytical chemist determines potassium ions admixture in a medicinal substance with sodium tetraphenylborate according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What analytical effect would con?rm the presence of this admixture?
a. Pink coloring
b. Brown coloring
c. Yellow coloring
d. Blue coloring
*e. White opalescence

82. The cholagogue derived from Rosa canina fruit is used in treatment of liver and gallbladder diseases. Name this drug:
a. Phytolyt
b. Chophytol
*c. Cholosas
d. Allochol
e. Altan

83. Standard stactometer divides 1 ml of water into:
a. 25 drops
b. 15 drops
*c. 20 drops
d. 30 drops
e. 10 drops

84. A medicinal plant contains hydroxycoumarins and is used in production of venotonic agents. Name the herbal raw material harvested from this plant:
*a. Semina Hippocastani
b. Fructus Ammi majoris
c. Fructus Dauci carotae
d. Fructus Pastinacae sativae
e. Herba Meliloti

85. What corticosteroid medicinal substance has two ?uorine atoms in its chemical structure?
a. Prednisolone
b. Hydrocortisone acetate
c. Dexamethasone
d. Triamcinolone acetonide
*e. Fluocinolone acetonide

86. A private pharmacy received a supply of a drug with 2.3-dihydro-2-methyl-1.4naphthoquinone-2-sulfonate sodium as an active ingredient. Name this drug:
a. Ergocalciferol
b. Cocarboxylase hydrochloride
c. Rutin
d. Ribo?avin
*e. Vicasol (Menadione)

87. When servicing customers it is necessary to maintain cash desk discipline. A cashier should make records in the cash book:
a. At the end of a workday
*b. Immediately after the cash transaction occurred
c. Quarterly
d. Monthly
e. Weekly

88. What factors affect tablet disintegration?
a. High speci?c gravity of powders
b. Poor ?owability
*c. Amount and nature of disintegrating agents
d. Tablet powder contains lamellar crystals
e. Heterogeneity of granulated material

89. Digoxin is given to the patients with chronic heart failure. What medicinal plant that contains cardiac glycoside is a source of this medicinal substance?
a. Erysimum canescens
b. Adonis vernalis
c. Convallaria majalis
*d. Digitalis lanata
e. Strophanthus kombe

90. What department of a wholesale ?rm is tasked with search for and analysis of potential suppliers’ commercial offers, as well as concluding supply contracts and supervision of contract ful?llment?
*a. Supply department
b. Shipping department
c. Finance department
d. Stores development
e. Marketing department

91. The reaction of glucose identi?cation produces red precipitate with the following reagent:
a. Thiocyanogen bromide
b. Alkaline potassium tetraiodomercurate solution
c. Sodium nitroprusside solution
*d. Copper-tartrate
e. Ammoniacal silver nitrate solution

92. During quantitative determination of Vicasol (Menadione) by means of cerimetry, the following indicator is used:
*a. Ferroin
b. Crystal violet
c. Methyl red
d. Methyl orange
e. Naphtholbenzein

93. As the result of reduction of alcoholic solutions of 5-nitrofuran derivatives by means of their reaction with zinc in the presence of diluted hydrochloric acid, the following occurs:
a. Color change from yellow to black
b. Precipitation and gassing
c. Precipitation
d. Ammonia production
*e. Solution decoloration

94. A patient developed dry cough while undergoing pharmacotherapy for arterial hypertension. What group of drugs can be characterized by this side effect?
a. Tranquilizers
b. Antacids
c. Calcium antagonists
d. Antipsychotics
*e. ACE inhibitors

95. Vinblastine and Vincristine demonstrate antitumor activity. Name the herbal raw material used in production of these medicines:
a. Herba Selaginis
*b. Folia Catharanthi rosei
c. Rhizomata Nupharis lutei
d. Herba Vincae minoris
e. Folia Berberidis

96. A pharmacist prepares 180 ml of adonis grass infusion. How much herbal raw material should be taken to prepare this infusion?
a. 18.0
*b. 6.0
c. 2.0
d. 10.0
e. 15.0

97. A certain drug explodes when heated to 180°C or upon impact and, therefore, must be handled carefully during receipt and storage. This drug is:
a. Barium chloride
b. Calcium chloride
c. Activated carbon
d. Alcoholic iodine solution
*e. Nitroglycerine solution

98. A pharmaceutical warehouse received a herbal raw material that consists of ”cones” with loose scales that are attached to a ?rm twig with or without fruits. Its collective fruits are pale green, fragrant, and bitter. Name the plant from which this herbal raw material was harvested:
a. Juniperus communis
b. Alnus incana
*c. Humulus lupulus
d. Rubus idaeus
e. Olea europeaea

99. The Income Statement of a pharmacy for the ?rst quarter of 20XX contains the following entries: goods turnover - 45 000 UAH, production cost of products sold - 30 000 UAH, turnover costs - 10 000 UAH. Determine the income:
a. 40000UAH
b. 30000UAH
*c. 5000UAH
d. 15000UAH
e. 35000UAH

100. Under the current legislation, full or partial exemption of persons and legal entities from tax payment is called:
a. Tax
b. Tax rate
*c. Tax concession
d. Tax system
e. Subject to taxation

101. Name the of?cial document on audit results, which is drawn under the standard procedure and contains conclusions about reporting credibillity and integrity of ?nancial statements of an organization:
*a. Auditor’s conclusion
b. Balance sheet
c. Statement of changes in equity
d. Cash ?ow statement
e. Income statement

102. In Ukraine the auditor position eligibility requires the candidate to be a Ukrainian citizen and have the quali?cation certi?cate for work as an auditor within the Ukraine’s territory. The certi?cate is effective for:
a. 2 years
b. 3 years
*c. 5 years
d. 1 years
e. Inde?nitely

103. During an asphyxiating attack the patient with bronchial asthma was given intravenously a drug that caused nausea, headache, excitation, and palpitations as side effects. What drug can cause such reaction?
a. Papaverine hydrochloride
*b. Euphylline (Aminophylline)
c. Ambroxol
d. Prednisolone
e. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)

104. A 46-year-old pharmacy customer suffers from chronic bronchitis and needs a medicine to facilitate expectoration of thick viscous sputum. What drug is indicated in this case?
a. Salbutamol
b. Oxeladin
*c. Ambroxol
d. Butamirate
e. Codeine phosphate

105. A 52-year-old patient has been diagnosed with gouty arthritis, phase 2. What drug should be basic in treatment of this patient?
a. Furosemide
b. Penicillin
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Paracetamol
*e. Allopurinol

106. A certain drug can be quantitatively assessed by means of direct alkalimetry in glycerine, mannitol, or other polyhydric alcohol medium. This drug is:
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Boric acid
c. Salicylic acid
d. Benzoic acid
e. Glutaminic acid

107. Bromatometry allows quantitative analysis of the following drug:
a. Benzoic acid
b. Potassium acetate
c. Glutamic acid
d. ?-Alanine
*e. Sodium salicylate

108. A pharmacy has received a formulation for the solution with a substance that moderately expands in the cold water. Name this substance:
*a. Gelatin
b. Calcium chloride
c. Protargol (Silver proteinate)
d. Sodium chloride
e. Glucose

109. Doctor’s prescription has several functions. What function of the prescription allows its participation in the process of payment in cases when medicines should be issued free of charge or at a reduced price?
a. Technological
*b. Economic
c. Legal
d. Social
e. Medical

110. What drug, due to ?-lactam ring in its structure, has positive reaction with hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution in the presence of sodium hydroxide with subsequent addition of iron (III) chloride solution?
a. Dibazol (Bendazol)
*b. Amoxicillin trihydrate
c. Papaverine hydrochloride
d. Metronidazole
e. Phenazone

111. A patient with angina pectoris takes long-acting nitrates. Consult him what side-effect is the most common for these drugs:
a. Nausea
b. Diarrhea
c. Constipation
*d. Headache
e. Vomiting

112. To ensure the quality of medicines the pharmacy devotes much attention to quality control. The following document is the quality assurance of a drug:
*a. Quality certi?cate
b. Certi?cate of compliance with hygiene regulations
c. Sanitary passport
d. Sanitary-epidemiological certi?cate
e. Registration certi?cate

113. How long should a retail business that deals in medicines keep the quality certi?cates issued by drug manufacturers?
*a. 3 years
b. 2 years
c. 5 years
d. 6 months
e. 1 year

114. Pharmacy employees receive their salary payments twice a month. What should the cashier do, if a pay day coincides with a holiday?
a. There are no regulations regarding payment of salaries in this case
*b. To pay the salaries one day earlier
c. To pay the salaries on the holiday
d. To pay the salaries after the holiday
e. To pay the salaries 10 days earlier

115. Essential oil of a certain plant contains up to 80% of cineole. Specify the herbal raw material that is collected from this plant:
a. Folia Betulae
b. Folia Мelissae
c. Folia Absinthii
*d. Folia Eucalypti
e. Folia Menthae piperitae

116. Nicotinamide is a pyridine derivative, which can be identi?ed by its positive reaction with:
a. Grade reagent
b. Copper-tartrate solution
*c. Cyanogen bromide reagent
d. Thioacetamide reagent
e. Thioglycolic acid solution

117. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist should use acidimetry in non-aqueous medium to determine quantitative content of the following purine alkaloid:
*a. Caffeine
b. Caffeine and sodium benzoate
c. Theophylline
d. Theophylline ethylenediamine
e. Theobromine

118. An analytical chemist performs identi?cation of lidocaine hydrochloride. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine the presence of chloride ions can be con?rmed by means of reaction with silver nitrate solution resulting in:
a. Violet coloring
b. Green ?uorescence
*c. White caseous precipitate
d. Yellow precipitate
e. Blue coloring

119. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, an analytical chemist can determine sulfate admixtures in sodium tetraborate by the effect of white opalescence that results from its reaction with the following solution:
a. Ammonium oxalate
b. Sodium sul?de
c. Silver nitrate
*d. Barium chloride
e. Magnesium sulfate

120. A pharmacist prepares an infusion in proportion 1:400. Specify the herbal raw material used in this infusion:
a. Camomile grass
*b. Thermopsis grass
c. Oak bark
d. Motherwort grass
e. Althaea roots

121. A pharmacist prepares 100 ml of glucose solution. Specify the amount of Weibel’s stabilizer necessary in this case:
a. 15 ml
b. 10 ml
*c. 5ml
d. 20 ml
e. 2ml

122. A pharmacist has dissolved a medicinal substance in the sterile puri?ed water to make an eye ointment. Specify this medicinal substance:
a. Xeroform
b. Basic bismuth nitrate
c. Puri?ed sulfur
*d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Menthol

123. An important indicator of business activity is pro?tability of a business. Specify the indices that can be used to measure the pro?tability:
a. Turnover/income
b. Turnover/cost price
*c. Pro?t/turnover
d. Income/turnover
e. Liquidity/solvency

124. A 60-year-old patient, who had suffered a myocardial infarction, was prescribed acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. Specify the optimal daily dosage of acetylsalicylic acid for antiaggregatory effect:
a. 500 mg
*b. 100 mg
c. 300 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 400 mg

125. A 25-year-old woman is in the third trimester of her pregnancy. During her regular examination, US detected a malformation in the fetus. Medical history of the patient shows that she was taking large doses of diazepam without prescription during her pregnancy. What type of side effect has occurred in this case?
a. Mutagenic
*b. Teratogenic
c. Fetotoxic
d. Embryotoxic
e. Carcinogenic

126. To identify cardiac glycosides there are usually three groups of color reactions being performed: for steroid nucleus, for lactonic ring, and for carbohydrate component. Specify the reaction for identi?cation of butenolide ring:
a. Reaction of sublimation
b. Dragendorff’s test
c. Stahl’s reaction
d. Mayer’s test
*e. Legal’s test

127. A 43-year-old woman has come to a pharmacy with complaints of sharp headache in the occipital area, palpitations, ”visual snow” in her eyes, nausea; her BP is 180/110 mm Hg. These symptoms correspond with:
a. Acute conjunctivitis
*b. Hypertensic crisis
c. Exertional angina pectoris attack
d. Migraine attack
e. Cervical osteochondrosis

128. What fatty oil is nondrying due to its oleic acid glyceride content?
a. Helianthi oleum
b. Cucurbitae oleum
c. Lini oleum
*d. Ricini oleum
e. Maydis oleum

129. A 36-year-old woman with herpetic rash on her lips has come to a pharmacy. Recommend her a drug for topical treatment:
*a. Acyclovir
b. Levo?oxacin
c. Amikacin
d. Metronidazole
e. Fluconazole

130. A woman with open tuberculosis is undergoing in-patient treatment in the tuberculosis clinic. What drug was prescribed by her physician for etiotropic treatment?
a. Acyclovir
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
c. Benzylpenicillin (Penicillin G)
*d. Isoniazid
e. Metronidazole

131. A pharmaceutical company produces belladonna tincture. In the process of standardization, excessive content of active substances was detected. How can this situation be remedied?
*a. Dilute the tincture with extractant to normal concentration
b. Filter the tincture through adsorbent
c. This kind of deviation is not important
d. The tincture is a non-recoverable reject material
e. Precipitate excessive active substances

132. The phytochemical workshop of a factory produces liquid extracts. What extractants are used in this manufacturing process?
a. Dichloroethane
b. Water
c. Chloroform
d. Ammonia solution
*e. Aqueous-alcoholic solutions

133. A pharmaceutical company has divided its customers into groups based on their gender, age, and size of their families. What approach to market segmentation is the basis of this customer division?
a. Socioeconomic
b. Geographic
*c. Demographic
d. Psychographic
e. Behavioral

134. To decrease business risks, a pharmaceutical company decided to expand its activity and penetrate into new market (to open a ?tness center). Name this process:
a. Integration
*b. Diversi?cation
c. Conglomeration
d. Intensi?cation
e. Modernization

135. A patient has been receiving palliative treatment with morphine hydrochloride for a week. Following that the patient demands continuation of this treatment. What phenomenon has occurred in this case?
a. Potentiation
b. Summation
c. To l e ra n c e
d. Cumulation
*e. Dependence

136. A 65-year-old man with communityacquired pneumonia was prescribed antibiotic agent amikacin. It should be kept in mind, that amikacin has the following side-effect:
a. Red coloring of urine
b. Increased blood pressure
c. Decreased blood pressure
*d. Ototoxicity
e. Vomiting

137. Considering thermolability of most animal-derived injection preparations, they are sterilized by means of:
a. High frequency current
b. Addition of buffer solutions
*c. Filtration through membrane
d. Autoclave chamber with high-pressure saturated steam
e. Ultrasound

138. An analytical chemist conducts quantitative determination of ibuprofen (substance) by means of direct alkalimetry. The following solution will be an indicator in this case:
*a. Phenolphthalein
b. Mordant black
c. Ammonium iron (III) sulfate
d. Potassium chromate
e. Tropeolin 00

139. During anti-Helicobacter quadrotherapy patient’s feces colored black. What drug could have caused this effect?
a. Clarithromycin
b. Metronidazole
c. Omeprazole
d. Amoxicillin
*e. Bismuth subcitrate

140. A patient receives heparin for acute myocardial infarction. On the third day the patient developed hematuria and subcutaneous hematomas. What medicine should be prescribed as an antidote in this case?
a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Clopidogrel
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Protamine sulfate
e. Streptokinase

141. A pharmacist approached the chief manager of the pharmacy with a request for pay raise. The chief manager turned down this request. What type of con?ict is it?
a. Con?ict between individual and group
*b. Interpersonal con?ict
c. Dysfunctional con?ict
d. Intrapersonal con?ict
e. Intergroup con?ict

142. An accountable person has received a sum of money from the pharmacy cash desk to buy a calculator. What document records the cash ?ow in such a transaction?
a. Receipt
b. Remains unregistered documentarily
c. Cash income order
d. Invoice
*e. Cash expense order

143. Hyoscyamine and scopolamine are typically contained in the plants of the following family:
a. Papaveraceae
b. Asteraceae
*c. Solanaceae
d. Apocynaceae
e. Fabaceae

144. A pharmaceutical company produces suppositories made from thermolabile medicinal substances. What method is used in their production?
a. Rolling
b. Dispersion
c. Steeping
d. Pouring
*e. Pressing

145. A pharmaceutical company produces liquid dosage forms. What principle is used in rotary pulsation apparatus to obtain an emulsion?
*a. Mechanical dispersion
b. Solubilization
c. Maceration
d. Coacervation
e. Ultrasonic dispersion

146. A pharmaceutical company produces soft dosage forms. What indicator should be measured additionally for the soft dosage forms that are intended for application on heavily damaged skin?
*a. Sterility
b. Identi?cation
c. Quantitative determination
d. Microbiological purity
e. pH

147. A pharmaceutical company produces warious medicines. Name the dosage form consisting of separate hard dry particles disintegrated to varying degree:
a. Dried extract
*b. Powders
c. Suspensions
d. Ta b l e t s
e. Emulsions

148. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the herbal raw material used in production of plantaglucide should be tested by means of thinlayer chromatography. The resulting chromatogram will have a weak blue zone, which will indicate the presence of:
a. Acorone
b. Azulene
c. Atropine
*d. Aucubin
e. Acteoside

149. A 74-year-old man came to the pharmacy. He had been prescribed ampicillin for antibiotic treatment of dysenteric gastroenterocolitis. What group of drugs should be recommended for dysbiosis prevention in this case?
a. Sorbents
b. Immunosuppressants
c. Antacids
d. Enzymatic agents
*e. Probiotics

150. Where on the shop ?oor of a pharmacy should various nutritional supplements and health food be placed?
a. By their pharmacotherapy group
b. Alongside medicines
c. By their Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classi?cation
*d. On separate shelves and in separate shopwindows
e. By their application

151. Product sales manager of a pharmaceutical company was tasked with sales program inspection and given 10 days to complete this task. The manager completedthistaskwithin5daysand expects to be rewarded with a bonus. What theory of achievement motivation is based on expectation of a certain event?
a. Herzberg’s two-factor theory
b. Maslow’s hierarchy of needs
*c. Vroom’s expectancy theory
d. McClelland’s theory of needs
e. McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y

152. The management plans to open a new pharmacy in one of the local villages. Such activity can be identi?ed as:
*a. Growth strategy
b. Horizontal integration
c. Horizontal diversi?cation
d. Conglomerate diversi?cation
e. Vertical integration

153. According to ecological survey, a certain pharmaceutical manufacturer holds the ?rst place among the local ”green” industries. What marketing concept is chosen by this manufacturer in relations with its customers?
a. Production development
b. Integrated marketing
c. Product development
d. Intensi?cation of commercial effort
*e. Socio-ethical marketing

154. Publicly-owned ”Isotope” factory is the only manufacturer of radiopharmaceuticals in Ukraine. What type of distribution is characteristic of radioactive drugs?
*a. Exclusive
b. Intensive
c. Bulk
d. Sample
e. Selective

155. A pharmaceutical company plans to introduce traditional herbal remedies to new markets. What marketing opportunity according to Ansoff Matrix was used by the company?
a. Consolidation
*b. Market development
c. Product development
d. Market penetration
e. Diversi?cation

156. A 28-year-old woman came to a pharmacy complaining of constipation that developed after antacid treatment. What drug could be the cause of this symptom?
*a. Aluminium-containing drugs
b. Calcium carbonate
c. Ranitidine
d. Simethicone
e. Magnesium-containing drugs

157. What antacid can cause constipations, osteoporosis, and encephalopathy when taken for a long period of time?
a. Sodium bicarbonate
b. Sodium alginate
c. Magnesium oxide
*d. Aluminium hydroxide
e. Calcium carbonate

158. A 60-year-old man has come to a pharmacy with complaints of impaired twilight vision, dry sclera, cracked and peeling skin. The dispensing chemist suspected hypovitaminosis and recommended the customer to take the following drug after consultation with the physician:
a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Ergocalciferol
*e. Retinol acetate

159. In the process of drug identi?cation, an analytical chemist of the State Inspection for Quality Control of Medicines performs ninhydrin test. What drug is being identi?ed?
a. Nitrofural
b. Resorcin
*c. Ty r o s i n e
d. Sulfamethoxazole
e. Retinol acetate

160. A pharmacy provides certain categories of ill persons with medicines free of charge or at a reduced price. What conditions allow free of charge supply of out-patients with necessary medicines?
a. Cold
b. Headache
*c. Diabetes mellitus
d. Muscle pain
e. Cuts and abrasions

161. Spectrophotometric analysis of anthracene derivatives contained in buckthorn bark is based on the following reaction:
a. Salt precipitation
b. Sublimation
c. Oxidation of anthracene derivatives
d. Anthraquinone reduction
*e. Production of phenolates with alkaliammonia solution

162. A patient with arterial hypertension, who takes captopril, was prescribed a potassium-sparing diuretic, spironolactone. What complication can develop in the patient due to this combination of drugs?
*a. Hyperkalemia
b. Hyponatremia
c. Hypernatremia
d. Hypoglycemia
e. Hypocalcemia

163. A patient was prescribed an oral antibiotic for treatment and an antacid to remove heartburn symptoms. If the drugs are taken simultaneously their interaction can result in the following:
a. Mutual potentiation
b. Acceleration of metabolism and excretion
c. Relative overdosage
d. Inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzymes
*e. Antibiotic malabsorption

164. Medicinal dyes should be stored in a special cabinet. Which of the listed medical products is a dye:
a. Hydrogen peroxide
b. Glucose
c. Ascorbic acid
*d. Brilliant green
e. Ethyl alcohol

165. Core tablets that are to be made into dragees must not have a ?at shape. Why such requirement is necessary?
a. To avoid prolonged contact with overlaying suspension
b. They are not durable enough
*c. To prevent them from adhesion to each other
d. To improve their appearance
e. To speed up the process of applying the coating

166. A 63-year-old woman suffering from diabetic nephropathy with functional disturbance of the kidneys needs etiotropic treatment for focal pneumonia. What drug is CONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Synthetic penicillins
b. Natural penicillins
*c. Aminoglycosides
d. Macrolides
e. Combined penicillins

167. Specify the formula of extractant calculation in the process of creating a tincture:
a. µ = mmreanwdpmraotdeuricatl × 100%
b. V = Vtincture × n + mrawmaterial × Kalcoholabsorption
c. mrawmaterial = mendproduct + mlosses
d. E = mramwlomsasteesrial × 100%
*e. V = Vtincture + mrawmaterial × Kalcoholabsorption

168. In the process of phytochemical examination of buckthorn bark, the reaction with alkaline solution resulted in red coloring, which indicates the presence of the following:
a. Flavonoids
b. Slime
c. Saponins
d. Alkaloids
*e. Anthracene derivatives

169. Atropa belladonna grass extract is a component of compound antispasmodic drugs. Select such drug from the list:
a. Urolesan
b. Herbogastrine
c. Olimetinum
d. Solutan
*e. Bellasthesin

170. Buckthorn bark and its derivative drugs are used as laxatives in medicine. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, during chromatographic identi?cation of buckthorn bark it is necessary to detect:
a. Panaxosides
b. Ginkgosides
c. Purpurea glycosides
*d. Glucofrangulins
e. Lanatosides

171. Name the optimal vehicle for soluble vaginal suppositories:
a. Glycerine
b. Cocoa butter
*c. Polyethylene oxide
d. Fat
e. Hard fat

172. Weibel’s liquid is necessary to stabilize the solution of a certain substance. Name this substance:
a. Novocaine
b. Sodium chloride
c. Magnesium sulfate
*d. Glucose
e. Potassium chloride

173. The chief manager of a pharmacy designs its organizational structure and job descriptions for its employees. These arrangements belong to the following management method:
*a. Organizational
b. Legal
c. Psychosocial
d. Simulation
e. Economic

174. A pharmacist approached the chief manager of the pharmacy with a proposition to introduce an additional service for their customers - blood pressure measurement. What type of communication is it?
a. Vertical descending
b. Intra-level
c. Horizontal
*d. Vertical ascending
e. External

175. What tablet coating protects stomach from harmful in?uence of active ingredients?
a. Gastrically absorbed
b. Water-soluble
*c. Intestinally absorbed
d. Fat-soluble
e. —

176. To replenish its ?xed assets, the pharmacy made a decision to arrange a credit with the trading bank. What document must be concluded in writing between the creditor and the debtor in this case?
a. Full material liability contract
b. Balance sheet
c. Auditor’s conclusion
*d. Credit contract
e. License

177. A pharmacy supplies the surgical ward of a hospital. What document enables the dispensing chemist to supply the goods:
a. Report on the movement of packaging
b. Product revaluation notice
*c. Purchase order
d. Consolidated register
e. Receipt log book

178. A manager of a wholesale pharmaceutical company is responsible for relaying various tasks to the employees and supervises the ful?llment of assigned tasks. What management level corresponds with these duties?
a. Middle-level
*b. Technical
c. Institutional
d. Administrative
e. Top-level

179. A ”Sunrise” pharmacy chain has changed the placement of medical products on its shelves and in the shop windows, to study what effect would this merchandising tactics have on the sales amount. What method of marketing research was used by this pharmacy chain?
a. Survey
b. Panel
*c. Experiment
d. Observation
e. —

180. A pharmaceutical company lowered its price for a certain drug due to strong competition and decreasing demand for this drug. What is the purpose of such price policy?
a. —
*b. To ensure business survival
c. To create the image of high-quality medicine manufacturer
d. To maximize pro?ts
e. To gain leadership due to high quality of manufactured medicines

181. Reye syndrome (encephalopathy, fatty degeneration of liver) develops as a side effect in children suffering from fever of viral origin when they take the following medicine:
a. Ibuprofen
b. Celecoxib
*c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Metamizole sodium
e. Paracetamol

182. According to the law regulating labour remuneration, the businesses must establish their compensation plan in the following document:
*a. Collective agreement
b. Decree
c. Job description
d. Statement
e. Contract of delivery

183. What activity of a pharmaceutical company includes improvement of employees’ working and living conditions, healthcare and medical insurance and other means of social development?
a. Charity
*b. Social responsibility
c. Financial activity
d. Commercial activity
e. Industrial activity

184. Analysis of work environment of a pharmaceutical company has detected there the following organizational features: dynamism, ?exibility of management structure, self-checking, and democratic communication. What type of adaptive organization structure is it?
a. —
*b. Organic
c. Combined
d. Mechanistic
e. Informal

185. What variable of the internal environment of the ”Provisor” pharmacy can be described as the ways of transformation of component materials (medicinal agents "an gross") into end product (various dosage forms)?
a. Ta s k s
b. Mission
*c. Technologies
d. Structure
e. Human resources

186. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, phthalylsulfathiazole is quantitatively determined by means of alkalimetry in non-aqueous medium. The following substance is used as a solvent in this case:
a. Benzene
b. Chloroform
c. Anhydrous acetic acid
d. Ethyl alcohol
*e. Dimethyl formamide

187. When dispensing an antacid agent and o?oxacin in tablets, the dispensing chemist warned the customer that these drugs should be taken separately with 2hour interval in between. Simultaneous taking of both drugs:
a. Increases antacid effectiveness
b. Increases o?oxacin absorption
*c. Decreases o?oxacin absorption
d. Decreases antacid effectiveness
e. Increases risk of dysbiosis

188. In the process of industrial production of rectal suppositories, certain substances insoluble both in water and suppository vehicle are introduced into this dosage form. Specify the optimal way to introduce these substances:
a. Introduce the substances as an emulsion
b. Melt a part of fatty vehicle and dissolve the substances there
c. Melt all of fatty vehicle and dissolve the substances there
*d. Introduce the substances as a suspension
e. Dissolve the substances in the water heated to 45°C

189. A 54-year-old hypertonic patient undergoing pharmacotherapy developed bronchial spasm. His physician considers it to be a therapy-induced complication caused by the drug that belongs to the following group:
a. Ganglionic blockers
b. Diuretics
c. Calcium antagonists
d. ?-adrenergic blockers
*e. ?-adrenergic blockers

190. Under the current legislation there is a certain list of controlled substances that require keeping of the special inventory log. Select the drug that belongs on this list:
*a. Phenobarbital
b. Solpadeine
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
d. Digoxin
e. Novocaine

191. Helichrysum arenarium herbal raw material has anti-in?ammatory and choleretic effect. What parts of this plant are harvested?
*a. Flowers
b. Rhizomes
c. Roots
d. Fruits
e. Grass

192. A control laboratory needs to analyze streptomycin powder for injections. According to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, to identify it sodium hydroxide is added into the dissolved powder, the resulting substance is heated, and then iron (III) chloride solution is added, which results in violet coloring of the substance. This test is known as:
a. Ninhydrin test
b. Biuret test
c. Thiochrome test
*d. Maltol test
e. Vitali-Morin reaction

193. A patient with chronic heart failure, who has been taking cardiac glycosides, developed signs of glycoside intoxication. What antidote would be advisable in this case?
a. Protamine
b. Vicasol (Menadione)
*c. Unithiol (DMPS)
d. Naloxone
e. Methionine

194. For treatment of enteric infection a 36-year-old woman was prescribed a nitrofuran derivative that is poorly absorbed in the intestine and takes its effect along the intestinal tract. Name this drug:
a. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
b. Furadonin (Nitrofurantoin)
c. Nalidixic acid
*d. Nifuroxazide
e. Nitroxoline

195. Bank is a ?nancial mediator in pharmacy’s payments. Payment of taxes withheld from the employees’ salary into the budget requires the following document:
a. Check payable in account
b. Cash register receipt
c. Cash order
*d. Payment order
e. Accounting form

196. In the process of industrial production, certain adjuvants are included in the soft dosage forms as pH regulators. Name these adjuvants:
a. Benzalkonium chloride, benzyl alcohol
*b. Citric acid, sodium phosphate salts
c. Glycerine, dimethyl sulfoxide
d. Paraf?n, spermaceti
e. Sodium lauryl sulfate, tween emulsi?ers

197. What effect will anthracene derivatives have, if -OH- groups are located in both benzene rings of anthraquinone?
*a. Laxative
b. Litholytic
c. Choleretic
d. Sedative
e. Diuretic

198. Polyethylene oxide base belongs to the following group:
a. Fat
*b. Hydrophilic
c. Amphiphilic
d. Hydrophobic
e. Emulsion

199. Choose the solvent necessary to prepare a concentrated solution of sodium bicarbonate in the pharmacy:
a. Peach-kernel oil
b. Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
c. Ethanol
*d. Puri?ed water
e. Chloroform

200. In the process of pharmaceutical company entering an offshore market the traditions and customs, religion, system of values, and education level of the local population were analyzed. What factors of international marketing environment were researched?
a. Technological
*b. Sociocultural
c. Economic
d. Political
e. Legal

