1. After consumption of rich food a patient has nausea and heartburn, steatorrhea. This condition might be caused by:
a. Increased lipase secretion
b. Amylase deficiency
c. Disturbed phospholipase synthesis
*d. Bile acid deficiency
e. Disturbed tripsin synthesis

2. Galactosemia is revealed in the child. Concentration of glucose in the blood is not considerably changed. Deficiency of what enzyme caused this illness?
a. Phosphoglucomutase
b. Amylo-1,6-glucosidase
*c. Galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase
d. Galactokinase
e. Hexokinase

3. Fatty of phospholipids is disordered due to fat infiltration of the liver. Indicate which of the presented substances can enhance the process of methylation during phospholipids synthesis?
a. Glucose
b. Ascorbic acid
*c. Methionine
d. Glycerin
e. Citrate

4. Characteristic sign of glycogenosis is muscle pain during physical work. Blood examination reveals usually hypoglycemia. This pathology is caused by congenital deficiency of the following enzyme:
*a. Glycogen phosphorylase
b. Alpha amylase
c. Lysosomal glycosidase
d. Gamma amylase
e. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase

5. An infant has apparent diarrhea resulting from improper feeding. One of the main diarrhea effects is plentiful excretion of sodium bicarbonate. What form of acid-base balance disorder is the case?
a. Metabolic alkalosis
b. Respiratory alkalosis
c. No disorders of acid-base balance will be observed
*d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Respiratory acidosis

6. Methotrexate (structural analogue of the folic acid which is competitive inhibitor of the dihydrofolatreductase) is prescribed for treatment of the malignant tumour.On which level does methotrexate inhibit synthesis of the nucleic acids?
a. Transcription
b. Replication
*c. Mononucleotide synthesis
d. Reparation
e. Processing

7. RNA-polymeraseB(II) is blocked due to amanitine poisoning (poison of death-cup). It disturbes:
a. Primers synthesis
b. Maturation of m-RNA
c. Synthesis of t-RNA
d. Reverse transcription
*e. Synthesis of m-RNA

8. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
*e. 

9. Patient with encephalopathy was admitted to the neurological in-patient department. Correlation of increasing of encephalopathy and substances absorbed by the bloodstream from the intestines was revealed. What substances that are created in the intestines can cause endotoxemia?
a. Biotin
b. Ornithine
c. Butyrate
d. Acetacetate
*e. Indole

10. Examination of a patient suffering from cancer of urinary bladder revealed high rate of serotonin and hydroxyanthranilic acid. It is caused by excess of the following amino acid in the organism:
*a. Tryptophan
b. Histidine
c. Tyrosine
d. Methionine
e. Alanine

11. A mother consulted a doctor about her 5-year-old child who develops erythemas, vesicular rash and skin itch under the influence of sun. Laboratory studies revealed decreased iron concentration in the blood serum, increased uroporphyrinogen I excretion with the urine. What is the most likely inherited pathology in this child?
a. Intermittent porphyria
*b. Erythropoietic porphyria
c. Hepatic porphyria
d. Methemoglobinemia
e. Coproporphyria

12. A 3 year old child with fever was given aspirin. It resulted in intensified erythrocyte haemolysis. Hemolytic anemia might have been caused by congenital insufficiency of the following enzyme:
*a. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
b. Glycogen phosphorylase
c. gamma-glutamiltransferase
d. Glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase
e. Glucose 6-phosphatase

13. Blood of a 12 year old boy presents low concentration of uric acid and accumulation of xanthine and hypoxanthine. This child has genetic defect of the following enzyme:
a. Arginase
b. Ornithine carbamoyltransferase
c. Glycerylkinase
*d. Xanthine oxidase
e. Urease

14. Increased amount of free fatty acids is observed in the blood of the patients with diabetes mellitus. It can be caused by:
*a. Increased activity of triglyceridelipase adipocytes
b. Activation of the ketone bodies utilization
c. Decreased activity of phosphatidylcholine-cholesterol-acyltransferase blood plasma
d. Activation of the synthesis of the apolipoproteins
e. Storage of palmitatoil-CoA

15. A patient is ill with diabetes mellitus that is accompanied by hyperglycemia of over 7,2 millimole/l on an empty stomach. The level of what blood plasma protein allows to estimate the glycemia rate retrospectively (4-8 weeks before examination)?
a. Fibrinogen
b. Albumin
*c. Glycated hemoglobin
d. C-reactive protein
e. Ceruloplasmin

16. In case of enterobiasis acrihine - the structural analogue of vitamin D2 - is administered. The synthesis disorder of which enzymes does this medicine cause in microorganisms?
a. Peptidases
b. Cytochromeoxidases
*c. FAD-dependent dehydrogenases
d. NAD-dependet dehydrogenases
e. Aminotransferases

17. 
a. 
b. 
*c. 
d. 
e. 

18. Hydroxylation of endogenous substrates and xenobiotics requires a donor of protons. Which of the following vitamins can play this role?
a. Vitamin D6
b. Vitamin P
*c. Vitamin C
d. Vitamin E
e. Vitamin A

19. The formation of a secondary mediator is obligatory in membrane-intracellular mechanism of hormone action. Point out the substance that is unable to be a secondary mediator:
a. Ca2+
*b. Glycerol
c. Inositol-3,4,5-triphosphate
d. Diacylglycerol
e. CAMP

20. A 4 y.o. child with signs of durative proteinic starvation was admitted to the hospital. The signs were as follows: growth inhibition, anemia, edemata, mental deficiency. Choose a cause of edemata development:
a. Reduced synthesis of lipoproteins
b. Reduced synthesis of glycoproteins
c. Reduced synthesis of globulins
d. Reduced synthesis of hemoglobin
*e. Reduced synthesis of albumins

21. Researchers isolated 5 isoenzymic forms of lactate dehydrogenase from the human blood serum and studied their properties. What property indicates that the isoenzymic forms were isolated from the same enzyme?
a. The same physicochemical properties
b. The same molecular weight
*c. Catalyzation of the same reaction
d. Tissue localization
e. The same electrophoretic mobility

22. On some diseases it is observed aldosteronism with hypertension and edema due to sodium retention in the organism. What organ of the internal secretion is affected on aldosteronism?
*a. Adrenal glands
b. Ovaries
c. Hypophysis
d. Pancreas
e. Testicle

23. An experiment proved that UV-radiated cells of patients with xeroderma pigmentosum restore the native DNA structure slower than cells of healthy individuals as a result of reparation enzyme defection. What enzyme helps this process?
a. DNA polymerase III
b. DNA gyirase
c. RNA ligase
d. Primase
*e. Endonuclease

24. A patient with suspicion on epidemic typhus was admitted to the hospital. Some arachnids and insects have been found in his flat. Which of them may be a carrier of the pathogen of epidemic typhus?
a. Houseflies
*b. Lice
c. Bed-bugs
d. Spiders
e. Cockroaches

25. A businessman came to India from South America. On examination the physician found that the patient was suffering from sleeping-sickness. What was the way of invasion?
a. With contaminated fruits and vegetables
b. As a result of mosquitos bites
*c. As a result of bugs bites
d. Through dirty hands
e. After contact with a sick dogs

26. 
a. 
b. 
*c. 
d. 
e. 

27. A 52 year-old patient with bronchial asthma was treated with glucocorticoids. Fever reaction appeared as a result of postinjective abscess. The patient had subfebrile temperature, which didn
a. Violation of heat-producing mechanisms
b. Thermoregulation center inhibition
c. Violation of heat loss through lungs
d. Inflammatory barrier formation in injection place
*e. Inhibited endogen pyrogens production

28. A 35-year-old man under the treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis has acute-onset of right big toe pain, swelling, and low-grade fever. The gouty arthritis was diagnosed and high serum uric acid level was found. Which of the following antituberculosis drugs are known for causing high uric acid levels?
a. Cycloserine
b. Rifampicin
c. Aminosalicylic acid
*d. Pyrazinamide
e. Thiacetazone

29. During metabolic process active forms of the oxygen including superoxide anion radical are formed in the human body. With help of what enzyme is this anion activated?
a. Peroxidase
b. Catalase
*c. Superoxide dismutase
d. Glutathioneperoxidase
e. Glutathionereductase

30. A patient presents high activity of LDH_1,2, aspartate aminotransferase, creatine phosphokinase. In what organ (organs) is the development of a pathological process the most probable?
a. In skeletal muscles (dystrophy, atrophy)
b. In connective tissue
c. In liver and kidneys
*d. In the heart muscle (initial stage of myocardium infarction)
e. In kidneys and adrenals

31. Buffer capacity of blood was decreased in the worker due to exhausting muscular work. Entry of what acid substance to the blood can this state be explained?
a. α-ketoglutarate
b. 3-phosphoglycerate
c. Pyruvate
d. 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate
*e. Lactate

32. While examining a child a doctor revealed symmetric cheeks roughness, diarrhea, disfunction of the nervous system. Lack of what food components caused it?
a. Phenylalanine, pangamic acid
*b. Nicotinic acid, tryptophane
c. Threonine, pantothenic acid
d. Lysine, ascorbic acid
e. Methionine, lipoic acid

33. A13-year-old boy complains of general weakness, dizziness, tiredness. He is mentally retarded. Increased level of valine, isoleucine, leucine is in the blood and urine. Urine has specific smell. What is the diagnosis?
a. Histidinemia
b. Graves disease
c. Addisons disease
d. Tyrosinosis
*e. Maple syrup urine disease

34. Increased breaking of vessels, enamel and dentine destruction in scurvy patients are caused by disorder of collagen maturing. What stage of modification of procollagen is disordered in this avitaminosis?
a. Detaching of N-ended peptide
*b. Hydroxylation of proline
c. Glycosylation of hydroxylysine residues
d. Formation of polypeptide chains
e. Removal of C-ended peptide from procollagen

35. A 62-year-old female patient has developed a cataract (lenticular opacity) secondary to the diabetes mellitus. What type of protein modification is observed in case of diabetic cataract?
a. Methylation
b. Limited proteolysis
c. Phosphorylation
d. ADP-ribosylation
*e. Glycosylation

36. Aspirin has antiinflammatory effect due to inhibition of the cyclooxygenase activity. Level of what biological active acids will decrease?
*a. Prostaglandins
b. Catecholamines
c. Iodinethyronyns
d. Biogenic amines
e. Leucotriens

37. The B cells of endocrine portion of pancreas are selectively damaged by alloxan poisoning. How will it be reflected in blood plasma?
a. The level of sugar decreases
b. The content of fibrinogen decrease
*c. The content of sugar increases
d. The content of globulins decreases
e. The content of albumins decreases

38. At the aboratory experiment the eukocyte culture was mixed with staphylococci. Neutrophile leukocytes engulfed and digested bacterial cells. This processes are termed:
a. Pinocytosis
b. Facilitated diffusion
c. Osmosis
*d. Phagocytosis
e. Diffusion

39. Examination of a patient revealed typical presentations of collagenosis. This pathology is characterized by increase of the following urine index:
*a. Hydroxyproline
b. Glucose
c. Ammonium salts
d. Mineral salts
e. Arginine

40. Marked increase of activity of
a. Cholecystitis
*b. Miocardial infarction
c. Rheumatism
d. Hepatitis
e. Pancreatitis

41. Untrained people often have muscle pain after sprints as a result of lactate accumulation. This might be caused by intensification of the following biochemical process:
a. Glycogenesis
*b. Glycolysis
c. Pentose phosphate pathway
d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Lipogenesis

42. A 16-year-old boy was performed an appendectomy. He has been hospitalized for right lower quadrant abdominal pain within 18 hours. The surgical specimen is edematous and erythematous. Infiltration by what of the following cells is the most typical for the process occuring here?
a. Eosinophils
b. Limphocytes
c. Monocytes
*d. Neutrophils
e. Basophils

43. ATP synthesis is totaly blocked in a cell. How will the value of membrane rest potential change?
a. It will be considerably increased
b. It will be slightly increased
*c. It will disappear
d. First it will increase, then decrease
e. First it will decrease, then increase

44. The concentration of albumins in human blood sample is lower than normal. This leads to edema of tissues. What blood function is damaged?
a. All answers are correct
*b. Maintaining the oncotic blood pressure
c. Maintaining the body temperature
d. Maintaining the Ph level
e. Maintaining the blood sedimentation system

45. Examination of a patient suffering from frequent haemorrhages in the inner organs and mucous membranes revealed proline and lysine being included in collagen fibers. Impairment of their hydroxylation is caused by lack of the following vitamin:
a. D
*b. C
c. K
d. E
e. A

46. A 20 year old patient complains of general weakness, dizziness, quick fatigability. Blood analysis results: Hb- 80 g/l. Microscopical examination results: erythrocytes are of modified form. This condition might be caused by:
a. Acute intermittent porphyria
b. Hepatocellular jaundice
*c. Sickle-cell anemia
d. Obturative jaundice
e. Addisons disease

47. A 48 year old patient complained about intense pain, slight swelling and reddening of skin over the joints, temperature rise up to 38oC. Blood analysis revealed high concentration of urates. This condition might be caused by disturbed metabolism of:
*a. Purines
b. Cholesterol
c. Carbohydrates
d. Pyrimidines
e. Collagen

48. A patient has yellow skin colour, dark urine, dark-yellow feces. What substance will have strengthened concentration in the blood serum?
a. Biliverdin
*b. Unconjugated bilirubin
c. Mesobilirubin
d. Conjugated bilirubin
e. Verdoglobin

49. A patient has an increased pyruvate concentration in blood. A large amount of it is excreted with the urine. What vitamin is lacking in this patient?
a. D6
b. D2
c. E
d. D3
*e. D1

50. Ammonia is a very toxic substance, especially for nervous system. What substance takes the most active part in ammonia detoxication in brain tissues?
*a. Glutamic acid
b. Proline
c. Alanine
d. Histidine
e. Lysine

51. A patient has pellagra. Interrogation revealed that he had lived mostly on maize for a long time and eaten little meat. This disease had been caused by the deficit of the following substance in the maize:
a. Tyrosine
b. Alanine
c. Histidine
*d. Tryptophan
e. Proline

52. Increased production of thyroidal hormones T3 and T4, weight loss, tachycardia, psychic excitement and so on present on thyrotoxicosis. How do thyroidal hormones effect energy metabolism in the mitochondrion of cells?
a. Stops phosphorylation of substance
b. Activates phosphorylation of substance
*c. Disconnect oxidation and oxidated phosphorylation
d. Stops respiratory chain
e. Activates oxidated phosphorylation

53. A patient with high rate of obesity was advised to use carnitine as a food additive in order to enhance "fat burning". What is the role of carnitine in the process of fat oxidation?
a. Activation of intracellular lipolysis
*b. Transport of FFA (free fatty acids) from cytosol to the mitochondria
c. It takes part in one of reactions of FFA beta-oxidation
d. Transport of FFA from fat depots to the tissues
e. FFA activation

54. An experimantal animal that was kept on protein-free diet developed fatty liver infiltration, in particular as a result of deficiency of methylating agents. This is caused by disturbed generation of the following metabolite:
a. Linoleic acid
*b. Choline
c. Cholesterol
d. DOPA
e. Acetoacetate

55. A patient consulted a doctor about symmetric dermatitis of open skin areas. It was found out that the patient lived mostly on cereals and ate too little meat, milk and eggs. What vitamin deficiency is the most evident?
a. Tocopherol
*b. Nicotinamide
c. Folic acid
d. Calciferol
e. Biotin

56. A 46 year old woman suffering from chololithiasis developed jaundice. Her urine became dark-yellow and fece became colourless. Blood serum will have the highest concentration of the following substance:
a. Mesobilirubin
b. Urobilinogen
c. Unconjugated bilirubin
d. Biliverdin
*e. Conjugated bilirubin

57. A 46 year old patient applied to a doctor complaining about joint pain that becomes stronger the day before weather changes. Blood examination revealed strengthened concentration of uric acid. The most probable cause of the disease is the intensified disintegration of the following substance:
a. Uridine triphosphate
b. Cytidine monophosphate
*c. Adenosine monophosphate
d. Uridine monophosphate
e. Thymidine monophosphate

58. A 42-year man suffering from gout has increased level of urinary acid in the blood. Allopurinol was prescribed to decrease the level of urinary acid. Competitive inhibitor of what enzyme is allopurinol?
a. Hypoxantinphosphoribosiltransferase
b. Guaninedeaminase
c. Adenosinedeaminase
d. Adeninephosphoribosiltransferase
*e. Xanthinoxidase

59. A 38 year old patient suffers from rheumatism in its active phase. What laboratory characteristic of blood serum is of diagnostic importance in case of this pathology?
a. Urea
b. Uric acid
*c. C-reactive protein
d. Creatinine
e. Transferrin

60. Patient experienced increased susceptibility of the skin to the sunlight. His urine after some time became dark-red. What is the most likely cause of this?
a. Pellagra
b. Alkaptonuria
c. Hemolytic jaundice
d. Albinism
*e. Porphyria

61. A patient with serious damage of muscular tissue was admitted to the traumatological department. What biochemical urine index will be increased in this case?
*a. Creatinine
b. Glucose
c. Uric acid
d. Mineral salts
e. Common lipids

62. hours after an accute attack of retrosternal pain a patient presented a jump of aspartate aminotransferase activity in blood serum. What pathology is this deviation typical for?
*a. Myocardium infarction
b. Collagenosis
c. Diabetes insipidus
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Viral hepatitis

63. Donor skin transplantation was performed to a patient with extensive burns. On the 8-th day the graft became swollen and changed colour; on the 11-th day graft rejection started. What cells take part in this process?
a. Basophils
b. Erythrocytes
*c. T-lymphocytes
d. Eosinophils
e. B-lymphocytes

64. A 30 y.o. woman had been ill for a year when she felt pain in the area of joints for the first time, they got swollen and skin above them became reddened. Provisional diagnosis is rheumatoid arthritis. One of the most probable causes of this disease is a structure alteration of a connective tissue protein:
a. Troponin
*b. Collagen
c. Myosin
d. Mucin
e. Ovoalbumin

65. Autopsy of a 12-year-old girl revealed: multiple cutaneous hemmorhages (mostly into the skin of buttocks, lower extremities), serous and mucous memrane hemmorhages, cerebral hemmorhages. Adrenal glands show focal necrosis and massive hemmorhages; kidneys show necrotic nephrosis, suppurative arthritis, iridocyclitis, vasculitis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Radiation sickness
*b. Meningococcemia
c. Periarteritis nodosa
d. Epidemic typhus
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

66. Examination of a 27-year-old patient revealed pathological changes in liver and brain. Blood plasma analysis revealed an abrupt decrease in the copper concentration, urine analysis revealed an increased copper concentration. The patient was diagnosed with Wilson
a. Xanthine oxidase
b. Carbonic anhydrase
*c. Ceruloplasmin
d. Leucine aminopeptidase
e. Alcohol dehydrogenase

67. A patient complains about dyspnea provoked by the physical activity. Clinical examination revealed anaemia and presence of the paraprotein in the zone of gamma-globulins. To confirm the myeloma diagnosis it is necessary to determine the following index in the patient
*a. Bence Jones protein
b. Haemoglobin
c. Antitrypsin
d. Ceruloplasmin
e. Bilirubin

68. As a result of exhausting muscular work a worker has largely reduced buffer capacity of blood. What acidic substance that came to blood caused this phenomenon?
a. Pyruvate
b. 3-phosphoglycerate
c. -
*d. Lactate
e. 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate

69. A patient was delivered to the hospital by an emergency team. Objectively: grave condition, unconscious, adynamy. Cutaneous surfaces are dry, eyes are sunken, face is cyanotic. There is tachycardia and smell of acetone from the mouth. Analysis results: blood glucose - 20,1 micromole/l (standard is 3,3-5,5 micromole/l), urine glucose - 3,5% (standard is - 0). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Acute alcoholic intoxication
c. Anaphylactic shock
*d. Hyperglycemic coma
e. Acute heart failure

70. Profuse foam appeared when dentist put hydrogen peroxide on the mucous of the oral cavity. What enzyme caused such activity?
*a. Catalase
b. Acetyltransferase
c. Methemoglobinreductase
d. Glucose-6-phosphatdehydrogenase
e. Cholinesterase

71. A 62 years old woman complains of frequent pains in the area of her chest and backbone, rib fractures. A doctor assumed myelomatosis (plasmocytoma). What of the following laboratory characteristics will be of the greatest diagnostical importance?
a. Hypoproteinemia
*b. Paraproteinemia
c. Proteinuria
d. Hyperalbuminemia
e. Hypoglobulinemia

72. A newborn child has convulsions that have been observed after prescription of vitamin B6. This most probable cause of this effect is that vitamin B6 is a componet of the following enzyme:
a. Glycogen phosphorylase
*b. Glutamate decarboxylase
c. Netoglubarate dehydromine
d. Pyruvate dehydrostase
e. Aminolevulinate synthase

73. Nappies of a newborn have dark spots that witness of formation of homogentisic acid. Metabolic imbalance of which substance is it connected with?
a. Cholesterine
b. Tryptophane
c. Galactose
d. Methionine
*e. Thyrosine

74. Pathological changes of the liver and brain were revealed in a 27-year-old patient.The copper concentration is abruptly decreased in blood plasma and increased in the urine. Wilsons disease was diagnosed. Activity of what enzyme in the blood serum should be examined to prove diagnisis?
a. Carboanhydraze
b. Leucinamineopeptidaze
c. Alcoholdehydrogenaze
*d. Ceruloplasmin
e. Xanthioxidase

75. A 50-year-old patient complains about general weakness, appetite loss and cardiac arrhythmia. The patient presents with muscle hypotonia, flaccid paralyses, weakened peristaltic activity of the bowels. Such condition might be caused by:
a. Hyperkaliemia
b. Hypoproteinemia
*c. Hypokaliemia
d. Hypophosphatemia
e. Hyponatremia

76. An 18-year-old patient has enlarged inguinal lymphnodes, they are painless, thickened on palpation. In the area of genital mucous membrane there is a small-sized ulcer with thickened edges and "laquer" bottom of greyish colour. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Trophic ulcer
c. Gonorrhea
*d. Syphilis
e. Lepra

77. Concentration of pyruvate is increased in the patients blood, the most of which is excreted with urine. What avitaminosis is observed in the patient?
*a. Avitaminosis D1
b. Avitaminosis D3
c. Avitaminosis
d. Avitaminosis D6
e. Avitaminosis E

78. Carnitine including drug was recomended to the sportsman for improving results. What process is activated most of all with help of carnitine?
a. Synthesis of ketone bodies
b. Synthesis of steroid hormones
*c. Transport of fatty acids to the mitochondria
d. Synthesis of lipids
e. Tissue respiration

79. A patient with suspected diphtheria went through bacterioscopic examination. Examination of throat swab revealed rod-shaped bacteria with volutin granules. What etiotropic preparation should be chosen in this case?
a. Interferon
*b. Antidiphtheric antitoxic serum
c. Diphtheria antitoxin
d. Bacteriophage
e. Eubiotic

80. Patient with diabetes mellitus experienced loss of consciousness and convulsions after injection of insulin. What is the result of biochemical blood analysis for concentration of the sugar?
a. 8,0 mmol/L
b. 3,3 mmol/L
c. 5,5 mmol/L
*d. 1,5 mmol/L
e. 10,0 mmol/L

81. A woman who has been keeping to a clean-rice diet for a long time was diagnosed with polyneuritis (beriberi). What vitamin deficit results in development of this disease?
a. Riboflavin
*b. Thiamine
c. Pyridoxine
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Folic acid

82. Removal of gall bladder of a patient has disturbed processes of Ca absorption through the intestinal wall. What vitamin will stimulate this process?
a. B12
b. K
c. PP
d. C
*e. D3

83. A 63-year-old woman developed signs of rheumatoid arthritis. Increase of which indicated blood values level could be helpful in proving diagnosis?
a. General cholesterol
b. R-glycosidase
c. Lipoproteids
d. Acid phosphatase
*e. Additive glycosaminoglycans

84. A 1,5-year-old child presents with both mental and physical lag, decolorizing of skin and hair, decrease in catecholamine concentration in blood. When a few drops of 5% solution of trichloroacetic iron had been added to the child
a. Alkaptonuria
b. Albinism
c. Xanthinuria
*d. Phenylketonuria
e. Tyrosinosis

85. A patient complains of frequent diarrheas, especially after consumption of fattening food, and of body weight loss. Laboratory examination revealed steatorrhea; hypocholic feces. What can be the cause of this condition?
*a. Obturation of biliary tracts
b. Lack of pancreatic lipase
c. Unbalanced diet
d. Lack of pancreatic phospholipase
e. Mucous membrane inflammation of small intestine

86. On the empty stomach in the patients blood glucose level was 5,65 mmol/L, in an hour after usage of sugar it was 8,55 mmol/L, in a 2 hours - 4,95 mmol/L. Such indicators are typical for:
a. Patient with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
b. Patient with tireotoxicosis
c. Patient with hidden diabetes mellitus
d. Patient with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
*e. Healthy person

87. A child is languid, apathetic. Liver is enlarged and liver biopsy revealed a significant excess of glycogene. Glucose concentration in the blood stream is below normal. What is the cause of low glucose concentration?
*a. Low (absent) activity of glycogene phosphorylase in liver
b. High activity of glycogen synthetase
c. Deficit of a gene that is responsible for synthesis of glucose 1-phosphaturidine transferase
d. Low (absent) activity of glucose 6-phosphatase
e. Low (absent) activity of hexokinase

88. A 65 year old man suffering from gout complains of kidney pain. Ultrasound examination revealed renal calculi. The most probable cause of calculi formation is the strengthened concentration of the following substance:
a. Bilirubin
b. Cholesterol
*c. Uric acid
d. Urea
e. Cystine

89. A 65-year-old suffering from the gout man complains of the pain in the kidneys region. On ultrasonic examination the renal calculi were revealed. As a result of what process were they formed?
a. Protein catabolism
b. Heme decay
c. Restoration of cysteine
*d. Decay of purine nucleotides
e. Ornithine cycle

90. A 5-year-old child who often fells ill with respiratory diseases has eczematous appearances after consumption of some food products, tendency to prolonged course of inflammatory processes. What kind of diathesis can be suspected in this case?
a. Hemmorhagic
b. Lymphohypoplastic
c. Asthenic
*d. Exudative-catharral
e. Arthritism

91. The greater amount of nitrogen is excreted from the organism in form of urea. Inhibition of urea synthesis and accumulation of ammonia in blood and tissues are induced by the decreased activity of the following liver enzyme:
a. Urease
b. Aspartate aminotransferase
*c. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
d. Amylase
e. Pepsin

92. A 35 y.o. patient who often consumes alcohol was treated with diuretics. There appeared serious muscle and heart weakness, vomiting, diarrhea, AP- 100/60 mm Hg, depression. This condition is caused by intensified excretion with urine of:
a. Sodium
b. Calcium
c. Phosphates
*d. Potassium
e. Chlorine

93. After intake of rich food a patient feels nausea and sluggishness; with time there appeared signs of steatorrhea. Blood cholesterine concentration is 9,2 micromole/l. This condition was caused by lack of:
a. Triglycerides
b. Phospholipids
c. Chylomicrons
*d. Bile acids
e. Fatty acids

94. Examination of a man who hadnt been consuming fats but had been getting enough carbohydrates and proteins for a long time revealed dermatitis, poor wound healing, vision impairment. What is the probable cause of metabolic disorder?
a. Lack of vitamins PP, H
b. Lack of palmitic acid
*c. Lack of linoleic acid, vitamins A, D, E, K
d. Low caloric value of diet
e. Lack of oleic acid

95. A 44-year-old woman complains of common weakness, heart pain, considerable increase of body weigt. Objectively: moon-like face, hirsutism, BP- 165/100 mm Hg, height - 164 cm, weight - 103 kg; fat is mostly accumulated in the region of neck, upper shoulder girdle, stomach. What is the main pathogenetic mechanism of obesity?
a. Increased production of insulin
b. Decreased production of thyroidal hormones
*c. Increased production of glucocorticoids
d. Decreased production of glucagon
e. Increased production of mineralocorticoids

96. An experimental animal has been given excessive amount of carbon-labeled glucose for a week. What compound can the label be found in?
a. Vitamin A
b. Methionine
*c. Palmitic acid
d. Choline
e. Arachidonic acid

97. After a serious viral infection a 3-year-old child has repeated vomiting, loss of consciousness, convulsions. Examination revealed hyperammoniemia. What may have caused changes of biochemical blood indices of this child?
a. Disorder of biogenic amines neutralization
b. Activated processes of aminoacids decarboxylation
*c. Disorder of ammonia neutralization in ornithinic cycle
d. Increased purtefaction of proteins in intestines
e. Inhibited activity of transamination enzymes

98. Examination of a patient with frequent hemorrhages from internals and mucous membranes revealed proline and lysine being a part of collagene fibers. What vitamin absence caused disturbance of their hydroxylation?
a. Vitamin E
*b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin K
e. Thiamine

99. Albinos can not stand sun impact - they do not aquire sun-tan but get sunburns. Disturbed metabolism of what aminoacid underlies this phenomenon?
a. Glutamic acid
b. Histidine
c. Methionine
d. Tryptophan
*e. Phenilalanine

100. A patient with continious bronchopneumonia was admitted to the therapeutic department. Antibiotic therapy did not give much effect. What medication for improvement of immune state should be added to the complex treatment of this patient?
a. Benadryl
b. Paracetamol
c. Analgin
d. Sulfocamphocaine
*e. Timaline

101. A patient suffers from hepatic cirrhosis. Examination of which of the following substances excreted by urine can characterize the state of antitoxic function of liver?
a. Uric acid
b. Aminoacids
c. Ammonium salts
d. Kreatinine
*e. Hippuric acid

102. Vitamin A together with specific cytoreceptors penetrates through the nuclear membranes, induces transcription processes that stimulate growth and differentiation of cells. This biological function is realized by the following form of vitamin A:
a. Retinol
b. Carotin
c. Trans-retinal
d. Cis-retinal
*e. Trans-retinoic acid

103. Products of some proteins hydrolysis and modification are the biologically active substances called hormones. Lipotropin, corticotropin, melanotropin and endorphins are synthesized in the hypophysis of the following protein:
a. Thyreoglobulin
*b. Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
c. Neurostromin
d. Neuroalbumin
e. Neuroglobulin

104. In patients with the biliary tract obstruction the blood coagulation is inhibited; the patients have frequent haemorrhages caused by the subnormal assimilation of the following vitamin:
a. A
b. E
c. C
*d. K
e. D

105. The study of the genealogy of a family with hypertrichosis (helix excessive pilosis) has demonstrated that this symptom is manifested in all generations only in men and is inherited by son from his father. What is the type of hypertrichosis inheritance?
*a. Y-linked chromosome
b. Autosome-dominant
c. X-linked dominant chromosome
d. X-linked recessive chromosome
e. Autosome-recessive

106. A newborn child suffers from milk curdling in stomach, this means that soluble milk proteins (caseins) transform to insoluble proteins (paracaseins) by means of calcium ions and a certain enzyme. What enzyme takes part in this process?
a. Lipase
*b. Renin
c. Gastrin
d. Pepsin
e. Secretin

107. The penetration of the irritable cell membrane for potassium ions has been increased during an experiment. What changes of membrane electric status can occur?
a. Local response
b. No changes
c. Depolarization
d. Action potential
*e. Hyperpolarization

108. A sportsman was recommended to take a medication that contains carnitine in order to improve his results. What process is activated by carnitine the most?
*a. Fatty acids transport to mitochondrions
b. Synthesis of ketone bodies
c. Tissue respiration
d. Synyhesis of lipids
e. Synthesis of steroid hormones

109. To prevent postoperative bleeding a 6 y.o. child was administered vicasol that is a synthetic analogue of vitamin K. Name post-translational changes of blood coagulation factors that will be activated by vicasol:
a. Polymerization
b. Glycosylation
c. Phosphorylation of serine radicals
d. Partial proteolysis
*e. Carboxylation of glutamin acid

110. A 4 years old boy has had recently serious viral hepatitis. Now there are such clinical presentations as vomiting, loss of consciousness, convulsions. Blood analysis revealed hyperammoniemia. Disturbunce of which biochemical process caused such pathological condition of the patient?
*a. Disturbed neutralization of ammonia in liver
b. Increased putrefaction of proteins in bowels
c. Inhibition of transamination enzyms
d. Activation of aminoacid decarboxylation
e. Disturbed neutralization of biogenic amines

111. During examination of an 11-month-old infant a pediatrician revealed osteoectasia of the lower extremities and delayed mineralization of cranial bones. Such pathology is usually provoked by the deficit of the following vitamin:
a. Pantothenic acid
b. Thiamin
*c. Cholecalciferol
d. Bioflavonoids
e. Riboflavin

112. Examination of a patient suffering from chronic hepatitis revealed a significant decrease in the synthesis and secretion of bile acids. What process will be mainly disturbed in the patient
*a. Fat emulsification
b. Carbohydrate digestion
c. Amino acid absorption
d. Glycerin absorption
e. Protein digestion

113. The energy inputs of a healthy man have been measured. In what position was the patient if his energy inputs were less than the main exchange?
a. Rest
b. Nervous exertion
c. Calmness
*d. Sleep
e. Easy work

114. Glutamate decarboxylation results in formation of inhibitory transmitter in CNS. Name it:
a. Glutathione
b. Serotonin
c. Asparagine
*d. GABA
e. Histamine

115. In course of histidine catabolism a biogenic amin is formed that has powerful vasodilatating effect. Name it:
a. Serotonin
b. Noradrenalin
c. Dopamine
*d. Histamine
e. Dioxyphenylalanine

116. Utilization of arachidonic acid via cyclooxigenase pathway results in formation of some bioactive substances. Name them:
a. Thyroxine
b. Somatomedins
c. Insulin-like growth factors
*d. Prostaglandins
e. Biogenic amins

117. After a sprint an untrained person develops muscle hypoxia. This leads to the accumulation of the following metabolite in muscles:
a. Glucose 6-phosphate
b. Oxaloacetate
c. Ketone bodies
d. Acetyl CoA
*e. Lactate

118. Myocyte cytoplasm contains a big number of dissolved metabolites of glucose oxidation. Name one of them that turns directly into a lactate:
*a. Pyruvate
b. Glycerophosphate
c. Fructose 6-phosphate
d. Glucose 6-phosphate
e. Oxaloacetate

119. Emotional stress causes activation of hormon-sensitive triglyceride lipase in the adipocytes. What secondary mediator takes part in this process?
a. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
b. Diacylglycerol
c. Ions of
*d. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
e. Adenosine monophosphate

120. A patient diagnosed with carcinoid of bowels was admitted to the hospital. Analysis revealed high production of serotonin. It is known that this substance is formed of tryptophane aminooacid. What biochemical mechanism underlies this process?
*a. Decarboxylation
b. Microsomal oxydation
c. Formation of paired compounds
d. Transamination
e. Desamination

121. A genetics specialist analyzed the genealogy of a family and found that both males and females may have the illness, not across all the generations, and that healthy parents may have ill children. What is the type of illness inheritance?
a. X-linked recessive
b. Y-linked
c. Autosomal dominant
d. X-linked dominant
*e. Autosomal recessive

122. Analysis of amniotic fluid that was obtained as a result of amniocentesis (puncture of amniotic sac) revealed cells the nuclei of which contain sex chromatin (Barrs body). What can it be evidence of?
a. Trisomy
b. Polyploidy
c. Development of male fetus
d. Genetic disorders of fetus development
*e. Development of female fetus

123. Vitamin B1 deficiency results in disturbance of oxidative decarboxylation of alpha-ketoglutaric acid. This will disturb synthesis of the following coenzyme:
a. Coenzyme A
*b. Thiamine pyrophosphate
c. Flavine adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
d. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
e. Lipoic acid

124. A childs blood presents high content of galactose, glucose concentration is low. There are such presentations as cataract, mental deficiency, adipose degeneration of liver. What disease is it?
*a. Galactosemia
b. Lactosemia
c. Fructosemia
d. Steroid diabetes
e. Diabetes mellitus

125. According to clinical indications a patient was administered pyridoxal phosphate. What processes is this medication intended to correct?
a. Synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases
b. Protein synthesis
c. Oxidative decarboxylation of ketonic acids
d. Desamination of purine nucleotide
*e. Transamination and decarboxylation of aminoacids

126. A 45 y.o. woman suffers from Cushings syndrome - steroid diabetes. Biochemical examination revealed: hyperglycemia, hypochloremia. Which of the under-mentioned processes is the first to be activated?
a. Glucose reabsorption
b. Glycogenolysis
*c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Glucose transport to the cell
e. Glycolysis

127. Autopsy of a 46-year-old man revealed multiple brown-and-green layers and hemmorhages on the mucous membrane of rectum and sigmoid colon; slime and some blood in colon lumen; histologically - fibrinous colitis. In course of bacteriological analysis of colon contents S.Sonne were found. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Cholera
*c. Dysentery
d. Yersiniosis
e. Crohns disease

128. A patient had been ill with bronchial asthma for many years and died from asthmatic fit. Histologic lung examination revealed: lumen of bronchioles and small bronches contain a lot of mucus with some eosinophils, there is sclerosis of alveolar septums, dilatation of alveole lumen. What mechanism of development of hypersensibility reaction took place?
*a. Reagin reaction
b. Immunocomplex reaction
c. Granulomatosis
d. Cytolysis determined by lymphocytes
e. Cytotoxic reaction

129. Desulfiram is widely used in medical practice to prevent alcocholism. It inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase. Increased level of what metabolite causes aversion to alcochol?
a. Malonyl aldehyde
b. Ethanol
*c. Acetaldehyde
d. Propionic aldehyde
e. Methanol

130. A 1-year-old child with symptoms of muscle involvement was admitted to the hospital. Examination revealed carnitine deficiency in his muscles. What process disturbance is the biochemical basis of this pathology?
a. Actin and myosin synthesis
*b. Transporting of fatty acids to mitochodrions
c. Substrate phosphorylation
d. Regulation of Ca2+ level in mitochondrions
e. Lactic acid utilization

131. The patient with complaints of permanent thirst applied to the doctor. Hyperglycemia, polyuria and increased concentration of 17-ketosteroids in the urine were revealed. What disease is the most likely?
a. Myxoedema
b. Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
*c. Steroid diabetes
d. Type I glycogenosis
e. Addisons disease

132. Index of pH of the blood changed and became 7,3 in the patient with diabetus mellitus. Detecting of the components of what buffer system is used while diagnosing disorder of the acid-base equilibrium?
a. Oxyhemoglobin
b. Protein
c. Phosphate
d. Hemoglobin
*e. Bicarbonate

133. As a result of posttranslative modifications some proteins taking part in blood coagulation, particularly prothrombin, become capable of calcium binding. The following vitamin takes part in this process:
a. A
b. C
*c. K
d. D1
e. D2

134. Objective examination of a patient revealed: slender figure, big skull, highly developed frontal region of face, short extremities. What constitutional type is it characteristic for?
a. Muscular
b. Cerebral
c. Mixed
*d. Respiratory
e. Digestive

135. A 38-year-old patient died during intractable attack of bronchial asthma. Histologic examination revealed mucus accumulation in bronchial lumen, a lot of fat cells (labrocytes) in the wall of bronches, many of them are in the state of degranulation, there are also a lot of eosinophils. What pathogenesis of bronchial changes is it?
*a. Atopy
b. Immunocomplex mechanism
c. Granulomatosis
d. Cellular cytolysis
e. Cytotoxic, cytolytic action of antibodies

136. Diabetes mellitus causes ketosis as a result of activated oxidation of fatty acids. What disorders of acid-base equilibrium may be caused by excessive accumulation of ketone bodies in blood?
a. Respiratory alcalosis
*b. Metabolic acidosis
c. Any changes wount happen
d. Metabolic alcalosis
e. Respiratory acidosis

137. A woman with 0 (I) blood group has born a child with AB blood group. This womans husband has A blood group. What genetic interaction explains this phenomenon?
a. Incomplete dominance
b. Complementation
c. Codominance
d. Polymery
*e. Recessive epistasis

138. Depressions and emotional insanities result from the deficit of noradrenalin, serotonin and other biogenic amines in the brain. Their concentration in the synapses can be increased by means of the antidepressants that inhibit the following enzyme:
a. L-amino-acid oxidase
b. Diamine oxidase
*c. Monoamine oxidase
d. D-amino-acid oxidase
e. Phenylalanine-4-monooxygenase

139. A 3 year old child with symptoms of stomatitis, gingivitis and dermatitis of open skin areas was delivered to a hospital. Examination revealed inherited disturbance of neutral amino acid transporting in the bowels. These symptoms were caused by the deficiency of the following vitamin:
a. Pantothenic acid
b. Cobalamin
c. Biotin
*d. Niacin
e. Vitamin A

140. During hypersensitivity test a patient got subcutaneous injection of an antigen which caused reddening of skin, edema, pain as a result of histamine action. This biogenic amine is generated as a result of transformation of the following histidine amino acid:
*a. Decarboxylation
b. Phosphorylation
c. Deaminization
d. Isomerization
e. Methylation

141. A patient with suspected diagnosis "progressing muscular dystrophy" got his urine tested. What compound will confirm this diagnosis if found in urine?
*a. Kreatine
b. Porphyrin
c. Calmodulin
d. Myoglobin
e. Collagen

142. A patient complained about dizziness, memory impairment, periodical convulsions. It was revealed that these changes were caused by a product of decarboxylation of glutamic acid. Name this product:
a. THFA
*b. GABA
c. TDP
d. Pyridoxal phosphate
e. ATP

143. A sportsman needs to improve his sporting results. He was recommended to take a preparation that contains carnitine. What process is activated the most by this compound?
*a. Fatty acids transporting
b. Calcium ions transporting
c. Vitamin K transporting
d. Glucose transporting
e. Amino acids transporting

144. A doctor examined a child and revealed symptoms of rachitis. Development of this desease was caused by deficiency of the following compound:
*a. D3
b. Tocopherol
c. Retinol
d. Naphtaquinone
e. Biotin

145. Laboratory examination of a child revealed increased concentration of leucine, valine, isoleucine and their ketoderivatives in blood and urine. Urine smelt of maple syrup. This disease is characterized by the deficit of the following enzyme:
a. Glucose-6-phosphatase
b. Aminotransferase
*c. Dehydrogenase of branched amino acids
d. Phosphofructokinase
e. Phosphofructomutase

146. A 9-month-old infant is fed with artificial formulas with unbalanced vitamin D6 concentration. The infant presents with pellagral dermatitis, convulsions, anaemia. Convulsion development might be caused by the disturbed formation of:
*a. GABA
b. Serotonin
c. Dopamine
d. DOPA
e. Histamine

147. It was found out that some compounds, for instance fungi toxins and some antibiotics can inhibit activity of RNA-polymerase. What process will be disturbed in a cell in case of inhibition of this enzyme?
a. Reparation
*b. Transcription
c. Replication
d. Processing
e. Translation

148. When blood circulation in the damaged tissue is restored, then lactate accumulation comes to a stop and glucose consumption decelerates. These metabolic changes are caused by activation of the following process:
a. Lipolysis
b. Anaerobic glycolysis
*c. Aerobic glycolysis
d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Glycogen biosynthesis

149. During starvation muscle proteins break up into free amino acids. These compounds will be the most probably involved into the following process:
a. Glycogenolysis
b. Decarboxylation
c. Gluconeogenesis in muscles
d. Synthesis of higher fatty acids
*e. Gluconeogenesis in liver

150. Surgical removal of a part of stomach resulted in disturbed absorption of vitamin B12, it is excreted with feces. The patient was diagnosed with anemia. What factor is necessary for absorption of this vitamin?
a. Gastrin
b. Pepsin
c. Folic acid
*d. Gastromucoprotein
e. Hydrochloric acid

151. A newborn develops dyspepsia after the milk feeding. When the milk is substituted by the glucose solution the dyspepsia symptoms disappear. The newborn has the subnormal activity of the following enzyme:
*a. Lactase
b. Maltase
c. Isomaltase
d. Amylase
e. Invertase

152. Patients who suffer from severe diabetes and dont receive insulin have metabolic acidosis. This is caused by increased concentration of the following metabolites:
a. Triacylglycerols
b. Cholesterol
c. Fatty acids
d. Unsaturated fatty acids
*e. Ketone bodies

153. A 4 year old child with hereditary renal lesion has signs of rickets, vitamin D concentration in blood is normal. What is the most probable cause of rickets development?
a. Increased excretion of calcium
b. Hypofunction of parathyroid glands
c. Lack of calcium in food
*d. Impaired synthesis of calcitriol
e. Hyperfunction of parathyroid glands

154. A 6 year old child was delivered to a hospital. Examination revealed that the child couldnt fix his eyes, didnt keep his eyes on toys, eye ground had the cherry-red spot sign. Laboratory analyses showed that brain, liver and spleen had high rate of ganglioside glycometide. What congenital disease is the child ill with?
a. Niemann-Pick disease
b. MacArdle disease
c. Wilsons syndrome
d. Turners syndrome
*e. Tay-Sachs disease

155. In clinical practice tuberculosis is treated with izoniazid preparation - that is an antivitamin able to penetrate into the tuberculosis bacillus. Tuberculostatic effect is induced by the interference with replication processes and oxidation-reduction reactions due to the buildup of pseudo-coenzyme:
a. CoQ
*b. NAD
c. FMN
d. FAD
e. TDP

156. A newborn child was found to have reduced intensity of sucking, frequent vomiting, hypotonia. Urine and blood exhibit increased concentration of citrulline. What metabolic process is disturbed?
*a. Ornithinic cycle
b. Glycolysis
c. Cori cycle
d. Glyconeogenesis
e. Tricarboxylic acid cycle

157. Dietary intake of a 30 year old nursing woman contains 1000 mg of calcium, 1300 mg of phosphorus and 20 mg of iron per day. It is necessary to change content of these mineral substances in the following way:
a. To reduce iron content
*b. To increase phosphorus content
c. To reduce fluorine content
d. To increase calcium content
e. To increase iron content

158. Cardinal symptoms of primary hyperparathyroidism are osteoporosis and renal lesion along with development of urolithiasis. What substance makes up the basis of these calculi in this disease?
a. Cholesterol
*b. Calcium phosphate
c. Cystine
d. Uric acid
e. Bilirubin

159. Study of conversion of a food colouring agent revealed that neutralization of this xenobiotic takes place only in one phase - microsomal oxydation. Name a component of this phase:
a. Cytochrome A
b. Cytochrome oxidase
c. Cytochrome B
d. Cytochrome C
*e. Cytochrome p-450

160. A patient had hemorrhagic stroke. Blood examination revealed strengthened kinin concentration.The patient was prescribed contrical. It was administered in order to inhibit the following proteinase:
a. Pepsin
b. Chemotrypsin
c. Collagenase
*d. Kallikrein
e. Trypsin

161. A 49-year-old driver complains about unbearable constricting pain behind the breastbone irradiating to the neck. The pain arose 2 hours ago. Objectively: the patient
a. Stenocardia
b. Acute pancreatitis
*c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Cholelithiasis
e. Diabetes mellitus

