1. Woman applied to the medico-genetic consulting centre for information about the risk of haemophilia in her son. Her husband has been suffering from this disease since birth. Woman and her parents are healthy (dont have haemophilia). Is the boy likely to have the disease in this family?
a. 50% of the boys will be ill
b. All boys will be ill
*c. All boys will be healthy
d. 25% of the boys will be ill
e. 75% of the boys will be ill

2. A man suffering from a hereditary disease married a healthy woman. They got 5 children, three girls and two boys. All the girls inherited their father’s disease. What is the type of the disease inheritance?
a. Autosomal recessive
b. Y-linked
c. Recessive, X-linked
*d. Dominant, X-linked
e. Asutosomal dominant

3. Electrocardiogram of a 45-year-old man showed absence of P-wave in all the leads. What part of the conducting system is blocked?
a. Purkinje
*b. Sinu-atrial node
c. Common branch of the bundle of His
d. Atrioventricular node
e. Branches of the bundle of His

4. When a patient with traumatic impairment of the brain was examined, it was discovered that he had stopped to distinguish displacement of an object on the skin. What part of the brain was damaged?
a. Occipital zone of the cortex
b. Frontal central gurus
c. Frontal zone
*d. Posterior central gurus
e. Parietal zone of the cortex

5. Different functional groups can be presented in the structure of L-amino acid:
a. -CH3
b. -NH2
c. -SH
d. -CONH2
*e. -OH

6. The conjugated protein necessarily contains special component as a non-protein part. Choose the substance that cant carry out this function:
a. AMP
b. Glucose
c. PP
d. Thiamine pyrophosphate
*e. HNO3

7. Moving of the daughter chromatids to the poles of the cell is observed in the mitotically dividing cell. On what stage of the mitotic cycle is this cell?
a. Metaphase
b. Prophase
c. Interfase
*d. Anaphase
e. Telophase

8. The patient with diabetes mellitus has been delivered in hospital in the state of unconsciousness. Arterial pressure is low. The patient has acidosis. Point substances, which accumulation in the blood results in these manifestations:
a. Amino acids
b. High fatty acids
c. Cholesterol esters
*d. Ketone bodies
e. Monosaccharides

9. A 58-year-old female has undergone surgery for necrotic bowel. Despite having been treated with antibiotics, on postoperative day 5, she develops symptoms (fever, hypotension, tachycardia, declining urine output, and confusion) consistent with septic shock. What hemodynamic support would be helpful?
*a. Fluids and Dobutamine infusion
b. Antibiotic administration
c. Atropine administration
d. Fluid administration
e. Dobutamine infusion

10. It was proved that a molecule of immature mRNA (precursor mRNA) contained more triplets than amino acids found in the synthesized protein. The reason for that is that translation is normally preceded by:
a. Replication
*b. Processing
c. Reparation
d. Initiation
e. Mutation

11. Examination of a patient revealed reduced contents of magnesium ions that are necessary for attachment of ribosomes to the granular endoplasmatic reticulum. It is known that it causes disturbance of protein biosynthesis. What stage of protein biosynthesis will be disturbed?
a. Replication
b. Transcription
*c. Translation
d. Aminoacid activation
e. Termination

12. Patient 54 year-old, 5th day after surgical operation. Blood count: Erythrocytes 3,61012/l, Hemoglobin 95 g/l, Erythrocyte
a. Chronic posthemorragic anemia
*b. Acute posthemorragic anemia
c. Anemia from iron deficiency
d. Acquired hemolytic anemia
e. Hypoplastic anemia

13. The patient with pneumonia was treated with antibiotics for a long period. After treatment patient complains of frequent and watery stool, abdomenal pain. What is the reason of intestine function disorder?
a. Antibiotics toxic influence on the GIT
b. Bacteria toxins influence
c. Hereditary enzyme defect
*d. Intestinal disbacteriosis development
e. Autoimmune reaction development

14. A 16 year-old patient got numerous traumas in automobile accident. Now the patient is haning a shock. АP - 80/60 mm Hg. daily urine volume 60-80 ml. What pathogenic mechanism leads to kidneys function violation?
a. Trauma of the urinary bladder
*b. Decreased hydrostatic pressure in glomerular capillaries
c. Increased pressure in Bowman
d. Increased osmotic pressure in glomerular capillaries
e. Increased vasopressin blood concentration

15. A 46 year-old patient has complained of headache, fatigue, thirst, pains in the spine and joints for the last 2 years. Clinically observed disproportional enlargement of hands, feet, nose, superciliary arches. He notes that he needed to buy bigger shoes three times. What is the main reason of such disproportional enlargement of different parts of the body?
a. Joints chronic inflammation development
*b. Cartilaginous tissue proliferation under growth hormone influence
c. Joints dystrophy development
d. Increased sensitivity of the tissues to growth hormone
e. Increased sensitivity of the tissues to insulin

16. A 55-year-old patient with continuing ventricular arrhythmias was admitted to the hospital. The patient is taking timolol drops for glaucoma, daily insulin injections for diabetes mellitus, and an ACE inhibitor for hypertension. You have decided to use phenytoin instead of procainamide. What is the reason?
a. The local anesthetic effect of procainamide would potentiate diabetes
b. The local anesthetic effect of procainamide would aggravate the hypertension
c. The cholinergic effects of procainamide would aggravate the diabetes
*d. The anticholinergic effect of procainamide would aggravate glaucoma
e. The hypertensive effects of procainamide would aggravate the hypertension

17. A 25-year-old woman with red and itchy eczematoid dermatitis visits your office. She had a dental procedure one day earlier with administration of a local anesthetic. There were no other findings, although she indicated that she had a history of allergic reactions. Which of the following drugs is most likely involved?
a. Bupivacaine
b. Etidocaine
c. Cocaine
d. Lidocaine
*e. Procaine

18. The CNS stimulation produced by methylxanthines, such as caffeine, is most likely due to the antagonism of one of the following receptors:
a. Glycine receptors
b. GABA receptors
c. Cholinergic muscarinic receptors
*d. Adenosine receptors
e. Glutamate receptors

19. Patients with similar complaints applied to the doctor: weakness, pain in the intestines, disorder of GIT. Examination of the faeces revealed that one patient with four nucleus cysts should be hospitalized immidiately. For what protozoa are such cysts typical?
a. Lamblia
*b. Dysenteric amoeba
c. Balantidium
d. Intestinal amoeba
e. Trichomonas

20. According to the data of WHO, for about 250 mln of Earth population fall ill with malaria. This disease is mostly spread in tropical and subtropical regions. Range of its spread falls into the areal of the following mosquitoes:
a. Mansonia
b. Culiseta
c. Culex
d. Aedes
*e. Anopheles

21. Labeled aminoacids alanine and tryptophane were introducted to a mouse in order to study localization of protein biosynthesis in its cells. Around what organellas will the accumulation of labeled aminoacids be observed?
a. Agranular endoplasmic reticulum
b. Lysosomes
c. Golgi apparatus
*d. Ribosomes
e. Cell centre

22. Highly injured person gradually died. Please choose the indicator of biological death:
*a. Autolysis and decay in the cells
b. Loss of consciousness
c. Absence of movements
d. Absence of palpitation
e. Disarray of chemical processes

23. In some regions of South Africa there is a spread sickle-shaped cell anemia, in which erythrocytes have shape of a sickle as a result of substitution of glutamin by valine in the hemoglobin molecule. What is the cause of this disease?
*a. Gene mutation
b. Crossingover
c. Transduction
d. Genomic mutations
e. Disturbance of mechanisms of genetic information realization

24. A female patient consulted a physician about digestive disorder, extended abdominal pain. Examination revealed drastic decrease in hemoglobin concentration. It is known from the anamnesis that while living in the Far East the patient used to eat freshly-salted caviar. Some relatives living with her had the similar condition. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Echinococcosis
b. Trichiniasis
c. Ascaridiasis
*d. Diphyllobothriasis
e. Teniasis

25. On autopsy of a still-born infant it is revealed heart development abnormalities: ventricles are not separated, originates from the right part single arterial trunk. For what class of vertebrate is such heart construction characteristic?
a. Reptiles
b. Fishes
*c. Amphibian
d. Mammals
e. Birds

26. If strong oxidizers get into the bloodstream, a methemoglobin is formed. It is a compound, where iron (II) becomes iron (III). What has to be done to save the patient?
a. He has to be calmed down and put to bed
b. Patient has to be exposed to the fresh air
*c. Interchangeable hemotransfusion has to be done
d. He has to be given pure oxygen
e. Respiratory centers have to be stimulated

27. A 10-year-old child complains of weakness, nausea, irritability. Helminthes of white color and 5-10 mm long were found on the underwear. On microscopy of the scrape from the perianal folds achromic ova of the unsymmetrical form were revealed. Indicate what helminth is parasiting on the child?
a. Trichina
b. Trichuris
c. Ascaris lumbricoides
d. Ancylostoma duodenalis
*e. Enterobins vermicularis

28. Parents with ill child came to the infectionist. They worked in one of the Asian countries for a long time. Child has eathy colored skin, loss of appetite, laxity, enlarged liver, spleen, peripheral glands. What protozoan illness can this child have?
a. Balantidiasis
b. Toxoplasmosis
c. Lambliasis
*d. Visceral leishmaniasis
e. Amebiasis

29. White-haired, with blue eyes girl was born in healthy parents. Irritability, anxiety, troubled sleep and feeding developed in the first months of life of the infant. What method of genetic investigation should be used for the exact diagnosis?
a. Genealogical
b. Population-statistical
c. Cytological
d. Twin
*e. Biochemical

30. The calcium canals of cardiomyocytes have been blocked on an isolated rabbits heart. What changes in the hearts activity can happen as a result?
a. Heart stops in systole
b. Heart stops in diastole
c. Decreased heart beat rate
d. Decreased force of the contraction
*e. Decreased rate and force of heart beat

31. After the trauma, the patients right n.vagus was damaged. Which violation of the cardiac activity is possible in this case?
a. Block of a conductivity in the atrio-ventricular node
b. Arrhythmia
c. Violation of the automatism of a atrio-ventricular node
d. Violation of a conductivity in the right auricle
*e. Violation of the automatism of a Kiss-Fleck node

32. While studing of the family tree with history of hypertrichosis (hyperhirsutism of the ear) this sign was founded only in the men and it was inherited from father to the son. Define the type of hypertrichosis inheritance?
a. Connected with
*b. Connected with Y-chromosome
c. Autosomal-dominant
d. Autosomal- recessive
e. Connected with

33. In the perianal folds of a 5-year-old girl her mother has found some white worms that caused itch and anxiety in the child. The worms were sent to the laboratory. During examination the physician saw white filiform helminths 0,5-1 cm long, with pointed ends, some helminths had twisted ends. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diphyllobothriasis
b. Ascaridiasis
c. Opisthorchiasis
*d. Enterobiasis
e. Teniasis

34. Part of the DNA chain turned about 180 degree due to gamma radiation. What type of mutation took place in the DNA chain?
a. Translocation
b. Replication
c. Deletion
d. Doubling
*e. Inversion

35. Chromosomes were revealed on karyotype examination of the 5-year-old girl. One of the 15th pair of chromosomes is longer than usual due to connected chromosome from the 21 pair. What type of mutation does this girl have?
a. Duplication
*b. Translocation
c. Inversion
d. Deletion
e. Insufficiency

36. A pregnant woman had been having toxicosis with severe repeated vomiting for 24 hours. In the end of the day there appeared tetanic convulsions and fluid loss. What shift of acid-base state caused these changes?
*a. Excretory alkalosis
b. Gaseous acidosis
c. Excretory acidosis
d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Gaseous alkalosis

37. Genetic structure of eukaryote is exon-intron-exon. This structure-functional organization of gene caused transcription peculiarities. What will be pro-i-RNA according to the schema?
a. Exon-exon-intron
b. Intron-exon
c. Exon-intron
*d. Exon-intron-exon
e. Exon-exon

38. Medical examination at the military registration and enlistment office revealed that a 15-year-old boy was high, with eunuchoid body proportions, gynecomastia, female pattern of pubic hair distribution. The boy had also fat deposits on the thighs, no facial hair, high voice, subnormal intelligence quotient. Which karyotype corresponds with this disease?
a. 46, XY
b. 47, XXX
c. 45, XO
d. 46, XX
*e. 47, XXY

39. RNA that contains AIDS virus penetrated into a leukocyte and by means of reverse transcriptase forced a cell to synthetize a viral DNA. This process is based upon:
a. Reverse translation
b. Operon repression
*c. Reverse transcription
d. Operon depression
e. Convariant replication

40. According to the model of double DNA helix that was suggested by Watson and Creek, it was established that one of chains would not be lost during replication and the second chain would be synthesized complementary to the first one. What way of replication is it?
*a. Semiconservative
b. Identical
c. Conservative
d. Dispersed
e. Analogous

41. A teenager was irradiated with high radiation dose that resulted in serious damages of lymphoid system, lysis of many lymphocytes. Restoration of normal hemogram is possible due to the functioning of the following gland:
*a. Thymus
b. Liver
c. Adrenal
d. Pancreas
e. Thyroid

42. It was revealed that T-lymphocytes were affected by HIV. Virus enzyme - reverse transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) - catalyzes the synthesis of:
a. Virus informational RNA on the matrix of DNA
b. Viral DNA on DNA matrix
c. mRNA on the matrix of virus protein
*d. DNA on the matrix of virus mRNA
e. DNA on virus ribosomal RNA

43. A patient after pathological process has a thickened alveolar membrane. The direct consequence of the process will be the reduction of:
a. Oxygen capacity of blood
b. Alveolar lung ventilation
c. Reserve expiratiory capacity
*d. Diffuse lung capacity
e. Minute respiratory capacity

44. Autopsy of a newborn boy revealed polydactylia, microcephalia, cheiloschisis and uranoschisis as well as hypertrophy of parenchimatous organs. These defects correspond with the description of Pataus syndrome. What is the most probable cause of this pathology?
a. Partial monosomy
*b. Trisomy of the 13th chromosome
c. Trisomy of the 21st chromosome
d. Trisomy of the 18th chromosome
e. Nondisjunction of sex chromosomes

45. A patient has symptoms of inflammation of urogenital tracts. Examination of a vaginal smear revealed big monocellular, pear-shaped organisms with the pointed spike at the posterior end of body, big nucleus and undulating membrane. What protozoa were found in the smear?
a. Trichomonas hominis
b. Trypanosoma gambiense
c. Lamblia intestinalis
*d. Trichomonas vaginalis
e. Trichomonas buccalis

46. During regular examination of schoolchildren it was revealed that a 10 year old girl had asymmetric oval eggs with a larva in the scrape from her perianal folds. What diagnosis should be made?
a. Trichocephalosis
b. Ankylostomiasis
c. Ascariasis
d. Amebiasis
*e. Enterobiasis

47. A woman delivered a dead child with multiple developmental defects. What protozoan disease might have caused the intrauterine death?
a. Malaria
b. Leishmaniasis
*c. Toxoplasmosis
d. Amebiasis
e. Lambliasis

48. Tuberculosis can be treated by means of combined chemotherapy that includes substances with different mechanisms of action.What antituberculous medication inhibits transcription of RNA into DNA in mycobacteria?
a. Ethionamide
b. Para-aminosalicylic acid
c. Isoniazid
d. Streptomycin
*e. Rifampicin

49. The body temperature of a patient with an infectious disease rises once in two days up to 39,5-40,5 degrees and stays so for about an hour and then drops to the initial level. What type of fever is it?
a. Continued
*b. Intermitting
c. Hectic
d. Recurrent
e. Septic

50. Larvae were detected occasionally on the microscopic examination of the sputum of the patient with pneumonia. Eosinophiles were detected on the blood examination. What helminthiasis can be diagnosed?
a. Paragonimiasis
b. Opistorchis
c. Enterobiosis
d. Trichocephaliasis
*e. Ascariasis

51. You are studying functioning of a bacteria operon. The operator gene has been released from the repressor gene. Immediately after this the following process will start in the cell:
a. Repression
*b. Transcription
c. Replication
d. Translation
e. Processing

52. While studying maximally spiralized chromosomes of human karyotype the process of cell division was stopped in the following phase:
a. Anaphase
b. Telophase
c. Prophase
d. Interphase
*e. Metaphase

53. It is known that the gene responsible for development of blood groups according to AB0 system has three allele variants. If a man has IV blood group, it can be explained by the following variability form:
a. Mutational
b. Genocopy
c. Phenocopy
*d. Combinative
e. Phenotypic

54. A patient complains of pain in the area of his liver. Duodenal intubation revealed yellowish, oval, narrowed at the poles eggs with an operculum at the end. Size of these eggs is the smallest among all helminth eggs. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Teniasis
b. Echinococcosis
c. Diphyllobothriasis
*d. Opisthorchosis
e. Beef tapeworm infection

55. A patient consulted an urologist about pain during urination. Analysis of his urine taken in the daytime revealed eggs with a characteristic sharp point. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient has recently returned from Australia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Opisthorchiasis
b. Dicroceliasis
c. Intestinal schistosomiasis
d. Japanese schistosomiasis
*e. Urogenital schistosomiasis

56. A child complains of general weakness, loss of appetite, a troubled sleep, itching in the perianal area. The provisional diagnosis is enterobiasis. In order to specify this diagnosis it is necessary to perform:
a. Roentgenoscopy
b. Immune diagnostics
c. Duodenal contents analysis
*d. Scraping from perianal folds
e. Biopsy of muscle tissue

57. The cell of the laboratory animal was overdosed with Roentgen rays. As a result albuminous fragments formed in the cytoplasm. What cell organoid will take part at their utilization?
a. Endoplasmic reticulum
b. Cells centre
c. Golgi complex
d. Ribosome
*e. Lysosomes

58. In course of practical training students studied a stained blood smear of a mouse with bacteria phagocyted by leukocytes. What cell organella completes digestion of these bacteria?
*a. Lisosomes
b. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
c. Ribosomes
d. Golgi apparatus
e. Mytochondrions

59. 
*a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

60. Two days after consumption of smoked pork a patient got face and eye-lid edemata, gastrointestinal disturbances, abrupt temperature rise, muscle pain. Blood analysis showed full-blown eosinophilia. What helminth could the patient be infected with?
a. Hookworm
*b. Trichina
c. Ascarid
d. Pinworm
e. Whipworm

61. A lymph node punctate of a patient with suspected protozoal disease was examined. Examination of the stained specimen (Romanovskys stain) revealed some crescent bodies with pointed end, blue cytoplasm and red nucleus. What protozoan were revealed in the smears?
*a. Toxoplasms
b. Dermotropic leishmania
c. Trypanosomes
d. Viscerotropic leishmania
e. Malarial plasmodiums

62. The guide of the scientific expedition in India was native who always was with his dog. What invasive diseases can be transmitted by the dog if it is the source of invasion?
a. Teniasis
b. Dicroceliasis
c. Fascioliasis
*d. Echinococcosis
e. Paragonimiasis

63. A patient has acne on his face. Microspcopic examination of scrapings from the affected areas revealed living porrect vermiform arthropoda 0,2-0,5 mm large with four pairs of short extremities in the front part of their bodies. What is the laboratory diagnosis?
*a. Demodicosis
b. Myiasis
c. Phthiriasis
d. Pediculosis
e. Scabies

64. 
*a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

65. Examination of cell culture got from a patient with lysosomal pathology revealed accumulation of great quantity of lipids in the lysosomes. What of the following diseases is this disturbance typical for?
a. Wilson disease
b. Galactosemia
c. Gout
d. Phenylketonuria
*e. Tay-Sachs disease

66. A 39-year-old woman has madescence in the region of mammilla, a small ulcer with inflammatory hyperemia and cutaneous edema. Histologic examination of tissue sampling from this area revealed in the malpighian layer of thickened epidermis atypical cells with light and optically empty cytoplasm, with no intracellular bridges. Such cells were also found in the orifice of big mammal gland ducts. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Pagets disease
b. Basal cell carcinoma
c. Melanocarcinoma
d. Epidermoid cancer
e. Intraductal cancer

67. Golgi complex exports substances from a cell due to the fusion of the membrane saccule with the cell membrane. The saccule contents flows out. What process is it?
a. Active transport
b. Endocytosis
*c. Exocytosis
d. Facilitated diffusion
e. All answers are false

68. A patient working at a pig farm complains about paroxysmal abdominal pain, liquid feces with admixtures of mucus and blood, headache, weakness, fever. Examination of large intestine revealed ulcers from 1 mm up to several cm large, feces contained oval unicellular organisms with cilia. What disease should be suspected?
a. Lambliasis
b. Trichomoniasis
c. Amebiasis
d. Toxoplasmosis
*e. Balantidiasis

69. A boy found a spider with the following morphological characteristics: it is 2 cm long, has roundish black abdomen with two rows of red spots on its dorsal side; four pairs of jointed limbs are covered with small black hairs. What arthropod is it?
*a. Karakurt spider
b. Solpuga
c. Tarantula
d. Mite
e. Scorpion

70. Normal, actively dividing cells of human red bone marrow are analyzed. What number of cells chromosomes is typical for G1 period?
a. 45
b. 23
c. 48
d. 47
*e. 46

71. A man has worked in an African country for 3 years. A month after his return to Ukraine he consulted an ophthalmologist and complained about eye ache, eyelid edema, lacrimation and temporary visual impairment. Underneath the eye conjunctiva the doctor revealed helminths 30-50 mm long with elongated filiform body. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Enterobiasis
b. Trichocephaliasis
c. Diphyllobothriasis
d. Ascaridiasis
*e. Filariasis

72. Life cycle of a cell includes the process of DNA autoreduplication. As a result of it monochromatid chromosomes turn into bichromatid ones. What period of cell cycle does this phenomenon fall into?
*a. S
b. G1
c. M
d. G2
e. Go

73. A 28-year-old female patient consulted a gynecologist about sterility. Examination revealed underdeveloped ovaries and uterus, irregular menstrual cycle. Analysis of the sex chromatin revealed 2 Barr bodies in most somatic cells. What chromosome disease is most likely?
a. Edwards syndrome
b. Klinefelters syndrome
c. Turners syndrome
*d. Triple X syndrome
e. Pataus syndrome

74. A cell at the stage of mitosis anaphase was stimulated by colchicine that inhibits chromosome separation to the poles. What type of mutation will be caused?
a. Duplication
b. Translocation
c. Inversion
d. Deletion
*e. Polyploidy

75. A patient in a transplantation centre underwent heart transplantation. The organ was taken from a donor who died in a road accident. Foreign heart can be rejected as a result of development of transplantation immunity. It is usually prevented by means of:
*a. Immunosuppressors
b. Ultrasound
c. X-ray therapy
d. Enzymes
e. Chemotherapy

76. Following exposure to radiation a lot of mutant cells appeared in a patient. Some time later most of them were detected and destroyed by the following cells of the immune system:
a. Stem cells
*b. T-lymphocytes-killers
c. T-lymphocytes-supressors
d. Plasmoblasts
e. B-lymphocyte

77. A gynaecologist was examining a patient and revealed symptoms of genital tract inflammation. A smear from vagina contains pyriform protozoa with a spine, flagella at their front; there is also an undulating membrane. What disease can be suspected?
a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Balantidiasis
c. Lambliasis
d. Intestinal trichomoniasis
*e. Urogenital trichomoniasis

78. A boy has I (I0I0) blood group and his sister has IV (IAIB) blood group. What blood groups do their parents have?
a. II (IАIА) and III (IВI0)
b. III (IВI0) and IV (IAIB)
c. I (I0I0) and III (IВI0)
*d. II (IАI0) and III (IВI0)
e. I (I0I0) and IV (IAIB)

79. For the purpose of myocardium infarction treatment a patient was injected with embryonal stem cells derived from this very patient by means of therapeutic cloning . What transplantation type is it?
a. Xenotransplantation
b. Allotransplantation
*c. Autotransplantation
d. Isotransplantation
e. Heterotransplantation

80. An alcoholic woman has born a girl with mental and physical developmental lag. Doctors diagnosed the girl with fetal alcohol syndrome. What effect is the cause of the girls state?
*a. Teratogenic
b. Malignization
c. Mechanic
d. Carcinogenic
e. Mutagenic

81. Hartnup disease is caused by point mutation of only one gene which results in disturbance of tryptophane absorption in the bowels and its resorption in the renal tubules. It is the reason for disorder of both digestive and urination systems. What genetic phenomenon is observed in this case?
a. Semidominance
*b. Pleiotropy
c. Polymery
d. Complementary interaction
e. Codominance

82. Cytogenetic examination of a patient with reproductive dysfunction revealed normal karyotype 46
a. Duplication
b. Monomorphism
c. Inversion
d. Transposition
*e. Mosaicism

