1. A 10-year-old child complains of weakness, nausea, irritability. Helminthes of while color and 5-10 mm long were found on the underwear. On microscopy of the scrape from the perianal folds achromic ovums of unsymmetrical form were revealed. Indicate what helminth is parasiting on the child?
a. Trichuris
b. Ancylostoma duodenalis
*c. Enterobins vermicularis
d. Trichina
e. Ascaris lumbricoides

2. A patient has been brought to the hospital with the complaints of headache, pain in left hypochondrium. He has been ill for 1,5 weeks. The sudden illness began with the increase of body temperature up to 39.9C. In 3 hours the temperature decreased and hydropoiesis began. The attacks repeat rhythmically in 48 hours. The patient had visited one an African country. The doctors have suspected malaria. What method of laboratory diagnostics is necessary to use?
a. Immunological tests
b. Examination of vaginal and urethral discharge
c. Urine examination
*d. Blood examination
e. Stool examination

3. Slime, blood and protozoa 30-200 microns of length have been revealed in a mans feces. The body is covered with cilias and has correct oval form with a little bit narrowed forward and wide round shaped back end. On the forward end a mouth is visible. In cytoplasm there are two nucleuses and two short vacuoles. For whom are the described attributes typical?
*a. Balantidium
b. Dysenteric amoeba
c. Intestinal amoeba
d. Trichomonas
e. Lamblia

4. A patient in three weeks after acute myocardial infarction has pain in the heart and joints and pneumonia. What is the main mechanism of development of post-infarction Dressler
a. Ischemia of myocardium
b. Secondary infection
c. Vessels thrombosis
*d. Autoimmune inflammation
e. Resorption of enzymes from necrotized area of myocardium

5. During the fetal period of the development in the vascular system of the fetus large arterial (Botallos) duct is functioning which converts into lig. arteriosum after birth. What anatomical formations does this duct connect between each other?
a. Right and left auricle
b. Pulmonary trunk and superior vena cava
c. Aorta and superior vena cava
*d. Pulmonary trunk and aorta
e. Aorta and inferior vena cava

6. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
*d. 
e. 

7. Children often have heavy nasal breathing resulting from excessive development of lymphoid tissue of pharyngeal mucous membrane. What tonsils growth may cause this effect?
a. Tonsilla lingualis
b. Tonsilla palatina
*c. Tonsilla pharyngea
d. Tonsilla tubaria
e. All above mentioned tonsils

8. In course of laparotomy a surgeon revealed gangrenous lesion of descending colon. It was caused by thrombosis of the following artery:
a. Median colic
b. Ileocolic
c. Superior mesenteric artery
*d. Sinister colic
e. Dexter colic

9. Three separate bones connected with cartilage in the area of pelvis cavity are noticed on the X-ray of the pelvis. What are these bones?
a. Sciatic, femoral, sacral
b. Pubic, sciatic, femoral
*c. Iliac, pubic, sciatic
d. Iliac, sacral, coccyx
e. Sacral, pubic, coccyx

10. A 60-year-old patient has reduced perception of high-frequency sounds. What structures disorder of auditory analizer caused these changes?
a. Muscles of middle ear
b. Tympanic membrane
c. Main membrane of cochlea near helicotrema
d. Eustachian tube
*e. Main membrane of cochlea near the oval window

11. The alveolar ventilation of the patient is 5 L/min, the breath frequency is 10 per/min, and the tidal volume is 700 ml. What is the patients dead space ventilation?
a. -
*b. 2,0 L/min
c. 1,0 L/min
d. 0,7 L/min
e. 4,3 L/min

12. During investigation of patient, it was found formation in the white substance of cerebral hemispheres with location in the knee and frontal part of posterior crus of internal capsule. Fibres of what conductive tract of the brain will be disrupted?
a. Tr. frontopontinus
b. Tr. parietooccipitopontinus
c. Tr. frontothalamicus
d. 
*e. Tr. pyramidalis

13. Only one factor can influence the charge of amino acid radicals in the active centre of enzyme. Name this factor:
a. The presence of a competitive inhibitor
b. The surplus of a product
c. Pressure
d. Temperature
*e. pH medium

14. Succinate dehydrogenase catalyses the dehydrogenation of succinate. Malonic acid HOOC—CH2–COOH is used to interrupt the action of this enzyme. Choose the inhibition type:
a. Limited proteolysis
b. Dephosphorylation
c. Allosteric
d. Non-competitive
*e. Competitive

15. The gluconeogenesis is activated in the liver after intensive physical trainings .What substance is utilized in gluconeogenesis first of all in this case:
a. Glutamate
b. Alanine
c. Pyruvate
d. Glucose
*e. Lactate

16. A patient with a stab wound of the anterior stomach wall is in surgical care. What formation of abdominal cavity did the stomach contents get into?
a. Hepatic bursa
b. Omental bursa
*c. Antegastrial bursa
d. Left mesenteric sinus
e. Right mesenteric sinus

17. A patient had been taking glucocorticoids for a long time. When the preparation was withdrawn he developed the symptoms of disease aggravation, decreased blood pressure and weakness. What is the reason of this condition?
a. Sensibilization
b. Hyperproduction of ACTH
*c. Appearance of adrenal insufficiency
d. Habituation
e. Cumulation

18. A patient has tissue ischemia below the knee joint accompanied with intermittent claudication. What artery occlusion should be suspected?
a. Posterior tibial artery
b. Peroneal artery
*c. Popliteal artery
d. Anterior tibial artery
e. Proximal part of femoral artery

19. A patient, who suffers from congenital erythropoietic porphyria, has skin photosensitivity. The accumulation of what compound in the skin can cause it?
*a. Uroporphyrinogen 1
b. Uroporphyrinogen 2
c. Heme
d. Coproporphyrinogen 3
e. Protoporphyrin

20. A patient has a malignisation of thoracic part of esophagus. What lymphatic nodes are regional for this organ?
*a. Anulus lymphaticus cardiae
b. Nodi lymphatici prevertebralis
c. Nodi lymphatici mediastinales posteriores
d. Nodi lymphatici pericardiales laterales
e. Nodi lymphatici paratrachealis

21. The patient has come to the hospital from the smelting workshop in the condition of hyperthermia. What is the direct cause of loss of consciousness at the heat stroke?
a. Decrease of heart output
b. Dilatation of peripheral vessels
c. Arterial pressure drop
d. Increased water loss through sweating
*e. Decreased brain blood supply

22. A patients blood was analyzed and the decreased erythrocyte
a. Vitamin B deficiency
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Hepatitis
d. Splenomegaly
*e. Polycytemia

23. A 55-year-old patien was hospitalized in result of the trauma of the medial group of femoral muscles. What kind of movements is the patient unable to do?
a. Extension of femur
b. Suppination of femur
c. Abduction of femur
d. Flexion of femur
*e. Adduction of femur

24. A mother of a newborn complains of her babys constant belching with undigested milk. Which developmental anomaly is it an evidence of?
a. Anal atresia
b. Esophageal fistula
c. Labium leporium
d. Faux lupinum
*e. Esophageal atresia

25. During the endoscopy the inflammation of a major papilla of the duodenum and the disturbances of bile secretion were found. In which part of duodenum were the problems found?
a. Bulb
b. Ascendant part
*c. Descendent part
d. Upper horizontal part
e. Lower horizontal part

26. A 18-year-old patient came to the out-patient department with the complaints of bleeding trauma in the vestibule of his nose. On examination: the mechanical injure of the mucous layer of the vestibule without continuation into nasal cavity proper. What is the boundary between the vestibule and nasal cavity proper?
a. Nostrils
*b. Nasal limen
c. Nasal septa
d. Nasal roller
e. Choanes

27. A 32-year-old patient has been diagnosed with bartholinitis (inflammation of Bartholins glands ). In what part of the female urogenital system are the Bartholins glands located?
a. The clitoris
b. The labia minor
*c. The labia major
d. The vagina
e. The uterus

28. A 50 year-old patient had hemorrhage of the brain and was taken to the hospital. The place of hemorrhage was revealed on the lateral hemispheres surfaces during the medical examination. What artety was injured ?
a. The posterior cerebral artery
b. The anterior cerebral artery
*c. The middle cerebral artery
d. The anterior communicating artery
e. The posterior communicating artery

29. A 30-year-old patient was hospitalized due to bleeding of the facial artery . What place on the face has to be pressed to stop bleeding?
*a. The mandible’s edge
b. The mandible’s branch
c. The molar bone
d. The nose’s back
e. The mental process

30. A 19 year-old patient was diagnosed with appendicitis and was hospitalized. The surgical operation on ablating appendix vermiformis is to be performed. What artery must be fixed to stop bleeding during the surgical operation?
a. The colica sinistra
b. The iliac
c. The colica dextra
d. The colica media
*e. The ileocolic artery

31. A 45-year-old man fell on the right knee and felt the acute pain in the joint. On examination: severe edema on the anterior surface of the knee joint. Crunching sounds are heard while moving the joint. Which bone is destroyed?
a. Head of the thigh bone
*b. Knee-cap
c. Left epicondyle of the thigh
d. Neck of the thigh bone
e. Right epicondyle of the thigh

32. During the operation on the hip joint of a 5-year-old child her ligament was damaged which caused bleeding.What ligament was damaged?
a. Perpendicular of the acetabule
b. Pubofemoral
c. Ischiofemoral
*d. The head of the thigh
e. Iliofemoral

33. A 6-year-old child fell on the cutting object and traumatized soft tissues between tibia and fibula . What kind of bone connection was injured?
a. Fontanel
b. Gomphosis
c. Suture
d. Ligament
*e. Membrane

34. Usually the intravenous injection is done into median cubital vein because it is slightly movable due to fixation by the soft tissues. What does it fix in the cubital fossa?
a. Brachioradial muscle
b. Anconeus muscle
c. Tendon of the triceps muscle
d. Brachial muscle
*e. Aponeurosis of biceps muscle

35. Victim has elbow joint trauma with avulsion of medial epicondyle of humerus. What nerve can be damaged in this trauma?
a. Cardiac cutaneous nerve
b. Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
c. Radial
d. Musculocutaneous nerve
*e. Ulnar

36. A 54-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with complaints of pain in the right subcostal region, vomiting with blood. Objectively: enlarged liver, varicose veins in the stomach and esophagus. Disfunction of what vessel is likely to be?
a. Aorta abdominalis
b. Vena cava superior
c. Vena cava inferior
*d. Vena porta
e. Vena hepatica

37. Examination of a 2-year-old child revealed physical developmental lag, the child often has pneumonias. The child was diagnosed with nonclosure of ductus arteriosus. Haemodynamics disorder was caused by the intercommunication of the following vessels:
a. Aorta and pulmonary veins
*b. Aorta and pulmonary trunk
c. Superior cava and aorta
d. Pulmonary trunk and pulmonary veins
e. Superior cava and pulmonary trunk

38. A 5-year-old child was admitted to the otorhinolaryngological department with diagnosis - suppurative inflammation of the middle ear. Disease started from the inflammation of the nasopharynx. Through the what canal of the temporal bone did the infection get into the tympanic cavity?
a. Carotid canal
b. Tympanic Canaliculus tympanicus
*c. Musculortubal canal
d. Canaliculus chordal tympani
e. Canaliculi caroticotympanici

39. After breathing with poisonous steams there is an increased quantity of slime in respiratory passages of a chemical production worker. What of respiratory tract epithelial cells participate in mucousa moistening?
a. Endocrine cells
b. Fibroblasts
*c. Goblet cells
d. Langergans cells
e. Intercalated cells

40. A patient suffering from thyrotoxicosis symptoms of vegetoasthenic syndrome was revealed. What of the following would show the histological appearance of a thyroid gland being stimulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)?
a. Decreased numbers of follicular cells
b. An abundance of colloid in the lumen of the follicle
c. Decreased numbers of parafollicular capillaries
*d. Columnar-shaped follicular cells
e. Increased numbers of parafollicular cells

41. The reason of occurrence of some diseases of an oral cavity is connected with structural peculiarities of its mucous membrane. What morphological attributes characterize these features?
*a. No muscularis mucosa, stratified squamous epithelium
b. Simple columnar ciliated epithelium
c. Transitional epithelium, no muscularis mucosa
d. Well developed muscularis, no submucosa
e. Transitional epithelium, no submucosa

42. There is the change of teeth at the 6-8-year-old children: deciduous are replaced by permanent. What embrionic tissues are the sources of formation of permanent teeth tissues?
a. Entodermal epithelium of a tooth plate and mesenhime
b. I, II brachial arches
c. Entodermal epithelium and mesoderm
*d. Ectodermal epithelium of a tooth plate and mesenhime
e. Mesodermal epithelium and mesenhime

43. Inflammation of the tympanic cavity (purulent otitis media) was complicated by inflammation of mammillary process sockets. What wall of tympanic cavity did the pus penetrate into the sockets through?
a. Medial
b. Anterior
*c. Posterior
d. Lateral
e. Superior

44. A 19-year-old female suffers from tachycardia in rest condition, weight loss, excessive sweating, exophtalmos and irritability. What hormone would you expect to find elevated in her serum?
a. Insulin
*b. Thyroxine
c. Mineralocorticoids
d. Cortisol
e. ACTH

45. A 60-year-old patient was diagnosed with hypothalamic lateral nuclei stroke. What changes in patient
*a. The rejection of food
b. Depression
c. Unsatisfied hunger
d. Thirst
e. Aggressive behaviour

46. The process of heart transplantation determined the viability of myocardial cells. The determination of what myocardium parameter is the most important?
a. Concentration of oxygen in heart vessels
b. Heart temperature
*c. Rest potential of cardiomyocytes
d. Concentration of calcium-ions in myofibrils
e. Concentration of Ca-ions in heart vessels

47. It is necessary to take the cerebrospinal fluid from a patient with suspected inflammation of brain tunics. Diagnostic puncture was performed between the arches of the lumbar vertebras. During the puncture the needle went through the following ligament:
*a. Yellow (flaval)
b. Anterior longitudinal
c. Intertransverse
d. Posterior longitudinal
e. Iliolumbar

48. Nowadays about 50 minor bases have been found in the t-RNA structure besides the main four nitrogenous bases. Choose the minor nitrogenous base:
a. Adenine
b. Cytosine
c. Uracil
d. Cysteine
*e. Dihydrouracil

49. Obturative jaundice developed in a 60-year-old patient because of malignant tumour of the big papillary of the duodenal. Lumen of what anatomical structure is squeezed with tumour?
*a. Hepatopancreatic ampulla
b. Common hepatic duct
c. Left hepatic duct
d. Right hepatic duct
e. Cystic duct

50. The patient with thymoma (thymus gland tumour) has cyanosis, extention of subcutaneous venous net and edema of the soft tissues of face, neck, upper part of the trunk and upper extremities. What venous trunk is pressed with tumour?
a. Frontal jugular vein
*b. Superior vena cava
c. Clavicular vein
d. External jugular vein
e. Internal jugular vein

51. A patient operated on complicated appendicitis has the following changes of blood count: erythrocytes - 4,0cdot1012/l,
*a. Degenerative left shift
b. Regenerative left shift
c. Regeneratively-degenerative
d. Hyperregenerative
e. Right shift

52. Patient complains of frequent and difficult urination. Imperfection of what formation can cause it?
*a. Prostate
b. Bulb-uretic glands
c. Sperm bubbles
d. Testicle adnexa
e. Testicles

53. Child inspired button. Where is it likely to be?
a. In the trachea
b. In the left main bronchus
*c. In the right main bronchus
d. In the larynx
e. In the gullet

54. Vegetative abnormalities in the sleep, heat regulation, all kinds of metabolism, diabetes insipidus are developing in the patient due to grouth of the tumour in the III ventricle of brain. Irritation of the nucleus of what part of the brain can cause this symptoms?
a. Mesencephalic tegmentum
b. Cerebral peduncles (cruces cerebri)
*c. Hypothalamus
d. Pons cerebelli
e. Medulla

55. A patient with infectious mononucleosis had been taking glucocorticoids for two weeks. He was brought into remission, but he fell ill with acute attack of chronic tonsillitis. What action of glucocorticoids caused this complication?
a. Anti-inflammatory
b. Antiallergic
c. Antitoxic
*d. Immunosuppressive
e. Antishock

56. A 45-year-old man with domestic apper arm injuiry came to the trauma unit. The objective data are: there are no extension, adduction or pronation functions of the arm. What muscle damage caused this condition?
*a. Teres major
b. Teres minor
c. Supraspinous
d. Subspinous
e. Subscapular

57. A man with internal abdominal right side injury and suspicion of liver rupture was admitted to the traumatological department. In what peritonial structure will blood accumulate?
a. Fossa ischio-analis
b. Recessus duodenalis inferior
c. Bursa omentalis
d. Recessus intersigmoideus
*e. Excavatio rectovesicalis

58. A histological spacemen presents parenchymal organ, which has cortex and medulla. Cortex consists of epitheliocytes bars with blood capillaries between them; the bars form three zones. Medulla consists of chromaffinocytes and venous sinusoids. Which organ has these morphological features?
a. Kidney
b. Thymus
c. Thyroid
*d. Adrenal gland
e. Lymph node

59. After trauma a 44-year-old patient had a rupture of left palm muscle tendons and of the surface of blood vessels. After operation and removal of the most part of the necrotically changed muscle tissue the bloodstream was normalized. What vessels have helped with restoration of bloodstream?
*a. Arcus palmaris profundus
b. Aa. digitales palmares communes
c. Aa. perforantes
d. Aa. metacarpeae palmares
e. Arcus palmaris superficialis

60. A 45-year-old man applied to the trauma unit because of domestic shoulder trauma. Objectively: flexibility, reduction and pronation functions of the shoulder are absent. What muscle was injured?
a. Subscapular muscle
b. Infraspinous muscle
c. Supraspinous muscle
*d. Teres major muscle
e. Teres minor muscle

61. Ovarian tumour was diagnozed in the woman. Surgery was indicated. What ligament should be cut by the surgeon to disconnect the ovary and the uterus?
*a. The ovarial ligament
b. Lateral umbilical ligament
c. Round ligament of uterus
d. Suspensory ligament of ovary
e. Broad ligament of uterus

62. An old woman was hospitalized with acute pain, edema in the right hip joint; the movements in the joint are limited. Which bone or part of it was broken?
a. Condyle of the thigh
b. The body of the thigh bone
*c. The neck of the thigh
d. Pubic bone
e. Ischial bone

63. A 53-year-old female patient was diagnosed with liver rupture resulting from a blunt abdominal injury. The escaped blood will be assembled in the following anatomic formation:
a. Right mesenteric sinus
b. Vesicouterine pouch
*c. Rectouterine pouch
d. Omental bursa
e. Left mesenteric sinus

64. A patient complains about edemata of legs, skin cyanosis, small ulcers on one side of the lateral condyle. Examination revealed a swelling, enlarged veins, formation of nodes. The pathological process has started in the following vein:
a. V. iliaca externa
*b. V. saphena parva
c. V. femoralis
d. V. saphena magna
e. V. profunda femoris

65. A 70 year old female patient was diagnosed with fracture of left femoral neck accompanied by disruption of ligament of head of femur. The branch of the following artery is damaged:
a. External iliac
b. Femoral
*c. Obturator
d. Inferior gluteal
e. Internal pudendal

66. A woman underwent an operation on account of extrauterine (tubal) pregnancy. In course of the operation the surgeon should ligate the branches of the following arteries:
*a. Uterine and ovarian
b. Inferior cystic and ovarian
c. Uterine and inferior cystic
d. Uterine and superior cystic
e. Superior cystic and ovarian

67. A 6 month old baby ill with bronchitis was taken for an X-ray of chest. Apart of changes associated with bronchi the X-ray film showed a shadow of thymus gland. What might have caused such changes?
a. It is caused by thymus inflammation
b. It is caused by neoplastic process
c. Its the effect of bronchitis
d. It is caused by abnormal position
*e. The above-mentioned condition is a normal variant for this age

68. A 7-year-old child cant abduct the shoulder, raise it to the horizontal level. He can raise the hand to the face only with dorsal side with abduction of the shoulder (with help of supraspinous muscle ) - "bugler" arm. Active function of what muscle is absent?
a. Infraspinous
b. Teres minor
c. Teres major
*d. Deltoid
e. Pectoral major

69. A 7-year-old girl has signs of anemia. Laboratory examination revealed pyruvate kinase deficiency in erythrocytes. What process disturbance plays the main role in anemia development?
a. Oxidative phosphorylation
b. Peroxide decomposition
c. Aminoacids desamination
*d. Anaerobic glycolysis
e. Tissue respiration

70. A patient complained about being unable to adduct and abduct fingers in the metacarpophalangeal articulations towards and away from the 3rd finger. Which muscles function is impaired?
a. Lumbrical muscles
b. Long flexors of fingers
c. Extensors
*d. Interosseous muscles
e. Breviflexors of fingers

71. A 45-year-old patient was admitted to the surgical department with complaints of abrupt sharp pain in the epigastric region. After examination it was diagnosed: perforated ulcer of the posterior wall of the stomach. Where did content of the stomach flow out while perforation?
a. To the left mesenteric sinus
b. To the right mesenteric sinus
c. To the liver bursa
d. To the proventriculus sack
*e. To the omental bursa

72. A 25-year-old patient complained of the decreased vision. Accommodation disorders, dilated pupil, not reacting on the light were revealed on examination. Function of what muscles is disturbed?
a. Lateral rectus muscle, pupil narrowing
b. Pupil narrowing and dilating muscle
c. Pupil dilating muscle, ciliary
d. Inferior oblique muscle, ciliary
*e. Pupil narrowing muscle, ciliary

73. Microspecimen of spinal cord contains a nucleus that should be analyzed. Its neurons form motor endings in the skeletal muscles. What nucleus of spinal cord is meant?
a. Proper nucleus of the posterior horn
b. Proper nucleus of gray substance
c. Thoracic nucleus
d. Intermediate lateral nucleus
*e. Proper nucleus of the anterior horn

74. A man with cut wound of his right foot sole was admitted to the hospital ward. The patient has limited elevation of the lateral foot edge. In course of wound management the injury of a muscle tendon was revealed. What muscle is injured?
a. Triceps muscle of crus
b. Short peroneal
c. Anterior tibial
d. Long extensor muscle of toes
*e. Long peroneal

75. A 35 year old man with a trauma of his left hand was admitted to the traumatology department. Objectively: cut wound of palmar surface of left hand; middle phalanxes of II
a. Dorsal interosseous muscles
*b. Superficial finger flexor
c. Lumbrical muscles
d. Profound finger flexor
e. Palmar interosseous muscles

76. A 38-year-old patient came to a traumatology centre and complained about an injury of his right hand. Objectively: the patient has a cut wound in the region of the thenar eminence on the right hand; distal phalanx of the I finger cannot be flexed. What muscle was injured?
a. Short abductor muscle of thumb
b. Short flexor muscle of thumb
*c. Long flexor muscle of thumb
d. Opposer muscle of thumb
e. Abductor muscle of thumb

77. A patient with neuritis of femoral nerve has disturbed flexion of thigh as well as disturbed crus extension in the knee joint. What muscles function is disturbed?
*a. Quadriceps muscle of thigh
b. Triceps muscle of thigh
c. Semimembranous muscle
d. Semitendinous muscle
e. Biceps muscle of thigh

78. In the specimen of one of the parts of respiratory system a tubular organ was found. It has low epithelium, well developed muscular tunic, glands and cartilage are absent. Name this organ:
a. Major bronchs
b. Median bronchs
c. Trachea
d. Larynx
*e. Minor bronchs

79. Where should the cathetor for evacuation of the lymph from the thoracic lymph duct be inserted?
a. To the left inguinal vein
*b. To the left venous corner
c. To the superior vena cava
d. To the right venous corner
e. To the inferior vena cava

80. A patient has difficulties with hand movement. Examination revealed inflammation of common synovial sheath of flexor muscles. It is known from the patients anamnesis that he got a stab wound of finger a week ago. Which finger was most probably damaged?
a. Pollex
b. Index
c. Digitus anularis
*d. Digitus minimus
e. Digitus medius

81. An injured man has bleeding from branches of carotid artery. For a temporary arrest of bleeding it is necessary to press the carotid artery to the tubercle of a cervical vertebra. Which vertebra is it?
a. IV
b. V
*c. VI
d. III
e. II

82. As a result of an accident a patient has intense painfullness and edema of the anterior crus surface; dorsal flexion of foot is hindered. Function of which crus muscle is most likely to be disturbed?
a. M.flexor digitorum longus
b. M.peroneus longus
c. M.peroneus brevis
*d. M.tibialis anterior
e. M.flexor hallucis longus

83. A 40-year-old patient complains of intensive heartbeats, sweating, nausea, visual impairment, arm tremor, hypertension. From his anamnesis: 2 years ago he was diagnosed with pheochromocytoma. Hyperproduction of what hormones causes the given pathology?
a. Aldosterone
b. ACTH
c. Thyroidal hormones
*d. Catecholamines
e. Glucocorticoids

84. A patient who suffers from cancer of back of tongue has an intense bleeding as a result of affection of dorsal lingual artery by the tumour. What vessel should be ligated to stop bleeding?
a. Ascending pharyngeal artery
*b. Lingual artery
c. Deep lingual artery
d. Dorsal lingual artery
e. Facial artery

85. A 58-year-old patient with acute cardiac insufficiency has decreased volume of daily urine - oliguria. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
a. Drop of oncotic blood pressure
b. Decreased number of functioning glomerules
*c. Decreased glomerular filtration
d. Rise of hydrostatic blood pressure in capillars
e. Reduced permeamility of renal filter

86. An 18-year-old man was delivered to the hospital after a road accident. Examination at the traumatological department revealed multiple injuries of soft tissues of face in the region of the medial eye angle. The injuries caused massive haemorrhage. What arterial anastomosis might have been damaged in this region?
a. a. carotis externa et a. subclavia
b. a. subclavia et a. ophthalmica
c. a. carotis interna et a. ophthalmica
*d. a. carotis externa et a. carotis interna
e. a. carotis interna et a. subclavia

87. After a 2 y.o. child has had flu, there appeared complaints about ear ache. A doctor revealed hearing impairment and inflammation of the middle ear. How did the infection penetrate into the middle ear?
*a. Through the auditory tube
b. Through canalis caroticus
c. Through canalis nasolacrimalis
d. Through atrium mastoideum
e. Through foramen jugularis

88. Cerebral trauma caused increase of ammonia formation. What aminoacid takes part in removal of ammonia from cerebral tissue?
*a. Glutamic
b. Valine
c. Lisine
d. Tryptophan
e. Tyrosine

89. A 40-year-old woman was admitted to the infectious diseases department with high body temperature. Objectively: marked meningeal symptoms. A spinal cord punction was made. What anatomic formation was puncturated?
*a. Spatium subarachnoideum
b. Spatium epidurale
c. Cisterna cerebellomedullaris posterior
d. Cavum trigeminale
e. Spatium subdurale

90. After resection of the middle third of femoral artery obliterated by a thromb the lower extremity is supplied with blood due to the surgical bypass. Name an artery that plays the main role in reestablishment of blood flow:
*a. Deep femoral artery
b. Descending genicular artery
c. Deep external pudendal artery
d. Superficial epigastric artery
e. Superficial circumflex artery of hip bone

91. A patients knee joint doesnt extend, there is no knee-jerk reflex, skin sensitivity of the anterior femoral surface is disturbed. What nerve structures are damaged?
a. Superior gluteal nerve
b. Obturator nerve
c. Inferior gluteal nerve
*d. Femoral nerve
e. Big fibular nerve

92. The electronic microphoto of kidney fragment has exposed afferent glomerular arteriole, which has giant cells under its endothelium, containing secretory granules. Name the type of these cells:
a. Interstitial
*b. Juxtaglomerular
c. Smoothmuscular
d. Mesangial
e. Juxtavascular

93. A 50 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints about pain behind his breastbone, asphyxia during physical activity. Angiography revealed pathological changes in the posterior interventricular branch of the right coronary artery. What heart parts are affected?
*a. Posterior wall of the right and left ventricles
b. Anterior wall of the right and left ventricles
c. Right atrioventricular valve
d. Right atrium
e. Left atrium

94. A patient was admitted to the surgical department with suspected inflammation of Meckels diverticulum. What part of bowels should be examined in order to discover the diverticulum in course of an operation?
a. Jejunum
b. Duodenum
*c. Ileum
d. Caecum
e. Colon ascendens

95. Examination of a newborn boys genitals revealed a cleft of urethra that opens on the inferior surface of his penis. What developmental anomaly is meant?
*a. Hypospadia
b. Epispadia
c. Cryptorchism
d. Monorchism
e. Hermaphroditism

96. A patient complains about impaired evacuatory function of stomach (long-term retention of food in stomach). Examination revealed a tumour of initial part of duodenum. Specify localization of the tumour:
a. Pars descendens
b. Pars inferior
*c. Pars superior
d. Pars ascendens
e. Flexura duodeni inferior

97. A man after 1,5 litre blood loss has suddenly reduced diuresis. The increased secretion of what hormone caused such diuresis alteration?
*a. Vasopressin
b. Natriuretic
c. Parathormone
d. Cortisol
e. Corticotropin

98. A young man consulted a doctor about disturbed urination. Examination of his external genitals revealed that urethra is split on top and urine runs out of this opening. What anomaly of external genitals development is the case?
a. Hermaphroditism
b. Phimosis
*c. Epispadia
d. Paraphimosis
e. Hypospadia

99. A 35 year old patient applied to a doctor with complaints about having intense rhinitis and loss of sense of smell for a week. Objectively: nasal cavity contains a lot of mucus that covers mucous membrane and blocks olfactory receptors. In what part of nasal cavity are these receptors situated?
a. Median nasal turbinate
b. Common nasal meatus
c. Vestibule of nose
*d. Superior nasal turbinate
e. Inferior nasal turbinate

100. Inflammatory process of modified subserous layer around cervix of the uterus caused an intensive pain syndrome. In what region of genitals does the pathological process take place?
a. Mesometrium
b. Endometrium
c. Perimetrium
*d. Parametrium
e. Myometrium

101. In course of an operation surgeon removed a part of a lung that was ventilated by a tertiary bronchus accompanied by branches of pulmonary artery and other vessels. What part of a lung was removed?
a. Pulmonary lobule
*b. Bronchopulmonary segment
c. Inferior lobe
d. Middle lobe
e. Superior lobe

102. While examining the oral cavity a stomatologist revealed inflammation of papillae on the border of the median and posterior third of the back of tongue. What papillae are inflamed?
a. Papillae filiformes
b. Papillae conicae
c. Papillae fungiformes
d. Papillae foliatae
*e. Papillae vallatae

103. Examination of a patient revealed an abscess of pterygopalatine fossa. Where can the infection spread to unless the disease is managed in time?
a. To the subgaleal temporal space
b. To the tympanic cavity
c. To the interpterygoid space
d. To the frontal sinus
*e. To the orbit

104. During complicated labour the symphysis pubis ruptured. What organ can be damaged mostly?
a. Uterine tubes
b. Uterus
c. Rectum
d. Ovaria
*e. Urinary blader

105. A patient with cholelithiasis fell ill with mechanic jaundice. Examination revealed that the stone was in the common bile duct. What bile-excreting ducts make up the obturated duct?
a. Ductus hepaticus sinister et ductus cysticus
b. Ductus hepaticus communis et ductus choledochus
c. Ductus hepaticus dexter et sinister
d. Ductus hepaticus dexter et ductus cysticus
*e. Ductus hepaticus communis et ductus cysticus

106. Neurological examination of a 65 y.o. patient revealed a haemorrhage within the superior temporal gyrus. In the blood supply area of which artery is it?
a. Anterior communicating artery
b. Basilar artery
c. Anterior cerebral artery
d. Posterior cerebral artery
*e. Middle cerebral artery

107. A 70 y.o. man has cut an abscess off in the area of mammiform process during shaving. Two days later he was admitted to the hospital with inflammation of arachnoid membranes. How did the infection penetrate into the cavity of skull?
a. V.v.auriculares
*b. V.emissaria
c. V.v.tympanicae
d. V.v.labyrinthi
e. V.facialis

108. The cerebrospinal fluid is being examined for the purpose of differential meningitis diagnostics. At what site is the lumbal puncture safe?
a. L V-S I
*b. L III-L IV
c. L I-L II
d. L II-L III
e. Th XII-L I

109. An isolated cell of human heart automatically generates excitation impulses with frequency 60 times pro minute. What structure does this cell belong to?
*a. Sinoatrial node
b. Ventricle
c. His bundle
d. Atrioventricular node
e. Atrium

110. While preparing a patient to the operation the heart chambers pressure was measured. In one of them the pressure changed during one heart cycle from 0 to 120 mm Hg. What chamber of heart was it?
a. Right ventricle
b. Left atrium
c. -
*d. Left ventricle
e. Right atrium

111. Part of alveoles of a preterm infant didnt spread because of enhanced elastic recoil of lungs. How can this recoil be reduced?
*a. By surfactant introduction
b. By artificial pulmonary ventilation
c. By glycose introduction
d. By fluid suction from the respiratory tracts
e. By pure oxygene inhalation

112. Preventive examination of a patient revealed an enlarged lymph node of metastatic origin on the medial wall of the left axillary crease. Specify the most likely localization of the primary tumour:
a. Thyroid gland
*b. Mammary gland
c. Lung
d. Submandibular salivary gland
e. Stomach

113. A man suffering from osteochondrosis got acute pain in the abdominal muscles (lateral and anterior). During objective examination a physician diagnosticated increased pain sensitivity of skin in the hypogastric region. This pain might be caused by affection of the following nerve:
a. Genitofemoral
*b. Iliohypogastric
c. Obturator
d. Sciatic
e. Femoral

114. A woman suffering from osteochondrosis felt acute pain in her humeral articulation that became stronger when she abducted her shoulder. These symptoms might be caused by damage of the following nerve:
a. Subscapular nerve
b. Subclavicular nerve
c. Throracodorsal nerve
*d. Axillary nerve
e. Dorsal scapular nerve

115. Pyeloureterography X-ray photo showed a renal pelvis with minor calyces only (major calyces were absent). What form of urinary tracts of a kidney was revealed?
a. -
*b. Embryonal
c. Mature
d. Fetal
e. Ampullar

116. A patient has a deep cut wound on the posterior surface of his shoulder in its middle third. What muscle might be injured?
*a. Triceps muscle of arm
b. Anconeus muscle
c. Coracobrachial muscle
d. Brachial muscle
e. Biceps muscle of arm

117. A patient has pain, edema and reddening of his skin in the anterosuperior area of his thigh and his foots thumb. What lymph nodes of his lower extremity responded to the inflammatory process?
a. Internal longitudinal
b. Deep inguinal
*c. Superficial inguinal
d. Superficial longitudinal
e. General longitudinal

118. A patient got a craniocerebral trauma that resulted in right-side convergent strabismus. Damage of which craniocerebral nerve caused such consequences?
*a. n.abducens
b. n.trigeminus
c. n.aculomotorius
d. n.trochlearis
e. n.facialis

119. In case of a penetrating wound of the anterior abdominal wall the wound tract went above the lesser curvature of stomach. What peritoneum formation is most likely to be injured?
a. Ligamentum hepatorenale
b. Ligamentum triangulare sinistrum
c. Ligamentum gastrocolicum
d. Ligamentum hepatoduoduodenale
*e. Ligamentum hepatogastricum

120. After a trauma a patient lost ability of elbow extension. This might have been caused by dysfunction of the following main muscle:
a. m. teres major
b. m. subscapularis
*c. m. triceps brachii
d. m. infraspinatus
e. m. levator scapulae

121. After a craniocerebral trauma a patient lost the ability to execute learned purposeful movements (apraxia). The injury is most likely localized in the following region of the cerebral cortex:
a. Gyrus paracentralis
b. Gyrus angularis
*c. Gyrus supramarginalis
d. Gyrus lingualis
e. Gyrus parahippocampalis

122. A patient got an injury of spinal marrow in a road accident that caused loss of tactile sensation, posture sense, vibration sense. What conduction tracts are damaged?
*a. Fascicle of Goll and cuneate fascicle
b. Rubrospinal tract
c. Tectospinal tract
d. Reticulospinal tract
e. Anterior spinocerebellar tract

123. Examination of a patient revealed hypertrophy and inflammation of lymphoid tissue, edema of mucous membrane between palatine arches (acute tonsillitis). What tonsil is normally situated in this area?
a. Tonsilla pharyngealis
b. Tonsilla lingualis
c. -
*d. Tonsilla palatina
e. Tonsilla tubaria

124. While performing an operation in the area of axillary crease a surgeon has to define an arterial vessel surrounded by fascicles of brachial plexus. What artery is it?
a. A.transversa colli
b. A.vertebralis
*c. A.axillaris
d. A.profunda brachii
e. A.subscapularis

125. Examination of a patient with impaired blood coagulation revealed thrombosis of a branch of inferior mesenteric artery. What bowel segment is damaged?
a. Ileum
b. Colon transversum
c. Colon ascendens
*d. Colon sigmoideum
e. Caecum

126. A patient was admitted to the surgical department with inguinal hernia. During the operation the surgeon performs plastic surgery on posterior wall of inguinal canal. What structure forms this wall?
a. Inguinal ligament
b. Aponeurosis of abdominal external oblique muscle
*c. Transverse fascia
d. Loose inferior edge of transverse abdominal muscle
e. Peritoneum

127. A man with an injury of the dorsal area of his neck was admitted to the resuscitation department. What muscle occupies this area?
a. M.rhomboideus minor
b. M.scalenus anterior
c. M.sternocleidomastoideus
d. M.latissimus dorsi
*e. M.trapezius

128. A patient complains of dizziness and hearing loss. What nerve is damaged?
a. Vagus
b. Trochlear
c. Trigeminus
d. Sublingual
*e. Vestibulocochlear

129. While palpating mammary gland of a patient a doctor revealed an induration in form of a node in the inferior medial quadrant. Metastases may extend to the following lymph nodes:
*a. Parasternal
b. Profound lateral cervical
c. Superior diaphragmal
d. Bronchopulmonary
e. Posterior mediastinal

130. A patient got a trauma that caused dysfunction of motor centres regulating activity of head muscles. In what parts of cerebral cortex is the respective centre normally localized?
a. Superior parietal lobule
b. Angular gyrus
c. Superior part of precentral gyrus
d. Supramarginal gyrus
*e. Inferior part of precentral gyrus

131. A patient was diagnosed with paralysis of facial and masticatory muscles. The haematoma is inside the genu of internal capsule. What conduction tract is damaged?
a. Tr. cortico-spinalis
b. Tr. cortico-fronto-pontinus
c. Tr. cortico-temporo-parieto-occipito-pontinus
*d. Tr. cortico-nuclearis
e. Tr. cortico-thalamicus

132. A patient has lost skin sensitivity in the region of the medial surface of his shoulder. This is the result of dysfunction of the following nerve:
a. Axillary nerve
*b. Medial brachial cutaneous nerve
c. Radial nerve
d. Medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve
e. Ulnar nerve

133. A foreign body (a button) closed space of the right superior lobar bronchus. What segments of the right lung wont be supplied with air?
a. Superior and inferior lingular
b. Apical and median basal
c. Medial and lateral
*d. Apical, posterior, anterior
e. Apical and posterior basal

134. A patient was diagnosed with bartholinitis (inflammation of greater vulvovaginal glands). In which organ of urogenital system are these glands localized?
a. Vagina
b. Uterus
c. Small lips of pudendum
d. Clitoris
*e. Large lips of pudendum

135. While performing an inguinal canal operation on account of hernia a surgeon damaged the canals contents. What exactly was damaged?
*a. Funiculus spermaticus
b. Lig. teres uteri
c. -
d. Lig. inguinal
e. Urarchus

136. Ultrasonic examination of a patient revealed aneurism in the area of aortic arch that caused alteration of vocal function of larynx. What nerve was constricted?
a. Sublingual
*b. Recurrent laryngeal
c. Superior laryngeal
d. Diaphragmatic
e. Mandibular

137. Surgical approach to the thyroid gland from the transverse (collar) approach involves opening of interaponeurotic suprasternal space. What anatomic structure localized in this space is dangerous to be damaged?
a. Inferior thyroid arthery
b. Superior thyroid arthery
c. External jugular vein
d. Subclavicular vein
*e. Jugular venous arch

138. In course of a small pelvis operation it became necessary to ligate an ovarian artery. What formation may be accidentally ligated together with it?
a. Urethra
*b. Ureter
c. Round ligament of uterus
d. Uterine tube
e. Internal iliac vein

139. An injured person was delivered to the hospital with a penetrating wound in the left lateral region of abdomen. What part of the large intestine is most likely damaged?
a. Caecum
b. Rectum
c. Colon ascendens
d. Colon transverses
*e. Colon descendens

140. After a road accident a driver was delivered to the hospital with an injury of the medial epicondyle of humerus. What nerve might be damaged in this case?
a. n. radialis
b. n. muscolocutaneus
c. n. medianus
*d. n. ulnaris
e. n. axillaris

141. A patient with a knife wound in the left lumbal part was delivered to the emergency hospital. In course of operation a surgeon found that internal organs were not damaged but the knife injured one of muscles of renal pelvis. What muscle is it?
a. Abdominal external oblique muscle
*b. Greater psoas muscle
c. Erector muscle of spine
d. Iliac muscle
e. Abdominal internal oblique muscle

142. A 25 year old patient was examined by a medical board. Examination revealed pathology of chest. Transverse dimensions were to small and the sternum was strongly protruding. What chest type is it?
*a. Keeled chest
b. Flat chest
c. Barrel chest
d. Cylindrical chest
e. Funnel chest

143. A man with a stab wound in the area of quadrilateral foramen applied to a doctor. Examination revealed that the patient was unable to draw his arm aside from his body. What nerve is most probably damaged?
a. N.medianus
b. N.ulnaris
c. N.subclavius
*d. N.axillaris
e. N.radialis

