1. An excess of concentrated ammonium hydroxide is a group reagent for the cations of the VI analytical group(acid-base classification), namely Co2+, Ni2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Hg2+. As a result of this reaction the following substances are formed:
a. Stained water-insoluble compounds
b. Hydroxides of acid-soluble cations
*c. Water-soluble ammonia complexes
d. Hydroxides of alkali-soluble cations
e. Hydroxides of the cations insoluble in the excess of ammonium hydroxide

2. Which of the listed reactions demonstrates the basic properties of pyridine?
a. 
b. 
*c. 
d. 
e. 

3. A patient with stenocardia has been administered acetylsalicylic acid for:
a. Increase in blood fibrinolytic activity
*b. Antiplatelet effect
c. Aggregate effect
d. Inhibition of blood fibrinolytic activity
e. Anti-inflammatory effect

4. On the 4th day of treatment with indomethacin a male 55-year-old patient developed gastric bleeding due to the ulceration of the gastric mucosa. Ulcerogenic effect of the drug is associated with a decrease in the activity of the following enzyme:
a. Prostacyclin synthase
*b. Cyclooxygenase-1
c. Lipoxygenase
d. Cyclooxygenase-2
e. Thromboxane synthetase

5. A patient with hypertensive crisis has been given an intravenous injection of clonidine. What mechanism underlies the antihypertensive effect of clonidine?
*a. Stimulation of presynaptic central α2-adrenoceptors
b. Blockade of β-adrenoceptors
c. Direct myotropic effect on blood vessels
d. Blockade of N-cholinergic receptors
e. Blockade of peripheral α1-adrenoceptors

6. A patient with ischemic heart disease has been administered inosine which is an intermediate metabolite in the synthesis of:
a. Ketone bodies
*b. Purine nucleotides
c. Lipoproteins
d. Metalloproteins
e. Glycoproteins

7. A patient with hypertensive crisis should be administered a diuretic as a part of complex therapy. What drug should be given the patient?
a. Amiloride
*b. Furosemide
c. Spironolactone
d. Diacarb
e. Triamterene

8. Rates of chemical reactions of the same order are compared by:
a. Change in the reactants concentration
b. Change in the concentration of the reaction products
c. Chemical reaction rate
d. Endpoint of a reaction
*e. Constant of chemical reaction rate

9. Consult a patient on which antihistamine drug DOES NOT have sedative and hypnotic effect:
a. Promethazine
b. Diphenhydramine
*c. Loradatine
d. Suprastinum
e. Tavegil (Clemastine)

10. Solutions of some electrolytes are used as medications. What is the maximum value of the isotonic coefficient for MgSO4 solution?
a. 5
b. 7
c. 4
d. 3
*e. 2

11. A patient with hypertension has been prescribed a drug that blocks angiotensin receptors. Specify this drug:
a. Prazosin
b. Nifedipine
*c. Losartan
d. Captopril
e. Apressin

12. A patient with gastric ulcer has been administered omeprazole. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Stimulation of mucus production
*b. Inhibition of H+ K+-ATPase
c. M-cholinergic receptor blockade
d. Blockade of histamine H2-receptors
e. Neutralization of HCl

13. Which of these formulas corresponds with acetoacetic acid?
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
*e. 

14. After taking phenacetin a patient developed acute sore throat, fever. Examination enabled doctors to make a diagnosis of necrotic angina and agranulocytosis. Agranulocytosis can be characterized by a decrease in the amount of the following WBCs:
a. Eosinophils
b. Lymphocytes
c. Monocytes
*d. Neutrophils
e. Basophils

15. Apatient with a heart rhythm disorder has been given lidocaine. Apart from the local anesthetic effect, this drug has the following pharmacological effect:
a. Hypnotic
b. Antidepressant
c. Nootropic
*d. Antiarrhythmic
e. Antipyretic

16. A patient with chronic constipation has been prescribed bisacodyl. After 3 weeks of treatment, the patient noticed a reduction of laxative effect. This is caused by the development of the following sideeffect:
*a. Habituation
b. Sensibilization
c. Dysbacteriosis
d. Cumulation
e. Dependence

17. It is not advisable to use antacids and iron supplements at the same time for the following reason:
a. Accelerated elimination of iron
*b. Malabsorption of iron
c. Impaired deposition of iron in the body
d. Increased binding to plasma proteins
e. Increased intoxication with iron

18. A patient with acute heart failure and cardiac glycosides intolerance was given an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Stimulation of α1-adrenoceptors
b. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase activity
c. Stimulation of M-cholinergic receptors
*d. Stimulation of β1-adrenoceptors
e. Blockade of K+ -, Na+ - ATPase

19. A female patient asked a pharmacist to recommend her a drug for headache with antiplatelet effect. Specify this drug:
*a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Promedol
c. Fentanyl
d. Tramadol
e. Codeine phosphate

20. A plant under examination has papilionaceous flowers. This plant belongs to the following family:
*a. Fabaceae
b. Ranunculaceae
c. Asteraceae
d. Lamiaceae
e. Scrofulariaceae

21. Microscopic analysis of a root revealed the following features: primary structure, endodermal cells with horseshoe-shaped areas, radial fascicle of the central cylinder, more than six xylem rays. Such root structure is typical for the following plants:
a. Angiosperms, dicotyledons
b. Gymnosperms, gnetalians
c. Pteridosperms
*d. Angiosperms, monocotyledons
e. Gymnosperms, conifers

22. Chronic pancreatitis is accompanied by the decreased synthesis and secretion of trypsin. This impairs the hydrolysis and absorption of the following substances:
a. Polysaccharides
b. Lipids
*c. Proteins
d. Nucleic acids
e. Disaccharides

23. Analysis of a plant revealed essentialoil glands with several layers of cells arranged in pairs. This allows for the possibility that the plant relates to the family:
a. Scrofulariaceae
b. Apiaceae
c. Lamiaceae
*d. Asteraceae
e. Solanaceae

24. In an emergency situation a scuba diver has quickly risen from the depths to the surface, which is against the rule. He is unconscious, exhibits respiratory failure and cardiac activity disorder as a result of decompression sickness.What complication may develop in the scuba diver?
a. Thromboembolism
*b. Gas embolism
c. Air embolism
d. Fat embolism
e. Cellular embolism

25. A patient has been hospitalized for chronic heart failure. Objectively: skin and mucous membranes are cyanotic, the patient has tachycardia, tachypnea. What type of hypoxia has developed in the patient?
a. Hemic
b. Anemic
*c. Circulatory
d. Tissue
e. Hypoxic

26. What are the indications for the use of naloxone?
a. Intoxication with cardiac glycosides
b. Heavy metal intoxication
*c. Acute intoxication with narcotic analgesics
d. Intoxication with ergot alkaloids
e. Atropine sulfate intoxication

27. Amino group of p-aminobenzoic acid is involved into reaction with the following reagent:
a. CH3COONa
b. KCN
c. NH4OH
d. NaOH
*e. HCl

28. A patient with renal colic has been administered a spasmolytic from the group of M-cholinergic antagonists as a part of the complex therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Benzohexonium
*b. Atropine
c. Galantamine
d. Proserin
e. Dithylinum

29. What drug is administered in case of uterine inertia?
a. Progesterone
b. No-spa
*c. Oxytocin
d. Vikasolum
e. Fenoterol

30. A patient with myocardial infarction has been administered intravenously a direct anticoagulant, namely:
a. Vikasol
b. Neodicumarinum
*c. Heparin
d. Thrombin
e. Calcium gluconate

31. What drug should be administered for individual prevention of malaria?
a. Biseptol (Co-Trimoxazolel)
*b. Chingamin
c. Ampicillin
d. Rifampicin
e. Gentamicin

32. A sample section of an axial body shows a complex consisting of phellogen and its derivatives - cork and phelloderm. This tissue is called:
a. Epidermis
*b. Periderm
c. Sclerenchyma
d. Colenchyma
e. Epiblema

33. A pharmacy dispenses glaucine hydrochloride to a patient with chronic bronchitis. The patient must be warned about the following typical side effect of the drug:
*a. Blood pressure fall
b. Arrhythmia
c. Allergic skin rash
d. Rise of intraocular pressure
e. Excitation of the central nervous system

34. A solution contains cations of zinc and aluminium. Specify the reagent that makes it possible to detect cations of zinc in this solution:
a. Sodium hydroxide solution
b. Excess of 6M sodium hydroxide in presence of hydrogen peroxide
c. Sulfuric acid solution
*d. Potassium hexacyanoferrate (II) solution
e. Cobalt nitrate Co(NO3)2

35. A medicament comprises sodium bicarbonate and sodium chloride. What method is used for quantitative determination of sodium bicarbonate?
a. Precipitation titration
b. Complexometric titration
c. Coulometric titration
*d. Acid-base titration
e. Redox titration

36. Concentration of magnesium sulfate in a drug can be determined by complexometric titration. Select an indicator for fixing the end point of titration:
a. -
*b. Chromogen black
c. Methyl orange
d. Phenolphtalein
e. Diphenylcarbazone

37. Select a pair of electrodes for potentiometric pH measurement of a solution:
a. Calomel and silver chloride
b. Mercury sulphate and silver chloride
c. Glass and antimonial
*d. Glass and silver chloride
e. Quinhydrone and antimonial

38. The mass percentage of ascorbic acid can be determined by the cerimetric analysis in the presence of the following redox indicator:
a. Methylene red
b. Fluorescein
c. Methylene orange
*d. Ferroin
e. Eosin

39. An injured person exhibits the following signs at the site of trauma: skin redness, throbbing small arteries, elevated local temperature, increased tissue turgor. What local blood circulation disorder are these presentations typical for?
a. Ischemia
*b. Arterial hyperemia
c. Thrombosis
d. Venous hyperemia
e. Embolism

40. Microscopic examination of a perennial stem revealed the secondary integumentary tissue that was formed as a result of cell division of:
a. Pericycle
b. Protoderma
c. Procambium
d. Cambium
*e. Phellogen

41. What synthetic drug of the hydrazide group is typically prescribed for pulmonary tuberculosis?
a. Rifampicin
b. Metronidazole
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
*d. Isoniazid
e. Acyclovir

42. A female student with a cold has been prescribed an antipyretic medication. Specify this drug:
*a. Paracetamol
b. Oxytocin
c. Cyanocobalamin
d. Famotidine
e. Ascorbic acid

43. Specify the drug that constricts pupils and reduces intraocular pressure:
a. Fenofibrate
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Dithylinum
*d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Nitrazepamum

44. A plant under study has stipules fused together and thus forming a tight tube - ochrea, that is a diagnostic feature of the following family:
a. Gramineae
b. Papaveraceae
c. Clusiaceae
*d. Polygonaceae
e. Rosaceae

45. A 42-year-old female has foamypurulent vaginal discharges. The smear stained by Romanovsky-Giemsa’s method has been found to include flagellated bacteria. What is the most likely microorganism that has been found by the doctor?
*a. Trihomonas vaginalis
b. Trypanosoma gambiense
c. Lamblia intestinalis
d. Trihomonas hominis
e. Leishmania donovani

46. A patient has been taking diclofenac sodium for a long time. The family physician withdrew this drug and administered celecoxib. What disease was the reason for the drug substitution?
a. Urolithiasis
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Peptic ulcer
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Chronic hepatitis

47. The rate of a chemical reaction DOES NOT DEPEND on the concentration of the reactants. Specify the order of such reaction:
a. Second
b. First
*c. Zeroth
d. Third
e. Fraction

48. A patient has been diagnosed with bronchial asthma. Specify a medicament that can be administered for asphyxiation:
a. Paracetamol
b. Diclofenac sodium
*c. Salbutamol
d. Anapriline
e. Acetylcysteine

49. Sulfanilamides inhibit the growth and development of bacteria. The mechanism of their action is based on the impairment of the following acid synthesis:
a. Lipoic
b. Pantothenic
c. Pangamic
*d. Folic
e. Nicotinic

50. Sulfanilamides are widely used as bacteriostatic agents. The mechanism of antimicrobial action of sulfanilamides is based on their structural similarity to:
a. Antibiotics
*b. Para-aminobenzoic acid
c. Folic acid
d. Glutamic acid
e. Nucleic acid

51. Specify the standard solution for the iodometric determination of reducing agents (direct titration):
a. KMnO4
b. K2Cr2O7
c. KI
*d. I2
e. Na2S2O3

52. The fourth group of cations includes the cations Al3+, Sn2+, Sn(IV ), As(V ), As(III), Zn2+, C3+. The group reagent for the fourth group of cations is the solution of:
a. HCl
b. H2C2O4
c. H2SO4, H2O2
*d. NaOH, H2O2
e. NH3, H2O2

53. In a qualitative analysis, when an excess of the group reagent (NH3 solution) reacts with the cations of the sixth analytical group (Cu2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Cd2+, Hg2+), the following compounds are formed:
*a. Metal ammine complexes
b. Basic metal salts
c. Hydroxocomplexes of metals
d. Aqua complexes of metals
e. Metal hydroxides

54. Sodium fluoride is one of the components of the drugs used in the treatment of dental caries. NaF reacts with the following compound:
a. CH3COOH
*b. H2SO4
c. NaCl
d. CO2
e. KI

55. The most common technology in pharmaceutical production is maintaining constant temperature and pressure. What is this process called?
a. Isochoric
b. Isothermal
c. Isochoric-isothermal
d. Isobaric
*e. Isobaric-isothermal

56. Some medications are colloidal solutions. What size of the colloidal particles is typical for the colloidal dispersion?
a. > 10-3m
*b. 10-7 - 10-9m
c. 10-10 - 10-11m
d. 10-5 - 10-7m
e. 10-5 - 10-3m

57. To maintain a certain level of pHmedium, the buffer solutions are used. Specify a composition of substances that DOES NOT EXHIBIT buffer properties:
a. CH3COOH + CH3COONa
b. HCOOH + HCOONa
c. NaH2PO4 + Na2HPO4
*d. NaOH + NaCl
e. NH4Cl +NH3· H2O

58. What non-narcotic centrally-acting antitussive drug can be used for dry cough?
a. Codeine
b. Ambroxol
c. Mucaltinum
*d. Glaucine
e. Acetylcysteine

59. What analytical effect is observed after fixing the endpoint during the titration by Mohr method?
a. White precipitate
b. Yellow precipitate
c. Red colour of solution
d. Yellow colour of solution
*e. Brick-red precipitate

60. What solution can be determined by photocolorimetric method by selfabsorbance?
*a. Potassium chromate
b. Potassium sulphate
c. Potassium phosphate
d. Potassium nitrate
e. Potassium chloride

61. What substance in a solution can be determined in two ways - by the polarimetric or refractometric method?
a. Calcium gluconate
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Sodium benzoate
d. Benzoic acid
*e. Ascorbic acid

62. A patient with symptoms of chronic bronchitis has been administered acetylcysteine. What is the mechanism of its expectorant action?
a. Stimulation of respiratory center
b. Anesthesia of respiratory mucosa
c. Stimulation of adrenergic receptors
d. Inhibition of cough center
*e. Depolymerization of sputum mucopolysaccharides

63. During the gastric secretion, proteolytic enzymes are secreted in form of zymogens.What enzyme is activated by hydrochloric acid?
a. Amylase
b. Trypsin
*c. Pepsin
d. Lipase
e. Chymotrypsin

64. Specify the reaction product of purine reacting with sodium hydroxide:
a. 
b. 
c. 
*d. 
e. 

65. What class of reactions does this reaction relate to?
a. Reduction
b. Substitution
*c. Addition
d. Oxidation
e. Rearrangement

66. The combined use of furosemide with aminoglycoside antibiotics causes:
a. Increased intraocular pressure
*b. Hearing impairment
c. Cramps
d. Increased blood pressure
e. Hyperhidrosis

67. A child exhibits physical and mental retardation. Urine analysis revealed high concentration of orotic acid. This disease can be addressed by the constant use of:
*a. Uridine
b. Guanine
c. Alanine
d. Glutamine
e. Adenine

68. To distinguish between phenol and salicylic acid, the following reagent is used:
a. Sodium hydroxide solution
b. Iron (III) chloride solution
*c. Sodium bicarbonate solution
d. Sodium chloride solution
e. Bromine solution

69. Ethane is the product of the following reaction:
a. C2H5OH [H2SO4 concentr., t°] =>
b. -
c. Al4C3 [H2O] =>
d. CO + 2H2 [Fe, t°] =>
*e. CH2=CH2 [H2, cat] =>

70. What titrants are used for the titration in the non-aqueous medium?
a. Hydrochloric acid and potassium ethylate
b. Sulfuric acid and barium hydroxide
*c. Perchloric acid and sodium ethylate
d. Nitric acid and sodium hydroxide
e. Perchloric acid and barium hydroxide

71. There are areas where humans or animals are exposed to the constant risk of contracting certain types of bacteria. What feature of these bacteria is responsible for their long viability in the soil?
a. Ability to multiply in the plant remains
b. Capsule formation
*c. Spore formation
d. Thick cell wall
e. Plasmids

72. What reagents are used to separate the cations of the IV analytical group from the cations of the V and VI analytical groups in the analysis of their composition?
a. H2SO4
b. NH4OH
c. Na2S
*d. NaOH and H2O2
e. Dithizone

73. Specify the standard substance for the standardization of 0,1 M of hydrochloric acid solution:
a. Oxalic acid
b. Ammonium hydroxide
*c. Sodium carbonate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Zinc sulphate

74. A patient with a diagnosis of drug poisoning has been admitted to the resuscitation department. The patient is in grave condition. Respiration is rapid, superficial, with periods of apnea (Biot’s respiration). What was the main cause of the development of periodic breathing in the patient?
*a. Inhibition of the respiratory center function
b. Impaired function of the neuromuscular system
c. Pulmonary dysfunction
d. Diminished chest mobility
e. Impaired function of spinal cord motoneurons

75. Specify the number of electrons involved into formation of the isolated conjugated system in the pyrimidine molecule:
*a. 6
b. 10
c. 8
d. 2
e. 4

76. In course of long-term treatment of an infectious patient with penicillin, the pathogen transformed into the L-form. What changes occur in the pathogen cell in case of L-transformation?
*a. Absence of a cell wall
b. Absence of a capsule
c. Absence of inclusions
d. Absence of a spore
e. Absence of flagella

77. Dosage forms produced as coarse dispersion systems with the liquid dispersion medium and the solid phase are called:
a. Foam
*b. Suspension
c. Aerosol
d. Emulsion
e. Powder

78. Ethanol C2H5OH, can be distinguished from glycerol CH2(OH)-CH2(OH)-CH2(OH) by the reaction with the following reagent:
a. Ag2O
*b. Cu(OH)2
c. FeCl3
d. HBr
e. KMnO4

79. A patient was found to have a tumor of the pancreatic head, which is accompanied by the impaired patency of the common bile duct. Blood test will reveal an increase in the following substance level:
a. Adrenaline
*b. Bilirubin
c. Hemoglobin
d. Urea
e. Insulin

80. On the 2nd day after developing acute inflammation of the knee joint, the patient exhibits the joint enlargement, swelling of the skin. At what stage of inflammation are these signs typically observed?
a. Proliferation
b. Alteration
*c. Exudation
d. Regeneration
e. Sclerosis

81. Quite often, the soil may contain a number of pathogenic microorganisms. The causative agents of the following disease may stay viable in the soil for a long time:
a. Pertussis
b. Dysentery
c. Diphtheria
d. Viral hepatitis
*e. Anthrax

82. As a result of an accident (snakebite) a male patient has the following blood values: Hb- 80 g/l, RBC- 3, 0·1012/l; WBC- 5, 5·109/l.What type of anemia is observed in this case?
*a. Hemolytic
b. Posthemorrhagic
c. Iron-deficiency
d. Aplastic
e. Folic acid-deficiency

83. Emulsions of 0,1 - 74% dispersedphase volume relate to:
a. O/W type
*b. Concentrated
c. Highly concentrated
d. Diluted
e. W/O type

84. Bacteriological inspection of disinfection quality at a pharmacy revealed a microorganism in an utility room (in the sink). The microorganism has the following properties: mobile nonspore-forming gram-negative bacteria that form capsular substance, grow well on ordinary nutrient media, secrete the blue-green pigment. This microorganism is most likely to be of the following genus:
*a. Pseudomonas
b. Clostridium
c. Vibrio
d. Shigella
e. Proteus

85. Microbiological analysis of medicinal raw materials revealed capsular bacteria. What stain method was used to detect the capsules?
a. Ozheshko’s
*b. Gin’s
c. Neisser’s
d. Ziehl-Neelsen’s
e. Gram’s

86. At pH value 5,0 and isoelectric point 4,0, the protein will migrate toward the following electrode during electrophoresis:
a. Platinum
*b. Anode
c. Calomel
d. Cathode
e. Silver chloride

87. The intracellular metabolism of glycerol starts with its activation. What compound is formed as a result of the first reaction of its conversion?
a. Acetyl coenzyme A
*b. Alpha-glycerolophosphate
c. Lactate
d. Pyruvate
e. Choline

88. A 40-year-old patient has a history of bronchial asthma and bradyarrhythmia. In order to eliminate bronchospasm, the drugs of the following pharmacological group should be administered:
a. Muscle relaxants
*b. M-anticholinergics
c. M-cholinergic agents
d. ?-adrenergic blocking agents
e. Anticholinesterase agents

89. Which representative of the Rosaseae family has spring bloom in form of white, fragrant flowers gathered in pendulous racemes at the ends of short shoots?
*a. Padus rasemosa (P.avia)
b. Sorbus aucuparia
c. Crataegus sanquinea
d. Cerasus vulgaris
e. Potentilla erecta

90. A patient had been diagnosed with right lung cancer and administered surgical treatment. After right-sided pulmonectomy the patient developed evident dyspnea. What form of respiratory failure developed in this patient?
a. Thoracodiaphragmal
*b. Pulmonary restrictive
c. Peripheral
d. Central
e. Pulmonary obstructive

91. A 22-year-old male was stung by bees, the affected region became hyperemic and edematous. What is the leading mechanism of edema development in this patient?
a. Reduced oncotic pressure of blood
*b. Increased permeability of the capillaries
c. Increased oncotic pressure of tissue fluid
d. Decreased hydrostatic blood pressure in the capillaries
e. Impaired lymphatic efflux

92. A patient has obstruction of the common bile duct. Which of these substances is usually found in urine in such cases?
*a. Bilirubin
b. Uric acid
c. Glucose
d. Creatinine
e. Ketone bodies

93. A ground for separating lead (II) chloride from the other chlorides of the II analytical group (acid-base classification) is its different solubility in:
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Ammonia solution
c. Sulfuric acid
*d. Hot water
e. Alkalis

94. A student analyzes an axial plant organ characterized by radial symmetry, unlimited growth, positive geotropism. It provides nutrition, vegetative propagation, anchorage of plant in the soil. This organ should be identified as:
a. Stem
b. Rhizome
c. Seed
*d. Root
e. Leaf

95. Cross section of a root conducting zone shows pericycle that gives rise to:
a. Adventitious roots
b. Trichomes
*c. Lateral roots
d. Root fibrilla
e. Root cap

96. Select a name that corresponds with the formula: CH3-C≡N:
a. Acetoxime
b. Ethyl isocyanide
c. Acetamide
d. Acetic anhydryde
*e. Acetic acid nitrile

97. What data is required to measure the activation energy?
a. Thermal energy of the reaction
b. Internal energy of the system
c. Reaction order
*d. Constants of reaction rate at two temperatures
e. Energy change of the system

98. A patient with chronic renal failure exhibits azotemia, hypo- and isosthenuria. What is the main factor in the pathogenesis of these symptoms in the patient?
*a. Reduction of existing nephrons mass
b. Reduction of tubular secretion
c. Decrease in glomerular filtration rate in each nephron
d. Disturbance of the permeability of the glomerular membrane
e. Increase in glomerular filtration rate

99. Which of the given compounds WILL NOT decolorize the bromine water?
a. CH3 - CH = CH2
b. 
c. CH2 = CH2
d. CH ≡ CH
*e. CH3 - CH3

100. Chemically, ethers are quite inert compounds. Ethers decompose even at a room temperature under the effect of the following haloid acid:
a. HCl
b. HBr
*c. HI
d. HF
e. HClO

101. Specify the number of existing stereoisomeric aldopentoses:
a. 4
b. 2
*c. 8
d. 6
e. 16

102. This scheme of nitroalkane synthesis is called the reaction of:CH3-CH3 + HNO3 diluted =>[t,p]=> CH3-CH2-NO2 + H2O
*a. Konovalov
b. Kucherov
c. Chichibabin
d. Tishchenko
e. Zinin

103. A hospital admitted a patient with arterial hypertension induced by renal artery stenosis. The patient complains of persistent nausea and headache. The main element in the pathogenesis of hypertension is the activation of the following system:
a. Kallikrein-kinin
b. Hypothalamic-pituitary
*c. Renin-angiotensin
d. Sympathoadrenal
e. Parasympathetic

104. The products of the toluene nitration are mainly:
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
*e. 

105. Halogen atoms in an organic compound can be detected by means of:
a. Bayer’s test
b. Molisch’s test
*c. Beilstein test
d. Lucas’ test
e. Iodoform test

106. Before a surgical operation, a surgeon treated his hands with an alcoholcontaining solution.Which group of drugs does this solution relate to?
a. Disinfectants
b. Detergents
c. Surface-active substances
*d. Antiseptics
e. Sterilizing solutions

107. Aniline can be converted into the water-soluble salt through the treatment with a solution of:
a. Ethanol
b. Dimethylamine
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Sodium sulfate
*e. Hydrochloric acid

108. Select the correct product of the reaction:
a. 
b. 
*c. 
d. 
e. 

109. Select the formula for pentene-2 from the list:
a. CH3 - CH2 - CH2 - CH3
b. CH3 - CH = CH - CH3
c. CH3 - CH2 - CH2 - CH2 - CH3
d. CH3 - CH2 - CH2 - CH = CH2
*e. CH3 - CH2 - CH = CH - CH3

110. Specify a compound having the most pronounced basic properties in the gas phase:
*a. CH3-N(CH3)-CH3
b. CH3-NH-CH3
c. 
d. NH3
e. CH3-NH2

111. Specify the correct name for the product of the acetaldehyde reacting with hydrazine:
a. Acetaldehyde semicarbazone
*b. Acetaldehyde hydrazone
c. Acetaldimine
d. Acetaldehyde oxime
e. Acetaldehyde phenylhydrazone

112. Select a conjugated diene from the list of diene hydrocarbons:
a. 
b. CH2 = CH - CH2 - CH2 - CH = CH2
c. CH2 = C = CH - CH3
d. CH2 = CH - CH2 - CH = CH2
*e. CH2 = CH - CH = CH2

113. Under the given conditions, the unsaturated organic compounds are reduced with the following reagent:
a. NaOH, H2O
b. HNO3, p, t
*c. H2, Ni, t
d. K2Cr2O7, H+
e. H2O, Hg2+, H+

114. Which of the following compounds relates to the conjugated dienes?
a. CH2 = CH - CH2 - CH2 - CH = CH2
b. CH2 = C = CH - CH2 - CH2 - CH3
*c. CH3 - CH2 - CH = CH - CH = CH2
d. CH3 - CH = C = CH - CH2 - CH3
e. CH3 - C(CH2) - CH2 - CH = CH2

115. Which of the following solutions with the same molar concentration has the maximum osmotic pressure?
a. Potassium iodide
*b. Aluminium nitrate
c. Sodium chloride
d. Glucose
e. Magnesium sulfate

116. What class of organic compounds is characterized by the presence of C ≡ N group?
*a. Nitriles
b. Nitro compounds
c. Aldehydes
d. Alcohols
e. Amines

117. If the amount of a high-molecular substance added to the sol is very small, it may not increase but decrease its stability. This phenomenon is called:
a. Colloidal protection
b. Sol habituation
c. Solubilization
d. Mutual coagulation
*e. Sensibilization

118. Which medicinal plant of the Asteraceae family has only disk flowers in the flowerhead?
a. Echinacea purpurea
b. Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)
*c. Three-part beggarticks (Bidens tripartita)
d. Cornflower (Centaurea cyanus)
e. Common yarrow (Achillea millefolium)

119. Spore and pollen analysis revealed in the pollen some tetrahedral spores with a semi-circular base and a reticular surface, which may belong to:
*a. Lycopodiophyta
b. Bryophyta
c. Pinophyta
d. Polypodiophyta
e. Equisetiphyta

120. Many species of wild rose are a source of vitamins, fatty oils and herbal material. Specify the juicy pseudocarps that are procured as herbal raw material:
a. Hesperides
b. Coenobia
*c. Rose hips
d. Aggregate-accessory fruits
e. Cenocarp stone-fruits

121. Comparison of the underground organs of herbaceous plants revealed that in the bipartite annuals the following organ prevails:
a. Corm
*b. Main root system
c. Rhizome
d. Adventitious root system
e. Bulb

122. Growth of some cancer cells is caused by a certain growth factor. Treatment of leukemia involves applying an enzyme that destroys this essential factor. Specify this enzyme:
*a. Asparaginase
b. Succinate dehydrogenase
c. Aspartate aminotransferase
d. Citrate synthase
e. Glutaminase

123. The anti-tumor preparation Methotrexate is a structural analogue of folic acid. The mechanism of its action is based on the inhibition of the following enzyme:
*a. Dihydrofolate reductase
b. Hexokinase
c. Lactate dehydrogenase
d. Creatine kinase
e. Xanthine oxidase

124. A sample of a finished dosage form was found to be contaminated with some microorganisms exhibiting the following properties: greenish fluorescent colonies of gram-negative nonsporeforming bacilli that grew on the medium for the detection of pyocyanin. The bacilli release the bluegreen pigment into the medium.What microorganisms contaminated the finished dosage form?
a. Staphylococcus epidermidis
b. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
c. Enterobacteriaceae
d. Staphylococcus aureus
*e. Pseudomonas aeruginosa

125. Vaccines are the artificial or natural preparations produced from bacteria, viruses and other microorganisms, their chemical components and waste products. They are used for the active immunization of humans and animals for the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases. The attenuated vaccines consist of:
a. Dead microbes and toxoid
b. Immunoglobulins
c. Dead microbes
d. Anatoxin
*e. Viable microbes

126. What method of sterilization should be used during the manufacturing liquid dosage forms containing proteins?
a. Pasteurization
*b. Filtering
c. Gas sterilization
d. Boiling
e. Autoclaving

127. Blood pressure is regulated by a number of biologically active compounds. What peptides that enter the bloodstream can affect the vascular tone?
a. Iodothyronines
b. Endorphins
c. Leukotrienes
d. Enkephalins
*e. Kinins

128. Addison’s (bronze) disease is treated with glucocorticoids. Their effect is provided by the potentiation of the following process:
a. Glycogenolysis
b. Ornithine cycle
c. Glycolysis
d. Pentose phosphate cycle
*e. Gluconeogenesis

129. Representatives of Asteraceae family have various types of flowers EXCEPT FOR:
a. Pseudoligulate
*b. Bilabiate
c. Funnelform
d. Tubular
e. Ligulate

130. Datura stramonium has dry manyseeded fruits formed by syncarpous gynoecium that dehisce when the valves are broken off. Specify the fruit type:
a. Siliqua
b. Follicle
*c. Capsule
d. Coenobium
e. Hesperidium

131. A sample of water used in drug production has been sent to a laboratory for sanitary and virological analysis. Presence of what virus group will be indicative of faecal contamination of water and thus the need for its additional purification?
a. Retroviridae
b. Flaviviridae
c. Herpesviridae
d. Orthomyxoviridae
*e. Picornaviridae

132. Specify the order of the reaction, for which К=1/t (1/c - 1/c0):
a. Zeroth
b. Fractional
c. Third
d. First
*e. Second

133. After an insulin injection a 45-yearold female with a long history of diabetes mellitus has developed weakness, paleness, palpitation, anxiety, double vision, numbness of lips and the tip of tongue. Blood glucose is at the rate of 2,5 mmol/l. What complication has developed in the patient?
a. Hyperketonemic coma
b. Uremic coma
c. Hyperosmolar coma
d. Hyperglycemic coma
*e. Hypoglycemic coma

134. A 45-year-old male patient was diagnosed with stomach ulcer. After the conservative treatment the pain and heartburn disappeared, the function of the gastrointestinal tract was normalized. Endoscopic examination of stomach revealed cicatrization of the ulcer. Qualify this course of the disease:
a. Prodromal stage
*b. Remission
c. Latent period
d. Relapse
e. Recovery

135. An older patient exhibits low levels of red blood cells and hemoglobin in blood, but the color index is 1,3. Blood smear analysis revealed megaloblasts. What type of anemia is observed in this case?
a. Acquired hemolytic
b. Iron-deficiency
*c. B12-folic acid deficiency
d. Hereditary hemolytic
e. Chronic posthemorrhagic

136. Morphological analysis of poplar inflorescence showed that it is a simple monopodial inflorescence: main axis is drooping, the flowers are sessile, unisexual. Specify the type of inflorescence:
*a. Catkin
b. Capitulum
c. Panicle
d. Cyme
e. Head

137. During the morphologic analysis of various plant leaves the students found the leaves, whose length of the leaf blade is 5 times more than its width. Specify the shape of the leaf blade:
a. Ovoid
b. Reniform
c. Elliptical
d. Lanceolate
*e. Linear

138. Food rich in carbohydrates at first increases the blood sugar and then decreases its rate due to the insulin action. What process is activated by this hormone?
a. Breakdown of glycogen
b. Gluconeogenesis
*c. Synthesis of glycogen
d. Breakdown of proteins
e. Breakdown of lipids

139. After drinking milk a 1-year-old child developed diarrhea, flatulence. The baby is likely to have the deficiency of the following enzyme:
*a. Lactase
b. Aldolase
c. Glycosidase
d. Hexokinase
e. Maltase

140. A patient has developedmegaloblastic anemia on a background of alcoholic cirrhosis. The main cause of anemia in this patient is the following vitamin deficiency:
a. Lipoic acid
b. Thiamin
c. Pantothenic acid
*d. Folic acid
e. Biotin

141. The fruit of black locust is dry, formed of a single carpel, dehisces by the ventral and dorsal sutures on two sides, the seeds are attached along the ventral suture. Such fruit is called:
*a. Legume
b. Follicle
c. Silicula
d. Capsule
e. Siliqua

142. At a chemical analytical laboratory, a technician examines a solution of the VI analytical group cations. After the addition of ammonium thiocyanate and amyl alcohol, the organic layer turned blue. What cation is present in the solution?
a. Cu2+
b. Ni2+
*c. Co2+
d. Hg2+
e. Cd2+

143. Microscopic study of soybean seeds stained with Sudan III revealed some droplets of various sizes. They are:
*a. Lipids
b. Starch
c. Glycogen
d. Inulin
e. Proteins

144. An analytical chemist determines sodium cations by ion-exchange chromatography. In order to prepare the cation-exchange resin in the H+ form, the analyst uses:
*a. HCl
b. C2H5OH
c. CH3OH
d. H3PO4
e. CH3COOH

145. When studying the diagnostic features of Origanum vulgare, the students noticed that the plant had a compound monopodial inflorescence. It is called:
a. Head
*b. Corymbose panicle
c. Cincinnus
d. Cluster of heads
e. Bostyx

146. While preparing a solution, a pharmaceutical analyst converted a freshly formed precipitate into a sol by treating it with an electrolyte solution. What method of obtaining disperse systems was used by the analyst?
a. Condensation from steam
*b. Peptization
c. Chemical condensation
d. Physical condensation
e. Solvent exchange method

147. Sol of iron (III) hydroxide is positively charged. Specify the ion which has the lowest coagulation threshold:
a. Cu2+
b. Cl-
*c. SO42-
d. Na+
e. J-

148. The method of treating people with serious diseases and intoxications is based on the absorption of toxic substances from the blood. What is this method called?
a. Hemadsorption
b. Electrophoresis
*c. Hemosorption
d. Dialysis
e. Ultrafiltration

149. It is known that malonyl CoA is formed from acetyl CoA and carbon dioxide under the influence of acetyl CoA carboxylase. What vitamin is a coenzyme of this enzyme?
a. Folic acid
b. Ascorbate
c. Thiamine
*d. Biotin
e. Pantothenic acid

150. Specify the standard solutions that are used in permanganatometry to quantify the oxidants by the residual titration method:
a. Potassium dichromate, sodium thiosulfate
b. Potassium iodate, sodium thiosulfate
c. Cerium (IV) sulfate, iron (II) sulfate
*d. Potassium permanganate, iron (II) sulfate
e. Potassium bromate, sodium thiosulfate

151. What indicator is used for fixing the endpoint of mercurimetric titration?
a. Fluorescein
b. Murexide
c. Potassium chromate
*d. Thiocyanate complexes of iron (III)
e. Eosin

152. Vitamin B1 deficiency has a negative effect on a number of processes. This is caused by the dysfunction of the following enzyme:
a. Glutamate
b. Lactate dehydrogenase
c. Aminotransferase
d. Succinate dehydrogenase
*e. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex

153. A patient with tuberculosis has been prescribed some anti-TB preparations. Which of the following chemotherapeutic drugs has an effect on the tuberculosis pathogen?
a. Phtalazolum
*b. Ftivazide
c. Methisazonum
d. Furacilinum
e. Sulfadimezinum

154. Many diseases of medicinal plants are caused by bacteria of the Pseudomonas genus. Select the bacteria relating to this genus:
a. Proteus
b. Colon bacillus
*c. Blue pus bacillus
d. Mycoplasma
e. Micrococci

155. Microbiological studies of air in the pharmacy room revealed the presence of pathogenic staphylococci. Select the medium in which you can detect the lecithinase activity of the isolated microorganism:
a. Sugar agar
b. Meat-extract agar
c. Blood agar
d. Bismuth sulfite agar
*e. Yolk-salt agar

156. Colloid silver preparations Protargolum and Collargolum are widely used in medical practice as bactericidal drugs. In addition to the active ingredients, these drugs contain protein compounds. What is the function of proteins in these preparations?
*a. Prevention of coagulation of the colloidal solution
b. Reduction of the side effects
c. Potentiation of the bactericidal action of silver
d. Improvement of the drug technology
e. Prolongation of shelf-life

157. Therapeutic preparations for topical use (transdermal, vaginal, etc.) do not require sterility. However, the total permissible number of microbial cells and fungi in 1 g (ml) of a drug should not exceed:
a. 10
b. 1000
c. 10 0000
*d. 100
e. 500

158. P.Ehrlich is considered to be the founder of modern chemotherapy. What chemotherapy drug was developed by this scientist?
a. Solusurminum
b. Novarsenolum
c. Osarsolum
*d. Salvarsan
e. Calomel

159. A patient was admitted to a hospital in a state of hypoglycemic coma. It occurs at the following level of blood glucose:
a. 5,5 mmol/l
*b. 2,5 mmol/l or less
c. 3,3 mmol/l
d. 4,0 mmol/l
e. 4,5 mmol/l

160. A patient who had been continuously treated with glucocorticoids was found to have a duodenal ulcer. What mechanism plays a major part in its development?
a. Hyperglycemia
*b. Increase of gastric juice secretion and acidity
c. Inhibition of gastrin secretion in the stomach
d. Acceleration of histamine inactivation in the stomach
e. Excess production of prostaglandin E

161. To isolate the lead (II) chloride from the other cations of the II analytical group in the systematic analysis, the chloride precipitate should be processed with:
a. Ammonia solution
b. Acetate acid solution
c. Alkali solution
*d. Hot water
e. Nitric acid solution

162. What reagent is used to separate the cations of copper (II) and mercury from the other cations of the VI analytical group?
a. Potassium sulfide
b. Excess of the concentrated ammonia solution
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Bromine water
*e. Sodium thiosulfate

163. For cultivation of Brucella, pure cultures should be incubated in CO2 enriched atmosphere. What type of breathing is typical for Brucella?
a. Facultative anaerobic
b. Obligate aerobic
c. Any
*d. Capnophilic
e. Obligate anaerobic

164. Some success in reducing malaria transmission was achieved through the mass destruction of transmitting mosquitoes and their larvae. The measures aimed at the destruction of insects are called:
*a. Disinfestation
b. Deratization
c. Decontamination
d. Sterilization
e. Disinfection

165. On the photomicrograph of a herbaceous plant stem the bicollateral vascular bundles are clearly visible. The microspecimen represents the stem of the following plant:
a. Corn
b. Solomon’s seal
c. Rye
d. Flax
*e. Pumpkin

166. What type of conducting bundles is typical for all root zones of one-seeded plants?
a. Collateral
*b. Radical
c. Central xylem
d. Central phloem
e. Bilateral

167. Antidepressants can increase the concentartion of catecholamines in the synaptic cleft. What is the mechanism of action of these drugs?
a. Activation of monoamine oxidase
b. Activation of acetylcholinesterase
c. Inhibition of acetylcholinesterase
*d. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase
e. Inhibition of xanthine oxidase

168. The figwort family Scrophulariaceae includes a biennial plant up to 1,5 m high, with golden-yellow flowers gathered in spiked inflorescences. The flowers have five stamens. Specify this plant:
a. Digitalis Ferruginea
*b. Verbascum flomoides
c. Digitalis grandiflora
d. Digitalis purpurea
e. Digitalis lanata

169. Permanganometric titration of hydrogen peroxide is carried out in the following medium:
a. Nitrate
b. Alkaline
*c. Sulfate
d. Hydrochloric
e. Alcohol

170. Quantitative analysis of zinc salts is performed by method of trilonometry. What indicator is used for this purpose?
a. Phenolphtalein
b. Potassium dichromate
c. Thymol blue
*d. Eriohrome black T
e. Methyl black

171. In response to the administration of protein drugs, a patient developed an allergic reaction. The development of the allergic reaction is caused by the increased synthesis of the following compound:
*a. Histamine
b. Adrenaline
c. Serotonin
d. Histidine
e. Choline

172. Astragalus dasyanthus has sessile flowers gathered into inflorescences with a short thick axis. This kind of inflorescence is called:
*a. Capitulum
b. Raceme
c. Calathidium
d. Head
e. Cyme

173. The technology of drug production widely uses the phenomena of absorption and ion exchange. Which of the ions will be selectively adsorbed on the surface of a silver chloride crystal from an aqueous solution?
a. OH-
*b. Ag+
c. NO3-
d. Cu2+
e. H+

174. A patient with acute myocarditis exhibits rapid fatigability, shortness of breath, edemata of legs, hepatomegaly. Classify the type of heart failure by the mechanism of its development:
a. Subcompensated
b. Combined
c. Overload
d. Compensated
*e. Myocardial

175. A child with PKU has an unpleasant mouse-like odor, growth retardation, mental retardation.These symptoms are associated with the high concentration of the following substance in blood:
a. Cholesterol
b. Glucose
*c. Phenylpyruvic acid
d. Adrenaline
e. Uric acid

176. After a contact with a person having an infectious diseases, the disease pathogens entered the patient’s body and started to multiply, but the symptoms of the disease were not yet observable. What period of the disease is this typical for?
a. Manifest illness stage
b. Prodromal
*c. Latent
d. Clinical outcome
e. Relapse

177. Extraction is commonly used in pharmacy for separating mixtures, increasing the concentration of any solute and extracting lipophilic compounds from the herbal material. This process is based on:
a. Third law of thermodynamics
b. Hess’s Law
c. Konovalov’s first law
d. Dalton’s second law
*e. Nernst distribution law

178. The rate of extraction of a drug substance depends on the value of its distribution coefficient. If the distributed substance is characterized by different rates of dissociation or association in different phases, the distribution coefficient is calculated by:
a. Nernst distribution law
b. The first Raoult’s law
c. Van’t Hoff rule
*d. Shilov-Lepin equation
e. Gibbs’ phase rule

179. A male patient developed fever up to 40oC, there are vomiting, diarrhea, the patient is in grave condition. Blood osmolality is 270 mOsm/l. What disorder of water-salt metabolism is observed in the patient?
a. Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
*b. Hypoosmolar hypohydration
c. Hyperosmolar hypohydration
d. Isoosmolar hypohydration
e. Isoosmolar hyperhydration

180. A 40-year-old male presented to the endocrinology department with disproprortionate enlargement of limbs, mandible and nose. These manifestations are caused by the overproduction of the following hormone:
a. Vasopressin
*b. Somatostatin
c. Aldosterone
d. Corticotropin
e. Adrenaline

181. Surfactants are commonly used in pharmaceutical production. What kind of surfactant is potassium oleate?
a. Amphoteric
b. None of the above
c. Cationic
d. Nonionic
*e. Anionic

182. Diabetes and starvation cause the excess production of ketone bodies that are used as an energy source. They are produced from the following compound:
*a. Acetyl-CoA
b. Lactate
c. Ketoglutarate
d. Malate
e. Isocitrate

183. Allantoic fluid of a chicken embryo contaminated with nasopharyngeal flush of a patient was found to contain a virus. What diagnostic agents should be used to identify it?
*a. Standard antiviral sera
b. Serum preparations
c. Polyvalent immune diagnostic sera
d. Diagnosticums produced of standard virus strains
e. Viral diagnosticums

184. A patient complains of severe abdominal pain, cramps, blurred vision. His relatives exhibit the same symptoms. The urine is of red colour. The patient has been hospitalized for acute intermittent porphyria. This disease might have been caused by the impaired synthesis of the following compound:
a. Bile acids
b. Insulin
*c. Heme
d. Prostaglandins
e. Collagen

185. Common nettle, hop, black elderberry relate to the plants that require soils rich in nitrogen compounds, that is, such plants are called:
a. Nitrophobes
b. Calciphobes
c. Halophytes
*d. Nitrophytes
e. Calciphiles

186. A 40-year-old female farmworker has been diagnosed with brucellosis and administered causal chemotherapy. What group of drugs will be used for this purpose?
a. Antitoxic serum
*b. Antibiotic
c. Inactivated therapeutic vaccine
d. Donor immunoglobulin
e. Polyvalent bacteriophage

187. A male received a radiation dose of 30 Gy. He presents with necrotic angina, disorders of the gastrointestinal tract. Blood tests revealed anemia, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. What phase of acute radiation syndrome is observed in the patient?
a. Latent
b. Primary reactions
*c. Manifest illness stage
d. Outcome of disease
e. -

188. As a result of hypothermia a male patient developed acute diffuse glomerulonephritis. What type of allergic reaction caused damage to the glomerular capillaries in the patient?
a. Cell-mediated
b. Stimulating
c. Anaphylactic
d. Cytotoxic
*e. Immunocomplex

189. A patient with hyperproduction of thyroid hormones has been prescribed Merkazolilum. This drug inhibits the following enzyme of iodothyronine synthesis:
a. Aminotransferase
*b. Iodide peroxidase
c. Reductase
d. Aromatase
e. Decarboxylase

190. A patient with Parkinson’s disease exhibits low level of dopamine which is produced from dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA). What enzyme catalyzes this conversion?
a. Aminotransferase
b. Carboxypeptidase
c. Deaminase
d. Hydrolase
*e. Decarboxylase

191. As a result of an emergency situation (shipwreck) a man had to drink sea (salty) water. What form of water-salt imbalance may occur in this case?
a. Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
b. Isoosmolar hyperhydration
c. Isotonic hyperhydration
*d. Hyperosmolar hyperhydration
e. Hypotonic hyperhydration

192. Hemoglobin catabolism results in release of iron which is transported to the bone marrow by a certain transfer protein and used again for the synthesis of hemoglobin. Specify this transfer protein:
a. Ceruloplasmin
b. Albumin
c. Transcobalamin
d. Haptoglobin
*e. Transferrin (siderophilin)

193. A laboratory received a food product that had been taken from the focus of food poisoning and presumably contained botulinum toxin. To identify the type of toxin, the neutralization reaction must be performed on white mice.What biological product is used in this reaction?
a. Diagnosticum
b. Allergen
c. Normal serum
d. Antibacterial serum
*e. Antitoxic serum

194. For the specific prevention of influenza, the employees of an enterprise were vaccinated with "Influvac". What type of immunity will develop in the body of the vaccinated?
a. Natural active
b. Natural passive
c. Innate congenital
d. Artificial passive
*e. Artificial active

195. Suspension is a form of pharmaceuticals used in medical practice. Which pair of substances is able to forma suspension?
a. Water-oil
b. Ethanol-ethyl acetate
c. Ethanol-diethyl ether
*d. Water-clay
e. Water-ethanol

196. In a sample studied under a microscope the multilayer palisade (columnar) parenchyma can be clearly seen. Such structure is typical for:
*a. Leaf
b. Dicotyledon stem
c. Adventitious roots
d. Rhizomes of ferns
e. Root

197. A patient exhibits small (petechial) hemorrhages under the skin and mucous membranes, bleeding gums, tooth decay, general weakness, edemata of the lower extremities. What vitamin deficiency can be suspected?
*a. C
b. A
c. E
d. D
e. B1

198. A parturient woman diagnosed with uterine inertia has been delivered to the maternity ward. The doctor gave her an injection of the drug that activates the contraction of smooth muscles of the uterus. What hormone is a component of this drug?
*a. Oxytocin
b. Secretin
c. Bradykinin
d. Angiotensin
e. Gastrin

199. Soil microflora often includes the representatives of pathogenic microorganisms. Specify the diseases, whose causative agents may say viable in the soil for a long time:
a. Tuberculosis and mycobacterioses
b. Leptospirosis and plague
c. Typhoid fever and dysentery
*d. Tetanus and gas anaerobic infection
e. Colibacillosis and cholera

200. The one-way penetration of solvent molecules into the polymer phase resulting in complete dissolution of the polymer is called:
a. Thixotropy
*b. Unlimited swelling
c. Coacervation
d. Limited swelling
e. Salting-out

