1. In a child-rearing facility there was an outbreak of measles. What specific urgent prophylaxis should be administered to contact UNVACCINATED children?
a. DPT vaccine
b. Measles virus vaccine live
*c. Gamma globulin against measles
d. Medical screening of the children
e. Isolation and treatment of infected children

2. Bouguer-Lambert-Beer law is the basis of molecular absorption analysis. According to this law, optical density of a solution is:
a. Directly proportional to concentration and inversely proportional to absorption coefficient
*b. Directly proportional to layer thickness and concentration of a substance
c. Inversely proportional to layer thickness and concentration of a substance
d. Directly proportional to layer thickness and absorption coefficient
e. Directly proportional to concentration and inversely proportional to layer thickness

3. Within folded parenchyma of a fir needle there are cavernous structures filled with galipot and lined with live thin-walled secretory cells. Name these structures:
a. Nectar glands
*b. Resin ducts
c. Hydatodes
d. Laticifers
e. Glandules

4. A chemotherapeutic agent has bactericidal effect against streptococci, staphylococci, bacilli, and clostridia. According to its action spectrum this drug belongs to the following group:
a. Broad spectrum antifungal agents
b. Narrow spectrum antibacterial agents
*c. Broad spectrum antibacterial agents
d. Antiviral agents
e. Antituberculous agents

5. Stem thickening occurs due to functioning of the following structures:
a. Wound meristem
b. Apical meristem
*c. Lateral meristem
d. Intercalary meristem
e. Endoderm

6. To determine mass fraction of sodium chloride in a drug, the Fajans method should be applied. Titration is to be performed in the presence of the following indicator solution:
a. Ammonium iron (III) sulfate
b. Phenolphthalein
c. Methyl red
d. Potassium chromate
*e. Fluorescein

7. Sulfanilamide drugs contain primary aromatic amides in their structure. Specify the method of quantitative determination of these compounds:
a. Cerimetry
*b. Nitritometry
c. Dichromatometry
d. Iodometry
e. Permanganatometry

8. Microbe survival within environment is facilitated by spore formation. What microorganisms of those listed below are spore formers:
*a. Clostridia
b. Staphylococci
c. Peptostreptococci
d. Peptococci
e. Bacteroides

9. Synthesis of a medicinal substance occurs in an isolated system. What is a direction criterion of spontaneous processes?
*a. Entropy change
b. Helmholtz energy
c. Enthalpy
d. Intrinsic energy
e. Gibbs energy

10. Dissociation degree in 0,01 M water solution is the same for all the strong electrolytes listed below. Name the substance with the highest boiling temperature of such solution:
a. K3PO4
*b. Al2(SO4)3
c. Na3PO4
d. KCl
e. Cu(NO3)2

11. Proteins are of great importance for vital functions. What value of pH results in zero electrophoretic mobility of gelatin (gelatin isoelectric point equals 4,7)?
a. 7,0
b. 5,5
c. 9,4
*d. 4,7
e. 14,0

12. Enzymes are widely used as drugs in pharmacy. What is the main difference that separates enzymes from non-biological catalysts?
a. High universality
b. High dispersion
c. High homogeneity
*d. High specificity and selectivity
e. Low universality

13. Chloroform and sodium nitrite solution were added into the acidulous investigated solution. The chloroform layer colored red-violet, which indicates the presence of:
*a. Iodide ions
b. Chloride ions
c. Fluoride ions
d. Sulfate ions
e. Carbonate ions

14. The following should be used for sterilization of laboratory glassware in a microbiological laboratory:
*a. Hot-air sterilizer
b. Koch’s steam sterilizer
c. Bactericidal lamps
d. Disinfectant
e. Bacteria-excluding filters

15. Parents of a 10-year-old child have made an appointment with an endocrinologist due to complaints of the child’s low height. The child’s appearance is corresponding with that of a 5-yearold. What hormone causes such changes in physical development, if its secretion is disturbed?
a. Testosterone
b. Insulin
c. Adrenocorticotropic hormone
d. Thyroxin
*e. Somatotropic hormone

16. Dry residue received after evaporation of the investigated solution turns previously colorless burner flame yellow, which is observed as violet through blue glass. What cations are there in the dry residue?
a. Na+ , Sr2+
b. Ca2+, K+
*c. Na+, K+
d. Li+, Ba2+
e. Na+, Ca2+

17. A smear of purulent excharge from urethra contains gram-negative beanshaped diplococci with both extra- and intracellular positions. Make the provisional microbiological diagnosis:
a. Trichomoniasis
b. Candidiasis
c. Syphilis
d. Chlamydiosis
*e. Gonorrhea

18. Under isobaric-isothermal conditions the possibility and direction of spontaneous processes can be predicted through change of:
a. Entropy
b. Intrinsic energy
c. Helmholtz energy
d. Enthalpy
*e. Gibbs energy

19. Investigated solution contains potassium and ammonium ions. Specify the reagent that can indicate the presence of potassium ions in this solution:
a. Sodium chloride
b. Potassium hexacyanoferrate (II)
c. Uranyl zinc acetate
*d. Potassium tetraiodomercurate
e. Sodium acetate

20. An injured person exhibits the following signs at the site of trauma: skin redness, throbbing small arteries, elevated local temperature, increased tissue turgor. What local blood circulation disorder are these presentations typical of?
a. Thrombosis
b. Venous hyperemia
*c. Arterial hyperemia
d. Embolism
e. Ischemia

21. During investigation of bacterial contamination of air it is necessary to take into account both total amount of microorganisms in a certain volume and qualitative content of microflora. What microorganisms are the sanitary indicators of air contamination within enclosed spaces?
a. Yeast fungi
b. Mold fungi
c. Colibacillus
d. Hay bacillus
*e. Staphylococcus aureus

22. Purine ring biosynthesis occurs in ribose-5-phosphate through gradual accumulation of nitrogen and carbon atoms and closing of the rings. The source of ribose phosphate is the process of:
a. Glycolysis
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Glycogenolysis
*d. Pentose phosphate cycle
e. Glyconeogenesis

23. Number of freedom degrees at the point of intersection of liquidus with Y-axis on the fusibility chart of a twocomponent system would equal:
a. 4
b. 1
c. 2
d. 3
*e. 0

24. In the process of qualitative analysis to determine strontium ions, so-called ”gypseous water” is used. This substance can be defined as:
a. Solution of Ba(OH)2
*b. Concentrated aqueous solution of CaSO4
c. Concentrated aqueous solution of CO2
d. Solution of Ca(OH)2
e. Aqueous solution of Ba(NO3)2

25. Which of the ligands is bidentate?
a. Cyanide ion
b. Thiocyanate ion
*c. Ethylenediamine
d. Pyridine
e. Hydroxide ion

26. Name the pH value, under which occurs the most intense color change of an indicator:
*a. pT value
b. Color change interval
c. Titration end point
d. Equivalence point
e. pK value

27. What compound produces phthalic acid during oxidation?
a. 
*b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

28. To distinguish between phenol and salicylic acid the following reagent is used:
*a. Sodium bicarbonate solution
b. Sodium hydroxide solution
c. Bromine solution
d. Sodium chloride solution
e. Iron (III) chloride solution

29. Reaction of benzaldehyde with chlorine produces:
a. 
*b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

30. Bacterial culture obtained from patient DOES NOT grow when exposed to oxygen. Conditions suitable for bacterial culture growth can be created in:
*a. Anaerobic culture jar
b. Pasteur oven
c. Oxidative medium
d. Krotov apparatus
e. Serum-supplemented medium

31. Specify the number of electrons that participate in creation of closed conjugated system within the pyrimidine molecule:
a. 8
*b. 6
c. 10
d. 4
e. 2

32. An oncological patient was prescribed fluorouracil that is a competitive inhibitor of thymidine synthase. It inhibits the process of:
a. Purine nucleotides disintegration
b. Lipids synthesis
c. Carbohydrate disintegration
d. Purine nucleotides synthesis
*e. Pyrimidine nucleotides synthesis

33. During feces analysis of a 3-monthold child with signs of enteric infection, numerous dark-red colonies has grown on Endo agar. What microorganisms can be the cause of such enteric infection?
a. Streptococci
b. Salmonellae
c. Shigella
*d. Escherichia
e. Gonococci

34. Sedimentation analysis has been applied for assessment of air purity in an aseptic unit of a phamacy. The test resulted in growth of the small colonies with areas of hemolysis. What medium was used for inoculation?
*a. Blood agar
b. Endo agar
c. Egg-yolk salt agar
d. Ploskirev’s agar
e. Levine’s agar (Eosin Methylene Blue agar)

35. Reaction of urea with nitrous acid produces the following:
a. CO + NH3 + CO2
b. CO2 + NO2 + H2O
*c. CO2 + N2 + H2O
d. CO2 + NO + NH3
e. CO2 + NH3 + NO2

36. Surface tension is an important characteristic of a liquid.What substance has maximal surface tension?
a. Ethanol
b. Acetone
c. Chloroform
*d. Water
e. Benzene

37. What standard solution can be used to standardize the solution of I2?
*a. Sodium thiosulfate solution
b. Potassium dichromate solution
c. Sodium nitrite solution
d. Potassium permanganate solution
e. Potassium iodide solution

38. Catalysts are widely used in production of drugs. How can reaction acceleration in the presence of a catalyst be explained?
a. Molecule speed increases
*b. Activation energy decreases
c. Activation energy increases
d. Total collision frequency increases
e. Collision frequency decreases

39. Microorganisms in the environment are being affected by various physical factors. What is the effect of high temperature on a microbial cell?
a. Transition into anabiosis state
b. Mutagenic effect
*c. Irreversible degradation of all cellular structures
d. Albuminolysis
e. Fats saponification

40. A person has been stung by a bee. The stung area developed redness and edema. What is the main mechanism of edema development?
*a. Increased permeability of the capillaries
b. Increased hydrostatic blood pressure
c. Disturbed lymphatic efflux
d. Decreased osmotic blood pressure
e. Decreased oncotic blood pressure

41. During identification of fruits of Datura family they were determined to be a:
a. Glossy black berry
b. Juicy globular cynarodium
c. Berry in an orange cup
*d. Thorned quadrivalve capsule
e. Urceolate capsule with a lid

42. During examination of a patient with intestinal infection, inoculation in Endo medium resulted in multi-colored colonies: red and colorless. According to its purpose this medium can be determined as:
a. —
*b. Differential diagnostic
c. Special
d. Universal
e. Selective

43. Formation enthalpy equals zero for the following substance:
a. CO2
*b. O2
c. H2SO4
d. H2O2
e. CaCO3

44. Nicotinic acid amide fulfills important metabolic function. What disorder develops, when it is deficient in the organism?
*a. Pellagra
b. Anemia
c. Beriberi
d. Xerophthalmia
e. Rickets

45. At the triple point of the water phase diagram:
a. f=1
b. P=3; n=1
c. f=2
d. P=3; f=1
*e. f=0

46. Reaction of benzene sulfonation produces:
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
*e. 

47. Choose the reaction of ester production among those listed below:
a. 
*b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

48. Select the formula of diazonium salt:
*a. 
b. C6H5 ? N = O
c. (CH3)2N ? N = O
d. C6H5 ? NH ? C(O) ? CH3
e. 

49. A patient was delivered into a resuscitation unit with signs of alcohol poisoning. The patient developed hypoxia of the following pathogenesis:
a. Hypoxic
b. Circulatory
c. Mixed
*d. Tissue
e. Hemic

50. Select the compound with amphoteric properties (which reacts both with acids and bases and produces salts):
a. 
*b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

51. Since 2005 in Asian and European countries there was recorded unusually high avian flu morbidity. Such spread of epidemic process can be determined as:
*a. Pandemia
b. Endemia
c. Epizooty
d. Sporadic
e. Epidemic

52. Pharmacopoeia reaction to determine benzoate ions requires interaction with the solution of:
*a. Iron (III) chloride
b. Resorcin
c. Diphenylamine
d. Acetic anhydride
e. Potassium chloride

53. Tricarboxylic acid cycle is a general way of carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids oxidation. Specify the acid with which acetyl-CoA reacts first in tricarboxylic acid cycle:
a. Citric
b. Fumaric
c. Malic
*d. Oxaloacetic
e. Isocitric

54. Specify the substance that results from the following reaction:
a. Acetic acid
*b. Ethanal
c. Propanal
d. Ethanol
e. Propanone

55. Choose the indicator and titration method to determine hydrogen carbonate ions in a drug:
a. Phenolphthalein, acidimetry
b. Phenolphthalein, alkalimetry
c. Murexide, acidimetry
*d. Methyl-orange, acidimetry
e. Methyl-orange, alkalimetry

56. Pharmacopoeia reaction to determine phosphate ions is a reaction with magnesia mixture. It results in production of white crystalline precipitate MgNH4PO4. Magnesia mixture consists of the following:
*a. MgCl2, NH3 × H2O, NH4Cl
b. MnCl2, NH3 × H2O, NaCl
c. MgCl2, NH4Cl
d. MgCl2, MnSO4, NH4Cl
e. MgCl2, NaOH, NaCl

57. An ophthalmologist has detected increased time of dark adaptation in a patient. What vitamin deficiency can result in such symptom?
*a. A
b. K
c. B6
d. B1
e. C

58. Prolonged taking of cytostatic agents resulted in development of necrotic tonsillitis in the patient. It can be associated with the following changes in the leukocyte content:
a. Lymphocytosis
*b. Agranulocytosis
c. Lymphopenia
d. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
e. Eosinopenia

59. During photosynthesis within plant cell chloroplasts there is short-term retained starch being produced, which rapidly hydrolyzes into glucose. This starch is called:
*a. Primary
b. Transitory
c. Reserve
d. Resistant
e. Secondary

60. A patient with type I diabetes mellitus developed hyperketonemic coma. What acid-base imbalance will be observed in the patient?
a. Gaseous acidosis
b. Gaseous alkalosis
c. There will be no acid-base imbalances
*d. Nongaseous acidosis
e. Nongaseous alkalosis

61. Reaction rate constant of a hypothetical reaction is measured as s?1. What is the order of this reaction?
*a. First-order
b. Second-order
c. Fractional-order
d. Third-order
e. Zero-order

62. Species character of Thymus serpyllum includes: apical inflorescences (flower heads), dark punctate glands on the inferior surface of a leaf, long hairs along the edge of leaf base, and:
a. Stems with prickles
b. Thorns
*c. Creeping stems
d. Climbing stems
e. Short decumbent stems

63. Natural peptides can perform various functions. What bioactive peptide is a major antioxidant and fulfills coenzyme functions?
a. Bradykinin
b. Liberin
c. Anserine
*d. Glutathione
e. Oxytocin

64. Gout develops when purine nucleotide metabolism is disturbed. A doctor prescribed the patient allopurinol that is a competitive inhibitor of:
a. Alcohol dehydrogenase
b. Succinate dehydrogenase
*c. Xanthine oxidase
d. Lactate dehydrogenase
e. Hexokinase

65. Specify the indicator of the protective properties of high-molecular compounds of body, which promote the retention of calcium, phosphate and carbonate in blood plasma:
a. Coagulation threshold
b. Hydrophilic-lipophilic balance
c. Volume of sol coagulated by 1 mol of the electrolyte substance
*d. Protective value
e. Critical micelle concentration

66. In a research center there is a live vaccine against dysentery being created. What property of attenuated vaccine strain should coincide with the properties of original virulent strain of dysentery bacillus?
a. Antibiotic susceptibility
b. Toxin production
c. Morphology
d. Biochemical activity
*e. Antigenic structure

67. Plantago major inflorescence grows at the apex, its rachis is long, with sessile flowers. Name this type of inflorescence:
a. Capitulum
b. Thyrse
c. Panicle
d. Spadix
*e. Spike

68. Microbiological investigation of vaginal suppositories determined them to be CONTRARY to the Pharmacopoeia demands. What microflora was detected in the suppositories, resulting in such a conclusion?
a. Citrobacter
*b. Blue pus bacillus
c. Micrococcus
d. Sarcina
e. Tetracoccus

69. A number of hereditary diseases is caused by mutations in gene areas that determine beginning or end of an intron. What process results in removal of introns and joining of exons?
*a. Splicing
b. Recombination
c. Translation
d. Replication
e. Transcription

70. Hyperlipemia can be observed in 23 hours after eating fatty food. 9 hours later lipid content normalizes again. How can this condition be characterized?
a. Hypertrophic obesity
*b. Alimentary hyperlipemia
c. Hyperplastic obesity
d. Transport hyperlipemia
e. Retention hyperlipemia

71. Name the mercurimetry titrant:
a. 0,1 М solution of AgNO3
b. 0,1 М solution of NaNO2
*c. 0,1 М solution of Hg2(NO3)2
d. 0,1 М solution of KSCN
e. 0,1 М solution of NH4SCN

72. What inflorescences are characteristic of Cruciferae (Brassicaceae) family?
*a. Raceme or panicle
b. Capitulum or umbel
c. Spadix or panicle
d. Corymb or spike
e. Capitulum or corymb

73. What cation of the 4th analytical group is present in a solution, if its reaction with the group reagent results in formation of yellow precipitate?
a. Sn(IV )
*b. Cr3+
c. Sn2+
d. Zn2+
e. Al3+

74. A patient presents with icteric sclera and mucous tunics; urine is dark; feces are light-colored. Blood content of direct and indirect bilirubin is increased, urine content of direct bilirubin is increased. What pathology can be characterized by these signs?
a. Jaundice of the newborn
b. Atherosclerosis
c. Hemolytic jaundice
d. Hepatocellular jaundice
*e. Obstructive jaundice

75. The patient presents with rapid growth of a tumor node and its progressing malignization. What stage of tumor growth can be characterized by these presentations?
a. Inactivation
*b. Progression
c. Transformation
d. Promotion (activation)
e. Exudation

76. You are studying a silvery downy plant of Asteraceae family, which is rich with essential oils and bitters. Harvested are apical sprouts with panicle of small round flower heads. This plant is:
a. Chamomilla recutita
*b. Artemisia absinthium
c. Bidens tripartita
d. Arctium lappa
e. Calendula officinalis

77. Among dosage forms there are numerous disperse systems. Specify the free disperse system:
a. Membrane
*b. Emulsion
c. Jelly
d. Gel
e. Diaphragm

78. A 55-year-old man, who had been suffering from mitral insufficiency for many years, developed acute heart failure. What pathophysiological type of heart failure can be observed in this case?
a. Due to hypoxic damage to the heart
b. Due to neurogenic damage to the heart
c. Due to acute cardiac tamponade
*d. Due to cardiac overload
e. Due to coronarogenic damage to the heart

79. Cataract (lenticular opacity) has developed in a 52-year-old woman with diabetes mellitus. Lenticular opacity was caused by intensification of the following processes:
a. Protein proteolysis
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Lipolysis
d. Ketogenesis
*e. Protein glycosylation

80. During practice in the laboratory the students had been investigating in vitro, how malonate affects enzymes of tricarboxylic acid cycle. They detected accumulation of the following metabolite:
a. Fumarate
b. Succinyl-CoA
c. Malate
d. Isocitrate
*e. Succinate

81. Aqueous solution of the following substance will have the smallest surface tension, if all the listed solutions are taken in the same concentration:
*a. Sodium stearate
b. Sodium chloride
c. Sucrose
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Ethanol

82. A 45-year-old woman, who for two weeks has been taking neodicoumarin (ethyl biscoumacetate) due to trombophlebitis, during a regular examination was detected to have decreased blood content of prothrombin, in urine there is microhematuria. What drug should be administered as a neodicoumarin antagonist?
*a. Vicasol (Menadione)
b. Sodium citrate
c. Aminocapronic acid
d. Heparin
e. Protamine sulfate

83. A patient complaining of dry mouth, photophobia, and visual impairment has been delivered into an admission room. The skin is hyperemic and dry; pupils are dilated; tachycardia is observed. The patient was diagnosed with belladonna alkaloids intoxication. What drug would be advisable?
a. Armin
b. Dipiroxim
c. Aceclidine
d. Pilocarpine
*e. Proserin

84. A child accidentally took a drink from the vial of grandmother’s medicine for glaucoma. The medicine was identified as pilocarpine hydrochloride. What drug can be used as an antidote?
a. Carbachol
b. Benzohexonium (Hexamethonium)
c. Pentamin (Azamethonium bromide)
*d. Atropine
e. Aceclidine

85. A woman suffering from neurosis has disturbed sleep.What drug is optimal for insomnia treatment?
*a. Nitrazepam
b. Aethaminalum-natrium (Pentobarbital)
c. Valerian tincture
d. Bromisoval
e. Phenobarbital

86. What antiprotozoal drug can be recommended to a woman with trichomoniasis?
a. Primaquine
b. Solusurminum (Sodium stibogluconate)
c. Chiniofon
*d. Metronidazole
e. Chloridine

87. Select the halogenated antiseptic that would be preferable for a child to pack in the first aid kit, when going to a summer camp:
a. Formaldehyde solution
*b. Iodine alcoholic solution
c. Copper sulfate
d. Brilliant green
e. Methylene blue

88. Name the most typical symptom of atropine poisoning:
a. Low intraocular pressure
*b. Dilated pupils unresponsive to light
c. Excessive sweating
d. Constricted pupils unresponsive to light
e. Bradycardia

89. .Apatient consulted an ophthalmologist about deterioration of twilight vision and xerophthalmus. What drug should the doctor prescribe?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Cocarboxylase
c. Pyridoxine
d. Tocopherol
*e. Retinol

90. A woman with hypertension came to a doctor complaining of dry cough that developed against the background of her therapy.What antihypertensive drug was she taking?
a. Furosemide
b. Dichlothiazide (Hydrochlorothiazide)
c. Atenolol
d. Nifedipine
*e. Lisinopril

91. Decreased absorption of tetracyclines, if they are taken simultaneously with antacids, is an example of their:
a. Synergism
b. Functional antagonism
c. Pharmaceutical incompatibility
d. Pharmacodynamic incompatibility
*e. Pharmacokinetic incompatibility

92. A patient after craniocerebral trauma has been prescribed piracetam. What pharmacological group does this drug belong to?
a. Antipsychotics
*b. Nootropic agents
c. Tranquilizers
d. Non-narcotic analgesics
e. General anesthetics

93. Recommend the patient with glaucoma an M-cholinomimetic agent:
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
c. Ephedrine hydrochloride
d. Sulfacyl-sodium (Sulfacetamide)
*e. Pilocarpine hydrochloride

94. A patient with hypertension was prescribed a nonselective betaadrenergic blocking agent. Name this drug:
*a. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
b. Proserin
c. Labetalol
d. Adrenalin hydrochloride
e. Prazosin

95. In the course of bronchitis pharmacotherapy a patient has developed dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis and hepatic failure. What drug can cause such disorders?
*a. Doxycycline
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Codeine phosphate
d. Acetylcysteine
e. Paracetamol

96. A 25-year-old woman with signs of acute morphine intoxication was administered naloxone, which rapidly improved her condition. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Serotonin receptor blockade
b. GABA receptor blockade
*c. Opioid receptor blockade
d. Dopamine receptor blockade
e. Benzodiazepine receptor blockade

97. Name the ability of a drug to accumulate within the patient’s body:
*a. Cumulation
b. Synergism
c. Allergy
d. Habituation
e. Antagonism

98. What pharmacological effect of acetylsalicylic acid allows its application in patients with ischemic heart disease for prevention of thromboses?
a. Antipyretic
b. Analgesic
*c. Antiaggregant
d. Ulcerogenic
e. Anti-inflammatory

99. A patient developed herpetic rashes. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Gentamicin
b. Benzylpenicillin
c. Biseptol (Co-trimoxazole)
*d. Acyclovir
e. Clotrimazole

100. A woman complaining of sleep disturbance, fearfulness, and anxiety came to a neurologist. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Nitroglycerine
b. Levodopa
*c. Diazepam
d. Oxytocin
e. Lisinopril

101. A man developed cardiac arrest due to thoracic trauma. Name the drug that should be introduced into the cavity of the left ventricle in this case:
a. Proserin
b. Metoprolol
c. Salbutamol
d. Lisinopril
*e. Adrenalin hydrochloride

102. A patient with acute heart failure was administered corglycon. What effect of this drug results in improvement of the patient’s condition?
a. Increased heart rate
b. Decreased oxygen demand of myocardium
c. Decreased heart force
d. Coronary vessels dilatation
*e. Increased heart force

103. Explain to an intern, what is the mechanism of analgesic action of morphine hydrochloride:
a. Phosphodiesterase blockade
b. Histamine receptors blockade
*c. Opiate receptors stimulation
d. Adenylate cyclase stimulation
e. Choline esterase blockade

104. What pharmacological effect of diazepam allows its application for termination of convulsions?
*a. Anticonvulsant
b. Antipyretic
c. Hypnotic
d. Anti-inflammatory
e. Analgesic

105. A patient suffers fromhyperchromic B12-deficiency anemia. What vitamin preparation should be prescribed in this case?
a. Riboflavin
b. Thiamine chloride
c. Retinol acetate
*d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Vicasol (Menadione)

106. A man is diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Paracetamol
b. Nitrazepam
*c. Levodopa
d. Aminazine
e. Anaprilin (Propranolol)

107. Direct titration CANNOT be applied for quantitative determination of calcium chloride by means of permanganatometry, because:
a. Side reactions are possible
b. The reaction runs slowly
c. The reaction runs very quickly
d. It is impossible to select the indicator to determine titration end point
*e. The investigated substance does not interact with the titrant

108. Colored or white component of double perianth, which consists of petals, is a:
a. Flower cup
b. Gynoecium
c. Perigonium
*d. Corolla
e. Androecium

109. A 54-year-old man requested a pharmacist’s advice on drug prescription. The patient has 4-year-long history of chronic glomerulonephritis and 2-yearlong history of persistent hypertension. What substance synthesized in the kidneys has important role in development of arterial hypertension?
a. Catecholamines
*b. Renin
c. Aldosterone
d. Nitric oxide
e. Histamine

110. A patient complains of general weakness, muscle weakness in the extremities (if the patient is asked to make a fist several times in a row, for example, the patient is capable of doing it only once), facial muscles are weak, swallowing is disturbed. Administration of acetylcholinesterase drugs removes these disturbances to a certain degree. Determine the pathology:
a. Paresis
b. Paralysis
*c. Myasthenia
d. Hemiplegia
e. Monoplegia

111. A drug solution sterilized by means of boiling was tested for sterility. Inoculation on Kitt-Tarozzi medium revealed clostridia. Clostridia survived the boiling because they are:
*a. Spore-formers
b. Anaerobic
c. Acid-fast
d. Prototrophic
e. Thermophilic

112. A 71-year-old woman developed mechanical jaundice due to obstruction of the bile duct with a chololith. Decrease of blood pressure and bradycardia are detected. These changes in functioning of the patient’s cardiovascular system are caused by increased blood content of the following substance:
a. Urobilin
b. Stercobilin
c. Direct bilirubin
d. Indirect bilirubin
*e. Bile acids

113. A sanitary-epidemic station employee has been poisoned when the premices were processed with an organophosphorous insecticide. What enzyme is inhibited by organophosphorous compounds?
a. Lactate dehydrogenase
b. Catalase
c. Pepsin
*d. Acetylcholinesterase
e. Xanthine oxidase

114. Indican excretion is a diagnostic criterion of intencified protein putrefaction in the intestine. Name the end product of tryptophan ”decay” occurring in the large intestine:
a. Mercaptan
b. Hydrogen sulfide
c. Putrescine
d. Benzoic acid
*e. Indole

115. The second stage of detoxification involves joining certain chemical compounds with functional groups of toxines. Select one such compound:
a. Pyruvate
*b. Glucuronic acid
c. Cholesterol
d. Higher fatty acids
e. Glucose

116. Actinomorphic apopetalous corolla include:
*a. Cruciform
b. Campanulate
c. Ligulate
d. Tubular
e. Funnelform

117. Selective medium can be used to separate various species of bacteria in a bacteriological laboratory.What medium of those listed below can be determined as selective?
a. Meat infusion broth
b. Hiss’ serum water medium
c. Endo agar
*d. Alkaline peptone water
e. Meat infusion agar

118. A 5-year-old child presents with abdominal distension, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea occurring 1-4 hours after drinking milk. Described symptoms are caused by the lack of enzymes that break up:
a. Fructose
*b. Lactose
c. Maltose
d. Glucose
e. Saccharose

119. If pH of a solution is lower than its isoelectric point, itmeans in this solution:
a. Certain protein aggregates are formed
b. Anion and cation forms of amino acids are balanced
*c. Cation forms of amino acids are prevalent
d. Irreversible protein precipitation occurs
e. Anion forms of amino acids are prevalent

120. Avidin - an egg white protein inhibits reception of biotin (carboxylase coenzyme) by the body. What reaction will be blocked by avidin administration?
a. NH3 detachment from glutamine
b. NH3 attachment to glutamate
*c. CO2 attachment to pyruvate
d. Detachment of phosphate residuals
e. Beta-oxidation of fatty acids

121. During mercurimetric titration of halogenide ions in the presence of diphenylcarbazone, at the titration end point the precipitate is produced. This precipitate will be colored:
*a. Blue
b. Yellow
c. Brown
d. Green
e. Red

122. When determining oxidizing agents by means of iodometry in the presence of starch the following phenomenon can be observed at the titration end point:
a. Green coloring of solution disappears
b. White precipitate occurs
c. Red coloring appears
d. Green coloring of precipitate appears
*e. Blue coloring disappears

123. To obtain exotoxins of some microorganisms, these microorganisms are inoculated into liquid nutrient medium, where microbial cultivation occurs and toxins are produced. At a certain stage it is necessary to remove themicrobial cells from the medium, that is, to separate the toxins from microbes. What method should be applied in this case?
a. Boiling
b. Ultraviolet irradiation
c. Disinfectants (chloramine)
*d. Bacteria-excluding filters
e. Autoclaving

124. A plant producing essential oil has square stem, bilabiate corolla, coenobium fruit. These features are characteristic of:
a. Polygonaceae
b. Papaveraceae
*c. Lamiaceae
d. Solanaceae
e. Scrophulariaceae

125. A plant under investigation has compound uniform monopodium inflorescence - compound umbel. What plant is it characteristic of?
a. Allium cepa
b. Rosa canina
c. Centaurea cyanus
*d. Anethum graveolens
e. Sorbus aucuparia

126. During field practice a student was tasked with making a morphological collection of coenocarpous fruits. What type of fruit belongs to this group?
a. Aggregate-accessory fruit
b. Cynarodium
c. Drupe
*d. Hesperidium
e. Fragaria

127. A patient with gingivitis was prescribed oral cavity irrigation with 0,02% potassium permanganate solution. What group of antiseptics does this drug belong to?
a. Detergents
b. Dyes
*c. Oxidants
d. Alcohols
e. Nitrofurans

128. To relieve dry cough a patient with bronchitis was prescribed a drug that is an alkaloid of yellow horned-poppy. Name this drug:
a. Codterpin
*b. Glaucine hydrochloride
c. Libexin (Prenoxdiazine)
d. Codeine phosphate
e. Oxeladin

129. Hydrochloric acid was added into the solution under investigation. The resulting precipitate was filtered, then this filter cake was processed with hot water; after the filtrate cooled, KI solution was added into it. What cation was present in the solution, if the precipitate was colored yellow?
a. Ag+
b. Ca2+
c. Ba2+
*d. Pb2+
e. Hg2+

130. When cations are divided into analytical groups according to the acidbase classification, group reagents can be acids or bases.What acids can be used as group reagents?
a. HCIO4
b. H2CO3
c. HNO3, CH3COOH
d. H3PO4, H2C2O4
*e. HCI, H2SO4

131. Main process of ammonia neutralization occurs in the liver. Arginine decomposition reaction that produces urea as a result is catalyzed with arginase. What group of enzymes does arginase belong to?
a. Transferases
b. Isomerases
c. Synthetases
d. Oxidoreductases
*e. Hydrolases

132. Connection between plant cell protoplasts and their metabolic function is provided by thin cytoplasmic threads that pass through pores in the cell walls. Name these threads:
a. Cytoskeleton
*b. Plasmodesma
c. Microtubules
d. Fibrils
e. Microfilaments

133. On autopsy there are numerous suppurative foci within many of the internal organs. What pathological process is it characteristic of?
a. Bacteriemia
b. Toxemia
c. Septicemia
d. Sepsis
*e. Septicopyemia

134. Isotonicity is required of infusion solutions. What phenomenon occurs when a hypertensive solution is introduced into blood plasma?
a. Hemolysis
b. Osmosis
*c. Plasmolysis
d. Denaturation
e. Thixotropy

135. The third analitycal group of cations (acid-base classification) includes Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+. What acid can function as a precipitator agent (group reagent) for these cations?
*a. H2SO4
b. HCI
c. HCIO4
d. CH3COOH
e. HNO3

136. During routine preventive examination the local pediatrician noticed a boy of short stature. Mental development of the child corresponds with his age. What endocrine disorder is it?
*a. Pituitary nanism
b. Acromegalia
c. Rickets
d. Gigantism
e. Cretinism

137. Eicosanoids synthesis begins with freeing polyene acids from membrane phospholipids by means of a specific phospholipase. Name this enzyme:
a. Protein kinase
b. Arginase
c. Cyclooxygenase
d. Phospholipase C
*e. Phospholipase A2

138. Thermal analysis is used in pharmacy to identify drugs and determine drug purity. What coordinates are necessary to build a cooling curve?
a. Volume-time
b. Temperature-volume
c. Pressure-time
d. Volume-temperature
*e. Temperature-time

139. Both scientific and folk medicine uses medicinal plant Glycyrrhiza glabra L.What part of the plant is harvested?
*a. Roots and rhizomes
b. Inflorescence
c. Seeds
d. Grass
e. Foliage

140. Choose the formula of nonionic surfactant among those listed below:
a. C6H13NH2COONa
b. C2H5NH2 × HCl
c. C15H31COONa
d. C11H23OSO3Na
*e. CH3(OCH2CH2)10OH

141. A pregnant woman was diagnosed with vaginal dysbacteriosis. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
a. Antibiotic
b. Interferon
c. Polyvitamins
*d. Probiotic
e. Bacteriophage

142. A patient has been receiving Theophylline (inhibitor of cyclic adenosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase) for a week. What hormone can increase its action due to such treatment and cause hyperglycemia?
a. Estradiol
*b. Glucagon
c. Aldosterone
d. Testosterone
e. Insulin

143. Reaction of sodium ions with potassium hexahydroxoantimonate (V) in neutral medium produces precipitate. Specify the color of this precipitate:
a. Green
b. Blue
c. Red
d. Yellow
*e. White

144. .Reaction with potassium permanganate is used to detect reducing anions. Specify the anion that decolorizes potassium permanganate:
a. Arsenate
*b. Sulfite
c. Tetraborate
d. Carbonate
e. Sulfate

145. A 25-year-old-patient with the II degree thermal burns came to a doctor. Objectively: there are large blisters on the upper limbs; the blisters are filled with clear exudate containing mostly water and albumines with isolated leukocytes. Name the type of the exudate:
a. Hemorrhagic
*b. Serous
c. Fibrinous
d. Catarrhal (mucous)
e. Purulent

146. Rhizome of an Asteraceae family species is polycephalous, succulent, has lysigenous cavities, accumulates inulin. Such underground organ is characterisic of:
a. Digitalis grandiflora
b. Hyoscyamus niger
*c. Inula helenium
d. Sorbus aucuparia
e. Helianthus annuus

147. Osmotic pressure is an important characteristic of biological fluids. Semipermeable membranes are necessary for penetration of solvent molecules. What substance CANNOT be used as a semipermeable membrane?
*a. Glass
b. Collodion film
c. Gelatine
d. Parchment
e. Biological membrane

148. Specify the substance that can be determined by means of polarimetry:
a. Benzene
*b. Glucose
c. Sulfuric acid
d. This method will suffice for any substance
e. Sodium chloride

149. A local general practitioner recommends taking interferon for influenza prevention. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
*a. Blocks virus protein synthesis
b. Inhibits virion exit from cells
c. Disrupts the process of virus assembly
d. Prevents adsorption of virus in cell receptors
e. Blocks virus stripping

150. What cation can be detected with Chugaiev’s agent (Dimethylglyoxime)?
a. K+
b. Ca2+
*c. Ni2+
d. Mn2+
e. Co2+

151. A solution of hydrogen peroxide in an acid medium was added into investigated solution, leading to blue coloring of the resulting solution. This analytical effect indicates the presence of the following anions:
a. Cl?
*b. Cr2O72?
c. C2O42?
d. MnO4?
e. NO3?

152. A patient presents with hypoxia. What metabolic process activates when oxygen supply is insufficient?
a. Tricarboxylic acid cycle
*b. Anaerobic glycolysis
c. Pentose-phosphate pathway
d. Urea cycle
e. Oxidative decarboxylation of keto acids

153. A child had been administered antidiphtheric serum. What resistance was formed in the child?
a. Physiological
*b. Passive
c. Primary
d. Active
e. Pathologic

154. A patient with brain edema presents with respiration that is characterized by periods of several respiratory movements of equal amplitude alternating with periods of apnea. What pathologic respiration is it characteristic of?
a. Kussmaul’s respiration
*b. Biot’s respiration
c. Apneustic respiration
d. Gasping respiration
e. Cheyne-Stokes’ respiration

155. A patient in the state of ketoacidotic coma presents with loud rapid respiration: labored expiration with tension of expiratory muscles occurs after deep inspiration. Name the type of pathologic respiration:
a. Stenotic
b. Biot’s
c. Cheyne-Stokes’
d. Gasping
*e. Kussmaul’s

156. In a nursery-garden some medicinal plants developed signs of a disease: there are yellow spots and necrotic foci on the leaves. Sap of the diseased plants remained infectious even after passing through a bacteria-excluding filter. No microorganisms growth was detected on the nutrient medium.What microorganisms could be the cause of this disease?
a. Ray fungi
b. Fungi
*c. Viruses
d. Bacteria
e. Mycoplasma

157. Bark of a thornless xylophyte of the Rhamnaceae family has laxative effect. Name this plant:
a. Aronia melanocarpa
b. Rubus idaeus
c. Crataegus sanguinea
*d. Frangula alnus
e. Hippophaё rhamnoides

158. Different structures of a bacterial cell perform different functions. What dispensable component of a cell ensures its survival within hostile environment?
a. Flagella
b. Cilia
c. Inclusions
*d. Spores
e. Capsule

159. Total content of chloride, bromide, and iodide ions in the investigated solution can be quantitatively determined with the following titrant:
a. Sodium nitrite solution
*b. Silver nitrate solution
c. Sodium thiosulfate solution
d. Potassium dichromate solution
e. Potassium permanganate solution

160. Specify the reaction product of complete aniline hydrogenation:
a. 
*b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

161. Name the isomer of diethyl ether functional group: CH3 ? CH2 ? O ? CH2 ? CH3:
a. Ethanol
b. Ethyl acetate
c. Dimethyl ether
*d. Butanol
e. Butanal

162. .What substance can be identified with aqueous solution of FeCl3?
a. 
*b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

163. What reaction proves that phenol has acidic properties?
a. 
b. 
*c. 
d. 
e. 

164. Gravimetry (precipitation method) is used for quantitative determination of sulfates in potable water. What substance should be used as precipitator for sulfates?
a. KCI
b. NaCI
c. NH4NO3
*d. BaCI2
e. MgCI2

165. In 9 days after administration of a therapeutic serum the patient developed urticaria, itching, edemas, and lymph nodes enlargement.What type of allergic reaction has occurred in the patient?
a. Cytotoxic
b. Stimulating
c. Cellular
*d. Immune complex
e. Anaphylactic

166. .Which of the listed compounds is an alpha-amino acid?
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
*e. 

167. Exudation is characteristic of inflammation. What factors cause exudation and local edema of the inflamed area?
a. Leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells
b. Decreased permeability of vessel wall
c. Hyperglycemia
d. Ischemia
*e. Increased permeability of vessel wall

168. For cardiovascular disease prevention the patient was recommended to take vitamin F. What is the chemical nature of this vitamin?
a. Carotin derivative
*b. Complex of polyunsaturated fatty acids
c. Polysaccharide complex
d. Cholesterol derivative
e. Amino acids complex

169. Wetting occurs when a drop of a liquid comes into contact with the surface of a solid substance. The degree of wetting is measured through:
a. Drop size
b. Work of adhesion
c. Drop density
d. Surface tension
*e. Contact angle

170. A perennial plant has white flower heads grouped in compound corymbs and bipinnatisected or tripinnatisected leaves. Name this plant:
a. Melilotus officinalis
b. Phaseolus vulgaris
c. Taraxacum officinale
*d. Аchillea millefolium
e. Potentilla erecta

171. What organic compounds are produced in the result of intramolecular dehydration of monohydric alcohols?
*a. Alkenes
b. Aldehydes
c. Arenes
d. Alkanes
e. Esters

172. A group of children in the kindergarten (6-year-olds) received Mantoux test; 15 children presented with negative results. What measures should be taken towards these children?
a. Referral for fluorography
*b. BCG vaccination
c. Isolation
d. Tuberculosis antitoxin
e. Repeat the test

173. Increased concentration of active oxygen forms is a mechanism of pathogenesis in a number of diseases. To prevent this process, antioxidants are prescribed. Select an antioxidant from the list below:
a. Glicerol
*b. Alpha-tocopherol
c. Calciferol
d. Glucose
e. Cobalamine

174. During excursion into a conifer forest the students noticed that bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus) stems are lignified only partially in their lower part, the upper part of the stem retains the form of caulis. Therefore, this plant can be classified as:
a. Perennial grass
b. Tree
c. Annual grass
d. Liana
*e. Suffrutex

175. Antibiotics derived from various species of actinomycetes are widely used in medical practice. Point out these drugs among those listed below:
a. Chloreline, arenarinum
b. Lysozyme, erytrinum
c. Penicillin, cephalosporin, griseofulvin
d. Polymyxin, bacitracin
*e. Aminoglycosides (streptomycin, monomycin)

176. In a human body there occur numerous reactions of direct interaction between substrate and molecular oxygen. What enzyme catalyzes attachment of two oxygen atoms to the substrate?
a. Catalase
b. Superoxide dismutase
c. Glutathione reductase
*d. Dioxygenase
e. Monooxygenase

177. Seeds of rye, corn, and other crops have small corymb-shaped cotyledon and accumulate nutrients in the:
a. Shell
b. Perisperm
*c. Endosperm
d. Gemmule
e. Embryo root

178. A 55-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of acute pain in his big toes.Meat and wine remain permanently in his diet. The doctor suspects gout. What substance must be measured in the patient’s blood to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Ketone bodies
*b. Uric acid
c. Lactate
d. Urea
e. Bilirubin

179. Isotonic glucose solution is widely used as a solvent or infuson medium for introduction of various drugs.What mass fraction is characteristic of this solution?
a. 15%
b. 10%
*c. 5%
d. 20%
e. 1%

180. Name the process of cell membrane saturation with a fat-like substance suberin:
*a. Suberization
b. Mineralisation
c. Sliming
d. Cutinization
e. Lignification

181. A man has been suffering from rheumatoid arthritis for 10 years. Due to its exacerbation he had been taking acetylsalicylic acid and prednisolone. The patient complains of stomachache, eructation, nausea, sensation of full epigastrium, and meteorism. On gastroscopy there was an erosion (0,5x0,5 cm) of gastric mucosa detected. What is the cause of gastric mucosa defect development?
a. Age-related changes of mucosa
b. Prolonged hypersthenia of gastric muscles
c. Immune-mediated destruction of gastric mucosa
d. Dysbacteriosis development
*e. Prolonged taking of aspirin and hormones

182. Treatment of a number of pathologic changes in human body is based on the peptization process, particularly disintegration of thrombi within blood vessels. The most important condition for efficient peptization can be determined as:
*a. Timely introduction of anticoagulant
b. Ultrasound effect
c. Heating
d. Shaking
e. Introduction of excessive solvent

183. The patient’s large-focal myocardial infarction is complicated with pulmonary edema. What disturbance of cardiohemodynamics contributed to the pulmonary edema development?
a. Acute right ventricular failure
b. Cardiogenic shock
c. Reperfusion syndrome
*d. Acute left ventricular failure
e. Autoimmune myocarditis

184. The fruit is a thorned many-seeded capsule that opens into four flaps when ripe. It is characteristic of:
a. Papaver somniferum
b. Digitalis purpurea
c. Linum usitatissimum
*d. Datura stramonium
e. Hyoscyamus niger

185. An interhospital pharmacy received a short-acting narcotic analgesic that is 100 times more active than morphine. Name this drug:
*a. Fentanyl
b. Naloxone
c. Ketanov (Ketorolac)
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Naltrexone

186. Hemoglobin break-up begins in the cells of reticuloendothelial system. What enzyme catalyzes the reduction reaction of biliverdine into bilirubin?
a. Beta-glucuronidase
b. Heme oxygenase
c. Hexokinase
*d. Biliverdine reductase
e. Xanthine oxidase

187. To stop diarrhea the doctor prescribed a drug that affects opiate receptors of the intestine and decreases its peristalsis. Name this drug:
a. Tetracycline
*b. Loperamide
c. Levorin
d. Heparin
e. Voltaren (Diclofenac)

188. What formula corresponds with alpha-nitropyrole?
a. 
b. 
c. 
*d. 
e. 

189. Essential oils are used both in pharmaceutical and cosmetic industry. To extract essential oils from herbal raw material the following technology is used:
a. Colorimetry
b. Calorimetry
*c. Steam distillation
d. Potentiometry
e. Conductometry

190. Specify the mechanism of the given reaction:
a. AN (nucleophilic attachment)
b. SN (nucleophilic substitution)
*c. Е (elimination)
d. SR (radical substitution)
e. SE (electrophilic substitution)

191. What type of bonds participates in creation of both linear and cyclic carboxylic acid associates in the form of dimers?
a. Polar covalent bonds
b. Ionic bonds
*c. Hydrogen bonds
d. Nonpolar covalent bonds
e. Donor-acceptor bonds

192. Specify the functional group of isoniazide (an isonicotinic acid derivative) molecule:
a. Pyridine heterocyclic group
b. Ester group
c. Amide group
d. Carboxyl group
*e. Hydrazide group

193. What compound is synthesized by means of beta-picoline oxidation?
a. Uric acid
b. Benzoic acid
*c. Nicotinic acid
d. Barbituric acid
e. Ascorbic acid

194. Specify quinoline among the compounds given below:
a. 
b. 
*c. 
d. 
e. 

195. Name the substance B in the following transformation:
a. Propanone
b. Ethanal
c. Ethanol
d. Propanal
*e. Acetic acid

196. What substance produces ketone, when oxidized with potassium permanganate?
a. CH3 ? CH ? CH2OH
b. 
c. 
*d. 
e. CH3 ? CH2OH

197. Among the given isomer pairs choose the position isomers of the functional group:
a. 
b. 
*c. 
d. 
e. 

198. Among the given substances choose the one that is used for oxidation of organic compounds:
a. CH3 ? CH3
b. HCl
c. NH2 ? NH2
*d. KMnO4
e. NaOH

199. What substance will be produced as the result of the following reaction:
a. C6H6
b. C6H5OH
*c. C6H5J
d. C6H5—Cl
e. C6H5OK

200. What reagent can simultaneously detect aldehyde group and glycol fragment in a glucose molecule?
a. AlCl3
b. Br2
*c. Cu(OH)2
d. FeCl3
e. KMnO4

