1. A patient visited a dentist with complaints of redness and edema of his mouth mucous membrane in a month after dental prosthesis. The patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis. What type of allergic reaction by Gell and Cumbs underlies this disease?
a. Cytotoxic
b. Anaphylactic
c. Stimulating
*d. Delayed type hypersensitivity
e. Immunocomplex

2. An electronic microphotograph shows a macrophagic cell with erythrocytes at different stages of differentiation located along its processes. This is the cell of the following organ:
a. Spleen
b. Thymus
*c. Red bone marrow
d. Tonsil
e. Lymph node

3. Decreased blood supply to the organs causes hypoxia that activates fibroblasts function. Volume of what elements is increased in this case?
a. Nerve elements
b. Vessels of microcircular stream
*c. Intercellular substance
d. Parenchymatous elements of the organ
e. Lymphatic vessels

4. A patient has undergone an amputation of lower extremity. Some time later painful nodules appeared in a stump. Amputatious neuromas were found out at the microscopic examination. To what pathological processes do those formations relate?
a. Dystrophy
b. Hyperemia
c. Metaplasia
*d. Regeneration
e. Inflammation

5. A 22-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of heavy nasal breathing. During the examination of her nasal cavity the doctors found thickened mucous membrane, a lot of mucus and nodular infiltrates without erosions in the nose.The nasal rhinoscleroma was diagnosed. The biopsy was taken. What typical morphological changes may be found?
a. Granulomas with Langhan’s cells
b. Granulomas with Virchow’s cells
*c. Granulomas with Mikulicz’s cells
d. Granulomas with foreign body cells
e. Interstitial inflammation

6. Lung of premature infant is presented on electronic photomicrography of biopsy material. Collapse of the alveolar wall caused by the deficiency of surfactant was revealed. Disfunction of what cells of the alveolar wall caused it?
a. Fibroblasts
*b. Alveocytes type II
c. Alveolar macrophages
d. Alveocytes type I
e. Secretory cells

7. During histological examination of the stomach it was found out that glands contain very small amount of pariental cells or they are totally absent. Mucose membrane of what part of the stomach was studied?
a. Body of stomach
b. -
c. Fundus of stomach
d. Cardiak part
*e. Pyloric part

8. Live vaccine is injected into the human body. Increasing activity of what cells of connective tissue can be expected?
a. Adipocytes and adventitious cells
b. Fibroblasts and labrocytes
c. Macrophages and fibroblasts
d. Pigmentocytes and pericytes
*e. Plasmocytes and lymphocytes

9. In the blood of a 26-year-old man it was revealed 18% of erythrocytes of the spherical, ball-shaped, flat and thorn-like shape. Other eritrocytes were in the form of the concavo-concave disks. How is such phenomenon called?
a. Pathological anisocytosis
b. Erytrocytosis
c. Pathological poikilocytosis
d. Physiological anisocytosis
*e. Physiological poikilocytosis

10. When the pH level of the stomach lumen decreases to less than 3, the antrum of the stomach releases peptide that acts in paracrine fashion to inhibit gastrin release. This peptide is:
a. Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)
*b. GIF
c. Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP)
d. Acetylcholine
e. Somatostatin

11. A 50-year-old male farm worker has been brought to the emergency room. He was found confused in the orchard and since then has remained unconscious. His heart rate is 45 and his blood pressure is 80/40 mm Hg. He is sweating and salivating profusely. Which of the following should be prescribed?
*a. Atropine
b. Proserine
c. Pentamine
d. Physostigmine
e. Norepinephrine

12. A 13-year-old girl with history of asthma complained of cough, dyspnea and wheezing. Her symptoms became so severe that her parents brought her to the emergency room. Physical examination revealed diaphoresis, dyspnea, tachycardia and tachypnea. Her respiratory rate was 42/min, pulse rate was 110 beats per minute, and blood pressure was 130/70 mm Hg. Choose from the following list the most appropriate drug to reverse the bronchoconstriction rapidly:
*a. Salbutamol
b. Beclomethasone
c. Ipratropium
d. Methylprednidsolone
e. Cromolyn

13. A doctor administered Allopurinol to a 26-year-old young man with the symptoms of gout. What pharmacological action of Allopurinol ensures therapeutical effect?
a. By general analgetic effect
*b. By inhibiting uric acid synthesis
c. By inhibiting leucocyte migration into the joint
d. By increasing uric acid excretion
e. By general anti-inflammatory effect

14. The pulmonalis embolism has suddenly developed in a 40 year-old patient with opened fracture of the hip. Choose the possible kind of embolism
a. Air
b. Thrombus-embolus
*c. Fat
d. Tissue
e. Foreign body

15. Hypertrychosis of auricles is caused by a gene that is localized in Y-chromosome. Father has this feature. What is the probability to give birth to a boy with such anomaly?
a. 0%
b. 35%
c. 75%
*d. 100%
e. 25%

16. On autopsy a 35-year-old man the focus of carnification 5 cm in diametre enclosed in a thin capsule was revealed in the second segment of the right lung . The focus consists of a tough dry friable tissue with a dim surface. For what disease are these morphological changes typical?
a. Lung cancer
b. Tumorous form of silicosis
c. Postinflammatory pneumosclerosis
*d. Tuberculoma
e. Chondroma

17. During postembryonal haemopoiesis in the red bone marrow the cells of one of the cellular differons demonstrate a gradual decrease in cytoplasmic basophilia as well as an increase in oxyphilia, the nucleus is being forced out. Such morphological changes are typical for the following haemopoiesis type:
a. Eosinophil cytopoiesis
b. Basophil cytopoiesis
c. Lymphopoiesis
d. Neutrophil cytopoiesis
*e. Erythropoiesis

18. In the microspecimen of red bone marrow there were revealed multiple capillares through the walls of which mature blood cells penetrated. What type of capillares is it?
*a. Sinusoidal
b. Somatical
c. Lymphatic
d. Visceral
e. Fenestrational

19. M-r S presents all signs of the hepatic coma: loss of consciousness, absence of reflexes, cramps, convulsion, disorder of heart activity, recurrent (periodical) respiration. What are cerebrotoxical substances which accumulate in blood under hepar insufficiency?
a. Necrosogenic substances
b. Ketonic body
c. IL-1
d. Autoantibody
*e. Ammonia

20. Autopsy of a man who died from chronic cardiacvascular collapse revealed "tiger heart". Sidewards of endocardium a yellowish-white banding can be seen; myocardium is dull, dark-yellow. What process caused this pathology?
a. Hyaline degeneration
b. Carbohydrate degeneration
*c. Fatty parenchymatous degeneration
d. Fatty vascular-stromal degeneration
e. Amyloidosis

21. The low specific gravity of the secondary urine (1002) was found out in the sick person. What is the most distant part of nephron where concentration of secondary urine takes place?
a. In ascending part of loop of Henle
b. In distal tubule of nephron
c. In the nephron’s glomerulus
d. In proximal tubule of nephron
*e. In the collecting duck

22. Blood sampling for bulk analysis is recommended to be performed on an empty stomack and in the morning. What changes in blood composition can occur if to perform blood sampling after food intake?
*a. Increased contents of leukocytes
b. Increased plasma proteins
c. Reduced contents of erythrocytes
d. Reduced contents of thrombocytes
e. Increased contents of erythrocytes

23. Most participants of Magellan expedition to America died from avitominosis. This disease declared itself by general weakness, subcutaneous hemmorhages, falling of teeth, gingival hemmorhages. What is the name of this avitiminosis?
*a. Scurvy
b. Rachitis
c. Biermers anemia
d. Polyneuritis (beriberi)
e. Pellagra

24. A histological specimen presents a receptor zone of a sensoepithelial sense organ. Cells of this zone are placed upon the basal membrane and include the following types: external and internal receptor cells, external and internal phalangeal cell, stem cells, external limiting cells and external supporting cell. The described receptor zone belongs to the following sense organ:
*a. Acoustic organ
b. Gustatory organ
c. Olfactory organ
d. Equilibrium organ
e. Visual organ

25. A patient died 3 days after the operation because of perforated colon with manifestations of diffuse purulent peritonitis. The autopsy revealed: colon mucose membrane was thickened and covered with a fibrin pellicle, isolated ulcers penetrated at different depth. The histology result: mucous membrane necrosis, leukocytes infiltration with hemorrhages focuses. What disease complication caused the patients death?
a. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
b. Typhoid
*c. Dysentery
d. Crohns disease
e. Amebiasis

26. A patient was admitted to the hospital with an asphyxia attack provoked by a spasm of smooth muscles of the respiratory tracts. This attack was mainly caused by alterations in the following parts of the airways:
a. Respiratory part
*b. Small bronchi
c. Large bronchi
d. Median bronchi
e. Terminal bronchioles

27. The increased intraocular tension is observed in the patient with glaucoma.Secretion of aqueous humor by the ciliar body is normal. Injury of what structure of the eyeball wall caused the disorder of flow-out from the anterior chamber?
a. Ciliary muscle
b. Back epithelium of cornea
c. Ciliar body
d. Choroid
*e. Venous sinus

28. Examination of a 43 y.o. patient revealed that his stomach has difficulties with digestion of protein food. Gastric juice analysis revealed low acidity. Function of which gastric cells is disturbed in this case?
a. Main exocrinocytes
b. Endocrinous cells
c. Cervical mucocytes
*d. Parietal exocrinocytes
e. Mucous cells (mucocytes)

29. A patient has been given high doses of hydrocortisone for a long time. This caused atrophy of one of the adrenal cortex zones. Which zone is it?
*a. Fascial
b. Reticular
c. -
d. Glomerular and reticular
e. Glomerular

30. Low level of albumins and fibrinogen was detected in the patients blood. Decreased activity of what organelle of the liver hepatocytes can cause it?
a. Agranular endoplasmatic net
b. Golgi complex
c. Lysosomes
*d. Granular endoplasmatic net
e. Mitochondrions

31. In a histological specimen parenchyma of an organ is represented by lymphoid tissue that forms lymph nodes; the latter are arranged in a diffuse manner and enclose a central artery. What anatomic formation has such morphological structure?
*a. Spleen
b. Lymph node
c. Red bone marrow
d. Thymus
e. Tonsil

32. As a result of a trauma a patient has damaged anterior roots of spinal cord. What structures have been affected?
*a. Axons of motoneurons and axons of neurons of lateral horns
b. Peripheral processes of sensitive spinal ganglions
c. Dendrites of neurons of spinal ganglions
d. Axons of neurons of lateral horns
e. Central processes of sensitive neurons of spinal ganglions

33. A histological specimen of a kidney shows a part of the distal tubule going between the afferent and efferent arteriole. The cells building the tubule wall have dense nuclei; basal membrane is absent. Such structural formation is called:
a. Mesangial cells
b. Juxtaglomerular cells
*c. Macula densa
d. Juxtavascular cells
e. -

34. Patient with injured muscles of the lower extremities was admitted to the traumatological department. Due to what cells is reparative regeneration of the muscle fibers and restoration of the muscle function possible?
a. Myofibroblasts
b. Myoblasts
*c. Satellite-cells
d. Fibroblasts
e. Myoepithelial cells

35. In course of an experiment a big number of stem cells of red bone marrow was in some way destructed. Regeneration of which cell populations in the loose connective tissue will be inhibited?
a. Of lipocytes
b. Of pericytes
c. Of fibroblasts
d. Of pigment cells
*e. Of macrophags

36. Histological examination of a 40 y.o. mans thymus revealed decreased share of parenchymatous gland elements, increased share of adipose and loose connective tissue, its enrichment with thymus bodies. The organs mass was unchanged. What phenomenon is it?
a. Accidental involution
b. Dystrophy
c. Atrophy
*d. Age involution
e. Hypotrophy

37. A histological specimen shows a blood vessel. Its inner coat is composed by endothelium, subendothelium and internal elastic membrane. The middle coat is enriched with smooth myocytes. Such morphological characteristics are typical for the following vessel:
a. Elastic-type artery
b. Non-muscular vein
c. Muscular-type vein
*d. Muscular-type artery
e. Capillary

38. In course of indirect histogenesis of tubular bone tissue a plate is formed between epiphyseal and diaphyseal ossification centres that provides further lengthwise growth of bones. What structure is it?
a. Layer of interior general plates
*b. Metaphyseal plate
c. Osseous plate
d. Osseous cuff
e. Osteon

39. A 2-year-old child has got intestinal dysbacteriosis, which results in hemorrhagic syndrome. What is the most likely cause of hemorrhage of the child?
*a. Vitamin K insufficiency
b. PP hypovitaminosis
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Fibrinogen deficiency
e. Activation of tissue thromboplastin

40. Histological specimen presents a vessel the wall of which consists of endothelium, basal membrane and loose connective tissue. What type of vessel is it?
a. Artery
b. Hemocapillary
c. Lymphocapillary
*d. Vein of non-muscular type
e. Vein of muscular type

41. A patient died from acute cardiac insufficiency. The histological examination of his heart revealed the necrotized section in myocardium of the left ventricle, which was separated from undamaged tissue by the zone of hyperimic vessels, small hemorrhages and leukocytic infiltration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diffuse exudate myocarditis
b. Productive myocarditis
c. Myocardial ischemic dystrophy
d. Focal exudate myocarditis
*e. Myocardial infarction

42. Vitamin A deficit results in the impairment of twilight vision. Name the cells that have the above-mentioned photoreceptor function:
a. Bipolar neurons
b. Ganglion neurocytes
c. Horizontal neurocytes
d. Cone receptor cells
*e. Rod receptor cell

43. Kidneys of a man under examination show increased resorbtion of calcium ions and decreased resorbtion of phosphate ions. What hormone causes this phenomenon?
a. Hormonal form D3
b. Thyrocalcitonin
*c. Parathormone
d. Aldosterone
e. Vasopressin

44. During pubescence the cells of male sexual glands begin to produce male sex hormon testosterone that calls forth secondary sexual characters. What cells of male sexual glands produce this hormone?
a. Supporting cells
b. Spermatozoa
c. Sustentocytes
d. Sertolis cells
*e. Leidig cells

45. The specimens present sections of haemopoetic and immunogenetic organs. Organ has lymph tissue forming different structures (lymph nodes,lobules, bars). In what organ does antigen-independent proliferation and differantiation take place?
*a. Thymus
b. Spleen
c. Tonsil
d. Hemolymph nodes
e. Lymphatic nodes

46. A patient with thrombophlebitis of lower extremities had got chest pains, blood spitting, growing respiratory failure that caused his death. Autopsy revealed multiple pulmonary infarctions. What is the most probable reason of their development?
a. Pulmonary venous thrombosis
*b. Pulmonary artery embolism
c. Bronchial artery thrombosis
d. Pulmonary artery thrombosis
e. Bronchial artery embolism

47. A patient complains of dryness of head skin, itching, fragility and loss of hair. After examination he was diagnosed with seborrhea. Disturbed activity of which cells caused this condition?
a. Cells of sudoriferous glands
b. Adipocytes
c. Melanocytes
*d. Cells of sebaceous glands
e. Epithelial cells

48. A histological specimen of kidney shows a structure consisting of a glomerulus of fenestrated capillaries and a bilayer epithelial capsule. Specify this structure:
a. Proximal tubule
b. Henles loop
c. Receiving tube
*d. Renal corpuscle
e. Distal tubule

49. A sensitive neural ganglion consists of roundish neurocytes with one extension that divides into axon and dendrite at some distance from the perikaryon. What are these cells called?
a. Bipolar
b. Unipolar
*c. Pseudounipolar
d. Multipolar
e. Apolar

50. An embryo displays disturbed process of dorsal mesoderm segmentation and somite formation. What part of skin will have developmental abnormalities?
a. Sebaceous glands
b. Hair
*c. Derma
d. Epidermis
e. Sudoriferous glands

51. An electron microphotography of a fragment of proper gastric gland shows a big irregular round-shaped cell. There are a lot of intracellular tubules and mitochondria in the cytoplasm. Specify this cell:
a. Undifferentiated cell
b. Principal cell
*c. Parietal cell
d. Mucous cell
e. Endocrine cell

52. A scheme presents an exocrinous gland that has unbranched excretory duct with a terminal part in form of a saccule openining into the duct. How is this gland called according to the morphological classification of exocrinous glands?
a. Simple branched tubular
b. Compound branched alveolar
*c. Simple unbranched alveolar
d. Compound unbranched alveolar
e. Compound unbranched alveolar tubular

53. Roentgenological examination of skull base bones revealed enlargement of sellar cavity, thinning of anterior clinoid processes, destruction of different parts, destruction of different parts of sella turcica. Such bone destruction might be caused by a tumour of the following wndocrinous gland:
a. Adrenal glands
b. Thyroid gland
c. Epiphysis
d. Thymus gland
*e. Hypophysis

54. Electronic microphotography of pulmonary alveoles wall presents a big cell. Its cytoplasm has a lot of mitochondria, developed Golgi apparatus, osmiophil lamellated corpuscles. What is the main function of this cell?
a. It purifies the air
b. It absorbs microorganisms
c. It is a component of blood-air barrier
d. It warms the air
*e. It produces surfactant

55. A pathological process in bronchi resulted in epithelium desquamation. What cells will regenerate bronchial epithelium?
a. Endocrinal
b. Goblet
c. Intercalary
d. Ciliate
*e. Basal

56. A viral infection has damaged cells that form walls of bile capillaries. This stimulated conditions for inflow of bile into the blood of sinusoidal capillaries. What cells are damaged?
a. Pit-cells
b. Endotheliocytes
c. Kupffers cells
d. Ito cells
*e. Hepatocytes

57. A histological specimen of spleen shows a vessel with a wall consisting of endothelium and subendothelial layer, median membrane is absent, exterior membrane inosculates with the layers of spleen connective tissue. What vessel is it?
a. Artery of muscular type
b. Vein of muscular type
*c. Vein of non-muscular type
d. Arteriole
e. Capillary

58. In course of a conditional experiment the development of mesenchyma cells was completely inhibited. Development of the following muscular tissue will be disturbed:
a. Skeletal muscular tissue
*b. Smooth muscular tissue
c. Epidermal muscular tissue
d. Neural muscular tissue
e. Cardiac muscular tissue

59. A patient ill with chronic gastritis went for endogastric pH-metry that allowed to reveal decreased acidity of gastric juice. It is indicative of diminished function of the following cells:
*a. Parietal exocrinocytes
b. Endocrinocytes
c. Accessory cells
d. Cervical cells
e. Chief exocrinocytes

60. Ultramicroscopical examination of "dark" hepatocyte population in the cell cytoplasm detected a developed granular endoplasmic reticulum. What function has this organella in these cells?
a. Calcium ion depositing
*b. Synthesis of blood plasma proteins
c. Deintoxicative function
d. Carbohydrate synthesis
e. Bile production

61. An endocrinal gland with parenchyma consisting of epithelium and neural tissue is under morphological examination. Epithelial trabecules have two types of cells: chromophilic and chromophobic. Identify this organ:
*a. Hypophysis
b. Hypothalamus
c. Parathyroid gland
d. Thyroid gland
e. Adrenal glands

62. A histological specimen presents an artery. One of the membranes of its wall has flat cells lying on the basal membrane. What type of cells is it?
*a. Endothelium
b. Smooth myocytes
c. Macrophages
d. Fibroblasts
e. Mesothelium

63. One of sections of central nervous system has layerwise arrangement of neurocytes. Among them there are cells of the following forms: stellate, fusiform, horizontal, pyramidal. What section of central nervous system is this structure typical for?
a. Spinal cord
b. Medulla oblongata
c. Hypothalamus
*d. Cortex of cerebrum
e. Cerebellum

64. Study of fingerprints (dactylography) is used by criminalists for personal identification as well as for diagnostics of genetic abnormalities, particularly Dawns disease. What layer of skin determines individuality of fingerprints?
*a. Dermopapillary
b. Reticular
c. Basal
d. Clear (stratum lucidum epidermidis)
e. Horny

65. A microspecimen of the submandibular salivary gland shows some basket-shaped cells concentrated around the acines and excretory ducts. These cells surround bases of the serous cells and are called myoepitheliocytes. These cells relate to the following tissue:
a. Special connective tissue
b. Loose fibrous connective tissue
c. Epithelial tissue
d. Neural tissue
*e. Muscular tissue

66. An infectious disease caused contractive activity of muscles that contract and dilate eye pupil (paralytic state). What functional eye system was damaged?
a. Photosensory
b. Lacrimal apparatus
c. Dioptric
d. Ancillary
*e. Accomodative

