1. A 30-year-old patient complains about having abdominal pain and diarrhea for five days; body temperature rise up to 37,5oC along with chills. The day before a patient had been in a forest and drunk from an open water reservoir. Laboratory analyses enabled to make the following diagnosis: amebic dysentery. What is the drug of choice for its treatment?
*a. Metronidazole
b. Levomycetin
c. Emetine hydrochloride
d. Phthalazol
e. Furazolidonum

2. A woman works as railway traffic controller. She suffers from seasonal vasomotor rhinitis and gets treatment in the outpatient setting. She was prescribed an antihistamine that has no effect upon central nervous system. What drug is it?
*a. Loratadine
b. Promethazine
c. Tavegil
d. Suprastin
e. Dimedrol

3. During an operation a patient got injection of muscle relaxant dithylinum. Relaxation of skeletal muscles and inhibition of respiration lasted two hours. This condition was caused by absence of the following enzyme in blood serum:
*a. Butyrylcholin esterase
b. Acetylcholinesterase
c. Glutathione peroxidase
d. Glucose 6-phosphatase
e. Catalase

4. A 60-year-old patient was admitted to the surgical department because of infection caused by blue pus bacillus (Pseudomonas aeruginosa) which is sensative to penicillin antibiotics. Indicate which of the given penicillins has marked activity to the Pseudomonas aeruginosa?
a. Methicillin
*b. Carbenicillin disodium
c. Phenoxymethylpenicillin
d. Benzylpenicillin
e. Oxacillin

5. A 45-year-old woman suffers from allergic seasonal coryza caused by the ambrosia blossoming. What medicine from the stabilizer of the adipose cells group can be used for prevention of this disease?
a. Phencarol
b. Diazoline
*c. Ketotifen
d. Tavegyl
e. Dimedrol

6. Systemic amebiasis with involvment of intestines, liver, lungs was diagnosed in a 52-year-old patient. What drug should be prescribed?
*a. Metronidasol
b. Tetracycline
c. Enteroseptol
d. Quingamine
e. Quiniofone

7. A 38-year-old man who poisoned himself with mercury dichloride was taken to the admission room in grave condition. What antidote should be immediately introduced?
*a. Unithiol
b. Atropine
c. Isonitrosine
d. Nalorphine
e. Dipiroxim

8. A patient who suffers from insomnia caused by emotional disorder was prescribed a hypnotic drug with tranquillizing effect. What hypnotic was prescribed?
a. Sodium ethaminal
b. Bromisoval
c. Phenobarbital
d. Chloral hydrate
*e. Nitrazepam

9. A patient had to go through an operation. Doctors introduced him dithylinum (listenone) and performed intubation. After the end of operation and cessation of anesthesia the independent respiration wasn't restored. Which enzyme deficit prolongs the action of muscle relaxant?
a. Succinate dehydrogenase
b. N-acetyltransferase
c. K-Na-adenosine triphosphatase
*d. Pseudocholinesterase
e. Carbanhydrase

10. The alternate usage of dichlotiazide, etacrin acid and lasex didnt cause marked diuretic effect in patient with marked peripheral edema. Increased amount of aldosterone is in the blood. Indicate the medicine to be prescribed
*a. Spironolacton
b. Clopamid
c. Amilorid
d. Urea
e. Mannit

11. In a 56-year-old patient with complains of thirst and frequent urination diabetes mellitus was diagnosed  and butamin was prescribed. What is the mechanism of action of this medicine?
*a. It stimulates beta-cells of Langergans islets
b. It relieves transport of glucose through the cells membranes
c. It inhibits absorption of glucose in the intestines
d. It inhibits alpha cells of Langergans islets
e. It helps to absorb the glucose by the cells of the organism tissues

12. A 37 year old patient suffering from obliterating vascular endarteritis of lower limbs takes daily 60 microgram/kilogram of phenylin. Because of presentations of convulsive disorder (craniocerebral trauma in anamnesis) he was prescribed phenobarbital. Withholding this drug caused nasal hemorhage. What is this complication connected with?
*a. Induction of enzymes of microsomal oxidation in liver caused by phenobarbital
b. Conjugation of phenylin with glucuronic acid
c. Inhibition of microsomal oxidation in liver caused by phenobarbital
d. Oxidative deamination of phenylin
e. Aliphatic hydroxylation of phenobarbital

13. Patient with complaints of dryness in the mouth, photophobia and vision violation was admitted to the reception-room. Skin is hyperemic, dry, pupils are dilated, tachycardia. Poisoning with belladonna alkaloids was diagnosed on further examination. What medicine should be prescribed?
a. Diazepam
b. Armine
c. Dipyroxim
*d. Prozerin
e. Pilocarpine

14. Patient was on glucocorticoids for a long time, discontinuation of usage caused exacerbation of the illness, decreased BP, weakness. How can you explain it?
*a. Insufficiency of adrenal glands
b. Sensitization
c. Cumulation
d. Hyperproduction of ACTH
e. Adaptation to the medicine

15. Patient complaines of weakness, dyspnea, low extremities oedema. Diagnosis: chronic cardiac insufficiency. What medicine should be prescribed first of all?
a. Papaverine
b. Caffeine
*c. Digitoxin
d. Propranolol
e. Raunatin

16. Signs of gastropathy develop in the patient with rheumatoid arthritis who was treated with indometacin. With what activity of the drug can this complication be connected?
a. Local irritating
*b. Anticyclooxygenase
c. Antihistamine
d. Antiserotonin
e. Antikinine

17. Testosterone and its analogs increase the mass of skeletal muscles that allows to use them for treatment of dystrophy. Due to interaction of the hormon with what cell substance is this action caused?
*a. Nuclear receptors
b. Ribosomes
c. Proteins- activators of transcription
d. Chromatin
e. Membrane receptors

18. A patient ill with neurodermatitis has been taking prednisolone for a long time. Examination revealed high rate of sugar in his blood. This complication is caused by the drug influence upon the following link of carbohydrate metabolism:
a. Activation of insulin decomposition
*b. Gluconeogenesis activation
c. Intensification of glucose absorption in the bowels
d. Glycogenogenesis activation
e. Inhibition of glycogen synthesis

19. Proserin increases skeletal muscle tone when given systematically. Halothane induces relaxation of skeletal muscles and reduces proserin effects. What is the nature of proserin and halothane interaction?
a. Noncompetitive antagonism
*b. Indirect functional antagonism
c. Competitive antagonism
d. Direct functional antagonism
e. Independent antagonism

20. A 70-year-old man, who suffered from chronic bronchitis, was prescribed medicine for the cough - codeine. What is the mechanism of anticoughing effect?
a. Competitive
b. Reflex
*c. Central
d. Local effect
e. Peripheral effect

21. A patient with frequent attacks of stenocardia was prescribed sustak-forte to be taken one tablet twice a day. At first the effect was positive but on the second day stenocardia attacks resumed. What can explain inefficiency of the prescribed drug?
a. Dependence
*b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Sensibilization
d. Cumulation
e. Idiosyncrasy

22. A 37-year-old man was admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of acute pancreatitis: vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, hypotension, weakness, dehydration of the organism. What medicine should be used first of all?
a. Etaperazine
b. Ephedrine
c. No-spa
d. Platyphylline
*e. Contrycal

23. The patient has taken the mixture prescribed by neuropathologist for neurasthenia for 2 weeks. Patient felt better but developed coryza, conjunctivitis, rash, inertia, decrease of memory. Bromizm was diagnosed. What should be prescribed to decrease symptoms?
*a. Natrium chloride
b. Asparcam
c. -
d. Polyglucin
e. Glucose solution 5%

24. Analeptical remedy of reflective type from the H-cholinomimetics group was given to the patient for restoration of breathing after poisoning with carbon monoxide. What medicine was prescribed to the patient?
a. Pentamin
*b. Lobeline hydrochloride
c. Adrenalin hydrochloride
d. Atropine sulphate
e. Mesaton

25. An aged patient complains of headache, dizziness, quick tiredness, worsening of memory. Anamnesis: craniocerebral injury. Medicine of what group should be prescribed?
a. Somnific
b. Analgetics
c. Sedatives
*d. Nootropics
e. Neuroleptics

26. The patient was treated medically for psychosis for 2 weeks. Patients condition improved but rigidity, tremor, hypokinesia developed. Which of the drugs can cause such complications?
a. Sydnocarb
b. Diphenine
*c. Aminazine
d. Imipramine
e. Chlordiazepoxide

27. Gonorrhoea was revealed in the patient on bacterioscopy of the smear from urethra. Taking into account that medecines for gonorrhoea are fluorquinolones, patient should be prescribed:
a. Urosulfan
b. Cefazoline
c. Furazolidone
d. Fluorouracil
*e. Ciprofloxacin

28. Patient with bronchial asthma was taking tablets which caused insomnia, headache, increased blood pressure. What medicine can cause such complications?
a. Adrenaline
b. Euphyline
c. Izadrine
*d. Ephedrine
e. Chromolin sodium

29. Diuretic drug was prescribed to the patient with hypertension in the course of complex treatment. In a few days BP decreased but signs of hypokaliemia developed. What drug could cause such complications?
a. Clophelin
b. Spironolactone
*c. Lasix
d. Triamterene
e. Enalapril

30. Patient was admitted to the infection unit with diagnosis of bacterial dysentery. On laboratory studies it was revealed that causative element is sensative to the many antimicrobial medicines, but patient has anemia. What medicine is contra-indicated to the patient?
a. Enteroseptol
b. Ampicillin
c. Phthalazol
d. Furazolidone
*e. Levomycetin

31. Patient with pneumonia has intolerance to antibiotics. Which of the conbined sulfanilamide medicines should be prescribed to the patient?
*a. Biseptol
b. Natrium sulfacyl
c. Sulfadimethoxine
d. Streptocid
e. Aethazol

32. A patient suffering from myasthenia has been administered proserin. After its administration the patient has got nausea, diarrhea, twitch of tongue and skeletal muscles. What drug would help to eliminate the intoxication?
a. Isadrine
b. Mesatonum
c. Physostigmine
d. Pyridostigmine bromide
*e. Atropine sulfate

33. A patient who had myocardial infarction was administered 75 mg of acetylsalicinic acid a day. What is the purpose of this administration?
a. Temperature reduction
b. Coronary vessel dilatation
c. Inflammation reduction
d. Pain relief
*e. Reduction of thrombocyte aggregation

34. Patient with mercury poisoning was admitted to the toxicological department from the chemical industry. What medicine should be used?
a. Naloxone
b. Isonitrozin
*c. Unithiol
d. Activated carbon
e. Enterosorbent

35. A 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with acute right distal pneumonia. Sputum inoculation revealed that the causative agent is resistant to penicillin, but it is senstive to macrolides. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Streptomycin
b. Ampicillin
c. Tetracycline
d. Gentamycin
*e. Azithromycin

36. A patient suffering from chronic hyperacidic gastritis takes an antacid drug for heartburn elimination. After its ingestion the patient feels better but at the same time he has a sensation of stomach swelling. Which of the following drugs might be the cause of such side effect?
*a. Sodium hydrocarbonate
b. Magnesium trisilicate
c. Pepsin
d. Aluminium hydrooxide
e. Magnesium oxide

37. A patient consulted a doctor about bowels disfunction. The doctor established symptoms of duodenitis and enteritis. Laboratory examination helped to make the following diagnosis: lambliosis. What medication should be administered?
*a. Metronidazole
b. Monomycin
c. Tetracycline
d. Chingamin
e. Erythromycin

38. Introduction of a pharmaceutical substance to an experimental animal resulted in reduction of salivation, pupil mydriasis. Next intravenous introduction of acetylcholine didnt lead to any significant changes of heart rate. Name this substance:
*a. Atropine
b. Propranolol
c. Salbutamol
d. Proserin
e. Adrenaline

39. Continious taking of a drug can result in osteoporosis, erosion of stomach mucous membrane, hypokaliemia, retention of sodium and water, reduced content of corticotropin in blood. Name this drug:
a. Digoxin
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
*c. Prednisolone
d. Indometacin
e. Reserpine

40. A 63 y.o. man with collapse symptoms was delivered to the emergency hospital. A doctor chose noradrenaline in order to prevent hypotension. What is the action mechanism of this medication?
a. Activation of dopamine receptors
b. Block of M-cholinoreceptors
c. Activation of serotonin receptors
d. Activation of ?-adrenoreceptors
*e. Activation of ?1-adrenoreceptors

41. Anapriline therapy caused positive effect in the dynamic of the disease of a 44-year-old woman suffering from stenocardia. What is the main mechanism of the effect of this medicine?
a. Decrease of oxidative exchange in myocardium due to enzyme blockade of Krebs cycle
b. Increased oxygen supply to the myocardium
c. Decreased need in increasing of oxygen supply to the myocardium
*d. Blockade of beta-adrenoreceptors and decrease myocardial requirements to the oxygen
e. Decreased power inputs of myocardium due to reduced loading

42. A patient suffering from syphilis has been treated with bismuth preparations. As a result of it some grey spots turned up on the mucous membrane of the oral cavity; nephropathy symptoms were also present. What drug should be used for treatment of bismuth intoxication?
a. Methylene blue
b. Bemegride
c. Nalorphine
*d. Unithiol
e. Naloxone

43. A 65 year old patient with chronic heart failure has been taking digitoxin in self-administered dosages for a long time. She was admitted to the hospital for general health aggravation, arrhythmia, nausea, reduced diuresis, insomnia. What is the primary action to be taken?
a. To reduce digitoxin dosage
b. To administer digoxin
c. To give an intravenous injection of calcium gluconate solution
*d. To withhold digitoxin
e. To administer strophanthine intravenously

44. A 20 year old patient complains of morbid thirst and huperdiuresis (up to 10 l daily). Glucose concentration in blood is normal but it is absent in urine. The patient has been diagnosed with diabetes insipidus. What hormonal drug is the most appropriate for management of this disorder?
a. Insulin
*b. Vasopressin
c. Thyroxin
d. Cortisol
e. Oxytocin

45. A patient has myocardial infarction with thrombosis of the left coronary artery. What pharmocological preparation group should be used to reestablish blood flow?
a. Narcotic analgesics
b. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
c. Glucocorticoids
*d. Fibrinolysis activators
e. Beta-adrenergic blockers

46. A patient has a slowly healing fracture. What medicine can be used to accelerate formation of connective tissue matrix?
a. Cyclosporine
*b. Methyluracil
c. Cyclophosphan
d. Prednisolone
e. Methotrexate

47. A 4 year old child was admitted to the orthopaedic department with shin fracture together with displacement. Bone fragments reposition requires preliminary analgesia. What preparation should be chosen?
a. -
*b. Promedol
c. Morphine hydrochloride
d. Analgin
e. Panadol

48. Patient with abscess of the cut wound applied to the traumatological department. Doctor for the cleaning of the wound from the pus washed it with 3% hydrogen peroxide. Foam was absent. What caused the absents on the drug activity?
*a. Inherited insufficiency of catalase
b. Inherited insufficiency phosphatdehydrogenase of erythrocyte
c. Pus in the wound
d. Shallow wound
e. Low concentration H2O2

49. A patient was diagnosed with active focal pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug should be prescribed in the first place?
a. Ethoxide
*b. Isoniazid
c. Cyclocerine
d. Sulfalen
e. Ethionamide

50. A patient taking clonidine for essential hypertension treatment was using alcohol that caused intense inhibition of central nervous system. What may it be connected with?
*a. Effect potentiating
b. Cumulation
c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Intoxication
e. Effect summation

51. Examination of a patient revealed extremely myotic pupils, sleepiness, infrequent Chain-Stokes respiration, urinary retention, slowing-down of heart rate, enhancement of spinal reflexes. What substance caused the poisoning?
a. Phosphacole
b. Atropine
*c. Morphine
d. Caffeine
e. Barbital

52. A patient suffers from diabetes melitus. After the regular insulin injection his condition grew worse: there appeared anxiety, cold sweat, tremor of limbs, general weakness, dizziness. What preparation can eliminate these symptoms?
*a. Adrenaline hydrochloride
b. Caffeine
c. Glibutide
d. Noradrenaline
e. Butamide

53. Continuous taking of some drugs foregoing the pregnancy increase the risk of giving birth to a child with genetic defects. What is this effect called?
a. Teratogenic effect
b. Embryotoxic effect
*c. Mutagenic effect
d. Fetotoxical effect
e. Blastomogenic effect

54. A doctor administered a patient with allergic dermatitis a H1-histamine blocker as a part of complex treatment. Name this medication:
a. Hydrocortisone
*b. Loratadine
c. Prednisolone
d. Cromolyn sodium
e. Adrenaline

55. A 19 year old woman suffers from primary syphilis. Doctor administered her complex therapy that includes benzylpenicillin sodium salt. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. It blocks synthesis of cytoplasm proteins
b. It blocks RNA synthesis
c. It blocks DNA synthesis
*d. It blocks synthesis of peptidoglycan of microbal membrane
e. It blocks thiol enzymes

56. A 65 year old female patient suffers from chronic renal insufficiency accompanied by evident edemata caused by chronic glomerulonephritis. What diuretic should be administered for forced diuresis?
a. Cyclometazide
b. Acetazolamide
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Chlorthalidone
*e. Furosemide

57. A patient suffering from coronary artery disease had taken a certain drug many times a day in order to arrest stenocardia attacks. Overdose of this drug finally caused intoxication. Objectively: cyanotic skin and mucous membranes, dramatic fall in the arterial pressure, tachycardia, respiration inhibition. Blood has increased concentration of methemoglobin. The drug the patient had taken relates to the following group:
a. Alpha-adrenoceptor blockers
b. Adenosine drugs
c. Myotropic spamolytics
*d. Organic nitrates
e. Calcium channel blockers

58. A patient with II stage hypertension has been taking one of hypotensive medications for the purpose of treatment. After a time arterial pressure decreased, but the patient started complaining of flaccidity, sleepiness, indifference. A bit later he felt stomach pain. He was diagnosed with ulcer. What hypotensive medication has the patient been taking?
a. Furosemide
b. Dibazole
*c. Reserpine
d. Verapamil
e. Captopril

59. A child suffers from drug idiosyncrasy. What is the cause of such reaction?
a. Inhibition of microsomal liver enzymes
b. Associated disease of target organ
c. Exhaustion of substrate interacting with pharmaceutical substance
d. Accumulation of pharmaceutical substance
*e. Hereditary enzymopathy

60. Examination of a 70 year old patient rrevealed insulin-dependent diabetes. What drug should be administered?
a. Insulin
b. Parathyroidin
c. Cortisone
*d. Glibenclamid
e. Mercazolilum

61. For the preparation of a patients burn skin surface a certain medication was used. Its antiseptic action is provided by free oxygen that segregates in presence of organic substances. Choose the right answer:
a. Boric acid
b. Sodium bicarbonate
c. Furacilin
d. Chlorhexidine
*e. Potassium permanganate

62. A patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency was recommended to undergo a prophylactic course of treatment with a cardiological drug from the group of cardiac glycosides that is to be taken enterally. What drug was recommended?
a. Corglycon
b. Strophanthine
*c. Digoxin
d. Cordiamin
e. Cordarone

63. A 50 y.o. patient with chronic cardiac insufficiency and tachyarrythmia was prescribed a cardiotonic drug. What drug was prescribed?
a. Amyodarone
b. Mildronate
c. Dopamine
d. Dobutamine
*e. Digoxin

64. An ophthalmologist used a 1% mesaton solution for the diagnostic purpose (pupil dilation for eye-ground examination). What is the cause of mydriasis induced by the drug?
a. Activation of M-cholinoreceptors
*b. Activation of alpha1 adrenoreceptors
c. Block of alpha1 adrenoreceptors
d. Activation of alpha2 adrenoreceptors
e. Activation of beta1 adrenoreceptors

65. Mother of a 2 year old child consulted a stomatologist. In the period of pregnancy she was irregularly taking antibiotics for an infectious disease. Examination of the child revealed incisor destruction, yellow enamel, brown rim around the dental cervix. What drug has apparent teratogenic effect?
a. Octadine
*b. Doxacycline
c. Ampiox
d. Furosemide
e. Xantinol nicotinate

66. A 36 y.o. man has a craniocerebral trauma. Objectively: diminished breath sounds, thready pulse, no reflexes. What way of pyracetam introduction will be the most apropriate in this case?
a. Inhalation
*b. Intravenous
c. Subcutaneous
d. Rectal
e. Peroral

67. A patient suffering from initial hypertension has been taking an antihypertensive preparation for a long time. Suddenly he stopped taking this preparation. After this his condition grew worse, this led to development of hypertensive crisis. This by-effect can be classified as:
a. Sensibilization
b. Dependence
c. Cumulation
d. Tolerance
*e. Abstinence syndrome

68. A patient ill with bronchial asthma didnt inform his doctor that he had attacks of stenocardia. Doctor administered him a medication, which taking resulted in less frequent attacks of bronchial asthma, but stenocardia attacks became more frequent. What medication was administered?
a. Salbutamol
b. Cromolyn sodium
c. Phenotherol
*d. Isadrin
e. Aminophylline

69. A patient who has been suffering from cardiac insufficiency for several months has been taking digoxin on an outpatient basis. At a certain stage of treatment there appeared symptoms of drug overdose. What phenomenon underlies the development of this complication?
a. Functional cumulation
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Habituation
d. Sensibilization
*e. Material cumulation

70. After the second abortion a 23 year old woman has been diagnosed with toxoplasmosis. Which drug should be used for toxoplasmosis treatment?
a. Mebendazole
b. Itraconazole
*c. Co-trimoxazole
d. Azidothimidine
e. Acyclovir

71. After 4 months of treatment for tuberculosis the patient began complaining of toes and fingers numbness, sensation of creeps. He was diagnosed with polyneuritis. What antituberculous drug might have caused these complications?
a. Alcohol iodine solution
*b. Isoniazid
c. Ciprofloxacin
d. Rifampicin
e. Sodium salt of benzylpenicillin

72. A patient suffers from vision impairment - hemeralopy (night blindness). What vitamin preparation should be administered the patient in order to restore his vision?
a. Pyridoxine
b. Vicasol
*c. Retinol acetate
d. Thiamine chloride
e. Tocopherol acetate

73. A patient suffers from severe postoperative pseudomonadous infection. What of the following antibiotics should be administered in this case?
a. Erythromycin
b. Doxycycline
c. Benzylpenicillin
d. Cephazolin
*e. Amicacin sulfate

74. After a tooth extraction a patient felt persistent pain behind his breast bone. After sublingual intake of an antianginal drug the pain behind the breast bone disappeared, but the patient complained of headache and dizziness. What drug are these properties typical for?
a. Metoprolol
b. Propranolol
*c. Nitroglycerin
d. Validol
e. Verapamil

75. A patient with fracture of his lower jaw was admitted to the maxillofacial department. It was decided to fix his bones surgically under anaesthetic. After intravenous introduction of muscle relaxant there arose short fibrillar contractions of the patients facial muscles. What muscle relaxant was applied?
a. Melictine
*b. Dithylinum
c. Pipecuronium bromide
d. Tubocurarin chloride
e. Diazepam

76. An elderly patient has chronic constipations induced by large intestine hypotonia. What drug should be administered?
a. Castor oil
b. Sodium sulphate
*c. Bisacodyl
d. Atropine
e. Novocaine amide

77. A patient with epilepsy and depressive reaction has been administered a drug that reduced epilepsy manifestations and improved the patients psychic condition:
a. Phenobarbital
*b. Sodium valproate
c. Amitriptyline
d. Ethosuxemide
e. Phenytoin

78. A patient diagnosed with morphinism has been admitted to the narcological department. A doctor noted a decrease in pharmacological activity of morphine. Repetitive use of a drug may result in tolerance to its effect, and this phenomenon is called:
*a. Addiction
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Allergy
d. Antagonism
e. Cumulation

79. Patient in the unconscious state was admitted to the emergency room. Skin is cold, pupils are delayed, breathing is heavy, with cycles of the Cheyne-Stokes type, blood pressure is decreased, urinary bladder is overloaded. Poisoning with what substance is the most likely?
*a. Narcotic analgesics
b. Non-narcotic analgesics
c. -
d. М-cholinergic antagonists
e. Sedatives

80. Examination of a 60 y.o. patient revealed hyperglycemia and glucosuria. A doctor administered him a medication for internal use. What medication is it?
a. Oxytocin
b. Furosemide
*c. Glibenclamid
d. Pancreatine
e. Corglycon

81. An elderly female patient suffers from the type 2 diabetes mellitus accompanied by obesity, atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease. Basal hyperinsulinemia is also present. What treatment would be the most appropriate?
*a. Glibenclamid
b. Retabolil
c. Amlodipine
d. Lovastatin
e. Insulin

82. A patient suffers from stenocardia and takes isosorbide mononitrate. He was prescribed a complementary drug with disaggregating effect. What drug is it?
a. Validol
*b. Acetylsalicinic acid
c. Propranolol
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Nifedipine

83. A patient in postoperative period was prescribed an anticholinesterase drug for stimulation of intestinal peristalsis and tonus of urinary bladder. What drug is it?
a. Propanolol
*b. Proserin
c. Reserpine
d. Dichlothiazide
e. Mannitol

84. An irradiated liquidator of a breakdown at a nuclear power plant  complained about vomiting that occurs suddenly. What medication should be prescribed?
*a. Metoclopramide
b. Atropine
c. De-Nol
d. Aeron
e. Reserpine

85. A patient with chronic cardiac insufficiency has been treated with cardiotonic drugs and a thiazide diuretic, but in spite of it there are still edemata and risk of ascites. What medication should be prescribed to amplify diuretic effect of the applied drugs?
*a. Spironolactone
b. Amyloride
c. Manitole
d. Clopamide
e. Furosemide

86. A patient ill with collagenesis has been taking prednisolone for a long time. Hypokaliemia development caused spastic pain of skeletal muscles. What medication should be used in order to correct potassium exchange?
a. Diazepam
b. Dithylinum
*c. Panangin
d. Noshpa
e. Thyrocalcitonin

87. A patient ill with essential hypertension was recommended a drug that prevents thrombosis. It is  taken parenterally. What drug is it?
a. Neodicumarin
b. Syncumar
c. Amben
d. Protamine sulfate
*e. Heparin

88. A patient presents with twilight vision impairment. Which of the following vitamins should be administered?
a. Nicotinic acid
*b. Retinol acetate
c. Pyridoxine hydrochloride
d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Ascorbic acid

89. A female patient consulted a doctor about pain and limited movements in the knee joints. Which of the following nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs should be administered taking into consideration that the patient has a history of chronic gastroduodenitis?
a. Acetylsalicilic acid
b. Butadiounum
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Promedol
*e. Celecoxib

90. A 66 year old female patient got intravenous injection of magnesium sulfate solution for the purpose of elimination of hypertensive crisis. But arterial pressure didnt go down and after repeated introduction of the same preparation there appered sluggishness, slow response, inhibition of consciousness and respiration. What preparation is antagonist of magnesium sulfate and can eliminate symptoms of its overdose?
a. Activated carbon
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Potassium chloride
d. Sodium chloride
*e. Calcium chloride

91. A 64 year old woman has impairment of twilight vision (hemeralopy). What vitamin should be recommended in the first place?
a. Vitamin C
b. Vitamin B6
c. Vitamin B2
d. Vitamin E
*e. Vitamin A

92. A patient underwent appendectomy. In the postoperative period he has been taking an antibiotic. The patient complains about hearing impairment and vestibular disorders. What group of antibiotics has such by-effects?
a. Macrolides
b. Cephalosporins
c. Penicillins
d. Tetracyclines
*e. Aminoglycosides

93. A student came to see a doctor and asked to administer him a drug for treatment of allergic rhinitis that occurs in the period of linden flowering. What drug may be used?
a. Ambroxol
b. Losartan
c. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
d. Propanolol
*e. Loratadine

94. A 7 year old child is ill with bronchitis. It is necessary to administer him an antibacterial drug. What drug of fluoroquinolone group is CONTRA-INDICATED at this age?
a. Ampicillin
b. Sulfadimethoxine
c. Ampiox
*d. Cyprofloxacin
e. Amoxicillin

95. A patient has been diagnosed with transmural myocardial infarction. What drug should be given in order to prevent cardiogenic shock?
a. Analgin
*b. Promedol
c. Octadine
d. Reserpin
e. Phentolamine

96. A patient consulted a physician about muscle rigidity, constrained movements, permanent arm tremor. The patient was diagnosed with Parkinsons disease. What preparation should be administered?
a. Phenobarbital
b. Phenytoin
*c. Levodopa
d. Diazepam
e. Ethosuximide

97. A patient takes digoxin for treatment of cardiac insufficiency. What diuretic may increase digoxin toxicity due to the intensified excretion of K+ ions?
a. Siliborum
b. Lisinopril
c. Spironolactone
d. Panangine
*e. Hydrochlorothiazide

98. A patient with coronary artery disease was admitted to the cardiological department. For stenocardia prevention a drug from the group of beta-adrenoceptor blockers was administered. What drug is it?
a. Morphine hydrochloride
b. Atropine sulfate
*c. Metoprolol
d. Oxytocin
e. Furosemide

99. A woman was delivered to a hospital for trachea intubation. What of the following drugs should be applied in this case?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Gentamycin sulfate
c. Nitroglycerine
d. Metronidazole
*e. Dithylinum

100. A patient suffers from pulmonary tuberculosis. During treatment neuritis of visual nerve arose. What drug has caused this by-effect?
a. Rifampicin
b. Streptomycin
c. Ethambutol
d. Kanamycin
*e. Isoniazid

101. A patient ill with amebiasis was prescribed a certain drug. The use of alcohol together with this drug is contra-indicated because the drug inhibits metabolism of ethyl alcohol. What drug is it?
*a. Metronidazole
b. Clonidine
c. Aminazine
d. Diazepam
e. Reserpine

102. A patient suffers from chronic left-ventricular insufficiency. What medication should be administered?
a. Pyracetam
*b. Digoxin
c. Etimizole
d. Bemegride
e. Vinpocetine

103. A patient ill with chronic cardiac insufficiency was prescribed an average therapeutic dose of digoxin. Two weeks after begin of its taking there appeared symptoms of drug intoxication (bradycardia, extrasystole, nausea). Name the phenomenon that caused accumulation of the drug in the organism?
a. Functional cumulation
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Idiosyncrasy
*d. Material cumulation
e. Tolerance

104. A patient with drug intoxication presented with the dryness of oral mucous membrane and mydriatic pupils. Such action of this drug is associated with the following effect:
a. Nicotinic cholinoreceptor stimulation
b. Muscarinic cholinoreceptor stimulation
*c. Muscarinic cholinoreceptor block
d. Adrenoreceptor stimulation
e. Adrenoreceptor block

105. A patient with ischemic heart disease has been administered an anti-anginal drug that reduces the myocardial oxygen consumption and improves blood supply of myocardium. What drug is it?
*a. Nitroglycerine
b. Propranolol
c. Retabolil
d. Promedol
e. Validol

106. A patient with a limb fracture must be administered a depolarizing drug from the myorelaxant group for the purpose of a short-time surgery. What drug is it?
a. Cytitonum
b. Tubocurarine chloride
*c. Dithylinum
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Pentaminum

107. A patient suffering from chronic bronchitis takes a synthetic mucolytic drug that facilitates the sputum thinning. What drug is it?
a. Furosemide
b. Enalapril
c. Diazepam
d. Heparin
*e. Acetylcysteine

108. For relief of hypertensive crisis a doctor administered a patient a drug that apart from antihypertensive effect has also sedative, spasmolytic and anticonvulsive effect. The drug was taken parenterally. When it is taken enterally it acts as a laxative and cholagogue. What drug was administered?
a. Apressin
*b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Reserpine
d. Dibasolum
e. No-spa

109. A patient with diabetes mellitus complicated by angiopathy has been recommended a drug which is a sulphonyl urease derivate of the second generation. It improves microcirculation and is known for its relatively good tolerance. What drug is it?
a. Adrenalin
*b. Glibenclamide
c. Insulin
d. Glibutidum
e. Acarbose

110. Burned skin surface was treated with a certain preparation. Its antiseptic properties are provided by atomic oxygen that is formed in presence of organic substances. What preparation was applied?
a. Chlorhexidine bigluconate
b. Furacillin
*c. Potassium permanganate
d. Alcoholic iodine solution
e. Sodium hydrocarbonate

111. On the 2-3rd day after stomach resection intestinal peristaltic wasnt restored. What is administered for stimulation of gastrointestinal tract?
a. Prasosin
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Acetylcholine
*d. Proserin
e. Cyclodole

112. A stomatologist injected a patient with a certain drug in order to reduce salivation during tooth filling. What drug is it?
a. Mesaton
*b. Atropine sulfate
c. Proserin
d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
e. Pilocarpine hydrochloride

113. A patient with chronic cardiac insufficiency has been taking foxglove (Digitalis) preparations for a long time. Due to the violation of intake schedule the woman got symptoms of intoxication. These symptoms result from:
a. Antagonism
b. Sensibilization
c. Tachyphylaxis
d. Idiosyncrasy
*e. Material cumulation

114. Before tooth extraction a patient was advised to take a certain drug for haemorrhage prevention. What drug was advised?
a. Asparcam
b. Heparin
*c. Vicasolum
d. Magnesium sulfate
e. Dimedrol

115. A man who has been taking a drug for a long time cannot withhold it because this causes impairment of psychic, somatic and vegetative functions. Name the syndrome of different disturbances caused by drug discontinuation:
a. Sensibilization
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Cumulation
*d. Abstinence
e. Idiosyncrasy

116. A patient consulted a stomatologist about purulent inflammation of his gums. What drug will be the most effective if it is suspected that a causative agent is an anaerobe?
a. Oxacillin sodium
b. Gentamicin
*c. Metronidazole
d. Co-trimoxazole
e. Nitroxoline

117. A 45-year-old patient suffers from neurosis characterized by irritability, sleeplessness, motiveless anxiety. What drug would eliminate all the symptoms?
a. Caffeine sodium benzoate
b. Levodopa
c. Valerian extract
d. Pyracetam
*e. Diazepam

118. A 12 year old child has intolerance to some foodstuffs. Their consumption causes an allergic reaction in form of itching skin eruptions. What antihistaminic drug should be admistered so that the child could attend school?
a. Dimedrol
b. Aminophylline
c. Ephedrine
*d. Loratadine
e. Diclofenac

119. A patient that entered the admission office had the following signs of acute cardiac insufficiency: paleness, acrocyanosis, frequent shallow respiration. What drug is indicated in this case?
*a. Corglycon
b. Cordiamin
c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Digitoxin

120. A patient with myocardial infarction was admitted to the cardiological department. For pain relief it was decided to potentiate fentanyl action with a neuroleptic. Which of the following neuroleptics is the most suitable for neuroleptanalgesia?
a. Haloperidol
b. Sulpiride
c. Aminazine
d. Triftazine
*e. Droperidol

121. A patient with bacterial pneumonia was prescribed benzylpenicillin. What is the mechanism of its antibacterial effect?
a. Inhibition of intracellular protein synthesis
b. Inhibition of SH-groups of microorganism enzymes
c. Antagonism with p-amino-benzoic acid
*d. Inhibition of synthesis of microorganism wall
e. Abnormal permeability of cytoplasmic membrane

122. A patient has herpetic rash. What medication should be administered?
a. Gentamycin
b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
c. Biseptol
*d. Acyclovir
e. Clotrimazole

123. A patient who has been treated in a neural clinic and has been taking a sedative for a long time got the following complication: cough, rhinitis, epiphora. What drug caused these disturbances?
a. Valerian
b. Diazepam
*c. Sodium bromide
d. Phenazepam
e. Reserpine

124. ×109In order to accelerate healing of a radiation ulcer a vitamin drug was administered. What drug is it?
a. Retabolil
b. Levamisole
c. Methyluracil
*d. Retinol acetate
e. Prednisolone

125. A patient with hip fracture was prescribed a narcotic analgetic. Its anesthetic action is determined by interaction with the following receptors:
a. GABA-ergic receptors
*b. Opiate receptors
c. Cholinoreceptors
d. Adrenoreceptors
e. Benzodiazepine receptors

126. A patient with hypertensic crisis was admitted to the cardiological department, he was injected intravenously with an antihypertensive drug - salt of an alkaline-earth metal. What drug was injected?
a. Calcium lactate
b. Benzohexamethonium
c. Potassium chloride
d. Sodium hydrocarbonate
*e. Magnesium sulfate

127. A patient with acute morphine poisoning was delivered to a hospital. What specific narcotic antagonist should be chosen in this case?
a. Methacin
b. Paracetamol
*c. Naloxone
d. Digoxin
e. Unithiol

