1. A 37-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his left lower jaw and reduced mouth opening. Objectively, edema and hyperemia of the mucosa are observed in the area of the left retromolar fossa that is painful to palpation. The mouth opening is reduced to 2 cm. X-ray shows dystopia of tooth 38 in the mesial direction. Make the diagnosis.
a. Pterygomaxillary space abscess
b. Parapharyngeal space abscess
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 38
*d. Pericoronitis of tooth 38
e. Acute odontogenic periostitis

2. A 18-year-old boy complains of bleeding and pain in her gums. The disease onset was 4 days ago. Objectively the skin is pale, body temperature is 38.5^oC) Her submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged, painful, non-fused with the surrounding tissues. The gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37 are hyperemic, ulcerated, and covered in necrotic deposit. Teeth present with soft dental plaque. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. -

3. What is the angle of the transverse articular path in a fixed (average) anatomical articulator?
a. 45°
*b. 17°
c. 12°
d. 33°
e. 110°

4. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist to have her 25 tooth extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Unilateral central anesthesia
b. Unilateral infraorbital and incisor anesthesia
c. Unilateral tuberal and palatal anesthesia
*d. Unilateral tuberal, infraorbital, and palatal anesthesia
e. Unilateral infraorbital and palatal anesthesia

5. During the preparation of teeth for installation of an orthopedic construction, a 65-year-old woman indistinctly complained of a sharp headache, sensation of heat, nausea, and numbness of her limbs. Her face is asymmetrical due to a smoothed out nasolabial fold on one side. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Myocardial infarction
*b. Acute disturbance of cerebral circulation
c. Unconsciousness
d. Pneumothorax
e. Angina pectoris

6. A 47-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of missing teeth 12, 11 and 21. After an examination, it was decided to make him a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge with teeth 13, 22 and 23 as the abutment. Paracervical ledges are being created on the abutment teeth during their preparation. Within what limits can their width vary?
*a. 0.5-1.0 mm
b. 0.1-0.2 mm
c. 2.0-2.5 mm
d. 3.0-3.2 mm
e. 2.5-3.0 mm

7. A 56-year-old man has an oval erosion with a deep red smooth surface on the vermillion border of the lower lip between the angle of the mouth and the midline. The surface of the erosion has bloody scabs that are difficult to remove. Their removal causes a slight bleeding. Slight trauma of the erosion in a place without scabs causes no bleeding. What type of lower lip precancer is it?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Bowen's disease
*d. Manganotti's abrasive precancerous  cheilitis
e. Circumscribed precancerous  hyperkeratosis of the vermillion border

8. A 45-year-old man came to the prosthodontic department to have a denture made for him. Before the preparation of the hard tissues of the intact teeth, the patient was given an infiltration anesthesia with 0.5% lidocaine solution. Several minutes later he developed depressed level of consciousness, his blood pressure dropped, convulsions started, and involuntary urination occurred. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
a. Syncope
b. Pain shock
c. Collapse
d. Heart failure
*e. Anaphylactic shock

9. A 71-year-old man came to a dental orthopedist to have a denture made for him. During examination, the dentist noticed that the mucosa that covers the palate and the alveolar processes was worn thin and barely pliant. What Supple class is it?
a. Fourth
b. -
c. First
*d. Second
e. Third

10. A 40-year-old woman came to an orthopedic dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect due to missing teeth 24 and 25. Examination shows that the clinical crowns of her teeth 23 and 26 are of optimal height and stable. X-ray detects no changes in the periapical tissues. A porcelain-fused-to-mental dental bridge with abutment teeth 23 and 26 is to be made for the patient. What impressions must be obtained in this case?
a. Complete working impression of the maxilla, partial impression of the mandible
b. Anatomical working and auxiliary impressions of the both jaws
*c. Two-layer working impression of the maxilla and anatomical auxiliary impression of the mandible
d. Two-layer working impression of the maxilla
e. Partial impressions of both jaws

11. Parents of a 3-year-old child complain of food periodically getting into the child's nasal cavity during feeding. Objectively there is a fissure in the area of the soft palate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Congenital hidden cleft palate
b. Isolated nonunion of the hard and soft palate
c. Combined cleft palate
*d. Isolated partial nonunion of the soft palate
e. Cleft hard palate

12. Parents of a 5-year-old girl brought her to the pediatric dentist for oral cavity sanation. After clinical examination she was diagnosed with chronic deep caries in 54. What filling material would be optimal for the treatment of tooth 54 in this case?
a. Silicophosphate cement
b. Composite
c. Silicate cement
d. Zinc phosphate cement
*e. Glass ionomer cement

13. A 44-year-old man came to a dentist for sanation of the oral cavity. Objectively, the crown of his tooth 17 is completely destroyed. Having conducted additional examinations, the dentist made the following diagnosis: chronic fibrous periodontitis of tooth 17. Extraction of tooth 17 is indicated in this case. What type of conduction anesthesia should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
a. Infraorbital and palatine anesthesia
*b. Tuberal and palatine anesthesia
c. Plexual anesthesia
d. Incisor and infraorbital anesthesia
e. Torusal anesthesia

14. A dental orthodontist has prescribed a complex of myogymnastic exercises with an equilibrator to an 8-year-old boy with the Angle's class II, subclass 1, closure of the first permanent molars. What muscle is trained using this dental appliance?
a. Mandibular elevator muscles
b. Pharyngeal muscles
*c. Orbicularis oris muscle
d. Respiratory muscles
e. Tongue muscles

15. Preventive examination of a 7-year-old child revealed a carious cavity with overhanging enamel within the limited area of a fissure in tooth 36. The probe catches in the softened dentin. In the other areas, the enamel on the edges of the fissures is glossy and dense. A dentist plans to fill the carious lesion of tooth 36. What tactics should be chosen regarding the intact areas of the fissure?
a. Application of fluoride varnishes
b. Application of calcium-containing gels
*c. Non-invasive sealing
d. Invasive sealing
e. Processing the tooth with an antiseptic solution

16. A 50-year-old woman with compensated insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus needs dental prosthetics. She has been in a clinic for several hours already, during which she was nervous and skipped her meals. In the process of obtaining her dental impressions, she suddenly became aggressive, paled, broke out in cold sweat, and fell unconscious. What substance is used for emergency aid in such clinical situations?
a. Insulin
b. Valocordin
c. Ammonia solution
d. Nitroglycerine
*e. Glucose solution

17. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of tooth mobility, pain and gingival bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth. Objectively, the roots of teeth 13, 12, 11, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36 and 37 are exposed by over 2/3; they have the mobility of the III-IV degree. It is planned to extract the mobile teeth in the front area. What are the terms for making an immediate denture?
a. Make the dentures in a month after the teeth extraction
b. Make the dentures in ten days after the teeth extraction
c. Make the dentures on the day after the teeth extraction
*d. Make the dentures before the teeth extraction and fix the dentures immediately after the extraction
e. Make the dentures in three months after the teeth extraction

18. A 24-year-old woman is at the III trimester of her pregnancy. She complains of white spots appearing on her lower front teeth. Examination detects chalk-like lesions on the vestibular surfaces of teeth 41, 42, 31, 32 in the precervical area. The lesions can be stained with dyes. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Preparation without filling
b. Preparation and filling
c. Impregnation with silver nitrate
d. ART-technique
*e. Remineralization therapy

19. A 44-year-old man after an injury complains of pain in his lower jaw. The pain intensifies during lower jaw movements, especially when the man opens his mouth. Objectively, the facial configuration is disturbed, there is an extensive hematoma in the area of the left mandibular angle. Palpation of this area is painful. The lower lip frenulum is displaced to the left of the midline. When the chin is pressed, pain appears in the left mandibular angle. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Bilateral fracture of the mandibular  ramus
b. -
*c. Left-sided fracture of the mandibular  angle
d. Posterior mandibular dislocation on the  left
e. Anterior bilateral mandibular dislocation

20. A 16-year-old girl came to a dental orthodontist with complaints of a loosened bracket on tooth 12. The bracket system was installed one week ago. Intraoral examination detects residual fixation material on tooth 12, the bracket is displaced and remains attached to the arch due to the ligature. What is the main active element of the bracket system?
*a. Orthodontic archwire
b. Metal ligature
c. Orthodontic ring
d. Bracket
e. Buccal tube

21. The parents of a 4-year-old girl complain of defects on the upper teeth of their child. Objectively, her upper incisors have defects in the cervical region of their vestibular surface. The defects do not cross the dentinoenamel junction and look like patches of chalky enamel with visible destruction of its structure. Probing detects a rough softened surface. There is no response to cold stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute median caries
b. Acute initial caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic initial caries

22. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated infiltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the infiltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the infiltration there is a fistula. In the oral cavity the crown of 46 is destroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the fistula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Migrating facial granuloma
b. Odontogenic lymphadenitis
c. Cheek furuncle
d. Actinomycosis
e. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis

23. A 14-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of a large cavity in her upper molar. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 26 there is a carious cavity within the parapulpar dentin, filled with dense pigmented dentin. Thermal test with a cold stimulus produces brief and weakly positive response. Percussion of tooth 26 is negative, tooth preparation is sensitive along the dentinoenamel junction. Probing of the cavity floor is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
*c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic median caries

24. A person has a unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was performed by applying a two-jaw dental ligature splint with anchoring loops and intermaxillary traction. Healing progresses without complications. When is it the time to remove the splint?
a. In 10 days
b. In 7 days
c. In 2 weeks
*d. In 3 weeks
e. In 5 weeks

25. A 29-year-old woman complains of short-term pain in her front teeth, provoked by thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli. She has a thyroid disease. Objectively, on the vestibular surface of teeth 11, 12, 13, 21, 22, 23, 31, 32, 33, 41, 42, and 43 there are defects of hard tissues, with softened dark pigmented dentin. The enamel at the edges is chalk-colored, rough, brittle, can be chipped off with an excavator. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
b. Erosion of hard dental tissues
*c. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
d. Acute median caries
e. Cuneiform defect

26. How often should a dentist's office be thoroughly cleaned?
a. No less than once a month
b. No less than once a year
c. No less than once every 2 weeks
d. No less than twice a week
*e. No less than once a week

27. During carious cavity preparation in a 20-year-old man, the pulp-chamber floor was accidentally perforated and horn of the pulp was exposed. On the carious cavity floor there is a point-like puncture surrounded with white predentin. Pink pulp can be seen through the perforation, pulp probing is acutely painful. What treatment should be given to the patient?
a. Devital amputation
b. Devital extirpation
*c. Biological approach
d. Vital amputation
e. Vital extirpation

28. A 44-year-old man came to the dental polyclinic to have a denture made for him. He complains of problematic chewing and aesthetical defects. Objectively teeth 14, 15, and 22 are missing. According to Agapov, the loss of masticatory efficiency in this case is:
a. 9%
b. 20%
c. 16%
d. 12%
*e. 18%

29. A 14-year-old boy complains of a rash in his oral cavity and on the lips. The rash appeared after a long-term antibiotic therapy. Objectively, there are painful erosions with a gray coating on the hyperemic mucosa of the oral cavity and hemorrhagic scabs on the lips. Maculo-papular rash is observed on the skin of the flexor surfaces of the forearms. What group of drugs should be chosen for etiotropic treatment of this disease?
a. Antiviral drugs
*b. Antihistamines
c. Keratoplastics
d. Antifungal drugs
e. Anti-inflammatory drugs

30. A 14-year-old child complains of bleeding and pain in the lower right molar during eating. Objectively, on the mesial and masticatory surfaces of tooth 46 there is a carious cavity filled with red tissue. Its superficial probing resuts in pain and moderate bleeding, while deeper probing causes sharp pain. Tooth percussion is painless. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic papillitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

31. How to separate teeth for orthodontic crowns?
a. With a diamond-tipped bore
b. With separating discs
*c. With elastics
d. With volcanic discs
e. No separation is needed

32. A patient complains of constant aching pain in a left upper tooth during the last 24 hours. Objectively, the mesial surface of tooth 25 has a carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity. The response to a cold stimulus is negative. Percussion of tooth 25 is painful. X-ray shows no pathological changes in the periapical bone tissue of tooth 25. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

33. A removable complete denture is being made for the lower jaw of a 50-year-old man. During the fitting of an individual impression tray, the border in the area of the mylohyoid line needs to be determined. What Herbst test should be performed for this purpose?
*a. Licking the upper lip
b. Stretching the tongue towards the tip of the nose
c. Wide mouth opening
d. Alternately touching the right and left cheeks with the tongue
e. Swallowing saliva

34. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain and bleeding in the area of his upper right teeth. Objectively, on the contact surfaces of teeth 16 and 17 there are dental restorations of unsatisfactory quality, the contact point of the teeth is not restored, the gingival papilla between teeth 16 and 17 is edematous, hyperemic, and bleeds when probed. X-ray shows resorption of the interalveolar septum in the area of teeth 16 and 17 by 1/3 of their root length. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Generalized periodontitis, degree I
*b. Localized periodontitis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis, degree I

35. A 70-year-old man complains of displacement of the lower jaw to the right when he opens his mouth, clicking in the left temporomandibular joint, and slight pain during eating. According to the patient, his mouth opening gradually becomes reduced. X-ray shows a round focus of significant darkening with clear contours in the area of the left articular process. The density of the focus matches the density of the cortical plate. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Osteoma
b. Odontoma
c. Giant-cell tumor of bone
d. Chondroma
e. Osteoid osteoma

36. During dental procedures, a 29-year-old man after receiving anesthesia suddenly developed a dense non-itching skin edema in the area of his face and neck. The edema was accompanied by cough and wheezing. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Urticaria
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Contact dermatitis
*d. Quincke's edema
e. Bronchial asthma attack

37. Preventive examination of a 15-year-old girl by a dentist revealed a carious cavity in the vestibular paracervical region of her tooth 36. The cavity has a wide opening and is located within dense, pigmented enamel. Probing of the defect is painless. Thermal stimulation results are negative. Make the diagnosis.
a. Chronic median caries
*b. Chronic superficial caries
c. Acute superficial caries
d. Acute initial caries
e. Chronic initial caries

38. A 2.5-year-old child is fussy and refuses to eat because of pain in the mouth that lasts for several days already. The body temperature is 37.2^oC) The child has pneumonia and is being treated in an inpatient department. Objectively, on the hyperemic and edematous mucosa of the cheeks, palate, and tongue, there is a white film that can be easily removed, with the formation of erosions in some areas. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*b. Acute candidal stomatitis
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Mild leukoplakia
e. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

39. A 14-year-old child has a bilateral mandibular fracture in the area of the mental foramina. Against the background of fractures, the clinic presentation of respiratory disorders intensifies. What is the cause of asphyxia in this case?
a. Formation of a hematoma in the floor of the mouth
b. Edema of the oral mucosa
c. Hypersalivation
*d. Posterior displacement of the tongue root with a mandibular fragment
e. Foreign bodies in the oral cavity

40. The medical station of a regiment received a patient with signs of bilateral mandibular fracture. What is the main task of first aid in this case?
a. To administer analgesics and cardiac medications
b. To clean oral cavity from blood clots, tooth shards, and bone fragments
*c. To control shock, bleeding, and asphyxia and to provide transport immobilization
d. To provide symptomatic therapy and care
e. To check and correct previously applied bandages

41. During Eschler-Bittner test the profile of a 12-year-old girl with posterior occlusion has shown some improvement. Specify the condition that resulted in the development of posterior occlusion in this patient:
*a. Mandibular underdevelopment
b. Mandibular overdevelopment
c. Maxillary underdevelopment
d. Mandibular underdevelopment and maxillary overdevelopment
e. Maxillary overdevelopment

42. A 29-year-old man is diagnosed with medial maxillary fracture. The line of the fracture is symmetrical on both sides. In this case sensory perception in the teeth and mucosa is likely to be disturbed within the following interval:
a. From tooth 11 to tooth 21
b. From tooth 13 to tooth 23
c. Sensitivity of the teeth and mucosa will remain undisturbed
d. From tooth 18 to tooth 28
*e. From tooth 15 to tooth 25

43. An 11-year-old child has a thickening in the frontal region of the lower jaw that appeared after the child fell down. The trauma occurred one month ago. Objectively, on the lower jaw, in the area of the mucogingival junction, there is a circumscribed dense spot with smooth surface that is slightly painful on palpation. The teeth in the pathologic focus are intact and vital. X-ray detects an osteoporotic focus with thickened periosteum in the frontal region of the lower jaw. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Osteitis deformans
b. Chronic osteomyelitis, destructive- productive form
*c. Rarefying periostitis
d. Chronic osteomyelitis, destructive form
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

44. Medical committee registers the patients, who for a long time lived in an area polluted with radiation. The patients are advised on the diet that will quickly purge the body from radionuclides. The portion of products rich in pectine should be increased in their diet. Name these products:
a. Baked goods
*b. Fruits and vegetables
c. Meat products
d. Dairy products
e. Pasta

45. A porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for tooth 11 is being made for the patient. The tooth will be left vital. What measures should be taken during treatment to prevent pulpitis in this tooth?
a. Calcium preparations
b. Fluorine preparations
c. Anti-inflammatory preparations
d. Physical therapy
*e. Pharmaceutical crown

46. A 70-year-old man has edentulous maxilla. Objectively maxillary tuberosity and alveolar processes are completely atrophied; palatine vault is flat, its mucosal layer is moderately pliant. In this case the patient's atrophic edentulous maxilla can be classified as:
a. -
b. Keller class III
c. Schroeder class II
d. Keller class II
*e. Schroeder class III

47. After examination, a 6-month-old infant was diagnosed with a complete labial cleft. What surgical operation should be performed in this case to remove this defect?
a. Frenulotomy
b. Uranostaphyloplasty
c. Uranoplasty
*d. Cheiloplasty
e. Frenulectomy

48. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complains of acute paroxysmal pain in his right lower jaw. The pain radiates to the ear and intensifies when a cold stimulus is applied. Six months ago this man had a severe pain in his tooth 46, but he made no appointment with a doctor. Three days ago the pain reappeared. Examination of the mesial surface of tooth 46 revealed a deep carious cavity filled with softened pigmented dentin. Probing is sharply painful at one point. In the area of the root apices of tooth 46, X-ray shows a widening of the periodontal fissure. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute limited pulpitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

49. A 48-year-old woman complains of itching gums and increased teeth sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively, the dental cervices are exposed. The gums are firm and pale. There is a small amount of supragingival dental plaque. In the area of teeth 13, 14, 24, and 25 there are cuneiform defects, probing of which is painful. The patient was provisionally diagnosed with periodontosis. What X-ray presentation is characteristic of this disease?
*a. Horizontal resorption
b. Diffuse osteoporosis
c. Vertical resorption
d. Uneven resorption of the alveolar bone
e. Bone pocket formation

50. A 27-year-old woman needs a denture. Objectively, her tooth 15 is missing, while teeth 14 and 16 are intact. What denture is preferable in this case?
*a. Adhesive dental bridge
b. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge
c. Clasp (bugel) denture
d. Partial removable laminar denture
e. Swaged dental bridge

51. A 42-year-old man complains of periodic pain in his tooth 48. On examination tooth 48 is partially erupted with its medial cusps, its mucosa is pale pink and painless on palpation, the mouth opening is fully unhindered. X-ray shows tooth 48 to be located medially to tooth 47. Choose the surgical treatment:
a. Operculum dissection
*b. Atypical tooth extraction of 48
c. Crown and root separation
d. Operculum removal
e. Typical tooth extraction of 48

52. A 20-year-old woman complains of pain in the area of tooth 38. The pain increases during swallowing and opening her mouth wide. Objectively, the crown of tooth 38 is partially covered in mucosa, from under which a purulent exudate is being discharged. Palpation is painful. The mucosa over tooth 38 is hyperemic and swollen. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute serous periostitis
b. Acute suppurative periostitis
c. Acute ulcerative pericoronitis
*d. Acute suppurative pericoronitis
e. Acute catarrhal pericoronitis

53. In a maternity clinic, conversations were held with pregnant women about the importance of nutrition for the budding and development of the teeth of unborn children. At what week of intrauterine development does the bud stage of temporary tooth follicles begin in a fetus?
a. 12th week
b. 15th week
c. 18th week
*d. 7th week
e. 4th week

54. The anatomo-physiological method was applied to determine the interalveolar height of a 65-year-old man with completely edentulous jaws. How does the distance between the control points on the chin and at the nasal base differ in this case from the physiological resting state of the lower jaw?
*a. It is 2-3 mm shorter
b. It is 2-3 mm longer
c. The distance is the same
d. It is 5-6 mm longer
e. It is 5-6 mm shorter

55. A 34-year-old woman complains of dark brown spots on her upper front teeth. The spots formed approximately 18 months ago. Objectively, the contact surfaces of teeth 22 and 23 have pigmented areas of brown enamel with clear margins. Probing is painless. The surface of the spots is rough, the probe does not catch on it. After drying with a chip-blower, the surface of the spots has lost its luster and become matte. Percussion and thermodiagnostics are painless. Electric pulp testing - 4 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic superficial caries
*b. Chronic initial caries
c. Tetracycline teeth
d. Local enamel hypoplasia
e. Fluorosis

56. A 30-year-old woman after an overexposure to cold complains of facial asymmetry and fever of 37.9^oC) Objectively, she can not wrinkle her forehead on the left or close her left eye. Her left nasolabial fold is smoothed out and her lips cannot close tightly. No superciliary reflex can be observed on the left. Name this pathology:
a. Facial hemispasm
b. -
*c. Facial nerve neuropathy
d. Progressive facial hemiatrophy
e. Trigeminal neuralgia

57. To make the external prosthesis for a 62-year-old man it is necessary to obtain a Hippocrates facial moulage of this patient. What impression material should be used?
a. Repin
b. Stens
*c. Plaster
d. Dentafol
e. Stomaflex

58. A 65-year-old man with fully edentulous upper jaw needs removable full laminar denture. To make the denture, anatomical impressions of the upper and lower jaws are necessary. The patient exhibits heightened gag reflex. What drug can be used to suppress the gag reflex in this patient?
a. 1% dimedrol (diphenhydramine) solution
b. 0.2% noradrenaline solution
c. 10% glucose solution
d. 0.1% atropin solution
*e. 10% lidocaine solution

59. A 48-year-old man complains of gingival overgrowth (''gums cover the teeth''). The patient suffers from epilepsy and takes anticonvulsant agents. Objectively gingival papillae are of normal color, dense, with lumpy surface; they do not bleed on probing and cover the lower front teeth up to their incisal surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form, degree III
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form, degree III
c. Gingival fibromatosis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form, degree II
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form, degree II

60. Complete removable dentures have been made for a patient for the first time. After denture fixation, among the other recommendations the doctor informs, how long these dentures can be used. When should these dentures be replaced with the new ones?
a. In 5 years
b. In one year
*c. In 3 years
d. In 7 years
e. In 2 years

61. A 58-year-old woman came to an orthopedic dentist complaining that her partial removable denture for the upper jaw had broken. She had been using this denture for 2 years. The denture base is broken. What plastic must be used to repair the denture?
a. Carboplast
b. Stomaplast
c. Phthorax
d. Ethacryl
*e. Redont

62. A 62-year-old woman presents with reduced occlusal height, which makes madibular condyles press on the vault of the articular fossa, the auriculotemporal nerve, and the chorda tympani. What disease can be caused by this clinical presentation?
*a. Costen's syndrome
b. Pierre Robin syndrome
c. Intra-articular ankylosis
d. Arthrogenic mandibular contracture
e. Juvenile temporomandibular joint dysfunction

63. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of missing upper teeth. Objectively, his teeth 24 and 25 are missing, the bite is orthognathic, the crowns of teeth 23 and 26 are tall and intact. It is planned to make a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge for this patient. What impression material must be used to obtain an impression in this case?
a. Plaster
b. Alginate
c. Zinc oxide eugenol
d. Thermoplastic
*e. Silicone

64. A 48-year-old woman complains of low-grade fever and a gradually enlarging ulcer on her gingival mucosa near the molars; the teeth in the affected area are mobile. Objectively on the gingival mucosa between the lower left molars there are two superficial sharply painful ulcers with undermining margins. Floor of the ulcers is granulated and covered in yellow-gray coating. Small tubercles surround the ulcers. Tooth cervices are exposed, pathologic tooth mobility is observed. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and matted together into dense clusters. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Tuberculosis
b. Trophic ulcer
c. Acute aphthous stomatitis
d. Syphilis
e. Cancerous ulcer

65. How often should the dentures be replaced in children during the period of milk occlusion according to Ilyina-Markosian?
a. Every 10-12 months
b. Every 8-10 months
c. Every 12-16 months
*d. Every 6-8 months
e. Every 16 months

66. A 36-year-old woman complains of a constant mild aching pain in her right lower jaw, observed during biting on tooth 45, as well. The pain appeared two days ago. Objectively, the masticatory surface of tooth 45 has a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the junction is painless, vertical percussion is positive. X-ray detects no pathological changes in the area of tooth 45. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute serous periostitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

67. A 5-year-old child has all temporary teeth in the oral cavity with tremas between them. The incisors are in direct contact and their cutting edges are worn off. The distal surfaces of two temporary molars form a mesio-sagittal step - the Zielinsky sign. What period of bite formation is it?
a. Early transitional dentition
b. Late transitional dentition
*c. Aging of the temporary bite
d. Stabilization of the temporary bite
e. Formation of the temporary bite

68. A 43-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 24. Tooth preparation, pulp extirpation, and mechanical and medical treatment of root canals were performed. How must the root canals be sealed in this case?
a. To the radiographic apex
b. Reaching 1 mm over the apex
*c. To the physiological apex
d. To the anatomical apex
e. -

69. A 21-year-old woman complains of short-term pain attacks in her lower left tooth that are provoked by thermal stimuli and quickly stop after the stimulus is removed. On the masticatory surface of tooth 47, examination reveals a carious cavity with a narrow entrance that is filled with light softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor and percussion of tooth 47 are painless. Probing of the cavity walls is painful. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
*c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

70. A 49-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, teeth 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, 36 are missing on his lower jaw. The remaining teeth on the lower jaw are intact, stable, without inclination, with a well-defined equator. It is recommended to make a clasp (bugel) denture for the patient's lower jaw. What type of clasp (clammer) should be used on abutment teeth 47 and 37 in this case?
a. Roach clasp
b. Bonwill clasp
*c. Akers clasp
d. Reverse action clasp
e. Circumferential clasp

71. A 58-year-old man complains of painless gum enlargement. He has a history of epilepsy and for a long time has been taking hydantoin derivatives. Objectively, the gingival margin of the both jaws is dense, painless on palpation, and covers the crowns to the half of their height. Gingival pockets are 5 mm deep. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Viral warts
b. Gingival fibromatosis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis, granulating form
d. Hyperplastic syndrome in leukemia
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form

72. A 17-year-old young man came to a dentist with complaints of significant gingival bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth. The doctor noted that walking is problematic for this patient because of pain in his knees and ankle joints. The patient's medical history informs that the pain is associated with hemorrhages into the joints - hemarthroses; the bleeding when he brushes his teeth has been observed since childhood. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Acute leukemia
b. Thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Rheumatoid polyarthritis
*d. Hemophilia
e. Post-traumatic arthritis

73. A removable partial laminar denture was made for the upper jaw of a 55-year-old patient. During assessment of its quality, small pores were detected all throughout the denture base. What has caused the formation of pores in the denture?
a. Insufficient amount of monomer in the plastic dough
b. Using plastic with an expired expiration date
c. Rapid cooling of the cuvette after plastic polymerization
*d. Rapid temperature increase during plastic polymerization
e. Insufficient pressure applied to the plastic during its polymerization

74. A 56-year-old man during obtaining a full anatomical impression of the upper jaw with alginate mass developed acute dyspnea, pale skin, increased sweating, cyanosis, and wheezing respirations. What urgent condition developed in this case?
a. Bronchial asthma attack
b. Overactive gag reflex
c. Pneumothorax
d. Acute bronchitis
*e. Aspiration asphyxia

75. A 33-year-old man has been hospitalized after a car accident with an injury to the soft tissues of his right parotid-masseteric region. The patient's right eye does not close, the right corner of his mouth is lowered. What has been injured in this case, causing these symptoms?
a. Mimic muscles
b. Parenchyma of the parotid salivary gland
*c. Facial nerve
d. Excretory duct of the parotid salivary gland
e. Capsule of the parotid salivary gland

76. A 46-year-old man complains of facial asymmetry, intense pain in the area of his teeth 17 and 18, severe headache, body temperature of 39^oC, and general weakness. Objectively, his face is asymmetrical due to a slight edema of the right buccal, zygomatic, and lower temporal regions. His mouth opening is limited. The crown of tooth 18 is destroyed. The mucosa of the mucogingival fold in the projection area of the roots of tooth 18 is hyperemic and edematous. Palpation reveals a painful infiltrate behind the right maxillary tuberosity. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Odontogenic acute purulent periostitis
d. Odontogenic buccal phlegmon
*e. Odontogenic abscess of the  pterygopalatine fossa

77. A 10-year-old child is referred by the orthodontist for extraction of tooth 53. Objectively the crown of 53 is retained, the tooth is immobile. X-ray of tooth 53 shows root resorption by less than 1/3. Choose the best instrument for extraction of tooth 53:
*a. Straight crown forceps
b. Beak-shaped root forceps
c. Straight elevator
d. Root bayonet forceps
e. Crown forceps with S-shaped handles

78. The parents of a 3-year-old girl complain of the destruction of the child's upper teeth. Objectively, there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the masticatory surfaces of teeth 54 and 55. Enamel and dentin in the affected area are softened and can be easily removed with an excavator. The child refuses to undergo teeth prteparation and is in a psychoemotionallly unstable condition. What method of treatment should be used in this case?
*a. Atraumatic restorative treatment
b. Non-invasive sealing
c. Remineralization therapy
d. Invasive sealing
e. ICON treatment

79. To clarify the diagnosis, the orthodontist performed Eschler-Bittner clinical diagnostic test. As the result the facial signs became more marked. What jaw abnormality is the most likely in this case?
a. Mandibular macrognathia
b. Maxillary micrognathia
c. Mandibular micrognathia
d. Combined pathology of both jaws
*e. Maxillary macrognathia

80. After examination, a 34-year-old patient was diagnosed with Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome. What complex of symptoms is characteristic of this syndrome?
a. Lichen ruber planus, essential hypertension, diabetes mellitus
b. Hutchinson's teeth, congenital deafness, congenital blindness
c. Fissured tongue, atopic cheilitis, trigeminal neuritis
*d. Macrocheilitis, fissured tongue, paresis of the facial nerve
e. Median rhomboid glossitis, eczematous cheilitis, paresis of the facial nerve

81. A 24-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for extraction of tooth 38. What anesthesia should be given to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
*a. Torusal
b. Infiltration
c. Mandibular
d. Plexus
e. Tuberal

82. As a result of a trauma, an upper front tooth was broken in a 39-year-old patient. Objectively, the cutting edge on the mesial surface of tooth 22 is destroyed, with the area of destruction remaining within the mantle dentin. What class of cavity is it according to the Black's classification?
*a. IV
b. II
c. III
d. V
e. VI

83. An 8-year-old boy complains of an acute pain in his lower left jaw, general weakness, high body temperature of 38.6^oC, and problems with opening the mouth and swallowing. Objectively, the face is asymmetrical because of edema in the submandibular region and in the lower third of the left cheek. Mucosa in the area of teeth 73, 74, and 75 is edematous on the both sides of the alveolar process. The teeth are mobile, percussion is positive, the Vincent's sign is positive. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Odontogenic phlegmon of the  submandibular region
b. Non-odontogenic acute purulent  lymphadenitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Inflammatory infiltration of the left  cheek

84. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 27. Vital extirpation is chosen as the treatment method. Amide anesthetic is to be used for tuberal and palatal anesthesia. What anesthetic solution needs to be administered in this case?
a. 5% anaesthesin (benzocaine)
b. 10% lidocaine
*c. 3% mepivastesin (mepivacaine)
d. 2% novocaine (procaine)
e. 2% dicain (tetracaine)

85. A 27-year-old woman complains of general weakness and pain in her lower jaw during swallowing. Two days ago she developed pain in tooth 38. Mouth opening is impossible. What anesthesia should be given to the patient before examination of the oral cavity and extraction of 38?
a. Infiltration
b. Verlotsky
c. Mental
*d. Berchet-Dubov
e. Tuberal

86. A 16-year-old boy complaints of generally feeling unwell, a fever of 37.8°С, and pain during swallowing. Objectively, the following is observed: catarrhal gingivitis; inflammatory changes in the pharyngeal region, palatine arches, and uvula; edema of the tonsils that have massive fibrinous coating, tightly fused with the underlying tissues and spreading to the soft and hard palate. Removal of the fibrinous coating exposes an erosive surface. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Hemolytic streptococcus
b. Epstein-Barr virus
c. Herpes simplex virus
*d. Loffler bacillus
e. Coxsackievirus

87. A 45-year-old woman diagnosed with thrombophlebitis of the angular vein of the face developed exophthalmos. What does this symptom indicate?
a. Development of periphlebitis
b. Development of purulent meningitis as a complication of thrombophlebitis
c. Spread of the inflammatory process into the pterygopalatine fossa
*d. Spread of the inflammatory process into the retrobulbar fat
e. Suppuration of the angular vein of the face

88. A 23-year-old man with an asthenic built came to a dental surgeon for the planned extraction of tooth 18. During the objective examination, the patient complained of general weakness, nausea, and darkened vision and lost his consciousness for several seconds. The skin of his face is pale and covered in sweat, the pulse is thready, the blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Collapse
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Syncope
d. Quincke's edema
e. Epilepsy attack

89. A 54-year-old patient is prescribed full cast porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridges for the upper and lower jaws. What type of impression material should be chosen in this case?
*a. Silicone
b. Zinc oxide eugenol
c. Alginate
d. Thermoplastic
e. Plaster

90. A 66-year-old woman while waiting for her appointment with a dentist complained of feeling unwell and developed asphyxia and acute constricting pain behind the sternum. Objectively, the following is observed: hyperemia of the skin of the face, sonorous heart sounds, systolic murmur over the aorta. Heart rate - 94/min., blood pressure - 230/120 mm Hg. What emergency condition has developed in the patient?
a. Myocardial infarction
*b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Angina pectoris attack
d. Quincke's edema
e. Anaphylactic shock

91. A 53-year-old man complains of increased teeth sensitivity to chemical stimuli. Objectively, the gums are pale pink, the roots are exposed by 1/3 of their length. A small amount of dental deposit is observed. Teeth 15, 14, 24, 41, 31, 42, and 32 have cuneiform defects. Probing of the defects and exposed cervices is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Periodontosis, I degree
d. Generalized periodontitis, II degree
e. Generalized periodontitis, I degree

92. A 20-year-old pregnant woman with the term of 22 weeks complains of thermal sensitivity of her upper front teeth. The sensitivity developed one month ago. She was diagnosed with acute initial caries of teeth 12, 11, 21, 22, Black class V. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.8. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Professional teeth cleaning, remineralization therapy, and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
b. Postpone the treatment until 30 weeks of gestation
c. Remineralization therapy and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
*d. Professional teeth cleaning and remineralization therapy
e. Professional teeth cleaning and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22

93. A 49-year-old patient complains of bleeding, itching, and sore gums. Objectively, the gums are bright red and edematous, seropurulent exudate  is produced from the periodontal pockets during palpation, individual teeth exhibit mobility of the first degree. What changes in the complete blood count are characteristic of such course of the disease?
a. Neutrophilic right shift, increased ESR
*b. Neutrophilic left shift, increased ESR
c. Neutrophilic left shift, polycythemia
d. Neutrophilic left shift, thrombocytopenia
e. Neutrophilic left shift, decreased ESR

94. Examination of the oral cavity of a 12-year-old child revealed a carious cavity on the medial contact surface of tooth 46. The cavity is located within the mantle dentin, its walls and floor are pigmented and dense. Thermal stimuli provoke no response. Preparation of tooth 46 is painful in the area of dentinoenamel junction. The decay-missing-filled index is DMF+df=2. What filling material will be optimal in this case?
*a. Photopolymer composite
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Zinc phosphate cement
d. Amalgam
e. Glass-ionomer cement

95. A full removable laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for a mbox{69-year-old man. After obtaining a functional impression, the denture borders are being determined on the cast. Where should the posterior border of the full removable laminar denture for the upper jaw be located?
a. -
b. Overlapping the line A by 5-6 mm
c. Leaving 5-6 mm before the line A
d. Leaving 1-2 mm before the line A
*e. Overlapping the line A by 1-2 mm

96. A 12-year-old boy complains of constant pain in the upper tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 26 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Thermal stimuli and probing of the cavity floor are painless. Percussion is sharply painful. Mucosa in the area of tooth 26 exhibits mild signs of inflammation. X-ray of tooth 26 shows no changes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative periodontitis

97. A 32-year-old man complains of a moderate periodical dull aching pain in the left temporomandibular joint. He notes stiffness in the left temporomandibular joint and limited mouth opening at the end of the day. X-ray shows a joint space narrowing in the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
*c. Chronic arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Acute arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
e. Pain dysfunction syndrome of the left temporomandibular joint

98. A woman came to a dentist with complaints of a formation on her face. Objectively, on the cheek there is a painless hemispherical tumor-like formation up to 1 cm in size. On palpation, the formation is dense-elastic, mobile, has a smooth surface, and is fused to the skin surface in one point at its center. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Papilloma
*b. Atheroma
c. Lymphangioma
d. Lipoma
e. Fibroma

99. What can be determined by studying the jaw casts during the period of permanent bite using the Korkhaus technique?
a. The ratio of the width of the transverse dimensions of the upper and lower incisors
b. Incorrect placement of the lateral teeth in the dentition in the sagittal and transversal directions
c. Longitudinal length of the dentitions
*d. The length of the front segment of the upper and lower dentitions in the sagittal direction
e. Dentition dimensions in the transversal plane

100. A 46-year-old woman complains of painful reddening of the skin of her face, chills, headache, generally feeling unwell, vomiting, and a fever of 39°С. Objectively, on the skin of her cheeks and nose there is a bright glossy red spot with clear irregular borders. The affected area is edematous, infiltrated, and hot and sharply painful to the touch. During palpation, the border between the affected reddened skin and unaffected skin does not disappear. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Scarlet fever
b. Shingles
c. Lupus erythematosus
*d. Erysipelas
e. Hemangioma

101. A 42-year-old woman after examination was diagnosed with closed medial mandibular fracture in the area of 31, 41, non-displaced. Crown portions of her other teeth are intact. Additionally she was diagnosed with chronic generalized parodontitis of moderate severity. What type of splint would be the most advisable for fracture treatment in this patient?
a. Tigerstedt splint with anchor hooks
b. Port gingival splint
c. Tigerstedt splint
d. Vankevych dentogingival splint
*e. Weber dentogingival splint

102. A 7-year-old practically healthy child was undergoing the carious cavity preparation of tooth 46 due to acute median caries. During this procedure the mesio-buccal pulp horn was accidentally exposed. What treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Vital amputation
b. Devital amputation
c. Devital extirpation
*d. Biological approach
e. Vital extirpation

103. A 16-year-old boy complains of general indisposition, fever, and pain during swallowing. Objectively, the oral mucosa of the pharynx, palatine arches, uvula, and palatine tonsils is hyperemic and edematous; it has clearly demarcated patches of fibrinous and membranous plaque, tightly attached to the adjacent tissues. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Measles
*b. Diphtheria
c. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative tonsillitis

104. A 29-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. He complains of frequent destruction of dental restorations in his upper front tooth. Objectively, his tooth 11 is restored with a filling material to 2/3 of its coronal portion; thermal stimulation and percussion are painless. What type of orthopedic installation is indicated in this case?
a. Swaged metal crown
b. Telescopic crown
c. Plastic crown
*d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. Crown made using the Belkin technique

105. An HIV-infected patients needs a dental prosthesis. The dentist plans to make dental bridges for this patient. How should the instruments be processed after the appointment?
*a. According to the special scheme
b. With 3% chloramine solution
c. With lysoformin
d. In a hot air sterilizer
e. According to the usual scheme

106. When receiving tuberal anesthesia intraorally, a man developed a rapidly progressing edema of the left cheek that soon spread to the temporal region. What complication has likely occurred in this case?
*a. Hematoma
b. Abscess
c. Quincke's edema
d. Ischemia
e. Emphysema

107. A victim of a traffic accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. How should this patient be transported?
a. Positioned on the side on a rigid stretcher
b. In the sitting position with the head thrown back
c. Positioned on the side on a soft stretcher
*d. In the prone position on a soft stretcher
e. In the sitting position with air tube inserted into the upper airways

108. A 44-year-old man complains of his gums bleeding when he brushes his teeth. Objectively, the following is observed: congestively hyperemic gingival papillae on the upper and lower jaws, mild edema of the gingival margin, mineralized and non-mineralized dental deposits. What test can confirm the presence of periodontal pockets?
a. Glycogen test
*b. Formalin test
c. Vacuum test
d. Rotter test
e. Benzidine test

109. A 27-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his gums, bad breath, bleeding, and general weakness for 3 days. Prior to his visit, he requested no physician's help. Examination shows that the patient is pale, his regional lymph nodes are enlarged, their palpation is painful. The gums on the both jaws are edematous and hyperemic. The gums have several ulcers with dirty-gray coating. What group of medicines must be used for the etiotropic treatment of this condition?
a. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
b. Steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
c. Antihistamines
d. Proteolytic enzymes
*e. Antibacterial agents

110. A 20-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of severe pain in her left upper jaw. The pain intensifies when she eats hot food, while cold liquids bring pain relief. Objectively, tooth 24 has a carious cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is sharply painful. Percussion is positive. Electric pulp testing - 50 microamperes. What treatment method must be used in this case?
*a. Vital extirpation
b. Biological method
c. Tooth extraction
d. Devital extirpation
e. Vital amputation

111. An 11-year-old child presents with protrusion of the upper front teeth, there are tremata and diastema between the child's teeth. What apparatus can be used for treatment of this pathology?
a. Brukle
b. Vasylenko
c. Frankel, type 3
d. Mershon
*e. Osadchy

112. A 50-year-old man complains of a formation 4 cm in size in the submandibular region. On palpation the neoplasm has homogeneous, soft, and elastic consistency, it is not fused with the skin or surrounding tissues. Its slow growth was observed for 3 years. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following condition:
a. Median cyst
*b. Lipoma
c. Fibroma
d. Fibromyoma
e. Migrating granuloma

113. A 6-month-old child has a spherical formation on the mucosa of the crest of the maxillary alveolar process. The formation is soft-elastic, 6 mm in diameter, translucent, with its blue-tinted content visible through. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Fibroma
b. Radicular cyst
*c. Eruption hematoma
d. Follicular cyst
e. Papilloma

114. After a fall, a 28-year-old man came to a maxillofacial surgery clinic with complaints of limited mouth opening and skin numbness in the left suborbital region, on the upper lip, and on the wing of the nose, as well as pain in the left zygomatic region that intensifies during mouth opening. Palpation detects the <<step sign>> along the zygomaticomaxillary suture. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
*b. Displaced zygomatic fracture
c. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
d. Fracture of the left zygomatic arch
e. Non-displaced zygomatic fracture

115. A 40-year-old man presents with a medial defect of the hard palate 2x3 cm in size. Dentition is intact. What type of obturator would be optimal in this case?
a. Floating obturator
b. Ilina-Markosian obturator
*c. Palatal plate
d. Plate prosthesis with obturator
e. Pomerantseva-Urbanska obturator

116. A child is diagnosed with congenital cleft in the soft palate and posterior part of the hard palate. What type of anesthesia should be given to the patient for uranostaphyloplasty?
*a. Intubation narcosis
b. Intravenous narcosis
c. Conduction anesthesia
d. Anesthesia mask
e. Infiltration anesthesia

117. The lateral incisors of a child are rotated around their axis by 45^o. Name this anomaly of tooth position:
*a. Tortoanomaly
b. Dystopia
c. Transposition
d. Infraocclusion
e. Supraocclusion

118. A 34-year-old woman complains of a short-lasting pain response to thermal stimuli in teeth 34 and 35. Objectively, the surfaces of teeth 34 and 35 are intact; the contat surfaces cannot be examined due to tight placement of the teeth. What examination method would be the most informative in this case, if the presence of a carious cavity is suspected?
a. Probing
b. Electric pulp testing
c. Tomography
*d. Diagnostic X-ray
e. Percussion

119. A clasp (bugel) denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 47-year-old woman. Objectively, the abutment teeth are intact, the crowns are tall. When checking the denture frame, the width of the arch needs to be estimated. What is the optimal width of the denture arch?
a. 4.0-5.0 mm
b. 0.5-1.0 mm
c. 1.5-2.0 mm
*d. 2.0-3.0 mm
e. 1.0-1.5 mm

120. After a blow to the temporomandibular joint the patient developed facial hematoma, the joint is difficult to move, mandibular mobility is reduced. Attempts to open the mouth wide are painful. What examination should be performed to make the diagnosis?
a. Limit the joint mobility
b. Rheoencephalography and consultation with the neurologist
c. Panoramic dental X-ray
*d. Bilateral X-ray of the temporomandibular joint with mouth open and closed
e. X-ray and consultation with the neurologist

121. A 32-year-old man complains of a swelling in his left mandibular angle. Objectively, in his lower jaw at the level of missing tooth 38 there is a bone thickening. The alveolar mucosa is unchanged. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. X-ray shows a round focus of lucency in the bone tissue. The focus is 3.5 cm in diameter with clear smooth margins and a rim of sclerosed tissue on its periphery. The crown part of impacted tooth 38 is facing the cavity within this focus of lucency. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Giant-cell tumor of bone
b. Radicular cyst
c. Adamantinoma
d. Odontoma
*e. Follicular cyst

122. A 24-year-old patient came to the dentist complaining of chalky lesions on the front teeth. Objectively teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 present with chalky lesions separated by areas of healthy unchanged enamel. Lesion surface is coarse;  there is no response to thermal stimuli. Childhood years of the patient were spent in the area with fluorine level of 1.8 mg/L in drinking water. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Enamel hyperplasia
*c. Endemic fluorosis
d. Enamel hypoplasia
e. Acute superficial caries

123. Objective examination of a 10-year-old child revealed slight hyperemia, infiltration, and dryness of the whole surface of the vermillion border. Architectonics of the lips is disturbed. Dryness and contracted sensation are observed in the lips, especially during cold seasons. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Atopic cheilitis
*b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Cheilitis of microbial origin

124. A 22-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of increased salivation and a sharp pain in the oral cavity during eating and talking. He notes the acute onset of the disease that occurred after an overexposure to cold, high body temperature (39,5^oC), general weakness, and headache. He has a history of chronic tonsillitis and is allergic to certain medicines. On examination his skin is pale. On the dorsal surface of his hands there are bluish-pink rashes with a hemorrhagic crust in the center. Vermilion border of the lips is swollen and covered in hemorrhagic crusts. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and mobile. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Drug-induced stomatitis
b. Acantholytic pemphigus
c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
*d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

125. When analyzing the composition of potable water in a region, it was revealed that its fluorine levels are 0.5 mg/L. What disease of the dental hard tissues can be expected in this environment?
a. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
b. Fluorosis
c. Erosion of dental hard tissues
d. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
*e. Caries

126. An 8-year-old boy was diagnosed by a dentist with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 36. Previously, the treatment and extraction of temporary teeth was performed with local anesthesia. What would be the most rational treatment method in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
*b. Vital amputation
c. Devital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Biological method

127. A 48-year-old woman was hospitalized after a car accident. The patient complains of a cheek wound, intense headache, nausea, and dizziness. After a thorough examination, the following diagnosis was established: a contused lacerated cheek wound, closed craniocerebral injury, concussion. What type of trauma is it?
*a. Compound
b. Multiple
c. Combined
d. Single
e. Isolated

128. During planned sanation of a 3-year-old child, a deep carious cavity filled with food debris and softened dentin is detected in tooth 54. After tooth preparation the pulp of 54 is bleeding, probing is sharply painful. To treat pulpitis by means of devital amputation, during the first visit it is necessary to use:
a. Iodoform paste
b. Zinc-eugenol paste
*c. Paraformaldehyde paste
d. Dentin paste
e. Calcium-containing paste

129. After sustained trauma a man developed nose bleeding, reduced mouth opening, sensation of paresthesia in the right infraorbital region and lower eyelid. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to concave right temporal region; step deformity symptom is observed in the middle of the lower right eye socket and in the area of zygomaticoalveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Displaced fracture of the temporal bone
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Zygomatic arch fracture
d. Nondisplaced fracture of the temporal bone
e. Le Fort I maxillary fracture

130. A 4-year-old practically healthy child came for oral cavity sanation. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 75 there is a carious cavity within mantle dentin. The cavity is filled with softened dentin. Dentinoenamel junction is painful on probing. What material would be optimal for permanent filling?
a. Phosphate cement
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Silicate cement
d. Composite material
*e. Glass ionomer cement

131. Six months ago a 40-year-old man had his tooth 26 extracted; afterwards his oral cavity and maxillary sinus became communicating and the patient developed the first signs of maxillary sinusitis. What surgical procedure should be performed in this case?
a. Osteotomy of the alveolar process
b. Caldwell-Luc surgery
c. Fistula packing with Iodoform gauze
*d. Maxillary sinusotomy with simultaneous plastic surgery for repair of the fistula
e. Fistula plication

132. The parents of a 3-year-old child came to the orthodontist. They complain of an aesthetical defect in the teeth of their child. The child has a history of tongue sucking habit. In the front region there is a vertical fissure 5 mm. What orthodontic appliance is indicated for the treatment of this pathology?
a. Dass activator appliance
b. Kerbitz plate
c. Schonherr plate
*d. Kraus plate
e. Friel plate

133. A 30-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his lower front teeth, which he associates with a chin injury. Objectively, the dentition ratio is orthognathic. X-ray shows a non-displaced midline mandibular fracture. What splint would be optimal in this case?
*a. Smooth splint-brace
b. Limberg splint
c. Vasiliev splint
d. Weber splint
e. Port splint

134. A 20-year-old man complains of spontaneous pain attacks (5-7 minutes) in the area of 36 that occur for the last 24 hours. Objectively in 36 there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface. Probing is painful at one point, response to cold stimulus is painful, with an aftereffect that lasts for 5 minutes. Percussion is painless. X-ray shows root canals to be slightly curved, canal lumen is clearly visible. The tooth is planned to be used as an abutment for a dental bridge. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Vital amputation
b. Filling of the carious cavity
c. Devital amputation
*d. Vital extirpation
e. Biological approach

135. A 43-year-old woman complains of her lower teeth mobility. Objectively the teeth mobility is of the I-II degree. It is planned to make a full-cast removable occlusal splint for her. What material would be optimal for this splint?
a. ''EI-95'' alloy
b. Stainless steel
c. ''PD-250'' alloy  (silver palladium alloy)
*d. Cobalt nickel chromium alloy
e. Gold alloy of 900 millesimal fineness

136. A 32-year-old woman complains of bleeding gums and a mild pain in the area of her tooth 36 during eating. Objectively, her tooth 36 has a filling on its distal surface; there is no contact point between teeth 37 and 36; the interdental papilla is atrophied; the periodontal pocket is 4 mm deep. X-ray shows resorption of the apex of the interalveolar septum between teeth 37 and 36 and signs of osteoporosis; there are no changes in the other areas. What is the primary cause of the described condition?
a. Insufficient hygiene
b. Virulent microflora
*c. Impractical installation of a filling
d. Traumatic occlusion
e. Decreased local resistance

137. The parents of a 7-year-old girl brought her to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. Examination detected a small carious cavity with a narrow opening in the limited area of a fissure in her tooth 46. The probe catches in the softened mantle dentin. Choose the optimal treatment tactics in this case.
a. Impregnation method
b. Non-invasive sealing
c. Invasive sealing
d. Deep fluoridation
*e. Preventive filling

138. A 43-year-old man complains of the mobility of his teeth 34, 36 and 37 and purulent discharge from the socket of extracted tooth 35. One and a half months ago, a cut was made along the mucogingival fold and tooth 35 was extracted. Objectively, there is a slight infiltration of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and mildly painful. The alveolar process in the area of teeth 34, 36 and 37 is thickened on the both sides, the mucosa is edematous and cyanotic. On the mucogingival fold a fistula with granulations was detected. The socket of extracted tooth 35 is filled with granulations with purulent exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Localized periodontitis
b. Chronic rarefying periostitis
c. Chronic alveolitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Chronic circumscribed osteomyelitis

139. A 12-year-old boy develops a long-term aching pain in the area of his tooth 46 after eating hot food. Objectively, the crown of tooth 46 is dirty gray and has a deep carious cavity. The cavity is filled with softened dentin and communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing of the carious cavity is painful. Heat stimuli provoke a pain that slowly subsides. Tooth 46 is moderately tender to percussion. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
*d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

140. A new dental polyclinic is being opened in the city. There are to be 38 doctors in the dental surgery department. How many department heads should supervise this number of personnel according to the normatives?
a. 1
b. 4
c. 5
*d. 3
e. 2

141. A man presents with clinical signs that resemble acute herpetic stomatitis. This diagnosis will be confirmed, if cytology detects the presence of the following cells:
a. Atypical mononuclear cells
b. Gaucher cells
c. Niemann-Pick cells
d. Tzanck cells
*e. Multinucleated giant cells

142. A 28-year-old woman came to a dentist for a preventive examination. Objectively, the pericervical region of her teeth 13 and 23 has irregular-shaped defects of hard tissues located within the deep layers of enamel. The floor of the defects is rough, their edges are matte white, without luster. What should be the doctor's tactics regarding these defects?
*a. Preparation and filling
b. Remineralizing therapy
c. Silvering of the defects
d. Filing-off of the defects
e. Composite filling without preparation

143. A man complains of gingival pain in his upper left jaw and bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively on the upper jaw he wears a swaged-soldered metal bridge with 14 and 16 as abutment teeth. The crown edge is pushed under the gingival margin by 0.3 mm. Intermediate part is closely fitted to the gums. The mucosa is hyperemic, swollen, interdental papillae are smoothed out; touching mucosa with a dental instrument provokes bleeding. What medical tactics should the dentist choose in the first place?
a. Make metal-fused-to-porcelain dental bridge
*b. Remove the dental bridge
c. Refer the patient for X-ray
d. Refer the patient for clinical blood test
e. Refer the patient for cosultation with the dental therapist

144. A child is 5 years old. There are complaints of an aesthetical defect. An extraoral examination shows that the face is symmetrical, but disproportionate because of reduced lower third of the face. In the oral cavity, teeth 55, 54, 64, and 65 are lost. What dental device is necessary for this patient?
a. Andresen-Haupl appliance
*b. Removable partial denture for the upper jaw
c. Frankel appliance
d. Clasp-retained (bugel) denture
e. Dental bridge

145. After a car accident, a 42-year-old man was hospitalized. Examination detects an edema of the tissues in the middle face region, bilateral hemorrhages into the lower eyelids, open bite, mobility of the nasal bones, and a <<step sign>> along the lower edge of the both eye sockets and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest. Palpation of the oral cavity detects mobility of the upper jaw. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Nasal fracture
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
c. Zygomatic fracture
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
*e. Le Fort II maxillary fracture

146. The width of the dentition of a 15-year-old girl is being measured using the Pont analysis. Name the Pont index for measured molar value and measured premolar value:
*a. Premolar index - 80, molar index - 64
b. Premolar index - 86, molar index - 72
c. Premolar index - 78, molar index - 32
d. Premolar index - 74, molar index - 68
e. Premolar index - 82, molar index - 68

147. A 42-year-old woman with diabetes mellitus developed weakness, palpitations, agitation, hand tremors, and dimming vision after physical exertion. A few minutes later she lost her consciousness. Objectively, her skin is pale, moist, with normal turgor. The pulse is 88/min., rhythmic, of satisfactory volume. Blood pressure - 130/75 mm Hg. The respiration is vesicular. The eyeball tonus remains unchanged. The muscle tone is increased, hyperreflexia is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ketoacidotic coma
b. Uremic coma
c. Hyperosmolar coma
d. Lactic acidotic coma
*e. Hypoglycemic coma

148. A 2-year-old girl has a bright red neoplasm 1x1.5 cm in size on her upper lip. The neoplasm does not protrude above the mucosa and becomes paler, when pressed. The regional lymph nodes have no pathology. The results of blood and urine analysis are normal for her age. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Capillary hemangioma
b. Systemic hemangiomatosis
c. Cavernous lymphangioma
d. Cavernous hemangioma
e. Capillary lymphangioma

149. 3 days after the extraction of tooth 46, a 29-year-old man developed complaints of a dull pain in the area of the dental alveolus of extracted tooth 46. He presents with hyperemic and edematous mucosa in the area of the dental alveolus; no blood clot; food debris are detected. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative alveolitis
*b. Acute serous alveolitis
c. Acute necropurulent alveolitis
d. Neuritis of the alveolar nerve
e. Chronic local osteomyelitis

150. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontics clinic to have dental prosthesis made for him. Objectively teeth 34, 35, 36, 43, and 16 are absent in this patient. During examination alginate impressions for diagnostic models were obtained. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
a. 3% sodium hypochlorite solution
b. Sterillium
*c. 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution
d. 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
e. 10% hydrogen peroxide solution

151. A clasp (bugel) denture is being made by a dentist for a 58-year-old patient with a defect of the lower dentition. When planning the design of the clasps (clammers), their rigid elements were placed in the zone between the occlusal surface and the boundary (survey) line of the abutment tooth. In what zone should the supporting part of the supporting and retaining clasp be located?
a. Neutral zone
b. Gingival zone
c. Retaining zone
d. Seal zone
e. Occlusal zone

152. A 42-year-old woman complains of a swelling and pus discharge from a fistula in her left parotid region and limited mouth opening, observed for three months. Six months ago, her tooth 38 was extracted due to its long-term chronic inflammation. Objectively, there is a facial asymmetry due to a cyanotic and dense (<<wooden>>) infiltration in the left parotid region. The infiltration has two fistulas: granulations protrude from one of them, while the other discharges liquid yellowish crumb-like pus. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. -
b. Odontogenic subcutaneous granuloma of the parotid region
c. Herzenberg parotitis
d. Actinomycosis of the parotid region,  musculocutaneous form
e. Chronic diffuse osteomyelitis of the  gonial angle and mandibular ramus

153. A 2-year-old child is being treated for severe acute herpetic stomatitis. Currently, it is the period of disease decline. What medicines for topical application to the oral mucosa should be added specifically at this stage to the complex of medicines being taken?
a. Keratoplastics
b. Proteolytic enzymes
c. Antiviral agents
d. Antiseptics
e. Anesthetics

154. A 16-year-old girl was referred for X-ray scan before therapeutic treatment of her tooth 46. X-ray detects no periapical changes in the area of the roots of tooth 46. In the area of the root apex of tooth 45, a homogeneous round dense shadow with clear margins was detected. The shadow is 5 mm in diameter. The neoplasm is similar in its structure to the tooth root tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Odontoma
b. Ameloblastoma
c. Osteoma
d. Cementoma
e. Giant-cell epulis

155. A porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge with teeth 21 and 13 as the abutment is being made for a 35-year-old woman. What type of intermediate part must be modeled in the denture by a dental technician in relation to the mucosa of the alveolar process?
a. Saddle-shaped
b. Contact
c. Arbitrary-shaped
d. Flushing
e. Combined

156. A 5-year-old girl was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 75. Objectively, her face is symmetrical, percussion of tooth 75 is painful. The child suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis. Determine the treatment tactics for this case:
a. Endodontic treatment of tooth 75 and  periostotomy
b. Endodontic treatment of tooth 75
c. Endodontic treatment of tooth 75 and  anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Extraction of tooth 75
e. Extraction of tooth 75 and periostotomy

157. A 40-year-old man came to a dental surgeon for extraction of tooth 16. The crown of tooth 16 is retained. What forceps should be used to extract tooth 16 in this case?
a. Bayonet crown forceps
b. S-shaped right-sided forceps
c. S-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped left-sided forceps
e. Straight forceps

158. A 30-year-old man presents with fresh median mandibular fracture without visible displacement of the fragments. What will be the function of the dental apparatus to be prescribed in this case?
a. Directing
b. Fixation
c. Formation
d. Setting
e. Replacement

159. What denture constructions should be chosen in cases of multiple adentia during the early period of changing occlusion?
a. Removable partial dentures
b. Dental bridges
c. Clasp-retained (bugel) dentures
d. No denture is necessary
e. Removable complete dentures

160. The parents of a 6-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of eruption of a permanent tooth on the lower jaw behind the deciduous one and lack of mobility in the deciduous tooth. Objectively, tooth 71 has the first degree of mobility, tooth 31 has erupted with its cutting edge on the lingual side behind tooth 71. The diagnosis of a physiological replacement of tooth 71 was made. What is the optimal method of anesthesia in this case?
a. Topical anesthesia
b. Intravenous anesthesia
c. Conduction anesthesia
d. Infiltration anesthesia
e. Anesthesia through a mask

161. A 13-year-old boy complains of facial pain and edema on the left, which appeared the day before, and a fever of 37.5^oC) Examination revealed facial asymmetry due to a dense painful edema of the left lower jaw. Hyperemia and edema of the gingival mucosa are observed on the vestibular side of tooth 36, the mucogingival fold is smoothed-out, the fluctuation sign is positive. The crown of tooth 36 is destroyed, its percussion is sharply painful. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute odontogenic purulent periostitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis  of tooth 36
c. Acute odontogenic purulent  lymphadenitis
d. Odontogenic buccal phlegmon
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

162. A patient from a psychiatric clinic was referred to a dentist for treatment. After the examination she was diagnosed with acute median caries of tooth 16 (Black's class I). The patient has problems with communication and is afraid of injections. The doctor decided to use the ART technique. What filling material should be used in this case?
a. Glass ionomer cement
b. Amalgam
c. Macrofilled composite
d. Microfilled composite
e. Hybrid composite

163. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 14, 15, 16, 17 are missing. It is planned to restore the defect of his upper dentition using a porcelain-fused-to-metal denture with implant supports. During the treatment, occlusion-surgical templates are being made. At what stage of treatment are they used?
a. Selective polishing
b. Fixation of the superstructure
c. Installation of the implants
d. Occlusion correction
e. Installation of the abutments

164. A 49-year-old man complains of progressing reduction of mouth opening, pain on the left when swallowing, severe deterioration of his general well-being, temperature increase up to 39.3^oC) Destroyed tooth 38 presents with acute pain. Objectively the face is symmetrical, the submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painful on palpation. Palpation under the left mandibular angle and in the the left retromandibular area provokes sharp pain. Mouth opening and movement of the mandible to the left are significantly reduced. The left pterygomandibular fold is hyperemic and infiltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of the parapharyngeal space
b. Abscess of the sublingual fossa
c. Phlegmon of the submandibular space
d. Phlegmon of the pterygomandibular space
e. Phlegmon of the retromandibular area

165. The parents of a 5-year-old child explain that lately their child has started chewing only on one side and refusing hard foods. Objectively, tooth 74 has a carious cavity and there are dental deposits on teeth 73, 74, and 75. Probing of the cavity floor in tooth 74 is painful and provokes a slight bleeding in the area where the cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Acute deep caries

166. A 27-year-old patient was provisionally diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic maxillary sinusitis. What radiology method would be the most informative in this case?
a. X-ray
b. Computed tomography
c. -
d. Spot-film radiography
e. Panoramic radiography

167. A 37-year-old woman complains of a tumor on her lower lip on the surface that faces the oral cavity. The tumor appeared approximately 2 weeks ago, gradually enlarges, and makes lip movement problematic. Objectively, within the lower lip there is a circumscribed round elastic painless induration fused to the mucosa. The mucosa over the induration is transparent, while around the induratuion it remains unchanged. The regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Lip abscess
b. Fibroma of the lip
c. Lipoma of the lip
d. Retention cyst of the lip
e. Papilloma of the lip

168. A patient undergoes fitting of the frame of a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge with abutment teeth 24 and 27. What should be the minimum thickness of the cobalt-chrome alloy metal cap, if an abutment porcelain-fused-to-metal crown is being made?
a. 0.5 mm
b. 0.8 mm
c. 0.4 mm
d. 0.1 mm
e. 0.3 mm

169. While waiting in line for an appointment with a dentist, a 48-year-old woman was stung in the neck by a bee. The bee sting caused a sharp symmetrical facial edema, bronchospasm, skin redness, and urticaria in this woman. What emergency condition developed in this case?
a. Collapse
b. Quincke edema
c. Epileptic seizure
d. Aseptic shock
e. Anaphylactic shock

170. A 28-year-old woman complains of a cavity in her lower left lateral tooth. Objective examination detects a mesio-occlusal-distal (MOD) defect of hard tissues of tooth 36. X-ray shows that tooth 36 is vital, no changes were detected in the periapical tissues. The anatomical and functional integrity of the tooth is being restored by making an inlay using an indirect method. During the first visit, the doctor prepared the dental cavity. What stage of denture-making is next?
a. Model casting
b. Obtaining an impression
c. Inlay modeling
d. Inlay fixation
e. Inlay casting

171. A 34-year-old man with missing teeth that were extracted 6 years ago came to a dentist to have dentures made for him. Objectively, the configuration of his face remains unchanged, the lower jaw has a dentition defect with missing teeth 34, 35, 36, 37. Teeth 24, 25, 26 are vertically displaced by 3.5 mm in relation to the occlusal plane, the alveolar process in this area was enlarged. The necks of the teeth are not exposed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Dental transposition
b. Dental divergence
c. Dental convergence
d. Infraocclusion
e. Dentoalveolar elongation

172. On the 7 day after an abdominal surgery, a 69-year-old man has developed pain and swelling in the area of his left parotid gland. His body temperature is 39^oC, his mouth is dry. Massage of the salivary gland produces purulent exudate from the excretory duct. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Herzenberg parotitis
b. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
c. Acute mumps
d. Phlegmon of the parotid-masseteric region
e. Phlegmon of the submassseteric region

173. At the dentist's office, a patient diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 14 undergoes a typical tooth extraction. What stage precedes the application of forceps?
a. Luxation
b. Fixation
c. Traction
d. Advancement of forceps
e. Syndesmotomy

174. A 43-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of defects on her upper front teeth and their sensitivity to sour and cold stimuli. The defects began to appear about 5 years ago, while the pain provoked by stimuli has been observed for a year. The woman suffers from thyrotoxicosis. On the vestibular surface of her teeth 12, 11, 21 and 22, in the area of their equator, examination revealed concave oval defects of the enamel up to 0.3 cm in size with a smooth, dense floor. What will be the diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Erosion of hard dental tissues
d. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
e. Cuneiform defects

175. A 44-year-old man complains of a constant dull pain in the area of his tooth 37 that was extracted two days ago. The pain intensifies during eating. Objectively, the socket of the extracted tooth has a gray coating. Mucosa around the socket is hyperemic, edematous, and painful when palpated. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pericoronitis
b. Acute serous alveolitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Acute serous periostitis
e. Chronic destructive osteomyelitis

176. A 5-year-old girl has a round soft elastic neoplasm up to 2 cm in diameter on the front surface of her neck on the midline. The neoplasm is painless to palpation and moves upwards during swallowing. This formation has been slowly growing over the course of the last 2 years. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Midline cervical cyst
b. Cyst of a submandibular salivary gland
c. Cervical dermoid cyst
d. Retention cyst of a sublingual salivary gland
e. Chronic hyperplastic lymphadenitis

177. After the extraction of tooth 38, the patient developed bleeding from the tooth socket. The dentist performed tamponade of the socket, but 20 minutes later, the socket is still bleeding. What should the doctor do in this case?
a. Finish the visit, give advice to the patient about properly taking care of the tooth socket
b. Perform tamponade of the socket again
c. Refer the patient to the inpatient department
d. Refer the patient to a hematologist for a consultation
e. Suture the socket

178. A 23-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of fever of 38^oC, headache, general weakness, pain during eating, bleeding gums, and bad breath. Objectively, her gingival margin has uneven contours and is covered in grayish-yellow plaque that can be easily removed exposing bleeding erosions and ulcers. Microscopy of the material obtained from the ulcer surface reveals a large number of spindle-shaped fusobacteria and spirochetes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Werlhof's disease
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Tertiary syphilis
d. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Acute leukemia

179. A 49-year-old man was diagnosed with recurrence of lower lip cancer two years after he had undergone radiation therapy. Objectively in the area of his lower right lip there is a neoplasm 1x2 cm in size with an ulcer in its center. In the right submandibular area there are 2 round, enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes. What approach to the treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Wedge resection of the lower lip
b. Vanakh's operation
c. Rectangular resection of the lower lip
d. Trapezial resection of the lower lip
e. Combined treatment

180. A 63-year-old completely edentulous patient (the upper jaw - Schroeder's type II, the lower jaw - Keller's type II) has the so-called "senile progeny". What factors underlie the mechanism of its development?
a. The basal arch of the upper jaw is wider than its alveolar arch, and the basal arch of the lower jaw is narrower than its alveolar arch
b. Basal arches of the upper and lower jaw are wider than their alveolar arches
c. The basal arch of the upper jaw is narrower than its alveolar arch, and the basal arch of the lower jaw is wider than its alveolar arch
d. Basal and alveolar arches of the upper and lower jaw are of the same width
e. Basal arches of the upper and lower jaw are narrower than their alveolar arches

181. A hit to the face has forced the upper central incisors of a 15-year-old boy to sink into the jaw to the half of their crown height. What treatment tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Replantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, ligation
b. Surgical repositioning of 11 and 21, teeth immobilization, endodontic treatment if necessary
c. Extraction of 11 and 21, their replacement with dentures
d. Transplantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, endodontic treatment
e. Dynamic observation, endodontic treatment of 11 and 21 if necessary

182. A 45-year-old man after a tooth extraction carried out by a dentist complained of sudden weakness and intense bursting retrosternal pain that radiated under the left shoulder blade. Objectively, the patient has skin pallor, cyanosis of the lips, and the blood pressure of 90/60 mm Hg. The heart sounds are rhythmic and weakened, the pulse is thready. The pain did not decrease after the patient took nitroglycerin three times. What condition is developing in the patient?
a. Collapse
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Anaphylactic cardiogenic shock
e. Angina pectoris attack

183. A 35-year-old woman, who works as a teacher, came to an orthopedic dentistry clinic with complaints of an aesthetical defect, inability to bite food, and problematic articulation. Objectively, her teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22 are missing due to an injury, while teeth 13 and 23 are stable and intact, with painless percussion. What anesthesia should be provided for this group of teeth before their preparation for the making of a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge?
a. Central conduction anesthesia
b. Infiltration anesthesia
c. Spongy anesthesia
d. Topical anesthesia
e. Tuberal anesthesia

184. A 55-year-old man periodically, once every few months, develops 1-2 sharply painful round erosions 5-8 mm in size in his oral cavity without any prodromal phenomena. The erosions are surrounded by a hyperemic border and covered with a yellow-gray coating. According to the patient's medical history, he has chronic colitis. Make the diagnosis.
a. Herpetic recurrent stomatitis
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Chronic candidal stomatitis
e. Papular syphilis

185. An 8-year-old girl complains of dry lips and a painful burning sensation in them. She has a history of food allergies. Objectively, there is a slight edema and hyperemia of the skin of her lips. The vermillion border is infiltrated and has fissures, scabs, and scales. The surface of the lips is dry. In the angles of the mouth there are infiltrations, maceration, and fissures. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exfoliative cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Eczematous cheilitis

186. During the treatment of acute diffuse pulpitis of tooth 16, a few minutes after receiving conduction anesthesia, the patient became anxious, flushed hot, and developed chest pain. Objectively, the patient developed problematic breathing, profuse sweating, hyperemic skin, vomiting, loss of consciousness, and convulsions. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Bronchial asthma attack
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Syncope
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Collapse

187. A 52-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a bright red spot that appeared on his buccal mucosa several months ago. Objectively, there is a lesion focus with small papillary growths up to 1 cm in size. The lesion is slightly sunken compared to the surrounding tissues, soft, with uneven clear contours. During palpation, it is painless and does not change in color. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Leukoplakia
b. Bowen's disease
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Hemangioma
e. Trophic ulcer

188. In the course of treatment for exacerbated chronic pulpitis of tooth 16, the system of root canals was obturated by means of lateral condensation of gutta-percha. What instruments should be used in this treatment method?
a. Spreader
b. Plugger
c. Root filler
d. Probe
e. Stopfer

189. An 18-year-old girl needs consultation of the dentist regarding a neoplasm that appeared in the frontal area of her face. On the frontal area there is a pink-red semicircular spot on her skin 3-4 cm in size, with clear margins. When pressed, the skin in the affected area discolors and becomes pale. As soon as the pressing stops, the skin again assumes its pink-red color. When the patient bows her head, the spot darkens and enlarges in volume; when the patient lifts her head, the spot gradually returns to its initial pink-red color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cavernous hemangioma
b. Birthmark (nevus)
c. Lymphangioma
d. Neurofibromatosis
e. Capillary hemangioma

190. A 47-year-old man complains of discolored teeth 11 and 21. Objectively, his teeth 11 and 21 are pink, their canals are sealed to the apex. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns are planned for teeth 11 and 21. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of proximal surfaces of the abutment teeth?
a. 0^o
b. 20^o
c. 5^o
d. 15^o
e. 10^o

191. When examining a 58-year-old patient, the dentist detected a deformity and decreased size of the tongue that is dense and bluish-red. Gummatous infiltration is observed on the palatine mucosa. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Congenital anomaly of the tongue
b. Median rhomboid glossitis
c. Desquamative glossitis
d. Tertiary syphilis
e. Fissured tongue

192. A 14-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of dry mouth and decreased salivation. During examination, her oral mucosa is matte and dry, with areas of whitish deposits. Hyperkeratosis of the excretory ducts of the salivary glands is observed. The skin of her face is pale and rough, her hair is dry, her nails are brittle and have transverse striations. Such symptoms can indicate the lack of a certain vitamin in the body. Name this vitamin.
a. D_3
b. А
c. К
d. B_1
e. B_2

193. When pressing plastic dough, a dental technician several times opened and closed the cuvette to check the quantity of the plastic mass in it. These actions may result in the development of:
a. Granular porosity
b. Gas porosity
c. Cracks in the plastic
d. Compression porosity
e. Residual stresses in the structure of a  denture

