1. An 8 year old child has low-grade fever, arthritis, colicky abdominal pain and a purpuric rash llocalized on the lower extremities. laboratory studies reveal a guaiac-positive stool, urinalysis with red blood cell (RBC) casts and mild proteinuria, and a normal platelet count. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
d. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
*e. Henoch-Schonleins vasculitis

2. A young man has painful indurations in the peripapillary regions of both mammary glands. The most reasonable action will be:
*a. To leave these indurations untouched
b. To cut and drain them
c. To administer steroids locally
d. To take an aspirate for bacterial inoculation and cytology
e. To remove them

3. A 9 year old girl with a history of intermittent wheezing for several years is brought to the pediatrician. The child has been taking no medications for some time. Physical examination reveals agitation and perioral cyanosis. Intercostal and suprasternal retractions are present. The breath sounds are quiet, and wheezing is audible bilaterally. The child is admitted to the hospital. Appropriate interventions might include all of the following textbfEXCEPT:
*a. Prescribe nebulized cromolyn sodium
b. Administer supplemental oxygen
c. Prescribe nebulized metaproterenol
d. Prescribe intravenous corticosteroids
e. Prescribe intravenous aminophylline

4. Routine examination of a child with a history of bronchial asthma reveals AP of 140/90 mm Hg. The most likely cause of the hypertension is:
a. Chronic lung disease
b. Theophylline overdose
*c. Renal disease
d. Coarctation of the aorta
e. Obesity

5. Routine examination of an otherwise healthy child with a history of bronchial asthma reveals AP of 140/90 mm Hg. The most likely cause of the hypertension is:
a. Theophylline toxicity
b. Coarctation of the aorta
c. Obesity
*d. Renal disease
e. Chronic lung disease

6. Patient with thyreotoxicosis is in the 2 beds hospital ward of therapeutic department. The area of the ward is 18 m2, height 3 m, ventilation rate 2,5/hr. Air temperature - 200С, relative humidity - 45%, air movement velocity - 0,3 m/s, light coefficient - 1/5, noise level - 30 dB. Do hygienic evaluation of the conditions meet the standards?
a. Non-effective ventilation
b. High level of noise
c. All conditions meet the requirements
*d. Discomfortable microclimate
e. Poor lighting

7. The child is 11 m.o. He suffers from nervous-arthritic diathesis. The increased synthesis of what acid is pathogenic at nervous-arthritic diathesis?
a. Sulfuric acid
*b. Uric acid
c. Phosphoric acid
d. Acetic acid
e. Hydrochloric acid

8. A 10-year-old child complains of fever (temperature is 39OC), frequent painful urination [pollakiuria]. Urine test: proteinuria [0,066 g/L], leukocytouria [entirely within eyeshot], bacteriuria [105 colony forming units/mL]. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
*c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Acute cystitis
e. Urolithiasis

9. A 8-year-old boy has suffered from tonsilitis. In 2 weeks he started complaining of migratory joint pain, edema of joints, restriction of movements, fever. On examination, an acute rheumatic heart disease, activity of the III-rd degree, primary rheumocarditis, polyarthritis; acute course of disease, cardiovascular failure IIA. What medication is to be prescribed?
a. Cefazolin
b. Diprazinum
c. Erythromycin
*d. Prednisone
e. Delagil

10. The 10 y.o. boy has complains on headache, weakness, fever 400С, vomiting, expressed dyspnea, pale skin with flush on right cheek, lag of right hemithorax respiratory movement, dullness on percussion over low lobe of right lung, weakness of vesicular respiration in this zone. The abdomen is painless and soft at palpation. Which disease lead to these symptoms and signs?
*a. Pneumonia croupousa
b. Acute appendicitis
c. Flu
d. Acute cholecystitis
e. Intestinal infection

11. A patient with acute respiratory viral infection (3rd day of disease) complains of pain in lumbar region, nausea, dysuria, oliguria. Urinalysis - hematuria (100-200 RBC in eyeshot spot), specific gravity - 1002. The blood creatinin level is 0,18 millimole/l, potassium level - 6,4 millimole/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute renal failure
b. Acute cystitis
c. Acute renal colic
*d. Acute interstitial nephritis
e. Acute glomerylonephritis

12. A neonate was born from the 1st gestation on term. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it became more acute. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were observed. Indirect bilirubin level was 275 mumol/L, direct bilirubin level - 5mu mol/L, Hb - 150 g/l. Mother’s blood group - 0[I], Rh+, child’s blood group- A[II], Rh+. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Physiological jaundice
b. Hemolytic disease of the neonate [Rh - incompatibility]
c. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder
d. Hepatitis
*e. Hemolytic disease of the neonate [АВО incompatibility], icteric type

13. A neonate was born from the 1st gestation on term. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it became more acute. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were observed. Indirect bilirubin level was 275mumol/L, direct bilirubin level - 5mumol/L, Hb- 150 g/l. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (АВ0 incompatibility), icteric type
b. Hepatitis
c. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (Rh - incompatibility)
d. Physiological jaundice
e. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder

14. A baby boy was born in time, it was his mothers 1st pregnancy. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it progressed. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were presented. The indirect bilirubin level was 275 mcmol/L, the direct bilirubin level - 5 mcmol/L, Hb- 150 g/L. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. Make a diagnosis
a. Hepatitis
b. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder
*c. Hemolytic disease of newborn (АВО incompatibility), icteric type
d. Physiological jaundice
e. Hemolytic disease of newborn (Rh - incompatibility)

15. A 3 month old infant suffering from acute segmental pneumonia has dyspnea (respiration rate - 80 per minute), paradoxical breathing, tachycardia, total cyanosis. Respiration and pulse - ratio is 1:2. The heart dullness under normal size. Such signs characterise:
a. Respiratory failure of I degree
b. Myocarditis
c. Congenital heart malformation
*d. Respiratory failure of III degree
e. Respiratory failure of II degree

16. The 7 m.o. infant is suffering from acute pneumonia which was complicated by cardiovascular insufficiency and respiratory failure of II degree. The accompanied diagnosis is malnutrition of II degree. Choose the best variant of therapy:
a. Gentamycin and Macropen
b. Ampiox and Polymixin
c. Macropen and Penicillin
d. Penicillin and Ampiox
*e. Ampiox and Amicacin

17. A 3 year old child has been suffering from fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis for 4 days. He has been taking sulfadimethoxine. Today it has fever up to 39°C and maculopapular rash on its face. Except of rash the childs skin has no changes. What is your diagnosis?
*a. Measles
b. Rubella
c. Pseudotuberculosis
d. Scarlet fever
e. Allergic rash

18. A 2 year old girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Adenoviral infection
b. Pseudotuberculosis
c. Scarlet fever
d. Measles
*e. Rubella

19. A 3 year old boy fell ill abruptly: fever up to 39°C, weakness, vomitng. Haemorrhagic rash of various size appeared on his lower limbs within 5 hours. Meningococcemia with infective - toxic shock of the 1 degree was diagnosed. What medications should be administered?
a. Chloramphenicol succinate and interferon
b. Ampicillin and immunoglobulin
c. Penicillin and prednisone
d. Penicillin and immunoglobulin
*e. Chloramphenicol succinate and prednisone

20. A 7 year old girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
a. Meningitis
b. Myelitis
c. Neurotoxic syndrome
*d. Encephalitis
e. Meningoencephalitis

21. A 7 y.o. girl fell ill abruptly: fever, headache, severe sore throat, vomiting. Minute bright red rash appear in her reddened skin in 3 hours. It is more intensive in axillae and groin. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is hyperemic. Greyish patches is on the tonsills. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. What is your diagnosis?
a. Enteroviral infection
*b. Scarlet fever
c. Rubella
d. Measles
e. Pseudotuberculosis

22. An 8-year-old boy fell ill acutely: he presents with fever, weakness, headache, abdominal pain, recurrent vomiting, then diarrhea and tenesmus. Stools occur 12 times daily, are scanty, contain a lot of mucus, pus, streaks of blood. His sigmoid gut is tender and hardened. What is your diagnosis?
a. Escherichiosis
*b. Dysentery
c. Cholera
d. Salmonellosis
e. Staphylococcal gastroenteritis

23. The child has complains of the "night" and "hungry" abdominal pains. At fibroscopy in area a bulbus ofa duodenum the ulcerrative defect of 4 mms diameter is found, the floor is obtected with a fibrin, (H.p +). Administer the optimum schemes of treatment:
a. Trichopolum
*b. Omeprasole - Trichopolum - Claritromicin
c. Maalox - Ranitidin
d. De-nol
e. Vicalinum - Ranitidin

24. A woman delivered a child. It was her fifth pregnancy but the first delivery. Mothers blood group is A(II)Rh-, newborns - A(II)Rh+. The level of indirect bilirubin in umbilical blood was 58 micromole/l, haemoglobin - 140 g/l, RBC- 3,8×1012/l. In 2 hours the level of indirect bilirubin turned 82 micromole/l. The hemolytic disease of newborn (icteric-anemic type, Rh-incompatibility) was diagnosed. Choose the therapeutic tactics:
a. Conservative therapy
b. Symptomatic therapy
c. Antibiotics
*d. Replacement blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
e. Blood transfusion (conservative therapy)

25. A mother with an infant visited the pediatrician for expertise advice. Her baby was born with body weight 3,2 kg and body length 50 cm. He is 1 year old now. How many teeth the baby should have?
a. 6
*b. 8
c. 12
d. 10
e. 20

26. A mother consulted a pediatrician about her son. Her son was born with body mass of 3 kg and length of 48 cm. Hes 1 year old now. What is the required normal mass?
a. 12,0 kg
b. 15,0 kg
c. 9,0 kg
d. 11,0 kg
*e. 10,5 kg

27. 6 m.o. infant was born with bodys mass 3 kg and length 50 cm. He is given natural feeding. How many times per day the infant should be fed?
*a. 5
b. 6
c. 4
d. 8
e. 7

28. Infant is 6,5 months now and is given natural feeding since birth. Body mass was 3,5 kg, with length 52 cm at birth. How many times per day the supplement (up feeding) should be given?
a. 4
*b. 2
c. 1
d. 3
e. 0

29. A 2 month old healthy infant with good appetite is given artificial feeding since he turned 1 month old. When is it recommended to start the corrective feeding (fruit juice)?
a. 1,0 months
*b. 4,0 months
c. 2,0 months
d. 1,5 months
e. 3,0 months

30. An infant was born with body mass 3 kg and body length 50 cm. Now he is 3 years old. His brother is 7 years old, suffers from rheumatic fever. Mother asked the doctor for a cardiac check up of the 3-year-old son. Where is the left relative heart border located?
a. 1 cm left from he left parasternal line
b. 1 cm right from the left parasternal line
c. 1 cm right from the left medioclavicular line
d. Along the left medioclavicular line
*e. 1 cm left from the left medioclavicular line

31. A boy of 7 y.o. had an attack of asthma and distant whistling rales after playing with a dog. In the medical hystory: atopic dermatitis caused by eating eggs, chicken, beef. What group of allergens is the reason of the development of bronchial astma attacks?
a. Itch mite
b. Chemical
c. Dust
d. Pollen
*e. Epidermal

32. A 14-year-old boy has rheumatism. Over the last 2 years he has had 3 rheumatic attacks. What course of rheumatism does the patient have?
*a. Prolonged
b. Subacute
c. Persistent-reccurent
d. Latent
e. Acute

33. The patient with aquired heart failure has diastolic pressure of 0 mm Hg. What heart failure does the child have?
a. Mitral insufficiency
b. Rheumatism
c. Mitral stenosis
d. Aortal stenosis
*e. Aortal insufficiency

34. A 12 year old child has the ulcer disease of stomach. What is the etiology of this disease?
*a. Intestinal bacillus
b. Salmonella
c. Influenza
d. Lambliosis
e. Helicobacter pylory

35. A nine year old child is at a hospital with acute glomerulonephritis. Clinical and laboratory examinations show acute condition. What nutrients must not be limited during the acute period of glomerulonephritis?
a. Liquid
b. Salt
*c. Carbohydrates
d. Proteins
e. Fats

36. An 18-month-old child was taken to a hospital on the 4-th day of the disease. The disease began acutely with temperature 39, weakness, cough, breathlessness. He is pale, cyanotic, has had febrile temperature for over 3 days. There are crepitative fine bubbling rales on auscultation. Percussion sound is shortened in the right infrascapular region. X-ray picture shows non-homogeneous segment infiltration 8-10 mm on the right, the intensification of lung pattern. Your diagnosis:
a. Bronchiolitis
b. Interstitial pneumonia
c. Grippe
d. Bronchitis
*e. Segmentary pneumonia

37. A 9-year-old girl has attacks of abdominal pain after fried food. No fever. She has pain in Cera point. The liver is not enlarged. Portion B [duodenal probe] - 50 ml. What is your diagnosis?
*a. Biliary tracts dyskinesia, hypotonic type
b. Acute colitis
c. Peptic ulcer
d. Chronic duodenum
e. Hepatocirrhosis

38. A baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation. Delivery was normal, by natural way. The baby has a large cephalohematoma. The results of blood count are: Hb- 120g/l, Er- 3,5×1012/l, total serum bilirubin - 123 mmol/l, direct bilirubin - 11 mmol/l, indirect - 112 mmol/l. What are causes of hyperbilirubinemia in this case?
a. Bile condensing
b. Mechanical obstruction of the bile outflow
c. Intravascular hemolysis
d. Disturbance of the conjugative function of liver
*e. Erythrocyte hemolysis

39. A 4-month-old girl with blond hair and blue eyes has "mousy" odor of sweat and urine, delayed psychomotoric development. The most typical laboratory data for this disorder is:
a. Low level of thyroid gland hormones in blood
*b. Positive urine ferric chloride test
c. High level of glycosaminoglycanes in urine
d. High level of oxyproline in urine
e. High concentration of chlorides in sweat

40. A neonate is 5 days old. What vaccination dose of BCG vaccine (in мg) is necessary for vaccination of this child?
a. 0,1 мg
b. 0,2 мg
c. 0,025 мg
d. 0,075 мg
*e. 0,05 мg

41. A neonate is 5 days old. What vaccination dose of BCG vaccine (in mg) is necessary for vaccination of this child?
a. 0,2 mg
*b. 0,05 mg
c. 0,075 mg
d. 0,025 mg
e. 0,1 mg

42. 7 y.o. boy with chronic sinusitis and rercurent pulmonary infections has chest X-ray demonstrating a right-sided cardiac silhouette. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cystic fibrosis (mucoviscidosis)
b. Laryngotracheomalacia
c. alpha-antitrypsin deficiency
*d. Kartagener syndrome
e. Bronchiolitis obliterans

43. A 2,9-kg term male infant is born to a mother who developed polyhydramnios at 34 weeks gestation. At birth, the Apgar scores were 9 and 9. The infant develops choking and cyanosis with the first feed. In addition, is unable to place a nasogastric tube. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Esophageal atresia
b. Laryngomalacia
c. Respiratory distress syndrome
d. Tracheal atresia
e. Choanal atresia

44. Full term newborn has developed jaundice at 10 hours of age. Hemolytic disease of newborn due to Rh-incompatibility was diagnosed. 2 hours later the infant has indirect serum bilirubin level increasing up to 14 mmol/L. What is most appropriate for treatment of hyperbilirubinemia in this infant?
*a. Exchange blood transfusion
b. Phenobarbital
c. Infusion therapy
d. Intestinal sorbents
e. Phototherapy

45. A 4 year old girl was playing with her toys and suddenly she got an attack of cough, dyspnea. Objectively: respiration rate - 45/min, heart rate - 130/min. Percussion revealed dullness of percutory sound on the right in the lower parts. Auscultation revealed diminished breath sounds with bronchial resonance on the right. X-ray pictue showed shadowing of the lower part of lungs on the right. Blood analysis revealed no signs of inflammation. The child was diagnosed with foreign body in the right bronchus. What complication caused such clinical presentations?
*a. Atelectasis
b. Pneumothorax
c. Pneumonia
d. Bronchitis
e. Emphysema

46. A man, 42 years old, died in a road accident after the hemorrhage on the spot, because of acute hemorrhagic anemia. What minimum percent of the whole blood volume could result in death by acute hemorrhage?
*a. 25-30%
b. 10-14%
c. 35-50%
d. 15-20%
e. 6-9%

47. A 6 week old child is admitted because of tachypnea. Birth had been uneventful, although conjunctivitis developed on the third day of life and lasted for about 2 weeks. Physical examination reveals tachypnea, bilateral inspiratory crackles and single expiratory wheezing. Bilateral pneumonia is evident on chest X-ray. The child is afebrile and has no history of fever. White blood cell count is 15×109/l, with 28% of eosinophils. The most likely cause of this childs symptoms is:
*a. Clamydia trachomanis
b. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
c. Varicella
d. Visceral larva migrans
e. Pneumocystis carinii

48. A 6 y.o. asthmatic child was taken to the emergency hospital because of severe coughing and wheezing for the last 24 hours. Physical examination reveals that the child is excitable, has intercostal and suprasternal retractions, expiratory wheezing throughout all lung fields, RR- 60/min. Initial treatment may include the prescription of:
*a. Subcutaneous epinephrine
b. Intravenous fluids in the first 2 h to compensate water deficiency
c. Parenteral gentamicyn
d. N-acetyl cysteine and cromolyn by inhalation
e. Parenteral phenobarbital

49. A full term infant was born after a normal pregnancy, delivery, however, was complicated by marginal placental detachment. At 12 hours of age the child, although appearing to be in good health, passes a bloody meconium stool. For determining the cause of the bleeding, which of the following diagnostic procedures should be performed first?
a. Gastric lavage with normal saline
b. An Apt test
*c. Barium enema
d. An upper gastrointestinal series
e. Platelet count, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time

50. In the 43rd week of gestation a long, thin infant was delivered. He is apneic, limp, pale, and covered with "pea soup" amniotic fluid. The first step in the resuscitation of this infant at delivery should be:
a. Artificial ventilation with bag and mask
b. Administration of 100% oxygen by mask
c. Catheterization of the umbilical vein
*d. Suction of the trachea under direct vision
e. Artificial ventilation with endotracheal tube

51. A newborn infant has mild cyanosis, diaphoresis, poor peripheral pule, hepatomegaly and cardiomegaly. Respiratory rate is 60 breaths per minute, and heart rate is 230 beats per minute. The child most likely has congestive heart failure caused by:
a. A ventricular septal defect and transposition of the great vessels
b. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
c. A large atrial septal defect and valvular pulmonary stenosis
*d. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
e. Atrial flutter and partial atrioventricular block

52. A 6-year-old boy was brought to the emergency room with a 3-hour history of fever up to 39,5°C and sore throat. The child looks alert, anxious and has a mild inspiratory stridor. You should immediately:
a. Admit the child and place him in a mist tent
*b. Prepare to establish an airway
c. Order a chest x-ray and lateral view of the neck
d. Obtain an arterial blood gas and start an IV line
e. Examine the throat and obtain a culture

53. A 7 d.o. boy is admitted to the hospital for evaluation of vomiting and dehydration. Physical examination is otherwise normal except for minimal hyperpigmentation of the nipples. Serum sodium and potassium concentrations are 120 meq/L and 9 meq/L respectively. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Panhypopituitarism
b. Hyperaldosteronism
c. Pyloric stenosis
d. Secondary hypothyroidism
*e. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

54. A 7 y.o. boy has crampy abdominal pain and a rash on the back of his legs and buttocks as well as on the extensor surfaces of his forearms. Laboratory analysis reveals proteinuria and microhematuria. He is most likely to be affected by:
a. Polyarteritis nodosa
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
*e. Anaphylactoid purpura

55. A 5-year-old boy was progressively getting worse compared to the previous 2 months. A chest x-ray has shown right middle lobe collapse. A tuberculin skin test was strongly positive. What is the most characteristic finding in primary tuberculosis?
a. Miliary tuberculosis
b. Hematogenous dissemination leading to extrapulmonary tuberculosis
c. Atelectasis with obstructive pneumonia
d. Cavity formation
*e. Hilar or paratracheal lymph node enlargement

56. A girl is 12 y.o. Yesterday she was overcooled. Now she is complaining on pain in suprapubic area, frequent painful urination by small portions, temperature is 37,8°C. Pasternatsky symptom is negative. Urine analysis: protein - 0,033 g/L, WBC- 20-25 in f/vis, RBC- 1-2 in f/vis. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Urolithiasis
*d. Acute cystitis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

57. The girl of 11 y.o. She is ill for 1 month. She has "butterfly"-type rash on face (spots and papules), pain and swelling of small joints on arms and legs, signs of stomatitis (small-sized ulcers in mouth). CBC: Нb– 80 g/L, RBC– 2,91012/L, WBC– 15109/L, ESR- 40 mm/hour. Urinalysis: protein– 0,33 g/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, systemic type
b. Acute rheumatic fever
c. Dermatomyositis
*d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Periarteriitis nodosa

58. An infant aged 1 year on the third day of common cold at night developed inspiratory stridor, hoarse voice and barking cough. Physical examination revealed suprasternal and intercostal chest retractions. There is a bluish skin discoloration moistly seen over the upper lip. The respiratory rate is 52 per min and pulse- 122 bpm. The body temperature is 37,5°C. What disease does the infant have?
a. Acute bronchiolitis with respiratory distress
b. Acute epiglottitis
c. Acute laryngitis
d. Bronchopneumonia without complications
*e. Acute infectious croup due to viral laryngotracheitis

59. A newborn aged 3 days with hyperbilirubinemia (428 mkmol/L) developed following disorders. From beginning there were severe jaundice with poor suckling, hypotomia and hypodynamia. Little bit later periodical excitation, neonatal convulsions and neonatal primitive reflexes loss are noted. Now physical examination reveals convergent squint, rotatory nystagmus and setting sun eye sign. How to explain this condition?
*a. Encephalopathy due to hyperbilirubinemia
b. Brain tumour
c. Spastic cerebral palsy
d. Hydrocephalus
e. Skull injury

60. A child is 2 years old. The child complains of hoarse voice, dyspnea with obstructed inspiration. The disease started 3 days ago from dry cough and nose stuffiness. Objectively: general condition is unbalanced, stridor is present. The childs skin is pale. Body temperature is 37,7°C. The palatine arches are hyperemic. There is no deposit. Heart sounds are rhythmic. Auscultation of lungs reveals rough breathing sounds, crepitation is absent. Parainfluenza virus has been detected in nasopharynx lavage. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diphtheria
b. Laryngospasm
c. Epiglottitis
d. Foreign body
*e. Acute laryngotracheitis

61. A 3-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital because of ostealgia and body temperature rise up to 39°C. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, unable to stand for ostealgia, there is apparent intoxication, lymph nodesare enlarged up to 1,5 cm. Liver can be palpated 3 cm below the costal margin, spleen - 2 cm below the costal margin. In blood: RBCs - 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, colour index - 0,9, thrombocytes - 190×109/l, WBCs - 3,2×109/l, eosinophils - 1, stab neutrophils - 1, segmented neutrophils - 0, lymphocytes - 87, monocytes - 2, ESR - 36 mm/h. What examination should be conducted in order to specify the diagnosis?
a. Lymph node biopsy
b. Computer tomography
c. Ultrasound
d. Lymph node puncture
*e. Sternal puncture

62. Apgar test done on a newborn girl at 1st and 5th minute after birth gave the result of 7-8 scores. During the delivery there was a short-term difficulty with extraction of shoulder girdle. After birth the child had the proximal extremity dysfunction and the arm couldnt be raised from the side. The shoulder was turned inwards, the elbow was flexed, there was also forearm pronation, obstetric palsy of brachial plexus. What is the clinical diagnosis?
*a. Duchenne-Erb palsy
b. Right hand osteomyelitis
c. Trauma of right hand soft tissues
d. Intracranial haemorrhage
e. Trauma of thoracic spine

63. Examination of a 9-month-old girl revealed skin pallor, cyanosis during excitement. Percussion revealed transverse dilatation of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed continuous systolic murmur to the left of the breastbone in the 3-4 intercostal space. This murmur is conducted above the whole cardiac region to the back. What congenital cardiac pathology can be suspected?
a. Defect of interatrial septum
b. Fallots tetrad
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
*d. Defect of interventricular septum
e. Coarctation of aorta

64. A worker was temporarily off work because of illness for 16 days, was under out-patient treatment. The doctor in charge issued a sick-list first for 5 days, then prolonged it for 10 days. Who can further prolong the sick-list of this patient?
a. Deputy head physician on the working ability expertise
b. The head of department
c. Working ability expertise committee
d. The doctor in charge of the case with the permission of the head of department
*e. The doctor in charge of the case together with the head of department

65. A 13 y.o. patient was treated in dermatological hospital for atopic dermatitis exacerbation. He was discharged in the condition of clinical remission. What recommendations should the doctor give to prevent exacerbations?
a. Systematic skin disinfection
b. Avoidance of skin insolation
c. Frequent skin washing with detergents
d. Systematic use of local corticosteroids
*e. Use of neutral creams to protect skin

66. On the 21 day after appearance of vesiculous chickenpox rash a 7-year-old child developed ataxia, nystagmus, intention tremor, muscle hypotonia. Liquor analysis shows a low-grade lymphocytic pleocytosis, slightly increased protein rate. What complication is it?
*a. Encephalitis
b. Pneumonitis
c. Postherpetic neuralgia
d. Acute nephritis
e. Purulent meningitis

67. An 8-year-old boy suffering from haemophilia was undergoing transfusion of packed red cells. Suddenly he felt pain behind the breastbone and in the lumbar area, dyspnea, cold sweat. Objectively: pale skin, heart rate - 100/min, AP - 60/40 mm Hg; oliguria, brown urine. For the treatment of this complication the following drug should be administered:
a. Lasix
b. Aminophylline
c. Analgine
*d. Prednisolone
e. Adrenaline

68. A 3-year-old child has been diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus, hyperosmolar coma. The laboratory confirmed the diagnosis. Which laboratory findings are characteristic for such condition?
a. Hyperglycemia and high indicators of acid-base balance
*b. High hyperglycemia without ketonemia
c. Hyperglycemia and glucosuria
d. Hyperglycemia and ketonemia
e. Hyperglycemia and ketonuria

69. A 3-year-old child was playing in a playpen when he suddenly developed paroxysmal cough and shortness of breath. Objectively: dry cough, mixed dyspnea. Lung auscultation revealed some wheezes. Breathing sounds on the right are diminished. The child doesnt mix with other children. Immunization is age-appropriate. What pathological condition can be suspected?
a. Pertussis
b. Bronchial asthma
c. Pneumonia
d. Acute respiratory viral infection
*e. Foreign body in the respiratory tracts

70. A 10-year-old child has been folowed-up for the dilated cardiomyopathy. The child presents with dyspnea, cardialgia. There are dense, nonmobile edemata on the lower extremities and sacrum. Ps- 120/min. The cardiac borders are extended transversely. Heart sounds are muffled, there is blowing systolic murmur at the apex and over the xiphoid process. Liver is 3 cm enlarged, urine output is reduced. The blood total protein - 58.6 g/l. In urine: protein - 0,025 g/l, WBCs - 2-4 in the field of vision, RBCs - 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the main mechanism of edema syndrome development:
a. Hypoproteinemia
*b. Venous congestion of greater circulation
c. Peripheral circulation disorder
d. Venous congestion of lesser circulation
e. Secondary nephropathy development

71. After objective clinical examination a 12 year old child was diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse. What complementary instrumental method of examination should be applied for the diagnosis confirmation?
a. Veloergometry
*b. Echocardiography
c. Phonocardiography
d. Roentgenography of chest
e. ECG

72. A full-term child survived antenatal and intranatal hypoxia, it was born in asphyxia (2-5 points on Apgar score). After birth the child has progressing excitability, there are also vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, strabismus, spontaneous Moros and Babinskys reflexes. What localization of intracranial hemorrhage is the most probable?
a. Hemorrhages into the brain ventricles
*b. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
c. Subdural hemorrhage
d. Small cerebral tissue hemorrhages
e. Periventricular hemorrhages

73. A 15 y.o. boy was twice attacked by bees, as a result he had severe anaphylactic shock. What is the most effective prophylaxis method?
a. Prescription of corticosteroids for summer
b. Limitation of outside staying during summer months
c. Protective clothing
*d. Desensibilisation by means of bee venom extract
e. Long-term prophylactic treatment with antihistamines

74. A 9-year-old boy has been suffering from bronchoectasis since he was 3. Exacerbations occur quite often, 3-4 times a year. Conservative therapy results in short periods of remission. The disease is progressing, the child has physical retardation. The childs skin is pale, acrocyanotic, he has "watch glass" nail deformation. Bronchography revealed saccular bronchiectases of the lower lobe of his right lung. What is the further treatment tactics?
a. Physiotherapeutic treatment
b. Further conservative therapy
*c. Surgical treatment
d. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
e. Tempering of the childs organism

75. A child with tetralogy of Fallot is most likely to exhibit:
a. Increased pulse pressure
b. Increased pulmonary blood flow
*c. Increased pressure in the right ventricle
d. Normal pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve
e. Normal oxygen tension (PaO_2) in the left ventricle

76. A 2-months-old child after preventive vaccination had a prolonged hemorrhage from the vaccination place and due to those an intramuscular hematoma. During examination of the child a considerable rise of prothrombin consumption and a significant prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastic time were found. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Henoch-Schoenlein disease
b. Werlhofs disease
*c. Hemophilia
d. Hemorrhagic disease of the neonate
e. Inborn afibrinogenemia

77. A 10 y.o. boy with hemophilia has signs of acute respiratory viral infection with fever. What of the mentioned antifebrile medications are contraindicated to this patient?
a. Paracetamol
b. Panadol extra
c. Analgin
d. Pipolphen
*e. Acetylsalicylic acid

78. A 7-year-old child is sick for 2 weeks with running nose, was taking nasal drops. The boy suffers with alimentary allergy. He applied to doctor due to suppurative and bloody discharges from nose, maceration of ala nasi and upper lip. Rhinoscopy results: there are whitish-greyish areas at nasal septum. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is not changed. What is the most probable disease?
a. Allergic rhinitis
b. Sinusitis (maxillar sinus))
c. Adenovirus
d. Rhinovirus
*e. Diphtheria of the nose

79. A 10-year-old boy underwent treatment in cardiological department for rheumatism, I acute attack of rheumatic fever, active phase, II degree. The patient was discharged in satisfactory condition. Which drug should be chosen for prevention of rheumatism recurrence?
a. Erythromycin
b. Bicillinum-1
*c. Bicillinum-5
d. Ampicillin
e. Oxacillin

80. A child is 4 years old, has been ill for 5 days. There are complaints of cough, skin rash, t°- 38,2°C, face puffiness, photophobia, conjunctivitis. Objectively: there is bright, maculo-papulous, in some areas confluent rash on the face, neck, upper chest. The pharynx is hyperemic. There are seropurulent discharges from the nose. Auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Scarlet fever
b. Adenoviral infection
*c. Measles
d. Rubella
e. Enterovirus exanthema

81. A 10 month old boy has been ill for 5 days after consumption of unboiled milk. Body temperature is 38-39°C, there is vomiting, liquid stool. The child is pale and inert. His tongue is covered with white deposition. Heart sounds are muffled. Abdomen is swollen, there is borborygmus in the region of ubbilicus, liver is enlarged by 3 cm. Stool is liquid, dark-green, with admixtures of mucus, 5 times a day. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Escherichiosis
b. Staphylococcal enteric infection
*c. Salmonellosis
d. Acute shigellosis
e. Rotaviral infection

82. A 3 year old child with weight deficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 millimol/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
b. Recurrent bronchitis
c. Pulmonary hypoplasia
d. Bronchiectasis
e. Bronchial asthma

83. A 12 y.o. child with acute glomerulonephritis presented with hypertensive syndrom during first days of the disease. What is the role of angiotesin II in the pathogenesis?
a. Infibits deppresive action of prostaglandins
b. Increases heart output
*c. Intensifies production and secretion of aldosterone
d. Increases erythropoetin production
e. Increases renine level

84. A full-term infant is 3 days old. On the different parts of skin there are erythemas, erosive spots, cracks, areas of epidermis peeling. The infant has scalded skin syndrome. Nikolskys symptom is positive. General condition of the infant is grave. Anxiety, hyperesthesia, febrile temperature are evident. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Impetigo neonatorum
b. Mycotic erythema
c. Phlegmon of newborn
d. Fingers pseudofurunculosis
*e. Exfoliative dermatitis

85. District pediatrician examines a healthy carried 1-month-old child. The child is breast-fed. Prophylaxis of what disease will the doctor recommend to do first?
a. Spasmophilia
b. Parathropy
c. Anemia
d. Hypotrophia
*e. Rachitis

86. A 7-year-old boy has been managed for a month. Immediately after hospitalization there were apparent edemata, proteinuria - 7,1 g/l, daily urine protein - 4,2 g. Biochemical blood test shows persistent hypoproteinemia (43,2 g/l), hypercholesterolemia (9,2 millimole/l). The patient is most likely have the following type of glomerulonephritis:
a. Hematuric
b. Combined
c. Nephritic
d. Isolated urinary
*e. Nephrotic

87. A 7 y.o. boy has been treated in a hospital for a month. At the time of admission he had evident edemata, proteinuria - 7,1 g/L, protein content in the daily urine - 4,2 g. Biochemical blood analysis reveals permanent hypoproteinemia (43,2 g/L), hypercholesterolemia (9,2 mmol/L). What variant of glomerulonephritis is the most probable?
a. Nephritic
b. Hematuric
c. Mixed
*d. Nephrotic
e. Isolated urinary

88. A 3 y.o. girl has had a temperature rise up to 380С, rhinitis, dry superficial cough, flabbiness, appetite loss. Palpation didnt reveal any changes over her lungs. Percussion sound has a wooden resonance, auscultation revealed puerile breathing, no rales. In blood: leukopenia, lymphocytosis, increased ESR. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bilateral microfocal pneumonia
*b. Acute simple tracheitis
c. Recurrent bronchitis, acute condition
d. Acute obstructive bronchitis
e. Acute simple bronchitis

89. A 5-year-old girl with the transitory immunodeficiency according to T-system has a clinical picture of a right-sided pneumonia during 2 months. How pneumonia progress can be described?
*a. Delaying
b. Chronic
c. Acute
d. Wavelike
e. Recidivating

90. A 12 y.o. girl took 2 pills of aspirine and 4 hours later her body temperature raised up to 39-400С. She complains of general indisposition, dizziness, sudden rash in form of red spots and blisters. Objectively: skin lesions resemble of second-degree burns, here and there with erosive surface or epidermis peeling. Nikolskys symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Polymorphous exudative erythema
b. Pemphigus vulgaris
*c. Acute epidermal necrolisis
d. Bullous dermatitis
e. Duhrings disease

91. A 5-year-old child had an attack of palpitation with nausea, dizziness, generalized fatigue. On ECG: tachycardia with heartbeat rate of 220/min. Ventricle complexes are deformed and widened. P wave is absent. What medication is to be prescribed to provide first aid?
a. Isoptin
b. Novocainamides
c. Strophantin
*d. Lydocain
e. Seduxen

92. Examination of a 4 month old child revealed some lemon-yellow squamae with fatty crusts on the scalp. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Strophulus
b. Milk crust
*c. Gneiss
d. Pseudofurunculosis
e. Infantile eczema

93. A neonate from gestation with severe gestosis of the second half was born on the 41st week with 2400 g birth weight and 50cm long. On physical examination: skin is flaccid, subcutaneous fatty cellular tissue is thin, muscle hypotonia, new-born period reflexes are decreased. Internal organs are without pathological changes. How would you estimate this child?
a. Immature infant
b. Premature infant
*c. Term infant with pre-natal growth retardation
d. Postmature infant
e. Term infant with normal body weight

94. A child was taken to a hospital with focal changes in the skin folds. The child was anxious during examination, examination revealed dry skin with solitary papulous elements and ill-defined lichenification zones. Skin eruption was accompanied by strong itch. The child usually feels better in summer, his condition is getting worse in winter. The child has been artificially fed since he was 2 months old. He has a history of exudative diathesis. Grandmother by his mothers side has bronchial asthma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atopic dermatitis
b. Seborrheal eczema
c. Urticaria
d. Strophulus
e. Contact dermatitis

95. A boy, aged 9, was examined: height - 127 cm (-0,36), weight - 28,2 kg (+0,96), chest circumference - 64,9 cm (+0,66), lung vital capacity - 1520 ml (-0,16). What is the complex assessment of the childs physical development?
a. Excessive
b. Below the average
c. Disharmonious
d. Apparently disharmonious
*e. Harmonious

96. A child is 7 months old. Birth weight was 3450, the child is breastfed. Supplemental feeding was introduced on time. Determine the daily protein requirements for the child:
a. 4,0 g/kg
*b. 3,0 g/kg
c. 2,5 g/kg
d. 2,0 g/kg
e. 3,5 g/kg

97. 2 weeks after recovering from angina an 8-year-old boy developed edemata of face and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Urine is of dark brown colour. Oliguria is present. On urine analysis: relative density - 1,015, protein - 1,2 g/l, RBCs are leached and cover the whole vision field, granular casts - 1-2 in the vision field, salts are represented by urates (big number). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis with isolated urinary syndrome
b. Nephrolithiasis
c. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome
d. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome, hematuria and hypertension
*e. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephritic syndrome

98. A 14 year old child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for attack reduction?
a. Amysyl
b. No-shpa
*c. Obsidan
d. Aminophylline
e. Corglicone

99. A child is 9 months old. The patients body temperature is 36,7°C, the skin is pale, humid, there is pain in leg muscles. There is no extremities mobility, sensitivity is present. The child has been diagnosed with poliomyelitis. The causative agent of this disease relates to the following family:
a. Paramyxovirus
b. Adenovirus
c. Rotavirus
*d. Picornavirus
e. Tohovirus

100. A 4 month old child fell seriously ill: body temperature rose up to 38,5°C, the child became inert and had a single vomiting. 10 hours later there appeared rash over the buttocks and lower limbs in form of petechiae, spots and papules. Some haemorrhagic elements have necrosis in the centre. What is the most probable disease?
a. Rubella
b. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
c. Scarlet fever
*d. Meningococcemia
e. Influenza

101. A 5-year-old child had strong headache, vomiting, ataxy, dormancy, discoordination of movements, tremor of the extremities on the 8th day of the disease. It was followed by rise in body temperature, vesiculosis rash mainly on the skin of the body and the hairy part of the head. At the second wave of the fever a diagnosis of encephalitis was given. What disease complicated encephalitis in this case?
a. Enterovirus ifection
b. Herpetic infection
c. Measles
d. German measles
*e. Chicken pox

102. A 13 year old girl was admitted to the cardiological department because of pain in the muscles and joints. Examination of her face revealed an edematic erythema in form of butterfly in the region of nose bridge and cheeks. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Periarteritis nodosa
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Rheumatism

103. A 4 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with complaints of dyspnea, rapid fatigability. His anamnesis registers frequent respiratory diseases. On percussion: heart borders are dilatated to the left and upwards. On auscultation: amplification of the SII above pulmonary artery, a harsh systolodyastolic "machine" murmur is auscultated between the II and the III rib to the left of breast bone, this murmur is conducted to all other points including back. AP is 100/20 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Isolated stenosis of pulmonary arterial orifice
b. Interventricular septal defect
*c. Opened arterial duct
d. Interatrial septal defect
e. Valvar aortic stenosis

104. A 12 year old girl complains about abrupt weakness, nausea, dizziness, vision impairment. The day before she ate home-made stockfish, beef. Examination revealed skin pallor, a scratch on the left knee, dryness of mucous membranes of oral pharynx, bilateral ptosis, mydriatic pupils. The girl is unable to read a simple text (mist over the eyes). What therapy would be the most adequate in this case?
a. Parenteral introduction of antitetanus serum
*b. Parenteral introduction of polyvalent antibotulinic serum
c. Parenteral introduction of antibiotics
d. Parenteral disintoxication
e. Gastric lavage

105. A child from the first non-complicated pregnancy but complicated labor had cephalhematoma. On the second day there developed jaundice. On the 3th day appeared changes of neurologic status: nystagmus, Graefes sign. Urea is yellow, feces- golden-yellow. Mothers blood group is А(II)Rh-, child- А(II)Rh+. On the third day childs Hb- 200 g/L, RBC- 6,1×1012/L, bilirubin in blood - 58 mk mol/L due to unconjugated bilirubin, Ht- 0,57. What is the childs jaundice explanation?
a. Physiologic jaundice
b. Bile ducts atresia
c. Fetal hepatitis
*d. Brain delivery trauma
e. Hemolytic disease of newborn

106. A full-term baby (the 1st uncomplicated pregnancy, difficult labour) had a cephalogematoma. On the 2nd day there was jaundice, on the third the following changes in neurological status appeared: nystagmus, Graefe syndrome. Urine was yellow, feces were of golden-yellow colour. Mothers blood group is A (II) Rh-, the babys one - A (II) Rh+. On the third day the childs Hb was 200g/l, RBCs - 6,1×1012/l, blood bilirubin - 58 micromole/l at the expense of unbound fraction. What caused the jaundice in the child?
a. Biliary atresia
b. Fetal hepatitis
c. Physiological jaundice
d. Neonatal anaemia
*e. Craniocerebral birth trauma

107. After birth a child was pale and had arrhythmical breathing. Oxygen therapy didnt have any effect. Pulse was weak and rapid. It was difficult to measure arterial pressure accurately. There were no edemata. What is the most likely reason for these symptoms?
a. Congenital pneumonia
*b. Asphyxia
c. Intracranial haematoma
d. Congestive heart failure
e. Intrauterine sepsis

108. A child was delivered severely premature. After the birth the child has RI symptoms, anasarca, fine bubbling moist rales over the lower lobe of the right lung. Multiple skin extravasations, bloody foam from the mouth have occured after the 2 day. On chest X-ray: atelectasis of the lower lobe of the right lung. In blood: Hb-100 g/L, Ht- 0,45. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hyaline membrane disease
b. Congenital pneumonia
c. Disseminated intravascular clotting syndrome
d. Pulmonary edema
*e. Edematous-hemorrhagic syndrome

109. An infant is 2 d.o. It was full-term born with signs of intrauterine infection, thats why it was prescribed antibiotics. Specify, why the gap between antibiotic introductions to the new-born children is longer and dosage is smaller compared to the older children and adults?
a. The newborns have diminished blood pH
b. The newborns have bigger hematocrit
c. The newborns have lower concentration of protein and albumins in blood
d. The newborns have reduced activity of glucuronil transferase
*e. The newborns have a lower level of glomerular filtration

110. A 10-year-old child is sick with chronic viral hepatitis B with marked activity of the process. Total bilirubin - 70mumol/L, direct - 26mumol/L, indirect - 44mumol/L. АSТ - 6,2 mmol/L, АLТ - 4,8 mmol/L. What mechanism underlies the transaminase level increase of this patient?
*a. Cytolysis of hepatocytes
b. Hypersplenism
c. Failure of bilirubin conjugation
d. Intrahepatic cholestasis
e. Failure of the synthetical function of the liver

111. A 12-year-old girl applied to doctor with complaints of swelling on the front part of the neck. The doctor diagnosed hyperplasia of the thyroid gland of the second degree, euthyroidism. Ultrasound suspected autoimmune thyroiditis. Blood was taken for titre of antibodies to thyroglobulin. What titre of antibodies will be diagnostically important?
a. 1:250
*b. 1:100
c. 1:150
d. 1:50
e. 1:200

112. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl didnt undergo any treatment. The girls irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl got puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin became of a waxen hue. What disease may be suspected?
a. Diffuse toxic goiter
b. Subacute thyroiditis
c. Juvenile basophilism
*d. Autoimmune thyroiditis
e. Thyroid carcinoma

113. In the anamnesis of a 2-year-old girl there are recurrent pneumonias with signs of obstruction. There are heterogeneous moist and dry rales, respiration is weakened. Dense, viscous secretion is difficult to hawk. There are "drumsticks", physical retardation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Recidivating bronchitis
b. Congenital pulmonary polycystosis
c. Pulmonary tuberculosis
*d. Mucoviscidosis, pulmonary form
e. Bronchial asthma

114. On the 3rd day of life a baby presented with haemorrhagic rash, bloody vomit, black stool. Examination revealed anaemia, extended coagulation time, hypoprothrombinemia, normal thrombocyte rate. What is the optimal therapeutic tactics?
a. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
b. Sodium ethamsylate
*c. Vitamin K
d. Fibrinogen
e. Calcium gluconate

115. A 2 month old full-term child was born with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
a. 150 g less than necessary
b. Hypotrophy of the II grade
c. Paratrophy of the I grade
*d. Corresponding to the age
e. Hypotrophy of the I grade

116. A 2 m.o. breast-fed child suffers from cheek skin hyperemia, sporadic papulous elements on the skin of the chest and back following the apple juice introduction. The child is restless. What is the initial pediatritians tactics?
a. Refer to prescribe dermathologist
b. Treat with claritine
c. Apply ointment with corticosteroids to affected skin areas
*d. Clarify mothers diet and exlude obligate allergens
e. Administer general ultraviolet irradiation

117. A 5 month old boy was born prematurely, he didnt suffer from any disease at the infant age and later on. Examination at an outpatients hospital revealed paleness of skin, sleepiness. Blood count: Hb - 95 g/l, erythrocytes - 3,5×1012/l, reticulocytes - 90/_00, colour index - 0,7, osmotic stability of erythrocytes - 0,44-0,33%, serum iron - 4,9 micromole/l. What is the most probable cause of anemia?
a. Hemogenesis immaturity
b. Erythrocyte hemolysis
c. B12 deficit
*d. Iron deficit
e. Infectious process

118. A 7 y.o. child had elevation of temperature tol 40°C in anamnesis. For the last 3 months he presents fusiform swelling of fingers, ankle joints and knee joint, pain in the upper part of the sternum and cervical part of the spinal column. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Toxic synovitis
b. Rheumatism
*c. Juvenile rheumatic arthritis
d. Septic arthritis
e. Osteoarthrits

119. An 8 year old girl complains about joint pain, temperature rise up to 38°C, dyspnea. Objectively: the left cardiac border is deviated by 2,5 cm to the left, tachycardia, systolic murmur on the apex and in the V point are present. Blood count: leukocytes - 20,0×109/l, ESR - 18 mm/h. What sign gives the most substantial proof for rheumatism diagnosis?
a. Fever
b. Accelerated ESR
c. Arthralgia
d. Leukocytosis
*e. Carditis

120. A 5 y.o. child with stigmas of dysembryogenesis (small chin, thick lips, opened mouth, hyperthelorismus) has systolic murmur in the second intercostal to the right of the sternum. The murmur passes to the neck and along the sternum left edge. The pulse on the left brachial artery is weakened. BP on the right arm is 110/60 mm Hg, on the left - 100/60 mm Hg. ECG results: hypertrophy of the right ventricle. What defect is the most probable?
a. Open aortic duct
*b. Aortic stenosis
c. Defect of interatrial septum
d. Defect of interventricular septum
e. Coarctation of the aorta

121. A 1,5-year-old child fell ill acutely with high temperature 38°C, headache, fatigue. The temperature declined on the fifth day, muscular pain in the right leg occured in the morning, there were no movements and tendon reflexes, sensitivity was reserved. What is the initial diagnosis?
a. Polyartropathy
b. Viral encephilitis
*c. Polyomyelitis
d. Osteomyelitis
e. Hip joint arthritis

122. A 3-year-old child has been delivered to a hospital in soporose state with considerable amyotonia, inhibition of tendon and periosteal reflexes. Miosis and asthenocoria are also present. Corneal reflexes are preserved. Pulse is rapid and weak. AP- 80/50 mm Hg. The parents suspect the child of accidental taking some tablets. Such clinical presentations are typical for intoxication with the following tableted drugs:
a. Antropine drugs
b. Barbiturates
c. Beta-2-adrenoceptor agonists
*d. Tranquilizers
e. Antihypertensive drugs

123. A 2 m.o. child with birth weight 5100 g has jaundice, hoarse cry, umbilical hernia, physical development lag. Liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not enlarged. In anamnesis: delayed falling-away of umbilical cord rest. In blood: Hb- 120 g/L, erythrocytes - 4,5×1012/L, ESR- 3 mm/h. Whole serum bilirubin is 28 mcmole/L, indirect - 20 mcmole/L, direct - 8 mcmole/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Conjugated jaundice
b. Cytomegalovirus infection
c. Congenital hepatitis
d. Hemolitic anemia
*e. Congenital hypothyreosis

124. A 5-year-old child developed an acute disease starting from body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, running nose, cough and conjunctivitis. On the 4th day the child presented with maculo-papular rash on face. Body temparature rose again up to 39,2°C. Over the next few days the rash spread over the whole body and extremities. Mucous membrane of palate was hyperemic, there was whitish deposition on cheek mucous membrane next to molars. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Enterovirus diseases
b. Rubella
c. Acute viral respiratory infection
d. Yersinia
*e. Measles

125. A 3 year old child fell acutely ill, body temperature rose up to 39,5°C, the child became inert, there appeared recurrent vomiting, headache. Examination revealed positive meningeal symptoms, after this lumbal puncture was performed. Spinal fluid is turbid, runs out under pressure, protein concentration is 1,8 g/l; Pandy reaction is +++, sugar concentration is 2,2 millimole/l, chloride concentration - 123 millimole/l, cytosis is 2,35×109 (80% of neutrophils, 20% of lymphocytes). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brain tumour
*b. Purulent meningitis
c. Serous tuberculous meningitis
d. Serous viral meningitis
e. Subarachnoid haemorrhage

126. A 13 y.o. girl complains of having temperature rises up to febrile figures for a month, joint ache, periodical skin rash. Examination revealed steady enhancing of ESR, LE-cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Rheumatics
*b. Systematic lupus erythematosus
c. Systematic scleroderma
d. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
e. Acute lymphoblast leukosis

127. A child is 1 y.o. Within the last months after the begining of supplemental feeding the child has appetite loss, diarrhea with massive defecation, sometimes vomiting. Objectively: body temperature is normal. Body weight is 7 kg. Evident pallor of skin, leg edemata, enlarged abdomen. Coprogram shows a lot of fatty acids and soaps. The child was diagnosed with celiac disease and prescribed gluten-free diet. What shoul be excluded from the dietary intake in this case?
a. Animal protein
b. Digestible carbohydrates
c. Milk and dairy produce
d. Fruit
*e. Cereals - wheat, oats

128. A child is 1 year old. Ater the recent introduction of complementary feeding the child has presented with loss of appetite, diarrhea with large amounts of feces and occasional vomiting, body temperature is normal. Objectively: body weight is 7 kg, the child is very pale, there are edemata of both legs, abdomen is significantly enlarged. Coprogram shows many fatty acids and soaps. The child has been diagnosed with celiac disease and administered the gluten-free diet. What is to be excluded from the ration?
*a. Cereals - wheat and oats
b. Fruit
c. High digestible carbohydrates
d. Animal protein
e. Milk and dairy products

129. A 7-year-old child was brought to a doctor for a check. The child has a 4-year history of bronchial asthma, asthma attacks occur mainly in spring and summer. Allergy tests revealed hypersensitivity to poplar seed tufts, field herbs. What recommendation should be given?
a. Phytotherapy
b. Needle reflexotherapy
c. Physiotherapy
d. Treatment at a health resort
*e. Specific hyposensitization

130. An 8 y.o. boy complains of constant cough along with discharge of greenish sputum, dyspnea during physical activities. At the age of 1 year and 8 months he fell ill for the first time with bilateral pneumonia that had protracted course. Later on there were recurrences of the disease 5-6 times a year, during the remission periods there was constant productive cough. What examination results will be the most important for making a final diagnosis?
a. Bacterial inoculation of sputum
b. Roentgenography of thorax organs
*c. Bronchography
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Spirography

131. A mother of a 5 y.o. girl consulted a doctor about doughters involuntary urination at night, nightmares, sleep disorders, slow gaining of body weight. Objectively: malnutrition, intellectual development is good, the girl can read and explains common situations quite adultly. Her skin is very pale, liver is enlarged in size. Her mother suffers from holetithiasis. What type of diathesis is the most probable in the childs case?
*a. Gouty diathesis
b. Exudative diathesis
c. Lymphohypoplastic diathesis
d. Allergic diathesis
e. Urine acid diathesis

132. A 10 year old girl complains about abdominal pain that is arising and getting worse after eating rough or spicy food. She complains also about sour eructation, heartburn, frequent constipations, headache, irritability. She has been suffering from this for 12 months. Objectively: the girls diet is adequate. Tongue is moist with white deposit at the root. Abdomen is soft, painful in its epigastric part. What study method will help to make a diagnosis?
a. Biochemical blood analysis
*b. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
c. Fractional examination of gastric juice
d. Intragastral pH-metry
e. Contrast roentgenoscopy

133. A 40 h.o. child age has hyperosthesia, CNS depression, dyspepsia. Sepsis is suspected. What should the differential diagnosis be made with?
a. Hyperkaliemia
b. Hypomagnesemia
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Hyperbilirubinemia
*e. Hypoglycemia

134. A 1,5 y.o. child fell seriously ill: chill, body temperature rise up to 40,1°С, then rapid dropping to 36,2°С, skin is covered with voluminous hemorrhagic rash and purple cyanotic spots. Extremities are cold, face features are sharpened. Diagnosis: meningococcosis, fulminant form, infection-toxic shock. What antibiotic must be used at the pre-admission stage?
*a. Soluble Levomycetine succinate
b. Lincomycin
c. Sulfamonometoxin
d. Gentamycin
e. Penicillin

135. A 10 year old boy suffers from chronic viral hepatitis type B with maximal activity. What laboratory test can give the most precise characteristic of cytolysis degree?
a. Weltmans coagulation test
b. Prothrombin test
c. Test for whole protein
*d. Transaminase test
e. Takata-Ara test

136. A 6 y.o child complains of thirst, polyuria, increased appetite for 2 months with weight loss for 3 kg. There has been nocturnal enuresis during last week. On examination: hyperglycemia 14 mol/L. The diagnosis is diabetis mellitus I type. What is the genesis of this disease?
a. Viral
b. Neurogenic
c. Virus-bacterial
*d. Autoimmune
e. Bacterial

137. A 10 y.o. child who is at oligoanuretic stage of acute renal insufficiency has got sensations of pricking in the mucous membrane of oral cavity and tongue, extremities numbness, reduced reflexes, respiratory disturbance, arrhythmia. What are these symptoms caused by?
a. Alkalosis
*b. Hyperkaliemia
c. Hyperazotemia
d. Hyponatremia
e. Acidosis

138. Examination of a 12 year old child revealed diffuse thyroid enlargement of the II degree. Heart auscultation revealed dullness of heart sounds, heart rate was 64/min. The child has frequent constipations, anemia. Concentration of thyreoglobulin antibodies is increased. What disease might have caused such symptoms?
a. Thyroid carcinoma
b. Diffuse toxic goiter
*c. Autoimmune thyroiditis
d. Thyroid hyperplasia
e. Endemic goiter

139. An 8-year-old girl has been admitted to the cardiology department. Objectively: there is a skin lesion over the extensor surfaces of joints with atrophic cicatrices, depigmentation, symmetrical affection of skeletal muscles (weakness, edema, hypotrophy). What disease are these changes most typical for?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Reiters disease
c. Systemic scleroderma
d. Nodular periarteritis
*e. Dermatomyositis

140. A 13 y.o. teenager who suffers from hemophilia A was taken to the hospital after a fight at school. His diagnosis is right-sided hemarthros of knee joint, retroperitoneal hematoma. What should be primarily prescribed?
a. Washed thrombocytes
b. Aminocapronic acid
*c. Fresh frozen plasma
d. Placental albumin
e. Dry plasma

141. A 3 m.o. child fell seriously ill, body temperature rised up to 37,8°C, there is semicough. On the 3-rd day the cough grew worse, dyspnea appeared. On percussion: tympanic sound above lungs, on auscultation: a lot of fine moist and wheezing rales during expiration. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis
b. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchopneumonia
*c. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchiolitis
d. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis with asthmatic component
e. Acute respiratory viral infection, focal pneumonia

142. On the 1st day of life a full-term girl (2nd labour) weighing 3500g, with Apgar score of 8 points, presented with jaundice. Indirect bilirubin of blood - was 80 micromole/l, 6 hours later - 160 micromole/l. What is the optimal method of treatment?
a. Phototherapy
b. Phenobarbital treatment
c. Enterosorbents
*d. Exchange blood transfusion
e. Infusion therapy

143. A child was born at a gestational age of 34 weeks in grave condition. The leading symptoms were respiratory distress symptoms, namely sonorous and prolonged expiration, involving additional muscles into respiratory process. The Silverman score at birth was 0 points, in 3 hours it was 3 points with clinical findings. Which diagnostic study will allow to diagnose the form of pneumopathy?
a. Determination of blood gas composition
b. Clinical blood test
*c. X-ray of chest
d. Proteinogram
e. Immunoassay

144. A 10-year-old girl consulted a doctor about thirst, frequent urination, weight loss. She has been observing these symptoms for about a month. Objectively: no pathology of internal organs was revealed. What laboratory analysis should be carried out in the first place?
a. Glucose in urine test on the base of daily diuresis
b. Glucose tolerance test
c. Glucosuric profile
*d. Blood glucose analysis on an empty stomach
e. Acetone in urine test

145. After a 10-year-old child had been bitten by a bee, he was delivered to a hospital. There were lip, face and neck edemata. The patient felt hot and short of breath. Objectively: breathing was laboured and noisy. There were foamy discharges from the mouth, cough. The skin was pale and cold. There was bradypnoea. Heart sounds were muffled and arrhythmic. Thready pulse was present. What diagnosis was made by the expert in resuscitation?
a. Cerebral coma
*b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Quinckes edema
e. Acute cardiovascular collapse

146. A 3-year-old girl presents with pertussis-like cough with thick sputum. There have been persistent changes in lungs since the age of 6 months when she was first diagnosed with acute pneumonia. Chloride concentration in the perspiration is 112 mEq/l. The child has been diagnosed with mucoviscidosis. What is the basis for autosomal recessive disease - mucoviscidosis?
a. Pulmonary artery hypoplasia
*b. Inadequate transport of sodium and chloride ions
c. Deposition of calcium triphosphates and carbotates in the alveoles
d. α1-antitrypsin deficiency
e. Pulmonary cysts

147. 15 minutes after the second vaccination with DTP vaccine a 4-month-old boy exhibited the symptoms of Quinckes edema. What medication should be given for emergency aid?
a. Adrenalin
b. Heparin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Furosemide
e. Seduxen

148. A full-term baby was born with body weight of 3200 g, body length of 50 cm, Apgar score - 8-10 points. What is the optimum time for the first breast-feeding?
a. First 48 hours
b. After 48 hours
c. First 6 hours
d. First 24 hours
*e. First 30 minutes

149. A 3-year-old child has been taken to a pediatrician. He has no recent history of any diseases. Objective examination revealed no pathology of the internal organs. The child needs the routine immunization against the following disease:
a. Type B hepatitis
*b. Poliomyelitis
c. Measles, rubella, parotitis
d. Diphtheria and tetanus
e. Pertussis

150. A 10-year-old girl was admitted to a hospital with carditis presentations. It is known from the anamnesis that two weeks ago she had exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. What is the most likely etiological factor in this case?
a. Staphylococcus
b. Klebsiella
c. Proteus
*d. Streptococcus
e. Pneumococcus

151. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in respect of its volume and composition. Muscle tonus is within norm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Microcephaly
b. Craniostenosis
c. Meningitis
d. Pylorostenosis
*e. Pylorospasm

152. On the second day after preventive vaccination a 2-year-old boy presented with abdominal pain without clear localization, body temperature rose up to 38°C. On the third day the child got red papular haemorrhagic eruption on the extensor surfaces of limbs and around the joints. Knee joints were edematic and slightly painful. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
b. Meningococcemia
c. DIC syndrome
d. Urticaria
e. Thrombocytopenic purpura

153. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
a. Miliaria
b. Impetigo neonatorum
*c. Vesiculopustulosis
d. Impetigo
e. Epidermolysis bullosa

