1. 6 months after treatment a patient with coronary heart disease developed tolerance to the prolonged-action nitrates. What drug with nitrate-similar effect should be recommended in this case?
a. Prazosin
b. Nifedipine
*c. Molsidomine
d. Verapamil
e. Metoprolol

2. Which of the below-listed drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
a. Рhenylinum
b. Heparinum
*c. Streptokinase
d. Ticlopidine
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

3. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
a. Protamine sulfate
b. Atropinum
c. Penicillamine
*d. Deferoxamium
e. Bemegridum

4. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. What antibacterial drug may be prescribed?
*a. Cefotaxime
b. Tetracycline hydrochloride
c. Co-trimoxazolum
d. Ofloxacinum
e. Gentamycin sulphate

5. One of the major indicator of drug elimination from the human body is:
*a. Effective halfbeak
b. Bioavailability
c. Highest concentration in blood
d. Bioequivalence
e. Volume of distribution

6. Mother of a 2-month-old child came to a pharmacy and asked for a febrifuge. What drug should be recommended for the child?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Nimesulide
*c. Paracetamolum
d. Indometacinum
e. Diclofenac sodium

7. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia was prescribed an antibiotic. After the treatment the child became deaf. Which antibiotic group might have caused this complication?
*a. Aminoglycosides
b. Macrolides
c. Semisynthetic penicillin
d. Natural penicillin
e. Cephalosporins

8. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
a. 500 mg
b. 200 mg
c. 50 mg
*d. 100 mg
e. 1000 mg

9. Choose an optimal antibacterial drug for the mycoplasmal pneumonia treatment:
a. Amoksiklav
*b. Rovamycine
c. Penicillin
d. Gentamycinum
e. Ampicillin

10. Which of the listed preparations should be used as antidote and included into the first-aid kit required at factories where acute intoxications with arsenic, mercury, chrome and bismuth compounds are possible?
a. Droperidolum
*b. Unithiolum
c. Аtropinum
d. Аdrenalinum
e. Morphinum

11. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent presentations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Drotaverine
b. Оmерrаzоlе
c. Acidin pepsinum
*d. Раncreatinum
e. Dе-Nоl

12. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
*a. Immediate allergy
b. Local irritation
c. Abstinence syndrome
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Delayed allergy

13. Examination of a patient who has been treated for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time revealed hyperglycemia. What drug might have caused it?
a. Diclofenac sodium
b. Chloroquine
c. Levamisole
*d. Dexamethasone
e. Ibuprofen

14. A 54-year-old patient who has been suffering from hyperacidic gastritis for several years was prescribed almagel. What pharmacotherapeutical complications on the part of digestive organs may be expected in the first place?
*a. Constipation
b. Anorexia
c. Diarrhea
d. Emesis
e. Nausea

15. A 26-year-old patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia provoked by mycoplasma. Choose the appropriate antimicrobial preparation for the patient treatment:
*a. Rovamycine
b. Gentamycinum
c. Amoksiklav
d. Веnzylpenicillinum
e. Amoxicillin

16. A 60-year-old patient has essential hypertension stage II, coronary disease, bronchial asthma. After pharmacotherapy correction the patient exhibited a bronchospastic attack, intensified dyspnea. What drug provoked this complication?
a. Nifedipinе
b. Мucaltinum
c. Salbutamolum
*d. Propranolol
e. Еuphyllinum

17. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Еnаlаpril
b. Diltiazem
c. Losartan
*d. Doxazosin
e. Propranolol

18. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of such side effect?
a. Ethambutol
b. Isoniazid
*c. Streptomycin
d. Rifampicin
e. Ethionamidum

19. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should not be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
*a. Co-trimoxazolum
b. Gentamycinum
c. Doxycycline
d. Benzylpenicillinum
e. Midecamycin

20. Which of the listed pharmacolgical groups of antihypertensive drugs is contra-indicated the patients with bronchial asthma?
*a. Beta-adrenergic blocking agent
b. Calcium channel blockers
c. Diuretics
d. Angiotensin receptors blockers
e. ACE inhibitor

21. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
a. Trimetazidine
b. Furosemide
*c. Verapamil
d. Panangin
e. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages

22. A patient with cholelithiasis was prescribed the following drug for the purpose of cholesterol gallstone dissolution:
a. Mefenamic acid
*b. Ursodeoxycholic acid
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Gamma-amino-butyric acid
e. Citric acid

23. A 68-year-old female patient has been continuously taking furosemide for heart failure treatment. What drug should be used to prevent hypokalemia in patients taking furosemide?
a. Trimetazidine
b. Sustac forte
c. Atp-long
d. Mildronatum
*e. Panangin

24. A 52-year-old patient complains of having increased arterial pressure for a month. She has a 5-year history of bronchial asthma. What group of hypotensive drugs should NOT be recommended this patient?
a. Diuretics
*b. ?-adrenoreceptor blockers
c. Tranquilizers
d. Calcium channel blockers
e. Angiotensin receptor blockers

25. An 18-year-old patient was diagnosed with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug will provide etiotropic pharmacotherapy?
a. Trimethoprim
b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
*c. Isoniazid
d. Lincomycin
e. Metronidazole

26. A patient suffering from arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Body temperature remained unchanged. It is known that the patient takes captopril. These symptoms can be explained by increased generation of:
*a. Bradyquinine
b. Renin
c. Natriuretic peptide
d. Aldosterone
e. Angiotensin-1

27. Which preparation from the group of laxative agents IS NOT to be administered in case of intoxication with CNS-inhibiting substances?
a. Bisacodyl
b. Guttalax
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Vaseline oil
*e. Magnesium sulfate

28. A 46-year-old patient suffering from chronic bronchitis came to a pharmacy. What expectorative drug may be recommended?
*a. Ambroxol
b. Libexin
c. Salbutamol
d. Glauvent
e. Falimint

29. A 26-year-old pregnant woman (III trimester of pregnancy) complains about body temperature rise up to 39oC. What febrifuge may be recommended in this case?
a. Aspirin
b. Analgin
c. Indometacin
*d. Paracetamol
e. Diclofenac

30. A 25-year-old patient has been taking antibiotics for 7 days. Antibiotic therapy has caused a complication in form of bowel dysbacteriosis. This complication should be treated with drugs of the following pharmacological group:
a. Cholagogic
b. Spasmolytics
*c. Probiotics
d. Antacids
e. Adaptogens

31. A 57-year-old female patient was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis; she has also a history of stomach ulcer. What drug from the group of nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs may be recommended this patient?
a. Diclofenac
b. Indometacin
c. Mefenamic acid
*d. Celecoxib
e. Aspirin

32. A patient fell ill with severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day connected with the fact that the drug:
a. Accumulates in the lungs
b. Poorly absorbed from the injection site
c. Has bactericidal effect
d. Pluripotential
*e. Slowly eliminated from the body

33. An internship doctor prescribed his patient nifuroxazid from the group of nitrofurans for treatment of urinary tracts infection. The doctor made a mistake because:
a. It has bacteriostatic effect
b. It is excreted from the orghanism very slowly
c. It is excreted with urine in the inactive state
d. It has nephrotoxic effect
*e. It cannot be absorbed from the digestive tract

34. Which of the following is the drug of choice for bronchial asthma attacks prevention?
a. Ambroxol
*b. Cromolyn sodium
c. Drotaverine
d. Salbutamol
e. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride

35. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed an antiulcer drug that also reduces secretion of hydrochloric acid and inhibits Chelicobacter pylori. What drug is it?
a. Gastrocepine
b. Famotidine
c. Almagel
*d. Omeprazole
e. Maalox

36. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering for diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
a. Dibazol
b. Dichlothiazide
c. Propranolol
d. Clonidine
*e. Enalapril

37. A patient with arterial hypertension was administered a non-prescription drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis. What pharmaceutical form should be recommended the patient in order to reduce as much as possible the likelihood of development of undesirable systemic vasoconstriction?
a. Drops
b. Gel
*c. Ointment
d. Aerosol
e. Tablets

38. A 56-year-old patient suffering from essential hypertension was prescribed an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and a potassium-sparing diuretic. Such combination is:
a. Reasonable because it decreases risk of hyperkaliemia development
b. Unreasonable because it reduces hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
c. Unreasonable because it increases risk of orthostatic collapse development
*d. Unreasonable because it increases risk of hyperkaliemia development
e. Reasonable because it potentiates hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor

39. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic DOES NOT NEED to be combined with potassium preparations?
a. Furosemide
b. Ethacrynic acid
c. Clopamide
d. Dichlothiazide
*e. Triamteren

40. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
*a. Orthostatic hypotension
b. Central nervous system depression effect
c. Diarrhea
d. Taste violation
e. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome

41. A 67-year-old patient who undergoes treatment for bronchial asthma presents with limb tremor, headache, insomnia, extrasystole. What drug might have caused such symptoms?
*a. Theophylline
b. Tavegyl
c. Acetylcysteine
d. Intal
e. Prednisolone

42. 6 months after treatment a patient with coronary heart disease developed tolerance to the prolonged-action nitrates. What drug with nitrate-similar effect should be recommended in this case?
a. Metoprolol
*b. Molsidomine
c. Prazosin
d. Nifedipine
e. Verapamil

43. Which of the below-listed drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
a. Рhenylinum
b. Heparine
*c. Streptokinase
d. Ticlopidine
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

44. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
a. Penicillamine
*b. Deferoxamium
c. Bemegridum
d. Protamine sulphate
e. Atropinum

45. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. What antibacterial drug may be prescribed?
a. Tetracycline hydrochloride
b. Gentamycin sulphate
*c. Cefotaxime
d. Ofloxacinum
e. Co-trimoxazolum

46. One of the major indicator of drug elimination from the human body is:
a. Bioequivalence
b. Highest concentration in blood
c. Volume of distribution
d. Bioavailability
*e. Effective halfbeak

47. Mother of a 2-month-old child came to a pharmacy and asked for a febrifuge. What drug should be recommended for the child?
a. Nimesulide
b. Indometacinum
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Paracetamolum
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

48. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia was prescribed an antibiotic. After the treatment the child became deaf. Which antibiotic group might have caused this complication?
a. Natural penicillin
b. Semisynthetic penicillin
c. Cephalosporins
d. Macrolides
*e. Aminoglycosides

49. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
a. 50 mg
*b. 100 mg
c. 1000 mg
d. 500 mg
e. 200 mg

50. A patient with hypertension has been administered one of antihypertensive drugs. Blood pressure dropped back to normal, but the patient has developed a persistent dry cough. Which of the following drugs has such a side effect?
a. Propranolol
b. Furosemide
c. Nifedipine
*d. Enalapril maleate
e. Clonidine

51. Name the reason for the reduction of anticoagulant effect of syncumar when it is applied in combination with phenobarbital:
a. Phenobarbital inhibits microsomal liver enzymes
b. These drugs are antagonists
c. Mutual inactivation
*d. Phenobarbital activates microsomal liver enzymes
e. Development of syncumar allergy

52. Choose an optimal antibacterial drug for the mycoplasmal pneumonia treatment:
*a. Rovamycine
b. Penicillin
c. Amoksiklav
d. Ampicillin
e. Gentamycinum

53. Which of the listed preparations should be used as antidote and included into the first-aid kit required at factories where acute intoxications with arsenic, mercury, chrome and bismuth compounds are possible?
a. Аdrenalinum
b. Morphinum
c. Droperidolum
*d. Unithiolum
e. Аtropinum

54. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent manifestations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Acidin pepsinum
*b. Раncreatinum
c. Dе-Nоl
d. Drotaverine
e. Оmерrаzоlе

55. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Abstinence syndrome
c. Delayed allergy
d. Local irritation
*e. Immediate allergy

56. Which of the following non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents has the least harmful effect on the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract?
a. Diclofenac
b. Piroxicam
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Nimesulide
e. Indomethacin

57. Examination of a patient who has been treated for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time revealed hyperglycemia. What drug might have caused it?
*a. Dexamethasone
b. Ibuprofen
c. Levamisole
d. Chloroquine
e. Diclofenac sodium

58. A 54-year-old patient who has been suffering from hyperacidic gastritis for several years was prescribed almagel. What pharmacotherapeutical complications on the part of digestive organs may be expected in the first place?
a. Emesis
b. Diarrhea
c. Nausea
d. Anorexia
*e. Constipation

59. A 60-year-old patient has essential hypertension stage II, coronary disease, bronchial asthma. After pharmacotherapy correction the patient exhibited a bronchospastic attack, intensified dyspnea. What drug provoked this complication?
*a. Propranolol
b. Еuphyllinum
c. Salbutamolum
d. Мucaltinum
e. Nifedipinе

60. After an emotional stress a 60-year-old patient presented with chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Specify a drug that relieves pain in this case:
a. Metoprolol
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Diltiazem
d. Nifedipine
e. Propranolol

61. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Propranolol
b. Еnаlаpril
*c. Doxazosin
d. Diltiazem
e. Losartan

62. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of such side effect?
*a. Streptomycin
b. Ethambutol
c. Ethionamidum
d. Rifampicin
e. Isoniazid

63. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should NOT be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
a. Gentamycinum
b. Midecamycin
*c. Co-trimoxazolum
d. Benzylpenicillinum
e. Doxycycline

64. Which of the listed pharmacolgical groups of antihypertensive drugs is contra-indicated the patients with bronchial asthma?
a. Angiotensin receptors blockers
b. Diuretics
c. ACE inhibitor
d. Calcium channel blockers
*e. Beta-adrenergic blocking agent

65. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
a. Furosemide
b. Panangin
c. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages
*d. Verapamil
e. Trimetazidine

66. A patient with cholelithiasis was prescribed the following drug for the purpose of cholesterol gallstone dissolution:
*a. Ursodeoxycholic acid
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Mefenamic acid
d. Citric acid
e. Gamma-amino-butyric acid

67. A 68-year-old female patient has been continuously taking furosemide for heart failure treatment. What drug should be used to prevent hypokalemia in patients taking furosemide?
a. Atp-long
b. Trimetazidine
c. Sustac forte
*d. Panangin
e. Mildronatum

68. A 52-year-old patient complains of having increased arterial pressure for a month. She has a 5-year history of bronchial asthma. What group of hypotensive drugs should NOT be recommended this patient?
a. Angiotensin receptor blockers
b. Diuretics
c. Calcium channel blockers
d. Tranquilizers
*e. beta-adrenoreceptor blockers

69. An 18-year-old patient was diagnosed with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug will provide etiotropic pharmacotherapy?
a. Metronidazole
*b. Isoniazid
c. Trimethoprim
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
e. Lincomycin

70. A woman in the III trimester of pregnancy has an acute respiratory viral disease accompanied with body temperature rise up to 39°C. Which of the drugs should be recommended?
a. Celecoxib
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Paracetamol
e. Indomethacin

71. A patient consults a pharmaceutist about taking acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. What is the daily dose that should be recommended for continuous use?
a. 0,5-1,0 g
b. 2,0-3,0
c. Over 4,0 g
*d. 0,1-0,3 g
e. 1,0-2,0 g

72. A patient suffering from arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Body temperature remained unchanged. It is known that the patient takes captopril. These symptoms can be explained by increased generation of:
a. Angiotensin-1
b. Aldosterone
c. Natriuretic peptide
*d. Bradyquinine
e. Renin

73. During the treatment of chronic heart failure with digoxin in a patient having bradycardia, nausea, vomiting, blurred vision. Which drug is the antidote in this case?
a. Dipiroximum
b. Tetacinum calcium
*c. Unithiol
d. Amyl nitrite
e. Atropine sulphate

74. A 46-year-old patient suffering from chronic bronchitis came to a pharmacy. What expectorative drug may be recommended?
a. Falimint
b. Glauvent
c. Salbutamol
*d. Ambroxol
e. Libexin

75. A 26-year-old pregnant woman (III trimester of pregnancy) complains about body temperature rise up to 39°C. What febrifuge may be recommended in this case?
a. Indometacin
*b. Paracetamol
c. Diclofenac
d. Aspirin
e. Analgin

76. A patient who has been undergoing combined drug therapy for peptic ulcer presents with black feces. Specify a drug that might have caused such a change:
a. Ranitidine
*b. Bismuth subcitrate
c. Actovegin
d. Omeprazole
e. Metronidazole

77. A man with a long history of chronic hepatitis has been diagnosed with pneumonia. Which of the following antibacterial drugs can be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Vancomycin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Biseptol
d. Tetracycline
e. Rifampicin

78. A 25-year-old patient has been taking antibiotics for 7 days. Antibiotic therapy has caused a complication in form of bowel dysbacteriosis. This complication should be treated with drugs of the following pharmacological group:
*a. Probiotics
b. Cholagogic
c. Adaptogens
d. Antacids
e. Spasmolytics

79. A 57-year-old female patient was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis; she has also a history of stomach ulcer. What drug from the group of nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs may be recommended this patient?
a. Mefenamic acid
*b. Celecoxib
c. Aspirin
d. Diclofenac
e. Indometacin

80. A patient fell ill with severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day connected with the fact that the drug:
a. Has bactericidal effect
b. Accumulates in the lungs
c. Poorly absorbed from the injection site
*d. Slowly eliminated from the body
e. Pluripotential

81. An internship doctor prescribed his patient nifuroxazid from the group of nitrofurans for the treatment of urinary tracts infection. The doctor made a mistake because:
a. It is excreted from the organism very slowly
*b. It cannot be absorbed from the digestive tract
c. It has nephrotoxic effect
d. It is excreted with urine in the inactive state
e. It has bacteriostatic effect

82. Which of the following is the drug of choice for bronchial asthma attacks prevention?
a. Drotaverine
b. Salbutamol
*c. Cromolyn sodium
d. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
e. Ambroxol

83. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering for diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
a. Dichlothiazide
*b. Enalapril
c. Clonidine
d. Propranolol
e. Dibazol

84. A patient with arterial hypertension was administered a non-prescription drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis. What pharmaceutical form should be recommended the patient in order to reduce as much as possible the likelihood of development of undesirable systemic vasoconstriction?
a. Tablets
*b. Ointment
c. Drops
d. Gel
e. Aerosol

85. A 56-year-old patient suffering from essential hypertension was prescribed an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and a potassium-sparing diuretic. Such combination is:
a. Unreasonable because it increases risk of orthostatic collapse development
*b. Unreasonable because it increases risk of hyperkaliemia development
c. Reasonable because it potentiates hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
d. Reasonable because it decreases risk of hyperkaliemia development
e. Unreasonable because it reduces hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor

86. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic DOES NOT NEED to be combined with potassium preparations?
a. Ethacrynic acid
*b. Triamteren
c. Dichlothiazide
d. Clopamide
e. Furosemide

87. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
a. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome
b. Taste violation
c. Diarrhea
*d. Orthostatic hypotension
e. Central nervous system depression effect

88. A 67-year-old patient who undergoes treatment for bronchial asthma presents with limb tremor, headache, insomnia, extrasystole. What drug might have caused such symptoms?
a. Acetylcysteine
*b. Theophylline
c. Tavegyl
d. Prednisolone
e. Intal

89. Which of the following drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
*a. Streptokinase
b. Phenylinum
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Ticlopidine
e. Heparin

90. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
*a. Deferoxamium
b. Bemegridum
c. Penicillamine
d. Atropinum
e. Protamine sulfate

91. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. Which of these antimicrobials should be administered to this patient?
a. Gentamicin sulfate
b. Ofloxacin
c. Biseptol
*d. Cefotaxime
e. Tetracycline hydrochloride

92. One of the major indicator of drug elimination from the human body is:
a. Highest concentration in blood
*b. Effective halfbeak
c. Bioavailability
d. Volume of distribution
e. Bioequivalence

93. Mother of a 2-month-old child came to a pharmacy and asked for a febrifuge. What drug should be recommended for the child?
*a. Paracetamolum
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Indometacinum
e. Nimesulide

94. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia has been administered an antibiotic. After treatment the child lost his hearing. What group of antibiotics might have caused this complication?
a. Macrolides
b. Cephalosporins
*c. Aminoglycosides
d. Natural penicillins
e. Semi-synthetic penicillins

95. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
*a. 100 mg
b. 1000 mg
c. 50 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 500 mg

96. A patient with hypertension has been administered one of antihypertensive drugs. Blood pressure dropped back to normal, but the patient has developed a persistent dry cough. Which of the following drugs has such a side effect?
*a. Enalapril maleate
b. Clonidine
c. Nifedipine
d. Furosemide
e. Propranolol

97. Name the reason for the reduction of anticoagulant effect of syncumar when it is applied in combination with phenobarbital:
a. These drugs are antagonists
b. Mutual inactivation
c. Phenobarbital inhibits microsomal liver enzymes
d. Development of syncumar allergy
*e. Phenobarbital activates microsomal liver enzymes

98. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent presentations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Dе-Nоl
b. Drotaverine
*c. Раncreatinum
d. Оmерrаzоlе
e. Acidin pepsinum

99. A 15-year-old patient has been first diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus. Which antihyperglycemic drug should be administered in this case?
*a. Insulin
b. Diabetone
c. Glibenclamide
d. Glurenorm
e. Metformin

100. Which of the following non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents has the least harmful effect on the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Nimesulide
c. Indomethacin
d. Diclofenac
e. Piroxicam

101. Which drug is used for thrombolysis in case of acute myocardial infarction?
a. Pentoxifylline
b. Fraxiparine
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Heparin
*e. Alteplase

102. A 26-year-old patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia provoked by mycoplasma. Choose the appropriate antimicrobial preparation for the patient treatment:
a. Amoxicillin
b. Веnzylpenicillinum
c. Amoxiklav
*d. Rovamycine
e. Gentamycinum

103. A 60-year-old patient has essential hypertension stage II, coronary disease, bronchial asthma. After pharmacotherapy correction the patient exhibited a bronchospastic attack, intensified dyspnea. What drug provoked this complication?
a. Salbutamolum
*b. Propranolol
c. Еuphyllinum
d. Nifedipinе
e. Мucaltinum

104. A woman asked a pharmaceutist to dispense an antipyretic for an 8-month-old child. Which drug should be recommended?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Piroxicam
*d. Paracetamol
e. Indomethacin

105. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
*a. Doxazosin
b. Propranolol
c. Losartan
d. Diltiazem
e. Еnаlаpril

106. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of such side effect?
a. Isoniazid
b. Rifampicin
c. Ethionamidum
*d. Streptomycin
e. Ethambutol

107. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should NOT be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
a. Benzylpenicillinum
b. Doxycycline
c. Midecamycin
d. Gentamycinum
*e. Co-trimoxazolum

108. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
a. Panangin
b. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages
c. Furosemide
d. Trimetazidine
*e. Verapamil

109. A patient with cholelithiasis should be administered the following drug for the dissolution of cholesterol gallstones:
a. Citric acid
b. Mefenamic acid
c. Gamma-aminobutyric acid
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
*e. Ursodeoxycholic acid

110. A 68-year-old female patient has been continuously taking furosemide for heart failure treatment. What drug should be used to prevent hypokalemia in patients taking furosemide?
a. Mildronatum
b. Atp-long
*c. Panangin
d. Trimetazidine
e. Sustac forte

111. A 52-year-old patient complains of having increased arterial pressure for a month. She has a 5-year history of bronchial asthma. What group of hypotensive drugs should NOT be recommended this patient?
a. Tranquilizers
b. Calcium channel blockers
*c. ?-adrenoreceptor blockers
d. Angiotensin receptor blockers
e. Diuretics

112. A woman in the III trimester of pregnancy has an acute respiratory viral disease accompanied with body temperature rise up to 39°C. Which of the drugs should be recommended?
a. Indomethacin
b. Celecoxib
*c. Paracetamol
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Diclofenac sodium

113. Benzathine benzylpenicillin is the drug of choice for treating the following disease:
a. Angina
b. Furunculosis
c. Intestinal infection
d. Pneumonia
*e. Syphilis

114. A patient consults a pharmaceutist about taking acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. What is the daily dose that should be recommended for continuous use?
a. 1,0-2,0 g
b. 0,5-1,0 g
*c. 0,1-0,3 g
d. 2,0-3,0
e. Over 4,0 g

115. A patient suffering from arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Body temperature remained unchanged. It is known that the patient takes captopril. These symptoms can be explained by increased generation of:
a. Natriuretic peptide
*b. Bradyquinine
c. Renin
d. Angiotensin-1
e. Aldosterone

116. Which preparation from the group of laxative agents IS NOT to be administered in case of intoxication with CNS-inhibiting substances?
a. Guttalax
*b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Vaseline oil
d. Sodium sulfate
e. Bisacodyl

117. Treatment of poisonings with inorganic mercury compounds includes the use of the following antidote:
a. Tetacinum-calcium
b. Naloxone
*c. Unithiol
d. Desferal
e. Dexamethasone

118. During the combined pharmacotherapy a patient with peptic ulcer presented with black-coloured feces. What drug might have caused such change?
a. Metronidazole
b. Ranitidine
c. Omeprazole
d. Actovegin
*e. Bismuth subcitrate

119. A patient who has been undergoing combined drug therapy for peptic ulcer presents with black feces. Specify a drug that might have caused such a change:
a. Omeprazole
b. Metronidazole
c. Ranitidine
*d. Bismuth subcitrate
e. Actovegin

120. A female patient in the first trimester of pregnancy has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What is the antibiotic drug of choice for treating this patient?
a. Amikacin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Gentamicin
d. Norfloxacin
e. Chloramphenicol

121. A 57-year-old female patient was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis; she has also a history of stomach ulcer. What drug from the group of nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs may be recommended this patient?
*a. Celecoxib
b. Aspirin
c. Mefenamic acid
d. Indometacin
e. Diclofenac

122. An internship doctor prescribed his patient nifuroxazid from the group of nitrofurans for the treatment of urinary tracts infection. The doctor made a mistake because:
*a. It cannot be absorbed from the digestive tract
b. It has nephrotoxic effect
c. It is excreted from the organism very slowly
d. It has bacteriostatic effect
e. It is excreted with urine in the inactive state

123. A patient fell ill with severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day connected with the fact that the drug:
a. Pluripotential
b. Has bactericidal effect
*c. Slowly eliminated from the body
d. Accumulates in the lungs
e. Poorly absorbed from the injection site

124. A patient with moderately severe pneumonia has been administered ceftriaxone 1 time per day. The drug should be taken once a day due to the following properties:
a. Wide range of action
b. Presence of bactericidal action
*c. Slow excretion
d. Cumulative ability
e. Poor absorption from the injection site

125. Which of the following is the drug of choice for bronchial asthma attacks prevention?
a. Salbutamol
b. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
c. Ambroxol
*d. Cromolyn sodium
e. Drotaverine

126. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed an antiulcer drug that also reduces secretion of hydrochloric acid and inhibits Chelicobacter pylori. What drug is it?
a. Almagel
*b. Omeprazole
c. Maalox
d. Gastrocepine
e. Famotidine

127. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
*a. Enalapril
b. Clonidine
c. Dichlothiazide
d. Dibazol
e. Propranolol

128. A patient with arterial hypertension was administered a non-prescription drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis. What pharmaceutical form should be recommended the patient in order to reduce as much as possible the likelihood of development of undesirable systemic vasoconstriction?
a. Aerosol
b. Tablets
c. Gel
d. Drops
*e. Ointment

129. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic does not need to be combined with potassium preparations?
a. Dichlothiazide
b. Clopamide
*c. Triamteren
d. Furosemide
e. Ethacrynic acid

130. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
a. Taste violation
b. Diarrhea
c. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome
d. Central nervous system depression effect
*e. Orthostatic hypotension

131. Losartan as a part of treatment of arterial hypertension is contraindicated in case of:
a. Hypokalemia
*b. Pregnancy
c. Urine acid diathesis
d. Hyperglycemia
e. Hyperlipidemia

132. What drug is used as the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
*a. Deferoxamine
b. Bemegride
c. Penicillamine
d. Atropine
e. Protamine sulfate

133. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
a. Atropinum
b. Penicillamine
c. Protamine sulfate
d. Bemegridum
*e. Deferoxamium

134. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. Which of these antimicrobials should be administered to this patient?
a. Ofloxacin
b. Biseptol
c. Gentamicin sulfate
d. Tetracycline hydrochloride
*e. Cefotaxime

135. One of the major indicator of drug elimination from the human body is:
a. Volume of distribution
b. Bioequivalence
c. Highest concentration in blood
*d. Effective halfbeak
e. Bioavailability

136. Which of the following antihypertensive drugs has potassium-sparing effect?
*a. Triamterene
b. Prazosin
c. Diltiazem
d. Metoprolol
e. Furosemide

137. Mother of a 2-month-old child came to a pharmacy and asked for a febrifuge. What drug should be recommended for the child?
a. Diclofenac sodium
*b. Paracetamolum
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Nimesulide
e. Indometacinum

138. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia has been administered an antibiotic. After treatment the child lost his hearing. What group of antibiotics might have caused this complication?
a. Cephalosporins
b. Natural penicillins
c. Semi-synthetic penicillins
*d. Aminoglycosides
e. Macrolides

139. A patient with hypertension has been administered one of antihypertensive drugs. Blood pressure dropped back to normal, but the patient has developed a persistent dry cough. Which of the following drugs has such a side effect?
a. Clonidine
b. Propranolol
*c. Enalapril maleate
d. Furosemide
e. Nifedipine

140. Select the optimal antibacterial drug for the treatment of mycoplasma pneumonia:
a. Amoxiclav
*b. Rovamycin
c. Penicillin
d. Gentamicin
e. Ampicillin

141. Which of the listed preparations should be used as antidote and included into the first-aid kit required at factories where acute intoxications with arsenic, mercury, chrome and bismuth compounds are possible?
a. Adrenalinum
b. Morphinum
c. Droperidolum
*d. Unithiolum
e. Atropinum

142. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent presentations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. De-Nol
b. Drotaverine
*c. Pancreatinum
d. Omeprazol
e. Acidin pepsinum

143. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Delayed allergy
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Abstinence syndrome
*d. Immediate allergy
e. Local irritation

144. A patient had been given an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient developed red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucosa. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Delayed allergy
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Withdrawal syndrome
*d. Immediate allergy
e. Local irritation

145. A 15-year-old patient has been first diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus. Which antihyperglycemic drug should be administered in this case?
a. Glibenclamide
*b. Insulin
c. Diabetone
d. Metformin
e. Glurenorm

146. Examination of a patient who has been treated for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time revealed hyperglycemia. What drug might have caused it?
a. Levamisole
*b. Dexamethasone
c. Ibuprofen
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Chloroquine

147. Which drug is used for thrombolysis in case of acute myocardial infarction?
a. Fraxiparine
*b. Alteplase
c. Heparin
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Pentoxifylline

148. A 26-year-old patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia provoked by mycoplasma. Choose the appropriate antimicrobial preparation for the patient treatment:
a. Amoksiklav
*b. Rovamycine
c. Gentamycinum
d. Amoxicillin
e. Benzylpenicillinum

149. A 60-year-old patient has essential hypertension stage II, coronary disease, bronchial asthma. After pharmacotherapy correction the patient exhibited a bronchospastic attack, intensified dyspnea. What drug provoked this complication?
a. ?uphyllinum
b. Nifedipin
*c. Propranolol
d. ?ucaltinum
e. Salbutamolum

150. After an emotional stress a 60-year-old patient presented with chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Specify a drug that relieves pain in this case:
*a. Nitroglycerine
b. Diltiazem
c. Metoprolol
d. Propranolol
e. Nifedipine

151. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Enalapril
b. Diltiazem
c. Losartan
*d. Doxazosin
e. Propranolol

152. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should not be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
a. Gentamycinum
b. Midecamycin
*c. Co-trimoxazolum
d. Benzylpenicillinum
e. Doxycycline

153. Which of the listed pharmacolgical groups of antihypertensive drugs is contra-indicated the patients with bronchial asthma?
a. Diuretics
*b. Beta-adrenergic blocking agent
c. Calcium channel blockers
d. ACE inhibitor
e. Angiotensin receptors blockers

154. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
*a. Verapamil
b. Trimetazidine
c. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages
d. Panangin
e. Furosemide

155. A 68-year-old female patient has been continuously taking furosemide for heart failure treatment. What drug should be used to prevent hypokalemia in patients taking furosemide?
a. Sustac forte
*b. Panangin
c. Mildronatum
d. Atp-long
e. Trimetazidine

156. A woman in the III trimester of pregnancy has an acute respiratory viral disease accompanied with body temperature rise up to 39oC. Which of the drugs should be recommended?
a. Celecoxib
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Paracetamol
e. Indomethacin

157. Which preparation from the group of laxative agents will not  be administered in case of intoxication with CNS-inhibiting substances?
*a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Vaseline oil
c. Guttalax
d. Bisacodyl
e. Sodium sulfate

158. Treatment of poisonings with inorganic mercury compounds includes the use of the following antidote:
a. Dexamethasone
*b. Unithiol
c. Tetacinum-calcium
d. Naloxone
e. Desferal

159. During the treatment of chronic heart failure with digoxin  a patient has bradycardia, nausea, vomiting, blurred vision. Which drug is the antidote in this case?
a. Atropine sulphate
*b. Unithiol
c. Dipiroximum
d. Tetacinum calcium
e. Amyl nitrite

160. A 26-year-old pregnant woman (III trimester of pregnancy) complains about body temperature rise up to 39 C. What febrifuge may be recommended in this case?
a. Analgin
b. Indometacin
c. Aspirin
d. Diclofenac
*e. Paracetamol

161. During the combined pharmacotherapy a patient with peptic ulcer presented with black-coloured feces. What drug might have caused such change?
*a. Bismuth subcitrate
b. Actovegin
c. Ranitidine
d. Metronidazole
e. Omeprazole

162. A patient who has been undergoing combined drug therapy for peptic ulcer presents with black feces. Specify a drug that might have caused such a change:
*a. Bismuth subcitrate
b. Actovegin
c. Ranitidine
d. Metronidazole
e. Omeprazole

163. A female patient in the first trimester of pregnancy has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What is the antibiotic drug of choice for treating this patient?
a. Gentamicin
b. Norfloxacin
*c. Amoxicillin
d. Chloramphenicol
e. Amikacin

164. A man with a long history of chronic hepatitis has been diagnosed with pneumonia. Which of the following antibacterial drugs can be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Rifampicin
b. Vancomycin
c. Tetracycline
d. Biseptol
*e. Amoxicillin

165. A 25-year-old patient has been taking antibiotics for 7 days. Antibiotic therapy has caused a complication in form of bowel dysbacteriosis. This complication should be treated with drugs of the following pharmacological group:
a. Spasmolytics
b. Antacids
c. Adaptogens
*d. Probiotics
e. Cholagogic

166. A patient with moderately severe pneumonia has been administered ceftriaxone 1 time per day. The drug should be taken once a day due to the following properties:
*a. Slow excretion
b. Wide range of action
c. Poor absorption from the injection site
d. Cumulative ability
e. Presence of bactericidal action

167. Which of the following drugs should be used for prevention of bronchial asthma attacks?
a. Ambroxol
*b. Cromolyn sodium
c. Drotaverine
d. Salbutamol
e. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride

168. A 25-year-old patient with frequent migraine attacks has been prescribed sumatriptan. Specify the mechanism of its action:
a. Stimulator of beta-adrenergic receptors
b. Selective alpha-blocker
c. Selective antagonist of 5-HT1-serotonin receptors
d. Nonselective alpha-blocker
*e. Selective agonist of 5-HT1-serotonin receptors

169. A 43-year-old patient with a severe form of rheumatoid arthritis has been administered a certain drug for background therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Prednisolone
b. Methylprednisolone
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Nimesulide
*e. Methotrexate

170. A 65-year-old male patient complains of nausea, vomiting, lethargy, seeing yellow spots in front of his eyes. The patient takes daily 0,25 mg of digoxin, 100 mg of aspecardum, 50 mg of metoprolol. What pathological condition is this syndrome typical for?
*a. Glycoside intoxication
b. Withdrawal syndrome
c. Hypersensitivity reaction
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Food poisoning

171. Bronchodilatory effect of short-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist salbutamol develops after:
a. 4-6 hours
*b. 5-10 minutes
c. 45-60 minutes
d. 20-30 minutes
e. 2-3 hours

172. In case of simultaneous use of metronidazole and oral anticoagulants derived from coumarin patients must be warned about:
a. Higher neurotoxicity
*b. Potentiation of anticoagulants effect and the risk of bleeding
c. Potentiation of metronidazole effect
d. Reduction of anticoagulants effect
e. Reduction of metronidazole effect

173. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
a. Propranolol
b. Dibazol
c. Dichlothiazide
*d. Enalapril
e. Clonidine

174. A 56-year-old patient suffering from essential hypertension was prescribed an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and a potassium-sparing diuretic. Such combination is:
*a. Unreasonable because it increases risk of hyperkaliemia development
b. Reasonable because it potentiates hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
c. Unreasonable because it increases risk of orthostatic collapse development
d. Unreasonable because it reduces hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
e. Reasonable because it decreases risk of hyperkaliemia development

175. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic does not need to be combined with potassium preparations?
*a. Triamteren
b. Dichlothiazide
c. Ethacrynic acid
d. Furosemide
e. Clopamide

176. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
a. Central nervous system depression effect
b. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome
*c. Orthostatic hypotension
d. Taste violation
e. Diarrhea

177. A 67-year-old patient who undergoes treatment for bronchial asthma presents with limb tremor, headache, insomnia, extrasystole. What drug might have caused such symptoms?
a. Intal
b. Acetylcysteine
c. Prednisolone
d. Tavegyl
*e. Theophylline

