1. A pharmaceutical enterprise widely applies technical and technological media of information use in order to increase efficiency of managing productive and administrative activity of an organization, to enhance labour productivity, to improve methods of planning and regulating management processes. All this is realized by means of:
a. Automation equipped working place
b. Information-management system
c. Automated data retrieval system
*d. Automated management system
e. Automated instruction and control system

2. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers’ recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
*a. Maturity
b. Growth
c. Development
d. Decrease
e. Market penetration

3. Marketing research of certain pharmaceutical groups involves collection and analysis of primary information. This is the following type of marketing research:
a. Research of drug consumers
b. Research of marketing network of pharmaceutical market
c. Armchair research
d. Research of drug market
*e. Field research

4. The market is characterized by the following conditions: a big number of salespersons and customers who dont make any influence upon the level of current prices; availability of uniform and interchangeable competing products; lack of price restrictions. What type of market is it?
a. Oligopolistic market
b. Market of monopolistic competition
*c. Market of pure competition
d. Market of pure monopoly
e. -

5. A pharmaceutist and a pharmacy manager were involved into the labour dispute about carry over of vacation time. The pharmaceutist applied to the council of conciliation. The council should consider his application within the following period:
*a. 10 days
b. 3 days
c. 1 month
d. 1 week
e. 5 days

6. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
a. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
b. -
c. Dealer
d. Seasonal
*e. Bonus

7. Development of advertising strategy for promotion of nonprescription drugs includes identification of the target audience. The highest selectivity of consumer audience can be achieved by means of the following advertisment type:
a. On transport
b. On the radio
*c. At sales outlet
d. In the printed publication
e. On TV

8. Theory of management currently marks out four the most important approaches to the management. Choose the approach that is NOT applied in the theory of management:
a. Systemic
b. Process approach
*c. Structured
d. Situational
e. Different schools dedication approach

9. On the initiative of the manufacturing company some amendments to a drug information leaflet are to be made for the restriction of the drug use. What type of marketing is applied in this case?
a. Remarketing
b. Conversion
*c. Opposed
d. Synchromarketing
e. Incentive

10. At the initial stage of establishing a pharmaceutical enterprise the internal disciplinary regulations should be adopted. One of the primary matters is the duration of the lunch break for the employees. According to the Labour Code of Ukraine, the break duration must be as follows:
a. Up to 1 hour
b. 2,5 hours
c. -
*d. Up to 2 hours
e. Not less than 3 hours

11. A large and well-known company has granted a small independent firm the right to use its trademark and technology so that it could take advantage of authority and customer trust to the well-known brand. Such concept is called:
a. Use of manufacturers brand
*b. Franchising
c. Use of dealers brand
d. Merchandising
e. Use of trademark

12. Management of a pharmaceutical company involves American and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
a. Slow career development
b. Heightened attention to the human factor
c. Group forms of control
d. Corporate liability
*e. Quick evaluation and career development

13. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own marketing departments, affiliated marketing companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Four-level
*b. Zero level
c. Two-level
d. One-level
e. Three-level

14. A pharmacy makes wholesale purchases of health and hygiene products. An agent works under the contract with the manufacturer and makes deals at the manufacturers cost. The agent may be entitled to exclusive distribution in some regions. What kind of agent is it?
a. Consignee
b. Broker
c. Dealer
*d. Wholesale agent
e. Commission agent

15. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Oligopolistic market
b. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market
c. Pure competition market
d. Monopolistic competitive market
*e. Pure monopoly market

16. A pharmaceutical company "Adonis" promotes its new products by means of advertisement that informs the customers about the product, highlights its advantages, typical features and properties. What kind of advertisment is it?
a. Aggressive
b. Indirect
c. Direct
*d. Informational
e. Supporting

17. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
a. Limited
b. Without preliminary licencing or registration
c. Normative
d. Free
*e. Licence-based

18. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Financial loss
*b. Business risk
c. Labour loss
d. Loss of property
e. Loss of time

19. As a pharmaceutist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient didnt apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the recipient:
a. Stereotype mentation
*b. Semantic barriers
c. Nonverbal barriers
d. Neglect of facts
e. Failure to understand the importance of information

20. A pharmaceutist has applied for a job of a stockkeeper at a wholesale pharmaceutical enterprise. What trial period doesnt require agreement with the trade-union committee?
a. Up to six monthes
*b. Up to three monthes
c. Up to two monthes
d. Up to one month
e. Up to four monthes

21. A pharmacy analyst is going to take a part of his holiday in spring and a part in summer. Holiday dividing is allowed provided that its main part will be no less than:
a. 12 days
b. 10 days
*c. 14 days
d. 16 days
e. 18 days

22. Marketing manager at a pharmaceutical factory is planning its communication policy. Which component of the marketing communication systems has the highest value for one contact?
a. Periodical advertising
b. Sales promotion
c. Public relations
d. TV advertising
*e. Personal sale

23. TV periodically conducts campaigns for young people aimed at popularization of mechanical contraceptives (not indicating concrete trademarks). Such actions are a kind of the following marketing communication:
a. Personal sale
b. Advertising
*c. Publicity
d. Sale promotion
e. Sponsorship

24. A joint-stock company involved into production and selling of drug preparations has developed a structure for working with various consuming organizations. Such organizational structure is called:
a. Departmentalization
b. Functional structure
*c. Divisional structure
d. Array (matrix) structure
e. Bureaucratic structure

25. What management style is characterized by managers particular compliance, when manager initiates goals formation by his subordinate and is ready to accept it without reservations?
a. Combined style
*b. Laissez-faire management style
c. Bureaucratic style
d. Democratic management style
e. Collective style

26. Public health services attach great importance to the drug quality, for this reason a pharmaceutic enterprise has concentrated its efforts upon the improvement of qualitative characteristics of its products. What concept of marketing management is applied in this company?
a. Modern marketing
b. Production improvement
*c. Product improvement
d. All answers are correct
e. There is no correct answer

27. When a graduate becomes employed on a certain position he should be first familiarized with his rights and duties. What document regulates rights and duties of pharmacy employees?
a. Internal employment policies and procedures
b. All the answers are correct
c. All the answers are false
*d. Job description
e. Labour code

28. Product assortment is the whole set of product assortment groups offered by an enterprise. The index representing number of positions in each product assortment group is called:
a. Assortment comparability
*b. Product assortment depth
c. Product assortment saturation
d. Product assortment width
e. Product assortment

29. Functioning of a pharmacy is realized on different levels of management. Function of direct control of employees fulfilling concrete tasks relates to the following level of management:
a. Bureaucratic
*b. Technical
c. Managerial
d. Institutional
e. Administrative

30. A pharmaceutical enterprise widely applies technical and technological media of information use in order to increase efficiency of managing productive and administrative activity of an organization, to enhance labour productivity, to improve methods of planning and regulating management processes. All this is realized by means of:
*a. Automated management system
b. Automated instruction and control system
c. Automated data retrieval system
d. Information-management system
e. Automation equipped working place

31. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers’ recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Market penetration
b. Decrease
c. Development
*d. Maturity
e. Growth

32. Marketing research of certain pharmaceutical groups involves collection and analysis of primary information. This is the following type of marketing research:
*a. Field research
b. Research of drug market
c. Research of marketing network of pharmaceutical market
d. Research of drug consumers
e. Armchair research

33. The market is characterized by the following conditions: a big number of salespersons and customers who dont make any influence upon the level of current prices; availability of uniform and interchangeable competing products; lack of price restrictions. What type of market is it?
a. -
*b. Market of pure competition
c. Oligopolistic market
d. Market of monopolistic competition
e. Market of pure monopoly

34. A pharmaceutist and a pharmacy manager were involved into the labour dispute about carry over of vacation time. The pharmaceutist applied to the council of conciliation. The council should consider his application within the following period:
a. 1 month
*b. 10 days
c. 3 days
d. 5 days
e. 1 week

35. On the initiative of the manufacturing company some amendments to a drug information leaflet are to be made for the restriction of the drug use. What type of marketing is applied in this case?
a. Conversion
b. Synchromarketing
c. Incentive
*d. Opposed
e. Remarketing

36. At the initial stage of establishing a pharmaceutical enterprise the internal disciplinary regulations should be adopted. One of the primary matters is the duration of the lunch break for the employees. According to the Labour Code of Ukraine, the break duration must be as follows:
*a. Up to 2 hours
b. Not less than 3 hours
c. -
d. 2,5 hours
e. Up to 1 hour

37. A large and well-known company has granted a small independent firm the right to use its trademark and technology so that it could take advantage of authority and customer trust to the well-known brand. Such concept is called:
a. Use of dealers brand
b. Merchandising
*c. Franchising
d. Use of trademark
e. Use of manufacturers brand

38. Management of a pharmaceutical company involves American and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
*a. Quick evaluation and career development
b. Corporate liability
c. Heightened attention to the human factor
d. Slow career development
e. Group forms of control

39. A pharmaceutical company conducted an age-specific segment analysis of the regional antihistamine market. It revealed the lack of antihistamines for children. The company will consider this segment as:
a. A market door
*b. A market niche
c. A market share
d. An unattractive segment
e. A segment requiring further research

40. An employee of a pharmaceutical company has been commissioned with marketing research on the regional market of antiarrhythmic drugs. What stage of research would he prefer in the first place?
a. Submission of report
*b. Collection and analysis of secondary information
c. Analysis of primary information
d. Collection of primary information
e. Preparation of report

41. A pharmaceutical company "Pfizer" is focused on offering the best quality goods at a high price which should cover the costs of research and development as well as production of high quality products. Despite the high price, the product is still in demand. What are the goals of the companys price policy?
a. Maintaining status quo
b. Ensuring the companys survival
*c. Winning the market leadership in respect of product quality
d. Increasing the market share
e. Increasing the companys assortment

42. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own sales departments, affiliated sales companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Three-level
b. Four-level
c. One-level
d. Two-level
*e. Zero level

43. A pharmaceutist plans voluntary termination of the open-ended employment contract for the reason of her husbands transfer to another area. Specify the form and term of notice that should be given to the pharmacy director:
a. One-month notice in written form
b. One-week notice in written form
*c. Two-week notice in written form
d. Five-day notice in written form
e. Two-day notice in written form

44. A pharmaceutical company "Adonis" promotes its new products by means of advertisement that informs the customers about the product, highlights its advantages, typical features and properties. What kind of advertisment is it?
a. Indirect
b. Direct
c. Aggressive
d. Supporting
*e. Informational

45. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
a. Without preliminary licencing or registration
*b. Licence-based
c. Free
d. Normative
e. Limited

46. A pharmacy makes wholesale purchases of health and hygiene products. An agent works under the contract with the manufacturer and makes deals at the manufacturers cost. The agent may be entitled to exclusive distribution in some regions. What kind of agent is it?
a. Broker
b. Dealer
c. Consignee
d. Commission agent
*e. Wholesale agent

47. Activity of an organization depends on various factors. What factors refer to the internal environment of the organization?
a. Consumers
*b. Abilities, skills and talent of staff
c. Infrastructure
d. Economy status
e. Public authorities

48. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Loss of property
b. Loss of time
c. Financial loss
*d. Business risk
e. Labour loss

49. Pharmacy activities are commonly operated by different types of managers. The function of direct control over drug preparation by a pharmaceutist refers to the following type of management:
a. Institutional
b. Administrative
c. Bureaucratic
*d. Technical
e. Managerial

50. As a pharmaceutist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient didnt apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the recipient:
a. Neglect of facts
b. Failure to understand the importance of information
c. Stereotype mentation
*d. Semantic barriers
e. Nonverbal barriers

51. A pharmaceutist has applied for a job of a stockkeeper at a wholesale pharmaceutical enterprise. What trial period doesnt require agreement with the trade-union committee?
a. Up to one month
b. Up to four monthes
c. Up to six monthes
*d. Up to three monthes
e. Up to two monthes

52. Marketing manager at a pharmaceutical factory is planning its communication policy. Which component of the marketing communication systems has the highest value for one contact?
a. Sales promotion
*b. Personal sale
c. TV advertising
d. "Public relations"
e. Periodical advertising

53. TV periodically conducts campaigns for young people aimed at popularization of mechanical contraceptives (not indicating concrete trademarks). Such actions are a kind of the following marketing communication:
*a. Publicity
b. Personal sale
c. Sponsorship
d. Sale promotion
e. Advertising

54. The relationships between the demand, supply and price level is studied within the following field of complex market research:
a. Analysis of market segmentation
b. Studies of market and product requirements
*c. Studies of economic environment
d. Studies of market structure of companies
e. Analysis of sociopsychological features of buyers

55. What management style is characterized by managers particular compliance, when manager initiates goals formation by his subordinate and is ready to accept it without reservations?
a. Democratic management style
b. Collective style
c. Combined style
*d. Laissez-faire management style
e. Bureaucratic style

56. Which component of the marketing communication system focuses on creating a positive image of a company?
a. Personal sales
b. Advertising
*c. Public relations
d. Retail logistics
e. Merchandising

57. Public health services attach great importance to the drug quality, for this reason a pharmaceutic enterprise has concentrated its efforts upon the improvement of qualitative characteristics of its products. What concept of marketing management is applied in this company?
a. All answers are correct
b. There is no correct answer
c. Production improvement
d. Modern marketing
*e. Product improvement

58. Product assortment is the whole set of product assortment groups offered by an enterprise. The index representing number of positions in each product assortment group is called:
a. Product assortment width
b. Product assortment
c. Assortment comparability
*d. Product assortment depth
e. Product assortment saturation

59. Functioning of a pharmacy is realized on different levels of management. Function of direct control of employees fulfilling concrete tasks relates to the following level of management:
a. Institutional
b. Administrative
c. Bureaucratic
*d. Technical
e. Managerial

60. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
a. Bureaucratic
b. Centralized
c. Decentralized
*d. Divisional
e. Functional

61. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Market penetration
b. Decrease
c. Development
*d. Maturity
e. Growth

62. The market is characterized by the following conditions: a big number of salespersons and customers who dont make any influence upon the level of current prices; availability of uniform and interchangeable competing products; lack of price restrictions. What type of market is it?
a. Market of pure monopoly
b. -
c. Market of monopolistic competition
d. Oligopolistic market
*e. Market of pure competition

63. A pharmaceutist and a pharmacy manager were involved into the labour dispute about carry over of vacation time. The pharmaceutist applied to the council of conciliation. The council should consider his application within the following period:
a. 3 days
b. 5 days
*c. 10 days
d. 1 week
e. 1 month

64. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
a. Dealer
b. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
c. -
*d. Bonus
e. Seasonal

65. Theory of management currently marks out four the most important approaches to the management. Choose the approach that textbfis NOT applied in the theory of management:
a. Situational
b. Different schools dedication approach
c. Process approach
d. Systemic
*e. Structured

66. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
*a. Counteractive
b. Remarketing
c. Stimulating
d. Synchromarketing
e. Conversion

67. On the initiative of the manufacturing company some amendments to a drug information leaflet are to be made for the restriction of the drug use. What type of marketing is applied in this case?
a. Incentive
*b. Opposed
c. Remarketing
d. Conversion
e. Synchromarketing

68. When developing a new drug a manufacturer may apply different strategies of brand use. If a company uses one brand name for all of its products, such strategy is called:
*a. Group brands
b. Brands for individual drugs
c. Multi-brand approach
d. The combination of brand name with an individual drug brand
e. Individual brands

69. At the initial stage of establishing a pharmaceutical enterprise the internal disciplinary regulations should be adopted. One of the primary matters is the duration of the lunch break for the employees. According to the Labour Code of Ukraine, the break duration must be as follows:
a. 2,5 hours
b. -
c. Up to 1 hour
d. Not less than 3 hours
*e. Up to 2 hours

70. A large and well-known company has granted a small independent firm the right to use its trademark and technology so that it could take advantage of authority and customer trust to the well-known brand. Such concept is called:
a. Merchandising
b. Use of trademark
c. Use of manufacturers brand
*d. Franchising
e. Use of dealers brand

71. Management of a pharmaceutical company involves American and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
a. Group forms of control
b. Slow career development
c. Heightened attention to the human factor
*d. Quick evaluation and career development
e. Corporate liability

72. A pharmaceutical company conducted an age-specific segment analysis of the regional antihistamine market. It revealed the lack of antihistamines for children. The company will consider this segment as:
a. Unattractive segment
b. Segment requiring further research
c. Market door
*d. Market niche
e. Market share

73. The manufacturing pharmaceutical company " Elema" set up its own corporate pharmacy. In this case, it uses the following distribution channel:
a. First level
b. Third level
c. Fourth level
*d. Zero level
e. Second level

74. An employee of a pharmaceutical company has been commissioned with marketing research on the regional market of antiarrhythmic drugs. What stage of research would he prefer in the first place?
*a. Collection and analysis of secondary information
b. Analysis of primary information
c. Submission of report
d. Preparation of report
e. Collection of primary information

75. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own sales departments, affiliated sales companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Four-level
*b. Zero level
c. Two-level
d. One-level
e. Three-level

76. Three founders set up a business entity for the wholesale distribution of medicines and healthcare products. Specify the form of such company:
a. Public
b. Unitary
*c. Corporate
d. Utility
e. Individual

77. A pharmaceutist plans voluntary termination of the open-ended employment contract for the reason of her husbands transfer to another area. Specify the form and term of notice that should be given to the pharmacy director:
a. Five-day notice in written form
b. Two-day notice in written form
c. One-week notice in written form
d. One-month notice in written form
*e. Two-week notice in written form

78. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Pure competition market
b. Oligopolistic market
c. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market
*d. Pure monopoly market
e. Monopolistic competitive market

79. A pharmaceutical company "Adonis" promotes its new products by means of advertisement that informs the customers about the product, highlights its advantages, typical features and properties. What kind of advertisment is it?
a. Supporting
b. Aggressive
*c. Informational
d. Indirect
e. Direct

80. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
*a. Licence-based
b. Free
c. Without preliminary licencing or registration
d. Limited
e. Normative

81. A pharmacy makes wholesale purchases of health and hygiene products. An agent works under the contract with the manufacturer and makes deals at the manufacturers cost. The agent may be entitled to exclusive distribution in some regions. What kind of agent is it?
*a. Wholesale agent
b. Commission agent
c. Dealer
d. Broker
e. Consignee

82. Activity of an organization depends on various factors. What factors refer to the internal environment of the organization?
a. Economy status
b. Public authorities
c. Consumers
*d. Abilities, skills and talent of staff
e. Infrastructure

83. The planning of marketing strategy involves two successive stages. What are the stages of the strategic planning process?
a. Describing the current marketing situation
b. Developing a program of activities
c. Budgeting
*d. Defining the mission and goals of a pharmaceutical company
e. Making the list of tasks and problems

84. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Labour loss
b. Loss of property
*c. Business risk
d. Loss of time
e. Financial loss

85. Inventory of human resources at pharmaceutical companies is based on keeping of work record books, employees files, personal data sheets T-2. What parameter CANNOT be estimated by the analysis of the above-mentioned date?
*a. Labour market state
b. Average staffing number
c. Data on the staff turnover
d. Staff categories
e. Average payroll strength

86. Pharmacy activities are commonly operated by different types of managers. The function of direct control over drug preparation by a pharmaceutist refers to the following type of management:
a. Bureaucratic
*b. Technical
c. Managerial
d. Institutional
e. Administrative

87. As a pharmaceutist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient didnt apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the recipient:
a. Nonverbal barriers
b. Neglect of facts
*c. Semantic barriers
d. Failure to understand the importance of information
e. Stereotype mentation

88. A pharmaceutist has applied for a job of a stockkeeper at a wholesale pharmaceutical enterprise. What trial period doesnt require agreement with the trade-union committee?
*a. Up to three monthes
b. Up to two monthes
c. Up to six monthes
d. Up to four monthes
e. Up to one month

89. Marketing manager at a pharmaceutical factory is planning its communication policy. Which component of the marketing communication systems has the highest value for one contact?
*a. Personal sale
b. TV advertising
c. Sales promotion
d. Periodical advertising
e. "Public relations"

90. A joint-stock company involved into production and selling of drug preparations has developed a structure for working with various consuming organizations. Such organizational structure is called:
a. Bureaucratic structure
*b. Divisional structure
c. Departmentalization
d. Functional structure
e. Array (matrix) structure

91. The relationships between the demand, supply and price level is studied within the following field of complex market research:
*a. Studies of economic environment
b. Analysis of market segmentation
c. Analysis of sociopsychological features of buyers
d. Studies of market structure of companies
e. Studies of market and product requirements

92. What management style is characterized by managers particular compliance, when manager initiates goals formation by his subordinate and is ready to accept it without reservations?
a. Collective style
b. Combined style
c. Democratic management style
d. Bureaucratic style
*e. Laissez-faire management style

93. Which component of the marketing communication system focuses on creating a positive image of a company?
a. Merchandising
*b. Public relations
c. Personal sales
d. Advertising
e. Retail logistics

94. Companys activity aimed at planning, organization and control of physical movement of materials and finished goods from the production site to the place of their utilization for the purpose of covering the consumer needs and gaining profit, is called:
a. Supply
b. Advertising
c. Management
*d. Marketing
e. Demand

95. Public health services attach great importance to the drug quality, for this reason a pharmaceutic enterprise has concentrated its efforts upon the improvement of qualitative characteristics of its products. What concept of marketing management is applied in this company?
a. Production improvement
b. All answers are correct
c. There is no correct answer
*d. Product improvement
e. Modern marketing

96. When a graduate becomes employed on a certain position he should be first familiarized with his rights and duties. What document regulates rights and duties of pharmacy employees?
*a. Job description
b. Labour code
c. All the answers are false
d. All the answers are correct
e. Internal employment policies and procedures

97. Product assortment is the whole set of product assortment groups offered by an enterprise. The index representing number of positions in each product assortment group is called:
*a. Product assortment depth
b. Product assortment saturation
c. Assortment comparability
d. Product assortment
e. Product assortment width

98. Functioning of a pharmacy is realized on different levels of management. Function of direct control of employees fulfilling concrete tasks relates to the following level of management:
a. Administrative
b. Bureaucratic
c. Institutional
d. Managerial
*e. Technical

99. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
a. Centralized
b. Decentralized
c. Bureaucratic
d. Functional
*e. Divisional

100. A pharmaceutical enterprise widely applies technical and technological media of information use in order to increase efficiency of managing productive and administrative activity of an organization, to enhance labour productivity, to improve methods of planning and regulating management processes. All this is realized by means of:
a. Information-management system
b. Automated data retrieval system
c. Automation equipped working place
d. Automated instruction and control system
*e. Automated management system

101. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Development
*b. Maturity
c. Growth
d. Market penetration
e. Decrease

102. Among the given principles of market segmentation select a principle that is used in the study of drug market most often:
*a. Demographic
b. Psychological
c. Socio-economic
d. Psychographic
e. Behavioral

103. Personnel records refer to the following type of documents:
*a. Managerial
b. Scientific
c. Reference information
d. Directive
e. Pharmaceutical

104. When developing the system of marketing communications, a company should consider the characteristics of each tool used for market promotion of a drug. Which of the following characteristics is typical for advertising?
a. Non-mass communication
b. All answers are correct
c. There is no correct answer
*d. Depersonalization (non-personal communication)
e. Two-way communication

105. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with the enterprise owner on behalf of the workforce. Any collective agreement is worked out in written form. Which article of the Labor Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
a. 40
b. 41
c. 36
d. 38
*e. 17

106. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
*a. Bonus
b. Seasonal
c. -
d. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
e. Dealer

107. Development of advertising strategy for promotion of nonprescription drugs includes identification of the target audience. The highest selectivity of consumer audience can be achieved by means of the following advertisment type:
a. On TV
*b. At sales outlet
c. On transport
d. On the radio
e. In the printed publication

108. Theory of management currently marks out four the most important approaches to the management. Choose the approach that is not applied in the theory of management:
a. Situational
b. Different schools dedication approach
c. Process approach
d. Systemic
*e. Structured

109. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
a. Stimulating
*b. Counteractive
c. Remarketing
d. Conversion
e. Synchromarketing

110. When developing a new drug a manufacturer may apply different strategies of brand use. If a company uses one brand name for all of its products, such strategy is called:
a. Multi-brand approach
*b. Group brands
c. Brands for individual drugs
d. Individual brands
e. The combination of brand name with an individual drug brand

111. A manufacturing enterprise plans to retail a new drug through the corporate network of pharmacies. What strategy of drug distribution will be used?
a. Vertical integration
*b. Direct
c. Flexible
d. Multi-echelon
e. Horizontal integration

112. In a pharmaceutical company both American and Japanese management styles are used. Select a characteristic feature of the Japanese management style:
a. Clearly formalized management structure
b. Short-term employment
c. Individual decision-making process
d. Fast evaluation and career advancement
*e. Collective responsibility

113. Management of a pharmaceutical company involves American and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
a. Corporate liability
b. Group forms of control
*c. Quick evaluation and career development
d. Slow career development
e. Heightened attention to the human factor

114. Drug A is in the stage of market saturation. In order to push up intensive sales, management of the manufacturing company decided to use the following type of advertising:
a. Sales promotion
b. Public relations
c. Informational
d. Personal sales
*e. Aggressive

115. The manufacturing pharmaceutical company " Elema" set up its own corporate pharmacy. In this case, it uses the following distribution channel:
a. Second level
b. First level
*c. Zero level
d. Third level
e. Fourth level

116. An employee of a pharmaceutical company has been commissioned with marketing research on the regional market of antiarrhythmic drugs. What stage of research would he prefer in the first place?
a. Preparation of report
b. Submission of report
c. Collection of primary information
d. Analysis of primary information
*e. Collection and analysis of secondary information

117. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own sales departments, affiliated sales companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Two-level
b. One-level
*c. Zero level
d. Three-level
e. Four-level

118. When setting up a joint-stock company the founders discussed the issues of financial liability. What is the liability of the board members in a joint-stock company?
a. Limited to the contributions to the statutory fund and their property
b. Limited to the double amount of deposits
*c. Limited to the value of their shares
d. Limited to the amount of deposits
e. Unlimited and solidary

119. Three founders set up a business entity for the wholesale distribution of medicines and healthcare products. Specify the form of such company:
a. Utility
b. Individual
c. Unitary
d. Public
*e. Corporate

120. Industrial, labor and socio-economic relations between the head of a pharmaceutical company and the employees are regulated by:
a. Employment agreement
b. Contract
c. Statute
*d. Collective agreement
e. Corporate code

121. A pharmacy makes bulk purchases of health and hygiene products. The agent works under a contract with the manufacturer and operates on his account. The agent may be given the exclusive right to sell goods in certain regions. Specify this agent:
a. Dealer
*b. Wholesale agent
c. Commission agent
d. Consignee
e. Broker

122. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market
*b. Pure monopoly market
c. Monopolistic competitive market
d. Pure competition market
e. Oligopolistic market

123. The planning of marketing strategy involves two successive stages. What are the stages of the strategic planning process?
a. Developing a program of activities
b. Budgeting
c. Describing the current marketing situation
d. Making the list of tasks and problems
*e. Defining the mission and goals of a pharmaceutical company

124. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Loss of time
b. Financial loss
c. Loss of property
d. Labour loss
*e. Business risk

125. Inventory of human resources at pharmaceutical companies is based on keeping of work record books, employees files, personal data sheets T-2. What parameter cannot be estimated by the analysis of the above-mentioned date?
*a. Labour market state
b. Average staffing number
c. Data on the staff turnover
d. Staff categories
e. Average payroll strength

126. As a pharmaceutist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient didnt apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the recipient:
*a. Semantic barriers
b. Nonverbal barriers
c. Stereotype mentation
d. Failure to understand the importance of information
e. Neglect of facts

127. A pharmacy analyst is going to take a part of his holiday in spring and a part in summer. Holiday dividing is allowed provided that its main part will be no less than:
a. 18 days
*b. 14 days
c. 12 days
d. 10 days
e. 16 days

128. TV periodically conducts campaigns for young people aimed at popularization of mechanical contraceptives (not indicating concrete trademarks). Such actions are a kind of the following marketing communication:
a. Advertising
b. Sale promotion
c. Sponsorship
*d. Publicity
e. Personal sale

129. A joint-stock company involved into production and selling of drug preparations has developed a structure for working with various consuming organizations. Such organizational structure is called:
*a. Divisional structure
b. Departmentalization
c. Bureaucratic structure
d. Array (matrix) structure
e. Functional structure

130. Which component of the marketing communication system focuses on creating a positive image of a company?
*a. Public relations
b. Personal sales
c. Merchandising
d. Retail logistics
e. Advertising

131. Companys activity aimed at planning, organization and control of physical movement of materials and finished goods from the production site to the place of their utilization for the purpose of covering the consumer needs and gaining profit, is called:
*a. Marketing
b. Demand
c. Management
d. Advertising
e. Supply

132. When a graduate becomes employed on a certain position he should be first familiarized with his rights and duties. What document regulates rights and duties of pharmacy employees?
a. All the answers are correct
b. All the answers are false
c. Internal employment policies and procedures
d. Labour code
*e. Job description

