1. 6 months after treatment a patient with coronary heart disease developed tolerance to the prolonged-action nitrates. What drug with nitrate-similar effect should be recommended in this case?
a. Metoprolol
*b. Molsidomine
c. Prazosin
d. Nifedipine
e. Verapamil

2. Which of the below-listed drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
a. Рhenylinum
b. Heparine
*c. Streptokinase
d. Ticlopidine
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

3. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
a. Penicillamine
*b. Deferoxamium
c. Bemegridum
d. Protamine sulphate
e. Atropinum

4. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. What antibacterial drug may be prescribed?
a. Tetracycline hydrochloride
b. Gentamycin sulphate
*c. Cefotaxime
d. Ofloxacinum
e. Co-trimoxazolum

5. One of the major indicator of drug elimination from the human body is:
a. Bioequivalence
b. Highest concentration in blood
c. Volume of distribution
d. Bioavailability
*e. Effective halfbeak

6. Mother of a 2-month-old child came to a pharmacy and asked for a febrifuge. What drug should be recommended for the child?
a. Nimesulide
b. Indometacinum
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Paracetamolum
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

7. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia was prescribed an antibiotic. After the treatment the child became deaf. Which antibiotic group might have caused this complication?
a. Natural penicillin
b. Semisynthetic penicillin
c. Cephalosporins
d. Macrolides
*e. Aminoglycosides

8. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
a. 50 mg
*b. 100 mg
c. 1000 mg
d. 500 mg
e. 200 mg

9. A patient with hypertension has been administered one of antihypertensive drugs. Blood pressure dropped back to normal, but the patient has developed a persistent dry cough. Which of the following drugs has such a side effect?
a. Propranolol
b. Furosemide
c. Nifedipine
*d. Enalapril maleate
e. Clonidine

10. Name the reason for the reduction of anticoagulant effect of syncumar when it is applied in combination with phenobarbital:
a. Phenobarbital inhibits microsomal liver enzymes
b. These drugs are antagonists
c. Mutual inactivation
*d. Phenobarbital activates microsomal liver enzymes
e. Development of syncumar allergy

11. Choose an optimal antibacterial drug for the mycoplasmal pneumonia treatment:
*a. Rovamycine
b. Penicillin
c. Amoksiklav
d. Ampicillin
e. Gentamycinum

12. Which of the listed preparations should be used as antidote and included into the first-aid kit required at factories where acute intoxications with arsenic, mercury, chrome and bismuth compounds are possible?
a. Аdrenalinum
b. Morphinum
c. Droperidolum
*d. Unithiolum
e. Аtropinum

13. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent manifestations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Acidin pepsinum
*b. Раncreatinum
c. Dе-Nоl
d. Drotaverine
e. Оmерrаzоlе

14. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Abstinence syndrome
c. Delayed allergy
d. Local irritation
*e. Immediate allergy

15. Which of the following non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents has the least harmful effect on the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract?
a. Diclofenac
b. Piroxicam
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Nimesulide
e. Indomethacin

16. Examination of a patient who has been treated for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time revealed hyperglycemia. What drug might have caused it?
*a. Dexamethasone
b. Ibuprofen
c. Levamisole
d. Chloroquine
e. Diclofenac sodium

17. A 54-year-old patient who has been suffering from hyperacidic gastritis for several years was prescribed almagel. What pharmacotherapeutical complications on the part of digestive organs may be expected in the first place?
a. Emesis
b. Diarrhea
c. Nausea
d. Anorexia
*e. Constipation

18. A 26-year-old patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia provoked by mycoplasma. Choose the appropriate antimicrobial preparation for the patient treatment:
*a. Rovamycine
b. Gentamycinum
c. Amoksiklav
d. Веnzylpenicillinum
e. Amoxicillin

19. A 60-year-old patient has essential hypertension stage II, coronary disease, bronchial asthma. After pharmacotherapy correction the patient exhibited a bronchospastic attack, intensified dyspnea. What drug provoked this complication?
*a. Propranolol
b. Еuphyllinum
c. Salbutamolum
d. Мucaltinum
e. Nifedipinе

20. After an emotional stress a 60-year-old patient presented with chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Specify a drug that relieves pain in this case:
a. Metoprolol
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Diltiazem
d. Nifedipine
e. Propranolol

21. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Propranolol
b. Еnаlаpril
*c. Doxazosin
d. Diltiazem
e. Losartan

22. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of such side effect?
*a. Streptomycin
b. Ethambutol
c. Ethionamidum
d. Rifampicin
e. Isoniazid

23. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should NOT be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
a. Gentamycinum
b. Midecamycin
*c. Co-trimoxazolum
d. Benzylpenicillinum
e. Doxycycline

24. Which of the listed pharmacolgical groups of antihypertensive drugs is contra-indicated the patients with bronchial asthma?
a. Angiotensin receptors blockers
b. Diuretics
c. ACE inhibitor
d. Calcium channel blockers
*e. Beta-adrenergic blocking agent

25. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
a. Furosemide
b. Panangin
c. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages
*d. Verapamil
e. Trimetazidine

26. A patient with cholelithiasis was prescribed the following drug for the purpose of cholesterol gallstone dissolution:
*a. Ursodeoxycholic acid
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Mefenamic acid
d. Citric acid
e. Gamma-amino-butyric acid

27. A 68-year-old female patient has been continuously taking furosemide for heart failure treatment. What drug should be used to prevent hypokalemia in patients taking furosemide?
a. Atp-long
b. Trimetazidine
c. Sustac forte
*d. Panangin
e. Mildronatum

28. A 52-year-old patient complains of having increased arterial pressure for a month. She has a 5-year history of bronchial asthma. What group of hypotensive drugs should NOT be recommended this patient?
a. Angiotensin receptor blockers
b. Diuretics
c. Calcium channel blockers
d. Tranquilizers
*e. beta-adrenoreceptor blockers

29. An 18-year-old patient was diagnosed with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug will provide etiotropic pharmacotherapy?
a. Metronidazole
*b. Isoniazid
c. Trimethoprim
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
e. Lincomycin

30. A woman in the III trimester of pregnancy has an acute respiratory viral disease accompanied with body temperature rise up to 39°C. Which of the drugs should be recommended?
a. Celecoxib
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Paracetamol
e. Indomethacin

31. A patient consults a pharmaceutist about taking acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. What is the daily dose that should be recommended for continuous use?
a. 0,5-1,0 g
b. 2,0-3,0
c. Over 4,0 g
*d. 0,1-0,3 g
e. 1,0-2,0 g

32. A patient suffering from arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Body temperature remained unchanged. It is known that the patient takes captopril. These symptoms can be explained by increased generation of:
a. Angiotensin-1
b. Aldosterone
c. Natriuretic peptide
*d. Bradyquinine
e. Renin

33. Which preparation from the group of laxative agents IS NOT to be administered in case of intoxication with CNS-inhibiting substances?
a. Bisacodyl
b. Guttalax
c. Sodium sulfate
d. Vaseline oil
*e. Magnesium sulfate

34. During the treatment of chronic heart failure with digoxin in a patient having bradycardia, nausea, vomiting, blurred vision. Which drug is the antidote in this case?
a. Dipiroximum
b. Tetacinum calcium
*c. Unithiol
d. Amyl nitrite
e. Atropine sulphate

35. A 46-year-old patient suffering from chronic bronchitis came to a pharmacy. What expectorative drug may be recommended?
a. Falimint
b. Glauvent
c. Salbutamol
*d. Ambroxol
e. Libexin

36. A 26-year-old pregnant woman (III trimester of pregnancy) complains about body temperature rise up to 39°C. What febrifuge may be recommended in this case?
a. Indometacin
*b. Paracetamol
c. Diclofenac
d. Aspirin
e. Analgin

37. A patient who has been undergoing combined drug therapy for peptic ulcer presents with black feces. Specify a drug that might have caused such a change:
a. Ranitidine
*b. Bismuth subcitrate
c. Actovegin
d. Omeprazole
e. Metronidazole

38. A man with a long history of chronic hepatitis has been diagnosed with pneumonia. Which of the following antibacterial drugs can be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Vancomycin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Biseptol
d. Tetracycline
e. Rifampicin

39. A 25-year-old patient has been taking antibiotics for 7 days. Antibiotic therapy has caused a complication in form of bowel dysbacteriosis. This complication should be treated with drugs of the following pharmacological group:
*a. Probiotics
b. Cholagogic
c. Adaptogens
d. Antacids
e. Spasmolytics

40. A 57-year-old female patient was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis; she has also a history of stomach ulcer. What drug from the group of nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs may be recommended this patient?
a. Mefenamic acid
*b. Celecoxib
c. Aspirin
d. Diclofenac
e. Indometacin

41. A patient fell ill with severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day connected with the fact that the drug:
a. Has bactericidal effect
b. Accumulates in the lungs
c. Poorly absorbed from the injection site
*d. Slowly eliminated from the body
e. Pluripotential

42. An internship doctor prescribed his patient nifuroxazid from the group of nitrofurans for the treatment of urinary tracts infection. The doctor made a mistake because:
a. It is excreted from the organism very slowly
*b. It cannot be absorbed from the digestive tract
c. It has nephrotoxic effect
d. It is excreted with urine in the inactive state
e. It has bacteriostatic effect

43. Which of the following is the drug of choice for bronchial asthma attacks prevention?
a. Drotaverine
b. Salbutamol
*c. Cromolyn sodium
d. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
e. Ambroxol

44. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed an antiulcer drug that also reduces secretion of hydrochloric acid and inhibits Chelicobacter pylori. What drug is it?
a. Gastrocepine
b. Famotidine
c. Almagel
*d. Omeprazole
e. Maalox

45. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering for diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
a. Dichlothiazide
*b. Enalapril
c. Clonidine
d. Propranolol
e. Dibazol

46. A patient with arterial hypertension was administered a non-prescription drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis. What pharmaceutical form should be recommended the patient in order to reduce as much as possible the likelihood of development of undesirable systemic vasoconstriction?
a. Tablets
*b. Ointment
c. Drops
d. Gel
e. Aerosol

47. A 56-year-old patient suffering from essential hypertension was prescribed an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and a potassium-sparing diuretic. Such combination is:
a. Unreasonable because it increases risk of orthostatic collapse development
*b. Unreasonable because it increases risk of hyperkaliemia development
c. Reasonable because it potentiates hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
d. Reasonable because it decreases risk of hyperkaliemia development
e. Unreasonable because it reduces hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor

48. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic DOES NOT NEED to be combined with potassium preparations?
a. Ethacrynic acid
*b. Triamteren
c. Dichlothiazide
d. Clopamide
e. Furosemide

49. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
a. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome
b. Taste violation
c. Diarrhea
*d. Orthostatic hypotension
e. Central nervous system depression effect

50. A 67-year-old patient who undergoes treatment for bronchial asthma presents with limb tremor, headache, insomnia, extrasystole. What drug might have caused such symptoms?
a. Acetylcysteine
*b. Theophylline
c. Tavegyl
d. Prednisolone
e. Intal

