1. A pharmaceutical enterprise widely applies technical and technological media of information use in order to increase efficiency of managing productive and administrative activity of an organization, to enhance labour productivity, to improve methods of planning and regulating management processes. All this is realized by means of:
*a. Automated management system
b. Automated instruction and control system
c. Automated data retrieval system
d. Information-management system
e. Automation equipped working place

2. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers’ recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Market penetration
b. Decrease
c. Development
*d. Maturity
e. Growth

3. Marketing research of certain pharmaceutical groups involves collection and analysis of primary information. This is the following type of marketing research:
*a. Field research
b. Research of drug market
c. Research of marketing network of pharmaceutical market
d. Research of drug consumers
e. Armchair research

4. The market is characterized by the following conditions: a big number of salespersons and customers who dont make any influence upon the level of current prices; availability of uniform and interchangeable competing products; lack of price restrictions. What type of market is it?
a. -
*b. Market of pure competition
c. Oligopolistic market
d. Market of monopolistic competition
e. Market of pure monopoly

5. A pharmaceutist and a pharmacy manager were involved into the labour dispute about carry over of vacation time. The pharmaceutist applied to the council of conciliation. The council should consider his application within the following period:
a. 1 month
*b. 10 days
c. 3 days
d. 5 days
e. 1 week

6. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
a. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
b. -
c. Dealer
d. Seasonal
*e. Bonus

7. Development of advertising strategy for promotion of nonprescription drugs includes identification of the target audience. The highest selectivity of consumer audience can be achieved by means of the following advertisment type:
a. On transport
b. On the radio
*c. At sales outlet
d. In the printed publication
e. On TV

8. Theory of management currently marks out four the most important approaches to the management. Choose the approach that is NOT applied in the theory of management:
a. Systemic
b. Process approach
*c. Structured
d. Situational
e. Different schools dedication approach

9. On the initiative of the manufacturing company some amendments to a drug information leaflet are to be made for the restriction of the drug use. What type of marketing is applied in this case?
a. Conversion
b. Synchromarketing
c. Incentive
*d. Opposed
e. Remarketing

10. At the initial stage of establishing a pharmaceutical enterprise the internal disciplinary regulations should be adopted. One of the primary matters is the duration of the lunch break for the employees. According to the Labour Code of Ukraine, the break duration must be as follows:
*a. Up to 2 hours
b. Not less than 3 hours
c. -
d. 2,5 hours
e. Up to 1 hour

11. A large and well-known company has granted a small independent firm the right to use its trademark and technology so that it could take advantage of authority and customer trust to the well-known brand. Such concept is called:
a. Use of dealers brand
b. Merchandising
*c. Franchising
d. Use of trademark
e. Use of manufacturers brand

12. Management of a pharmaceutical company involves American and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
*a. Quick evaluation and career development
b. Corporate liability
c. Heightened attention to the human factor
d. Slow career development
e. Group forms of control

13. A pharmaceutical company conducted an age-specific segment analysis of the regional antihistamine market. It revealed the lack of antihistamines for children. The company will consider this segment as:
a. A market door
*b. A market niche
c. A market share
d. An unattractive segment
e. A segment requiring further research

14. An employee of a pharmaceutical company has been commissioned with marketing research on the regional market of antiarrhythmic drugs. What stage of research would he prefer in the first place?
a. Submission of report
*b. Collection and analysis of secondary information
c. Analysis of primary information
d. Collection of primary information
e. Preparation of report

15. A pharmaceutical company "Pfizer" is focused on offering the best quality goods at a high price which should cover the costs of research and development as well as production of high quality products. Despite the high price, the product is still in demand. What are the goals of the companys price policy?
a. Maintaining status quo
b. Ensuring the companys survival
*c. Winning the market leadership in respect of product quality
d. Increasing the market share
e. Increasing the companys assortment

16. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own sales departments, affiliated sales companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Three-level
b. Four-level
c. One-level
d. Two-level
*e. Zero level

17. A pharmaceutist plans voluntary termination of the open-ended employment contract for the reason of her husbands transfer to another area. Specify the form and term of notice that should be given to the pharmacy director:
a. One-month notice in written form
b. One-week notice in written form
*c. Two-week notice in written form
d. Five-day notice in written form
e. Two-day notice in written form

18. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Oligopolistic market
b. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market
c. Pure competition market
d. Monopolistic competitive market
*e. Pure monopoly market

19. A pharmaceutical company "Adonis" promotes its new products by means of advertisement that informs the customers about the product, highlights its advantages, typical features and properties. What kind of advertisment is it?
a. Indirect
b. Direct
c. Aggressive
d. Supporting
*e. Informational

20. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
a. Without preliminary licencing or registration
*b. Licence-based
c. Free
d. Normative
e. Limited

21. A pharmacy makes wholesale purchases of health and hygiene products. An agent works under the contract with the manufacturer and makes deals at the manufacturers cost. The agent may be entitled to exclusive distribution in some regions. What kind of agent is it?
a. Broker
b. Dealer
c. Consignee
d. Commission agent
*e. Wholesale agent

22. Activity of an organization depends on various factors. What factors refer to the internal environment of the organization?
a. Consumers
*b. Abilities, skills and talent of staff
c. Infrastructure
d. Economy status
e. Public authorities

23. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Loss of property
b. Loss of time
c. Financial loss
*d. Business risk
e. Labour loss

24. Pharmacy activities are commonly operated by different types of managers. The function of direct control over drug preparation by a pharmaceutist refers to the following type of management:
a. Institutional
b. Administrative
c. Bureaucratic
*d. Technical
e. Managerial

25. As a pharmaceutist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient didnt apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the recipient:
a. Neglect of facts
b. Failure to understand the importance of information
c. Stereotype mentation
*d. Semantic barriers
e. Nonverbal barriers

26. A pharmaceutist has applied for a job of a stockkeeper at a wholesale pharmaceutical enterprise. What trial period doesnt require agreement with the trade-union committee?
a. Up to one month
b. Up to four monthes
c. Up to six monthes
*d. Up to three monthes
e. Up to two monthes

27. A pharmacy analyst is going to take a part of his holiday in spring and a part in summer. Holiday dividing is allowed provided that its main part will be no less than:
a. 12 days
b. 10 days
*c. 14 days
d. 16 days
e. 18 days

28. Marketing manager at a pharmaceutical factory is planning its communication policy. Which component of the marketing communication systems has the highest value for one contact?
a. Sales promotion
*b. Personal sale
c. TV advertising
d. "Public relations"
e. Periodical advertising

29. TV periodically conducts campaigns for young people aimed at popularization of mechanical contraceptives (not indicating concrete trademarks). Such actions are a kind of the following marketing communication:
*a. Publicity
b. Personal sale
c. Sponsorship
d. Sale promotion
e. Advertising

30. A joint-stock company involved into production and selling of drug preparations has developed a structure for working with various consuming organizations. Such organizational structure is called:
a. Departmentalization
b. Functional structure
*c. Divisional structure
d. Array (matrix) structure
e. Bureaucratic structure

31. The relationships between the demand, supply and price level is studied within the following field of complex market research:
a. Analysis of market segmentation
b. Studies of market and product requirements
*c. Studies of economic environment
d. Studies of market structure of companies
e. Analysis of sociopsychological features of buyers

32. What management style is characterized by managers particular compliance, when manager initiates goals formation by his subordinate and is ready to accept it without reservations?
a. Democratic management style
b. Collective style
c. Combined style
*d. Laissez-faire management style
e. Bureaucratic style

33. Which component of the marketing communication system focuses on creating a positive image of a company?
a. Personal sales
b. Advertising
*c. Public relations
d. Retail logistics
e. Merchandising

34. Public health services attach great importance to the drug quality, for this reason a pharmaceutic enterprise has concentrated its efforts upon the improvement of qualitative characteristics of its products. What concept of marketing management is applied in this company?
a. All answers are correct
b. There is no correct answer
c. Production improvement
d. Modern marketing
*e. Product improvement

35. When a graduate becomes employed on a certain position he should be first familiarized with his rights and duties. What document regulates rights and duties of pharmacy employees?
a. Internal employment policies and procedures
b. All the answers are correct
c. All the answers are false
*d. Job description
e. Labour code

36. Product assortment is the whole set of product assortment groups offered by an enterprise. The index representing number of positions in each product assortment group is called:
a. Product assortment width
b. Product assortment
c. Assortment comparability
*d. Product assortment depth
e. Product assortment saturation

37. Functioning of a pharmacy is realized on different levels of management. Function of direct control of employees fulfilling concrete tasks relates to the following level of management:
a. Institutional
b. Administrative
c. Bureaucratic
*d. Technical
e. Managerial

