1. A pharmacy analyst supervises the state of a refractometer. For its calibration he needs some distilled water. The distilled water must have the following value of the refractive index:
a. 1,3440
b. 1,3550
c. 1,3110
d. 1,3220
*e. 1,3330

2. In order to identify a polyatomic glycerin alcohol a pharmacy analyst carries out dehydration reaction with potassium hydrosulfate. The generated hereat product has a strong characteristic smell and gives blue colour to the filter paper moistened with 1% solution of sodium nitroprusside and with piperidine. What product is it?
a. Chloroform
*b. Acrolein
c. Acetic acid
d. Diethyl ethe
e. Ethanol

3. A pharmacy analyst analizes distilled water. For this purpose he brings some amount of the sample material to the boiling point, adds 0,02 M solution of potassium permanganate and diluted sulfuric acid. After 5 minutes of boiling the pink colour of the produced solution should not change. The pharmacy analyst tries to detect the following admixture:
a. Sulfates
b. Heavy metals
c. Carbon dioxide
d. Nitrates
*e. Chemical reducing agent

4. An analytical laboratory carries out quantitative analysis of sodium citrate by method of ion-exchanging chromatography on a cationite. What titrated solution is to be used for the following titration of generated citric acid?
a. Potassium iodate
b. Iodine
*c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Hydrochloric acid
e. Trilon B

5. A pharmacy analyst can verify presence of iron cation (II) in a drug formulation by means of the following solution:
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Ammonium sulfide
d. Potassium bromide
e. Sodium phosphate

6. When the glucose is heated with the copper-tartrate reagent (Fehlings reagent) the brick-red precipitate settles down. It indicates presence of the following group:
a. Ketonic
b. Etherific
c. Amide
*d. Aldehyde
e. Carboxyl

7. An analyst of a pharmaceutical storehouse received the substance of hydrogen peroxide for analysis. Quantitative determination of this drug should be performed by permanganatometric method. According to the analytical normative document, titration should be carried out till the solution turns:
a. Colourless
*b. Pink
c. Yellow
d. Green
e. Dark blue

8. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, a pharmacy analyst determines iron admixture in a preparation by means of citric and thioglycolic acids. What staining indicates presence of this admixture?
a. Black
*b. Pink
c. Yellow
d. Green
e. Blue

9. An analytical laboratory received substance of citric acid for the analysis. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, citric acid can be determined by method of:
a. Iodometry
b. Bromatometry
c. Iodochlorometry
*d. Alkalimetry
e. Acidimetry

10. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, the amount of calcium gluconate can be determined by the chelatometric method. What solution should be used as a titrant?
a. Argentum nitrate
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Iodine monochloride
*e. Sodium edetate

11. Codeine can be derived for medical purposes out of a plant alkaloid by means of semisynthetic method. Name this alkaloid:
a. Protopine
b. Chelidonine
c. Papaverine
d. Berberine
*e. Morphine

12. During the analysis of diethyl ether (Aether medicinales) you can determine presence of aldehydes as a specific admixture. Which of the following reragents can be used for determining presence of aldehyde admixture?
a. Potassium sulfate
*b. Potassium tetraiodomercurate alkaline
c. Iron (III) cloride
d. Phenolphtalein
e. Acetic acid

13. Quantitative analysis of drugs containing primary aromatic amine can be performed by means of nitritometric method. Which of the following preparations can be determined by the nitritometric method without preliminary acid hydrolysis?
a. Soluble streptocid
*b. Sulfadimine
c. Phthazin
d. Phthalazol
e. Paracetamol

14. An analytical chemist makes a test for the presence of sodium thiosulphate. Select a reagent which allows to detect the thiosulphate ion:
*a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Potassium iodide
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Sodium hydroxide
e. Sodium bromide

15. An analytical chemist determines the admixture of sulphates in the boric acid. What is the main reagent that he has to add:
a. Potassium ferrocyanide
b. Sodium sulphide
*c. Barium chloride
d. Silver nitrate
e. Ammonium oxalate

16. An analyst of the National drug quality control inspection identifies "Sulfametoxazol" by adding the solutions of hydrochloric acid, sodium nitrite and beta-naphthol to the preparation. Thereat intense red colour is observed. What functional group is identified by this reaction?
a. Carboxyl group
b. Aldehyde group
c. Secondary aromatic amino
d. Sulpho group
*e. Primary aromatic amino

17. In order to detect an admixture of potassium in medical preparations a pharmacy analyst should carry out a reaction with:
a. Sodium tetraborate
b. Sulfuric acid
c. Salicylic acid
*d. Sodium tetraphenylborate
e. Boric acid

18. An analyst of the National drug quality control inspection carries out quantitative analysis of "Resorcin" substance by method of bromatometry (back titration). What indicator is used by doing so?
a. Ammonium iron (III) sulfate
b. Phenolphtalein
c. Sodium eozinat
*d. Starch
e. Potassium chromate

19. An expert of an analytical laboratory is determining Nitrofural. What quantitative titrimetric method can be applied?
a. Argentometry
b. Nitritometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Alkalimetry
*e. Iodometry

20. Quantitative determination of silver nitrate is done by method of thiocyanatometry. What indicator is used in this case?
a. Sodium eosinate
*b. Iron (III) ammonium sulphate
c. Potassium chromate
d. Phenolphtalein
e. Methylene blue

21. An analytical chemist was identifying xeroform in reaction with sodium sulphide. As a result of reaction a black solid dropped out. What ion was detected?
a. Lead
b. Copper
c. Silver
*d. Bismuth
e. Zinc

22. A pharmacy analyst is determining one of the following drugs by the nintritometric method. What drug is it?
a. Ammonium chloride
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Ftivazide
d. Analgin
*e. Norsulfazole

23. Specify the reaction to the ester-type drugs that is tolerated by the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia:
a. Formation of tayleohin
*b. Formation of iron hydroxamates
c. Formation of indophenol
d. Formation of azo dye
e. Formation of 3-bromphenol

24. A chemist of an analytic laboratory has to prepare turbidity standards according to the requirements of Pharmacopoeia. What substances are to be used as the reference?
*a. Hexamethylenetetramine and hydrazine sulphate
b. Sodium chloride and calcium nitrate
c. Furacilinum and calcium chloride
d. Potassium chloride and barium sulphate
e. Calcium sulphate and glycerin

25. A pharmacist-analyst is measuring the quantity of an adrenaline tartrate substance by method of acid-base titration in nonaqueous solvents. Which indicator is to be used in this case according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia?
a. Thymolphthalein
b. Eriochrome black
c. Methyl orange
d. Phenolphtalein
*e. Crystal violet

26. Which of the following drugs a pharmacist-analys can quantify by ceriometry method?
a. Sodium benzoate
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
*c. Vicasolum
d. Phenyl salycylate
e. Phenobarbital

27. A pharmacist-analyst is measuring the quantity of a drug by method of indirect bromatometry. Which of the following titrated solutions is to be used?
a. Argentum nitricum (silver nitrate)
*b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Sodium edetate
d. Calcium bromate
e. Sodium nitrite

28. During the identification of a drug an analytical chemist of the State Inspectorate for Quality Control performs a lignin test. Specify this drug:
a. Cortisone acetate
b. Ascorbic acid
*c. Streptotcid
d. Methionine
e. Analgin

29. An expert of an analytical laboratory is determining Ca2+ in the substance of calcium pantothenate. Specify the method of analysis:
a. Permanganatometry
b. Iodometry
c. Nitritometry
d. Argentometry
*e. Chelatometry

30. A pharmacist-analyst carries out quantitative analysis of procaine hydrochloride. Which of the following solutions is to be used?
a. Sodium edetate
b. Sodium thiosulfate
*c. Sodium nitrite
d. Potassium bromate
e. Argentum nitricum

31. A pharmacy analyst carries out purity test of the drug substance "Sodium thiosulfate". Violet colour, that comes from reaction with sodium nitroprusside, indicates the presence of the following admixture:
a. Iodides admixture
*b. Specific sulfides admixture
c. Sulfur admixture
d. Sulphates admixture
e. Sodium chloride admixture

32. An analytical laboratory received "Adrenalini tartras" substance for analysis. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, quantitative analysis of this substance can be carried out by method of:
a. Iodometry
b. Acidimetry in aqueous medium
*c. Acidimetry in non-aqueous medium
d. Nitritometry
e. Bromatometry

33. An analytic laboratory received "Aether anaestheticus" for analysis. Which reagent should be used for detection of acetone and aldehyde admixtures according to the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine?
a. Ammonium solution of argentum nitrate
b. Sodium hydrosulphite
c. Hydroxylamine solution
*d. Alkaline solution of potassium tetraiodomercurate
e. Aqueous solution of potassium iodide

34. Qualitative reaction for phenol is the reaction with bromine water. What compound is produced as a result of the interaction of phenol with bromine water and drops out as a white solid?
*a. 2,4,6-tribromophenol
b. 3-bromophenol
c. 2,4-dibromophenol
d. 4-bromophenol
e. 2-bromophenol

35. The basic structure of steroid hormones is hydrocarbon skeleton - cyclopentane perhydrophenanthrene. What natural compound is used for testosterone propionate production?
a. Anthracene
*b. Cholesterol
c. Naphthalene
d. Indole
e. Phenanthrene

36. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, a pharmacy analyst should determine procaine hydrochloride by nitritometric method. What indicator is to be used for this purpose?
a. Acid chrome blue
*b. Neutral red
c. Crystal violet
d. Methyl red
e. Xylenol orange

37. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, a pharmacy analyst should determine fluorouracil by method of nonaqueous titration. What titrated solution is to be used?
a. Sodium edetate
*b. Tetrabutyl ammonium hydroxide
c. Potassium bromate
d. Sodium nitrite
e. Ammonium thiocyanate

38. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a pharmacy analyst is determining calcium gluconate quantity by method of complexometric titration. What indicator is to be used?
a. Thymolphthalein
b. Tropeoline 00
c. Methyl red
d. Crystal violet
*e. Calconcarboxylic acid

39. An analytical chemist analyses the substance of ethylmorphine hydrochloride. The substance purity is tested by method of semi-microanalysis. What reagent is used to determine the water admixture?
a. Molibdeno-vanadium
b. Hypophosphite
c. Biuretic
d. Methoxyphenyl acetic acid
*e. Iodosulphurous

40. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, a certain drug is being measured by method of chelatometric titration. What drug is it?
*a. Calcium chloride
b. Potassium chloride
c. Sodium thiosulfate
d. Sodium benzoate
e. Potassium citrate

41. An analytical laboratory carries out an analysis of ferrum sulphate heptohydrate according to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. The test portion of the substance should be titrated with the following solution:
a. Potassium bromate
*b. Ammonium cerium sulfate
c. Ammonium thiocyanate
d. Argentum nitrate
e. Sodium edetate

42. An analytical chemist determines the quantitative content of caffeine by method of acidometry in nonaqueous media in compliance with the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What solution is used as a titrant?
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Sodium nitrite
c. Sodium edetate
d. Potassium bromate
*e. Perchloric acid

43. A pharmacy analyst identifies sodium hydrocarbonate. What indicator can confirm the presence of alkalescent medium reaction in the sodium hydrocarbonate solution?
a. Ferroin
b. Naphtholbenzein
c. Starch
d. Tropeolin 00
*e. Phenolphtalein

44. An analyst is measuring sodium benzoate in the anhydrous medium by the acidimetric method according to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia. What reagent had to be used as a solvent?
a. Pyridine
b. Dimethyl formamide
c. Methanol
*d. Anhydrous acetic acid
e. Water

45. A pharmacy analyst is measuring mercury dichloride by method of indirect chelatometry. Excess of titrated solution of sodium edetate can be titrated by means of the following titrated solution:
a. Sodium thiosulfate
b. Sodium hydroxide
*c. Zinc sulfate
d. Potassium bromate
e. Sodium methylate

46. Calcium lactate can be quantitatively determined by chelatometric method. According to the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia, the following substance should be used as indicator:
a. Naphthol benzein
b. Diphenylcarbazone
*c. Calconcarbon acid
d. Phenolphthalein
e. Tropeolin 00

47. Substance of calcium pangamate is to be studied in  analytical laboratory. Calcium cation forms a white precipitate with the following reagent:
a. Sodium cobaltinitrite
*b. Ammonium oxalate
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Sodium chloride
e. Potassium bromide

48. A chemist of an analytical laboratory studies procaine hydrochloride according to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine. What method is recommended by the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine for the quantitative analysis of this preparation?
a. Bromatometry
b. Alkalimetry
c. Chelatometry
*d. Nitritometry
e. Acidimetry

49. As main reagent in test for phosphates admixtures the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia recommends to use:
a. Hypophosphite
*b. Sulfomolybdenum
c. Thioacetamide
d. Cupric tartrate
e. Acetylacetone

50. A common method for quantitative determination of drugs from the group of alkali metal halogenides is:
a. Alkalimetry
b. Nitritometry
c. Permanganatometry
d. Chelatometry
*e. Argentometry

51. Salicylates are widely applied in medical practice as anti-inflammatory drugs. For quantitative analysis of salicylic acid the following method is applied:
a. Permanganatometry
b. Chelatometry
c. Nitritometry
d. Argentometry
*e. Alkalimetry

52. Select the reductant required for the determination of arsenic impurity in drugs (method 2):
a. Hydrochloric acid solution
b. Sodium hydroxide solution
c. Potassium iodide solution
*d. Sodium hypophosphite
e. Sodium sulfite solution

53. Theobromine and theophylline can be determined by alkalimetric method according to the substituent. What acid is to be titrated with sodium hydroxide?
a. Acetic
b. Phosphoric
c. Chydrochloric
d. Sulfuric
*e. Nitric

54. According to the requirements of the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia (Supplement 1), a pharmacy analyst has to carry out quantitative analysis of potassium iodide by means of the following method:
*a. Iodatometry
b. Acidimetry
c. Nitritometry
d. Alkalimetry
e. Complexonometry

55. A pharmacy has sulfonamide biseptol on sale. What chemical compounds are the main components of this drug?
a. Sulfazin, salazodimethoxinum
b. Phthalazolum, sulfadimezin
c. Urosulfan, sulfapiridazin
*d. Sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim
e. Sulgin, norsulfazol

56. In course of isoniazid identification a pharmacy analyst boiled thoroughly the substance with 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene. The substance turned yellow, after adding alkaline solution it turned first violet and then brownish-red. As a result of this reaction the following aldehyde derivative is produced:
a. Glyoxylic
b. Hexanic
c. Gluconic
d. Glutamic
*e. Glutakon

57. In order to verify identity of tropan derivatives, Vitali’s reaction is applied. For that purpose the medications should be first decomposed with nitric acid and then treated with alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide and acetone. What effect will be observed?
a. Setting of black precipitate
b. Setting of white precipitate
c. The solution will turn green
d. Emission of gas bubbles
*e. The solution will turn purple

58. Which of the mentioned below drugs has the following chemical name: n-aminobenzoic acid diethylaminoethyl ester hydrochloride:
a. Streptocid
b. Dimedrol
*c. Novocaine
d. Tetracaine
e. Streptomycin

59. Quantitative determination of nitrofural (furacilin) can be done by method of spectrophotometry. A pharmacy analyst can calculate quantity by measuring:
a. Refractive index
b. pH of solution
c. Fusion temperature
*d. Optical density
e. Rotation angle

60. Analgin substance was sent for analysis. What method allows to evaluate quantitative content of analgin?
a. Alkalimetry
b. Acidimetry
*c. Iodometry
d. Chelatometry
e. Permanganatometry

61. An analytical laboratory is studying substance of calcium lactate. In presence of ammonium chloride calcium cation forms white crystalline precipitation with the following reagent:
a. Sodium tetraborate
b. Sodium cobaltnitrite
c. Sodium chloride
d. Potassium permanganate
*e. Potassium ferrocyanide

62. Analytical laboratories oten use 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol solution, which is normally blue and can be decolourized by the reducing agents. What drug can be identified by means of 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol solution?
*a. Ascorbic acid
b. Nicotinic acid
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Benzoic acid
e. Salicylic acid

63. A pharmacy analyst of the laboratory at the National drug quality control inspection is conducting quantitative determination of caffeine by method of acid-base titration in the anhydrous solvents according to the requirements of National Pharmacopeia of Ukraine. What titrated solution is to be used?
a. Potassium bromate
*b. Perchloric acid
c. Sodium hydroxide
d. Sodium methylate
e. Sodium edetate

64. Pharmaceutical chemistry studies methods of drug synthesis. Interaction of anesthesin with beta-diethylaminoethanol in presence of sodium alcoholate with following acidation with hydrochloric acid results in origination of:
a. Trimecaine hydrochloride
*b. Procaine hydrochloride
c. Tetracaine hydrochloride
d. Procainamide hydrochloride
e. Xycain

65. After a sulfamide preparation was heated with salicylic acid in presence of concentrated sulfuric acid, it turned crimson. What drug is analyzed?
a. Sulfaguine
b. Streptocid
*c. Soluble streptocid
d. Ethazol
e. Phtalazol

66. Which of the following reagents should be added to the isoniazid to achieve blue colour and precipitation that turns light-green and emits gases when heated?
a. Iron (III) chloride solution
*b. Copper sulfate solution
c. Alkaline solution
d. Silver nitrate solution
e. Hydrochloric acid solution

