1. A pharmaceutist made a tincture of althaea root. What is the proportion of herbal crude drug and extractant?
a. 1:30
b. 1:10
*c. 1:20
d. 1:100
e. 1:400

2. A pharmaceutist revealed incompatibility in the formulation.Rp.:Sol. Collargoli 1% - 10 mlSol. Adrenalini hydrochloridi 0,1% - 1 mlM.D.S. Nasal drops.What chemical process underlies this incompatibility?
a. Adsorption
*b. Oxidization
c. Precipitation
d. Neutralization
e. Hydrolysis

3. A pharmaceutist prepared solution of ethacrydine lactate. What is the peculiarity of this substance dissolving?
a. Grinding in a mortar with water
b. Dissolving in potassium iodide solution
c. Dissolving in freshly distilled water
d. Dissolving in cold water
*e. Dissolving in hot water

4. A pharmaceutist prepared an oil emulsion containing zinc oxide. Specify the rational method of substance incorporation:
a. Dissolution in the finished emulsion
*b. Suspension-type icorporation into the prepared emulsion
c. Grinding with water for dilution of the primary emulsion
d. Dissolution in oil
e. Dissolution in water for preparation of the primary emulsion

5. A pharmaceutist made a tincture of Adonis herb. A peculiarity of its preparation is that the active substances are derived in:
a. In the alkalescent medium
b. In the subacid medium
c. In the acid medium
*d. In the neutral medium
e. In the alkaline medium

6. A pharmaceutist is preparing fat-based suppositories by method of pouring. What base is to be used for this purpose?
a. Wax
b. Spermaceti
c. Vaseline (petrolatum)
d. Cocoa butter
*e. Butirol

7. A pharmacist-technologist received an ointment formulation. Rp.:Unguentum Resorcini 1,5% - 10,0Da. Signa. To be applied on the affected skin areas.The pharmaceutist incorporated dry medical substance into the ointment by the following way:
a. Triturated with a part of vaseline
*b. Triturated with a few vaseline oil drops
c. Triturated with a few water drops
d. Triturated with a few ethanol drops
e. Added to molten vaseline

8. A pharmacy got an order for eye drops containing 1% solution of pilocarpine hydrochloride. What substance was used in order to ensure isotonicity?
a. Glucose
b. Boric acid
*c. Sodium chloride
d. Sodium nitrate
e. Sodium sulfate

9. A pharmaceutist prepared some powders whose composition includes camphor. What capsules are required for their packaging?
a. Waxed
b. Paper
*c. Parchment
d. Paraffin
e. Cellophane

10. Ophthalmic drops are produced on the base of concentrated riboflavin solution (1:5000). How much solution should be taken if the formulation says "0,001 of riboflavin"?
a. 2 ml
b. 4 ml
c. 1 ml
*d. 5 ml
e. 3 ml

11. A pharmacist made eye drops of pilocarpine hydrochloride and adrenaline hydrochloride solution. A peculiarity of the incorporation of the adrenaline hydrochloride solution is that it is added:
a. After isotoning
*b. After sterilization, aseptic
c. To the half dose of solvent
d. After dissolving of solids
e. In the first place

12. A doctor prescribed a patient 100 ml of tincture made out of 0,25 of Herba Thermopsidis. How much dried concentrated extract of Herba Thermopsidis should be weighed by a pharmaceutist?
a. 0,1 g
*b. 0,25 g
c. 0,3 g
d. 0,5 g
e. 0,2 g

13. A patient has ordered 50 g of zinc ointment. How much zinc and Vaseline should be weighed by a pharmaceutist?
*a. 5,0 g and 45,0 g
b. 2,5 g and 47,5 g
c. 0,5 g and 49,5 g
d. 1,0 g and 49,0 g
e. 10,0 g and 40,0 g

14. A patient has been administered powders containing menthol. What is the best way to achieve the required extent of menthol comminution?
a. To triturate it with purified water
b. To triturate it with glycerine or chloroform
*c. To triturate it with alcohol or ether
d. To triturate it with other components of the formulation
e. To triturate it thoroughly with sugar

15. Stability of suspensions can be enhanced by substances which increase the viscosity of the dispersion medium. Specify the substance that exhibits such properties:
a. Ether
*b. Glycerol
c. Ethanol
d. Purified water
e. Dimexid

16. A doctor prescribed an olive oil emulsion whose composition includes anesthesin. In order that anesthesin can be incorpotated into the emulsion it should be dissolved:
*a. In the oil before emulsifying
b. In the treated water
c. In the alcohol and add to the primary emulsion
d. In the primary emulsion
e. In the mature emulsion

17. 100 ml of 0,9% sodium chloride solution were prepared according to the doctor’s prescription. What sterilization schedule is required for this solution?
a. 120°C - 12 minutes
b. 180°C - 30 minutes
c. 100°C - 15 minutes
*d. 120°C - 8 minutes
e. 120°C - 15 minutes

18. A pharmaceutist-technologist has to prepare a medication with the following formulation:Rp.:Mentholi 0,1Glycerini 10,0M.D.S. Nasal drops.What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Coagulation of colloidal system
*b. Insolubility of ingredients
c. Adsorption of the medicinal agent
d. Separation of the mixture
e. Eutectic alloy formation

19. A pharmacy got an order for a mixture containing manzanita decoction and belladonna extract. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Redox (oxidation-reduction) processes
b. Hydrolysis
*c. Sedimentation
d. Liberation of gaseous substances
e. Coagulation of colloidal systems

20. A pharmaceutist prepared eyedrops with boric acid. What sterilization method was applied?
a. Sterilization by gases
b. By high-frequency current
c. Tyndallization
d. Sterilization by dry heat
*e. Sterilization by saturation vapor pressure

21. A pharmaceutist refused preparation of nasal drops to a patient because of incompatibility between collargol and dimedrol written in the prescription. What is the reason for incompatibility between these ingredients?
a. Immiscibility
b. Dissection
c. Eutectic formation
*d. Coagulation
e. Adsorption

22. Preparation of multicomponent powders with phenyl salicylate and camphor is accompanied by generation of some fluid. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Crystallization water exudation
b. Adsorption
*c. Eutectic alloy formation
d. Hygroscopic components
e. Gases separation

23. A pharmaceutist was preparing an ointment with ricin oil and Vaseline but failed to get homogenous system. What is the most likely cause of incompatibility between these components?
a. Release of water of crystallization
b. Restricted solubility
*c. Component immiscibility
d. Coagulation
e. Adsorption

24. A doctor wrote a prescription for the tincture of digitalis with hydrochloric acid. What is the reason for their incompatibility?
a. Change in odour
*b. Hydrolysis (with no visible change)
c. Gassing
d. Precipitation
e. Change in colour

25. A pharmaceutist revealed incompatibility in a prescription for powders with ascorbic acid and hexamethylenetetramine. What process takes place when these components are combined?
a. Eutectic formation
b. Substances adsorption
c. Crystallization water exudation
*d. Mixture dampening
e. Immiscibility

26. A pharmaceutist revealed physical incompatibility caused by coagulation. This process takes place in a solution if the combination of the following substances is present:
a. Dimedrol and sodium chloride
b. Dimedrol and novocaine
*c. Dimedrol and collargol
d. Dimedrol and diazoline
e. Dimedrol and glucose

27. A pharmaceutist made a medicinal preparation according to the following formulation:Rp.:ChloroformiiOlei HelianthiMethylii salicylatis ana 10,0M.D.S. For infriction.Specify the kind of disperse system:
a. Liniment - combined
b. Liniment suspension
c. Liniment - extractional
*d. Liniment - solution
e. Liniment - emulsion

28. A pharmaceutist revealed physical incompatibility in a recipe. Specify the combination of drug substances demonstrating eutectic when blended:
a. Streptocid and antipyrine
b. Glucose and phenyl salicylate
*c. Camphor and menthol
d. Ascorbic acid and hydrocarbonate sodium
e. Basic bismuth nitrate and magnesium oxide

29. A pharmaceutist prepared a surface action ointment. What ointment base was used?
a. Polyethylene oxide basis
*b. Vaseline (petrolatum)
c. Kutumovas basis
d. Lanoline
e. Gelatin-glycerol base

30. A pharmacy received the following prescription: 0,0002 g of scopolamine hydrobromide per 1 powder. How much of 1:100 trituration is required for the preparation of 10 powders?
a. 2,0
*b. 0,2
c. 4,0
d. 0,04
e. 0,4

31. A pharmacy received a prescription for 3% alcohol solution of boric acid. What concentration of ethyl alcohol is required for preparing the drug form?
a. 60%
b. 90%
c. 96%
*d. 70%
e. 40%

32. Eye drops are prepared with an ointment base which is an alloy of vaseline and lanolin. Specify the method of its sterilization:
a. Flowing steam
b. Ethylene oxide
*c. Dry heat
d. Pasteurization
e. Tyndallization

33. A pharmacy received a prescription for preparation of dermatological ointment with benzylpenicillin. Specify the type of ointment that necessary to prepare:
a. Hydrophilic ointment
b. Liquid ointment
*c. Suspension ointment
d. Alloy ointment
e. Combined

34. During production of powders in a pharmacy physiochemical properties of certain ingredients should be taken into consideration. What pharmaceutical substance can be incorporated into the powder mass without additional grinding?
a. Salicylic acid
b. Streptocid
c. Camphor
d. Menthol
*e. Starch

35. Suspensions as heterogenous systems can be characterized by kinetic and sedimentary instability. What substance is used for increasing suspension stability with hydrophobic substances?
a. Sodium sulphate
b. Glucose
c. Sodium chloride
d. Boric acid
*e. Gelatose

36. Liquid dosage forms are prepared with concentrated solutions of pharmacetical substances or under consideration of volume increase factor during substance dissolution when the following substance is used as a solvent:
*a. Treated water
b. Glycerol
c. Polyethylene glycol-400
d. Ethanol (ethyl alcohol)
e. Aromatic water

37. While preparing decoctions in volume from 1000 to 3000 ml time of processing in boiling water bath should be:
a. 15 minutes
*b. 40 minutes
c. 30 minutes
d. 25 minutes
e. 45 minutes

38. How much water should be taken in order to prepare 200 ml of aqueous extract of motherwort (water absorption coefficient = 2 ml/g)?
a. 160 ml
b. 210 ml
c. 220 ml
d. 200 ml
*e. 240 ml

39. Dispersion degree of drug substances is of great importance for the preparation of ophtalmic ointments. What drug substance should be thoroughly triturated with sterile vaseline oil before incorporating it into the pharmacopoeia-recommended ointment base?
a. Resorcin
b. Zinc sulfate
c. Ethyl morphine hydrochloride
*d. Mercuric oxide yellow
e. Pilocarpine hydrochloride

40. A pharmaceutist has prepared an ointment intended for application on the open wound surface. Such kind of ointment should meet the following additional requirement:
*a. Sterility
b. Isoviscosity
c. Prolonged action
d. Isoionicity
e. Isotonicity

41. In course of preparation of suppositories by the pumping method the suppository mass became viscous and fluid after the incorporation of chloral hydrate into the cocoa butter. What substance should be added to the suppository mass in order to restore its density and plasticity?
a. Starch
*b. Wax
c. Purified water
d. Glycerine
e. Dimexid

42. Powders make up an important group among the extemporal medicinal preparations. Which of the following components can be incorporated into a powder without being preliminarily ground?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Xeroform
c. Calcium gluconate
*d. Basic Bismuth nitrate
e. Camphor

43. A pharmaceutist is preparing powders according to the following formulation:Rp.:Scopolamini hydrobromidi 0,0003Ephedrini hydrochlorodi 0,05Sachari 0,15M.f. pulvisD.t.d. № 10S. 1 powder thrice a day.Calculate the mass of 1 powder providing that the trituration (1:100) is used:
a. 0,17
b. 0,203
c. 0,15
d. 0,23
*e. 0,20

44. A pharmaceutist is preparing powders by the way of triturating one of the components with ethyl alcohol. Such technology of preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Talc
b. Starch
*c. Streptocid
d. Zinc oxide
e. Bolus alba

45. A pharmaceutist prepares several different solutions with antibiotics under aseptic conditions. He can sterilize the solution of the following substance:
a. Neomycin sulphate
b. Benzylpenicillin-sodium
*c. Chloramphenicol
d. Benzylpenicillin-potassium
e. Polymyxin sulphate

46. A pharmaceutist prepared a suspension. It must contain the following amount of fluid in order to comply with Deriagins rule:
a. 1,5-0,7 millilitre for 1,0 substance
b. 1-0,8 millilitre of 1,0 substance
*c. 0,4-0,6 millilitre for 1,0 substance
d. 0,9-2 millilitres for 1,0 substance
e. 0,1-1,0 millilitre for 1,0 substance

47. A pharmaceutist has revealed an incompatibility in the prescription. What drug substances form an eutectic mixture?
a. Calcium chloride + sodium chloride
b. Antipyrine + analgin
*c. Chloral hydrate + camphor
d. Ephedrine hydrochloride + glucose
e. Sodium hydrocarbonate + hexamethylenetetramine

48. A pharmacy got an order for powders containing ascorbic acid and sodium hydrocarbonate. What process takes place between the ingredients?
a. Sedimentation
b. Stratification
c. Oxidization
d. Absorption
*e. Dampening

49. A pharmacy got the following recipe:Rp.:Mucilaginis Amyli 50,0Da. Signa. For the enema purposes.How much starch and distilled water did the pharmaceutist use in order to make this preparation?
a. 2,0 g of starch; 48 ml of distilled water
b. 1,0 g of starch; 50 ml of distilled water
*c. 1,0 g of starch; 49 ml of distilled water
d. 5,0 g of starch; 45 ml of distilled water
e. 10,0 g of starch; 40 ml of distilled water

50. A pharmacy produces some injection solutions that have to be apyrogenic. Solution of the following substance can be depyrogenized by method of adsorption with activated carbon?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Scopolamine hydrobromide
c. Platyphyllini hydrotartras
*d. Glucose
e. Papaverine hydrochloride

51. A pharmacy received a prescription for a topical powder including a substance that is hard to disperse. Which of the listed fluids may be used for dispersing the substance?
a. Water for injections
b. Purified water
*c. Diethyl ether
d. Dimexid
e. Isopropyl alcohol

52. A pharmaceutist has to prepare suppositories with a glycerine gelatin base by the molding method. What is the ratio of gelatin, water and glycerine required for the base?
a. 2:2:4
b. 2:1:5
c. 3:2:3
*d. 1:2:5
e. 1:3:4

53. Powders that quickly enter into a reaction in presence of water and emit carbon dioxide relate to the following group:
a. Powders for oral use
b. Soluble powder
*c. Effervescent powder
d. Nasal powders
e. Powders for external use

54. Calculate the quantity of dried belladonna extract (1:2) required for preparing the following drug formulation:Extraсti Belladоnnae 0,015Magnesii oxydi 0,5Natrii hydrocarbonatis 0,2Misce ut fiat pulvis Da tales doses №10Signa. 1 powder thrice a day
*a. 0,3
b. 0,4
c. 0,015
d. 0,6
e. 0,15

55. Spesify the type of the following liniment: Ol. Helianthi 7,4Sol. Ammonii caustici 25 mlAc. Oleinici 0,1M.f. linimentumD.S. To be rubbed in
a. Liniment-solution
b. Combined liniment
*c. Liniment, emulsion o/w
d. Liniment-suspension
e. Liniment, emulsion w/o

56. A pharmaceutist is preparing rectal suppositories based on cocoa butter and containing dimedrol with mass concentartion less than 5%. For rational incorporation of dimedrol into the base it should be solved:
a. In the melted cocoa butter
b. In olive oil
*c. In the minimum amount of treated water
d. In vaseline oil
e. In alcohol

57. A pharmaceutist needs to sterilize 250 ml of glucose solution for injections. How many minutes should the solution undergo sterilization in the autoclave under the temperature of 120°C?
*a. 12
b. 15
c. 30
d. 25
e. 8

58. A pharmaceutist is preparing an ointment under aseptic conditions on the sterile ointment base - composition of vaseline and lanoline at a ratio 6:4. The drug substance is incorporated by suspension type. Such technology of ointment preparation is typical for the following substance:
a. Thiamine chloride
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Sodium sulfate

59. This substance is of blue colour but unlike the colouring substances it doesn’t leave any stain. The powders prepared out of it are made according to the general rules. What substance is it?
a. Ethacridine lactate
b. Acrichine
c. Furacilin
*d. Copper sulfate
e. Riboflavin

60. A pharmaceutist brews an aqueous extract out of medicinal raw material in the tightly closed infusion vessel for 15 minutes and stirs it without opening the lid. Such technology of infusion preparation is typical for the following medicinal raw material:
a. Cowberry leaves
*b. Mint leaves
c. Senna leaves
d. Bilberry leaves
e. Manzanita leaves

61. A pharmaceutist made 10 powders containing atropine sulfate at a rate of 0,00005 pro dose. What trituration did he use?
*a. 1:100
b. 1:1000
c. 1:20
d. 1:50
e. 1:10

62. A pharmacy got an order for manzanita decoction and hexamethylenetetramine. A pharmacist cancelled it with a stamp "Invalid prescription". What is the reason for the incompatibility?
a. Oxidization
b. Eutectic
*c. Deposition
d. Moisture-repellant
e. Insolubility

63. A pharmaceutist prepares internal drops with the following formulation: 5 ml of adoniside, 10 ml of valerian and lily-of-the-valley tincture each, 0,1 g of menthol, 2,0 g of potassium bromide. It will be efficient to dissolve potassium bromide in the following substance:
a. Potassium bromide should be added into the selling vial last of all
*b. In the adoniside
c. In the valerian tincture
d. In the lily-of-the-valley tincture
e. In the mixture of tinctures

64. A pharmacist technologist revealed incompatibility in the following prescription:Rp.:Mentholi 0,5Natrii hydrocarbonatisNatrii tetraboratis aa 1,5Aquae purificatae 100 mlM.D.S. 1 tablespoon twice a day.In order to prepare this drug form the pharmacist should apply the following techniques:
a. Apply another solvent
b. Apply fractional dissolution
*c. Add stabilizer
d. Change one of the component
e. Change dosage form

65. A pharmaceutist is preparing vaginal suppositories by method of pouring. Which hydrophilic base can he use for this purpose?
a. Hard fat
b. Butyrol
c. Cocoa butter
d. Vitepsol
*e. Polyethylene oxide

66. An edema can be relieved by means of hypertonic solutions. What phenomenon takes place in the blood cells after injection of such solution?
a. Hydrolysis
b. Lipolysis
c. Electrolysis
*d. Plasmolysis
e. Hemolysis

