1. During local anaesthetization novocaine solution is usually compounded with solution of adrenaline hydrochloride. What is the purpose of this action?
a. Vasodilatation
b. Decrease in smooth muscle tone
c. Algesthesia reduction
*d. Vasoconstriction
e. Increase in smooth muscle tone

2. A 32-year-old patient takes antituberculous drugs. Some time later he has noticed that his urine turned orange. What preparation is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
*a. Rifampicin
b. Pyrazinamide
c. Streptomycin sulfate
d. Ethambutol
e. Isoniazid

3. On the 4th day of treatment with indometacin a 55-year-old patient developed gastrorrhagia as a result of gastric mucosa ulcer. Ulcerogenic effect of this drug is explained by the lowered activity of the following enzyme:
a. Lipoxygenase (LOG)
b. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
*c. Cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1)
d. Prostacyclin synthetase
e. -

4. A 45-year-old patient has been taking neodicumarinum for thrombophlebitis for two weeks. The regular blood test revealed a decrease in prothrombin concentration, microhematuria. Which drug should be used as neodicumarinum antagonist?
*a. Vicasol
b. Sodium citrate
c. Aminocaproic acid
d. Heparin
e. Protamine sulfate

5. A patient complaining of dry mouth, photophobia and blurred vision has been delivered to the admission ward. Objectively: the skin is hyperemic, dry, mydriatic pupils and tachycardia are present. He has been diagnosed with belladonna alkaloids intoxication. Which of the drugs should be given as an antidote?
a. Dipiroxim
*b. Neostigmine
c. Pylocarpine
d. Aceclidine
e. Armin

6. A patient suffering from peptic ulcer was administered ranitidine. Gastric juice acidity has reduced considerably. What mechanism underlies the action of this drug?
a. M-cholinergic receptors blockade
b. N1-histamine receptors blockade
*c. N2-histamine receptors blockade
d. H,K-ATPase activity inhibition
e. Autonomic ganglion H-cholinergic receptors blockade

7. A 52-year-old patient was diagnosed with systemic amebiasis accompanied by bowels, liver and lungs affection. What preparation should be administered?
a. Tetracycline
b. Chiniofon
*c. Metronidazole
d. Chingamin
e. Phthalazol

8. A 33-year-old woman who has been treated for chronic polyarthritis for a long time complains about arterial pressure rise, change of adipose tissue distribution, menstrual cycle disorder. What preparation has she taken?
a. Butadion
b. Indometacin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Synaflan
e. Diclofenac sodium

9. A gravida in her 20th week of gestation got ill with pneumonia. What chemotherapeutical drug may be administered with no risk for the fetus development?
a. Sulfalenum
b. Gentamycin
*c. Веnzylpenicillinum
d. Laevomycetinum
e. Ofloxacinum

10. During a surgical operation the muscle relaxant tubocurarine chloride was used. What antagonist drug should be injected in order to allow the patient to brief independently?
a. Cytitonum
b. Dithylinum
*c. Neostigmine
d. Aethimizolum
e. Веnzohexonium

11. A child has accidentally drunk a solution that was used by his grandmother for glaucoma treatment. The solution turned out to be pilocarpine hydrochloride. What drug can be used as an antidote?
a. Реntaminum
*b. Аtropinum
c. Aceclidinum
d. Carbacholinum
e. Веnzohexonium

12. Choose an antiseptic from the group of halogen containing drugs that can be included into the first-aid kit for a child going to a summer camp:
a. Methylene blue solution
b. Formaldehyde solution
c. Brilliant green solution
d. Copper sulfate solution
*e. Alcoholic iodine solution

13. A pharmacy received a new-generation nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drug "meloxicam" that mainly blocks cyclooxygenase-2. What advantages does this preparation have in comparison with other nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs?
a. Evident myospasmolytic action
b. Minimal side effect on hematogenesis
c. Significant inhibition of protease activity
*d. Minimal side effect on alimentary tract
e. Interferonogenic properties

14. When fenoterolum for inhalations is not available in a pharmacy, it can be substituted by the following drug from the group of bronchoselective beta-2-adrenomimetics:
a. Isadrinum
b. Ephedrinum
c. Еuphyllinum
*d. Salbutamolum
e. Metacinum

15. A patient consulted an ophthalmologist about scotopic vision impairment, cornea dryness. What drug was prescribed?
a. Тосоpherol
b. Pyridoxine
*c. Retinolum
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Сосаrboxylasum

16. A patient suffering from essential hypertension has increased concentration of renin in blood plasma. Which pharmacological group should be preferred for this patient treatment?
a. Diuretics
b. ?-adrenoblockers
*c. ACE inhibitors
d. Blockers of calcium channels
e. Sympatholytics

17. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed almagel. Which of its pharmacological properties is intended for treatment of this pathology?
a. Blocking the muscarinic cholinoreceptors
b. Anti-inflammatory action
c. Local anaesthetization
d. Blocking the H2-histamine receptors
*e. HCl neutralization

18. A patient with depression has been administered a drug from the group of tricyclic antidepressants. Specify this drug:
a. Caffeine
*b. Amitriptyline
c. Droperidol
d. Phenazepam
e. Aminalonum

19. A patient suffering from hypertension consulted a doctor about dry cough that was presumably provoked by antihypertensive therapy. What antihypertensive drug had she been taking?
a. Hydrochlorthiazide
*b. Lisinopril
c. Nifedipinе
d. Аtеnоlоl
e. Furosemidum

20. A patient suffering from ulcer disease was prescribed famotidine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Inhibition of adenosine triphosphatase activity
b. Block of cholinoreceptors of sympathetic ganglions
c. Block of Н1-histamine receptors
d. Block of muscarinic cholinoreceptors
*e. Block of Н2-histamine receptors

21. Which antiseptic preparation has bactericidal effect due to the formation of atomic oxygen?
*a. Potassium permanganate
b. Furacilinum
c. Silver nitrate
d. Aethonium
e. Chloraminum

22. During digitoxin therapy for chronic cardiac insufficiency, a patient developed signs of intoxication with this preparation. The patient was prescribed unithiol. What is the mechanism of unithiol action in case of intoxication with cardiac glycosides?
*a. Reduction of К+-Na+-adenosine triphosphatase
b. Increase of sodium concentration in the cardiomyocytes
c. Binding of glycoside into the complex compound
d. Increased potassium permeability in the cardiomyocytes
e. Binding of calcium ions

23. A 67-year-old patient with chronic heart failure takes digoxin. In order to reduce its side effects the patients doctor recommended to combine it with the followig drug:
a. Hydrochlorthiazide
b. Calcium chloride
c. Calcium gluconate
d. Еuphyllinum
*e. Раnangin

24. A patient suffering from neurosis accompanied by anxiety and fear development was prescribed diazepam. What pharmacological effect makes it possible to apply the drug for this disease treatment?
a. Hypotensive
b. Antianginal
c. Antiarrhythmic
d. Anti-inflammatory
*e. Anxiolytic

25. After a craniocerebral trauma a patient was administered pyracetam. This drug relates to the following pharmacological group:
a. Nonnarcotic (nonopioid) analgetic
b. Anesthetic agent
c. Neuroleptic
*d. Nootropic agent
e. Tranquilizers

26. In order to arrest stenocardia attacks a patient takes nitroglycerin capsules. What is the rational way of the drug introduction?
*a. Sublingual
b. Rectal
c. Hypodermic
d. Inhalation
e. Peroral

27. A hospital admitted a child with signs of poisoning with belladonna alkaloids. What drug should be applied as an antidote?
a. Sodium caffeine benzoate
b. Magnesium sulfate
*c. Proserin
d. Paracetamol
e. Sodium valproate

28. Which mucolytic drug can you recommend a patient with acute bronchitis  that ease difficulty in expectoration:
a. Glaucine
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Drotaverine hydrochloride
*d. Acetylcysteine
e. Loratadine

29. You are employed in a pharmaceutical storehouse. When adding newly received preparations to the computerized database, specify the pharmacological group of paracetamol:
a. Hypotensive drug
b. Antianginal drug
c. Hypnotic
d. Diuretic
*e. Nonnarcotic analgetic

30. A patient with atherosclerosis has been administered an anti-atherosclerotic agent. Specify this drug:
a. Pyracetam
b. Ascorbic acid
*c. Phenofibrate
d. Dexamethasone
e. Phenylbutazone

31. A patient after bees stings has angioedema (Quinckes edema). Which drug should be immediately inject to eliminate this condition?
*a. Epinephrine hydrochloride
b. Platyphyllini hydrotartras
c. Аnарrilinum
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Sodium chloride

32. A patient with hypertension was administered metoprolol for the arterial pressure reduction. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Indirect adrenomimetic action
b. Alpha adrenoceptor blockade
*c. Beta adrenoreceptor blockade
d. Antispasmodic
e. Angiotensinic receptors blockade

33. A 34-year-old patient suffering from bronchitis was prescribed an antitussive drug of central action. What drug is it?
a. Corglycon
b. Furosemide
c. Fercoven
*d. Glaucine
e. Enalapril

34. Continuous taking of a drug results in reduction of its efficiency. This phenomenon is called:
a. Tachyphylaxis
*b. Habituation
c. Cumulation
d. Sensibilization
e. Dependence

35. A patient was warned that taking the prescribed preparation might cause cough. What drug is it?
a. Dichlothiazide
b. Metoprolol
c. Clonidine
d. Phenihidine
*e. Lisinopril

36. A patient with acute cardiac insufficiency and cardiac glycoside intolerance got an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase activity
b. Stimulation of muscarinic cholinoreceptors
c. Stimulation of alpha1-adrenoreceptors
d. Block of K+-, Na+-adenosine triphosphatase
*e. Stimulation of beta1-adrenoreceptors

37. For thrombosis treatment a patient was prescribed a drug from the group of direct anticoagulants. What drug is it?
a. Vikasol
*b. Heparin
c. Syncumar
d. Fenilin (phenylinum)
e. Neodicumarin

38. A patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency was prescribed a cardiac glycoside from the foxglove (Digitalis) group. What drug is it?
a. Corvalol
b. Strophanthine
*c. Digoxin
d. Corglycon
e. Cordiamin

39. A patient presents with morphine intoxication. Which drug should be injected as an antidote?
*a. Naloxone
b. Bemegride
c. Unithiol
d. Atropine sulphate
e. Lobeline hydrochloride

40. In course of pharmacotherapy of bronchitis a patient was found to have dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis, liver dysfunction. Which of the prescribed drugs might have caused these manifestations?
a. Асеtуlсуsteinum
b. Codeine phosphate
c. Paracetamolum
d. Ascorbic acid
*e. Doxycyсlin

41. A patient who has been suffering from gastric diseases for a long time is found to have hyperchromic anemia. Which of the following drugs is applied for this pathology treatment?
a. Охуferriscorbone
*b. Сyanocobalamine
c. Unitiol
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Ferrum Lek

42. A 25-year-old woman presenting with acute morphine intoxication was given an injection of naloxone that caused rapid improvement of her condition. The mechanism of action of this preparation is based on the block of the following receptors:
a. Dopamine
b. Benzodiazepine receptors
c. GABA-receptors
d. Serotonin receptors
*e. Opioid receptors

43. A man came to a pharmacy and asked to recommend him a drug for treatment of allergic rhinitis that occurs in the period of linden flowering. What drug may be applied?
a. Adrenaline
b. Ambroxol
c. Losartan
*d. Loratadine
e. Anapriline

44. It is necessary to prescribe non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug for patient with rheumatoid arthritis and concomitant duodenal ulcer. Which drug is the drug of choice in this case?
a. Diclofenac sodium
*b. Celecoxib
c. Paracetamol
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Analgin

45. During the sensitifity test for benzylpenicillin a patient developed anaphylactic shock. The following preparation must be injected around the spot of antibiotic injection:
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
*c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
d. Propranolol
e. Ceftriaxon

46. A patient with bronchial asthma has been administered a drug from the group of beta-adrenergic agonists. Specify this drug:
a. Digoxin
*b. Salbutamol
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
d. Diazepam
e. Nitroglycerine

47. A patient has been administered a spasmolytic from the group of muscarinic receptor antagonists as a part of the complex treatment for renal colic. Specify this drug:
a. Neostigmine
b. Dithylinum
c. Benzohexonium
*d. Atropine
e. Galantamine

48. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed salbutamol that has led to relief of bronchospasm symptoms. This is associated with stimulation of:
a. beta1-adrenoreceptors
*b. beta2-adrenoreceptors
c. Muscarinic cholinoreceptors
d. alpha1-adrenoreceptors
e. Acetylcholine synthesis

49. A patient has been taking isosorbide for stenocardia prevention for quite a long time. Now he notes a significant decrease in the effect of the drug. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Cumulation
b. Allergy
c. Potentiation
*d. Tolerance
e. Physical dependence

50. A patient with chronic bronchitis wants to buy glaucine hydrochloride at a pharmacy. What typical side effect of the drug should the patient be warned against?
a. Allergic skin rash
*b. Drop of arterial pressure
c. Irregular heartbeat
d. Excitation of the central nervous system
e. Rise of intraocular pressure

51. A 30-year-old patient with a sleep disorder and psychoemotional disbalance has been administered diazepam. What is the mechanism of its psychosedative action?
a. Inhibition of the limbic system
b. Reduction of noradrenaline amount in the CNS
c. Inhibition of opioid receptors
*d. Activation of GABAergic system
e. Inhibition of the reticular formation

52. Benzylpenicillin sodium is not used per os, because this drug:
a. Reduces formation of gastric HCl
b. Is destroyed by penicillinase
c. Poorly absorbed in the intestine
d. Irritates gastric mucosa
*e. Destroys gastric HCl

53. A female has prolonged labour. Select a drug that stimulates labour activity due to its physiological effect from the listed below:
a. Pachycarpine
b. Neostigmine
*c. Oxytocin
d. Progesterone
e. Estrone

54. A 48-year-old patient was given an intravenous injection of prednisolone in order to arrest a severe attack of bronchial asthma. Prednisolone relates to the following group of hormonal drugs:
a. Gestagenic drugs
b. Mineral corticoids
c. Anabolic steroids
*d. Glucocorticoids
e. Estrogens

55. A patient who has been taking phenazepam for a month came to a pharmacy. He insisted on buying another two packs of this drug. According to the patient, he feels unwell without phenazepam. What is the mechanism of the developed side effect?
a. Cumulation
b. Addiction
c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Aftereffect syndrome
*e. Drug dependence

56. A patient suffering from allergic rhinitis was prescribed ephedrine in form of nasal drops. The patient has significantly benefited from nasal instillation, and this stimulated him to use the drug every 2 hours. But under these conditions the drug appeared to be ineffective. What is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Allergy
b. Cumulation
c. Drug dependence
d. Idiosyncrasy
*e. Tachyphylaxis

57. Which anaesthetic, anti-inflammatory, the least harmful for the stomach preparation can be recommended to a patient with exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis?
a. Indometacinum
*b. Celecoxib
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Ibuprofenum

58. Select a loop diuretic of strong, emergency and short-term action from the listed below:
a. Spironolactone
b. Triamterene
c. Clopamide
d. Acetazolamide
*e. Furosemide

59. A patient suffering from epilepsy has taken Phenobarbital for a long time and developed drug tolerance. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon development?
a. Substances accumulation in the body
*b. Acceleration of biotransformation
c. Receptors sensitivity enhancement
d. Absorption process reduction
e. Inhibition of biotransformation

60. Absorption of tetracycline preparations will be reduced when they are administered simultaneously with antacids. This is an example for:
*a. Pharmacokinetic incompatibility
b. Pharmacodynamic incompatibility
c. Functional drugs antagonism
d. Drugs synergism
e. Pharmaceutical incompatibility

61. A patient being treated in the infectious disease ward for dysentery is administered phthalazol. What is the reason for phthalazol being used only for treatment of enteric infections?
a. Rapidly excreted in unchanged form
*b. The drug is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
c. Slowly eliminated from the body
d. The high degree of reabsorption in the kidneys
e. Rapidly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract

62. During an operation a dentist needs to reduce salivation in a patient. The dentist has to use a drug of the following pharmacological group:
a. Muscarinic and nicotinic cholinomimetics
*b. Muscarinic receptor blockers
c. Adrenomimetics
d. Muscarinic cholinomimetics
e. Adrenoceptor blocker

63. A consulting pharmacist informed a patient about possible side effect of metronidazole that is normally provoked by alcohol intake. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
*a. Enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase blocking
b. Enzyme acetylcholinesterase blocking
c. Enzyme glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase activation
d. Enzyme acetylcholinesterase activation
e. Enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase activation

64. An anaesthesiologist has to perform an operation under neuroleptanalgesia. Which of the following drug combinations should be used in this case?
a. Diazepam with aminazine
b. Promedol with amitriptillin
c. Droperidol with prednisolone
d. Fentanyl with diazepam
*e. Fentanyl with droperidol

65. A 40-year-old patient suffers from bronchial asthma and cardiac rhythm disturbance in form of bradyarrhythmia. Drugs of which pharmacological group should be administered for bronchospasm suppression?
a. M-cholinomimetics
b. Beta-blockers
*c. M-cholinergic antagonists
d. Cholinesterase inhibitors
e. Muscle relaxant

66. An interhospital pharmacy got an order from a surgical department for a depolarizing muscle relaxant for surgical interventions. What drug was ordered?
*a. Dithylinum
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Hygronium
d. Methacin
e. Nicotine

67. A patient who has taken phenobarbital for a long time was prescribed diclofenac sodium. However the anti-inflammatory effect of diclofenac appeared to be less than expected due to the pharmacokinetic interaction of these drugs. Such interaction might be the result of the following processes:
*a. Accelerated drug metabolism in liver
b. Reduced protein concentration in plasma
c. Increased drug dosage
d. Change of receptor sensibility
e. Decelerated drug metabolism in liver

