1. A patient with heart failure induced by a long-term coronary vessel disorder can be administered a drug produced out of the following herbal raw material:
a. Ginseng roots
b. Calendula flowers
*c. Hawthorn
d. Aralia roots
e. Berberis roots

2. A patient came to a drugstore and ordered cowberry leaves. Which of the available herbal raw materials can be offered as a substitute?
a. Radix Taraxaci officinalis
*b. Folium Uvae ursi
c. Rizoma et radix Sanquisorbae officinalis
d. Rizoma Calami
e. Herba Achilleae millefolii

3. A pharmacy depot received a batch of common plantain leaves. According to the requirements of the Pharmacopoeia, this herbal raw matrial is of adequate quality if it contains the following active substances:
a. Anthracene derivatives
b. Essential oils
c. Flavonoids
d. Tannins
*e. Polysaccharides

4. Preparations on the basis of dandelion roots are recommended for better digestion and as a choleretic because this herbal raw material contains:
*a. Bitters
b. Balsams
c. Flavonoids
d. Saponins
e. Essential oil

5. Preparations made of ginseng roots have tonic and adaptogenic properties, improve mental and physical performance. If the ginseng tincture cannot be found in a pharmacy, it can be substituted by the analogous preparations made of the following raw material:
*a. Radices Eleutherococci
b. Radices Inulae
c. Radices Rhei
d. Radices Ononidis
e. Radices Valerianae

6. Coltsfoot preparations are used for upper airways treatment. During procurement of this herbal raw material the following admixture may appear:
a. Spring adonis (Adonis vernalis)
b. Common plantain (Plantago major)
*c. Great bur (Arctium lappa)
d. Marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis)
e. Pot marjoram (Origanum vulgare)

7. If the internal surface of buckthorn rind is moistened with 5% alkaline solution, it becomes cherry-red colouring. This is the evidence of presence of the following substance:
a. Tannins
*b. Anthracene derivatives
c. Saponins
d. Alkaloids
e. Flavonoids

8. Leaves of belladonna, henbane and datura containing tropane alkaloids must be stored according to the following list requirements:
a. General sales list
b. A list (poisonous drug substances)
*c. B list (these drug substances require caution in handling, storage or use)
d. Essential oil materials list
e. List of substances equivalent to narcotics

9. Specify the herbal raw material with high concentration of carotinoids which is used for production of phytopreparations:
a. Parsley roots
*b. Sea-buckthorn fruits
c. Caseweed grass
d. Currant leaflets
e. Wild strawberry leaves

10. One of the ways to derive essential oil is enfleurage, or maceration. Essential oil can be derived by enfleurage from the following herbal raw material:
*a. Petals of Damascus rose
b. Coriander fruits
c. Camomile flowers
d. Mint leaves
e. Lemon skin

11. Calamus rhizome is likely to be confused with some other plant rhizome that can be found as an admixture in the herbal raw material. Specify the most likely admixture:
a. Phlojodicarpus roots
*b. Iris rhizome
c. Elecampane roots
d. Valerian rhizome
e. Althaea roots

12. Tannins can be used as an antidote for alkaloid poisoning. What herbal remedy should be applied in case of such intoxication:
a. Calamus rhizome
b. Rhizome and roots of madder
c. Elecampane root
*d. Cinquefoil root
e. Althaea root

13. Tannins have astringent effect and are used for treatment of colitis, enterocolitis, diarrhea. What herbal raw material contains a lot of tannins?
a. Fructus Rhamni catharticae
b. Fructus Frangulae
c. Fructus Sambucci nigri
d. Fructus Ribes nigri
*e. Fructus Myrtilli

14. Emodin, an anthracene derivative, haspurgative effect. Large quantities of anthracene-derived groups of emodin are contained in the fruits of the following plant:
a. Blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus)
b. Alder buckthorn (Frangula alnus)
c. Elder (Sambucus)
d. Blackcurrant
*e. Buckthorn

15. Cardioglycosides of Adonis vernalis are used for heart failure treatment. This plant raw material should be stored:
a. According to the list A
b. Protected from CO2
c. In metal containers
*d. According to the list B
e. Under normal conditions

16. In order to determine the purity a drop of lavender essential oil was applied on a strip of filter paper and warmed up in the stream of warm air. Some time later the stain increased in diameter. What impurity substance was found in the lavender oil?
a. Ethanol
b. Phenol
*c. Fatty or mineral oil
d. Acetone
e. Diethyl ether

17. Underground organs of medicinal plants that accumulate the most of active substances should be collected:
a. At the stem extension stage
*b. After the seeds have ripened and the overground parts died off
c. During the green fruiting
d. At the flowering stage
e. At the budding stage

18. Styles of maize with stigmata containing fatty acids, vitamins, essential oils, saponins and other substances are used as:
a. Cardiotonic and antiarrhythmic
b. Sedative and anticonvulsant
*c. Diuretic and choleretic
d. Expectorant and antibechic
e. Bactericidal and astringent

19. Yellow gentian contains bitter glycosides. Raw material of this plant is reccomended for production of drugs with the following effect:
a. Hepatoprotective
b. Venotonic
c. Tonic
d. Diuretic
*e. Stimulates appetite

20. It is required to analyse some herbal raw material in form of shiny black drupes up to 6-8 mm in diameter; the bone is large, very firm, spherical, light brown, with a single seed; it has a sweet, slightly astringent taste. This herbal raw material should be qualified as a fruit of:
*a. Bird cherry
b. Black chokeberry
c. Hawthorn
d. Buckthorn
e. Blueberry

21. Preparations of common valerian are used in medical practice as sedative drugs. The main feature that allows to distinguish valerian from the admixtures is:
a. Specific taste
b. No specific odor
*c. Specific odor
d. Specific color of raw materials
e. Stems remains

22. One of the methods of quantitative analysis of active substances in the raw material is the biological standardization. It can be applied with the following group of biologically active substances:
a. Tannins
b. Mucilages
c. Alkaloids
d. Fatty oils
*e. Cardiac gliycosides

23. A phytopreparation "Flacarbinum" has spasmolytic, anti-inflammatory and antiulcer effect. This preparation is produced out of the following plant:
a. Mountain angelica (Aralia mandshurica)
b. Pot marigold (Calendula officinalis)
c. Jacobs ladder blue (Polemonium caeruleum)
d. Buckeye (Aesculus)
*e. Licorice (Glycyrrhiza)

24. Essential oil of rose is used as an anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic agent. It is localized in the following excretory organs:
a. Secretory cells
b. Glandular hairs
c. Essential oil glandules
d. Essential oil conceptacles
*e. Glandular spots

25. Styles of maize with stigmata containing fatty acids, vitamins, essential oils, saponins and other substances are used as:
a. Cardiotonic and antiarrhythmic drug
*b. Diuretic and choleretic drug
c. Bactericidal and astringent drug
d. Expectorant and antitussive drug
e. Sedative and anticonvulsive drug

26. The main active components of hawthorn berries are flavonoids. What is their pharmacological effect?
*a. Hypotensive and sedative
b. Tonic and antispasmodic
c. Antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory
d. Diuretic and styptic
e. Laxative and sedative

27. Fatty oil containing unsaturated fatty acids are used for atherosclerosis prevention. What herbal raw material contains such fatty oil?
a. Buckhorn plantain (Plantago lanceolata) seeds
b. Parsnip fruitages
c. Scurfy pea (Psoralea) fruitages
*d. Cucurbit seeds
e. Chestnut (Castanea) seeds

28. Fatty oil containing saturated fatty acids is used for atherosclerosis prevention. Specify the medicinal plant that is used for oil production:
a. Fennelflower seeds
b. Black chokeberry fruits
c. Hawthorn fruits
*d. Flax seeds
e. Dill seeds

29. A storehouse received a batch of althaea roots. For its verification a drop of ammonia solution was applied upon the root section; the spot of section turned yellow. This is the evidence of presence of the following substance:
a. Gum
b. Tannins
*c. Mucilages
d. Pectins
e. Vitamin C

30. Upper airways diseases can be treated by means of herbal raw materials containing mucilages. The plant source of this compound class is:
a. Radix Rhodiolae
b. Radix Belladonnae
c. Radix Inulae
d. Radix Ipecacuanhae
*e. Radix Althaeae

31. The main active components of senna leaves and fruits are sennosides A, B, C, D. They relate to the following class of biologically active substances:
a. Flavonoids
b. Phenolic acids
*c. Anthracene derivatives
d. Iridoids
e. Thioglycosides

32. Preparations containing cardiosteroids are produced out of the following herbal raw material:
a. Folia Ficusi Caricae
b. Folia Sennae
c. Cortex Quercus
d. Radix Taraxaci
*e. Herba Convallariae

33. A laboratory received some herbal raw material for analysis. It is a composition of ovoid-pointed leaves up to 25 cm long and 20 cm wide; the leaf base is cuneate, the leaf edge is emarginate. The cutting is long and cylindric. The leaf venation is pinnatisect; the midrib and the first-order veins project significantly on the inferior surface of the leaf. The superior leaf surface is dark green, the inferior surface is light green. The plant has a weak narcotic smell. The taste cannot be determined. The plant is poisonous! The described herbal raw material relates to the following plant:
a. Passiflora incarnata
b. Vinca minor
c. -
*d. Datura stramonium
e. Chelidonium majus

34. Tanning agents of silverweed roots and rhizomes are used as an astringent. What species of silverweed is pharmacopoeial?
a. Potentilla impolita
b. Potentilla anserina
c. Potentilla argentea
d. Potentilla pilosa
*e. Potentilla erecta

35. Some domestic and foreign hepatoprotective activity preparation are made of holy thistle bearing. Purity of this material is determined by the content of:
a. Alkaloids
b. Coumarins
*c. Flavolignan
d. Vitamins
e. Terpenoids

36. Preparations made out of eleutherococcus roots and rhizomes are administered as a tonic and adaptogenic drug. If these preparations cannot be found in a pharmacy, they can be substituted by the analogous preparations made of the following raw material:
a. Elecampane roots
b. Polemonium roots
c. Acorus calamus roots
*d. Ginseng roots
e. Rhizomes and roots of valerian

37. A biennial or perennial plant from the Apiaceae family has a blue-grey stem branching in its lower part. Its leaves are also blue-grey, finely dissected, with the ultimate filiform segments. The flowers are yellow, in compound umbels. Its fruit is used for production of "dill water". What plant is it?
a. Petroselium crispum
b. Carum carvi
*c. Foeniculum vulgare
d. Coriandrum sativum
e. Conium maculatum

38. On the base of licorice root different drug dosage forms are produced, notably tablets, powders, syrups, teas. The only unused form is injection solution. Licorice roots exhibit haemolytic properties typical for the following active substances:
a. Iridoids
b. Polysaccharides
c. Alkaloids
d. Essential oils
*e. Saponins

39. Tincture of what medicinal plant can be applied as a tonic?
a. Orthosiphon stamineus
b. Achillea millefolium
*c. Rhodiola rosea
d. Digitalis purpurea
e. Robinia pseudacacia

40. A laboratory received some herbal raw material for analysis. The plant had flowerheads up to 4 cm in diameter, the marginal flowers were agamic, blue, funnel-shaped; the inner flowers were bisexual, purple, tubular. What plant has these features?
a. Solidago virgaurea
b. Scutellaria baicalensis
c. Viola tricolor
*d. Centaurea cyanus
e. Polygonum persicaria

41. Restharrow (Ononis) root is used for production of a tincture applied for treatment of haemorrhoidal haemorrhages. Isoflavonoids can be identified in the raw material by means of:
a. Biological standardization
b. Foam number
c. Cyanidin test
d. Hemolytic index
*e. Chromatographic method

42. Hawthorn flowers are used for production of cardiotonic drugs. During procurement of this crude drug the flowers of the following plant can appear in it:
a. Elder
*b. Blackthorn
c. Bird-cherry
d. Buckthorn
e. Brier

43. Common juniper is applied as a diuretic, anti-inflammatory and cholagogic agent. This plant gives the following medicinal raw material:
a. Roots
b. Seeds
c. Sprouts
d. Leaves
*e. Fruits

44. A pharmacy procured common origanum. What drying conditions should be applied for producing high quality crude drug?
a. 70-80°C
*b. 35-40°C
c. 60-70°C
d. 80-90°C
e. 50-60°C

