1. A tablet production unit produces press-coated tablets. What equipment is used for this purpose?
a. Dragee pan
b. Eccentric tabletting machine
c. Triturating machine
*d. Double pressing tabletting machine
e. Marmerizer

2. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces a dense extract with 0,25% ammonia solution used as an extractant. This dense extract is:
a. Valerian
b. Sagebrush (Artemisia)
*c. Licorice
d. Male fern
e. Motherwort (Leonurus)

3. Aerosol production involves application of different groups of propellents. What propellents relate to the group of compressed gases?
*a. Nitrogen, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide
b. Propane, butane, isobutane
c. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride
d. Vinyl chloride, methyl chloride
e. Freons

4. For granule drying different types of dryers are used. The dryer SP-30 relates to the following type:
a. Infrared
b. Sublimation
*c. With fluidized bed
d. With silica gel column
e. With a forced air circulation

5. One of the quality indicators for finished ampoules is lack of residual stress in the glass. Which operation at the stage "Preparation of ampoules to be filled" eliminates this imperfection?
a. Capillary opening
b. Ampoule drying
c. Ampoule sterilization
*d. Ampoule annealing
e. Ampoule washing

6. Companies producing injectable dosage forms apply different methods of ampoule sealing. Sealing against a jet of inert gases (nitrogen, argon, carbon dioxide) is suitable for the following injection solutions:
a. Viscous
b. Hydrolytically unstable
c. Photosensitive
*d. Easily oxidable
e. Thermostable

7. Quality control of tablets produced at a pharmaceutical enterprise involves quantitative determination of such subsidiary substances as talc and aerosil. What method is applied for such determination?
a. Photocolorimetric
b. Titrimetric
*c. Gravimetric
d. Spectrophotometric
e. Chromatographic

8. Pharmaceutical plants produce enteric-coated tablets. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the coating mustnt disintegrate in the acidic medium within the following period:
*a. 1 hour
b. 4 hours
c. 5 hours
d. 3 hours
e. 2 hours

9. While producing phytopreparations and organotherapeutic preparations different kinds of dryers are used. What dryer would be the most effective for drying thermolabile compounds?
a. Roller dryer
b. Drying oven
c. Drum dryer
*d. Freeze-dryer
e. Band dryer

10. Injection solutions of salts derived from weak acids and strong bases require stabilization. What stabilizers are used for these solutions?
*a. 0,1 M sodium hydroxide solution
b. Trilon B
c. Buthylhydroxytoluene (BHT)
d. Ascorbic acid
e. 0,1 M acid chloride solution

11. One of the tablet coatings is enterosoluble capsule. They get solved in:
a. Oral cavity
b. Stomach
*c. Bowels
d. Rectum
e. -

12. Aerosol composition includes active substances, solvents and propellents. Which of the following substances is used as propellent?
a. Linethol, myristic acid, benzocaine
b. Hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen, triethanolamine
c. Isopropyl myristate, neon, sulfur oxide
d. Propylen glycol monostearate, argon, helium
*e. Freon-11, carbon oxide, propane-butane

13. Efficiency of aerosol therapy is to a considerable extent determined by the size of disperse particles. What factor determines the size of aerosol particles during dispersion of an aerosol?
a. System homogeneity, dispersion velocity
b. Reduction range, container quantity
*c. Exit port diameter, propellent vapour pressure
d. Percentage of phase, filling temperature
e. Fractional composition, containers filling method

14. A department producing sterile pharmaceutical forms needs a method of eye drops sterilization applicable for drugs derived from thermolabile substances. What is the optimal method of sterilization?
a. Thermal sterilization
b. Filling in the inert gas medium
c. Use of polymeric packings
*d. Sterile filtration
e. Addition of ascorbic acid

15. In the production of injection solutions the activated carbon is used as:
a. Buffer system creation
b. Chemical resistance of ampoules glass increasing
c. Ampoules residual stress relaxation
*d. Purification
e. Antioxidant properties increasing

16. Lipophilic bases for suppositories include:
a. Collagen base
b. Glycerol soap base
c. Polyethylene oxide base
d. Gelatin-glycerol base
*e. Mixtures of hydrogenatedd fats

17. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces nitroglycerine tablets. What is the method of their production?
a. Direct pressing with addition of adjuvants
b. Direct pressing, without adjuvants
*c. Extrusion
d. Pressing with preliminary wet granulation
e. Pressing with preliminary dry granulation

18. Which of the listed methods of filling ampoules with injectable solutions can protect the capillaries from contamination with thick and viscous solutions?
a. Steam condensing method
b. Solution squeezing method
c. Vacuum method
d. Turbo-vacuum method
*e. Syringe method

19. Production of injection solutions involves an operation of solution filtration. What filters are used for sterile filtration?
a. Pressure filters
b. Mushroom filter
c. Nutsch filters
d. Filter developed by the Kharkiv Chemo-pharmaceutic Research Institute
*e. Filter candles

20. Quality of injection solutions supplied in ampoules can be assessed according to different indices. How many ampoules should be checked while determining quality of sealing (leaktightness of an ampoule)?
a. 75%
b. 50%
c. 97%
d. 80%
*e. 100%

21. A chemical department produces alcohol solution of boric acid. What filters are used for filtration of this solution?
a. Bag filter
b. Membrane filter
c. Paper filter
d. Nutsch filter
*e. Pressure filters

22. A tablet shop produces trituration tablets. What quality indicators ARE NOT relevant for these tablets?
a. Homogeneity of dosage
b. Disintegration and dissolution
*c. Abrasion, resistance to crushing
d. Homogeneity of content
e. Microbiological purity

23. An ampule production unit produces glucose solution. If the special sort of glucose "for injections" is not available, then the glucose should be separated from the following admixtures:
*a. Pyretogenetic and dyes
b. Manganese and iron (Fe)
c. Proteic substances and dyes
d. Pyretogenetic and proteic substances
e. Sulfates and iron (Fe)

24. A department of a pharmaceutical plant produces injection solutions. Ascorbic acid solution for injections relates to the following group of solutions:
*a. Easily oxidized solutions
b. Solutions of salts derived from weak bases and strong acids
c. Solutions of substances requiring special rectification
d. Solutions of salts derived from strong bases and weak acids
e. Solutions of substances that should be subjected to thermal sterilization

25. A phytochemical production unit produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the biogenic stimulators of organo-mineral origin:
a. Extractum Aloes fluidum, Linimentum Aloes, Succus Aloes, Biosedum
b. Extractum Aloes fluidum, Linimentum Aloes, Рlasmolum
c. Peloidinum, Humisolum, Torfotum, Рlasmolum, Solcoseryl
*d. Peloidinum, Humisolum, Torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
e. Vitreous body, Placenta injection, Рlasmolum, Solcoseryl

26. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the plant-derived biogenic stimulators:
a. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmol, solcoseryl
*b. Liquid extract of aloe, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biosedum
c. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
d. Liquid extract of aloe, peloidinum, biosedum juice
e. Vitreous body, Suspesio Рlacetae prо injectionibus, aloe juice, biosedum

27. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces water solutions. The solution of the following substance is produced by method of chemical interaction and electrochemically:
*a. Aluminum hydroxide acetate
b. Calcium gluconate
c. Potassium arsenite
d. Polyvinyl alcohol
e. Plumbum hydroxide acetate

28. According to the pharmacopoeia requirements of liquid extract production, the extractant and the raw material should be taken in the following proportion:
a. 1:10
b. 1:4
c. 1:3
d. 1:5
*e. 1:1

29. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces neogalenic preparations. Which preparation is produced by the use of Soxhlet circulation apparatus?
*a. Аdonisidum
b. Corglyconum
c. Сеlanidum
d. Lantosidum
e. Digoxin

30. Aerosol production involves usage of propellents relating to different groups. Choose the propellants that relate to the group of volatile organic solvents:
a. Vinyl chloride and methyl chloride
b. Carbon dioxide
c. Freons
d. Propane, butane, isobutane
*e. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride

31. Which of the following drug forms is produced in granules?
*a. Plantaglucide
b. Мucaltinum
c. Lincomycin hydrochloride
d. Rеvitum
e. Diazolinum

32. A pharmaceutical factory produces camphor oil for topical application. What oil is to be used as a solvent?
a. Plum
*b. Sunflower seed
c. Vaseline
d. Peach
e. Olive

33. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces ointments. What base is applied for production of sulfur ointment simple?
a. Lanolin
b. Polyethylene glycol
c. Vaseline
d. Base "For ophthalmic ointments"
*e. Emulsion

34. Adjuvant substances in the production of tablets give the tableted mass all necessary technological properties, ensure dosage precision, mechanical strength and stability of tablets during their storage. What adjuvant substances facilitate disintegration or solution of the tablets in the organism?
a. Lubricants
b. Antifriction agents
*c. Disintegrants
d. Filling agents
e. Flavors

35. While filling hard gelatin capsules such glidants as 0,1% - 0,3% aerosil or magnesium stearate along with 0,5% - 1% talc are often added to the filling agent in order to improve the following properties:
a. Ability to contact molding
*b. Flowability
c. Regulation of moisture content
d. Homogeneity
e. Homogeneity of mixing

36. Aerosol department of a pharmaceutical factory uses condensed gases in the capacity of propellents. Which of the following substances relates to the group of condensed gases?
a. Methylene chloride
b. Ethylene chloride
c. Nitrogen
d. Nitrous oxide
*e. Freon

37. Grinding equipment is classified by the way of grinding. What kind of machines does a roller crusher relate to?
a. Impact
b. Impact-centrifugal
c. Cutting
d. Abrasive
*e. Crushing

38. Antacid gastritis can be treated with plantain juice. What is the way of its extraction?
a. Maceration with aqueous ethanol solution
b. Extraction with condensed gases
*c. High-pressure compression
d. Dissolution of concentrates
e. Repercolation

39. A pharmaceutical factory produces herbal juice out of fresh raw material. What operation should be performed at the stage of juice purification?
*a. Heating followed by quick cooling
b. Adsorption
c. Crystallization
d. Filtration
e. Sedimentation

40. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces valerian tincture of fresh material. Technological peculiarity of its production is that it should be produced on the base of:
*a. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:5
b. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:5
c. 95% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
d. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
e. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:10

