1. For isolation of alkaloids from biological material by Kramarenkos method extract is cleaned. For what operation ammonium sulphate is added to extract?
a. Ether extraction
b. Chloroform extraction
c. Infusion
d. Centrifugation
*e. Salting-out

2. Analysis of an extract by chromatographic method revealed presence of phenyl prapanolamine. It is the metabolite of the following alkaloid:
a. Pyrocatechin
b. Securinin
c. Reserpine
*d. Ephedrine
e. Aconitine

3. It is necessary to make rapid analysis of opiates in urine. Which of the following methods is the most sensitive?
a. Extraction photometric
*b. Immunoenzyme
c. Photometric
d. Chromatographic
e. Spectrochemical in the UV region

4. TLC-screening is used for omnidirectional investigation of "acid" chloroform extract. For detection of barbiturates following developers are used:
a. Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate
b. Diphenylamine
*c. Diphenylcarbazide and mercury sulfate
d. Ditizone
e. Isopropylamine

5. In the medical practice this compound is used as a disinfectant. In case of intoxication with this compound the patients urine turns olive or olive-black. Specify the compound:
a. Isoamyl alcohol
b. Ethyl ether
c. Ethyl lbenzoata
*d. Phenol
e. Iodoform

6. О-methylation is an important method of organic substances biotransformation in the body, compounds that are subject to such method contain:
a. Nitro groups
b. Carboxyl groups
c. Amides
d. Tthiol groups
*e. Phenolic groups

7. Method of gas-liquid chromatography is often applied for identification and quantitative determination of toxicologically meaningful substances. Substances can be placed into the chromatograph dispenser in the following aggregate states:
a. Liquid and solid
b. Liquid
c. Gaseous
*d. Liquid and gaseous
e. Gaseous and solid

8. Preliminary tests involve using various kinds of indicator paper. Blackening of the indicator paper treated with plumbum acetate indicates that the biological object contains:
a. Sulphuric acid
b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Hydrogen chloride
d. Ammonium hydroxide
*e. Hydrogen sulphide

9. An obtained mineralisate contains sulphates of lead, barium and strontium in form of white precipitation. What procedure will allow to separate the lead sulphate?
a. Dissolution in concentrated sulphuric acid
b. Conversion into diethyldithiocarbamate
c. Conversion into arsine
*d. Dissolution in ammonium acetate
e. Conversion into carbonate

10. It is necessary to analyse incrustation of reducing tube after Marsh test for arsenicum to exclude in biological materials compounds of:
a. Waist
b. Argentum
*c. Stibiy
d. Cadmium
e. Zinc

11. Substances that enter the body subject to various transformations under enzymes influence. What is the direction of mono- and polyatomic alcohol metabolism has the largest toxicological value?
a. Dealkylation
b. Hydroxylation
*c. Oxidization
d. Conjugation
e. -

12. A chemotoxicological laboratory received a biological material. A toxicologist carries out uncontrollable analysis aimed at detection of the following group of toxic substances:
*a. Volatile toxins
b. Metal toxins
c. Mineral acids, alkali, inorganic salts
d. Pesticides
e. Medical use toxins

13. During the chemico-toxicological study of the dialysate of an aqueous extract, the ammonia test is not carried out if the dialysate includes the following substance:
a. Sulphurous acid
b. Nitric acid
c. Nitrous acid
*d. Hydrogen sulphide
e. Sulphuric acid

14. A forensic chemical laboratory received an object for analysis. The analysis involves quantitative determination of mercury by means of a reaction with dithizone. What physical-chemical method is used within this analysis?
a. Thin layer chromatography
*b. Extraction photocolorimetry
c. UV spectrophotometry
d. Gas-liquid chromatography
e. IR spectrophotometry

15. Most alkaloids are isolated from the biological material by polar solvents. Which of the listed alkaloids is isolated by the way of distillation with water vapour?
a. Atropine
b. Quinine
c. Strychnine
d. Cocaine
*e. Coniine

16. A patient has accidentally taken a barium-containing salt. All of the following salts have toxic effect upon the human organism EXCEPT for:
a. Barium chloride
*b. Barium sulfate
c. Barium nitrate
d. Barium carbonate
e. Barium acetate

17. A mineralizate under examination contains precipitates of barium sulfate and plumbum sulfate. These salts can be separated by means of:
a. Acetic acid
b. Sulfuric acid
*c. Solution of ammonium acetate
d. Solution of sodium acetate
e. Solution of ammonium nitrate

18. Name a "metal poison" which is isolated from the biological material by the method of destruction:
a. Cadmium
b. Stibium
*c. Mercury
d. Silver
e. Arsenic

19. Toxic substances can be isolated from the objects of biological origin by different methods. In case of intoxication with pesticides - derivatives of phosphoric acids - the following method is applied:
a. Distillation with water steam from the alkaline medium
b. Infusion with water acidified with chloric acid
c. Dialysis from alkalized solutions
*d. Infusion with organic solvents
e. Infusion with alkalized water

20. Reaction with KI solution which is called "Golden Rain Reaction" helps to detect presence of the followingg toxic metal:
a. Mn
*b. Pb
c. Cu
d. Ba
e. Ag

21. Presence of ethanol in a biological sample can be demonstrated by the following reaction:
a. Libermans reaction
b. With iron (III) chloride
c. With sodium nitroprusside
d. With Fredes reagent
*e. Iodoform test

22. Novocaine metabolism in the organism results in generation of p-amino-benzoic acid. What metabolic process underlies this conversion?
a. Rehabilitation
b. Conjugation
c. Dealkylation
d. Oxidization
*e. Hydrolysis

23. While studying the reaction of an "acid" chloroform extraction in acidic medium with sodium nitrite, a forensic toxicologist got a compound stained emerald green. Which of the substances is capable of forming the mentioned nitrose compound?
*a. Antipyrine
b. Amidopyrine
c. Salicylic acid
d. Noxiron
e. Analgin

24. A patient got poisoned with nitrites. Nitrite detection by means of azo dye reaction involves using such acid:
a. Salicylic
*b. Sulphanilic
c. Phosphoric
d. Sulphuric
e. Hydrochloric

25. When heroin comes into an an organism, it metabolizes chiefly to:
a. Morphine
b. Codeine
*c. Morphine and 6-monoacetylmorphine
d. 6-acetylmorphine
e. 3-acetylmorphine and morphine

26. Forensic toxicological analysis is often done for the metabolism products of toxic substances. Amino benzophenones are generated during biotrasformation of:
a. Opiates
*b. 1,4-benzodiazepines
c. Barbiturates
d. Phenothiazines
e. Butyrophenones

27. Determination of pH of a biological material by means of indicator paper is applied for the preliminary conclusion about substances that might have caused intoxication. The indicator paper moistened with plumbum acetate solution was exposed to the evaporations of the material under examination and turned black. This indicates that the material under examination contains:
a. Methane
b. Ammonia
*c. Hydrogen sulfide
d. Carbon monoxide
e. Carbonic gas

28. Lapkina-Lazarenko method of ethylene glycol separation enables to isolate it effectively from the objects of chemotoxicological analysis. What is the selective transporter of ethylene glycol from the objects to the distillate?
a. Chloroform
b. Acetone
c. Water
d. Ethanol
*e. Benzol

29. Oxidation of some toxins within the body results in generation of compounds that increase their toxicity. Thus, due to the oxidation of heptachlor in the body the folowing compound is formed:
a. Carbon dioxide
b. Carbon monoxide
*c. Heptachlor epoxide
d. Heptachlor oxide
e. Hexachlorocyclohexane

30. What substance will impede reaction of iodoform test aimed at detection of ethyl alcohol in the biological material?
a. Phenol
b. Formaldehyde
c. Methanol
d. Isoamyl alcohol
*e. Acetone

31. Ions of some metal make it difficult to detect zinc ions in the mineralizate. For this reason zinc is separated from mineralizate by converting it into:
a. Dithizone
b. Sulfide
c. Tetrarodanomerkuroat
*d. Diethyldithiocarbamate
e. Hexacyanoferrate (II)

