1. A 34-year-old patiet got a cut wound 7х0,3 cm large in the region of popliteal fossa. The wound is gaping and bleeding. Bright red blood comes out in pulsating jets. Specify the scope of the first aid:
*a. Application of a tourniquet
b. Application of a compressive bandage
c. Immobilization with Diterichs' splint
d. Application of haemostatic sponge
e. Application of an occlusive bandage

2. 2 hours after the operation on stomach under general anesthesia a 36-year-old patient presented with respiratory disorder: superficial, arrhythmic respiration up to 24-26/min, cyanosis and tachycardia. AP- 140/90 mm Hg, the patient stayed conscious. The first aid should be started with:
a. Further active monitoring of the patient
b. Connecting the patient to the artificial respirator
c. An injection of caffeine solution
d. Artificial lung ventilation
*e. Ensuring airway patency

3. A patient diagnosed with anaerobic gas gangrene of hip has been delivered to the hospital. Which antiseptic must be used for instrument treatment after bandaging?
*a. 6% hydrogen peroxide solution
b. 5% iodine solutio
c. 0,1% potassium permanganate solution
d. 0,02% decamethoxin solution
e. 0,0002% furacilin solution

4. A 31-year-old male patient consulted a doctor about body temperature rise up to 38°C, pain and swelling in the lumbar region. Objectively: there is a painful infiltrate sized 5х6 cm in the right lumbar region, the skin above it is crimson, there are multiple purulo-necrotic fistulas in the centre. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Paranephritis
b. Furuncle
c. Abscess
d. Erysipelas
*e. Carbuncle

5. During a fight a 42-year-old man got a chest injury produced with a sharp object. Objectively: the wound is in IX projection of intercostal space along the left scapular line. The wound is open allowing blood to drain and air to escape with a loud sound during breathing. What first aid should be rendered?
a. To inject hemostatics
*b. To apply occlusive dressing
c. To inject analgetic agents
d. To apply aseptic dressing
e. To refer to doctor immediately

6. A 66-year-old male patient complains about discomfort, anus itch and periodical bleeding after defecation. He has had these presentations for about 3 years. Bleeding has become more frequent over the last 6 months. Examination reveals bluish nodes sized about 1cm in the anal region in 7 and 11 o'clock-position. What is the most likely cause of such condition?
a. Periproctitis
b. Rectal prolapse
c. Rectal fissure
d. Rectal cancer
*e. Hemorrhoid

7. A 45-year-old victim has been trapped in a mine where he had his right leg buried under debris. The patient is diagnosed with crush syndrome. What dangerous complication may result from this pathology?
a. Phlegmon of hip
b. Dry gangrene
c. Thrombophlebitis of superficial veins of shin
d. Acute respiratory failure
*e. Acute renal failure

8. A 26-year-old male patient had been operated for acute appendicitis. On the fifth day after the operation a nurse revealed the following: suture line was straight, borders were well matched, the healing process was quick, there were no infection symptoms. Specify the way of wound healing?
a. Secondary early intention
b. Under scab
*c. Primary intention
d. Secondary late intention
e. -

9. A 49-year-old male patient spends the postoperative period at the surgical department. Choose the factor that will facilitate the development of deep venous thrombosis:
a. Operation under local anaesthesia
b. Operation under noninhalation narcosis
*c. Limitation of movements after operation
d. Use of anticoagulating agents
e. Application of crepe bandages

10. A 50-year-old male patient with abdominal injury was delivered to the hospital. He complained about abdominal pain, sickness and vomiting. After physical examination he was found to have positive Blumberg's sign. What disease was it?
a. Perforated ulcer
b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Acute appendicitis
*e. Acute abdomen

11. A patient with facial and oropharyngeal trauma was delivered to the traumatology department. These traumas may cause such potential problems as aspiration of vomit masses and aspiration pneumonia. The main method of solving these problems is:
a. Drainage position in bed
b. Respiratory gymnastics
c. Drainages
*d. Suction of contents from the respiratory tracts
e. Wet oxygen inhalations

12. A 40-year-old male patient has gastric ulcer. He complains about progresing weakness and dizziness. When the patient got up in the morning he turned pale and lost consciousness for a few seconds. There are no peritonitis symptomw. What complication of gastric ulcer might be suspected?
*a. Bleeding ulcer
b. Penetration of ulcer
c. Malignization of ulcer
d. Perforation of ulcer
e. Pyloric stenosis

13. A 44-year-old victim undergoes an operation for intraperitoneal haemorrhage being the result of a road accident. What trauma allows to use patient's abdominal blood for autohemotransfusion?
*a. Splenic rupture
b. Thin bowel rupture
c. Stomach rupture
d. Bladder rupture
e. Liver rupture

14. A 21-year-old male patient has been hospitalized in the surgical department for pain in the lower abdomen, nausea, vomiting. Objectively: the patient is in medium severity condition, the tongue is dry. Abdomen is soft, extremely tender on palpation in the right iliac region. There are positive Blumberg's and Rovsing's symptoms. Blood test results: 14х106 leukocytosis with a left shift. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Ovarian apoplexy
c. Acute cholecystitis
*d. Acute appendicitis
e. Peptic ulcer

15. A woman fell down in the street two hours ago, she is unable of moving by herself. She complains about pain in her left shin. Examination revealed edema of the lower third and deformity in the middle third of shin. There is pain and crepitation at the deformity site. What can a nurse suspect?
a. Joint dislocation
b. Myorrhexis
c. Shin contusion
d. Sprain of ligaments
*e. Shin bone fracture

16. A patient with HIV infection is scheduled for opening a panaritium on the thumb of his right hand. Which of the given antiseptics should be prepared for the surgical scrubbing?
a. Chlorhexidine
b. Ethyl alcohol
*c. Betadine
d. Chlorantoine
e. Brilliant green

17. A patient with haemorrhoids asks to explain the most common causes that provoke exacerbation of the disease. Which of the listed provocations is most likely?
*a. Alcohol consumption
b. Cycling
c. Use of laxatives
d. Abstinence of rich food
e. Hot baths

18. A female patient consulted a health post nurse about high fever, palpitation. Anterior abdominal muscles are tense, there are positive Murphy's and phrenicus symptoms. What disease can be suspected?
a. Acute intestinal obstruction
*b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Acute adnexitis

19. The 51-year-old male patient Zh. has been admitted to the surgical department with complaints of pain and edema in the right shin. Objectively: there is skin redness over the veins, the veins are soft, extremely tender. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Thrombophlebitis
b. Lymphangitis
c. Phlebemphraxis
d. Arteritis
*e. Phlebitis

20. A victim delivered to a feldsher-midwife station was found to have clinical signs of internal bleeding. First aid drugs for arterial bleeding include:
a. Hydrocortisone
b. Vikasol
c. Cresolum
*d. Dicynone
e. Almagel

21. A patient is registered in a dispensary for gastric ulcer. He complains about constant abdominal pain that is getting worse at night, foul-smelling eructation, morning vomiting. Objectively: the patient is 178 cm high and weighs 52 kg, his skin is dry, his tongue is coated with greyish deposit. Heart sounds are muffled, epigastrium is painful, there is visible peristalsis. What complication is it?
a. Penetration
b. Hemorrhage
*c. Pyloric stenosis
d. Perforation
e. Malignization

22. A patient has spontaneously developed weakness, coffee ground vomiting, black stool. What examination is required in the first place to specify the diagnosis?
a. Proctosigmoidoscopy
*b. Esophagogastroduodenofibroscopy
c. Ultrasound of the abdomen
d. Radiography of stomach
e. Fibrocolonoscopy

23. In the recovery room there is a patient with an endotracheal tube. You have to perform endotracheal suctioning. What should you do before this procedure?
*a. Hyperventilation with 100% oxygen
b. Give painkillers
c. Give spasmolytics
d. The patient should breathe deeply
e. Provide appropriate position in bed

24. A 35-year-old patient consults a surgeon about the right shin injury. The surgeon found out that the patient hadn't been vaccinated against tetanus over the last 3 years. What drug should be used for urgent tetanus prevention in this case?
a. Diphteria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine
*b. Tetanus anatoxin
c. Antitetanus horse immunoglobulin
d. Antitetanus serum
e. Tetanus anatoxin and antitetanus serum

25. A 33-year-old male patient fell and hit his head but stayed conscious. He complained about headache. The patient fainted two hours later. Medical examination revealed: he was unconscious, anisocoria was present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cerebral compression
b. Traumatic shock
c. Collapse
d. Syncope
e. Brain concussion

26. The 19-year-old patient B. got a chemical burn of his right leg with concentrated sulfuric acid. What substance would you apply to neutralize the acid?
a. 2% boric acid solution
b. 0,9% saline
c. 0,02% furacilinum solution
*d. 2% sodium bicarbonate solution
e. 3% solution of hydrogen peroxide

27. A 65-year-old female patient undergoes treatment for right cervical hip fracture at the traumatology department. After the operation the skeletal extension was applied. What can be the cause of osteomyelitis development?
*a. Unsterile instruments
b. Absolute bed rest
c. Bone osteoporosis
d. Bedsore development
e. Non-union of a broken bone

28. A 28-year-old male patient consulted a surgeon about acute pain, reddening with scalloped margins, cutaneous edema in the lower third of his right shin and body temperature rise up to 39°C. What disease might be suspected?
*a. Erysipelas
b. Thrombophlebitis
c. Obliterating endarteritis
d. Lymphadenitis
e. Varix dilatation

29. A 29-year-old male patient with traumatic kidney affection has been at the urology department for 1 day. What symptom will be the most informative in this case?
a. Pollakiuria
b. Stranguria
c. Paradoxal ischuria
d. Polyuria
*e. Hematuria

30. The victim was found clinically dead. There were attempts to revive him by cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Which of the listed actions indicate efficiency of external cardiac massage?
a. Spontaneous chest movements
b. Epigastrium movements
c. Rib fracture
*d. Pulsation in carotid artery
e. Body temperature rise

31. Intubation of trachea involved injecting a muscle relaxant of short-time action called dithylinum. What drug can eliminate its residual action?
*a. Proserin
b. Mesatone
c. Atropine
d. Adrenaline
e. Naloxone

32. A drowned man was pulled out to the shore after 6 minutes. Resuscitation actions involved closed-chest massage and ALV. What symptoms indicate the efficiency of resuscitation actions?
a. Mydriasis
b. Faster breathing
c. Arterial pressure rise
d. Pulse acceleration
*e. Corestenoma

33. A nurse working at the urology department was asked to prepare the indigo carmine solution. What study is it intended for?
a. Retrograde pyeloureterography
b. Intravenous urography
*c. Cystochromoscopy
d. Antegrade urography
e. Renal phlebography

34. After the transfusion of 500 ml of blood stabilized with sodium citrate a 42-year-old patient developed convulsions, anxiety, accelerated heart rate, pressure drop, dyspnea. What complication is it?
a. Pyrogenic reaction
b. Transfusion shock
c. Allergic reaction
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Citrate shock

35. A 45-year-old patient has inguinal hernia. After performing hard physical work the hernia became very painful, firm, irreducible. The abdomen is irregularly swollen, there is no release of gases. What complication has developed in this patient?
a. Irreducible hernia
b. Coprostasia
c. Ileus
*d. Incarcerated hernia
e. Hernial inflammation

36. A patient is in the surgical ward after appendectomy. Select a high-risk factor that delays recovery of the respiratory system in the patient:
a. Diabetes
b. Respiratory standstill during surgery
c. Spinal anesthesia
d. Long-lasting vomiting
*e. Use of morphine

37. A nurse of the surgical department revealed postoperative tremor in a 48-year-old male patient. This condition can be eliminated by:
a. Antiarrhythmic agents
*b. Inhalation of oxygen
c. Anticonvulsants
d. Warming the patient
e. Sedatives

38. A patient with suspected gastric ulcer perforation has been delivered to the admission ward. What diagnostic method can confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Survey radiography
b. Irrigoscopy
c. Rheography
d. Contrast radiography
e. Ultrasonography of the abdomen

39. A 45-year-old male patient complains about pain in the left lumbar region irradiating to his hip; frequent urination and unitary vomiting. Pasternatsky's symptom is positive on the left. What drug should be injected as the first medical aid?
*a. Baralgine
b. Nitroxoline
c. Avisanum
d. Cystenal
e. Lasix

40. While examining the 35-yer-old patient Ch. who has been beaten by unknown persons you have found the following clinical signs: pain, tissue swelling in the pubic and inguinal regions of the abdomen, muscle tension, positive Blumberg's sign, anuria. What would you think of?
a. Injury of the urethra
b. Injury of the colon
c. Injury of the urinary tracts
d. Injury of the kidneys
*e. Injury of the bladder

41. A 57-year-old man stays at the surgical department after venotomy (phlebotomy). In order to implement the nursing care plan a nurse should teach the patient to:
a. Keep to a diet
b. Take body temperature
c. Do therapeutic physical massage
d. Change body position in bed
*e. Apply crepe bandage

42. Two days after laparotomy performed under endotracheal anaesthesia a 31-year-old male patient was told to turn from side to side, do respiratory gymnastics and alkaline inhalations on doctor's orders. What complication can be prevented by doing such things?
a. Enteroparesis
b. Embolism
c. Surgical drain obstruction
*d. Bronchitis
e. Thrombosis

43. A 45-year-old man consulted a doctor about pain in the right iliac area. After load lifting the patient felt acute pain in the region of protrusion which he failed to fix to the abdominal cavity. Objectively: there is a painful tense protrusion in the iliac region. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Reducible hernia
b. Nonincarcerated hernia
c. Noncomplicated hernia
*d. Strangulated hernia
e. Incarcerated hernia

44. A 30-year-old patient has been admitted to the surgical department with complaints of pain in the region of wound, muscle twitching, swelling of the extremities, headache, fever up to $39^°C$, palpitations. The skin is cold to the touch, the wound is contaminated with soil. What disease is most likely?
a. Phlegmon
b. Erysipelas
*c. Tetanus
d. Angina
e. Gas gangrene

45. A 39-year-old injured man with a craniocerebral trauma has been delivered to the admission ward. Objectively: the victim is unconscious, there is pink liquid slowly coming out from the external acoustic meatus and nasal passages. There are haemorrhages around both eyes. AP is 105/55 mm Hg, Ps- 65/min. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Fracture of zygomatic bones
b. Fracture of the cranial vault
*c. Basal skull fracture
d. Cerebral compression
e. Intracranial hematoma

46. A patient is 70 years old. Objectively: his condition is grave, skin is pale, Ps- 120/min, AP- 85/55 mm Hg. His tongue is dry and furred. He has insignificant abdominal swelling, Vale's symptom is positive on palpation, splashing sound is also present. A plan X-ray film shows several horizontal intestinal fluid levels. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Renal colic
b. Acute appendicitis
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Acute pancreatitis
*e. Bowel obstruction

47. A 72-year-old male patient complains about stranguria. He claims that urine trickles or drips and there are frequent urinations at night. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Urolithiasis
*b. Adenoma of prostate gland
c. Acute urethritis
d. Acute prostatitis
e. Cystic tuberculosis

48. A 25-year-old patient consulted a doctor about reduced sensitivity of nose, cheeks and forehead that developed after skiing. Objectively: the skin is pale and cold to the touch. Describe the patient's condition:
*a. Prereactive period of frostbite
b. General supercooling
c. Second degree frostbite
d. Reactive period of frostbite
e. Initial stage of general frostbite

49. You performed a clinical examination of the 46-year-old patient R. complaining of girdle pain in the right lumbar region, frequent urination, pain irradiation to the perineum, a single episode of vomiting. Examination revaled positive Pasternatsky's symptom on the right. What disease can you think of?
a. Intestinal obstruction
*b. Urolithiasis
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Acute appendicitis

50. A patient had been admitted to the thoracic department with a penetrating chest wound complicated by lung injury. The patient underwent pulmonectomy and was administered thoracostomy. Specify the required passive drainage:
a. With electrical device
b. With 3-ampoule system
*c. Siphonic, by Bulau's method
d. With water-jet device
e. With a rubber balloon

51. During the inhalation anesthesia a patient had respiratory standstill as a result of tongue-swallowing. A nurse applied triple-airway maneuver but it was ineffective. What should the staff do to render further aid?
a. Give an injection of 2,4% aminophylline solution
b. Press upon chest
c. Perform defibrillation
*d. Establish an artificial airway
e. Give an injection of 10% solution of calcium chloride

52. A woman presented at the plant medical station and complained of swelling and bursting pain in the lower limb. She has a history of varix dilatation of deep veins on the left. Objectively: the limb is enlarged and cyanotic. Pulse on the pedal arteries is present. The nurse suspected acute deep vein thrombosis of the left leg. The primary action of the nurse should be:
a. Raise the affected limb
b. Apply hot compress on the limb
c. Give spasmolytics
d. Give diuretics
*e. Apply ice packs

53. A 28-year-old man presents in the first-aid post. He had worked in the cold weather for 4 hours on the previous day. Objectively: there are blisters on hands containing transparent liquid, skin sensitivity is decreased in the affected region. Choose the type and the degree of affection:
a. Frostbite of III B degree
*b. Frostbite of II degree
c. Burn of II degree
d. Frostbite of III A degree
e. Burn of III degree

54. A scrub nurse is busy with preparations for the operative intervention, namely tracheostomy. What are the special instruments required for this operation?
a. Three-prong hook
b. Bellied scalpel
c. Farabif's hook
d. Surgical forceps
*e. Tracheal dilator of Troussean

55. A scrub nurse makes preparations for craniotomy. Which tool from the special set should be prepared?
a. Amputational retractor
*b. Gigli saw
c. Lancet-shaped scalpel
d. Surgical forceps
e. Farabeuf retractors

56. An ambulance nurse renders first aid to a victim with an open craniocerebral trauma received in a traffic accident. She notes bone fragments in the brain tissue. What is her first-priority action?
a. To perform initial surgical d-bridement
*b. To apply a sterile bandage
c. To remove bone fragments from the wound
d. To give intramuscular injection of morphine
e. To apply a capeline bandage

57. A patient inadvertently seized a bared wire under 380 V. He is unconsciousness. What will be the first aid?
*a. To release the patient from electric current
b. To apply aseptic dressing
c. To perform surgical treatment of wound
d. To do the toilet of oral cavity
e. To resuscitate

