1. An airport traffic controller who had worked with high power radiolocators for 16 years was referred to the in-patient hospital. Choose a clinical syndrome which is most typical for chronic electromagnetic radiation affection:
a. Syndrome of "acute abdomen"
*b. Asthenovegetative syndrome
c. Convulsive disorder
d. Hyperthermic syndrome
e. Depressive syndrome

2. A 45-year-old driller complains of dull pain in his hands at night, creeps, chill hands, headaches, poor sleep. He also observes whitening of fingers after washing his hands with cold water. Whitening of skin of the finger phalanges is observed during application of the following examination test:
*a. Cold test
b. Test for reactive hyperaemia
c. Dolorimetry
d. Pallesthesiometry
e. Capillaroscopy

3. An emergency team arrived to a 42-year-old male patient. He complained about general weakness, headache, sickness, vomiting and body temperature rise up to 38,9°C. Such condition developed an hour ago after processing trees with chlorindan chemicals. Objectively: there is reddening of eye and pharynx mucous membranes, cough and tremor of hands. The first aid should include the treatment of skin and mucous membranes with:
a. Strzyzewski antidote
*b. 2% sodium bicarbonate solution
c. Soap water
d. Running water
e. 5% ammonia solution

4. A man has lung disease caused by continuous ingress of productive dust into the lungs. He complains about cough, stabbing chest pain and dyspnea. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Radiation sickness
*b. Pneumoconiosis
c. Decompression sickness
d. Berylliosis
e. Pneumatic hammer disease

5. A patient consulted a nurse of a mining plant about shortness of breath that occurs at the end of a shift, stabbing chest pain without clear localization. What type of pneumoconiosis are these presentations typical for?
a. Aluminosis
*b. Silicosis
c. Anthracosis
d. Asbestosis
e. Byssinosis

6. What occupational diseases is accompanied by angiodystrophic, angiospastic, vestibular syndromes as well as syndromes of nerve affection and vegetomyofascitis?
a. Caisson disease
b. Radiation sickness
c. Occupational deafness
*d. Pneumatic hammer disease
e. Altitude sickness

7. A 43-year-old male patient is a foundry worker with 16 years of service record. He complains about exertional dyspnea, dry cough and sensation of chest tingling during cough. Instrumental examination revealed: restrictive type of external respiration disturbance of I degree. X-ray examination of lungs revealed: diffuse, round-shaped, small and well-defined opacities of average intensity located in the upper lung segments. The occupational pathologist suspected silicosis. What dust can cause this disease?
*a. Silicon dioxide in free state
b. Silicon dioxide in bound state
c. Manganese
d. Graphite
e. Carbon

8. A 49-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital with symptoms of organophosphate pesticide intoxication. What laboratory studies are required to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Blood bilirubin test
*b. Blood cholinesterase test
c. Blood methemoglobin test
d. Complete blood count
e. Urinalysis

9. The 35-year-old male patient B. was delivered to the admission ward. Examination revealed abdominal tenderness, sallow pale skin, purple-gray strip along the edge of the gums and teeth, sweet-smelling breath. What disease can be suspected in the patient?
*a. Saturnism
b. Radiation sickness
c. Mercury vapor intoxication
d. Manganese intoxication
e. Vibration disease

10. A 42-year-old female patient complains about foul taste in the moth, poor appetite, nausea, stomachache, eructation, vomiting at times, frequent pangs in the epigastric region. There are constipations taking turns with diarrheas. Objectively: there is a lilac-grey stipe on the gums, the skin is sallow and pale. What substance is the cause of intoxication?
a. Tetraethyl lead
*b. Lead
c. Amino compound of benzol
d. Benzol
e. Mercury vapor

11. A 45-year-old drillman complains about aching hand pain disturbing him at night, creeping sensation, hands chill, headache and sleep disorder. In addition, notes blanching of fingers after washing hands with cold water. What disease might be suspected?
a. Siderosis
b. Silicosis
c. Silicatosis
d. Anthracosis
*e. Pneumatic hammer disease

12. A hot shop worker presented to the medical center with complaints of general weakness, blackout, tinnitus, dry mouth, thirst. Objectively: the skin is hyperemic, hot to the touch; rapid respiration, tachycardia are present. What condition can you think of?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Sunstroke
*c. Hyperthermic form of overheating
d. Alterations in the cardiovascular system
e. Caisson disease

13. A man with symptoms of acute catarrhal intoxication with arsenic compounds was delivered to the hospital. Choose the antidotes that should be used for his treatment:
a. Glucose, ascorbic acid, vitamins of B group
b. Atropine sulphate, unithiol
c. Cordiamin, sodium caffeine benzoate
*d. Sodium thiosulfate, tetacine calcium
e. Proserin, tropazine

14. A patient consulted a doctor about dyspnea, dry cough, constant chest pain. Chest radiograph shows nodular shadows 1-2 mm in diameter located in the middle and inferior segments. It is known from the history that the patient has worked as a miner for over 15 years. What disease can be suspected?
*a. Anthracosis
b. Chronic bronchitis
c. Pneumonia
d. Pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Pneumatic hammer disease

15. A woman complains about abrupt temperature rise, myalgia, cough, sharp intermittent stomachache, metalic taste in the mouth and nasal bleedings. It is known from the past history that she had processed tomatoes with bordeaux chemicals for 2 days. Objectively: AP- 80/50 mm Hg, Ps- 60/min, there is skin rash on the upper and lower extremities. Which pesticides might have caused the described disease?
a. Arsenic compounds
b. Carbonates
c. Organochlorine compounds
d. Organophosphorous compounds
*e. Metal-containing compounds

16. A patient with a history of frequent colds undergoes examination. What problem will be a priority if it is known that he has worked as a polisher of metal products for 11 years?
a. Chest pain
b. Fever
c. Hypervolemia
*d. Attacks of cough with expectoration of sputum
e. Anemia

17. A 30-year-old milking machine operator has been experiencing muscle and joint pain for several months. On examination the signs of affection of shoulder, elbow and hip joints, fibrositis were revealed. What kind of professional disease can be suspected?
a. Tularemia
b. Toxoplasmosis
*c. Brucellosis
d. Glanders
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

18. A patient with II degree silicosis presented in the occupational disease department. The nurse who followed up the patient last year noticed that he lost weight, his body temperature could rise to 37,3°C at night, there was profuse sweating. What complication is most likely?
a. Pulmonary emphysema
b. Bronchitis
*c. Tuberculosis
d. Pulmonary insufficiency
e. Stenocardia

