1. A male patient with a severe craniocerebral trauma has been unconsciousness for a long time. What feeding method should be used in this case?
a. Enteroalimentation
*b. Through nasoenteric tube
c. By mean of nutrient enemas
d. Parenteral
e. Gastrostogavage

2. A 58-year-old patient has a long history of gastric ulcer. For the last year he has complained of appetite loss, dissatisfaction with food, bloating and heaviness in the stomach, belching. He has also lost up to 10 kg within two months. In blood: anaemia. What kind of disease should be suspected in the first place?
*a. Malignization of gastric ulcer
b. Iron deficiency anemia
c. Alimentary cachexia
d. Complication of gastric ulcer with hemorrhage
e. Exacerbation of gastric ulcer

3. A 40-year-old male patient has burns of the upper extremities. On the third day after the injury he developed compressing retrosternal pain and heart ache. Which of the following therapeutic means can be administered by a nurse?
a. Tincture of valerian
b. Cold compress
c. Compress with camphor alcohol
d. Inhalation of ammonia
*e. Validol, nitroglycerin

4. The 17-year-old female patient B. has a subcutaneous panaritium on the 2 finger of the left hand. During dressing the patient suddenly experienced nausea, severe weakness, blackout. The face turned pale, the skin got sweaty. What action should be taken by a nurse?
a. Apply a cold compress to the forehead
*b. Soak some cotton wool in ammonia and hold it under the patient's nose
c. Perform closed-chest massage
d. Perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
e. Place the patient on the couch with raised head end

5. Ten days after an intramuscular injection a patient developed a painful inflammatory formation in the upper external quadrant of the right buttock. Over the last three days she has presented with body temperature rise up to 38°C at night. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Post-injection abscess
b. Erysipelatous inflammation
c. Phlegmon
d. Purulent abscess
e. Haematoma of buttock

6. A patient has been suffering from rheumatic heart disease for 15 years. He complains about experiencing inspiratory dyspnea at minimal physical activity for a month. The cardiophony shows that the first heart sound is apparently quiet at the apex, there is rough holosystolic murmur. The auscultation of lungs reveals vesicular respiration, diminished breath sounds in the lower parts on both sides, crackles in the zone of diminished breath sounds. This patient has:
a. Chronic right ventricular failure
b. Acute circulatory collapse
c. Acute left ventricular failure
d. Acute right ventricular failure
*e. Chronic left ventricular failure

7. Clinical urine analysis gave following results: relative density - 1,018, protein - 0,033 g/l, 10-20 unchanged erythrocytes in the field of vision, 3-5 leucocytes in the field of vision, here and there epithelium of urinary bladder, high concentration of oxalates. Such results are typical for the following pathological state:
a. Pyelitis
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Urethritis
*d. Urolithiasis
e. Acute pyelonephritis

8. A 24-year-old male patient consulted a doctor about stomachache, sickness, vomiting and body temperature rise up to 38°C. Last food intake was 6 hours ago. Objectively: the skin is pale, covered with cold sweat. There is pain in the epigastrium region. Ps- 95/min. The tongue is coated. What manipulation should be carried out by the nurse on doctor's orders first of all?
a. Enzymatic drug injection
*b. Gastric lavage
c. Fractional gastric intubation
d. Antibiotic injection
e. Vitamin injection

9. A 30-year-old woman consulted a family nurse about acute headache. Examination revealed that AP was160/90 mm Hg. What should the nurse do for initial care?
a. Put ice pack to the occipital region of head
b. Apply mustard plasters to the chest
c. Raise lower extremities
*d. Apply mustard plasters to the occipital region of head
e. Put hot-water bag on legs

10. A 35-year-old man who had mistakenly drunk 150 ml of methyl alcohol was delivered to the admission ward. What antidote should be used in this case?
*a. Ethanol
b. Absorbed carbon
c. Atropine sulphate
d. Sodium bicarbonate solution
e. Unithiol

11. A 47-year-old male complains of heaviness in the right hypochondrium, general weakness. Three years ago he had Hepatitis B. Objectively: there is scleral and skin icterus. On the skin of the chest vascular spiders are seen. Gynecomastia is present. The liver is +3 cm. Blood tests reveal high levels of bilirubin and transaminases.Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic cholecystitis
b. Chronic pancreatitis
*c. Chronic hepatitis
d. Cholelithiasis
e. Gallbladder dyskinesia

12. A 48-year-old male patient complains of general weakness, insomnia, weight loss, hemorrhoidal bleeding. The skin is icteric. On the anterior surface of the abdomen Caput medusae is seen. Ascites is present. The legs are swollen. Daily urine output is 500 ml. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
*a. Liver cirrhosis
b. Chronic cholecystitis
c. Chronic enteritis
d. Chronic pancreatitis
e. Chronic hepatitis

13. A 58-year-old male patient complains of general weakness, decreased performance, heaviness in the left hypochondrium. These presentations have been observed for 7 months. The patient hasn't sought medical help. Objectively: the skin is pale. The liver is +4 cm, the spleen is +8 cm. Complete blood count: RBC - 3,3x1012/l, hemoglobin 100 g/l, color index - 0,9, WBC - 112x109/l, basophils - 2%, eosinophils - 7%, myeloblasts - 1%, promyelocytes - 7%, myelocytes - 10%, juvenile neutrophils - 4%, stab neutrophils - 10%, segmented neutrophils - 32%, ESR - 28 mm/h. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Chronic myelogenous leukemia
b. Lymphogranulomatosis
c. B-12 anemia
d. Iron deficiency anemia
e. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia

14. At the first stage of nursing examination a nurse revealed mucous membrane bleeding, metrorrhagia and "leopard spots". Bleeding time was increased. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Purpura rheumatica
*c. Thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Haemophilia
e. Acute leukaemia

15. A patient complains about expectoration of purulent foul-smelling sputum in the morning (200 ml), drumstick fingers and watch-glass nails. These presentations have been observed for 5 years. What disease are they typical for?
*a. Bronchiectasis
b. Pneumoconiosis
c. Tuberculosis
d. Pleurisy
e. Pneumonia

16. A 66-year-old male patient has pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug should be used for secondary prophylaxis?
*a. Isoniazid
b. Levamisole
c. Remantadin
d. Amoxicillin
e. Bicillin-5

17. A patient complains of chest pain, cough with expectoration of rust-colored sputum, fever up to 39C. What disease can be suspected in this patient?
a. Pharyngitis
b. Laryngitis
*c. Pneumonia
d. Purulent bronchitis
e. Abscess of lung

18. A 45-year-old male patient consulted a physician about weakness, mild fever, facial ademata, changes in the color and amount of urine. These symptoms have been present for a week since recovering from a quinsy. Objectively: the skin is pale, eyelids are swollen, AP is 170/100 mm Hg, pulse is 90 bpm, heart sounds are muffled, there is a positive Pasternatsky's symptom. What test is required to specify the diagnosis?
a. Complete blood count
b. Urine diastase test
c. Urine glucose test
d. Zimnitsky's test
*e. Nechiporenko's test

19. A 26-year-old female patient complains of fugitive pain in the knee and elbow joints, fever up to 37,5°C in the evening. The pain gets worse with movements. The patient has a history of frequent quinsies. Examination of the joints reveals swelling and redness. What disease is characterized by these signs?
a. Tuberculous arthritis
b. Gonorrheal arthritis
c. Deforming osteoarthritis
*d. Rheumatic arthritis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

20. A patient complains of general weakness, dizziness, sensation of creeps, numbness in the lower extremities, periodical darting pain in the extremities, as well as burning of the tongue tip. Objectively: pale skin, subicteric scleras, bright red, glossy and smooth tongue. In blood: colour index - 1,4, macrocytosis of red blood cells, anisocytosis, Jolly bodies, Cabot's rings. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. B12-folic acid deficiency anaemia
b. Chronic haemorrhagic anaemia
c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Haemolytic anaemia
e. Iron deficiency anaemia

21. A patient with a history of asthma has developed Status asthmaticus. What drug should be administered in the first place?
a. Corglycon intravenously
*b. Prednisolone intravenously
c. Dimedrol subcutaneously
d. Potassium iodide intravenously
e. Furosemide intravenously

22. A 20-year-old patient has been hospitalised in grave condition. He complains about chest pain, stomatorrhagia, body temperature rise up to 38°C, shiver and general weakness. Objectively: skin is pale, cervical and axillary lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. Blood analysis: Hb- 59 g/l, RBCs - 2,21012/l, colour index - 0,8, reticulocytes - 0,1%, WBCs – 80109/l, blastocytes - 40%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 28%, lymphocytes - 10%, monocytes - 18%, trombocytes – 76109/l, ESR - 38 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic leukaemia
b. Hypochromic anemia
c. Hemorrhagic diathesis
*d. Acute leukaemia
e. Aplastic anemia

23. A female patient has developed hyperemic rash, skin itch, dizziness and dyspnea after penicillin test. What should you do immediately on doctor's orders?
a. To repeat the test
*b. Inject benadryl intramuscularly
c. Put hot-water bag on extremities
d. Hospitalise the patient
e. Call an ambulance

24. A female patient has gastric ulcer. She has developed coffee-grounds vomiting. What emergency care should be rendered?
*a. Ice pack on stomach
b. Injection of analgin
c. Warm drink
d. Hot-water bag on stomach
e. Gastric lavage

25. A patient developed intensive burning retrosternal pain 6 hours ago. Body temperature is 37,2°C. Heart action is rhythmic. Heart rate - 68/m, AP- 110/75 mm Hg. The abdomen is soft and painless on palpation. What instrumental examination should the patient be prepared?
a. Echocardioscopy
b. Veloergometry
c. Daily monitoring
*d. Electrocardiography
e. Coronary arteriography

26. A nurse working with a family doctor supervises the treatment of a patient with bronchial asthma. What drugs should he take?
a. Ketotifen, lasolvan
b. Corglycon
c. Atropine
*d. Salbutamol, berotec
e. Strophanthin, mucaltinum

27. A 42-year-old patient has been delivered to a hospital in grave condition with body temperature 39,8°C. He complains about chest pain on the right that is getting worse while coughing. The patient presents with headache and cough with "rusty" sputum. Which disease are these symptoms most typical for?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Bronchitis
*c. Pneumonia
d. Pneumonectasia
e. Multiple bronchiectasis

28. A 62-year-old man has developed burning retrosternal pain irradiating to the left hand after a psychologic overexertion. The pain cannot be relieved by nitroglycerine. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary edema
b. Rest angina
*c. Myocardial infarction
d. Cardiogenic shock
e. Hypertensic crisis

29. A patient has suffered a stroke. Which drug should be inluded in complex therapy for normalization of neurometabolic processes in brain?
*a. Pyracetam
b. Seduxen
c. Droperidol
d. Caffeine
e. No-shpa

30. A 40-year-old in-patient undergoes treatment for the community-acquired pneumonia with pronounced clinical symptoms. What can happen to him in the period of sudden drop in body temperature?
a. Infarction
b. Insult
*c. Collapse
d. Coma
e. Biliary colic

31. A female patient with chronic nephritis undergoes treatment at the nephrological department. She complains about sickness, food aversion, headache and skin itch. What examination will allow to confirm nephratonia?
*a. Test for urea and creatinine level in blood
b. Nechiporenko urine examination
c. Complete blood count
d. Bacteriological urine examination
e. Clinical urine examination

32. A 32-year-old male patient undergoes treatment in the hematology department for thrombocytopenic purpura. For a complete blood count a blood sample has been taken. What alterations in the blood formula are most common?
a. Leukopenia
b. Thrombocytosis
c. Erythrocytosis
*d. Thrombocytopenia
e. Leukocytosis

33. A patient complains about cough with expectorating a mouth-full of sputum. Objectively: "drumstick fingers", "watch-glass nails". What disease are these symptoms characteristic of?
*a. Bronchiectasis
b. Pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Pneumonia
d. Pleurisy
e. Pulmonary emphysema

34. A patient with gastric ulcer complains about general weakness, fatiguability, body weight loss, aversion to meat food and constant pain in the epigastrium. What complication is it?
*a. Malignization
b. Haemorrhage
c. Penetration
d. Pylorostenosis
e. Perforation

35. A 36-year-old male patient suffering from insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus was delivered to a hospital in grave condition. Objectively: he is unconsciousness, has muscular jerks, skin is pale and wet, there is no acetone odour. What drug injection should be given to the patient first of all?
a. Noradrenaline
*b. 40% glucose solution
c. Glucagon
d. 5% glucose solution
e. Insulin

36. Patients with renal diseases are subject to differential diagnostics of acute glomerulonephritis and acute pyelonephritis. What alterations in urine characterize acute glomerulonephritis?
a. Bacteriuria, pyuria
*b. Gross hematuria, proteinuria
c. Pyuria, cylindruria
d. Severe proteinuria, pyuria
e. Pyuria, gross hematuria

37. A patient with complaints of heartbeats, limb tremor, tearfulness, body weight loss and sleep disturbance has been admitted to the endocrinological department. Objectively: Ps- 120/min, heart sounds are rhythmic, AP- 150/90 mm Hg. The isthmus of thyroid gland is enlarged on palpation. What drug shoud be applied for treatment?
a. Thyreocomb
b. Thyroidin
*c. Mercazolil
d. Hydrochlorothiazide
e. Furosemide

38. An admitting nurse interviewed a 72-year-old male patient. After that she talked to the patient's relatives accompanying the patient and found out that the patient was exaggerating symptoms of his disease. Such behavior of the patient is called:
*a. Aggravation
b. Dissimulation
c. Ataxia
d. Appeal
e. Simulation

39. A patient experiences recurrent pain in the epigastric region. The pain is seasonal, closely associated with eating (usually occurs 15-45 minutes after having meals), becomes less intense after vomiting and heat application. What disease is characterized by these clinical presentations?
a. Cholelithiasis
b. Esophagitis
c. Biliary dyskinesia
*d. Gastric ulcer
e. Gastritis

40. A patient was found to have urinary syndrome: cloudy urine with a foul smell, proteinuria (0,99g/l), pyuria, cylindruria, bacteriuria. What disease can be suspected?
a. Chronic renal disease
b. Cystitis
c. Nephrotic syndrome
*d. Pyelonephritis
e. Glomerulonephritis

41. A patient complains of cough, body temperature rise up to 39°C and sternal pain. He has been provisionally diagnosed with pneumonia. What is the most credible additional examination that will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Peakflowmetry
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Spirography
d. Pneumotachometry
*e. X-ray

42. A 30-year-old patient complains of hoarseness, laborious cough, inspiratory dyspnea. Objectively: stridor, pale and edematic face and neck. The edema is dense, localized on the lips, eyelids, neck. The patient has a history of allergies to certain foodstuffs. What condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Acute bronchitis
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Quincke's edem
d. Pneumonia
e. Heart failure

43. A nurse looks after a patient of the gastroenterologic department. Specify the peculiarities of diet in case of gastric ulcer:
a. Limited fluid intake
b. Avoidance of dairy products
c. Fasting days
*d. Boiled and ground food
e. Increase in carbohydrates

44. A nurse cares for a patient with hypertensive crisis. She should apply mustard plasters to the following anatomic region:
a. Region of heart
b. Forehead
c. Sternum
*d. Occiput
e. Interscapular

45. A patient suddenly developed pronounced inspiratory dyspnea and dry cough during the sleep. The patient's condition progressively worsened, he developed noisy bubbling breathing, cough with pink foamy sputum. The patient was administered oxygen inhalation. Oxygen should be humidified with:
a. Methyl alcohol
b. Saline solution
c. Distilled water
d. Tap water
*e. Ethyl alcohol

46. 10 days after angina a 19-year-old girl consulted a district doctor about facel edemata, severe weakness. Objectively: pale skin, to-37,4°C, HR- 98/min, AP- 165/98 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, there is aortic accent of the second sound. Urine is dark red in amount of 400 ml per day. The patient is to be hospitalized to the following department:
a. Therapeutic
b. Cardiologic
c. Infectious
*d. Nephrologic
e. Urologic

47. A 60-year-old patient is depressed, he sees everything in black, feels anguish, anxiety, fear, has thoughts of suicide. What emotional disorder is it?
*a. Depression
b. Euphoria
c. -
d. Dysphoria
e. Apathy

48. A 17-year-old patient complains about pain in the right knee joint. He claims to have been suffering from it since childhood. The nasal hemorrhages are frequent. There are three children in the family: two boys and one girl. His brother has similar disease. Objectively: the knee joint is swollen, palpation and movements cause pain. What is the most likely disease?
a. Chronic leukaemia
*b. Haemophilia
c. Schonlein-Henoch disease
d. Werlhof's disease
e. Acute leukaemia

49. Nursing examination of a 70-year-old male patient with chronic atonic colitis revealed such problems as nausea, abdominal swelling and costiveness for over 3 days. What foodstuffs should the nurse recommend for costiveness prevention?
a. Milk, brown bread, pork
b. Tinned food, white bread, cabbage
*c. Beet, carrot, prunes
d. Vegetables, fresh milk, hard cheese
e. Vegetables, fruit juices, cakes

50. A nurse of therapeutics department was summoned to a 59-year-old patient. Objectively: the patient was excited, he was sitting on the bed and gasping for air. The skin was cyanotic, tachypnoe was present. Bubbling breathing could be heard at a distance. There was cough with pink foamy sputum and moist rales over the lungs. These symptoms are indicative of the following urgent condition:
a. Hypertensic crisis
b. Attack of stenocardia
c. Asthmatic attack
d. Myocardial infarction
*e. Pulmonary edema

51. A nurse cares for a 19-year-old patient in the framework of nursing process. The patient complains of stabbing heart pain, palpitation, dyspnea on exertion, body temperature rise up to 38,3°C at night. She has a history of frequent anginas. A month ago she had angina but underwent no treatment. After that there appeared the mentioned problems. What disease are these problems typical for?
a. -
*b. Rheumatic disease
c. Arthrosis deformans
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Glomerulonephritis

52. A nurse recommends a patient with diabetes mellitus to eat 30 minutes after an insulin injection. This can prevent the following complication:
*a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Hyperosmolar coma
c. Thyrotoxic coma
d. Lactic acid coma
e. Hyperglycemic coma

53. A 49-year-old female patient complains about intermittent pain in the right lumbar region, body temperature rise up to 37-38°C and frequent urination. She has been diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic pyelonephritis. Which changes in urine will confirm this diagnosis?
a. Leukocyturia, glucosuria
b. Leukocyturia, hematuria
*c. Leukocyturia, bacteriuria
d. Glucosuria, cylindruria
e. Hematuria, proteinuria

54. A 23-year-old patient undergoes treatment at the endocrinologic department for diabetes mellitus. A nurse should control if the patient follows the following diet:
a. Diet № 7
b. Diet № 10
c. Diet № 1
d. Diet № 5
*e. Diet № 9

55. A patient complains about pain in hand and feet joints, morning stiffness and deformity of these joints. What disease can be suspected?
a. Rheumarthritis
b. Osteoarthritis
*c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Podagra
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

56. Examination of a patient with lung carcinoma revealed cough with bloody sputum, weakness, dysorexia, weight loss and chest pain. What is the most urgent problem in this case?
a. Dysorexia
b. Weight loss
c. Weakness
d. Chest pain
*e. Hemoptysis

57. After eating forest berries a patient developed choking cough, husky voice and inspiratory dyspnea. The patient is anxious, pale. Paraglossia and face edema are also presented. What drug should be injected according to doctor's orders?
a. No-shpa
*b. Prednisolone
c. Ketanov
d. Analgin
e. Baralgine

58. A 42-year-old female patient is depressed. She is sad and thoughtful, she communicates with nurse unwillingly and refuses to eat. She lies on the bad with her face turned to the wall. The nurse should suspect the following danger to the patient's life:
*a. Suicidal thoughts and actions
b. Body weight loss
c. Hypostatic pneumonia development
d. Avitaminosis development
e. Bedsore development

59. A patient has presented with low-grade fever, hyperhidrosis and decline in work performance for two months. The patient associates body weight loss with diarrhea. Medical examination revealed enlarged axillary lymph nodes and liver, multiple aphtae of oral mucosa. The patient is intravenous drug abuser. What disease might be suspected?
*a. Human immunodeficiency virus
b. Viral hepatitis type B
c. Chronic colitis
d. Viral hepatitis type C
e. Tuberculosis

