1. 6 months after treatment a patient with coronary heart disease developed tolerance to the prolonged-action nitrates. What drug with nitrate-similar effect should be recommended in this case?
a. Metoprolol
*b. Molsidomine
c. Prazosin
d. Nifedipine
e. Verapamil

2. Losartan as a part of treatment of arterial hypertension is contraindicated in case of:
a. Hypokalemia
*b. Pregnancy
c. Urine acid diathesis
d. Hyperglycemia
e. Hyperlipidemia

3. Which of the following drugs is used for thrombolytic therapy in case of myocardial infarction?
*a. Streptokinase
b. Phenylinum
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Ticlopidine
e. Heparin

4. What drug is used as the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
*a. Deferoxamine
b. Bemegride
c. Penicillamine
d. Atropine
e. Protamine sulfate

5. Which preparation is the specific antidote in case of intoxication with iron preparations?
a. Atropinum
b. Penicillamine
c. Protamine sulfate
d. Bemegridum
*e. Deferoxamium

6. A pregnant woman fell ill with severe pneumonia. Which of these antimicrobials should be administered to this patient?
a. Ofloxacin
b. Biseptol
c. Gentamicin sulfate
d. Tetracycline hydrochloride
*e. Cefotaxime

7. One of the major indicator of drug elimination from the human body is:
a. Volume of distribution
b. Bioequivalence
c. Highest concentration in blood
*d. Effective halfbeak
e. Bioavailability

8. Which of the following antihypertensive drugs has potassium-sparing effect?
*a. Triamterene
b. Prazosin
c. Diltiazem
d. Metoprolol
e. Furosemide

9. Mother of a 2-month-old child came to a pharmacy and asked for a febrifuge. What drug should be recommended for the child?
a. Diclofenac sodium
*b. Paracetamolum
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Nimesulide
e. Indometacinum

10. A 6-year-old child with pneumonia has been administered an antibiotic. After treatment the child lost his hearing. What group of antibiotics might have caused this complication?
a. Cephalosporins
b. Natural penicillins
c. Semi-synthetic penicillins
*d. Aminoglycosides
e. Macrolides

11. A 52-year-old patient had myocardial infarction and was discharged from the hospital after the stationery treatment. What daily dose of acetylsalicylic acid should be administered in order to prevent thrombosis?
*a. 100 mg
b. 1000 mg
c. 50 mg
d. 200 mg
e. 500 mg

12. A patient with hypertension has been administered one of antihypertensive drugs. Blood pressure dropped back to normal, but the patient has developed a persistent dry cough. Which of the following drugs has such a side effect?
a. Clonidine
b. Propranolol
*c. Enalapril maleate
d. Furosemide
e. Nifedipine

13. Name the reason for the reduction of anticoagulant effect of syncumar when it is applied in combination with phenobarbital:
a. These drugs are antagonists
b. Mutual inactivation
c. Phenobarbital inhibits microsomal liver enzymes
d. Development of syncumar allergy
*e. Phenobarbital activates microsomal liver enzymes

14. Choose an optimal antibacterial drug for the mycoplasmal pneumonia treatment:
a. Amoksiklav
*b. Rovamycine
c. Penicillin
d. Gentamycinum
e. Ampicillin

15. Select the optimal antibacterial drug for the treatment of mycoplasma pneumonia:
a. Amoxiclav
*b. Rovamycin
c. Penicillin
d. Gentamicin
e. Ampicillin

16. Which of the listed preparations should be used as antidote and included into the first-aid kit required at factories where acute intoxications with arsenic, mercury, chrome and bismuth compounds are possible?
a. Adrenalinum
b. Morphinum
c. Droperidolum
*d. Unithiolum
e. Atropinum

17. A patient has chronic pancreatitis with apparent presentations of pancreatic exocrine hypofunction. Which of the following drugs would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. De-Nol
b. Drotaverine
*c. Pancreatinum
d. Omeprazol
e. Acidin pepsinum

18. A patient got an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient has presented with red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucous membrane. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Delayed allergy
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Abstinence syndrome
*d. Immediate allergy
e. Local irritation

19. A patient had been given an injection of 0,25% novocaine solution for the purpose of anaesthetization. Suddenly the patient developed red spots, intense sweating, tachycardia, bronchospasm, edema of nasal mucosa. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Delayed allergy
b. Tachyphylaxis
c. Withdrawal syndrome
*d. Immediate allergy
e. Local irritation

20. A 15-year-old patient has been first diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus. Which antihyperglycemic drug should be administered in this case?
a. Glibenclamide
*b. Insulin
c. Diabetone
d. Metformin
e. Glurenorm

21. Which of the following non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents has the least harmful effect on the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
*b. Nimesulide
c. Indomethacin
d. Diclofenac
e. Piroxicam

22. Examination of a patient who has been treated for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time revealed hyperglycemia. What drug might have caused it?
a. Levamisole
*b. Dexamethasone
c. Ibuprofen
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Chloroquine

23. Which drug is used for thrombolysis in case of acute myocardial infarction?
a. Fraxiparine
*b. Alteplase
c. Heparin
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
e. Pentoxifylline

24. A 54-year-old patient who has been suffering from hyperacidic gastritis for several years was prescribed almagel. What pharmacotherapeutical complications on the part of digestive organs may be expected in the first place?
a. Emesis
b. Diarrhea
c. Nausea
d. Anorexia
*e. Constipation

25. A 26-year-old patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia provoked by mycoplasma. Choose the appropriate antimicrobial preparation for the patient treatment:
a. Amoksiklav
*b. Rovamycine
c. Gentamycinum
d. Amoxicillin
e. Benzylpenicillinum

26. A 60-year-old patient has essential hypertension stage II, coronary disease, bronchial asthma. After pharmacotherapy correction the patient exhibited a bronchospastic attack, intensified dyspnea. What drug provoked this complication?
a. ?uphyllinum
b. Nifedipin
*c. Propranolol
d. ?ucaltinum
e. Salbutamolum

27. After an emotional stress a 60-year-old patient presented with chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Specify a drug that relieves pain in this case:
*a. Nitroglycerine
b. Diltiazem
c. Metoprolol
d. Propranolol
e. Nifedipine

28. A woman asked a pharmaceutist to dispense an antipyretic for an 8-month-old child. Which drug should be recommended?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Diclofenac sodium
c. Piroxicam
*d. Paracetamol
e. Indomethacin

29. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about elevated arterial pressure. He has a history of benign hyperplasia of prostate. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Enalapril
b. Diltiazem
c. Losartan
*d. Doxazosin
e. Propranolol

30. A woman who has been treated for infiltrative focal tuberculosis for a long time complains of acute hearing impairment. Which of the following preparations might be the cause of such side effect?
a. Ethambutol
b. Isoniazid
*c. Streptomycin
d. Rifampicin
e. Ethionamidum

31. Which of the listed antibacterial drugs should not be administered to a patient with diabetes mellitus type II being treated with glibenclamid?
a. Gentamycinum
b. Midecamycin
*c. Co-trimoxazolum
d. Benzylpenicillinum
e. Doxycycline

32. Which of the listed pharmacolgical groups of antihypertensive drugs is contra-indicated the patients with bronchial asthma?
a. Diuretics
*b. Beta-adrenergic blocking agent
c. Calcium channel blockers
d. ACE inhibitor
e. Angiotensin receptors blockers

33. What drug may cause constipation in a patient undergoing combined therapy for arterial hypertension?
*a. Verapamil
b. Trimetazidine
c. Acetylsalicilic acid in small dosages
d. Panangin
e. Furosemide

34. A patient with cholelithiasis should be administered the following drug for the dissolution of cholesterol gallstones:
a. Citric acid
b. Mefenamic acid
c. Gamma-aminobutyric acid
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
*e. Ursodeoxycholic acid

35. A 68-year-old female patient has been continuously taking furosemide for heart failure treatment. What drug should be used to prevent hypokalemia in patients taking furosemide?
a. Sustac forte
*b. Panangin
c. Mildronatum
d. Atp-long
e. Trimetazidine

36. A 52-year-old patient complains of having increased arterial pressure for a month. She has a 5-year history of bronchial asthma. What group of hypotensive drugs should NOT be recommended this patient?
a. Angiotensin receptor blockers
b. Diuretics
c. Calcium channel blockers
d. Tranquilizers
*e. beta-adrenoreceptor blockers

37. An 18-year-old patient was diagnosed with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug will provide etiotropic pharmacotherapy?
a. Trimethoprim
b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
*c. Isoniazid
d. Lincomycin
e. Metronidazole

38. A woman in the III trimester of pregnancy has an acute respiratory viral disease accompanied with body temperature rise up to 39oC. Which of the drugs should be recommended?
a. Celecoxib
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Paracetamol
e. Indomethacin

39. Benzathine benzylpenicillin is the drug of choice for treating the following disease:
a. Angina
b. Furunculosis
c. Intestinal infection
d. Pneumonia
*e. Syphilis

40. A patient consults a pharmaceutist about taking acetylsalicylic acid as an antiaggregant. What is the daily dose that should be recommended for continuous use?
a. 1,0-2,0 g
b. 0,5-1,0 g
*c. 0,1-0,3 g
d. 2,0-3,0
e. Over 4,0 g

41. A patient suffering from arterial hypertension and chronic bronchitis suddenly presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Body temperature remained unchanged. It is known that the patient takes captopril. These symptoms can be explained by increased generation of:
a. Natriuretic peptide
*b. Bradyquinine
c. Renin
d. Angiotensin-1
e. Aldosterone

42. Which preparation from the group of laxative agents will not  be administered in case of intoxication with CNS-inhibiting substances?
*a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Vaseline oil
c. Guttalax
d. Bisacodyl
e. Sodium sulfate

43. Treatment of poisonings with inorganic mercury compounds includes the use of the following antidote:
a. Dexamethasone
*b. Unithiol
c. Tetacinum-calcium
d. Naloxone
e. Desferal

44. During the treatment of chronic heart failure with digoxin  a patient has bradycardia, nausea, vomiting, blurred vision. Which drug is the antidote in this case?
a. Atropine sulphate
*b. Unithiol
c. Dipiroximum
d. Tetacinum calcium
e. Amyl nitrite

45. A 46-year-old patient suffering from chronic bronchitis came to a pharmacy. What expectorative drug may be recommended?
*a. Ambroxol
b. Libexin
c. Salbutamol
d. Glauvent
e. Falimint

46. A 26-year-old pregnant woman (III trimester of pregnancy) complains about body temperature rise up to 39 C. What febrifuge may be recommended in this case?
a. Analgin
b. Indometacin
c. Aspirin
d. Diclofenac
*e. Paracetamol

47. During the combined pharmacotherapy a patient with peptic ulcer presented with black-coloured feces. What drug might have caused such change?
*a. Bismuth subcitrate
b. Actovegin
c. Ranitidine
d. Metronidazole
e. Omeprazole

48. A patient who has been undergoing combined drug therapy for peptic ulcer presents with black feces. Specify a drug that might have caused such a change:
*a. Bismuth subcitrate
b. Actovegin
c. Ranitidine
d. Metronidazole
e. Omeprazole

49. A female patient in the first trimester of pregnancy has been diagnosed with acute pyelonephritis. What is the antibiotic drug of choice for treating this patient?
a. Gentamicin
b. Norfloxacin
*c. Amoxicillin
d. Chloramphenicol
e. Amikacin

50. A man with a long history of chronic hepatitis has been diagnosed with pneumonia. Which of the following antibacterial drugs can be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Rifampicin
b. Vancomycin
c. Tetracycline
d. Biseptol
*e. Amoxicillin

51. A 25-year-old patient has been taking antibiotics for 7 days. Antibiotic therapy has caused a complication in form of bowel dysbacteriosis. This complication should be treated with drugs of the following pharmacological group:
a. Spasmolytics
b. Antacids
c. Adaptogens
*d. Probiotics
e. Cholagogic

52. A 57-year-old female patient was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis; she has also a history of stomach ulcer. What drug from the group of nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs may be recommended this patient?
*a. Celecoxib
b. Aspirin
c. Mefenamic acid
d. Indometacin
e. Diclofenac

53. An internship doctor prescribed his patient nifuroxazid from the group of nitrofurans for the treatment of urinary tracts infection. The doctor made a mistake because:
*a. It cannot be absorbed from the digestive tract
b. It has nephrotoxic effect
c. It is excreted from the organism very slowly
d. It has bacteriostatic effect
e. It is excreted with urine in the inactive state

54. A patient fell ill with severe pneumonia was prescribed ceftriaxonum once a day. Prescription of ceftriaxonum once a day connected with the fact that the drug:
a. Pluripotential
b. Has bactericidal effect
*c. Slowly eliminated from the body
d. Accumulates in the lungs
e. Poorly absorbed from the injection site

55. A patient with moderately severe pneumonia has been administered ceftriaxone 1 time per day. The drug should be taken once a day due to the following properties:
*a. Slow excretion
b. Wide range of action
c. Poor absorption from the injection site
d. Cumulative ability
e. Presence of bactericidal action

56. Which of the following drugs should be used for prevention of bronchial asthma attacks?
a. Ambroxol
*b. Cromolyn sodium
c. Drotaverine
d. Salbutamol
e. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride

57. A 25-year-old patient with frequent migraine attacks has been prescribed sumatriptan. Specify the mechanism of its action:
a. Stimulator of beta-adrenergic receptors
b. Selective alpha-blocker
c. Selective antagonist of 5-HT1-serotonin receptors
d. Nonselective alpha-blocker
*e. Selective agonist of 5-HT1-serotonin receptors

58. A 43-year-old patient with a severe form of rheumatoid arthritis has been administered a certain drug for background therapy. Specify this drug:
a. Prednisolone
b. Methylprednisolone
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Nimesulide
*e. Methotrexate

59. A 65-year-old male patient complains of nausea, vomiting, lethargy, seeing yellow spots in front of his eyes. The patient takes daily 0,25 mg of digoxin, 100 mg of aspecardum, 50 mg of metoprolol. What pathological condition is this syndrome typical for?
*a. Glycoside intoxication
b. Withdrawal syndrome
c. Hypersensitivity reaction
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Food poisoning

60. Bronchodilatory effect of short-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist salbutamol develops after:
a. 4-6 hours
*b. 5-10 minutes
c. 45-60 minutes
d. 20-30 minutes
e. 2-3 hours

61. In case of simultaneous use of metronidazole and oral anticoagulants derived from coumarin patients must be warned about:
a. Higher neurotoxicity
*b. Potentiation of anticoagulants effect and the risk of bleeding
c. Potentiation of metronidazole effect
d. Reduction of anticoagulants effect
e. Reduction of metronidazole effect

62. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed an antiulcer drug that also reduces secretion of hydrochloric acid and inhibits Chelicobacter pylori. What drug is it?
a. Gastrocepine
b. Famotidine
c. Almagel
*d. Omeprazole
e. Maalox

63. A 24-year-old patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus type I for 8 years. Diabetic nephropathy provoked development of symptomatic arterial hypertension. Which of the folowing drugs is indicated for long-term therapy?
a. Propranolol
b. Dibazol
c. Dichlothiazide
*d. Enalapril
e. Clonidine

64. A patient with arterial hypertension was administered a non-prescription drug for symptomatic treatment of rhinitis. What pharmaceutical form should be recommended the patient in order to reduce as much as possible the likelihood of development of undesirable systemic vasoconstriction?
a. Aerosol
b. Tablets
c. Gel
d. Drops
*e. Ointment

65. A 56-year-old patient suffering from essential hypertension was prescribed an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and a potassium-sparing diuretic. Such combination is:
*a. Unreasonable because it increases risk of hyperkaliemia development
b. Reasonable because it potentiates hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
c. Unreasonable because it increases risk of orthostatic collapse development
d. Unreasonable because it reduces hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitor
e. Reasonable because it decreases risk of hyperkaliemia development

66. Treatment course of essential hypertension includes diuretics. Which diuretic does not need to be combined with potassium preparations?
*a. Triamteren
b. Dichlothiazide
c. Ethacrynic acid
d. Furosemide
e. Clopamide

67. A patient with hypertensive crisis received an injection of ganglionic blocker benzohexonium. What side effect might be expected after the drug injection?
a. Central nervous system depression effect
b. Withdrawal (abstinence) syndrome
*c. Orthostatic hypotension
d. Taste violation
e. Diarrhea

68. A 67-year-old patient who undergoes treatment for bronchial asthma presents with limb tremor, headache, insomnia, extrasystole. What drug might have caused such symptoms?
a. Intal
b. Acetylcysteine
c. Prednisolone
d. Tavegyl
*e. Theophylline

