1. A pharmaceutical company focuses on selling a diverse range of products covering different customer groups and regions. What kind of organizational structure is typical for such company?
a. Centralized
b. Decentralized
c. Bureaucratic
d. Functional
*e. Divisional

2. A pharmaceutical enterprise widely applies technical and technological media of information use in order to increase efficiency of managing productive and administrative activity of an organization, to enhance labour productivity, to improve methods of planning and regulating management processes. All this is realized by means of:
a. Information-management system
b. Automated data retrieval system
c. Automation equipped working place
d. Automated instruction and control system
*e. Automated management system

3. A pharmaceutical enterprise that has achieved high sales rates and customers recognition will reach the highest profit at the following stage of the product life cycle:
a. Development
*b. Maturity
c. Growth
d. Market penetration
e. Decrease

4. Marketing research of certain pharmaceutical groups involves collection and analysis of primary information. This is the following type of marketing research:
*a. Field research
b. Research of drug market
c. Research of marketing network of pharmaceutical market
d. Research of drug consumers
e. Armchair research

5. The market is characterized by the following conditions: a big number of salespersons and customers who dont make any influence upon the level of current prices; availability of uniform and interchangeable competing products; lack of price restrictions. What type of market is it?
a. Oligopolistic market
b. Market of monopolistic competition
*c. Market of pure competition
d. Market of pure monopoly
e. -

6. Among the given principles of market segmentation select a principle that is used in the study of drug market most often:
*a. Demographic
b. Psychological
c. Socio-economic
d. Psychographic
e. Behavioral

7. Personnel records refer to the following type of documents:
*a. Managerial
b. Scientific
c. Reference information
d. Directive
e. Pharmaceutical

8. When developing the system of marketing communications, a company should consider the characteristics of each tool used for market promotion of a drug. Which of the following characteristics is typical for advertising?
a. Non-mass communication
b. All answers are correct
c. There is no correct answer
*d. Depersonalization (non-personal communication)
e. Two-way communication

9. Collective labour agreement is concluded by a trade union committee with the enterprise owner on behalf of the workforce. Any collective agreement is worked out in written form. Which article of the Labor Code regulates the duration of the collective agreement?
a. 40
b. 41
c. 36
d. 38
*e. 17

10. A pharmaceutist and a pharmacy manager were involved into the labour dispute about carry over of vacation time. The pharmaceutist applied to the council of conciliation. The council should consider his application within the following period:
a. 1 month
*b. 10 days
c. 3 days
d. 5 days
e. 1 week

11. For the purpose of sales stimulation a pharmaceutical wholesale company grants its customers a discount according to the social contract and on condition of their loyalty. Specify the type of discount:
*a. Bonus
b. Seasonal
c. -
d. Discounts for quantity of purchased goods
e. Dealer

12. Development of advertising strategy for promotion of nonprescription drugs includes identification of the target audience. The highest selectivity of consumer audience can be achieved by means of the following advertisment type:
a. On TV
*b. At sales outlet
c. On transport
d. On the radio
e. In the printed publication

13. Theory of management currently marks out four the most important approaches to the management. Choose the approach that is not applied in the theory of management:
a. Situational
b. Different schools dedication approach
c. Process approach
d. Systemic
*e. Structured

14. A manufacturing company initiates changes to the package insert of a drug aimed at limitation of its use. What type of marketing is used by the company in this case?
a. Stimulating
*b. Counteractive
c. Remarketing
d. Conversion
e. Synchromarketing

15. On the initiative of the manufacturing company some amendments to a drug information leaflet are to be made for the restriction of the drug use. What type of marketing is applied in this case?
a. Incentive
*b. Opposed
c. Remarketing
d. Conversion
e. Synchromarketing

16. When developing a new drug a manufacturer may apply different strategies of brand use. If a company uses one brand name for all of its products, such strategy is called:
a. Multi-brand approach
*b. Group brands
c. Brands for individual drugs
d. Individual brands
e. The combination of brand name with an individual drug brand

17. A manufacturing enterprise plans to retail a new drug through the corporate network of pharmacies. What strategy of drug distribution will be used?
a. Vertical integration
*b. Direct
c. Flexible
d. Multi-echelon
e. Horizontal integration

18. At the initial stage of establishing a pharmaceutical enterprise the internal disciplinary regulations should be adopted. One of the primary matters is the duration of the lunch break for the employees. According to the Labour Code of Ukraine, the break duration must be as follows:
a. Up to 1 hour
b. 2,5 hours
c. -
*d. Up to 2 hours
e. Not less than 3 hours

19. A large and well-known company has granted a small independent firm the right to use its trademark and technology so that it could take advantage of authority and customer trust to the well-known brand. Such concept is called:
a. Merchandising
b. Use of trademark
c. Use of manufacturers brand
*d. Franchising
e. Use of dealers brand

20. In a pharmaceutical company both American and Japanese management styles are used. Select a characteristic feature of the Japanese management style:
a. Clearly formalized management structure
b. Short-term employment
c. Individual decision-making process
d. Fast evaluation and career advancement
*e. Collective responsibility

21. Management of a pharmaceutical company involves American and Japanese approaches. Choose a typical feature of American model of management:
a. Corporate liability
b. Group forms of control
*c. Quick evaluation and career development
d. Slow career development
e. Heightened attention to the human factor

22. Drug A is in the stage of market saturation. In order to push up intensive sales, management of the manufacturing company decided to use the following type of advertising:
a. Sales promotion
b. Public relations
c. Informational
d. Personal sales
*e. Aggressive

23. A pharmaceutical company conducted an age-specific segment analysis of the regional antihistamine market. It revealed the lack of antihistamines for children. The company will consider this segment as:
a. Unattractive segment
b. Segment requiring further research
c. Market door
*d. Market niche
e. Market share

24. The manufacturing pharmaceutical company " Elema" set up its own corporate pharmacy. In this case, it uses the following distribution channel:
a. Second level
b. First level
*c. Zero level
d. Third level
e. Fourth level

25. An employee of a pharmaceutical company has been commissioned with marketing research on the regional market of antiarrhythmic drugs. What stage of research would he prefer in the first place?
a. Preparation of report
b. Submission of report
c. Collection of primary information
d. Analysis of primary information
*e. Collection and analysis of secondary information

26. A pharmaceutical company "Pfizer" is focused on offering the best quality goods at a high price which should cover the costs of research and development as well as production of high quality products. Despite the high price, the product is still in demand. What are the goals of the companys price policy?
a. Maintaining status quo
b. Ensuring the companys survival
*c. Winning the market leadership in respect of product quality
d. Increasing the market share
e. Increasing the companys assortment

27. A pharmaceutical company "Pharmasvet" has patented and produces now a new hypoglycemic preparation. The company markets this product directly through the own sales departments, affiliated sales companies, pharmacy network. Marketing policy of this pharmaceutical company can be characterized by the channel of the following level:
a. Two-level
b. One-level
*c. Zero level
d. Three-level
e. Four-level

28. When setting up a joint-stock company the founders discussed the issues of financial liability. What is the liability of the board members in a joint-stock company?
a. Limited to the contributions to the statutory fund and their property
b. Limited to the double amount of deposits
*c. Limited to the value of their shares
d. Limited to the amount of deposits
e. Unlimited and solidary

29. Three founders set up a business entity for the wholesale distribution of medicines and healthcare products. Specify the form of such company:
a. Utility
b. Individual
c. Unitary
d. Public
*e. Corporate

30. A pharmaceutist plans voluntary termination of the open-ended employment contract for the reason of her husbands transfer to another area. Specify the form and term of notice that should be given to the pharmacy director:
a. One-month notice in written form
b. One-week notice in written form
*c. Two-week notice in written form
d. Five-day notice in written form
e. Two-day notice in written form

31. Industrial, labor and socio-economic relations between the head of a pharmaceutical company and the employees are regulated by:
a. Employment agreement
b. Contract
c. Statute
*d. Collective agreement
e. Corporate code

32. A pharmacy makes bulk purchases of health and hygiene products. The agent works under a contract with the manufacturer and operates on his account. The agent may be given the exclusive right to sell goods in certain regions. Specify this agent:
a. Dealer
*b. Wholesale agent
c. Commission agent
d. Consignee
e. Broker

33. A pharmacy makes bulk purchases of health and hygiene products. The agent works under a contract with the manufacturer and operates on his account. The agent may be given the exclusive right to sell goods in certain regions. Specify this agent:
a. Dealer
*b. Wholesale agent
c. Commission agent
d. Consignee
e. Broker

34. Pharmaceutical market is in such a situation when there is only one company selling a certain product. Specify the competitive structure of the market:
a. Pure monopoly market and oligopolistic market
*b. Pure monopoly market
c. Monopolistic competitive market
d. Pure competition market
e. Oligopolistic market

35. A pharmaceutical company "Adonis" promotes its new products by means of advertisement that informs the customers about the product, highlights its advantages, typical features and properties. What kind of advertisment is it?
a. Indirect
b. Direct
c. Aggressive
d. Supporting
*e. Informational

36. The founders are going to open a retail pharmacy. What way of business running is stipulated in this case?
a. Limited
b. Without preliminary licencing or registration
c. Normative
d. Free
*e. Licence-based

37. A pharmacy makes wholesale purchases of health and hygiene products. An agent works under the contract with the manufacturer and makes deals at the manufacturers cost. The agent may be entitled to exclusive distribution in some regions. What kind of agent is it?
a. Consignee
b. Broker
c. Dealer
*d. Wholesale agent
e. Commission agent

38. Activity of an organization depends on various factors. What factors refer to the internal environment of the organization?
a. Economy status
b. Public authorities
c. Consumers
*d. Abilities, skills and talent of staff
e. Infrastructure

39. The planning of marketing strategy involves two successive stages. What are the stages of the strategic planning process?
a. Developing a program of activities
b. Budgeting
c. Describing the current marketing situation
d. Making the list of tasks and problems
*e. Defining the mission and goals of a pharmaceutical company

40. The risk can arise from some forms of activity connected with production of goods and services, their selling, commodity-money and financial operations, commerce, implementation of socioeconomic and scientific-and-technical projects. This is the definition for the following concept:
a. Loss of time
b. Financial loss
c. Loss of property
d. Labour loss
*e. Business risk

41. Inventory of human resources at pharmaceutical companies is based on keeping of work record books, employees files, personal data sheets T-2. What parameter cannot be estimated by the analysis of the above-mentioned date?
*a. Labour market state
b. Average staffing number
c. Data on the staff turnover
d. Staff categories
e. Average payroll strength

42. Pharmacy activities are commonly operated by different types of managers. The function of direct control over drug preparation by a pharmaceutist refers to the following type of management:
a. Bureaucratic
*b. Technical
c. Managerial
d. Institutional
e. Administrative

43. As a pharmaceutist was serving a customer who ordered a nonprecription drug he realized that the patient didnt apprehend the verbal information. Name the communicative barriers that arise when words or symbols may have different meanings for the information sender and the recipient:
*a. Semantic barriers
b. Nonverbal barriers
c. Stereotype mentation
d. Failure to understand the importance of information
e. Neglect of facts

44. A pharmaceutist has applied for a job of a stockkeeper at a wholesale pharmaceutical enterprise. What trial period doesnt require agreement with the trade-union committee?
a. Up to one month
b. Up to four monthes
c. Up to six monthes
*d. Up to three monthes
e. Up to two monthes

45. A pharmacy analyst is going to take a part of his holiday in spring and a part in summer. Holiday dividing is allowed provided that its main part will be no less than:
a. 18 days
*b. 14 days
c. 12 days
d. 10 days
e. 16 days

46. Marketing manager at a pharmaceutical factory is planning its communication policy. Which component of the marketing communication systems has the highest value for one contact?
*a. Personal sale
b. TV advertising
c. Sales promotion
d. Periodical advertising
e. "Public relations"

47. TV periodically conducts campaigns for young people aimed at popularization of mechanical contraceptives (not indicating concrete trademarks). Such actions are a kind of the following marketing communication:
a. Advertising
b. Sale promotion
c. Sponsorship
*d. Publicity
e. Personal sale

48. A joint-stock company involved into production and selling of drug preparations has developed a structure for working with various consuming organizations. Such organizational structure is called:
*a. Divisional structure
b. Departmentalization
c. Bureaucratic structure
d. Array (matrix) structure
e. Functional structure

49. The relationships between the demand, supply and price level is studied within the following field of complex market research:
*a. Studies of economic environment
b. Analysis of market segmentation
c. Analysis of sociopsychological features of buyers
d. Studies of market structure of companies
e. Studies of market and product requirements

50. What management style is characterized by managers particular compliance, when manager initiates goals formation by his subordinate and is ready to accept it without reservations?
a. Collective style
b. Combined style
c. Democratic management style
d. Bureaucratic style
*e. Laissez-faire management style

51. Which component of the marketing communication system focuses on creating a positive image of a company?
*a. Public relations
b. Personal sales
c. Merchandising
d. Retail logistics
e. Advertising

52. Companys activity aimed at planning, organization and control of physical movement of materials and finished goods from the production site to the place of their utilization for the purpose of covering the consumer needs and gaining profit, is called:
*a. Marketing
b. Demand
c. Management
d. Advertising
e. Supply

53. Public health services attach great importance to the drug quality, for this reason a pharmaceutic enterprise has concentrated its efforts upon the improvement of qualitative characteristics of its products. What concept of marketing management is applied in this company?
a. Modern marketing
b. Production improvement
*c. Product improvement
d. All answers are correct
e. There is no correct answer

54. When a graduate becomes employed on a certain position he should be first familiarized with his rights and duties. What document regulates rights and duties of pharmacy employees?
a. All the answers are correct
b. All the answers are false
c. Internal employment policies and procedures
d. Labour code
*e. Job description

55. Product assortment is the whole set of product assortment groups offered by an enterprise. The index representing number of positions in each product assortment group is called:
a. Product assortment width
b. Product assortment
c. Assortment comparability
*d. Product assortment depth
e. Product assortment saturation

56. Functioning of a pharmacy is realized on different levels of management. Function of direct control of employees fulfilling concrete tasks relates to the following level of management:
a. Institutional
b. Administrative
c. Bureaucratic
*d. Technical
e. Managerial

