1. During local anaesthetization novocaine solution is usually compounded with solution of adrenaline hydrochloride. What is the purpose of this action?
a. Increase in smooth muscle tone
b. Vasodilatation
*c. Vasoconstriction
d. Decrease in smooth muscle tone
e. Algesthesia reduction

2. A 32-year-old patient takes antituberculous drugs. Some time later he has noticed that his urine turned orange. What preparation is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Pyrazinamide
b. Isoniazid
*c. Rifampicin
d. Ethambutol
e. Streptomycin sulfate

3. On the 4th day of treatment with indomethacin a 55-year-old patient developed gastric bleeding as a result of ulceration of the gastric mucosa. Ulcerogenic effect of this drug is due to a decrease in activity of the following enzyme:
*a. Cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1)
b. Lipoxygenase (LOX)
c. Prostacyclin synthetase
d. Thromboxane synthetase
e. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)

4. A 45-year-old patient has been taking neodicumarinum for thrombophlebitis for two weeks. The regular blood test revealed a decrease in prothrombin concentration, microhematuria. Which drug should be used as neodicumarinum antagonist?
a. Protamine sulfate
b. Heparin
c. Aminocaproic acid
*d. Vicasol
e. Sodium citrate

5. A patient complaining of dry mouth, photophobia and blurred vision has been delivered to the admission ward. Objectively: the skin is hyperaemic, dry; mydriatic pupils and tachycardia are present. He has been diagnosed with belladonna alkaloids intoxication. Which of the drugs should be given as an antidote?
a. Dipiroximum
*b. Neostigmine
c. Pylocarpine
d. Aceclidine
e. Arminum

6. A patient suffering from peptic ulcer was administered ranitidine. Gastric juice acidity has reduced considerably. What mechanism underlies the action of this drug?
a. H,K-ATPase activity inhibition
b. Autonomic ganglion H-cholinergic receptors blockade
c. H1-histamine receptors blockade
d. M-cholinergic receptors blockade
*e. H2-histamine receptors blockade

7. To stop the delusions and hallucinations in a schizophrenic patient a doctor administered aminazine. What is the mechanism of antihypoxic action of this drug?
a. Stimulation of cholinergic processes in the CNS
b. Stimulation of adrenergic and dopaminergic processes in the CNS
*c. Inhibition of dopaminergic processes in the CNS
d. Inhibition of cholinergic processes in the CNS
e. Inhibition of adrenergic processes in the CNS

8. A 52-year-old patient was diagnosed with systemic amebiasis accompanied by bowels, liver and lungs affection. What preparation should be administered?
a. Chingamin
b. Phthalazol
c. Chiniofon
d. Tetracycline
*e. Metronidazole

9. A 33-year-old woman who has been treated for chronic polyarthritis for a long time complains about arterial pressure rise, change of adipose tissue distribution, menstrual cycle disorder. What preparation has she taken?
*a. Prednisolone
b. Butadion
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Synaflan
e. Indometacin

10. A gravida in her 20th week of gestation got ill with pneumonia. What chemotherapeutical drug may be administered with no risk for the fetus development?
a. Gentamycin
b. Laevomycetinum
c. Ofloxacinum
*d. ??nzylpenicillinum
e. Sulfalenum

11. During a surgical operation the muscle relaxant tubocurarine chloride was used. What antagonist drug should be injected in order to allow the patient to breathe independently?
*a. Neostigmine
b. Cytitonum
c. ??nzohexonium
d. Aethimizolum
e. Dithylinum

12. A child has accidentally drunk a solution that was used by his grandmother for glaucoma treatment. The solution turned out to be pilocarpine hydrochloride. What drug can be used as an antidote?
*a. ?tropinum
b. Aceclidinum
c. ??ntaminum
d. ??nzohexonium
e. Carbacholinum

13. At the end of the drug action drug addicts develop severe mental, neurological and somatic disorders. This complex of symptoms is called:
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Cumulation
c. Tolerance
*d. Withdrawal syndrome
e. Sensibilization

14. What antiprotozoal agent can be recommended to a female patient with trichomoniasis?
a. Chloridinum
b. Primaquine
*c. Metronidazole
d. Solusurminum
e. Chiniofonum

15. A patient has a history of chronic bronchitis. Recommend him an expectorant which can be purchased at a pharmacy to facilitate the expectoration of thick and viscous mucus:
a. Glauvent
b. Falimint
*c. Ambroxol
d. Libexin
e. Salbutamol

16. Choose an antiseptic from the group of halogen containing drugs that can be included into the first-aid kit for a child going to a summer camp:
a. Brilliant green solution
b. Methylene blue solution
c. Formaldehyde solution
*d. Alcoholic iodine solution
e. Copper sulfate solution

17. A pharmacy received a new-generation nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drug "meloxicam" that mainly blocks cyclooxygenase-2. What advantages does this preparation have in comparison with other nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs?
a. Evident myospasmolytic action
b. Minimal side effect on hematogenesis
c. Significant inhibition of protease activity
*d. Minimal side effect on alimentary tract
e. Interferonogenic properties

18. When fenoterolum for inhalations is not available in a pharmacy, it can be substituted by the following drug from the group of bronchoselective beta-2-adrenomimetics:
a. Metacinum
b. Isadrinum
*c. Salbutamolum
d. Ephedrinum
e. ?uphyllinum

19. What drug from the group of cardiac glycosides can be used as an alternative for strophanthine if it is not available at a pharmacy?
a. Celanidum
*b. Corglycon
c. Digitoxin
d. Isolanidum
e. Adonisidum

20. What is the most common symptom of atropine intoxication?
a. Bradycardia
b. Reduction of intraocular pressure
c. Myotic pupils with no light response
d. Hyperhidrosis
*e. Mydriatic pupils with no light response

21. A patient consulted an ophthalmologist about scotopic vision impairment, cornea dryness. What drug was prescribed?
a. ????rboxylasum
*b. Retinolum
c. ????pherol
d. Pyridoxine
e. Ascorbic acid

22. A patient suffering from essential hypertension has increased concentration of renin in blood plasma. Which pharmacological group should be preferred for this patient treatment?
a. Diuretics
b. Beta-adrenoblockers
*c. ACE inhibitors
d. Blockers of calcium channels
e. Sympatholytics

23. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer was prescribed almagel. Which of its pharmacological properties is intended for treatment of this pathology?
a. Blocking the H2-histamine receptors
b. Local anaesthetization
*c. HCl neutralization
d. Blocking the muscarinic cholinoreceptors
e. Anti-inflammatory action

24. A patient with depression has been administered a drug from the group of tricyclic antidepressants. Specify this drug:
a. Phenazepam
b. Aminalonum
c. Caffeine
*d. Amitriptyline
e. Droperidol

25. A patient suffering from hypertension consulted a doctor about dry cough that was presumably provoked by antihypertensive therapy. What antihypertensive drug had she been taking?
a. Hydrochlorthiazide
*b. Lisinopril
c. Nifedipin
d. Atenolol
e. Furosemidum

26. A patient suffering from ulcer disease was prescribed famotidine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Inhibition of adenosine triphosphatase activity
b. Block of cholinoreceptors of sympathetic ganglions
c. Block of ?1-histamine receptors
d. Block of muscarinic cholinoreceptors
*e. Block of ?2-histamine receptors

27. Help a medical student to select an adrenergic drug for the treatment of anaphylactic shock:
a. Clonidine
b. Fenoterolum
c. Isadrinum
*d. Epinephrine hydrochloride
e. Galazolin

28. A patient with gastric ulcer has been administered omeprazole. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Stimulation of mucus production
*b. Inhibition of H+K+-ATPase
c. Blockade of M-cholinergic receptors
d. Blockade of histamine H2 receptors
e. HCl neutralization

29. Which antiseptic preparation has bactericidal effect due to the formation of atomic oxygen?
a. Chloraminum
b. Aethonium
c. Silver nitrate
*d. Potassium permanganate
e. Furacilinum

30. During digitoxin therapy for chronic cardiac insufficiency, a patient developed signs of intoxication with this preparation. The patient was prescribed unithiol. What is the mechanism of unithiol action in case of intoxication with cardiac glycosides?
a. Binding of glycoside into the complex compound
*b. Reduction of K+-Na+-adenosine triphosphatase
c. Increase of sodium concentration in the cardiomyocytes
d. Binding of calcium ions
e. Increased potassium permeability in the cardiomyocytes

31. A 67-year-old patient with chronic heart failure takes digoxin. In order to reduce its side effects the patients doctor recommended to combine it with the followig drug:
a. Calcium chloride
*b. ??nangin
c. ?uphyllinum
d. Calcium gluconate
e. Hydrochlorthiazide

32. What is the main mechanism of action that underlies the bactericidal effect of penicillin on the coccal flora?
*a. Disruption of synthesis of the microbial cell wall
b. Damage to the cytoplasmic membrane permeability
c. Phagocytic activity of leukocytes
d. Activation of the immune system of the macroorganism
e. Inhibition of protein synthesis

33. A patient suffering from neurosis accompanied by anxiety and fear development was prescribed diazepam. What pharmacological effect makes it possible to apply the drug for this disease treatment?
a. Hypotensive
b. Antianginal
c. Antiarrhythmic
d. Anti-inflammatory
*e. Anxiolytic

34. After a craniocerebral trauma a patient was administered pyracetam. This drug relates to the following pharmacological group:
a. Neuroleptic
*b. Nootropic agent
c. Tranquilizers
d. Nonnarcotic (nonopioid) analgetic
e. Anesthetic agent

35. A patient with a history of essential hypertension has been administered lisinopril. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. It inhibits beta-adrenergic receptors
b. It inhibits alpha-adrenergic receptors
*c. It inhibits ACE
d. It stimulates beta-adrenergic receptors
e. It inhibits M-cholinergic receptors

36. In order to arrest stenocardia attacks a patient takes nitroglycerin capsules. What is the rational way of the drug introduction?
*a. Sublingual
b. Rectal
c. Hypodermic
d. Inhalation
e. Peroral

37. A hospital admitted a child with signs of poisoning with belladonna alkaloids. What drug should be applied as an antidote?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Paracetamol
c. Sodium valproate
*d. Proserin
e. Sodium caffeine benzoate

38. Recommend a patient with acute bronchitis a mucolytic drug that facilitates expectoration:
*a. Acetylcysteine
b. Loratadine
c. Drotaverine hydrochloride
d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Glaucine

39. You are employed in a pharmaceutical storehouse. When adding newly received preparations to the computerized database, specify the pharmacological group of paracetamol:
a. Hypotensive drug
b. Antianginal drug
c. Hypnotic
d. Diuretic
*e. Nonnarcotic analgetic

40. A male patient has been administered an antiulcerant that blocks histamine receptors of the gastric mucosa. What drug is it?
a. Pirenzepine
*b. Famotidine
c. Almagelum
d. Omeprazole
e. Atropine sulfate

41. Stimulation of beta-cells of the pancreas causes the hypoglycemic effect of the following drug:
a. Heparin
*b. Glibenclamide
c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
d. Prednisolone
e. Retabolilum

42. A patient with atopic dermatitis presented at the hospital. Which drug with anti-inflammatory and antiallergic effect should be administered to this patient?
*a. Prednisolone
b. Oxytocin
c. Retabolil
d. Insulin
e. Aethamidum

43. A patient with atherosclerosis has been administered an anti-atherosclerotic agent. Specify this drug:
a. Phenylbutazone
*b. Phenofibrate
c. Pyracetam
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Dexamethasone

44. A patient after bees stings has angioedema (Quinckes edema). Which drug should be immediately inject to eliminate this condition?
a. Platyphyllini hydrotartras
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Epinephrine hydrochloride
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Anaprilinum

45. A patient with hypertension was administered metoprolol for the arterial pressure reduction. What is its mechanism of action?
*a. Beta adrenoreceptor blockade
b. Indirect adrenomimetic action
c. Angiotensinic receptors blockade
d. Antispasmodic
e. Alpha adrenoceptor blockade

46. A 34-year-old patient suffering from bronchitis was prescribed an antitussive drug of central action. What drug is it?
a. Fercoven
*b. Glaucine
c. Enalapril
d. Corglycon
e. Furosemide

47. Continuous taking of a drug results in reduction of its efficiency. This phenomenon is called:
a. Cumulation
b. Sensibilization
*c. Habituation
d. Dependence
e. Tachyphylaxis

48. A patient was warned that taking the prescribed preparation might cause cough. What drug is it?
a. Phenihidine
b. Clonidine
*c. Lisinopril
d. Dichlothiazide
e. Metoprolol

49. A patient has glaucoma. Recommend him a drug of the M-cholinomimetic group:
a. Sulfacyl sodium
b. Ephedrine hydrochloride
*c. Pylocarpine hydrochloride
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Laevomycetin

50. Advise an internship doctor on why iron preparations should not be administered together with antacids:
a. This causes increased binding to blood proteins
b. This increases intoxication with iron preparations
c. This accelerates elimination of iron preparations
*d. This causes malabsorption of iron
e. This prevents deposition of iron in the body

51. A patient with acute heart failure and cardiac glycoside intolerance was given an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. Block of K+-, Na+-ATPase
b. Stimulation of alpha1-adrenoceptors
*c. Stimulation of beta1-adrenoceptors
d. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase
e. Stimulation of M-cholinergic receptors

52. For thrombosis treatment a patient was prescribed a drug from the group of direct anticoagulants. What drug is it?
a. Vikasol
*b. Heparin
c. Syncumar
d. Fenilin (phenylinum)
e. Neodicumarin

53. A patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency was prescribed a cardiac glycoside from the foxglove (Digitalis) group. What drug is it?
*a. Digoxin
b. Corvalol
c. Cordiamin
d. Corglycon
e. Strophanthine

54. An elderly patient has constipation caused by hypotonia of colon. What drug should be administered to this patient?
*a. Bisacodyl
b. Castor oil
c. Novocaine amide
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Sodium sulfate

55. A patient presents with morphine intoxication. Which drug should be injected as an antidote?
a. Lobeline hydrochloride
b. Atropine sulphate
c. Unithiol
*d. Naloxone
e. Bemegride

56. In course of pharmacotherapy of bronchitis a patient was found to have dyspeptic disorders, photodermatitis, liver dysfunction. Which of the prescribed drugs might have caused these manifestations?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Paracetamolum
*c. Doxycy?lin
d. ???t?l??steinum
e. Codeine phosphate

57. From the pharmaceutical stock select an anticholinesterase drug to be administered to the patients with atony of the intestine and urinary bladder in the postoperative period:
*a. Proserin
b. Benzohexonium
c. Dithylinum
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Phosphacolum

58. A patient who has been suffering from gastric diseases for a long time is found to have hyperchromic anemia. Which of the following drugs is applied for this pathology treatment?
a. Oxyferriscorbone
*b. Сyanocobalamine
c. Unitiol
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Ferrum Lek

59. A 25-year-old woman presenting with acute morphine intoxication was given an injection of naloxone that caused rapid improvement of her condition. The mechanism of action of this preparation is based on the block of the following receptors:
a. Dopamine
b. Benzodiazepine receptors
c. GABA-receptors
d. Serotonin receptors
*e. Opioid receptors

60. A patient with schizophrenia has been administered a neuroleptic. Which of the listed drugs falls into this group?
a. Propranolol
b. Celecoxib
*c. Aminazine
d. Morphine
e. Pyracetam

61. A man came to a pharmacy and asked to recommend him a drug for treatment of allergic rhinitis that occurs in the period of linden flowering. What drug may be applied?
a. Losartan
*b. Loratadine
c. Anapriline
d. Adrenaline
e. Ambroxol

62. It is necessary to prescribe non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug for patient with rheumatoid arthritis and concomitant duodenal ulcer. Which drug is the drug of choice in this case?
*a. Celecoxib
b. Paracetamol
c. Diclofenac sodium
d. Analgin
e. Acetylsalicylic acid

63. During the sensitifity test for benzylpenicillin a patient developed anaphylactic shock. The following preparation must be injected around the spot of antibiotic injection:
a. Propranolol
b. Ceftriaxon
c. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
d. Atropine sulfate
*e. Adrenaline hydrochloride

64. When a certain drug reduces the effect of another drug, such phenomenon is called:
a. Tachyphylaxis
*b. Antagonism
c. Sensibilization
d. Habituation
e. Potentiation

65. A patient with bronchial asthma has been administered a drug from the group of beta-adrenergic agonists. Specify this drug:
*a. Salbutamol
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
c. Digoxin
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Diazepam

66. The ability of drugs to accumulate in the patients body is called:
a. Allergy
*b. Cumulation
c. Synergism
d. Antagonism
e. Habituation

67. A patient has been administered a spasmolytic from the group of muscarinic receptor antagonists as a part of the complex treatment for renal colic. Specify this drug:
a. Dithylinum
b. Benzohexonium
c. Neostigmine
d. Galantamine
*e. Atropine

68. A patient with bronchial asthma was prescribed salbutamol that has led to relief of bronchospasm symptoms. This is associated with stimulation of:
a. Muscarinic cholinoreceptors
b. Beta1-adrenoreceptors
*c. Beta2-adrenoreceptors
d. Acetylcholine synthesis
e. Alpha1-adrenoreceptors

69. A patient has been taking isosorbide for stenocardia prevention for quite a long time. Now he notes a significant decrease in the effect of the drug. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Potentiation
*b. Tolerance
c. Physical dependence
d. Cumulation
e. Allergy

70. A patient with myocardial infarction has been given an intravenous injection of a direct-acting anticoagulant. Select it among the listed drugs:
a. Vikasolum
b. Neodicumarinum
*c. Heparin
d. Thrombin
e. Calcium gluconate

71. A patient with chronic bronchitis wants to buy glaucine hydrochloride at a pharmacy. What typical side effect of the drug should the patient be warned against?
a. Irregular heartbeat
b. Excitation of the central nervous system
*c. Drop of arterial pressure
d. Rise of intraocular pressure
e. Allergic skin rash

72. A patient with chronic bronchitis gets glaucine hydrochloride at a pharmacy. The patient must be warned about the following typical side effect of this drug:
*a. Arterial pressure drop
b. Irregular heartbeat
c. Allergic skin rash
d. Increased intraocular pressure
e. Excitation of the central nervous system

73. A 30-year-old patient with a sleep disorder and psychoemotional disbalance has been administered diazepam. What is the mechanism of its psychosedative action?
a. Inhibition of opioid receptors
*b. Activation of GABAergic system
c. Inhibition of the reticular formation
d. Inhibition of the limbic system
e. Reduction of noradrenaline amount in the CNS

74. Benzylpenicillin sodium is not used per os, because this drug:
a. Poorly absorbed in the intestine
b. Reduces formation of gastric HCl
c. Is destroyed by penicillinase
*d. Destroys gastric HCl
e. Irritates gastric mucosa

75. Which drug with antagonistic effect can be used to stop bleeding caused by prolonged use of neodicumarinum?
a. Aminocapronic acid
b. Fibrinogen
c. Ascorbic acid
*d. Vikasolum
e. Etamsylate

76. A female has prolonged labour. Select a drug that stimulates labour activity due to its physiological effect from the listed below:
a. Pachycarpine
b. Neostigmine
*c. Oxytocin
d. Progesterone
e. Estrone

77. A 48-year-old patient was given an intravenous injection of prednisolone in order to arrest a severe attack of bronchial asthma. Prednisolone relates to the following group of hormonal drugs:
*a. Glucocorticoids
b. Estrogens
c. Anabolic steroids
d. Mineral corticoids
e. Gestagenic drugs

78. A patient who has been taking phenazepam for a month came to a pharmacy. He insisted on buying another two packs of this drug. According to the patient, he feels unwell without phenazepam. What is the mechanism of the developed side effect?
a. Aftereffect syndrome
b. Idiosyncrasy
*c. Drug dependence
d. Cumulation
e. Addiction

79. A patient suffering from allergic rhinitis was prescribed ephedrine in form of nasal drops. The patient has significantly benefited from nasal instillation, and this stimulated him to use the drug every 2 hours. But under these conditions the drug appeared to be ineffective. What is the most likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Drug dependence
*c. Tachyphylaxis
d. Allergy
e. Cumulation

80. Which anaesthetic, anti-inflammatory, the least harmful for the stomach preparation can be recommended to a patient with exacerbation of rheumatoid arthritis?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Diclofenac sodium
*c. Celecoxib
d. Ibuprofenum
e. Indometacinum

81. Select a loop diuretic of strong, emergency and short-term action from the listed below:
a. Clopamide
b. Spironolactone
c. Triamterene
*d. Furosemide
e. Acetazolamide

82. A patient suffering from epilepsy has taken phenobarbital for a long time and developed drug tolerance. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon development?
a. Absorption process reduction
b. Inhibition of biotransformation
c. Accumulation of substances in the body
*d. Acceleration of biotransformation
e. Receptors sensitivity enhancement

83. Absorption of tetracycline preparations will be reduced when they are administered simultaneously with antacids. This is an example for:
*a. Pharmacokinetic incompatibility
b. Pharmacodynamic incompatibility
c. Functional drugs antagonism
d. Drugs synergism
e. Pharmaceutical incompatibility

84. A patient being treated in the infectious disease ward for dysentery is administered phthalazol. What is the reason for phthalazol being used only for treatment of enteric infections?
a. Rapidly excreted in unchanged form
*b. The drug is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
c. Slowly eliminated from the body
d. The high degree of reabsorption in the kidneys
e. Rapidly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract

85. During an operation a dentist needs to reduce salivation in a patient. The dentist has to use a drug of the following pharmacological group:
a. Muscarinic and nicotinic cholinomimetics
*b. Muscarinic receptor blockers
c. Adrenomimetics
d. Muscarinic cholinomimetics
e. Adrenoceptor blocker

86. A consulting pharmacist informed a patient about possible side effect of metronidazole that is normally provoked by alcohol intake. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
a. Enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase activation
b. Enzyme acetylcholinesterase activation
c. Enzyme glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase activation
*d. Enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase blocking
e. Enzyme acetylcholinesterase blocking

87. An anaesthesiologist has to perform an operation under neuroleptanalgesia. Which of the following drug combinations should be used in this case?
a. Droperidol with prednisolone
b. Diazepam with aminazine
c. Promedol with amitriptillin
*d. Fentanyl with droperidol
e. Fentanyl with diazepam

88. A 40-year-old patient suffers from bronchial asthma and cardiac rhythm disturbance in form of bradyarrhythmia. Drugs of which pharmacological group should be administered for bronchospasm suppression?
a. M-cholinomimetics
b. Beta-blockers
*c. M-cholinergic antagonists
d. Cholinesterase inhibitors
e. Muscle relaxant

89. A 40-year-old patient has a history of bronchial asthma and heart rhythm disorders in form of bradyarrhythmia. Bronchospasm can be eliminated by the drugs of the following pharmacological group:
a. Muscle relaxants
*b. M-cholinergic antagonists
c. M-cholinomimetics
d. Beta-blockers
e. Cholinesterase inhibitors

90. An interhospital pharmacy got an order from a surgical department for a depolarizing muscle relaxant for surgical interventions. What drug was ordered?
*a. Dithylinum
b. Atropine sulfate
c. Hygronium
d. Methacin
e. Nicotine

91. A patient who has taken phenobarbital for a long time was prescribed diclofenac sodium. However the anti-inflammatory effect of diclofenac appeared to be less than expected due to the pharmacokinetic interaction of these drugs. Such interaction might be the result of the following processes:
a. Decelerated drug metabolism in liver
b. Change of receptor sensibility
c. Increased drug dosage
*d. Accelerated drug metabolism in liver
e. Reduced protein concentration in plasma

