1. A syrup contains 82 parts of sugar syrup; 1 part of KJ (KBr); 12 parts of liquid thyme extract and 5 parts of 96% ethanol. What is this medicine called?
*a. Pertussinum
b. Ambroxol
c. Licorice syrup
d. Broncholytin
e. Cholosasum

2. A tablet production unit produces press-coated tablets. What equipment is used for this purpose?
a. Eccentric tabletting machine
b. Triturating machine
c. Dragee pan
d. Marmerizer
*e. Double pressing tabletting machine

3. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces a dense extract with 0,25% ammonia solution used as an extractant. This dense extract is:
a. Sagebrush (Artemisia)
b. Male fern
c. Motherwort (Leonurus)
*d. Licorice
e. Valerian

4. A pharmaceutical company produces concentrated extracts. Specify the concentration of ethanol in the extractant required for the production:
a. 70-75%
b. 90-96%
*c. 20-40%
d. 50-60%
e. 70-90%

5. A factory workshop producing suspensions and emulsions is going to start manufacturing new drugs. What equipment can be used for the ultrasound processing of drugs?
a. Disintegrator, liquid whistle
b. Dismembrator, electrical impulse plasmolyzer
*c. Liquid whistle, magnetostrictive source
d. Rotor-pulsation apparatus, dismembrator
e. Centrifugal mixer with rotating housing

6. A pharmaceutic plant producing ointments can use the following equipment at the packing stage:
a. Eccentric machines
b. Disc machines
c. Rezepin automatic machine
d. Rotary machines
*e. Screw and piston dosing machines

7. The ointment workshop of a pharmaceutical plant launches production of a new ointment. Specify the manufacturing operation that ensures equal distribution of the drug substance in the base:
a. Pre-packing
b. Packaging
c. Preparation of the base
d. Standardization
*e. Homogenization

8. Aerosol workshop of a pharmaceutic plant uses propellents of different groups. What propellents relate to the group of compressed gases?
a. Propane, butane, isobutane
b. Freons
*c. Nitrogen, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide
d. Vinyl and methyl chloride
e. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride

9. A pharmaceutical factory produces tablets of sodium chloride. What is the method of their poduction?
a. Moulding
b. Wet granulation prior to compression
c. Dry granulation prior to compression
*d. Direct compression without additional substances
e. Direct compression with the addition of excipients

10. For granule drying different types of dryers are used. The dryer SP-30 relates to the following type:
a. Sublimation
b. With silica gel column
c. With a forced air circulation
*d. With fluidized bed
e. Infrared

11. One of the quality indicators for finished ampoules is lack of residual stress in the glass. Which operation at the stage "Preparation of ampoules to be filled" eliminates this imperfection?
a. Capillary opening
b. Ampoule drying
c. Ampoule sterilization
*d. Ampoule annealing
e. Ampoule washing

12. Companies producing injectable dosage forms apply different methods of ampoule sealing. Sealing against a jet of inert gases (nitrogen, argon, carbon dioxide) is suitable for the following injection solutions:
*a. Easily oxidable
b. Thermostable
c. Photosensitive
d. Hydrolytically unstable
e. Viscous

13. Quality control of tablets produced at a pharmaceutical enterprise involves quantitative determination of such subsidiary substances as talc and aerosil. What method is applied for such determination?
a. Titrimetric
b. Spectrophotometric
c. Chromatographic
*d. Gravimetric
e. Photocolorimetric

14. Pharmaceutical plants produce enteric-coated tablets. According to the requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia of Ukraine, the coating mustnt disintegrate in the acidic medium within the following period:
a. 4 hours
b. 2 hours
*c. 1 hour
d. 3 hours
e. 5 hours

15. While producing phytopreparations and organotherapeutic preparations different kinds of dryers are used. What dryer would be the most effective for drying thermolabile compounds?
a. Drum dryer
*b. Freeze-dryer
c. Band dryer
d. Roller dryer
e. Drying oven

16. Injection solutions of salts derived from weak acids and strong bases require stabilization. What stabilizers are used for these solutions?
*a. 0,1 M sodium hydroxide solution
b. Trilon B
c. Buthylhydroxytoluene
d. Ascorbic acid
e. 0,1 M acid chloride solution

17. A pharmaceutical plant produces suppositories. What is the best method for their manufacturing in industrial quantities?
a. Lyophilization
*b. Outpouring
c. Pressing
d. Pumping-out
e. Stamping

18. One of the tablet coatings is enterosoluble capsule. They get solved in:
a. Stomach
b. Rectum
c. -
*d. Bowels
e. Oral cavity

19. Aerosol composition includes active substances, solvents and propellents. Which of the following substances is used as propellent?
*a. Freon-11, carbon oxide, propane-butane
b. Propylen glycol monostearate, argon, helium
c. Hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen, triethanolamine
d. Linethol, myristic acid, benzocaine
e. Isopropyl myristate, neon, sulfur oxide

20. Efficiency of aerosol therapy is to a considerable extent determined by the size of disperse particles. What factor determines the size of aerosol particles during dispersion of an aerosol?
*a. Exit port diameter, propellent vapour pressure
b. System homogeneity, dispersion velocity
c. Fractional composition, containers filling method
d. Percentage of phase, filling temperature
e. Reduction range, container quantity

21. A department producing sterile pharmaceutical forms needs a method of eye drops sterilization applicable for drugs derived from thermolabile substances. What is the optimal method of sterilization?
*a. Sterile filtration
b. Addition of ascorbic acid
c. Use of polymeric packings
d. Filling in the inert gas medium
e. Thermal sterilization

22. In the production of injection solutions the activated carbon is used as:
a. Antioxidant properties increasing
b. Buffer system creation
*c. Purification
d. Chemical resistance of ampoules glass increasing
e. Ampoules residual stress relaxation

23. Lipophilic bases for suppositories include:
a. Gelatin-glycerol base
b. Polyethylene oxide base
*c. Mixtures of hydrogenated fats
d. Collagen base
e. Glycerol soap base

24. In the process of pressing the tablets adhere to the pressing tool. The technological error is the lack of:
a. Disintegrants
b. Adhesive substances
*c. Lubricants
d. Diluents
e. Dyes

25. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces nitroglycerine tablets. What is the method of their production?
a. Direct pressing with addition of adjuvants
b. Direct pressing, without adjuvants
*c. Extrusion
d. Pressing with preliminary wet granulation
e. Pressing with preliminary dry granulation

26. Which of the listed methods of filling ampoules with injectable solutions can protect the capillaries from contamination with thick and viscous solutions?
a. Vacuum method
b. Steam condensing method
c. Solution squeezing method
*d. Syringe method
e. Turbo-vacuum method

27. Production of injection solutions involves an operation of solution filtration. What filters are used for sterile filtration?
a. Nutsch filters
b. Pressure filters
c. Mushroom filter
*d. Filter candles
e. Filter developed by the Kharkiv Chemo-pharmaceutic Research Institute

28. Quality of injection solutions supplied in ampoules can be assessed according to different indices. How many ampoules should be checked while determining quality of sealing (leaktightness of an ampoule)?
a. 97%
b. 75%
c. 50%
*d. 100%
e. 80%

29. A chemical department produces alcohol solution of boric acid. What filters are used for filtration of this solution?
*a. Pressure filters
b. Nutsch filter
c. Membrane filter
d. Bag filter
e. Paper filter

30. A tablet shop produces trituration tablets. What quality indicators  relevant are not for these tablets?
a. Homogeneity of dosage
b. Disintegration and dissolution
*c. Abrasion, resistance to crushing
d. Homogeneity of content
e. Microbiological purity

31. An ampule production unit produces glucose solution. If the special sort of glucose "for injections" is not available, then the glucose should be separated from the following admixtures:
a. Manganese and iron (Fe)
b. Sulfates and iron (Fe)
*c. Pyretogenetic and dyes
d. Pyretogenetic and proteic substances
e. Proteic substances and dyes

32. A department of a pharmaceutical plant produces injection solutions. Ascorbic acid solution for injections relates to the following group of solutions:
a. Solutions of substances requiring special rectification
*b. Easily oxidized solutions
c. Solutions of salts derived from weak bases and strong acids
d. Solutions of substances that should be subjected to thermal sterilization
e. Solutions of salts derived from strong bases and weak acids

33. The ampoule workshop produces solutions for injections. The aminophylline solution for injections relates to the following group of solutions:
a. Solutions of salts composed of weak bases and strong acids
b. Solutions of easily oxidizable substances
*c. Solutions are not subject to heat sterilization
d. Solutions of salts composed of strong bases and weak acids
e. Solutions of substances requiring special purification

34. A phytochemical production unit produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the biogenic stimulators of organo-mineral origin:
a. Peloidinum, Humisolum, Torfotum, Plasmolum, Solcoseryl
*b. Peloidinum, Humisolum, Torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
c. Vitreous body, Placenta injection, Plasmolum, Solcoseryl
d. Extractum Aloes fluidum, Linimentum Aloes, Succus Aloes, Biosedum
e. Extractum Aloes fluidum, Linimentum Aloes, Plasmolum

35. The phytochemical workshop of a pharmaceutical plant produces biogenic stimulators from different starting materials. Specify the biogenic stimulators of animal origin:
a. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmolum, solcoseryl
*b. Vitreous body, placental suspension for injections, plasmolum, solcoseryl
c. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs Rro injectionibus
d. Liquid aloe extract, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biossedum
e. Liquid aloe extract, aloe liniment, plasmolum

36. Phytochemical workshop of a pharmaceutical plant produces biogenic stimulators from different raw materials. Specify the biogenic stimulators of animal origin:
*a. Vitreous body, placental suspension for injections, plasmolum, solcoseryl
b. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
c. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmolum, solcoseryl
d. Liquid aloe extract, aloe liniment, plasmolum
e. Liquid aloe extract, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biossedum

37. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces biogenic stimulators out of different raw materials. Specify the plant-derived biogenic stimulators:
a. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, Fibs pro injectionibus
b. Liquid extract of aloe, peloidinum, biosedum juice
*c. Liquid extract of aloe, aloe liniment, aloe juice, biosedum
d. Vitreous body, Suspesio Placetae pro injectionibus, aloe juice, biosedum
e. Peloidinum, humisolum, torfotum, plasmol, solcoseryl

38. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces water solutions. The solution of the following substance is produced by method of chemical interaction and electrochemically:
*a. Aluminum hydroxide acetate
b. Calcium gluconate
c. Potassium arsenite
d. Polyvinyl alcohol
e. Plumbum hydroxide acetate

39. According to the pharmacopoeia requirements of liquid extract production, the extractant and the raw material should be taken in the following proportion:
a. 1:3
b. 1:10
c. 1:4
*d. 1:1
e. 1:5

40. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces neogalenic preparations. Which preparation is produced by the use of Soxhlet circulation apparatus?
a. Corglyconum
b. Digoxin
*c. Adonisidum
d. Lantosidum
e. Lanidum

41. Aerosol production involves usage of propellents relating to different groups. Choose the propellants that relate to the group of volatile organic solvents:
*a. Methylene chloride, ethylene chloride
b. Propane, butane, isobutane
c. Carbon dioxide
d. Vinyl chloride and methyl chloride
e. Freons

42. Which of the following drug forms is produced in granules?
a. Diazolinum
b. Revitum
c. Lincomycin hydrochloride
*d. Plantaglucide
e. Mucaltinum

43. A pharmaceutical factory produces camphor oil for topical application. What oil is to be used as a solvent?
a. Olive
b. Plum
c. Peach
d. Vaseline
*e. Sunflower seed

44. A pharmaceutical enterprise produces ointments. What base is applied for production of sulfur ointment simple?
a. Lanolin
b. Polyethylene glycol
c. Vaseline
d. Base "For ophthalmic ointments"
*e. Emulsion

45. Adjuvant substances in the production of tablets give the tableted mass all necessary technological properties, ensure dosage precision, mechanical strength and stability of tablets during their storage. What adjuvant substances facilitate disintegration or solution of the tablets in the organism?
a. Filling agents
b. Flavors
c. Antifriction agents
d. Lubricants
*e. Disintegrants

46. While filling hard gelatin capsules such glidants as 0,1% - 0,3% aerosil or magnesium stearate along with 0,5% - 1% talc are often added to the filling agent in order to improve the following properties:
a. Homogeneity
b. Homogeneity of mixing
c. Ability to contact molding
*d. Flowability
e. Regulation of moisture content

47. A pharmaceutic plant producing aerosol forms uses liquefied gases as propellents. Which of the following substances relates to the group of liquefied gases?
a. Methylene chloride
b. Ethylene chloride
c. Nitrogen
d. Nitrous oxide
*e. Freons

48. Grinding equipment is classified by the way of grinding. What kind of machines does a roller crusher relate to?
a. Abrasive
b. Cutting
*c. Crushing
d. Impact
e. Impact-centrifugal

49. Antacid gastritis can be treated with plantain juice. What is the way of its extraction?
a. Maceration with aqueous ethanol solution
b. Extraction with condensed gases
*c. High-pressure compression
d. Dissolution of concentrates
e. Repercolation

50. Pharmaceutical plants produce ointments on various bases. Specify the ointment base having the most pronounced osmotic properties:
a. Silicon
b. Methyl cellulose
c. Hydrogenated fat
*d. Polyethylene oxide
e. Vaseline, lanolin

51. Production unit for ampouled medicinal preparations produces procaine hydrochloride solution. This solution is stabilized by adding:
a. 0,1 mol/l of sodium hydroxide solution
b. 20,0 of sodium hydrogen carbonate
c. 1,5 g of amino-propylene glycol
*d. 0,1 mol/l of hydrochloric acid solution
e. 0,1 mol/l of sodium hydrogen carbonate solution

52. A pharmaceutical factory produces herbal juice out of fresh raw material. What operation should be performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Crystallization
*b. Heating followed by quick cooling
c. Adsorption
d. Sedimentation
e. Filtration

53. A pharmaceutical factory produces herbal juice from fresh raw material. What operation should be performed at the stage of juice purification?
a. Sedimentation
b. Filtration
c. Crystallization
*d. Heating followed by rapid cooling
e. Adsorption

54. A phytochemical department of a pharmaceutical factory produces valerian tincture of fresh material. Technological peculiarity of its production is that it should be produced on the base of:
a. 95% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
*b. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:5
c. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:5
d. 70% ethanol with the ratio 1:10
e. 90% ethanol with the ratio 1:10

55. Phytochemical workshop of a factory manufactures pancreatin. What is the starting material for obtaining pancreatin?
*a. Pancreas of pigs or cattle
b. Lungs of cattle
c. Egg white
d. Heart of cattle
e. Gastric mucosa of pigs

56. Galenic preparations are produced with the use of various extractants. What extractants require pressure as a prior condition for the extraction process?
a. Ethanol
b. Vegetable oils
c. Dichloroethane, chloroform
*d. Liquefied gases
e. Methyl alcohol, acetone

