1. A chemist in analytical laboratory needs to standardize solution of sodium hydroxide. What primary standard solution can be applied for this purpose?
a. Chloride acid
b. Acetate acid
*c. Oxalic acid
d. Sodium tatraborate
e. Sodium chloride

2. Choose reagents for detection of nitrite ions in presence of nitrate ions contained in a pharmaceutical under examination:
a. Iron (II) sulfate (diluted) and potassium iodide
b. Iron (II) chloride
c. Iron (III) chloride
*d. Antipyrin and chlorohydrogen acid (diluted)
e. Iron (III) sulfate (concentrated) and potassium bromide

3. A chemist in an analytical laboratory needs to standardize a sodium hydroxide solution. What primary standard solution can be used for this purpose?
a. Sodium tetraborate
b. Sodium chloride
c. Acetic acid
d. Chlorohydrogen acid
*e. Oxalic acid

4. Dimethyl glyoxime entered into reaction with a solution that contained cations of the IV analytical group (acid-base classification). The deposition turned crimson. What cation caused this analytical effect?
a. Copper cation (II)
b. Mercury cation (II)
*c. Nickel cation (II)
d. Cadmium cation (II)
e. Cobalt cation (II)

5. Thiocyanatometry is based upon using of secondary standard solution of potassium thiocyanate that should be standardized according to the following standard solution of:
a. Hydrochloric acid
b. Iron (II) sulfate
c. Copper (II) nitrate
*d. Silver nitrate
e. Sulfuric acid

6. Concentration of potassium dichromate in a solution was determined by means of iodometry. Name a titrant of iodometric method for determination of strong oxidizer:
a. Potassium iodide
b. Sodium hydroxide
*c. Sodium thiosulfate
d. Potassium permanganate
e. Potassium bromate

7. Solution of potassium chromate was added to a solution under examination. As a result of it some yellow deposition settled down. This deposition cannot be dissolved in acetic acid. This means that the solution under examination contains cations of:
a. Cobalt
b. Magnesium
c. Calcium
d. Sodium
*e. Barium

8. Solution of Trilon B is the titrant in chelatometry. It makes complex compounds with metal cations irrespective of their valency with the following proportion:
a. 1:2
b. 1:3
*c. 1:1
d. 2:1
e. 3:1

9. Concentration of ethyl alcohol in some drug formulations and tinctures can be determined by means of refractometry. For this purpose the following characteristic is measured:
a. Angle of rotation of plane of polarized light
b. Light ray angle
c. Angle of light refraction
*d. Index of solution refraction
e. Angle of total internal reflection of light ray

10. Quantitative determination of pharmaceutical substances can be done by means of acidimetry. Its titrant is the secondary standard solution of hydrochloric acid. According to which compound the precise concentration of hydrochloric acid can be determined?
a. Sodium thiosulfate
b. Magnesium sulphate
c. Oxalic acid
d. Potassium dichromate
*e. Sodium tetraborate

11. For determination of nitrate ions diphenylamine was added to the solution under examination. The following changes were observed:
*a. Generation of blue solution
b. Generation of blue deposition
c. Emergence of a typical smell
d. Generation of brown gas
e. Generation of yellow deposition

12. Concentrated nitric acid and crystalline lead dioxide were added to a solution under examination. The solution turned crimson. This analytical effect indicates presence of:
*a. Manganese (II)
b. Iron (III)
c. Tantum (II)
d. Chromium (III)
e. Bismuth (III)

13. Determination of chlorides in potable water can be done by means of mercurymetry. The following solution is used as a titrant:
a. Hg2(NO3)2
b. HgSO4
c. Hg2Cl2
*d. Hg(NO3)2
e. HgCl2

14. Iodometric determination of formaldehyde in formaline can be done by the back titration. Iodine surplus is titrated with the standard solution of:
*a. Sodium thiosulphate
b. Sodium sulphate
c. Sodium phosphate
d. Sodium carbonate
e. Sodium nitrate

15. Titrant of chelatometry method is trilon B solution that forms complex compounds with metal cations irrespective of their valence at a ratio of:
a. 3:1
*b. 1:1
c. 1:2
d. 1:3
e. 2:1

16. Name the type of reaction that takes place during detection of ascorbic acid in a preparation by iodometric method:
*a. Oxidation-reduction
b. Neutralization
c. Complexing
d. Precipitation
e. Acylation

17. During quantitative estimation of glucose by polarimetric method the following factor is measured:
*a. Angle of rotation of polarized beam plane
b. Rate of polarized beam absorption by a solution
c. Optical density of a solution
d. Beam dispersion by a solution
e. Coefficient of light refraction

18. Sodium arsenate solution can be distinguished from the arsenite solution by means of the following reagent:
*a. Magnesia mixture
b. Potassium nitrate
c. Sodium fluoride
d. Sodium chloride
e. Potassium sulphate

19. Excess of ammonia was added to a solution under examination. The solution turned bright blue. This indicates presence of the following ions:
a. Silver
b. Bismuth
c. Mercury (II)
*d. Copper
e. Lead

20. Quantitative determination of calcium chloride is carried out by method of direct chelatometric titration. Choose an indicator for fixation of the titration endpoint:
*a. Eriochrome black T
b. Methyl red
c. Starch
d. Eosin
e. Phenolphthalein

21. Determination of sodium and potassium chlorides in pharmaceuticals can be done by means of:
a. Acidimetry
b. Chelatometry
c. Reduction-oxidation titration
d. Alkalimetry
*e. Argentometry, Mohr method

22. Filter paper impregnated with solution of cobalt (II) nitrate and a solution under examination makes blue ash when burned down. This is the evidence of presence of the following ions:
a. Zn2+
*b. Al3+
c. Ni2+
d. Cr3+
e. Sb3+

23. After a solution had been heated with (NH4)2S2O8 in presence of AgNO3, it turned crimson. What ions were present in the solution?
a. Co2+
b. Cu2+
c. Fe3+
d. Fe2+
*e. Mn2+

24. A solution under examination was added to the solution of FeSO4 in presence of concentrated H2SO4. Formation of a brown ring indicates presence of:
*a. Nitrate ions
b. Carbonate ions
c. Phosphate ions
d. Oxalate ions
e. Acetate ions

25. Specify standard substances used for standardization of titrant solutions (NaOH, KOH) in the alkalimetric method:
*a. Oxalic and succinic acids
b. Formic and acetic acids
c. Sulphanilic and salicylic acids
d. Sulphanilic and oxalic acids
e. Acetic and succinic acids

26. Sulphuric acid of 1M solution was added to the solution under study. This resulted in formation of white sediment that was soluble in the alkalies. This indicated that the solution contains:
*a. Plumbum cations
b. Barium cations
c. Mercury (I) cations
d. Argentum cations
e. Calcium cations

27. Cations of the third analytical group (acid-base classification) can be isolated in course of systematic analysis by means of the following group reagent:
a. 0,1 M solution of ammonium oxalate
b. 1 M solution of ammonium carbonate
c. 1 M solution of potassium chromate
d. 0,1 M solution of sodium carbonate
*e. 1 M solution of sulfate acid in presence of ethanol

28. Solution of potassium iodide was added to the solution acidated with sulfate acid that contained anions of the third analytical group. Release of free iodine is observed. What anion are present in the solution?
a. Sulfate ion
b. Carbonate ion
*c. Nitrite ion
d. Bromide ions
e. Acetate ions

29. A solution contaning anions of the second analytical group has been blended with the solution of argentum nitrate. This resulted in formation of black precipitate insoluble in the ammonia solution and soluble in the diluted nitric acid at heating. What anions are present in the solution?
a. Chloride ions
b. Iodide ions
*c. Sulphide ions
d. Bromide ions
e. Arsenite ions

30. Argentum nitrate solution was added to a solution containing anions of the second analytical group. This resulted in formation of light-yellow sediment that was insoluble in the nitric acid and partly soluble in the ammonia solution. What anions were present in the solution?
a. Arsenite ions
*b. Bromide ions
c. Chloride ions
d. Iodide ions
e. Sulphide ions

31. During gravimetric determination of mass fraction of sulfate ions in the magnesium sulfate preparation precipitation is performed by means of barium chloride solution. Precipitated barium sulfate should be rinsed with:
*a. Diluted solution of sulfate acid
b. Solution of barium chloride
c. Solution of hydrochloride acid
d. Solution of sodium sulfate
e. Distilled water

32. Solution of 0,1M potassium permanganate is used as a titrant in permanganatometry. The solution is prepared like the secondary standard solution and standardized according to:
*a. Ammonia oxide
b. Sodium chloride
c. Calcium oxide
d. Sodium carbonate
e. Potassium dichromate

33. Specify the standardized solutions used for direct and back titration of reducing agents in the iodometric method:
a. KMnO4, KI
b. K2Cr2O7, I2
c. K2Cr2O7, Na2S2O3
d. I2, KI
*e. I2, Na2S2O3

34. Determination of medications containing cations of magnesium and calcium is done by trilonometric titration. What type of chemical reaction takes place in this case?
a. Alkylation
b. Precipitation
c. Oxidation-reduction
d. Electrophylic substitution
*e. Complexation

35. Name a standard solution of iodometric determination of reducing agents (direct titration)?
a. Solution of KI
*b. Solution of I2
c. Solution of Na2S2O3
d. Solution of KMnO4
e. Solution of K2Cr2O7

36. Choose a pair of electrodes for FeSO4 determination by method of potentiometric titration:
a. Hydrogen and glass
b. Antimonial and silver
c. Copper and glass
d. Chingidron and zink
*e. Platinum and chlorosilver

37. During the qualitative analysis under the influence of group reagent NaOH upon the aluminium ions the following substance is produced:
a. Aluminium oxide
*b. Sodium hexahydroxoaluminate
c. Sodium metaaluminate
d. Aluminium hydroxide
e. Basic aluminium salts

38. During the quantitative analysis carried out under the primary conditions, a specific reagent to Fe3+ cations is K4[Fe(CN)6]. Their interaction gives a precipitate of the following colour:
a. Black
*b. Blue
c. Brown
d. White
e. Red

39. During analysis of cations of the IV analytic group Zn cations can be detected under certain conditions with the following reagent:
a. Alkali
b. Ammonia solution
*c. Dithizone
d. Alkali metal carbonates
e. Dimethylglyoxime

40. Specify the titration method, in which a standardized titrant solution is gradually added to the solution under study until a titration endpoint is reached:
a. Back titration
b. Substitution titration
c. Residue titration
*d. Direct titration
e. Indirect titration

41. What standard solution (titrant) is used in Folgards method of direct titration?
a. Silver nitrate
b. Sodium chloride
*c. Ammonium thiocyanate
d. Potassium chromate
e. Potassium dichromate

42. While detecting Co2+ ions in presence of Fe3+ the following ions should be added to the solution in order to mask Fe3+ ions:
a. Sulphate ions
*b. Fluoride ions
c. Bromide ions
d. Chloride ions
e. Nitrite ions

43. You need to prepare ammoniac buffer solution. For this purpose you should add the following solution to the water solution of ammonia:
*a. Solution of ammonium chloride
b. Solution of sulfate acid
c. Solution of sodium sulfate
d. Solution of potassium chloride
e. Solution of chloride acid

44. What saturated heated solution is used for transformation of sulphates BaSO4, SrSO4, CaSO4 to carbonates during the systematic analysis?
a. CO2
*b. Na2CO3
c. (NH4)2CO3
d. CaCO3
e. MgCO3

45. Which indicatorless method enables quantitative determination of iron (II) content?
a. Nitritometry
*b. Permanganatometry
c. Argentometry
d. Chelatometry
e. Iodometry

46. Choose a pair of substances that can be used for standardization of 0,1 M solution of KMnO4:
a. K2CO3, CH3COOH
b. KHC2O4, HCOOH
c. Na2C2O4, CH3COOH
*d. Na2C2O4, H2C2O4
e. CH3COOK, H2C2O4

47. Permanganatometry enebles determination of H2O2 in high-acidity medium. What acid can be used for production of such medium?
*a. H2SO4
b. HNO3
c. H3PO4
d. CH3COOH
e. HCl

48. It is required to determine the amount of sodium salicylate in a solution. What titrimetric method can be applied for the quantitative determination of aromatic compounds?
a. Cerimetry
b. Mercurimetry
*c. Bromometry
d. Argentometry
e. Chelatometry

49. You are given 0,05 M solution of versene. What is standard substance for standardization of this solution?
*a. Metallic zinc
b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Potassium dichromate
d. Oxalic acid
e. Sodium tetraborate

50. Coulometry is based upon measurement of electrics that is spent on electrode reaction. What law underlies coulometric method?
a. Newton law
b. Archimedes principle
*c. Faraday law
d. Stokes law
e. Bouguer-Lambert-Beer law

51. In order to determine mass fraction of calcium in a pharmaceutical preparation, gravimetric method was applied. Ammonium oxalate solution was used as a precipitating agent. What is the gravimetric form in this case?
a. Calcium hydroxide
*b. Calcium chloride
c. Monohydrous calcium oxalate
d. Anhydrous calcium oxalate
e. Calcium carbonate

52. Analytical indication of effect of potassium iodide solution upon unstained oxidizing anions in presence of chloroform is:
a. Emission of gas bubbles
b. Origination of deposition and its solution in reagent excess
c. Settling down of white deposition
d. Change of aggregate state
*e. Brown stain of free iodine

53. Specify the relevant indicators for fixation of the titration endpoint when using nitritometric method:
a. Methylene blue
b. Starch solution
c. Diphenylamine
*d. Tropeolin 00 + methylene blue
e. Methylene orange

54. Choose a reduction-oxidation method for the quantitative determination of iron (II) salts in a solution that contains hydrochloric acid:
a. Permanganatometry
b. Iodometry
*c. Dichromatometry
d. Nitritometry
e. Ascorbinometry

55. During thin-layer chromatography of novocaine, the developed plate represented a stain 3 cm away from the start line, and the length of solvent front was 10 cm. What is the Rf value of novocaine?
a. 0,7
*b. 0,3
c. 0,5
d. 0,4
e. 0,6

56. A compound undeer examination contains cations of iron (III) and copper (II). What group reagent can separate these cations?
a. Solution of sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide
b. Solution of sodium hydroxide
c. Concentrated solution of sulfuric acid
*d. Concentrated ammonia solution
e. Concentrated solution of hydrochloride acid

57. In order to choose an indicator during the acid-bace titration a titration curve is made which is the dependence of:
*a. pH solution from the volume of the added titrant
b. pH solution from the volume of the solution under analysis
c. pH solution from the temperature
d. Concentration of the solution under analysis from pH solution
e. pH solution from the concentration of the added titrant

58. What method of titrimetric analysis can be applied for the quantitative determination of sulphuric acid by means of the potassium hydroxide solution?
*a. Alkalimetry
b. Oxidation-reduction
c. Complexation
d. Precipitation
e. Acidimetry

59. You have to carry out a qualitative analysis. What substance will originate from chromium ions under the influence of group reagent excess (solution of sodium hydroxide) upon cations of the IV analytical group?
*a. Sodium hexahydroxochromate (III)
b. Chromium (III) oxide
c. Chromium (II) oxide
d. Chromium (II) hydroxide
e. Chromium (III) hydroxide

60. Choose the reagents for detection of the sulphate ions in a solution containing carbonate, sulphate and phosphate ions:
a. CaCl2, NH4OH
b. AgNO3, HNO3
c. Ba(NO3)2, NaOH
d. BaCl2, H2O
*e. Ba(NO3)2, HCl

61. A composition under examination contains ions of Cl–, Br– and I– in equimolar quantities. The sequence of precipitate formation in course of argentometric titration will be determined by:
a. Way of titration - either back or direct
b. Value of oxidation-reduction potentials
*c. Solubility product of the corresponding silver halogenides
d. Value of corresponding ion mobility
e. Ionic strength of solution

62. Choose an appropriate indicator for fixation of titration end point in method of bromatometry:
*a. Methyl red
b. Starch
c. Tropeolin 00
d. Methyl blue
e. Phenolphthalein

63. Choose a pair of titrants for the qualitative determination of ammonia in a solution by the method of back titration:
a. KOH, NaOH
b. HCl, H2SO4
*c. HCl, NaOH
d. NaOH, KCl
e. H2SO4, K2SO4

64. Nitritometric determination of compounds containing primary aromatic amino group can be carried out under the following conditions:
a. With adding of the crystalline KBr (catalyst)
b. At a temperature up to 10°C
*c. With observation of all the mentioned conditions
d. Chloric acid excess
e. Slow titration

65. What electrode is used as indicator during dichromatometric determination of FeSO4 in a solution provided that fixation of the equivalence point is done by a potentiometric method?
a. Silver
b. Silver chloride
c. Glass
d. Quinhydrone
*e. Platinum

66. Content of potassium dichromate in a solution was determined by iodometric method. Name the titrant of iodometric method for oxidant determination:
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Potassium permanganate
c. Potassium bromate
*d. Sodium thiosulfate
e. Potassium iodide

67. What cations added to the solution of potassium iodide form orange-red deposition that is soluble in reagent excess and builds up a colourless solution?
a. Bismuth
b. Mercury (I)
*c. Mercury (II)
d. Antimony (V)
e. Lead

68. Nitritometric determination of primary aromatic amines in acidic medium results in generation of the following reaction product:
a. Nitrose antipyrine
b. Azide
c. Nitrosoamine
d. Nitrose arylenamine
*e. Diazonium salt

69. What is the primary standard for standardization of Hg2(NO3)2 solution?
a. Sodium hydroxide
b. Sodium dichromate
c. Sodium bromide
d. Sosium sulphate
*e. Sodium chloride

70. Determination of sodium chloride by Folgards method involves the following techniques:
a. Back titration, mercurimetry
b. Direct titration, mercurimetry
c. Direct titration, argentometry
d. Substitute titration
*e. Back titration, argentometry

71. Quantitative determination of iodide can be done by method of:
*a. Oxidation-reduction titration
b. Chelatometry
c. Precipitating titration
d. Spectrophotometry
e. Acid-base titration

72. What analytical effect is observed when potassium cation is being determined by the sodium hexanitrocobaltate (III) solution?
a. Black crystalline precipitate
b. Red crystalline precipitate
c. White crystalline precipitate
d. Yellow colouring of the solution
*e. Yellow crystalline precipitate

73. What substance can be identified by method of acid-base titration and oxidation-reduction titration?
a. Sodium sulphate
b. Sodium hydroxide
c. Ammonium chloride
*d. Oxalate acid
e. Calcium nitrate

74. A drug solution under examination contains cations of magnesium (II) and aluminium (III). Which reagent can help to separate these cations during analysis of this drug?
*a. Alkali solution
b. Solution of silver nitrate
c. Solution of chloride acid
d. Ammonia solution
e. Solution of hydrogen peroxide in acidic medium

75. Quantitative determination of pharmaceutical substances can be carried out by method of alkalimetry using 0,1 M sodium hydroxide solution as a titrant. Precise concentration of sodium hydroxide can be determined according to:
a. Ammonium hydroxide
*b. Oxalic acid
c. Potassium dichromate
d. Sodium tetraborate
e. Sodium thiosulphate

76. A solution containing the cations of the V analytic group (acid-base classification) has been taken for the analysis. The solution of sodium hydroxostannite has been added to the composition which resulted in formation of black deposition. This is the evidence of presence of the following cation:
a. Fe2+
b. Fe3+
c. Mg2+
*d. Bi3+
e. Sb3+

77. What cations relate to the I analytic group according to the acid-base classification?
a. Aluminium, magnesium, zinc
b. Potassium, barium, bismuth
c. Calcium, strontium, barium
d. Silver, lead, nickel
*e. Sodium, potassium, ammonium

78. In course of the systematic analysis separation of cations of the V and VI analytic groups (according to the acid-base classification) is carried out under the action of excess of:
a. Sulphuric acid solution
*b. Concentrated ammonia solution
c. Hydrochloric acid solution
d. Sodium hydroxide solution
e. Potassium hydroxide solution

