1. A female patient suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis. Urine analysis revealed proteinuria, hematuria, leukocyturia. Proteinuria indicates disturbance of the following process in kidneys:
a. Tubular reabsorption
b. Tubular secretion
*c. Glomerular filtration
d. Tubular secretion and reabsorption
e. Renal blood flow

2. Examination of the lower limbs of a 40-year-old patient with coronary artery disease and vascular disease of lower limbs (obliterating endarteritis) revealed skin pallor and dystrophy, local temperature decrease, sense shock, pain. The patient is likely to have the following disorder of the peripheral blood circulation:
a. Arterial hyperaemia
*b. Obstruction ischemia
c. Angiospastic ischemia
d. Compression ischemia
e. Venous hyperaemia

3. A 45-year-old patient complains of nausea, foul-smelling eructation, periodic vomiting, meteorism. Fractional analysis of the secretory function of stomach revealed the absence of hydrochloric acids and some enzymes. The patient has the following pathology of the gastrointestinal tract:
a. Anacidic state
*b. Achylia
c. Hypoacidic state
d. Hypochlorhydria
e. Achlorhydria

4. A 56 y.o. patient complains of periodical pain attacks in the heart area irradiating to his left arm, sometimes to the left scapula. These pain attacks can be relieved by nitroglycerine. What heart patholohgy can be suspected?
a. Myocarditis
b. Myocardium infarction
*c. Stenocardia
d. Endocarditis
e. Pericarditis

5. A 54 y.o. patient with stomach ulcer complains about great weakness, dyspnea caused by the slightest physical exercise. Blood count: erythrocytes - 1,44×1012l, Hb- 66 g/l, colour index - 1,4. What anemia are these changes of peripheral blood count typical for?
a. Acute posthemorrhagic
b. Iron-deficiency
*c. B12-deficiency
d. Acquired hemolytic
e. Chronic posthemorrhagic

6. What intracardiac compensation mechanism is actuated under conditions of cardiac insufficiency and causes blood volume overload?
a. Tachycardia
b. Myocardium hypertrophy
c. Increase of respiratory rate
*d. Heterometric
e. Homeometric

7. A patient was diagnosed with anacydic gastritis. What enzyme activity will be reduced?
a. Lipase
b. Amylase
*c. Pepsin
d. Chemotrypsin
e. Trypsin

8. A child with evident hypotrophy got edemata on his lower extremities, ascites. What is the main mechanism of pathogenesis of cachectic edema?
a. Rise of oncotic pressure of intercellular fluid
b. Rise of hydrostatic blood pressure
*c. Drop of oncotic pressure of blood plasma
d. Increased permeability of vascular wall
e. Disturbance of lymph outflow

9. What disease of blood coagulation system is based upon abrupt deceleration of blood coagulation due to disturbed formation of plasma thromboplastin (VIII factor deficit)?
a. Hemorrhagic purpura
*b. Hemophilia
c. Hemorrhagic vasculitis
d. Thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Symptomatic thrombocytopenia

10. In order to estimate antibiotic susceptibility of a patient doctors introduced him intracutaneously 0,2 ml of penicilline solution. Ten minutes after introduction there appeared hyperemy and edema. What type does this reaction relate to (according to Coombs and Gells classification)?
a. Reaction of Arthus phenomenon type
b. Cytotoxic reaction
*c. Anaphylactic reaction
d. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
e. Tuberculine reaction

11. Examination of a patient revealed an increase in low-density lipoprotein concentration in blood serum. The patient can be expected to have the following disease:
a. Glomerulonephritis
b. Pneumonia
*c. Atherosclerosis
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Gastritis

12. As a result of spine injury a female patient has no voluntary movements of her lower limbs. This disorder is called:
a. Paraparesis
*b. Paraplegia
c. Monoplegia
d. Tetraplegia
e. Hemiplegia

13. What classification criterion incorporates the following types of anemias: posthemorrhagic, hemolytic and anemia induced by disturbed hematogenesis?
a. Hematogenesis type
b. Etiology
*c. Pathogenesis
d. Bone marrow regenerability
e. Colour index

14. A 40 year old woman has been suffering from profuse uterine bleedings for a long time. Blood count: Нb- 90 g/l, erythrocytes - 3,9×1012l, colour index - 0,6. What is the main cause of hypochromic anemia?
a. Deficiency of vitamin B12
b. Insufficient iron content in food ration
c. Increased consumption of iron
d. Nonassimilability of iron
*e. Iron loss with blood

15. A patient suffering from gastric ulcer for a long time has dramatic emaciation, skin pallor, appetite loss, aversion to meat products. Biopsy of mucous membrane of stomach revealed cellular atypia. What pathology are these symptoms typical for?
a. Helminthic invasion
*b. Malignant tumour of stomach
c. Polyposis
d. Benign tumour of stomach
e. Hypertrophic gastritis

16. A patient had cerebral haemorrhage that made impossible active motions of left arm and leg. Muscle tone of these limbs is increased, their spinal reflexes are intensified, reflex zones are increased. What type of CNS disorder is it?
*a. Central paralysis
b. Spinal shock
c. Reflex paralysis
d. Atonic paralysis
e. Peripheral paralysis

17. A patient had an attack of calculous cholecystitis that was accompanied by saponated feces, steatorrhea. These changes are the evidence of disturbance of the following stage of lipometabolism:
a. Adipose tissue exchange
b. Depositing
c. Transport
d. Intermediary metabolism
*e. Digestion and absorption

18. After a stomach resection a patient presented with weakness, skin pallor, face puffiness, enlargement of liver and spleen. Analysis of the peripheral blood revealed megaloblasts and megalocytes; hyperchromatism (colour index - 1,3). What type of anaemia is observed in this patient?
a. Hypoplastic
b. Haemolytic
*c. B12-deficient
d. Iron-deficient
e. Toxic

19. A few minutes afer repeated introduction of penicillin a patient got dyspnea, tongue numbness, hyperemia and then skin pallor. The patient also lost consciousness. What is the cause of such a grave condition?
a. Hemolytic anemia
b. Serum sickness
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Bronchial asthma

20. A patient has bradycardia, moderate hypotension, decrease of basal metabolism, edemata. What disorder can induce such syndrome?
a. Adrenal hypofunction
*b. Thyroid hypofunction
c. Thyroid hyperfunction
d. Parathyroid hypofunction
e. Parathyroid hyperfunction

21. A patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency has got soft tissue edemata on his shins. What is the leading pathogenetic factor of edema development?
a. Drop of hydrostatic pressure in capillaries
b. Rise of osmotic pressure in tissues
c. Drop of osmotic pressure in blood plasma
d. Rise of oncotic pressure in tissues
*e. Rise of hydrostatic pressure in capillaries

22. Most cases of alimentary starvation are accompanied by development of evident edemata. What is the leading pathogenetic mechanism of edemata development in this case?
a. Rise of oncotic pressure in the intercellular fluid
b. Fall of osmotic pressure in the intercellular fluid
c. Rise of hydrostatic pressure in the capillaries
d. Fall of hydrostatic pressure in the tissues
*e. Fall of oncotic pressure of blood plasma

23. A patient suffering from pleuritis underwent pleural puncture. There was obtained a transparent odourless liquid. What type of exudate was obtained?
*a. Serous
b. Purulent
c. Putrefactive
d. Fibrinous
e. Haemorrhagic

24. A 45-year-old woman has frequent uterine haemorrhages, she presents with general weakness, dyspnea, tachycardia, cardiac pain. In blood: erythrocytes – 3×109l, haemoglobin - 70 g/l, colour index - 0,7. The smear contains mostly hypochromic erythrocytes, microcytes. Specify the type of anaemia accrding to its mechanism of development:
*a. Iron-deficiency
b. Haemolytic
c. Protein-deficiency
d. Minkowsky-Shauffard disease
e. B12-folate-deficiency

25. A 38 year old patient had hepatitis but didnt give up alcohol. There appeared symptoms of hepatocirrhosis along with ascites and edemata of his lower limbs. What changes in blood are main factor of edemata development?
a. Hypocholesterolemia
b. Hypoglobulinemia
*c. Hypoalbuminemia
d. Hypokalemia
e. Hypoglycemia

26. What form of hypoxia develops during shock and collapse?
a. Respiratory
b. Hemic
c. Tissue
*d. Circulatory
e. Hypoxic

27. The leukocytes that are the first to appear in a focus of inflammation are called:
a. Monocytes
b. Lymphocytes
c. Basophils
*d. Neutrophils
e. Eosinophils

28. After a 5-year-old child has been brought home from the kindergarten he presented with weakness, headache, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. What period of disease develompent is the case?
*a. Prodromal
b. Incubative
c. Fastigium
d. Recovery
e. Latent

29. A 56 year old patient complains about limitation of movements and pain in hand joints, mainly at night. Objectively: there is a disfiguring painful swelling of affected joints. Blood and urine have high concentration of uric acid. What disease has developed?
a. Tyrosinosis
*b. Gout
c. Phenylketonuria
d. Pellagra
e. Alkaptonuria

30. A patient ill with pheochromocytoma has high secretion of the following hormone:
a. Thyroxin
b. Somatotropin
c. Glucagon
d. Insulin
*e. Adrenaline

31. Every year during the plant blossoming a female patient develops acute catarrhal inflammation of conjunctiva and nasal mucosa that is the clinical presentation of an allergy. These symptoms relate to the following type of allergic reactions:
a. Immune complex
b. Cytotoxic
*c. Anaphylactic
d. Cell-mediated
e. Cellular dysfunction

32. A female patient consulted a doctor about leg pain that arises usually toward the evening; feet and shins edemata. Objectively: leg skin is cyanotic, cold to the touch. What type of peripheral circulation disorder does the patient present with?
a. Ischaemia
b. Arterial hyperaemia
*c. Venous hyperaemia
d. Stasis
e. Thrombosis

33. A group of alpinists climbing to the top had their blood tested. The test revealed erythrocytosis and increase in hemoglobin rate. What type of hypoxia caused the stimulation of erythropoiesis in the bone marrow?
a. Tissue
*b. Hypoxic
c. Hemic
d. Combined
e. Circulatory

34. A 42-year-old patient suffering from chronic calculous cholecystitis complains of acute pain in the right subcostal area, itching and skin icteritiousness, multiple petechial haemorrhages, saponified and light-coloured feces (steatorrhea). What type of icterus is it?
a. Hemolytic
b. Cythemolytic
c. Hepatocellular
*d. Mechanic
e. Parenchymatous

35. A 55-year-old woman with renal failure has arterial pressure at the rate of 170/100 mm Hg. Stable pressure rise is caused by hyperactivity of the following system:
a. Sympathoadrenal
b. Central nervous
c. Kallikrein-kinin
*d. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
e. Hypothalamo-pituitary

36. A boy is 4 year old. Glucose concentration in blood plasma is 12 millimole/l. This might be caused by deficiency of the following hormone:
a. Cortisol
b. Glucagon
*c. Insulin
d. Somatotropin
e. Adrenocorticotropin

37. A 40 year old patient complains about general weakness, headache, body temperature rise, cough with sputum, dyspnea. After examination his illness was diagnosed as focal pneumonia. What type of hypoxia is observed?
a. Circulatory
b. Tissue
c. Hypoxic
*d. Respiratory
e. Hemic

38. A 58 year old patient complained about persistent rise of arterial pressure. Clinical examination revealed chronic renal disease accompanied by disturbance of renal blood flow. Rise of arterial pressure was induced by activation of the following regulatory system:
*a. Renin-angiotensin
b. Sympathetic nervous
c. Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal
d. Sympathoadrenal
e. Parasympathetic nervous

39. A patient diagnosed with acute abdomen was delivered to the hospital. A doctor suspected acute appendicitis and ordered urgent blood test. What factor would be the evidence of acute inflammation in this patient?
*a. Leukocytosis
b. Eosinophilia
c. Erythropenia
d. Erythrocytosis
e. Leukopenia

40. What pathology of tissue growth is characterized by cellular and tissue atypia from the point of histomorphology?
a. Benign tumour
b. Regeneration
c. Dystrophy
d. Degeneration
*e. Malignant tumour

41. After a birth trauma a newborn presents with limited movements of the right upper extremity, hyporeflexia, myatrophy. These changes relate to the following type of motor dysfunctions:
a. Myasthenia
b. Central paralysis
*c. Peripheric (atonic) paralysis
d. Bulbar paralysis
e. Neuritis

42. A 37-year-old man was admitted to a hospital with an attack of bronchial asthma. What respiration type will be observed in this patient?
a. Apnoea
b. Inspiratory dyspnea
*c. Expiratory dyspnea
d. Gasping respiration
e. Hyperpnoea

43. A child got burn on his hand caused by hot water. Burn skin is bright red. What disturbance of local blood circulation is it?
a. Embolism
*b. Arterial hyperemia
c. Stasis
d. Venous hyperemia
e. Thrombosis

44. A patient has obstructive respiratory failure. Name a disease that is usually accompanied by such type of respiratory failure:
a. Pneumonia
b. Pneumoconiosis
c. Pneumothorax
*d. Bronchial asthma
e. Exudative pleuritis

45. A patient suffering from the bone marrow form of radiation sickness was found to have the following changes in his hemogram: leukocytes – 2*10^9/l, lymphopenia, erythrocytes - 3,0*10^12/l, Hb- 52 g/l, thrombocytes – 105*10^9/l, reduced blood coagulation. These changes are typical for the following stage of the radiation sickness:
a. Solution
b. Relapse
c. Latent period
d. Prodromal period
*e. Fastigium

46. Immediate-type allergies are characterized by degranulation of the tissue basophils that secrete biologically active substances. One of such substances is:
*a. Histamine
b. Plasminogen
c. Thromboxane
d. Hagemans factor
e. Acetylcholine

47. A 57-year-old worker at an asphalt plant complains of weakness, cough with blood-streaked sputum, chest pain. He has been diagnosed with lung cancer. What is the first stage of carcinogenesis?
a. Promotion
b. Progression
c. Induction
*d. Transformation
e. Activization

48. A 56-year-old female patient complains about a fast growing hard neoplasm in the mammary gland that appeared a month ago. Objectively: the formation is fused with the surrounding tissues, it is uneven, slightly painful. What are the peculiarities favouring the infiltrative growth of a malignant tumour?
*a. Lack of contact inhibition
b. Intensified contact inhibition
c. Rise of embryonal antigens
d. Intensified formation of tight contacts
e. Intensified chalone formation

49. Examination of a patient revealed neutrophilic leukocytosis with shift of leukogram to the right. It is typical for:
a. Allergy
b. Rheumatism
c. Chronic inflmmatory process
d. Autoimmune process
*e. Acute inflammatory process

50. A patient is 54 year old. After intense emotional stress he felt strong pain behind his breastbone irradiating to his left arm and left part of his neck. He felt also death anxiety and broke into a cold sweat. Nitroglycerine relieved pain. Name a disturbamce of local blood circulation in heart that has developed in this case:
*a. Ischemia
b. Embolism
c. Venous hyperemia
d. Arterial hyperemia
e. Thrombosis

51. A patient present’s with Kussmaul’s respiration, acetone smell from the mouth; low tonus of eyeballs, myotic pupils, dry skin, polyuria, glycosuria, hyperglycemia. Such symptom complex is typical for the following coma:
*a. Diabetic
b. Alimentary dystrophic
c. Adrenal
d. Hypoglycemic
e. Hepatic

52. A patient was diagnosed with right lung cancer and doctors administered him surgical treatment. After right-sided pulmonectomy the patient began to suffer from evident dyspnea. What form of respiratory failure is it?
a. Central
b. Pulmonary obstructive
c. Thoracodiaphragmal
*d. Pulmonary restrictive
e. Peripheral

53. A patient with acute pneumonia has an edema and hardening of pulmonary tissue. What cells are the first to infiltrate the inflammation zone and provide the effective protection from the bacterial infection?
a. Eosinophils
b. Basophils
c. Monocytes
d. Thrombocytes
*e. Neutrophils

54. A patient complains of belting pain in epigastrium. Examination revealed high diastase content in urine, as well as undigested fat in feces. What pathology are these occurences typical for?
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Enterocolitis
c. Gastritis
d. Infectious hepatitis
*e. Acute pancreatitis

55. A patient was found to have an increase in total bilirubin concentration in plasma at the expense of indirect bilirubin; high rate of stercobilin in feces and urine; normal rate of direct bilirubin. What jaundice is it?
*a. Haemolytic
b. Gilberts syndrome
c. Physiological
d. Parenchymatous
e. Mechanic

56. Examination of a patient revealed symptoms of myocardial insufficiency. What is the possible cause of cardiac insufficiency of myocardial type?
a. Mitral stenosis
b. Essential hypertension
c. Aorta coarctation
d. Pulmonary emphysema
*e. Infectious myocarditis

57. A child has got a burn. Burnt skin is hyperemic, there are small vesicles full of transparent fluid. What type of fluid is it?
a. Hemorrhagic exudate
b. Transsudate
c. Putrid exudate
*d. Serous exudate
e. Purulent exudate

58. A 47-year-old patient with an arm injury was delivered to a hospital in pain shock condition. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, with mental confusion; integuments are moist, pale, acrocyanotic. There are also tachypnea, fall in the arterial pressure, tachycardia. What type of hypoxia is prevailing in this patient?
*a. Circulatory
b. Tissue
c. Substrate
d. Respiratory
e. Haemic

59. A patient suffering from the essential hypertension presents with an increase in the arterial pressure up to 180/110 mm Hg; dyspnea, cyanosis, tachycardia; heart borders are dilated to the left, in lungs moist rales are present. What signs of urgent compensation for cardiac failure are observed?
a. Cyanosis
b. Arterial pressure rise
*c. Tachycardia
d. Dyspnea
e. Myogenic dilatation

60. A patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 10 years. He was delivered to a hospital in grave condition. On the 2nd day of treatment his condition grew significantly worse: he lapsed into a coma, there appeared noisy deep breathing. Deep inspirations took turns with forced expirations with assistance of expiratory muscles. What form of respiration disorder is it?
a. Stenotic respiration
b. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
c. Biots respiration
*d. Kussmauls respiration
e. Tachypnea

61. After taking phenacetin a patient complained about sore throat and impossibility of deglutition. An otolaryngologist made a dignosis of necrotic angina. In blood: Hb- 130 g/l, erythrocytes - 4,5*10^12/l, leukocytes - 3,0*10^9/l, among them lymphocytes - 75%, neutrophils - 10%, eosinophils - 5%, monocytes - 10%. What type of white blood cell disorder is it?
a. Monocytosis
b. Neutrophilia
*c. Neutropenia
d. Eosinophylia
e. Lymphopenia

62. A Rh-positive child of a Rh-negative woman (secundapara) has yellow skin, pathologic reflexes, convulsions. The child has an increased rate of indirect bilirubin in blood. What type of jaundice is it?
a. Hepatic with violation of bilirubin capture
b. Hepatic with violation of bilirubin excretion
c. Mechanic
*d. Haemolytic
e. Hepatic with violation of bilirubin conjugation

63. After a road accident a patient has the arterial pressure at the rate of 70/40 mm Hg and daily diuresis at the rate of about 300 ml. What is the mechanism of oliguria development in this case?
a. Increase in tubular reabsorption
b. Decrease in tubular secretion
c. Increase in glomerular filtration
d. Decrease in tubular reabsorption
*e. Decrease in glomerular filtration

64. 3 years ago a patient was diagnosed with chronic glomerulonephritis. The patient has got multiple edemata within the last 6 months. What is the cause of their development?
a. Glucocorticoid treatment
b. Vasopressin hyperproduction
c. Hyperaldosteronism
d. Injection of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory preparations
*e. Proteinuria

65. A warmly dressed child has spent a considerably long time out of doors. This resulted in body temperature elevation and general weakness development. What form of thermoregulation disorder is observed in this case?
a. Endogenous hyperthermia
b. Heat shock
c. Centrogenous hyperthermia
*d. Exogenous hyperthermia
e. Fever

66. A patient with pneumosclerosis has blood pH at the rate of 7,34. Analysis of gas formula of blood showed hypercapnia. Urine analysis revealed the increase in its acidity. What form of acid-base disbalance is the case?
*a. Gaseous acidosis
b. Gaseous alkalosis
c. Non-gaseous acidosis
d. Non-gaseous alkalosis
e. Secretory alkalosis

