1. A 3 year old child has a cavity in the 84 tooth. Objectively: there is a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the tooth within mantle dentin. Dentin is softened, probing of cavity walls is painful, percussion is painless. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Acute median caries

2. Preventive examination of a 7-year-old schoolboy revealed unremovable grey-and-white layerings on the mucous membrane of cheek along the line of teeth joining. Mucous membrane is slightly hyperaemic, painless on palpation. The boy is emotionally unbalanced, bites his cheeks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Mild leukoplakia
b. Chronic candidous stomatitis
c. Multiform exudative erythema
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Chronic recurrernt aphthous stomatitis

3. Mother of a 6,5-year-old child consulted a dentist about checking fissure hermetizatioon of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth. They were treated six month ago. Sealant in the 36, 46 teeth is preserved, but sealant in the 16 and 26 teeth is absent. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Preventive filling
b. Coating the teeth with fluorine lacquer Ftorlak
c. Electrophoresis with 1% sodium fluoride solution
*d. To repeat fissure hermetization
e. Applications with remodentum solution

4. A 12-year-old boy complains about short-term pain in a lower jaw tooth on the right caused by cold stimuli. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within the circumpulpar dentine which has no intercommunication with the dental cavity. The cavity floor and walls are coated with light softened dentine. Cold test causes short-standing pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute localized pulpitis
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

5. A 12-year-old child complains about sore throat, headache, body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, rhinitis, cough in summer period. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is hyperemic, edematic. There are 10-15 erosions up to 0,5 mm large on the palate and palatine arches, that arent covered with deposit and have red floor. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
*d. Herpetic angina
e. Erythema multiforme

6. A 12-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage and tooth mobility. He has been suffering from this since the age of 4. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic and edematic, bleed during instrumental examination. Tooth roots are exposed by ⅓ and covered with whitish deposit. II degree tooth mobility is present. Dentogingival pouches are 4-5 mm deep. External examination revealed dryness and thickening of superficial skin layer on the hands and feet, there are also some cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis
b. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
*c. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
d. Letterer-Siwe disease
e. Localized periodontitis

7. An 8-year-old boy was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 21 tooth. It was treated by extirpation method. Choose the material for root filling:
a. Resorcin-formalin paste
b. Phosphate cement
c. Glass-ionomer cement
d. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
*e. Calcium-containing material

8. An 11 year old girl complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating. She has been suffering from this for a year. Gum of both upper and lower jaws is edematic and congestively hyperemic. Hygienic state of oral cavity is unsatisfactory. Bite is edge-to-edge. Roentgenological examination of periodontium revealed no pathological changes. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. Localized periodontitis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

9. A 13 year old child complained about painfulness of his lower lip. He has been suffering for two months. Objectively: mucous membrane of lower lip is hyperemic, excretory ducts of minor salivary glands are dilated, "dew" symptom is present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cheilitis exfoliativa
b. Contact allergic cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Microbal cheilitis
*e. Cheilitis glandularis

10. A virtually healthy 9 year old child complains about crown fracture and pain in the right superior frontal tooth. Objectively: crown part of the 11 tooth is broken by ⅓, pulp is pointwise dehisced, it is red, acutely painful and bleeds during probing. Percussion is slightly painful. The child got a trauma several hours ago. Choose an optimal treatment method:
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Biological method
c. Devital amputation
d. Vital amputation
e. Vital extirpation

11. An 8 year old child has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 16 tooth within circumpulpar dentin. Probing of cavity floor is painful, dentin is softened, slightly pigmented. Cold stimulus causes short-term pain. Choose a dental treatment paste:
a. Arsenious
b. Thymol
c. Resorcin-formaline
d. Paraformaldehyde
*e. Hydroxycalcium-containing

12. A 5-year-old boy presents with body temperature rise up to 39,2°C, sore throat, headache, nausea. Objectively: mucous membrane of soft palate and palatine arches is evidently hyperemic, there is distinct border between it and surrounding tissues. The childs tongue is dry, edematic, its lateral surfaces are red and free of fur, fungiform papillae are evidently enlarged. Face skin is covered with spotty rash, hyperemic except for pale nasolabial triangle. Submandibular lymph nodes are painful on palpation. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Lofflers bacillus
*b. Haemolytic streptococcus
c. Herpes virus
d. Coxsackie virus
e. Bordet-Gengou bacillus

13. Preventive examination of tongue back of a 6-year-old child revealed areas of epithelium desquamation in form of red oval spots located close to the zones of hyperkeratinization of filiform papillae. Clavate papillae are hypertrophic. There are no complaints. The child has a history of intestinal dysbacteriosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute catarrhal glossitis
b. Candidal glossitis
*c. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
d. Rhomboid glossitis
e. Herpetic affection of tongue

14. A 14-year-old child complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal teeth region. Objectively: enamel of the 11, 12, 21, 22, 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth is thin in the region of cutting edge, there is a sulcate enamel pit 1,5 mm wide which encircles the tooth and is parallel to the cutting edge. The cusps of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth are underdeveloped and have conical form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
b. Local hypoplasia
c. Stainton-Capdepont dysplasia
*d. Systemic hypoplasia
e. Enamel dysplasia

15. A 7 month old child was brought to a dentist because of an ulcer in the oral cavity. The child was born prematurely. She has been fed with breast milk substitutes by means of a bottle with rubber nipple. Objectively: on the border between hard and soft palate there is an oval ulcer 0,8х1,0 cm large covered with yellowish-grey deposit and surrounded with a roll-like infiltration. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute candidous stomatitis
*b. Bednars aphtha
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Settons aphtha
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

16. A 10-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous spasmodic pain in an upper jaw tooth on the left. Objectively: distal contact surface of the 26 tooth exhibits a carious cavity filled with light softened dentine and localized within parapulpar dentine. Probing of the cavity floor causes acute pain, percussion is painless. Cold stimuli cause a long-standing pain attack. The child has a history of lidocaine allergy. Choose an optimal paste to be used during the first visit:
a. Iodoform
b. Formocresol
c. Zinc oxide eugenol
*d. Paraformaldehyde
e. Thymol

17. Preventive examination of an 8-year-old boy revealed some lusterless chalk-like spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth, which are localised in the precervical region. Subjective complaints are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. White-spotted fluorosis

18. Parents of a 6-year-old child consulted a dentist about oral cavity sanitation. Objectively: the 85 tooth has a carious cavity on the distal surface within the mantle dentine. Floor and walls are dense and pigmented. Probing is painless. Cold stimuli and percussion cause no pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic deep caries

19. A 3-year-old child complains of a cavity in a lower jaw tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 84 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within mantle dentine. Dentine is softened, probing of the cavity walls is painful, percussion is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic superficial caries
*c. Acute median caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic deep caries

20. According to the mother, a 5-year-old child complains about pain during swallowing, weakness, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C, swelling of submental lymph nodes. Objectively: the childs condition is grave, body temperature is 38,8°C. Mucous membrane of oral cavity is brightly hyperemic and edematic with haemorrhages and ulcerations. Pharynx is brightly hyperemic, lacunae are enlarged and have necrosis areas. Regional, cervical, occipital lymph nodes are painful, enlarged and dense. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lacunar tonsillitis
*b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivostomatitis
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Herpetic angina

21. A girl is 1,2 year old. Vestibular surface of her 52, 51, 61, 62 teeth has large carious cavities within the enamel. Probing is slightly painful, percussion of the 52, 51, 61, 62 teeth is painless. What treatment is to be administered?
a. Amalgam filling
*b. Silver impregnation
c. Remineralizing therapy
d. Filling with phosphoric acid cement
e. Coating with fluorine lacquer

22. A 7-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in the upper right molars. Both medial contact and masticatory surfaces of the 55 tooth have a carious cavitiy filled with clear softened dentin and localized within parapulpar dentin. Floor probing causes acute pain, tooth percussion is slightly painful. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process in the root projection of the 55 is intact, examination of this region revealed no roentgenological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Deep acute caries
*b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

23. An 8-year-old boy complains about acute short-term pain in the 11 tooth caused by cold and sweet stimuli. Objectively: medial contact surface of the 11 tooth has a carious cavity within dentinoenamel junction filled with softened moist dentine that can be easily removed. Enamel edges are white, undermined, friable. Superficial probing is painless, thermal test is positive, percussion is negative. What is the filling material of choice?
a. Composite material
b. Silicophosphate cement
*c. Glass ionomer cement
d. Silver amalgam
e. Silicate cement

24. A 3-month-old child has been in disease state for two days. The child is anxious, refuses food, has normal body temperature. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is edematic and hyperemic. There is white caseous coating on the back of tongue and buccal mucosa. After the coating removal one can see extremely hyperemic surface with petechial haemorrhages. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mild leukoplakia
b. Herpetic angina
c. Lichen ruber planus
*d. Acute candidal stomatitis
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

25. A 13 year old child has been suffering from pain in the left inferior molar induced by cold stimuli for several months. Objectively: on the masticatory surface of the 37 tooth there is a carious cavity with overhanging enamel edges filled with circumpulpar dentin. The cavity is filled with light softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is somewhat painful. Cold stimuli cause short-term pain. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
*e. Acute deep caries

26. An 11 year old patient complains about tooth mobility and gingival haemorrhage. He has been suffering since he was 3 years old. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic, edematic, bleed during instrumentl examination. Tooth roots are dehisced by ⅓ and covered with white deposit. There is 2 degree tooth mobility. Dentogingival pockets are 4-5 mm deep. External examination revealed dryness and thickening of palms, anterior third of forearms, sole surfaces; there are scratches. What is the most probable provisional diagnosis?
*a. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
b. Letterer-Siewe disease
c. Niemann-Pick disease
d. Hand-Schueller-Christian disease
e. Gauchers disease

27. Preventive examination of a 4-year-old child revealed a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 54 tooth. The cavity has no intercommunication with the tooth cavity and is filled with dense dentine. Probing, percussion, thermal test of the 54 tooth provoke no pain. The decay/filled index is 1, hygiene index is 1,9. What filling material is the most suitable for permanent filling of the 54 tooth?
a. Chemical composite
b. Photopolymer composite
c. Silicate cement
d. Silicophosphate cement
*e. Glass-ionomer cement

28. An 8 year old child complains about permanent dull pain in the 46 tooth that is getting stronger during cutting. The pain appeared 1 day ago. Previously there has been pain induced by cold stimuli. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth, tooth cavity is closed, probing and temperature stimuli cause no pain reaction. Percussion is painful, a slight mobility is present. Gum around the 46 tooth is hyperemic, edematic, palpatory painful. X-ray picture shows no changes near the apex of undeveloped roots. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute general serous pulpitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
*c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis

29. A 13-year-old girl complains about frequent falling out of a filling in the 21 tooth. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 years ago she underwent treatment on account of a dental trauma. Objectively: a transverse defect of ⅓ of the crown in the 21 tooth. Percussion is painless. Tooth colour is unchanged. X-ray picture shows that root canal is filled by 1 mm from the apex, filling material closely fits the walls of root canal. What stomatological tactics should be chosen?
*a. The defect should be restored with photopolymer
b. The root apex should be resected
c. The tooth should be crowned with an artificial crown
d. The tooth should be extracted
e. The root canal should be refilled

30. Parents of a 2-year-old girl complain about fistulas with purulent discharge in the region of the upper frontal teeth. Objectively: crowns of the 51, 52, 61, 62 teeth are significantly decayed, probing of root canal orifices is slightly painful, it causes significant haemorrhage. Percussion is painless. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is pastose and cyantotic, there are cicatrices and fistulas in this region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis

31. A 13,5 year old girl complains of gingival painfullness and haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating, halitosis. She has been ill with angina for a week. Objectively: mucous membrane of gums in the area of frontal teeth of her upper and lower jaws is edematic, hyperemic. Apices of gingival papillae are necrotic, they also bleed when touched. There is a thick layer of soft tooth plaque. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Streptococci
b. Herpes virus
*c. Anaerobic microflora
d. Staphylococci
e. Yeast fungi

32. Parents of an 8-year-old child complain about a painful formation in the childs oral cavity that obstructs food intake. The same complaints were registered two years ago. Mucous membrane of lateral tongue surface is hyperemic and edematic. There is an oval erosion over 0,7 cm large covered with yellow greyish deposit. Erosion edges are hyperemic and painful on palpation. The child has a history of chronic cholecystocholangitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Behcets syndrome
c. Traumatic erosion
d. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
e. Erythema multiforme

33. A 1,8 year old boy was under treatment in the infectious disease department. He was given ampicillin. On the 6th day of treatment there appeared white deposits in form of caseous films that were revealed on the hyperemic mucous membrane in the area of gingival torus, cheeks and on the tongue. The films can be removed leaving hyperemic surface underneath them. General condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 36,7°C. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Drug-induced stomatitis
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Mild case of leukoplakia
*d. Acute candidous stomatitis
e. Chronic candidous stomatitis

34. A girl is 18 months old. Vestibular surfaces of the 52, 51, 61, 62 teeth have wide carious cavities within enamel. Probing is slightly painful, percussion of the 52, 51, 61, 62 is painless. What is the treatment of choice?
*a. Silver impregnation
b. Remineralizing therapy
c. Filling with phosphate cement
d. Fluorine laquer coating
e. Filling with amalgam

35. Examination of a 9 year old patient revealed a milky spot on the vestibular surface of the 11 tooth close to the cutting edge. Probing and tempearture stimuli cause no pain reaction. The child was diagnosed with local enamel hypoplasia of the 11 tooth. What treatment should be administered?
a. Hermetization of the affected part
b. Cosmetic filling
c. Prophylactic hygiene of oral cavity
d. Spot removal
*e. A course of remineralizing therapy

36. Parents of a 6-year-old child applied to a pedodontist for preventive examination of their child. The oral cavity is sanitized. According to the parents, the child has recently cut the 36 and the 46 tooth. What method of caries prevention should be applied within 1,5-2 years after cutting of the mentioned teeth?
a. Fissure silvering
b. Remodentum solution applications
c. Gargling with sodium fluoride
*d. Fissure hermetization
e. Coating the teeth with fluorine lacquer Ftorlak

37. A 12-year-old child complains about bleeding and pain in the 46 tooth during eating. He has a history of acute pain some time before. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity (Blacks class II) communicating with the dental cavity, partially filled with overgrown pulp. Pulp tissue is bleeding, painful on touch. There is soft white dental deposit. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic papillitis
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
e. Chronic simple pulpitis

38. Examination of a 6-year-old girl revealed a deep carious cavity in the 85 tooth. Percussion and probing are painless. After removal of the softened dentine, communication with the tooth cavity showed up. Deep probing is painless. X-ray picture of the 85 tooth shows the focus of destruction of bone tissue in the region of bifurcation; cortical plate of the 35 has no pathological changes. It is most expedient to use the following material for the root filling:
a. Glass-ionomer cement
b. Resorcin-formalin paste
*c. Zinc oxide eugenol cement
d. Phosphate cement
e. Calcium-containing paste

39. A 12-year-old child complains about bleeding from the tooth socket during eating and tooth brushing. The tooth has hurt him before. Objectively: the 36 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity and filled with red excrescences. Probing causes pain and slight haemorrhage; percussion is painless, thermal stimuli cause mild pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic papillitis
c. Chronic simple pulpitis
d. Gingival polyp
e. Chronic granulating pulpitis

40. A 13-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic and edematic, PMA index (papillary marginal alveolary index) is 46%, Greene-Vermillion hygiene index is 2,5. Provisional diagnosis: exacerbation of chronic generalized catarrhal gingivitis. This patient should be recommended to use a toothpaste with the following active component:
a. Calcium glycerophosphate
b. Vitamins A, D, E
c. Microelement complex
*d. Chlorhexidine
e. Monofluorophosphate

41. A 10-year-old child undergoes sanitation of the oral cavity. The girl was found to have chalky spots on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical region of the 21 and 12 teeth. Enamel surface is dull, smooth. Pain reaction to the temperature stimuli is absent. What additional method of examination is expected to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Ultraviolet stomatoscopy
*b. Vital staining
c. Intraoral roentgenography
d. Orthopantomography
e. Electroodontodiagnostics

42. A 9-year-old child complains about pain caused by sweet and sour food in an upper tooth on the left. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within the enamel limits. What is the optimal material to fill the 26 tooth?
a. Silicate cement
b. Zinc phosphate cement
c. Glass ionomer
d. Silicophosphate cement
*e. Сomposite

43. A 2-month-old child is anxious, sleeps badly, refuses food, has subfebrile body temperature. Objectively: hyperaemic mucous membrane of the child’s tongue, lips, cheeks and palate has a caseous coating that can be easily removed with a tampon. Regional lymph nodes are slightly enlarged and painful on palpation. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Acute pseudomembranous candidous stomatitis
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Measles-associated stomatitis
d. Diphtheria
e. Chronic atrophic candidous stomatitis

44. Stomatological examination of a child revealed abnormal form of the central incisors: they are barrel-shaped, there is a semilunar groove on the cutting edge. It is known from the anamnesis that the child’s mother had syphilis during pregnancy. Besides the dental abnormality the child presents also with deafness and parenchymatous keratitis. This abnormality of tooth development is called:
a. Wedge-shaped defect
b. Pfluger teeth
*c. Hutchinsons teeth
d. Fluorosis (destructive form)
e. Erosion of hard tissues

45. A 13 year old boy complains about pain in the 46 tooth induced by cold stimuli. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth within light softened circumpulpar dentin. Probing of carious cavity floor is overall painful, cold stimulus causes acute pain that is quickly relieved after the stimulus elimination. Choose an optimal dental treatment paste:
a. Iodoform
b. Thymol
*c. Hydroxycalcium-containing
d. Resorcin-formaline
e. Zink-eugenol

46. An 8 year old child complains about pain in the 21 tooth that is getting worse during cutting. A month ago a part of tooth crown broke off as a result of a fall. The child didnt consult a dentist. Objectively: in the area of medial angle of the 21 tooth there is a crown defect that makes up ⅓ of the crowns height. Tooth cavity is open, probing and thermal stimulus cause no pain. Percussion is acutely painful. Gum around the 21 tooth is edematic and hyperemic. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
*b. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

47. A 10,5-year-old child complains about painful skin rash on his lips. Objectively: red border is edematic and hyperemic, covered with cracks and multiple bloody crusts. There are small vesicles with serous contents on the upper lip skin that merge together in certain areas. Maceration and madescence of skin is also present, especially in the mouth corners. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
*c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Actinic cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

48. A 7 year old girl was brought to a hospital for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. She was born and has been living in an area where fluorine concentration in water makes up 2,5 mg/l. Examination revealed symmetrically placed dark spots on the vestibular surfaces of the 11, 21, 31, 41 teeth as well as on the tubera of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth. It is known from the anamnesis that the teeth cut out already with affection. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Odontogenesis imperfecta
d. Amelogenesis imperfecta
*e. Tooth fluorosis

49. A 9-year-old child complains about dull pain that is getting worse while pressing the tooth. The tooth was treated for pulpitis one mounth ago. Objectively: the 36 tooth is filled. Percussion causes acute pain. Mucous membrane is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

50. A 12 year old girl complains about burning and painfulness of her tongue, especially during eating spicy food. Objectively: there are oval red spots on the tip and dorsum of tongue. Filiform papillae are not present in the affected area. The girl mentions that the spots become periodically larger and have migratory nature. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lingua plicata
b. Median rhomboid glossitis
*c. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
d. Glossotrichia
e. Raspberry tongue

51. A 2 year old child was brought to a dentist to consult about rash and painfulness during eating that appeared yesterday. Objectively: body temperature is 37,5°C, skin is clean, submaxillary lymph nodes are painful. Examination of oral cavity revealed on the mucous membrane of lips and tongue roundish painful erosions 1-3 mm in diameter covered with whitish deposit. The gum on both upper and lower jaws is hyperemic, edematic, bleed when touched. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
*c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Multiform exudative erythema
e. Recurrent herpetic stomatitis

52. A 5-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute serous pulpitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

53. An 11 year old girl complains about bleeding of a tooth on her lower jaw during eating and tooth brushing. This tooth hurt her before but she didnt consult a dentist. Examination of the 46 tooth revealed a deep cavity communicating with tooth cavity and filled with red growth tissue. Probing causes a slight haemorrhage and pain, percussion is painless, cold stimulus cause mild pain. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic papillitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*c. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
d. Gingival polyp
e. Chronic simple pulpitis

54. A 13-year-old boy complains about pain in the upper jaw caused by warm and hot stimuli, offensive breath when he sucks his tooth. Objectively: the 24 tooth is changed in color, there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Deep probing is painful. Percussion causes no pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

55. An 8,5-year-old child is apparently healthy. The child complains about pain in an upper tooth on the left caused by traumatic injury sustained three hours ago. Objectively: the crown part of the 21 tooth is destroyed by ½, the pulp is red and significantly exposed, probing causes acute pain and bleeding. Percussion of the 21 tooth is extremely painful. Choose the most efficient treatment method of the 21 tooth:
*a. Vital amputation
b. Devital amputation
c. Bioassay technique
d. Devital extirpation
e. Vital extirpation

56. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

57. A 13 year old child complains about acute spontaneous short-term attack-like pain in the area of the 36 tooth that is getting worse during eating. The pain appeared yesterday. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 36 tooth. Tooth cavity is closed, floor probing is painful in one point. Cold stimulus causes short-term pain. Make a diagnosis:
a. Accute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
*c. Acute localized pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis

58. A 13-year-old girl has been experiencing gingival hemorrhages and frontal teeth mobility throughout the last month. Objectively: gingival mucous membrane in the region of lower incisors and canines is edematic, hyperemic, it bleeds on touch. These teeth present with I degree mobility, parodontal pouches are 3 mm deep. Orthopantomogram shows reduction of bone tissue of interalveolar septa by ⅓ of their height. Frontal teeth of the lower jaw are overcrowded. Hygiene index is 4,2. What local treatment should be provided in the first place?
a. Physical therapy
b. Antibacterial therapy
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Orthodontic care
*e. Professional hygiene

59. A 16-year-old teenager complains about halitosis, general weakness, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. These symptoms turned up 2 days ago, the boy has a history of recent angina. Objectively: oral cavity hygiene is unsatisfactory, teeth are covered with soft white deposit. Gums are hyperaemic, gingival papillae are covered with greyish coating. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Ulcero-necrotic gingivitis
b. Hypertrohic gingivitis
c. Desquamative gingivitis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Acute catarrhal gingivitis

60. A 16-year-old teenager complains about halitosis, general weakness, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. These symptoms turned up two days ago, the boy had a history of recent angina. Objectively: oral hygiene is unsatisfactory, the teeth are coated with soft dental deposit. Gums are hyperemic, gingival papillae are covered with greyish deposit. Specify the causative agent of this disease:
a. Herpes viruses
b. Streptococci
*c. Fusobacteria, spirochetes
d. Staphylococci
e. Yeast fungi

61. A 12-year-old girl complains about swelling, reddening and itching of lips. She has a history of bronchial asthma. Such condition has been observed in the child for 3 years in winter period. Objectively: red border of lips and adjacent skin exhibit a well-defined erythema and edema, small cracks. There are signs of lip lichenification. There are also marks of scratches on the skin of lips, cheeks and forehead in form of abrasions and crusts. Mucous membrane exhibits no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Microbal cheilitis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis
e. Contact allergic cheilitis

62. Parents of a 5-year-old child noted irregular colour of the child’s back of tongue and consulted a pedodontist about this. Objectively: the oral cavity is sanitized, DF index = 4, dorsal and lateral surfaces of tongue have area of desquamating epithelium bordering upon areas of hypertrophy and increased cornification of filiform papillae. The child has a history of being allergic to some foodstuffs. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Acute catarrhal glossitis
*b. Desquamative glossitis
c. Candidous glossitis
d. Tuberculous glossitis
e. Herpetic tongue lesion

63. During the planned oral cavity sanitation an 11,5-year-old girl complained about periodic spontaneous chilalgia during food intake. Objectively: mucous membrane of lips is hyperemic, edematic and dry. During talking one can observe small drops of mucous secretion. Make the provisionaldiagnosis:
a. Cheilitis exfoliativa
*b. Cheilitis glandularis
c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Angular cheilitis
e. Contact allergic cheilitis

64. Examination of an 11 year old girl revealed: caries intensity (sum of carious, filled and extracted teeth) = 3, Green-Vermillions hygienic index - 1,6, papillary-marginally-alveolar index = 20%. The girl catches a cold once or twice a year. Average caries intensity index for this age group in this region is 4. How many times a year should the girl see a dentist?
a. 2
b. 1-2
*c. 1
d. 2-3
e. 3-4

65. A 12-year-old boy complains about permanent intense throbbing toothache that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric because of a collateral edema of soft tissues, submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. The 26 tooth has a deep cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity. Thermal test is positive, probing is painless, percussion causes acute pain, the tooth is mobile. X-ray picture of the 26 tooth shows no changes in the periodontium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

66. A 6-year-old girl was brought to the dentist for completing the treatment of the 75 tooth for chronic granulating periodontitis. The patient has no complaints. Objectively: occlusive dressing on the 75 tooth remains intact, percussion is painless, mucous membrane in the region of the 75 tooth exhibits no pathological changes, is painless on palpation. What material is the most appropriate for the root canal filling in this case?
a. Glass ionomer cement
b. Iodoform paste
c. Sealer with gutta-percha point
d. Calcium-containing paste
*e. Zinc oxide eugenol paste

67. A 4-year-old child presents with headache, nausea, pain when swallowing. Body temperature is 39°C. Examination of the oral cavity revealed extremely hyperaemic mucous membrane and tonsils. On the first day of disease the child’s tongue was furred with greyish coating, on the second day the tongue was found to be self-purified. On the third day the tongue was smooth, of crimson colour, with hyperaemic fungiform papillae. What is presumptive diagnosis?
a. Varicella
b. Diphtheria
c. Herpangina
*d. Scarlet fever
e. Measles

68. A 14-year-old girl complains about an aesthetic defect in form of white spots on her teeth. Fluorine concentration in the drinking water in the area of her residence is 2 mg/l. Objectively: vestibular surfaces of all teeth are covered with ill-defined white spots. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Amelogenesis imperfecta
*b. Fluorosis
c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Local hypoplasia
e. Multiple caries

