1. A 4-year-old girl presents with body temperature rise, aggravation of general condition. The symptoms has been observed for 3 days. Objectively: general condition is grave, body temperature is 38,6°C, the girl is anxious and pale. She presents also with halitosis, hyperaemia and edema of gingival mucous membrane in the region of the 83, 84, 85 teeth on both sides from the alveolar process. The mentioned teeth are mobile, their percussion causes acute pain; the 84 tooth is filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis beginning from the 84 tooth
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis beginning from the 84 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radiculodental mandibular cyst beginning from the 84 tooth
e. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland

2. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with granulating periodontitis of the 55 tooth. The crown is completely destroyed. X-ray picture shows separated tooth roots. Choose an optimal tool for operative intervention:
a. Crown S-shaped forceps
*b. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Root beak-shaped forceps
d. Root straight forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

3. A 3-year-old girl complains about pain and tumescence in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5-37,9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a tumescence in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II degree of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis
b. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
d. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
e. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis

4. A 6-year-old boy hit his forehead one day ago. A few hours later a swelling appeared in the right superciliary region. Objectively: there is a considerable edema of forehead tissues spreading to eyelids of the right eye, the skin over the swelling is cyanotic, the swelling is of soft consistency. Fluctuation is also present. General condition of the boy is normal. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Hematoma of the right superciliary region
b. Fracture of frontal bone
c. Inflammatory infiltration of tissues of the right superciliary region
d. Hematic abscess of the right superciliary region
e. Postraumatic edema of tissues of the right superciliary region

5. Parents of a 4-year-old child complain about speech defect, namely lallation. Examination shows limited tongue movements, when the tongue is moved forward it turns down, the lower edge of tongue frenulum is positioned in front of the submandibular salivary ducts. The frenulum is thin and transparent. Specify the terms of operative intervention:
*a. After making the diagnosis
b. After eruption of permanent incisors
c. After eruption of permanent molars
d. After formation of permanent occlusion
e. After complete development of maxillofacial bones

6. An 8 year old boy was referred to the oral surgery for extraction of his 64 tooth because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. Tooth crown is intact. What instrument should be applied?
a. Straight forceps
b. Beak-shaped forceps with non-converging beaks
*c. S-shaped forceps without thorns
d. Broad-beaked forceps
e. S-shaped forceps with thorns

7. A 5 year old child was diagnosed with congenital complete nonclosure of soft and hard palate. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for uranostaphyloplasty?
a. Intravenous narcosis
b. Mask narcosis
*c. Nasotracheal narcosis
d. Orotracheal narcosis
e. Endotracheal narcosis through tracheostome

8. A 4-year-old child got a face trauma 2 hours ago. A stomatologist on duty made a diagnosis: intrusive luxation of the 61 tooth. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Reposition of the 61 tooth
b. Observation
*c. Extraction of the 61 tooth
d. Splinting of the 61 tooth
e. Removal of pulp of the 61 tooth

9. A 2 year old girl has body temperature 38,5°C, a swelling below her jaw on the right. On the 5th day of illness there apeared rhinitis, cough, a small movable globule under her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: general condition of the child is moderately severe. The face is asymmetric due to the swelling in the right submaxillary area. The skin is hyperemic, glossy, there is a diffuse infiltrate in the right submaxillary area spreading to the upper neck parts on the right, it is dense and painful; the skin doesnt make folds. Teeth are healthy. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute sialoadenitis of the right submandibular salivary gland
b. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible on the right
c. Acute nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis on the right
d. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible on the right
*e. Adenophlegmon of the right submaxillary area

10. A 12 year old boy complains about pain and swelling in the parotidomasticatory area on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. He has been suffering from this for 5 years. Objectively: palpation reveals a dense painful nonmobile formation 3,5х5 large in the parotidomasticatory area on the left. Skin colour is unchanged. Orifice of the left salivary gland duct excretes transparent secretion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mixed tumour of parotid gland
b. Acute condition of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
c. Buccal abscess
*d. Herzenbergs pseudoparotitis
e. Epidemic parotitis

11. A 5-year-old child sustained a dental injury. Objectively: the crowns of the 51, 61 teeth are shorter than neighbouring teeth by ½. Mucous membrane is edematic and hyperemic in theregion of the 51, 61 teeth. X-ray picture shows that there is no periodontal fissure in the apical parts of roots of the 51, 61 teeth, apexes of the 51, 61 teeth are imbedded into the spongy substance of body of maxilla. What treatment tactics would be the most efficient?
a. Reposition of the 51, 61 teeth
b. Regular medical check-up
*c. Extraction of the 51, 61 teeth
d. Ligature splinting of the 51, 61 teeth
e. Reimplantation

12. An 8-year-old child presents with an edema of the submandibular region, the mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm, further opening is difficult, body temperature is 37,6°C, mucogingival fold is vestibularly flattened, hyperaemic and swollen. The 84 and 85 teeth have fillings, their percussion is painless. The 84 tooth exhibits I degree mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenic periostitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
d. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

13. Parents of a 7-year-old boy complain about missing of the 11 tooth. Objectively: there is enlargement of alveolar process in projection of the 11, 12 teeth. X-ray picture shows multiple shades of different size. They have dentate shape and look like hard tooth tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Odontoma of maxilla
b. Cementoma of maxilla
c. Odontogenic fibroma of maxilla
d. Adamantinoma of maxilla
e. Follicular cyst of maxilla starting from the 11 tooth

14. After preventive examination a 10-year-old child was diagnosed with osteoporosis circumscripta of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. The patient was administered electrophoresis with remineralizing solutions. What preparations and in what order are to be applied in this case?
*a. Calcium and posphorus preparations with the following application of fluorine praparation
b. Calcium preparations only
c. Fluorine preparations only
d. Phosphorus preparations only
e. Fluorine preparations with the following application of calcium and phosphorus preparations

15. A child was brought to the traumatology centre of oral surgery department with complaints about changed position of the 21 tooth that was inclined towards palate. The day before the child was hit in the face. Make a diagnosis:
a. Complete dislocation of the 21 tooth
b. Contusion of the 21 tooth
c. Break-off of the crown part of the 21 tooth
*d. Subluxation of the 21 tooth
e. Fracture of crown part of the 21 tooth

16. Parents of a 1,5-year-old child complain about the childs tongue enlargement and ingestion disorder. The child has been suffering from this since birthday. Objectively: general condition has no peculiarities. The tongue is enlarged (macroglossia). Its mucous membrane exhibits granular vesicular outgrowths. The tongue is dense, painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemangioma of tongue
b. Cyst of tongue
c. Cancer of tongue
*d. Lymphangioma of tongue
e. Fibroma of tongue

17. A 14-year-old child has orthodontic indication for extraction of the 14 tooth. What forceps should be applied for extraction of the 14 tooth?
*a. S-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Curved on flat forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps
e. Straight forceps

18. A 14-year-old child was undergoing extraction of the 16 tooth on account of chronic periodontitis. During the tooth extraction it came to perforation of maxillary sinus along with penetration of the distal buccal root into the maxillary sinus. What is the further dentists tactics?
*a. The patient should be directed to the hospital for a surgical procedure
b. The dentist should form a clottage without informing the patient
c. The dentist should perform maxillary sinusotomy in the outpatient setting
d. The dentist should close the perforation with mucoperiosteal graft
e. The dentist himself should try to extract the root

19. A 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with dental cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed some months ago and wasnt treated. What treatment method is efficient in this case?
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Biological method
e. Vital amputation

20. A boy is 1 month old. At the medial edge of the inferior eyelid on the right there is a wound with purulent discharge. The boy fell ill suddenly, body temperature rose up to 40°C. The general condition is grave. On the second day of disease there appeared an infiltration at the internal edge of eye socket and right cheek. The skin above it is hyperemic, fluctuation cannot be determined. Palpebral fissure is narrowed. The right nasal meatus discharges pus. There is an infiltration on the vestibular surface of alveolar process and on the right palate. Mucous membrane above it is hyperemic along the mucogingival fold, fluctuation can be determined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of the right eye socket
b. Acute dacryocystitis
*c. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
d. Acute right-sided highmoritis
e. Acute serous periostitis

21. During the removal of dermoid cyst of the nose bridge a 14-year-old boy complained about giddiness, sickness, weakness. Objectively: the skin is pale, covered with cold sweat. Tachypnoe is present. The pulse is weak, the arterial pressure is low (80/60 mm Hg), hands feel cold. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic shock
b. Collapse
c. Toxic shock
*d. Syncope
e. Anaphylactic shock

22. A 9 year old child complains about pain and swelling of soft tissues beneath his mandible on the right. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory; there is face asymmetry due to the inflammatory infiltration and collateral tissue edema in the right submandibular area. Crown of the 85 tooth is decayed, mucous membrane of gums in the area of the 84, 85, 46 teeth is hyperemic, edematic; mucogingival fold is flattened. What treatment should be administered?
a. Extraction of the 85 tooth and incision along the mucogingival fold
b. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth
*c. Extraction of the 85 tooth
d. Periosteotomy
e. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth and periosteotomy

23. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the childs submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. Objectively: the childs face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
*c. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
d. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Submandibular adenophlegmon

24. An oral surgeon attended a 3 day old child staying in the newborn pathology department. Objectively: bilateral hypogenesis of zygomatic bones and orbits, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures, nonclosure of inferior eyelids, hypogenesis of mandible (bird face), deformity of auricles with a preauricular fistula on the right. What congenital disease does the child have?
*a. Mandibulofacial dysostosis
b. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia
c. Oculodentodigital syndrome
d. Oculomandibulofacial syndrome
e. Oculocerebrorenal syndrome

25. During local anesthetization (with 2 ml of 10% solution of lidocaine) a 9 year old girl cried out, lost consciousness, there appeared generalized convulsions. Objectively: the childs skin is pale and cyanotic. It is impossible to feel the pulse because of convulsions. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Bronchial obstruction
b. Febrile convulsions
c. Quinckes edema
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Lidocaine intoxication

26. A childs mother had acute purulent mastitis. Now the 2-month-old child experiences an edema of his left infraorbital and malar regions, dermahemia of the left face side, temperature rise up to 39-40°C, purulent discharges from the nose. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Phlegmon of infraorbital region
d. Acute maxillary sinusitis
*e. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis

27. According to the parents of a 7-year-old child, the child complains about weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, toothache in the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: condition is grave, the child is pale and adynamic, the face is asymmetric because of infiltration of the upper jaw on the left. The 64 tooth has a carious cavity. Percussion is painful, I degree of teeth mobility is also present. There are purulent discharges from the subgingival edge of the 64 tooth. Mucogingival fold of the 63, 64, 65 teeth is smoothed. Vestibular and palatine mucous membrane is edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
*b. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis starting from the 64 tooth
c. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis starting from the 64 tooth
d. Acute serous maxillary periostitis
e. Suppurative radicular cyst of maxilla

28. A 3-month-old child has an inborn tissue defect in the oral cavity. Objectively: the lip is intact, the oral cavity exhibits a cleft defect of soft palate and median part of hard palate. The child was diagnosed with complete schistasis of soft palate and partial schistasis of hard palate. Specify the dispensary group according to A.A.Kolesov:
a. Second
b. Fourth
c. Fifth
*d. First
e. Third

29. A 5-year-old child was bitten by a dog 2 days ago. The child is diagnosed with a bite wound of cheek. The parent’s didn’t appeal for medical aid in proper time. The wound exhibits pyoinflammatory process. What kind of surgical d-bridement should be performed?
*a. Secondary
b. Initial delayed
c. Surgical procedure is not required
d. Initial late
e. Initial early

30. A 7-year-old child sustained a sport injury. He complains about pain in the region of mandible, inability to join his teeth. Pressing against the chin causes intensification of pain in the region of mandible on the right. The child is diagnosed with a fracture of mandible body without fragment displacement. What therapeutic tactics should be chosen in order to prevent the displacement of bone fragments in the transitional dentition?
a. Fixation by means of Tigerstedt splints
b. Osteosynthesis
c. Administration of anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Application of sling bandage
*e. Fragment immobilization by means of an intraoral splint

31. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boy’s mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
c. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
d. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation
e. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation

32. A 4-year-old girl was bitten by a dog in her upper lip. Which of the following solutions should be primarily used for the wound d-bridement?
a. 3% soda solution
*b. 10% solution of laundry soap
c. 1% solution of hydrogen oxide
d. 0,002% solution of chlorhexidine
e. 1: 5000 solution of potassium permanganate

33. A 3 year old child was burnt with boiling water. Face skin is hyperemic and edematic, there are blisters of different sizes filled with transparent liquid. Define a degree of face skin burn:
a. III degree - A
b. I degree
*c. II degree
d. III degree - B
e. IV degree

34. A 13 year old patient got a trauma in the area of median face zone. She complains about pain, swelling of soft tissues in the area of her upper jaw, pain during mouth closing. Examination revealed mobility of nose bones, significant swelling of soft tissues in the left zygomatic area, haemorrage in the eye sclera, "step" sign along the inferior edge of both orbits and zygomaticomaxillary sutures, nasal haemorrhage, open bite, lengthening of median face part. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
b. Fracture of nose bones
c. Fracture of skull base
*d. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
e. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw

35. A 15-year-old child presents with puffiness in the region of the mandible branch; enlarged, dense and painless lymph nodes adhering to the surrounding tissues. X-ray picture of mandible branch shows a well-defined bone resorption area containing small sequestra. After Mantoux test a 12 mm papule was noted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ewings sarcoma
*b. Tuberculosis of mandible branch
c. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible branch
d. Mandibular actinomycosis
e. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis

36. A 12-year-old girl complains about intense pain in the region of the 46 tooth socket that was extracted 3 days ago. The pain is irradiating along the branches of trigeminus. Objectively: lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation, tissues around the tooth socket are edematic and hyperaemic. The socket walls are covered with grey-and-green deposition with putrid smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteomyelitis
*b. Alveolitis
c. Ostitis
d. Pericoronaritis
e. Periostitis

