1. A 26-year-old patient needs an inlay for a class V cavity of the 35 tooth. During the cavity preparation a prosthodontist has accidentally opened the pulp. What might be the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Absence of an additional cavity
*b. Forming a flat floor
c. Forming convergent walls
d. Forming divergent walls
e. Forming a bevel

2. A 29 year old patient complains that the crown of his 26 tooth broke off. Objectively: tooth decay index is 0,9, root tissues are hard, roentgenography revealed that the canal was filled to the top, no chronic inflammations of periodontium were revealed. What construction should be used for prosthetics of the 26 tooth?
a. Pin tooth with a ring
b. Pin tooth with protective bar
c. Simplified pin tooth
*d. Pin stump inlay and a crown
e. Pin tooth with an inlay

3. A 32-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhages during eating and tooth brushing. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 weeks ago the patient got a cast metal crown. Objectively: the 27 tooth has a cast metal crown going beyond the gingival edge by 1-1,5 mm, touching causes haemorrhage. Percussion is slightly painful. What tactics is the most appropriate in this case?
a. To give the patient time to get used to the prosthesis
b. To remove the crown and administer treatment for marginal periodontitis
c. To administer gargling with Rotocan
d. To open the crown through the masticatory surface
*e. To remove the crown and fabricate a splint

4. A 38 year old patient was admitted to the orthopaedic department after a therapeutic treatment on account of periodontitis. His anamnesis contains data about frequent recurrences of this disease, acute attacks are accompanied by periodontal abscesses. Objectively: the 42, 41,31, 32 teeth manifest mobility of I-II degree, the 43 and 33 are stable, tooth cervices are dehisced by ?, hyperesthesia of hard tooth tissues is not observed. What rational construction of permanent splint should be recommended?
a. Halfcrown splint
b. Crown-shell splint
c. Girder Kurliandkys splint
*d. Fullcast circle removable splint
e. Mamlocks splint

5. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth. What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
*a. Acker clasp
b. Jackson clasp
c. Bent wire clasp
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Roach clasp

6. A 55-year-old woman complains about liquid pouring through her nose during eating of fluid food. Objectively: there is a perforating defect of alveolar process 3x2,8 cm deep in the lateral part of the upper jaw at level with the extracted 16 tooth. The patient refused operative intervention. What construction should be offered?
*a. Minor saddle prosthesis with clasp fixation
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
c. Celluloid mouth protector
d. Fixed dental bridge
e. Clasp dental prosthesis with obturating element made of elastic plastic

7. A 25-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the 23 tooth is pulpless. The filling restores vestibular-approximal surface of the tooth crown by ⅓, it is stable, closely fits within cavity walls, its colour doesn’t match the colour of the tooth. The tooth itself has changed its colour, its percussion is painless. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for this patient?
a. Inlay
*b. Metal-ceramic crown
c. Metal swaged crown
d. Elastic crown
e. Portion crown

8. A 24-year-old female patient complains about hard tissues defect of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is destroyed by ⅓ along the cutting edge, it is changed in color. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled to the top. It was decided to fabricate a plastic crown. Where should the crown edge be situated against the marginal gingiva?
a. 0,5 mm below the gingiva
b. 1,0 mm below the gingiva
c. 0,5 mm away of gingiva
d. 1,0 mm away of gingiva
*e. At a level with gingiva

9. A 52 year old patient complains of gum inflammation, tooth mobility. Objectively: dentitions are intact, all teeth have the 1-2 degree of mobility. What type of teeth stabilization should be applied in this case?
a. Frontal
b. Sagittal
c. Frontosagittal
*d. Arch-directed stabilization
e. Parasagittal

10. A 70-year-old male patient ordered complete removable dentures for both jaws. In the clinical stage he came for "identification of central relationship". For verification of interalveolar height the patient underwent speaking test. The patient was asked to pronounce the sounds "O", "E", "M". What distance should be between the occlusal rims for correct identification of interalveolar height?
a. 7-8 mm
*b. 5-6 mm
c. 3-4 mm
d. 9-10 mm
e. 1-2 mm

11. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
a. Combined method of compression molding
b. In water under pressure
c. Direct method of compression molding
d. Inverse method of compression molding
*e. Method of transfer molding

12. A 47-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dental cervix exposure on both jaws. Objectively: the dentitions are intact, the dental cervixes are exposed. Untimely teeth contacts are present. It is planned to perform selective grinding. What controlling method should be chosen?
a. Chewing test
b. Masticatiography
*c. Occlusiography
d. Roentgenography
e. Gnathodynamometry

13. A 70-year-old male patient complains about total teeth missing on both jaws. It is planned to fabricate a complete removable lower jaw prosthesis. Objectively: alveolar process of the lower jaw is atrophied only in the frontal aspect. Identify the type of lower jaw atrophy according to Kellers classification:
a. І
b. ІІ
*c. ІV
d. ІІІ
e. -

14. A 18-year-old female patient ordered a metal-ceramic crown for the 24 tooth. It is necessary to choose an optimal impression material for combined impression of the upper jaw. What material should be used for a preliminary impression?
a. Orthocar
b. Dentafol
*c. Stens
d. Wax
e. Protacryl

15. A 54 year old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by ⅓ of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
a. Metal stamped
b. Combined Belkins
*c. Fullcast
d. Plastic
e. Metal-ceramic

16. A 38-year-old female patient complains about pain in projection of the external acoustic meatus, clicking during mouth opening, ear stuffiness. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth is opened in staright path. There is Kennedy I type dentition defect, the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. What anatomical formation carries the maximum load?
*a. Articular disk (meniscus)
b. Distal clivus of medial articular tubercle
c. Joint capsule
d. Glenoid fossa floor of temporal bone
e. Articular head

17. Objective examination of a patient revealed hard tissue defect of the 24 tooth. Tooth decay index is 0,8. The defect is partly restored by a filling that doesnt meet the requirements. The tooth has pink colouring. X-ray picture shows no pathological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
a. Halfcrown
b. Equator crown
c. Artificial crown
d. Inlay
*e. Pin construction

18. Physical examination of a patient revealed a hard tissues defect of the 24 tooth. Index of occlusal surface destruction was 0,8. The defect was restored by filling that doesnt meet the requirements. The tooth is of rose colouring. X-ray picture shows no patological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
a. Portion crown
b. Equator crown
c. Artificial crown
d. Inlay
*e. Pivot crown

19. A 38 year old patient got a blow that resulted in upper jaw fracture. Objectively: flattening and impression of face, mobility and dangling of broken jaw with cartilage of nose and eyeballs, nasal haemorrhage, tissue edema, "glasses" symptom; palpation reveals crepitation, subcutaneous emphysema, liquorrhea, loss of sensitivity in the area of half the upper jaw, nose wing and frontal teeth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
b. Upper jaw cancer on the right
c. Upper jaw ostemia
d. Upper jaw odontoma
*e. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw

20. A 58-year-old male patient has considerable microstomia as a result of a face trauma and burn. The patient has indication for fabrication of a partial removable prosthesis. What construction of prosthesis should be used in this case?
*a. Collapsible prosthesis
b. Clasp dental prosthesis with attachments
c. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
d. Pivot-point removable prosthesis
e. Clasp dental prosthesis

21. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect caused by partial teeth missing. Objectively: the 15, 14, 24, 25 teeth are missing, the central group of upper jaw teeth is in protrusion and presents with diasthemas. What orthodontic appliance should be used to prepare the oral cavity for prosthetics?
*a. Palatine plate with vestibular bow
b. Palatine plate with oblique plane and vestibular bow
c. Expansion plate for the upper jaw with orthodontic lock
d. Brueckls appliance
e. Schwarz guard

22. A 35-year-old patient has teeth mobility of І degree, the teeth have apparent dental cusps. The dentist recommends to do occlusive teeth grinding. What method is the most objective for determining the grinding topography?
*a. Occlusiography
b. Roentgenography
c. Rubinovs masticatory test
d. Gnathodynamometry
e. Masticatiography

23. It is planned to organize a dental room with three universal dental sets. The total area of the room must be:
a. No less than 18 square metres
*b. No less than 28 square metres
c. No less than 30 square metres
d. No less than 21 square metres
e. No less than 42 square metres

24. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect 1 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
b. Clasp denture
*c. Oxmans bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
e. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point

25. A 60-year-old male patient has an extensive defect of nose caused by an injury. The patient temporarily refused operative intervention, it was suggested to fabricate an external nasal prosthesis fixed by eyeglass frame. What impression material should be used?
a. Gypseous impression
*b. Gypseous impression of the whole face
c. Impression of the defect with elastic material
d. Impression of the whole face with thermoplastic material
e. Impression of the defect with thermoplastic mass

26. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
a. Fixed crown splint
b. Equator crown splint
c. Intradental splint
*d. Inlay splint
e. Crown cap splint

27. A 28-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 13 tooth is decayed by ⅔ of its height, the stump sticks out above the gum line by 2 mm. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled up to the top. What construction should be fabricated for the patient?
a. Inlay
b. Crown
*c. Pivot tooth
d. Equator crown
e. The crown should be restored with photopolymer

28. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
a. On the saddle
b. On the base
c. On the clasps
*d. On the arch
e. On the artificial teeth

29. A 40-year-old patient complains about frequent falling out of a filling. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious (Black’s class II) cavity. It is planned to restore the anatomic form of the tooth by means of a metal inlay. What is the peculiarity of the cavity preparation for the inlay in this case?
a. Forming an additional shoulder
b. Preparation for parapulpar posts
c. Cavity deepening
*d. Forming a bevel
e. Cavity floor widening

30. A 43-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, as well as significant cervixes exposure. Objectively: gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale with cyanotic tint. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth present with I-II degree mobility. The 42, 41, 31, 31 teeth are overcrowded. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have cervix exposure by ? and the 43, 33 teeth have cervix exposure by ?. What orthopaedic construction should be used in this situation?
a. Cast bar Kurliandsky splint
b. Portion crown splint
c. -
*d. One-piece guard
e. Cap splint

31. A 45 year old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
*a. Lesser saddle denture with clasps fixation
b. Common partial removable denture
c. Protective palatal bars
d. Common dental bridge
e. Clasp denture with obturating part

32. 3 months after the immediate prosthetics a patient complained about the prosthesis balancing. Objectively: there is a gap between the prosthesis edge and vestibular surface of alveolar process. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Correction of prosthesis edges
b. Dentition buildup with quick-setting plastic
c. Correction of dentitions
*d. Fabrication of a new prosthesis
e. Prosthesis relocation with quick-setting plastic

33. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed full-cast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. Visually by means of models in the articulator
b. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
c. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
*d. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials
e. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper

34. An 18-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 21 tooth is pulpless, of dark-grey colour. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. It is planned to crown the tooth with a plastic crown. Choose the plastic mass for its fabrication:
a. Ethacryl
b. Ftorax
c. Bakril
*d. Sinma
e. Acrel

35. A 43 year old man applied to the dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 37th tooth is decayed by ⅔, buccal and lingual walls are thin. Occlusion picture shows strong contact with antagonists. How thick should be the layer of tooth surface that must be ground off during preparation for metallic stamped crown?
a. 0,6-0,7 mm
b. 0,7-0,8 mm
c. 0,1-0,2 mm
d. 0,5-0,6 mm
*e. 0,28-0,3 mm

36. A 68 year old patient has a defect in the lower third of his nose as a result of malignant tumour removal. Objectively: dorsum of nose up to the middle third and external nostril outlines are intact. Skin at the base of nose is thinned and erosive. The patient strongly objects to any plastic operation. What method of fixation of nose ectoprosthesis is the most acceptable?
a. By means of lace
b. Anatomic retention
c. Head cap
*d. On the glasses frame
e. Transparent adhesive tape

37. A 12 year old girl complained about a crown defect in the frontal part of her upper jaw. Anamnesis data: the tooth was filled more than once but the fillings fell out. Objectively: the 12 tooth is filled. There is IV class defect according to Blacks classification. Devitalization has never been performed, percussion of the 12 tooth is painless. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Ceramic crown
b. Metal crown
c. Metal-ceramic crown
d. Halfcrown
*e. Circumpulpar pin inlay

38. A 48-year-old male patient has been wearing partial removable dentures for 3 months. According to the patient, results of physical examination and additional methods of testing, the patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis provoked by dyes of the acrylic resin of his prosthesis. Allergic effects of dyes can be eliminated in the following way:
a. Fabrication of bilayer bases
b. Fabrication of cast metal prosthetic bases
c. Fabrication of swaged metal bases
*d. Ffabrication of a denture out of colorless plastic
e. Moulding of plastic by method of casting

39. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
a. Dentafol
*b. Gelin
c. Stomalgin
d. Stomatoplast
e. Orthocor

40. A 23 year old woman came to a dental clinic for restoration of the 11th tooths crown. Objectively: root of the 11th tooth is at a level with gingival edge, its walls are thick enough. A dentist made and adjusted a stump inlay upon which a metal-plastic crown will be fixed. What plastic will be used for veneering?
a. Noracryl
b. Protacryl
c. Acryloxide
d. Carbodent
*e. Sinma-M

41. A patient ordered soldered stainless-steel bridge prostheses. Their fabrication involves calibration of crown sleeves. Which device is used for this purpose?
a. Copes
b. Bromshtrom
c. Parkers
d. Larins
*e. Samson

42. A 35-year-old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37th tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the peculiarity of tooth preparation?
a. Forming additional cavity
*b. Forming a bevel
c. Widening of cavity floor
d. Forming an additional shoulder
e. Forming flat floor

43. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edge. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Stump fixing
*b. Impression taking
c. Casting
d. Wax construction making
e. Stump fitting

44. A 23 year old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment in a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each side. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
a. 3 cm
b. 2 cm
*c. 1 cm
d. 3,5 cm
e. 4 cm

45. A 56-year-old patient complains about missing lateral teeth on both sides of mandible. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Kennedy I denttion defect
b. Kennedy II denttion defect
c. Betelman II denttion defect
d. Kennedy III denttion defect
e. Kennedy IV denttion defect

46. A 48-year-old female patient complains about some discomfort induced by wearing an upper jaw clasp denture with elastic attachments. The patient notes the denture mobility during mastication and articulation. The patient asks to fabricate a new denture with consideration of the indicated defects. Clinical crowns of abutment teeth are low. What fixation should be the most efficient in this case?
*a. Telescopic
b. Locking
c. Clasp
d. Saddle-type
e. Arch-bar

47. A 75-year-old patient ordered a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. While adjusting the individual tray by Herbsts method the orthodontist revealed that the tray could be thrown off when the patient rounded his lips. What part of the tray requires correction?
*a. Vestibular part between the canines
b. In the region of buccal cords
c. Behind the maxillary tuber
d. Along the whole vestibular edge
e. Distal part along the A line

48. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaws. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic. What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity
b. Locate and fix central occlusion
*c. Adjust individual trays
d. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
e. Fabricate occlusal rims

49. A 57 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about dull pain in the area of his right temporomandibular joint that is getting worse during eating. The disease developed gradually, it began with constrained mandibular motion in the morning that sometimes grew more intensive, sometimes less. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the mouth can be opened up to 3 cm. Opening of mouth is accompanied by articular noise and clicking (step-like dislocation of mandible). Skin above the joint is intact. Muscle tone is palpatory unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
b. Occlusive articulation syndrome
c. Subluxation of mandible
*d. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint
e. Neuromuscular syndrome

50. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Objectively: the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are destroyed by caries by ⅔ of their height. The occlusion is orthognathic. X-ray picture shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no patological changes in periapical tissues. What construction should be the most efficient in this situation?
a. Artificial metal swaged crowns
b. Fabrication of plastic inlays
c. Richmonds pivot crowns
*d. Stump inlays and metal-ceramic crowns
e. Restoration of tooth crowns with composite materials

51. The patient is 75 years old. The inspection of construction of complete removable dentures revealed that only lateral artificial teeth were in contact, there was a gap between frontal teeth. In the lateral part on one side cusp-to-cusp contact was present, on the other side there was a horizontal gap; the central line was deviated. What mistake was made?
a. The patient was thought to have anterior occlusion
b. Occlusal rims were irregularly softened
*c. The patient was thought to have lateral occlusion
d. Interalveolar height was increased
e. Wax moulds were deformed while determining central occlusion

52. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II degree. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
a. Sagittal
b. Transversal
c. Frontal
d. Frontal-lateral
*e. Circle

53. A 25-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible without evident displacement of fragments. All the teeth are intact. What kind of wire splint is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Splint with hooks
b. Smooth splint with a spreading curve
*c. Smooth splint
d. Splint with guide plane
e. Pomerantseva-Urbanskayas splint

54. A 65-year-old patient complains about unsatisfactory fixation of complete removable lamellar denture of his upper jaw. The denture was fabricated 6 years ago. Objectively: balancing and poor fixation of complete removable denture is present. What is the reason of such condition?
*a. Atrophy of osseous base of the prosthetic bed tissues
b. Bad hygiene of removable denture
c. Loss of certain antagonists
d. Discoloration of basic plastic
e. Wear of artificial teeth

55. A female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the patients face is shortened, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of lower and upper jaw teeth is missing, the crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn off by ⅔ of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented. The alveolar process isnt hypertrophied. Interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological tooth wear in this patient:
a. Horizontal, compensated, II grade severity
b. Vertical, compensated, III grade severity
c. Combined, noncompensated, III grade severity
*d. Horizontal, noncompensated, III grade severity
e. Vertical, noncompensated, III grade severity

56. A 30-year-old saxophonist complains about wearing of the occlusal surface of his frontal teeth along with separation between the upper and lower teeth (apertognathia). Height of the lower third of the patient’s face remains unchanged. What method should be applied for elimination of this deformity?
*a. Protetic
b. Shortening of teeth
c. Instrumental-and-surgical
d. Orthodontic
e. Increase of the interalveolar height

57. A 68 year old patient underwent full jaw removal. Before the operation an impression of the patients upper and lower jaws was taken and a substitutive denture was made. What are the means of the denture fixation in the oral cavity?
a. Anchors
b. Magnets
c. Attachments
*d. Spiral Fosher springs
e. Clasps

58. A 69-year-old patient underwent an operation for complete removal of his lower jaw. They took impressions of both jaws and fabricated a lower jaw replacement prosthesis before operation. What elements will provide fixation of this prosthesis in the oral cavity?
a. Attachments
*b. Foshars spiral springs
c. Clasps
d. Wire loops
e. Magnets

59. A 47-year-old patient complains about discolouration of the 11, 12 teeth. Objectively: the 12, 12 are changed in colour, canals are filled to the top. It was decided to make metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of approximal surfaces of abutment teeth?
a. 30-35 degrees
*b. 5-8 degrees
c. 10-15 degrees
d. 15-20 degrees
e. 20-25 degrees

60. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Dentures with extended borders
b. Dentures with shortened borders
c. Implant-supported dentures
*d. Dentures with elastic lining
e. Dentures with metal bases

61. A 48-year-old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervixes of the 42, 41, 31, 32 are exposed by ⅔, there is pathological III degree mobility. It is indicated to extract the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be used for the direct prosthetics?
a. Adhesive
b. Clasp denture
*c. Removable partial lamellar denture
d. Metal-ceramic bridge-like denture
e. Swaged-and-soldered bridge-like denture

62. A month after cementing the metal-ceramic crown on the 23 tooth a patient complained of its decementing. Examination revealed that the tooth stump was of sufficient height, stump walls were convergent to the vertical tooth axis at an angle of approximately 30 degrees. What angle of convergence had to be formed?
a. 22-25 degrees
b. 10-12 degrees
c. 12-15 degrees
d. 15-18 degrees
*e. Up to 8 degrees

63. A 57 year old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by ⅔ in the area of the 33, and by ½ of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
*a. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress
b. Devitalization of supporting teeth
c. Garland modelling in the precervical area
d. Massive grinding off of hard tissues
e. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges

64. During lateral movements of mandible the frontal teeth are displaced sidewards. Deviation of incisor point from the central position is measured by an angle of 100-110o. What is characterized by such a value of incisor point deviation?
a. Bennetts angle
*b. Lateral incisor path
c. Sagittal incisor path
d. Lateral joint path
e. Sagittal joint path

65. A 52-year-old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: in the lateral parts of mandible teeth are worn down to the gums, in the frontal parts teeth are worn by ⅓. Treatment includes two stages. What prosthetic construction should be applied for bite disjoining and myotatic reflex change?
*a. Periodontal splint for the lateral parts
b. Plastic splint for the frontal part
c. Elastic plastic splint
d. Crown splint for the lateral parts
e. Plastic splint for the whole dentition

66. A 47 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11th tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
*a. Partial removable lamellar denture
b. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth
c. Implant
d. Clasp denture
e. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth

67. A 53 year old patient has to undergo resection of the left half of mandible together with its ramus. It is indicated to make an immediate Oxmans denture. What denture element keeps the remaining mandible fragment from deviation towards the defect?
a. Artificial teeth
*b. Removable or non-removable inclined plane
c. Multiclasp system
d. The whole fixing part
e. Resection part

68. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 13 and 24 teeth remain as well as all the teeth on the lower jaw. The lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, crowns of the 13, 24 teeth are worn off by ⅔. What constructional element will provide optimal fixation of the partial removable prosthesis on the upper jaw?
a. Compound clasps
b. Bars
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
*d. Telescopic crowns
e. Retaining clasps

69. A 70 year old patient is awaiting complete removable dentures for both upper and lower jaws. Teeth placement will be made by Vasilyevs method. What teeth in the upper denture must not touch glass?
a. Second premolars and first molars
*b. Lateral incisors and second molars
c. First and second premolars
d. Central incisors and first molars
e. Canines and first molars

70. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
a. Subperiosteal
b. Conical
c. Endodontic-endoosseous
d. Plate-form
*e. Threaded

71. A 25-year-old male patient got bilateral fracture of the lower jaw. A fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Kurlyandskys appliance with levers
b. One-jaw bite-guard splint
*c. Posts appliance
d. Webers appliance
e. Shurs appliance

72. A 36 year old patient applied to a dentist 1,5 month after a mandibular trauma with complaints about difficult food mastication, esthetic face defect. Objectively: the face is proportional, asymmetric as a result of oral displacement of a lateral fragment of the left lower jaw. When the jaws are closed the 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are not in contact with their antagonists. The patient strongly objects to surgical operation. What orthopaedic treatment should be administered?
a. Mechanotherapy
b. Crowns with occlusal applications
c. Levelling of occlusal surface
*d. A denture with double dentition
e. Interjaw traction

73. A 43 year old patient complains of tooth mobility and considerable dehiscence of dental cervices of the lower jaw in its frontal part. Objectively: gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale, slightly cyanotic, without haemorrhage. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have mobility of the I-II degree. There is also overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced by ½ of root length, of the 43, 33 - by ¼. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Cap splint
b. Kurlandskys girder splint
*c. Fullcast removable kappa
d. Halfcrown splint
e. Semicircle splint

74. A 48 year old patient complained about posttraumatic pain in the area of his chin. Examination revealed median fracture of lower jaw with I class dentition defect (according to Kennedy classification). It is indicated to make a Vankevich splint in Stepanovs modification. What will determine the height of directing planes of this splint?
a. Height of molar teeth of the upper jaw
*b. Extent of mouth opening
c. Height of central jaw correlation
d. It will be determined arbitrary
e. Form of edentulous alveolar crests of the lower jaw

75. A 24-year-old soldier was injured by a shell splinter. He was diagnosed with a mandibular fracture with a bone defect in the mental region over 2 cm long. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Tigerstedts splints
b. Gunning-Ports splint
c. Direct osteosynthesis
*d. Fragments fixation by means of Rudkos apparatus
e. Intermandibular Ivy ligature

76. A 40-year-old patient is hospitalized with Le Fort II maxillary fracture. The teeth are intact. Choose the most appropriate apparatus for this patient:
a. Yermolaev-Kulagovs apparatus
b. Gunning-Ports splint
c. Yadrovas apparatus
d. Rudkos apparatus
*e. Standard Zbarzh construction

77. A patient ordered partial removable lamellar dentures for the upper and lower jaw. An orthodontist took elastic alginate impressions of both jaws. What is his next step?
a. To put the impressions into the microten bag for 90 minutes
*b. To send the impressions for disinfection
c. To invite a dental mechanic for joint analysis of the impressions
d. To let the impressions dry out in the open air
e. To send the impressions immediately to the laboratory

78. A patient is waiting for a partial removable laminar denture. Anatomic models of both jaws were made by means of elastic alginate material "Ipin" and referred for disinfection. What disinfection method should be applied?
a. Desoxone 0,1%
b. Sodium hypochloride 0,5%
*c. Glutaraldehyde 2,5% рH 7,0-8,7
d. Hydrogen peroxide solution 6%
e. Alcohol solution 70%

79. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
*a. Fixed Oxmans prosthesis with pivot point
b. Gavrilows prosthesis with pivot point
c. Oxmans double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
d. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp
e. Oxmans single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point

80. A 39-year-old patient complains about experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the anamnesis that the indicated tooth was treated for carious. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is sharply painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to take off the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anesthesia should be applied?
a. Intraligamentous anesthesia
b. Infiltration anesthesia
*c. Field block anesthesia
d. Application anesthesia
e. Intraosseous anesthesia

81. An orthodontist was treating a patient infected with AIDS virus. Accidentally he injured skin of one of his fingers with a dental disk during tooth preparation. What actions should the orthodontist take in this case?
a. To apply a tourniquet on the shoulder
b. To treat the skin with 5% iodine solution
c. To press blood out and treat the skin with strong solution of KMnO4
*d. To press blood out and treat the skin with 70% alcohol solution
e. To perform diathermo-coagulation

82. A patient consults a prosthodontist about a dentition defect of the 14, 15, 16 teetht. It is necessary to prepare teth for crowning. Before the preparation the handpiece must be processed with:
a. With 3% solution of chloramine once
b. With 3% solution of hydrogen oxide
*c. With 3% solution of chloramine (two times with 15 minute interval)
d. With solution of potassium permanganate
e. With furacilin solution

83. A 36-year-old female patient complains about acute pain, clicking in the right temporomandibular joint, burning pain in the region of the right external acoustic meatus. Movements of lower jaw are step-like with short-standing disabling moments and acute pain in the joint. Objectively: the face is symmetric. Occlusion is orthognathic. Palpation of lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the right. Tomogram shows that bone structure circuits of joints are smooth and slick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatic arthritis of TMJ
b. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
c. Ankylosis of TMJ
*d. Dysfunction of TMJ
e. Acute posttraumatic arthritis of TMJ

84. A 45-year-old teacher consulted a prosthodontist about choosing efficient prosthetic tactics. Objectively: the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth present with III degree mobility. What orthopaedic care is the most efficient?
a. Early prosthetics
b. Delayed prosthetics
c. Clasp denture
*d. Immediate prosthetics
e. Fixed prosthesis

85. A 40 year old patient complains about difficult mastication as a result of lower jaw deviation. Anamnesis data: mental fracture 2 months ago. Objectively: the 35; 36; 38 ... 45; 46 teeth are missing. Remaining teeth are intact. The 43; 44; 47; 48 teeth have no contact with antagonists and their oral deviation makes up 1 cm. What is the optimal construction of lower jaw denture?
a. Removable lamellar denture
b. Adhesive denture
c. Metal-ceramic dental bridge
d. Soldered splint on rings
*e. A denture with double dentition

86. A patient is 24 years old. Artificial crown of his 22 tooth broke off. The tooth was devitalized 8 years ago and its crown is totally decayed. What microprosthesis should be made for restoration of tooth crown?
a. Inlay
b. Filling
*c. Stump-root inlay
d. Application
e. Stamped crown

87. Examination of a 25-year-old male patient revealed maximal number of occlusional contacts of opposing teeth during denture joining. X-ray picture shows that the articular head of the lower jaw is near the base of the slope of articular tubercle. What type of occlusion is present?
a. Posterior occlusion
*b. Central occlusion
c. Right lateral occlusion
d. Anterior occlusion
e. Left lateral occlusion

88. One of the methods to define central occlusion is to construct a flat that will go through cutting edges of central incisors and distalobuccal tubercles of last molar teeth providing that there is sufficient quantity of teeth. What flat should be constructed?
a. Transversal
b. Frankfort
c. Sagittal
d. Vertical
*e. Occlusal flat

89. A 49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to ⅓ of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Kopeinin
*b. Novotny
c. Treuman
d. Mamlock
e. Kogan

90. A 65-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about fabrication of an external prosthesis of orbit that was lost as a result of a trauma. What is the fixing element of the orbit prosthesis?
*a. Spectacle frame
b. Swivel devices
c. Magnets
d. Clamps
e. Watch spring

91. A 56-year-old patient needs a partial removable lamellar denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 25, 26, 27, 28 teeth on the upper jaw are missing. In order to provide transversal line of clasps the clasp arms should be placed upon the following teeth:
a. 13 and 18
b. 24, 13 and 18
c. -
*d. 13 and 24
e. 24 and 18

92. A 56-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain underneath the bar of her clasp prosthesis. It is known from the anamnesis that the clasp was placed in another city a week ago. Examination revealed a mechanic injury of mucous membrane of the palatine vault caused by the bar of the clasp prosthesis. What distance should exist between the palate and the bar of the clasp prosthesis in order to prevent this complication?
*a. 0,5 mm
b. 0,2-0,3 mm
c. 5-6 mm
d. 1,5-2,0 mm
e. 2-3 mm

93. For fabrication of an external prosthesis a 62-year-old male patient needs "Hippocratic facies". What impression material should be applied?
a. Repin
*b. Gypsum
c. Stens
d. Dentafol
e. Stomaflex

94. A 32-year-old female patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 14, 25 teeth. It is planned to make metal-ceramic crowns. What impression material should be used for making these crowns?
a. Alginate
b. Zinc oxide eugenol
c. Hardening
d. Wax
*e. Silicone

95. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patients chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth are missing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get special medical aid?
*a. Specialized army surgical hospital
b. Regimental aid station
c. Separate medical battalion
d. Separate medical detachment
e. Battalion aid station

96. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a free-end edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
a. Ney clasps
b. Telescopic crowns
*c. Attachments and bar system
d. Jackson clasps
e. Dentoalveolar clasps

97. A 34-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain and clicking in the final stage of mouth opening. The patient has a history of a dislocation. Amplitude of maximal mouth opening is 58 mm. Mouth opening should be limited down to the following amplitude:
a. Up to 50-60 mm
b. Up to 25-30 mm
*c. Up to 40-50 mm
d. Up to 10-15 mm
e. Up to 90-100 mm

98. A 60-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication due to the mandible displacement that resulted from an untreated fracture. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38, 45, 46 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with the upper lateral teeth, and exhibit oral deviation up to 1 cm. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for the manible?
a. Vankevich splint
*b. Prosthesis with double dentition
c. Arch bar prosthesis
d. Whole-piece bridge
e. Adhesive prosthesis

99. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed by 80%, the root is stable, the canal is filled up to the top. After examination it was decided to restore the decayed tooth with a cast stump inlay. The root canal of the 23 tooth should be broadened by:
a. ⅓ of canal length
b. ½ of canal length
*c. ⅔ of canal length
d. ¼ of canal length
e. By the total canal length

100. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain in the left parotid-masticatory region, disorder of mandible movements. Objectively: skin over the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is reddened, the surrounding tissues are edematic. Disfunction of the left temporomandibular joint is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
b. Ankylosis of the left TMJ
c. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of TMJ
d. Arthrosis of the left TMJ
*e. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of TMJ

101. A patient complains about limited mouth opening. She has a history of intra-articular disorders in the left temporomandibular joint. Roentgenological examination revealed subchondral sclerosis of articular plates, regular narrowing of articular cavity, limited excursion of condylar process of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Deforming arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
*c. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint

102. A 46-year-old patient complains of difficult opening of her mouth, body temperature rise, tissue edema around both temporomandibular joints (TMJ). It is known from the anamnesis that the patient had short-term non-intense bilateral pain in the parotid-masticatory region, limited mouth opening, tension and discomfort in the region of both temporomandibular joints that had been observed for a couple of days. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibrous ankylosis
b. Deforming atrhrosis
c. Infectional arthritis
d. Arthrosis
*e. Rheumatic arthritis

103. A 40-year-old patient suffers from chronic generalized periodontitis. Objectively: both dentitions are intact, the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit I degree mobility. What splint would be aesthetically acceptable for this group of teeth?
a. Guard splint
b. Cap splint
c. Ring splint
*d. Glass Span and photopolymer splinting
e. Splint of soldered combined crowns

104. A 64 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: there is a sharp bony prominence in the area of the missing 15 tooth. It is planned to make a partial removable denture with two-layer base. What plastic should be used for elastic backing?
a. Ftorax
b. Protacryl
c. Bacryl
*d. Plastic PM-01
e. Acryl

105. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Examination revealed that the 21 tooth was missing, the crowns of the 11 and the 22 tooth are intact, high, relatively parallel. The patient refused teeth preparation as well as implantation or fabrication of a removable denture. What orthopedic construction should be fabricated?
a. Lamellar denture
b. Clasp denture
*c. Adhesive denture
d. Immediate denture
e. Polypropylene denture

106. A 40-year-old patient underwent selective grinding of teeth on account of TMJ disease provoked by functional occlusal disorder. 3 days later the patient consulted the orthopaedist about injuring buccal mucosa because of its getting in between dentitions on the right. What mistake was made during teeth grinding?
a. Lingual tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
b. Tops of the buccal tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
*c. Tops of the support palatal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
d. Buccal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
e. Upper teeth tubercles were ground off

107. A 51 year old lecturer came to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced, III degree mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
*a. On the day of dental extraction
b. In 2-3 months
c. In 5-6 days
d. In 4-6 months
e. In 16-30 days

108. A 32 year old patient lost his 41 and 31 teeth as a result of a sporting accident. Replantation is impossible because these teeth have cracks and splits both on crown and root surfaces. Clinical and roentgenological examination proved the possibility of immediate implantation. What implant materials should be preferred?
a. Sapphire
*b. Titanium
c. Ceramic
d. Carbon
e. Platinum

109. A 38-year-old patient consulted an orthopedist about metal taste, dry mouth and tongue burning. Objectively: defects of the lower dental arch were replaced with soldered stainless steel bridges. What examination method would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Electroodontometry
*b. Galvanometry
c. Occlusiography
d. Masticatiography
e. Myography

110. A 28-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw. Objectively: the crown part of the 11 tooth is decayed below the gum level. The root is stable, percussion is painless. It is planned to restore the tooth with a stump inlay and cover it with a metal-ceramic crown. What additional method of diagnostics should be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Masticatiography
b. Electromyography
*c. X-ray diagnostics
d. Gnathodynamometry
e. Electroodontodiagnostics

111. A patient came to a dental clinic for dental prosthetics. Objectively: total lack of teeth on the mandible. Sharp and regular atrophy of alveolar part. Frenula attachment and fold position is high. Name the type of atrophy of edentulous mandible using Kellers classification:
a. III type
b. I type
*c. II type
d. IV type
e. V type

112. During military operations the head of the Army Medical Department gave the order to deploy a stomatological aid unit on the territory of the Army Hospital Base. A patient with missile wound of face was admitted to the unit. What kind of aid can be rendered in the stomatological unit?
a. Stomatological aid
b. Prosthodontic aid
c. Qualified aid
d. Consultation aid
*e. Specialized (secondary) aid

113. A patient with a missile wound of his face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
*a. Secondary care
b. Consultancy
c. Dental orthopaedic service
d. Dental health service
e. Professional care

114. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinsteins pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point

115. A 68-year-old patient complains about pain in the palate that occurs during wearing a complete removable denture the patient got 3 months ago. Objectively: palatine torus is strongly marked, mucous membrane around it is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. It was made anatomic teeth arrangement
b. Prosthesis base is made of acrylic plastic
c. Previous impression was made in plaster
d. Functional impression was taken by means of a rigid individual tray
*e. Torus wasnt isolated

116. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 7 cm
b. 5 cm
*c. 9 cm
d. 12 cm
e. 18 cm

117. A 40-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about upper jaw teeth mobility that turned up after therapeutic treatment. Objectively: the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless, exhibit II degree mobility, unchanged colour. What prosthetic construction should be applied?
a. Crown soldered splint
b. Cast bar splint
c. Wire-band splint
*d. Mamlock splint
e. Elastic crown splint

118. Tooth replacement with complete removable dentures involves adjustment of occlusal relations by different movements of the lower jaw. Transversal movements of the lower jaw are initiated by the following muscle:
a. Mastication muscle
b. Digastric muscle
c. Internal (medial) pterygoid muscle
d. Temporal muscle
*e. External (lateral) pterygoid muscle

119. At the stage of adjustment of an individual tray the Herbst test should be done. What muscles cause the shift of the individual tray during functional testing - alternate touching right or left cheek with the tip of tongue?
*a. Mylohyoid
b. Mentalis and orbicular muscle of mouth
c. Mastication muscles
d. Mimic muscles
e. Digastric, geniohyoid

120. A 37 year old patient was diagnosed with arthrosis of mandibulotemporal joint. During auscultation the doctor heard pathological rustle in the area of the joint, namely "clicking" that was caused by a load. What is the mechanism of this pathological rustle?
*a. Asynchronous movement of disc and articulation head
b. Loosening of mandibulotemporal joint ligaments
c. Inflammation of cartilaginous tissue of the disc
d. Calcification of mandibulotemporal joint disc
e. Friction of bone surfaces in the joint

121. A 65-year-old male patient complains about crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, angular fissures and cracks are also present. Palpation reveals crepitatnt rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Costens syndrome
b. Temporomandibular arthrosis
c. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
d. Temporomandibular dislocation
e. Temporomandibular arthritis

122. A 50-year-old patient complains about pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mouth opening. Dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44. While opening the mouth the lower jaw moves in a zigzag manner towards the affected joint. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Habitual TMJ dislocation
b. Chronic arthritis of TMJ
c. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
*d. Musculoarticular dysfunction
e. Sclerosing arthrosis of TMJ

123. A 35-year-old patient is at a dentist. He is anxious, complains of being afraid of the dentist, is unwilling to let the dentist examine him. Drugs of which group should be given the patient before stomatological manipulations?
a. Cardiac glycosides
b. Desensitizing
c. Analgetics
d. Hypotensive
*e. Sedative

124. A 52-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. There is gingival edema, parodontal pouches are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by ½ of root length. A dentist made a diagnosis: generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is the most efficient in this situation?
*a. Elbrecht splint
b. Murrays splint
c. Temporary Novotny splint
d. Mamlock splint
e. Plastic mouthguard

125. A 20 year old man got a blow to the chin. He remained conscious. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. He has an edema and haematoma in the area of his lower jaw on both sides. Jaw palpation causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited. There is also a rupture of mucous membrane of oral cavity in the area of the 44, 43 and 34, 35 teeth. Occlusion is deviated. What asphyxia type can be developed?
a. Obturation
b. Valve
c. Aspiration
*d. Dislocation
e. Stenotic

126. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57 year old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Neja clasp should be applied?
a. II type clasp
*b. V type clasp
c. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
d. I type clasp
e. I-II type clasp

127. A patient ordered metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. Block anaesthesia was performed before preparation. In a few minutes the patient felt anxiety, tinnitus, abdominal pain, giddiness. Breathing is hurried, pulse is rapid, AP is 60/40 mm Hg. What aid should be rendered to the patient in the first place?
*a. Intravenous introduction of 0,5 ml of 0,1% adrenaline solution, prednisolone
b. To soak a cotton web with some liquid ammonia and give it for the patient to inhale
c. Make an injection of aminophylline
d. To bring the patient into horizontal position
e. Promedol, suprastin

128. A 43 year old patient applied to a prosthetic dentistry for the purpose of prosthetics. In anamnesis: has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. The patient has been very anxious before the appointment with a doctor. Suddenly the patients condition grew worse, he felt limb weakness. The patient became covered with cold clammy sweat and lost consciousness. What critical state is it?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Syncope
*c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Myocardium infarction

129. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous areas is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
a. Consumption of solid food
b. Wear of artificial teeth
c. Improper care of denture
d. Denture using during sleep
*e. Alveolar process atrophy

130. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lower jaw subluxation
b. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
c. Meniscus tresis
d. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
e. Lower jaw dislocation

131. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Kellers classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
a. Third
b. Second
c. Fourth
*d. First
e. Fifth

132. A 22-year-old patient is afraid of pain from conduction anaesthesia. A dentist decided that this anaesthesia should be preceded by applicational anaesthesia of mucous membrane on the spot of injection. What drug should be used for this purpose?
a. 3% doxycyclin ointment
*b. 5% lidocaine ointment
c. 5% oxacillin ointment
d. 1% synthomycin ointment
e. 3% sinaflan ointment

