1. An ophthalmologist has detected increased time of darkness adaptation in the patient’s eye. What vitamin deficiency can cause this sign?
a. K
b. D
c. E
d. C
*e. A

2. The patient exhausted by starvation presents with intensification of the following process in the liver and kidneys:
a. Urea synthesis
b. Hippuric acid synthesis
c. Uric acid synthesis
*d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Bilirubin synthesis

3. Various substances can be used as anticoagulants. Among them there is a certain naturally derived polysaccharide. Name this polysaccharide:
a. Chondroitin sulfate
b. Dextran
c. Hyaluronic acid
d. Dermatan sulfate
*e. Heparin

4. A patient presents with osteoporosis. Hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are observed in the patient’s blood. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Increased corticosteroid secretion
b. Inhibited corticosteroid secretion
c. Increased thyroxin secretion
d. Inhibited parathormone secretion
*e. Increased parathormone secretion

5. A patient with pulmonary tuberculosis is prescribed rifampicin that inhibits RNApolymerase enzyme at the stage of initiation of the following process:
a. Translation
b. Termination
c. Elongation
*d. Transcription
e. Replication

6. The patient’s saliva has been tested for antibacterial activity. What saliva component has antibacterial properties?
a. Amylase
b. Parotin
c. Cholesterol
*d. Lysozyme
e. Ceruloplasmin

7. A 35-year-old man has come to a dentist with complaints of decreased density of dental tissue and increased brittleness of his teeth during consumption of solid food. Laboratory analysis measured Ca/P correlation in the enamel sample. What value of Ca/P indicates increased demineralization?
*a. 0.9
b. 1.85
c. 1.5
d. 2.5
e. 1.67

8. Lab rats were used to study the effect of a certain vitamin on the body. Deficiency of this vitamin has resulted in a disturbed reproductive function and skeletal muscle dystrophy. What vitamin is it?
*a. E
b. A
c. D
d. K
e. B2

9. In the patient’s blood there is a C-reactive protein that chemically can be classified as a glycoprotein. It indicates the following pathology:
*a. Rheumatism
b. Thrombocytopenia
c. Porphyria
d. Anemia
e. Leucopenia

10. An 8-year-old child presents with frequent severe subcutaneous hemorrhages. Prescription of Vicasol, synthetic analogue of vitamin K, had a positive effect. This vitamin participates in gamma-carboxylation of glutamic acid in a certain blood-clotting protein. Name this protein:
*a. Prothrombin
b. Hageman factor
c. Proconvertin
d. Rosenthal factor
e. Fibrinogen

11. A child presents with hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, and convulsions that occur predominantly during fasting or in stressinducing situations. The child is diagnosed with von Gierke disease (glycogen storage disease type I). What enzyme is affected by the genetic defect that is the cause of this disease?
a. Glucokinase
*b. Glucose 6-phosphatase
c. Phosphoglucomutase
d. Amylo-1,6-glycosidase
e. Glycogen phosphorylase

12. Formation of a large amount of immunoglobulins with various antigen specificity from a small number of genes occurs due to:
a. Translocation
b. Deletion
c. Replication
*d. Recombination
e. Transcription

13. Glucose synthesis from non-carbohydrate components is an important biochemical process. Gluconeogenesis from amino acids occurs most actively if a diet is rich in proteins. Which amino acid of those listed below is the most glucogenic?
a. Leucine
b. Valine
c. Lysine
*d. Alanine
e. Isoleucine

14. A 6-year-old girl exhibits marked signs of hemolytic anemia. Biochemical anlysis of her erythrocytes shows deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme. What metabolic process is disturbed in this patient and has leading role in the development of this pathology?
a. Tissue respiration
b. Oxidative phosphorylation
*c. Pentose-phosphate pathway
d. Anaerobic glycolysis
e. Gluconeogenesis

15. A patient was diagnosed with a genetic disorder leading to lipoprotein lipase deficiency. What finding will be characteristic of biochemical blood analysis in this case?
*a. Hypertriacylglycerolemia
b. Hyperglycemia
c. Hypochylomicronemia
d. Hypotriacylglycerolemia
e. Hypoglycemia

16. A patient with Cushing syndrome presents with persistent hyperglycemia and glucosuria. This patient is likely to have increased production and secretion of the following hormone:
*a. Cortisol
b. Glucagon
c. Aldosterone
d. Thyroxine
e. Adrenaline

17. A 25-year-old young man complains of general weakness, rapid fatigability, irritability, reduced working ability, and bleeding gums. What vitamin deficiency is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Folic acid
*b. Ascorbic acid
c. Thiamine
d. Riboflavin
e. Retinol

18. A 37-year-old woman presents with fructosemia and fructosuria. Her blood glucose is 2.1 mmol/L. She is diagnosed with fructose intolerance. What congenital enzyme deficiency is the molecular basis of this disease?
a. Triose-phosphate isomerase
b. Phosphoglucomutase
c. Hexokinase
d. Phosphofructokinase
*e. Fructose 1-phosphate aldolase

