1. According to the law of constancy of chromosome numbers, most animal species have definite and constant chromosome number. The mechanism that maintains this constancy during sexual reproduction of organisms is called:
*a. Meiosis
b. Amitosis
c. -
d. Regeneration
e. Schizogony

2. In human population some people throughout their life develop not two but three dentitions. It is the manifestation of the following law:
*a. Biogenetic law (recapitulation theory)
b. Hardy-Weinberg principle
c. Embryonic induction
d. Homologous series of genetic variation
e. Independent assortment

3. Microscopy of a sputum sample obtained from a patient who has been suffering from pneumonia for a week detected helminth larvae. Eosinophilia is observed in the patient’s blood. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Taeniasis
b. Echinococcosis
c. Paragonimiasis
d. Fasciolasis
*e. Ascariasis

4. During their expedition to the Middle East, the students found a 7-centimeter-long arthropod. Its body consists of cephalothorax with 4 pairs of ambulatory legs and segmented abdomen with two venom glands in its last segment. The gland openings are located on the tip of the hook-shaped sting. The animal was identified as a nocturnal predator, its venom is dangerous for humans. It belongs to the following order:
a. Acarina
b. Aranei
*c. Scorpiones
d. Solpugae
e. Aphaniptera

5. Mother with a 12-year-old child came to the gastroenterologist. She complains of loss of appetite and meteorism in her child. Endoscopically the child was diagnosed with biliary dyskinesia, in the duodenal contents there were pear-shaped protozoa with two nuclei and multiple flagella. What disease is the most likely in this child?
*a. Lambliasis
b. Amebiasis
c. Toxoplasmosis
d. Trichomoniasis
e. Balantidiasis

6. Biochemical analysis of amino acid contents of freshly synthesized polypeptides shows that in the process of their translation the first amino acid in each of these proteins will be the same. Name this amino acid:
*a. Methionine
b. Histidine
c. Isoleucine
d. Phenylalanine
e. Serine

7. The height of a person is controlled by several non-allelic dominant genes. If the number of this genes is increased, the height of a person increases as well. What type of interaction occurs between these genes?
*a. Polymery
b. Epistasis
c. Complementarity
d. Codominance
e. Pleiotropy

8. Mother of a 2-year-old child with delayed physical and mental development has made an appointment with the genetic consultation. What method allows the doctor to rule out chromosomal abnormalities?
*a. Cytogenetic
b. Genealogical
c. Population statistics
d. Cytological
e. Biochemical

9. During a class in molecular biology, the mutations resulting in production of abnormal hemoglobin are being studied. What amino acid substitution occurs when S-hemoglobin is being produced, resulting in the development of sickle-cell anemia?
a. Threonine is substituted with lysine
b. Histidine is substituted with arginine
c. Glycine is substituted with asparagine
*d. Glutamic acid is substituted with valine
e. Lysine is substituted with glutamine

10. People of various nationalities, who live in the Arctic climate, develop a number of features to adapt to their environment. Representatives of the Arctic adaptive type compared to the natives of the Central Africa have the following characteristic feature:
*a. Increased layer of subcutaneous fat
b. Lower need for fat intake
c. Elongated legs and shorter arms
d. Lean stature
e. Hyperhidrosis

11. Fetal malformations can be caused by such maternal diseases as rubella, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegaly, herpes, and chlamydiosis. These malformations belong to the following type of variability:
*a. Modification
b. Combinative
c. Epimutational
d. Genomic imprinting
e. Mutational

12. A tourist, who had been to one of the Far East countries, was hospitalized into the therapeutics unit with suspected pneumonia. Examination of his sputum and feces detected there lung fluke eggs. What food products are the most likely cause of lung fluke infestation?
a. Raw fruits and vegetables
*b. Insufficiently thermally processed freshwater crabs
c. Insufficiently thermally processed eggs
d. Insufficiently thermally processed beef
e. Insufficiently thermally processed pork

