1. In the skin biopsy material in the epidermis there are cells with processes and dark brown granules in their cytoplasm. Name these cells:
a. Intraepidermal macrophages
b. Merkel cells
c. Lymphocytes
*d. Melanocytes
e. Keratinocytes

2. A smear specimen of human red bone marrow shows, among myeloid cells and adipocytes, certain stellate cells with oxyphilic cytoplasm that are connected with their cellular processes. Name these cells:
a. Fibroblasts
b. Dendritic cells
c. Osteocytes
*d. Reticular cells
e. Macrophages

3. A microslide shows a section of a beanshaped organ with cortical and medullary substances. Its cortical substance contains separate spheric nodules 0.5-1 mm in diameter; its medullary substance consists of medullary cords. This histological section demonstrates the following organ:
a. Thymus
b. Kidney
*c. Lymph node
d. Adrenal gland
e. Spleen

4. Microslide of a cardiac tissue shows rectangular cells with central location of the nucleus and well-developed myofibrils connected with Z-disks. These cells perform the following cardiac function:
a. Protective
b. Regenerative
c. Impulse conduction
d. Endocrine
*e. Contraction

5. A woman presents with edemas. In her urine there is a large amount of protein excreted. What nephron segment is functionally disturbed in this case?
a. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
*b. Renal corpuscle
c. Distal convoluted tubule
d. Proximal convoluted tubule
e. Descending limb of loop of Henle

6. A urine sample was taken via a catheter from the urinary bladder of a 17-yearold young man. Microscopy of the urine precipitate in this case can detect cells of the epithelium that lines the urinary bladder. What epithelium is it?
a. Keratinized stratified epithelium
*b. Transitional epithelium
c. Non-stratified columnar epithelium
d. Non-keratinized stratified epithelium
e. Non-stratified cuboidal epithelium

7. A connective tissue specimen stained with hematoxylin-eosin shows isogenous cell groups surrounded with basophilic intercellular substance. No fibrous structures are detected. What type of connective tissue is it?
a. Dense fibrous tissue
b. Elastic cartilage tissue
*c. Hyaline cartilage tissue
d. Loose fibrous tissue
e. Splenial bone tissue

8. A sample obtained from the patient’s thyroid gland was processed with silver salts, which revealed large argyrophilic cells in the follicular walls. What hormone is being secreted by these cells?
a. Aldosterone
b. Adrenaline
c. Thyroxine
d. Parathyrin
*e. Calcitonin

9. A histological specimen shows three neurons: pseudounipolar, bipolar, and multipolar. How many axons will each of these cell have?
a. Three
*b. One
c. None
d. Two
e. Many

10. A certain embryonic organ is being studied. In this organ the first blood corpuscles that make up blood as a tissue are being formed. Name this organ:
*a. Yolk sac
b. Thymus
c. Red bone marrow
d. Spleen
e. Liver

11. Fibrocartilaginous layer of trachea consists of C-shaped hyaline cartilage rings, with their open ends facing posteriorly. What tissue connects these open ends?
a. Adipose connective tissue
b. Dense unformed connective tissue
c. Striated muscular tissue
d. Loose fibrous connective tissue
*e. Smooth muscular tissue

12. A histological specimen shows cells that form isogenous groups. There are glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and collagen fibers in the intercellular substance. What tissue is it?
a. White adipose tissue
b. Brown adipose tissue
c. Bone tissue
d. Mucous tissue
*e. Cartilaginous tissue

13. A patient with chronic hepatitis undergoes blood test for serum protein fractions. Total protein levels are low, which indicates that in the hepatic cells the following organelles are functionally disturbed:
a. Cytoskeleton
*b. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
c. Mitochondria
d. Golgi apparatus
e. Lysosomes

14. A histological specimen of mucous tunic of a certain organ shows stratified epithelium consisting of 20-25 cellular layers with squamous superficial cells. Name the organ from which this sample was obtained:
a. Gastric fundus
b. Small intestine
c. Duodenum
*d. Esophagus
e. Large intestine

15. Histologic specimen of a tooth slice shows a tissue consisting of intercellular substance permeated with tubules, in which cellular processes of odontoblasts are situated. What tissue is presented in this histologic specimen?
a. Periodontium
*b. Dentin
c. Pulp
d. Enamel
e. Cement

