1. According to the data collected by WHO researchers, every year approximately 250 millon malaria cases occur in the world. This disease can be encountered predominantly in tropical and subtropical areas. The spread of this disease matches the natural habitat of the following genus of mosquitoes:
a. Aedes
b. Culex
*c. Anopheles
d. Mansonia
e. Culiseta

2. A child was hospitalized with diagnosis of diphtheria. What should be given to this child for specific therapy?
a. Diphtheria vaccines: DPT, DT, diphtheria vaccine
b. Diphtheria bacteriophage
c. Diphtheria anatoxin, antibiotics
d. Codivac vaccine, sulfanilamides
*e. Diphtheria antitoxin serum, antibiotics

3. A man complaining of nausea, liquid stool with mucus and blood streaks, high temperature, and weakness was hospitalized into the infectious diseases department. The doctor suspects dysentery. What method of laboratory diagnostics would be the most effective for confirmation of this diagnosis?
*a. Bacteriological analysis
b. Mycological analysis
c. Protozoan analysis
d. Microscopy
e. Serological analysis

4. A person bitten by a stray dog came to the surgeon’s office. Wide lacerated wounds are localized on the patient’s face. What rabiesprevention aid should be provided to this person?
a. Immediately administer DPT vaccine
b. Prescribe combined vitamin therapy
*c. Begin immunization with antirabic vaccine
d. Hospitalize the patient and continue to monitor his condition
e. Immediately administer normal gamma globulin

5. A bacteriological laboratory conducts the analysis of potable water quality. Microbial number of the water sample is approximately 100. What microorganisms were accounted for in this case?
a. Human and animal pathogenic bacteria
b. Colibacilli
*c. All bacteria that have grown on a nutrient medium
d. Opportunistic pathogenic bacteria
e. Enteropathogenic bacteria and viruses

6. Often the cause of secondary immunodeficiency is organism exposure to an infection, agents of which reproduce directly in the cells of immune system and destroy them. Specify the diseases, during which the described above occurs:
a. Poliomyelitis, viral hepatitis type A
b. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis
*c. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS
d. Dysentery, cholera
e. Q fever, typhus

7. A sick child is suspected to have tuberculosis and is referred for Mantoux test. 24 hours later the place of allergen injection became swollen, hyperemic, and tender. What main components determine the development of this reaction?
*a. Mononuclear cells, T-lymphocytes, and lymphokines
b. Plasma cells, T-lymphocytes, and lymphokines
c. Macrophages, B lymphocytes, and monocytes
d. B-lymphocytes and IgM
e. Granulocytes, T-lymphocytes, and IgG

8. A 3-year-old girl has rubella. Her 10- year-old sister was not infected, despite both girls constantly remaining in contact. The pediatrician determined that the elder girl had rubella 5 years ago. What type of immunity does the elder sister have?
a. Artificial active
b. Natural passive
*c. Natural active
d. Artificial passive
e. Innate

9. During identification of pure culture of microorganisms the most important part is a serological identification that is conducted by means of agglutination reaction. What components are necessary to conduct this reaction?
a. Specific antigen, known antibody, bacteria
b. Unknown antibodies, nonspecific antigen
c. Thermoextract, specific serum
*d. Unknown bacterial culture, specific antibodies
e. Specific antigen, serum sample obtained from the patient

10. During laboratory diagnostics of hepatitis C, it is necessary to detect the presence of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in the patient’s blood serum. What test should be conducted in this case?
a. Nucleic acid hybridization with signal amplification
b. Nucleic acid hybridization
*c. Enzyme-linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA)
d. Ligase chain reaction
e. DNA probe method

