1. An experimental animal, a dog, received a weak solution of hydrochloric acid through a tube inserted into the duodenum. Primarily it will result in increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Histamine
b. Gastrin
*c. Secretin
d. Cholecystokinin
e. Neurotensin

2. An athlete before a sports contest presents with elevated blood pressure and heart rate. What part of the CNS induces these changes?
a. Mesencephalon
b. Hypothalamus
c. Diencephalon
d. Medulla oblongata
*e. Cerebral cortex

3. A patient complains that even small traumas lead to persistent hemorrhages. Laboratory analysis shows disturbed blood composition, namely a low count of the following blood corpuscles:
a. Erythrocytes
b. Lymphocytes
c. Monocytes
*d. Platelets
e. Neutrophils

4. A 19-year-old young man has been examined in a nephrological hospital. Increased potassium content was detected in secondary urine of the patient. Such changes are the most likely to be caused by increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Glucagon
b. Testosterone
c. Oxytocin
d. Adrenaline
*e. Aldosterone

5. In an experiment a peripheral segment of the sympathetic nerve that innervates the sublingual gland is being stimulated. In this case this gland will produce:
a. A small amount of non-viscous saliva
b. No saliva
*c. A small amount of viscous saliva
d. A large amount of non-viscous saliva
e. A large amount of viscous saliva

6. An athlete overexerted himself during a training and developed a muscle contracture. In such cases the muscle loses its flexibility and gradually becomes rigid due to its inability to relax. What is the likely cause of the contracture in this case?
a. Increased blood levels of K+
*b. ATP deficiency
c. Increased blood levels of lactic acid
d. Decreased blood levels of Ca++
e. Tropomyosin structural changes

7. Condition of a patient with thoracic trauma deteriorates quickly: he develops increasing asphyxiation, facial pallor, tachycardia. What is the likely cause of these developments?
a. Rib fracture
b. Thoracic contusion
*c. Pneumothorax
d. Response to pain stimulus
e. Fright

8. A man was submerged into the ice-cold water and soon died of abrupt exposure to cold. In such cases an organism loses heat most intensively by the way of:
a. Heat conduction and radiation
b. -
c. Radiation
d. Convection
*e. Heat conduction

9. In hot weather the bus passengers asked to open the roof hatches. What way of heat transfer is activated in this situation?
a. Radiation
b. Conduction
*c. Convection
d. Conduction and radiation
e. Sweat evaporation

10. People with diseases of internal organs often assume forced positions (e.g. with lower limbs flexed and pressed to the abdomen) due to the following reflex response:
a. Viscerodermal
b. Viscero-visceral
c. Motor-visceral
d. Dermatovisceral
*e. Visceromotor

11. A 30-year-old woman has developed signs of virilism (body hair growth, balding temples, disturbed menstrual cycle). This condition can be caused by hyperproduction of the following hormone:
a. Estriol
b. Oxytocin
c. Prolactin
*d. Testosterone
e. Relaxin

12. A dentist has to spend much of his time on his feet when working, which can result in a venous congestion in the legs and varicose veins. Leading mechanism of congestion in this case is the decrease of:
a. Cardiac residual pumping force
b. Diaphragmatic piston effect on the abdominal organs
c. Blood pressure gradient in the veins
d. Thoracic pump effect
*e. Skeletal muscle contraction in the lower limbs

13. A car accident victim presents with a spinal hematoma accompanied by retrosternal pain, tachycardia, and elevated blood pressure. The patient’s condition results from the damage to the following segments of the spinal cord:
a. S1-S3
b. -
c. C6-C8
d. L1- L3
*e. Th1-Th5

14. In an experiment the vagus is being stimulated, which results in increased acetylcholine entry to the synaptic cleft, and that in turn results in the decresed heart rate due to the following mechanism:
a. Increase in AV nodal conduction velocity
b. Depolarization of cardiomyocyte membrane
*c. Hyperpolarization of cardiomyocyte membrane
d. Increase of action potential duration
e. Decrease of action potential duration

15. A person in a hot weather for a long time had no water, which resulted in a severe thirst. What indicator of blood homeostasis was affected, leading to the development of this sensation?
a. Glucose level
b. pH
c. Plasma oncotic pressure
d. Hematocrit
*e. Plasma osmotic pressure

16. During a brain surgery stimulation of the cerebral cortex resulted in tactile and thermal sensations in the patient. What gyrus was stimulated?
a. Parahippocampal gyrus
b. Cingulate convolution
*c. Postcentral gyrus
d. Superior temporal gyrus
e. Precentral gyrus

17. Curariform drugs are used to immobilize the patient during a surgery. Their mechanism of action is based on the blockade of:
*a. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of skeletal muscles
b. Noradrenaline release into the synaptic cleft
c. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors of smooth muscles
d. Conduction of excitation in the nerve fibers
e. Acetylcholine release into the synaptic cleft

