1. After a collision of two cars, one of the drivers presents with a deformity in the middle third of the left shin. The driver feels extreme pain that exacerbates on attempts to move it. The ends of a broken bone protrude from the open wound, the bone is triangular on section, movements cause the bleeding to intensify. What bone was damaged?
*a. Tibia
b. Femur
c. Talus
d. Patella
e. Fibula

2. A certain disease of infection-allergic or unknown origin leads to bilateral diffuse or focal non-suppurative inflammation of renal glomerular apparatus with characteristic renal and extrarenal signs. Name this disease:
a. Nephrosclerosis
*b. Glomerulonephritis
c. Nephrolithiasis
d. Pyelonephritis
e. Polycystic renal disease

3. A patient presents with acute onset of the disease: high fever and enlarged painful spleen. On the 10th day since the onset the patient developed a maculopapular rash on the abdomen. On the 21st day the patient died of peritonitis. Postmortem study of the body shows deep ulcers in the area of necrotic aggregate lymphoid follicles (Peyer’s patches) in the ileum of the deceased. One of the ulcers is perforated and diffuse fibrinopurulent peritonitis is observed. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Intestinal amebiasis
b. Dysentery
*c. Typhoid fever
d. Cholera
e. Salmonellosis

4. Autopsy of an 86-year-old woman, who suffered from cerebral atherosclerosis, shows atrophy of her cerebral cortex. Name this type of atrophy based on its cause:
a. Caused by physico-chemical factors
b. Pressure-induced
*c. Insufficient blood supply
d. Neurogenic
e. Dysfunctional

5. An autopsy of a 42-year-old man, who suffered from chronic diffuse bronchitis and died of cardiopulmonary failure, shows large hyperinflated lungs that cover mediastinum with their edges. The lungs do not deflate, are colored pale gray, crunch on section; lung surface does not straighten out when pressed with a finger, resulting in a permanent depression. Mucopurulent exudate is produced from the bronchial lumen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vicarious compensatory emphysema
*b. Chronic diffuse obstructive emphysema
c. Interstitial emphysema
d. Chronic focal emphysema
e. Primary idiopathic emphysema

6. Autopsy of a man with tuberculosis has revealed a 3x2 cm large cavity in the superior lobe of the right lung. The cavity was communicating with a bronchus, its wall was dense and consisted of three layers: the internal layer was pyogenic, the middle layer was made of tuberculous granulation tissue, and the external one was made of connective tissue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal tuberculosis
b. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
c. Fibrous focal tuberculosis
d. Tuberculoma
*e. Fibrous cavernous tuberculosis

7. The dentist examines a pregnant woman. There are 3 round lesions up to 1 cm in diameter on her oral mucosa. The lesions appeared 3 days ago, they have white-gray surface and red margin. The dentist can make the following diagnosis:
a. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
b. Gangrenous stomatitis
c. Leukoplakia
d. Catarrhal stomatitis
*e. Aphthous stomatitis

8. A 28-year-old patient presented with elevated blood pressure, hematuria, and facial edemas. Despite the treatment, the signs of renal failure were exacerbating. 6 months later the patient died of uremia. Microscopy of the kidneys shows proliferation of nephrothelium in the glomerular capsules and proliferation of podocytes that contributes to crescent formation. Sclerosis and hyalinosis of the glomeruli is observed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute pyelonephritis
b. Chronic glomerulonephritis
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
*d. Subacute glomerulonephritis
e. Nephrotic syndrome

9. Autopsy of a man, who died suddenly with signs of acutely disturbed cerebral circulation, revealed aneurysm rupture of the medial cerebral artery and a round cavity 4 cm in diameter filled with blood in his frontal lobe. Name this type of hemorrhage:
*a. Hematoma
b. Hemorrhagic infiltration
c. -
d. Contusion
e. Petechiae

10. During teeth examination on the lateral surface of the first upper molar there was detected a cone-shaped carious cavity with the base oriented toward the tooth surface and the apex - toward the tooth center. Softened dentin is visible in the floor of the carious cavity. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel caries
b. Tooth erosion
c. -
*d. Dentin caries
e. Cement caries

11. A 23-year-old man developed a perforation in his hard palate, a dense formation with clear margins was detected in this area. After a surgery, microscopy of the excised formation shows there a large focus of caseous necrosis surrounded with a granulation tissue with endovasculitis and a cellular infiltration consisting of lymphocytes and epithelioid cells with predominance of plasma cells. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Sarcoma
*b. Syphilis
c. Leprosy
d. Tuberculosis
e. Scleroma

12. A 53-year-old woman complains of painful swelling in her left parotid area. The swelling appeared 5 days ago. Objectively the skin in this area is slightly hyperemic and tender. Excretory duct of the salivary gland produces a small amount of viscous turbid yellow-green liquid. Microscopy detects a diffuse infiltration of the gland with segmented neutrophils. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute suppurative parotitis
b. Sjogren syndrome
c. Acute serous parotitis
d. Glandular adenoma
e. Epidemic parotitis

13. A 65-year-old man presents with acute mandibular osteomyelitis. 3 days after the disease onset he developed marked edema of skin and soft submandibular cervical tissues. Microscopically there is a diffuse infiltration with neutrophils. What complication of the main disease occurred in the patient’s skin tissues?
a. Furuncle
b. Actinomycosis
c. Abscess
d. Carbuncle
*e. Phlegmon

14. Oral examination revealed dark yellow and brown spots and stripes on the labial and lingual surfaces of the patent’s teeth; more than the half of the dental surface is affected; enamel and dentin are destroyed. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Dystrophic calcification
c. Metastatic calcification
d. Dental calculus
*e. Fluorosis

15. Mother of a 4-year-old child complains that the child developed elevated body temperature, tenesmus, diarrhea, and abdominal pain attacks. The child attends a preschool facility. Laboratory analysis detected mucus and blood admixtures in the child’s feces. Name the changes that occur in the gastrointestinal tract during dysentery:
a. Gastroenteritis
*b. Colitis
c. Enterocolitis
d. Gastritis
e. Enteritis

16. During autopsy of the patient, who died of cardiovascular failure, the patient’s right foot is darkly colored. The vessels of the patient’s thigh are partially obstructed by grayish-red clots. On the vessel walls there are yellowish-gray spots and fibrous plaques, some of which are of stony density. What clinicopathological type of atherosclerosis was complicated in the patient?
a. Atherosclerosis of aorta
b. Cerebral atherosclerosis
*c. Atherosclerosis of lower extremities
d. Vascular intestinal atherosclerosis
e. Renal atherosclerosis

17. A 35-year-old man had been suffering from bronchial asthma for a long time. Eventually he developed a status asthmaticus that became lethal. Examination of section materials shows a bronchiolar spasm in the lungs. The bronchiolar walls show signs of cellular infiltration with predominance of eosinophilic leukocytes and lymphocytes, labrocytes with signs of degranulation are observed. What mechanism of hypersensitivity is the cause of these changes?
a. Antibody-dependent
b. Cell-mediated cytotoxicity
c. -
*d. Reaginic reaction
e. Immune complex

18. Examination of a tooth shows that there is a large cavity in its crown. The floor of the cavity consists of thin layer of softened dentin that separates the cavity from the pulp. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis
*b. Deep caries
c. Superficial caries
d. Median caries
e. Pulpitis

