1. A pregnant woman developed severe toxemia with exhausting recurrent vomiting throughout a day. By the end of the day she developed tetanic convulsions and dehydration. The described changes were caused by the following type of acid-base imbalance:
a. Nongaseous excretory acidosis
*b. Nongaseous excretory alkalosis
c. Gaseous acidosis
d. Gaseous alkalosis
e. Nongaseous metabolic acidosis

2. A 50-year-old man has been undergoing treatment for peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. His digestion normalized, pain disappeared, and general mood improved. However, several weeks later he again developed epigastric pain, heartburn, and sour eructation. How can this clinical course be characterized?
a. Latent period
*b. Relapse
c. Terminal state
d. Remission
e. Prodromal stage

3. After a total gastric resection the patient developed severe B12-deficient anemia with disturbed hematopoiesis. Changed erythrocytes appeared in the patient’s blood. One of the signs of this anemia is the presence of the following in blood:
*a. Megalocytes
b. Elliptocytes
c. Anulocytes
d. Normocytes
e. Microcytes

4. A patient with essential hypertension presents with circadian fluctuations in total peripheral vascular resistance to blood flow. What vessels will be the most affected in this case?
a. Arteriolovenular anastomoses
b. Veins
c. Aorta
d. Capillaries
*e. Arterioles

5. On clinical examination a woman presents with excessive sweating, tachycardia, loss of weight, and tremor. What endocrine pathology can cause these signs?
a. Hypogonadism
b. Hypoaldosteronism
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Hypergonadism
*e. Hyperthyroidism

6. A 49-year-old man presents with facial edema, significant proteinuria, hypoproteinemia, dysproteinemia, and hyperlipidemia. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
*a. Nephrotic syndrome
b. Prostatitis
c. Cystitis
d. Pyelonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

7. A patient on the 2nd day after a cardiac infarction presents with acute decrease of systolic blood pressure down to 60 mm Hg with tachycardia 140/min., dyspnea, loss of consciousness. What mechanism is essential in the pathogenesis of shock developed in this case?
a. Development of paroxysmal tachycardia
b. Development of anaphylactic reaction to myocardial proteins
c. Increased myocardial excitability caused by products of necrotic disintegration
d. Decreased circulating blood volume
*e. Decreased cardiac output

8. Lower limbs of a patient with varicose veins were examined. The patient’s legs are cyanotic and pastose, skin temperature is low, single petechiae are observed. What disturbance of hemodynamics is it?
*a. Venous hyperemia
b. Obstruction ischemia
c. Arterial hyperemia
d. Thromboembolism
e. Compression ischemia

9. After a mechanical injury a tourniquet was applied to the patient’s arm to stop the bleeding. Below the tourniquet the arm became pale and numb. This condition is caused by:
*a. Compression ischemia
b. Obstruction ischemia
c. Thrombosis
d. Angiospastic ischemia
e. Venous congestion

10. A 36-year-old man traveled to the mountains for a vacation (altitude of 2000 meters above the sea level). He developed increased respiration rate, tachycardia, and slight dizziness. Two days later these signs disappeared. This process is called:
a. Regeneration
b. Compensation
*c. Adaptation
d. Inhibition
e. Proliferation

11. 30 minutes after the dental treatment the patient developed red itching spots on the face and oral mucosa. The patient was diagnosed with urticaria. What bioactive substance with vasodilating and pruriginous effect is produced during this type of allergic reaction?
*a. Histamine
b. Leukotriene B4
c. Bradykinin
d. Interleukin-1
e. Prostaglandin E2

12. A 16-year-old girl, who has been starving herself for a long time to lose weight, developed an edema. This phenomenon is mainly caused by:
a. Hypoglycemia due to glycogen synthesis disturbance
b. Deceleration of glomerular filtration rate
c. Decreased production of vasopressin in the hypothalamus
*d. Hypoproteinemia due to protein synthesis disturbance
e. Venous congestion and increased venous pressure

13. The doctor stated the absence of respiration and cardiac activity in a traffic accident victim. This condition lasts for 1 minute already. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following terminal state:
a. Agony
*b. Clinical death
c. Traumatic shock, torpid phase
d. Traumatic shock, erectile phase
e. Preagony

14. A 50-year-old man, who has been suffering from chronic hepatic failure for years, developed ascites. What is the main mechanism of development of this new disorder in the patient?
a. Increased oncotic blood pressure
*b. Increased pressure in the portal venous system
c. Increased blood levels of low density and very low density lipoproteins
d. Decreased hepatic synthesis of albumins and globulins
e. Appearance of neurotoxic substances in blood

15. A 56-year-old man with a valvular defect complains of lower limb edemas that lately increased in frequency. Name the local pathogenetic factor of edema development in this case:
a. Increase of oncotic blood pressure
b. Decrease of hydrodynamic blood pressure
c. Increase of interstitial pressure
*d. Increase of hydrodynamic blood pressure
e. Decrease of vessel wall permeability

16. A woman was diagnosed with peptic ulcer of the stomach. She has a long history of rheumatoid arthritis. What drugs are the likely cause of this disease in the patient?
a. H2 blockers
b. Antibiotics
*c. Glucocorticoids
d. Antihistamines
e. Antihypertensive drugs

17. Due to an accident on board a nuclear submarine, a soldier received a radiation dose of 5 Gy. He complains of headache, nausea, and vertigo. What changes in leukocyte number can be observed in this soldier after the irradiation?
a. Agranulocytosis
b. Lymphocytosis
c. Leukopenia
*d. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
e. Eosinophilia

18. A patient was brought to the hospital with a lacerated wound of the maxillofacial area. Profuse bleeding from the wound could not be stopped for a long time. What disturbance of total blood volume will be observed within the first hour after the blood loss occurred?
a. Hypervolemia
b. No disturbances in blood volume
c. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
d. Polycythemic hypovolemia
*e. Normocythemic hypovolemia

