1. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed acute heart failure. What drug should be prescribed in this case?
*a. Strophanthin
b. Соrdigitum
c. Adonisid
d. Convallaria majalis tincture
e. Digitoxin

2. To treat ischemic heart disease, a patient was prescribed a beta-adrenergic blocking agent. After a time he developed a cough and bronchospasm. What drug can cause these side effects?
a. Atenolol
b. Talinolol
*c. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
d. Phenihidine (Nifedipine)
e. Metoprolol

3. A child with signs of rickets has been prescribed a certain liposoluble vitamin drug by the pediatrician and dentist. This drug affects the metabolism of phosphorus and calcium in the body and facilitates calcium accumulation in bone tissue and dentin. If its content in the body is insufficient, a person develops disorders of ossification process, dental structure, and occlusion. Name this drug:
*a. Ergocalciferol
b. Tocopherol acetate
c. Thyroidin
d. Menadione (Vicasolum)
e. Retinol acetate

4. A patient with signs of anxiety, fear, uncertainty, and mental strain was prescribed diazepam. What mechanism of tranquilizing action can be observed in this case?
*a. Interaction with benzodiazepine receptors
b. Interaction with cholinergic receptors
c. Interaction with dopamine receptors
d. Interaction with serotonin receptors
e. Interaction with adrenergic receptors

5. A patient with hypochromic anemia was prescribed an iron-containing drug for intravenous administration only. Name this drug:
a. Dichlothiazide (Hydrochlorothiazide)
*b. Fercoven
c. Furosemide
d. Mannitol
e. Etacrynic acid

6. A child presents with dry cough. What non-narcotic antitussive drug can relieve the patient’s condition?
a. Morphine hydrochloride
b. Codeine phosphate
*c. Glaucine hydrochloride
d. Potassium iodide
e. Althaea officinalis roots

7. A patient with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach is prescribed a drug that blocks histamine H2 receptors. Select this drug from the list:
*a. Famotidine
b. Omeprazole
c. Dithylin (Suxamethonium)
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Bisacodyl

8. The patient is in the state of cardiogenic shock, he needs to be given a non-glycoside cardiotonic drug. What will be the drug of choice in this case?
a. Cordiamin (Nikethamide)
b. Amrinone
*c. Dobutamine
d. Ethimizol
e. Caffeine

9. A certain drug with potent natriuretic action is usually prescribed for dehydration therapy of cerebral and pulmonary edemas. Name this drug:
a. Spironolactone
b. Mannitol
c. Theophylline
*d. Furosemide
e. Etacrynic acid

10. A patient with malignant tumor was prescribed a narcotic analgesic to relieve the unbearable pain. What is the mechanism of analgesic action of such drugs?
a. Inhibition of histamine receptors
*b. Activation of opiate receptors
c. Activation of D2 dopamine receptors
d. Inhibition of cholinergic receptors
e. Inhibition of serotonin receptors

11. A patient with streptococcal pneumonia was prescribed an antimicrobial agent that disrupts microbial membranes. Name this drug:
a. Erythromycin
b. Doxycycline hydrochloride
c. Gentamicin sulfate
*d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
e. Azithromycin

12. A 26-year-old woman presents with skin rashes and itching after eating citrus fruits. Prescribe her a drug that is an H1-histamine receptor antagonist:
a. Menadione (Vicasolum)
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
*c. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Paracetamol

13. A 30-year-old patient after a case of viral hepatitis type B has developed complaints of continuous nasal hemorrhages. What drug would be the most advisable for treatment of this condition?
a. Folic acid
b. Nadroparin calcium (Fraxiparine)
*c. Menadione (Vicasolum)
d. Dipiridamol
e. Asparcam

14. A patient with megaloblastic anemia was taking a water-soluble vitamin. Name this substance:
*a. Cyanocobalamin
b. Tocopherol acetate
c. Pyridoxine
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Thiamine chloride

15. Complex therapy of a patient with bronchopneumonia accompanied by exhausting dry cough includes a certain mucolytic agent that depolymerizes mucoproteins. Name this drug:
*a. Acetylcysteine
b. Strophanthin
c. Atenolol
d. Neodicoumarin
e. Codeine

16. Prior to tooth extraction under a local anesthesia, the patient was tested for novocaine allergy. The test result was positive. What substance can be used to administer anesthesia in this case?
a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Procainamide
*c. Lidocaine
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Sodium valproate

17. To terminate a bronchial asthma attack that developed in the patient during the tooth extraction, the patient was given salbutamol. This drug belongs to the following pharmacological group:
*a. Beta-2-adrenergic agonists
b. Narcotic analgesics
c. Analeptics
d. Adaptogens
e. Muscarinic agonists

18. A doctor has made a diagnosis of gingivitis and recommended the patient to rinse the oral cavity with an oxidizing agent. Specify this agent:
a. Salicylic acid
b. Boric acid
*c. Hydrogen peroxide
d. Phenol
e. Brilliant green

