1. A newborn child has heart rate of 92/min, his breathing rate is irregular, muscular tone is low, extremities are cyanotic, irritation with a catheter causes a grimace. Estimate the child's condition according to Apgar score:
a. 1-2 points
*b. 5-6 points
c. 9-10 points
d. 7-8 points
e. 3-4 points

2. A visiting nurse makes a regular home visit to a healthy 3-month-old child. To calculate the daily amount of food she uses the volumetric method. What is the due daily amount for this child?
a. 1/4 of body weight
*b. 1/6 of body weight
c. 1/7of body weight
d. 1/5 of body weight
e. 1/8 of body weight

3. A child developed a disease Iin the second year of life when his mother noticed formation of large bruises after minor injuries. The child was admitted to the hospital with a bleeding into the knee joint. What disease can be suspected?
*a. Haemophilia
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Acute vascular purpura
d. Thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Rheumatic carditis

4. A 9-year-old child complains about weakness, headache, sternal pain and dry cough. Objectively: the skin is pale, body temperature is 38,6°C. The auscultation of lungs reveals rough respiration, dry and heterogeneous bubbling crackles which quantity diminishes after cough. Percussion reveals clear pulmonary sound above the lungs. X-ray examination reveals symmetric intensification of pulmonary vasculature and pulmonary roots expansion. What is the most likely disease?
*a. Acute bronchitis
b. Acute pneumonia
c. Acute laryngotracheitis
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Bronchial asthma

5. Examination of a 7-year-old child revealed dullness on percussion over the lungs below the angle of scapula, auscultation revealed harsh respiration and small bubbling rales. A nurse should think of the following disease:
a. Acute nasopharyngitis
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Acute viral pneumonia
d. Acute laryngotracheitis
*e. Focal pneumonia

6. After medical examination of a 4-month-old baby a nurse revealed 26% deficit of body weight. Specify this chronic hypotrophy:
*a. Hypotrophy of II degree
b. Hypotrophy of III degree
c. Paratrophia of III degree
d. Paratrophia of II degree
e. Hypotrophy of I degree

7. 2 weeks after recovering from angina a 10-year-old boy presented with headache, swelling of eyelids, gross hematuria. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Pneumonia
b. Cholecystitis
c. Rheumatism
d. Pyelonephritis
*e. Glomerulonephritis

8. A 9-year-old girl had angina. Two weeks after recovery she developed erythema annulare and polyarthritis symptoms. Objectively: skin is pale, dyspnea, tachycardia and cardiac border dilatation are present. Specify the disease:
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*b. Acute rheumatic fever
c. Vasoneurosis
d. Pneumonia
e. Anaemia

9. An infant is 3 months old, he is breast-fed. Medical examination reveals hyperhidrosis especially in the occiput region, symptom of "occiput alopecia", acrimony, anxiety, softness of prefontanel borders and moderate craniotabes. What disease is it?
a. Pneumonia
b. Acute respiratory disease
c. Dysostosis
*d. Rachitis
e. Hydrocephalus

10. A 7-year-old child underwent Mantoux test. 72 hors later an infiltration 18 mm in diameter was revealed. What does it mean?
a. Negative reaction
b. Positive reaction
c. -
*d. Hyperergic reaction
e. Dubious reaction

11. The plan for rickets prevention in premature infants should include monitoring the timely specific prevention of rickets. It should be done since the following age of a child:
a. From the 1st week of life
b. From the 1st month
*c. From the 10th day of life
d. From 1,5 months
e. In the 2nd month of life

12. A young child attending day nursery was hospitalised to contagious isolation ward with complaints of fever, general weakness, frequent vomiting and defecation. What should the kindergarten nurse do to comply with sanitary and antiepidemic conditions?
*a. Place the kindergarten in quarantine for 7 days, terminal disinfection
b. Place the kindergarten in quarantine for 2 weeks, physical disinfection
c. Place the kindergarten in quarantine for 10 days, terminal disinfection
d. Place the kindergarten in quarantine for 5 days, chemical disinfection
e. Place the kindergarten in quarantine for 21 days, current disinfection

13. A 6-year-old child was vaccinated with "Priorix". After that he developed petechial skin rash. There were no other pathological symptoms. Blood analysis: Hb- 130g/l, leukocytes - 6,0109/l, thrombocytes ? 120109/l. What disease corresponds with such child's condition?
a. Anemia
b. Acute leukaemia
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*d. Immune thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Purpura rheumatica

14. Re-examination of a newborn 1 hour after birth revealed increased excitement and motor restlessness. The child cries for no reason, moans, has shallow breathing; the muscle tone is decreased. There is expressed perioral cyanosis. The eyes are open, focused at one point, occasionally a convergent strabismus occurs. What pathology is the case?
a. Asphyxia of newborn
b. Pneumonia of newborn
*c. Intracranial birth trauma
d. Cephalohematoma
e. Respiratory distress syndrome

15. A 2-month-old baby has been hospitalized in an infectious disease hospital for frequent vomiting, liquid stool. Examination findings: a serious condition, pinched features, dry skin, large fontanel depression. What premedical first aid should be rendered to the child?
a. Anaesthetization
*b. Oral rehydration
c. Cleansing enema
d. Injection of antibiotics
e. Gastric lavage

16. A 7-year-old child was found to have the following problems: abrupt decrease in body temperature to 35,2°C, weakness, cold sweat, thready pulse, frequent shallow breathing. What condition are these problems typical for?
a. Acute respiratory failure
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Syncope
*d. Collapse
e. Pulmonary edema

17. According to the nursing intervention plan a nurse asked the mother of a 6-month-old child to visit children's hospital for compulsory virus B hepatitis vaccination. Choose the dose and method of vaccination in accordance with nursing intervention plan:
a. 1,0 ml i/m to buttock
*b. 0,5 ml i/m to exterior hip surface
c. 0,1 ml i/d to forearm
d. 0,5 ml s/c to shoulder
e. 0,1 ml s/c to shoulder

18. A 5-year-old child undergoing in-patient treatment for thrombocytopenic purpura suddenly developed nasal bleeding. What solution should used for anterior nasal packing?
a. 4,2% solution of sodium bicarbonate
b. 5% glucose solution
c. 0,9% solution of sodium chloride
*d. 3% solution of hydrogen peroxide
e. 0,05% furacilinum solution

19. A 6-month-old boy was diagnosed with dehydration of I degree against the background of intestinal toxicosis. What daily amount of liquid is it necessary to drink in such condition per 1 kg of child's body weight?
*a. 50-100 millilitres
b. 100-130 millilitres
c. 170-200 millilitres
d. 160-170 millilitres
e. 70-90 millilitres

20. The process of primary dentition finishes at the age of two years. How many deciduous teeth should children have?
a. 24
b. 10
c. 6
*d. 20
e. 14

21. A child with diabetes mellitus needs to be given an injection of 16 units of insulin. (1ml - 40 units). Specify the insulin dose in millilitres:
*a. 0,4 ml
b. 0,8 ml
c. 0,1 ml
d. 1,0 ml
e. 0,2 ml

22. A full-term infant with A(??) Rh(+) blood group was born of mother with 0(?) Rh(-) blood group. Jaundice appeared on the first day of life. Bilirubin level is 150 micromole/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Birth trauma
b. Physiologic jaundice
*c. Hemolytic disease of newborn
d. Impetigo neonatorum
e. Vesiculopustulosis

23. A child is 6 years old. There are complaints about body temperature rise to 39°C, headache, inertness, myalgia and, joint pain and backache. The symptoms has been present for two days. His nose is bunged, he has a tickling in his throat and hyperaemic larynx. What disease is it?
a. Adenovirus infection
b. Tracheobronchitis
c. Laryngitis
*d. Influenza
e. Pneumonia

24. A 10-year-old child complains about frequent stranguria, body temperature rise and symptoms of intoxication. Common urine examination shows leukocyturia and bacteriuria. What disease is it?
*a. Pyelonephritis
b. Glomerulonephritis
c. Urolithiasis
d. Pneumonia
e. Renal insufficiency

25. A 2-year-old boy has been ill for 3 days. He is gravel-voiced, "barking cough" is present. The child developed dyspnea at night. The skin is cyanotic, auxiliary muscular system takes part in breathing. What urgent state corresponds with such symptoms?
a. Foreign body in the upper respiratory tracts
*b. Stenosing laryngotracheitis
c. Diphtheritic croup
d. Asthmatic attack
e. Pneumonia

26. A body temperature drop in an 8-year old child caused weakness, paleness, cold clammy sweat and thready pulse. What condition corresponds with such clinical signs?
a. Syncope
b. Acute right ventricular failure
c. Cold coma
*d. Collapse
e. Acute left ventricular failure

27. On the 5th day after birth a newborn child presents with purulent discharges from umbilical wound, hyperaemia of umbilical ring. He was diagnosed with purulent omphalitis. What is the necessary nursing intervention?
a. Chest roentgenography
b. Echography of heart
c. Electrocardiogram
*d. Inoculation of umbilical wound discharges
e. Encephalogram

28. A newborn baby has birth weight of 3500 g, and birth length of 52 cm. What is the normal frequency of respiratory movements per minute for this child?
a. 16-20
b. 25-30
c. 30-35
*d. 40-60
e. 20-25

29. A 3-month-old baby has been formula-fed since the age of one month. Prevention of rickets was not performed. Objectively: the baby has flattened and bald occiput, large fontanel sized 3x3 cm with soft edges. These changes are caused by the deficiency of:
*a. Vitamin D
b. Vitamin B12
c. Vitamin C
d. Magnesium
e. Iron

30. A 3-year-old child during vaccination lost consciousness, the skin turned pale and got covered with cold sweat. What complication might be suspected by a nurse first of all?
a. Eclampsy
b. Episyndrome
c. Syncope
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Fright

31. A 5-year-old child was delivered to the hospital with nosebleed. Te child has also skin haemorrhages in form of irregular petechia and ecchymosis. What changes in complete blood count will confirm the provisional diagnosis?
a. Neutrophilia
*b. Thrombocytopenia
c. Leukopenia
d. Anaemia
e. Presence of blast cells

32. A 12-year-old boy suddenly felt anxiety, weakness and tachycardia during PE lesson. The skin was pale and very wet. Some time later he developed convulsions and lost consciousness. He has been ill with diabetes mellitus for 5 years. Estimate the patient's condition:
a. Diabetic ketoacidosis
b. Diabetic ketoacidic coma
*c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Epileptic seizure
e. Uremic coma

33. 2 years after having B hepatitis a 12-year-old child has been diagnosed with chronic hepatitis. What laboratory test will be the most objective indicator of compromised liver function?
*a. Bilirubin level in blood serum
b. Clinical urine analysis
c. Glucose concentration in blood serum
d. Bile pigment urine analysis
e. Clinical blood analysis

34. Since birth a 2-year-old child presents with cyanosis of skin and mucous membranes which progresses with physical load. Auscultation reveals rough systolic heart murmur. The child lags behind in physical development, body weight is 10 kg. These symptoms are typical for the following pathology:
a. Myocardiopathy
b. Anaemia
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Rheumatic carditis
*e. Atelocardia

35. After discharge from the maternity hospital a baby presented with blisters that burst uncovering the erosive surface. His condition is getting worse and worse. Body temperature is 39°C. What disease might be suspected?
a. Umbilical sepsis
b. Pseudofurunculosis
*c. Impetigo neonatorum
d. Vesiculopustulosis
e. Toxic erythema of a newborn

36. A 4-year-old boy presents with indisposition, marked weakness, decreased motor activity, pale skin. On the skin and mucous membranes there are petechiae and ecchymoses, some painless asymmetrically arranged hemorrhages. AP is 80/40 mm Hg, and tachycardia is present. Indicate the main reason for the existing problems in the child:
a. Increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate
*b. Decrease in platelet level
c. Inflammation of the small vessels
d. Decrease in hemoglobin level
e. Deficiency of IX factor

37. A 6-year-old child has pain and borborygmus, sickness, vomiting and itch in the perianal folds region. Medical examination reveals pinworm eggs. Choose the drug for the child's treatment:
a. Ascorutine
b. Cephazoline
c. Festal
*d. Vormil
e. Naphthamonnum

38. A 5-year-old child presents with poor appetite, inertness, pale skin and mucous membranes, dry skin, brittle hair. In blood: Hb- 91 g/l, colour index - 07, ESR - 8 mm/hour. What disease are these symptoms most typical for?
a. Pneumonia
b. Dyspepsia
c. Rickets
*d. Anaemia
e. Stomatitis

39. A 3-year-old child has skin cyanosis, "watch-glass" nails and "drumstick" nail bones. Auscultation reveals that II sound of pulmonary artery is weak, there is rough systolic murmur. The child has hypoxemic attacks such as tachypnoe, cyanosis aggravation and excitement. The child is physically underdeveloped. Choose the disease that is characterised by the described symptoms:
a. Acute myocarditis
b. Rheumatic fever
*c. Congenital heart disease
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Rheumatic pericarditis

40. A nurse performs preventive tuberculosis vaccination to a newborn weighing 3400 g. How long can the diluted vaccine be used?
a. 5 hours
b. 10 hours
c. 6 hours
d. 3 hours
*e. 2 hours

41. What condition is considered a specific contraindication to rickets prevention?
a. Exudative catarrhal diathesis
b. Hemolytic disease of newborns
c. Hypotrophy
d. Anemia
*e. Small size of the large fontanel

42. What test should be administered to a child after an attack of laryngospasm in order to confirm spasmophilia diagnosis?
*a. Biochemical blood test for calcium
b. Urinalysis
c. Blood test for bilirubin
d. Biochemical blood test for C-reactive protein
e. Complete blood count

43. A child has mumps. When scheduling the plan of nursing care and treatment, a nurse will include the following independent intervention:
a. Hot compress
b. Water-alcohol compresses
*c. Warm heat to the parotid salivary glands
d. Cold to the affected glands
e. Dabbing the skin over the glands with camphor oil

44. While drawing up an annual plan for preventive vaccination of 6-year-old children the head nurse of a kindergarten should schedule the following vaccinations:
a. DPT, polio and Haemophilus influenzae
b. DT, hepatitis B, measles, mumps
c. Polio, DT
*d. DT, polio, rubella, measles, mumps
e. DT, polio, BCG

45. A 5-year-old child undergoes in-patient treatment for ARVI. Nursing observation findings: body T° - 38,8°C, pink skin hot to the touch. What premedical first aid should be rendered to the child in this case?
a. Clysterize the child with water of 38-40°C temperature
b. Warm the child
*c. Undress the child, wipe the skin with alcohol-water solution
d. Give aspirin
e. Give paracetamol

46. A 10-year-old boy complains of dry cough, dyspnea. He has a one-year history of the disease. Dyspnea attacks occur 1-2 times per month. He has been diagnosed with bronchial asthma. What changes in the respiratory system can be revealed during objective examination?
a. Suppressed breath sounds, moist rales
*b. Bilateral wheezes, expiratory dyspnea
c. Harsh respiration, moist rales
d. Suppressed breath sounds, crepitation
e. Inspiratory dyspnea with chest indrawing

47. An infant is 3 months old. Objectively: there is marked pallor of the mucous membranes and skin, excessive sweating, especially in the head, agitation, occipital alopecia. The baby is formula-fed. What disease are these symptoms indicative of?
a. Rickets, the height of disease
b. Rickets, convalescence
c. Rickets, the period of residual effects
*d. Rickets, the initial period
e. Anemia

48. A 7-year-old boy was hospitalised to te children's hospital. He complains about knee joint edema that appeared during playing football. It is known from the past history that his elder brother and his grandfather by mother's side are disposed to bleeding sickness. What laboratory examination will allow to clarify the diagnosis?
*a. Bleeding-time test
b. Biochemical blood analysis
c. Serologic examination of dynamic of bundle branch reentry
d. Common urine analysis
e. Complete blood count

49. A child is 2 years old. His mother consulted a doctor about deteriorating health of the child, inertness, capricious mood, loss of appetite, liquid, sometimes greenish stool. Laboratory analysis of feces revealed a significant decrease in bifidobacteria and lactobacilli rate and growth of opportunistic microflora. What state can be suspected?
a. Functional dyspepsia
b. Toxicosis with exsicosis
*c. Dysbiosis
d. Food poisoning
e. Rotavirus

50. A 7-year-old male patient undergoes treatment at the nephrological department. He complains about general weakness, to- 38°C, backache and sickness. Urine analysis: leukocytes 30-40 in visual field and bacteriuria. What additional examinations should be included into the nursing examination plan?
a. Mantoux test
b. Schick's test
c. Test of Reberg
d. Sulcovich's test
*e. Nechiporenko's analysis

51. A 4-year-old girl has to- 37,4°C, obstructed nasal breathing, mucous and serous nasal discharge, voice hoarseness, rough cough. What disease that accompanies ARVI are these changes typical for?
a. Acute pharyngitis
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Obstructive bronchitis
*d. Acute laryngitis
e. Acute tracheitis

52. A 9-month-old boy has excessive moist cough, dyspnea with difficult expiration, remote wheezing, respiratory rate 52/min, body temperature - 36,9°C, HR - 110/min. Specify the top-priority factor in the planning of nursing examination:
a. Body temperature
b. Heart rate
*c. Respiratory rate
d. Auscultation of the lungs
e. Sputum

53. You provide nursing care for a 10-year-old child with acute glomerulonephritis. What alterations in the urine are common?
*a. Erythrocyturia, cylindruria
b. Increased glucose level, cylindruria
c. Erythrocyturia, bacteriuria
d. Leukocyturia, erythrocyturia
e. Leukocyturia, bacteriuria

54. A neonate has lesions the size of a millet grain with serous-purulent contents on the skin of the trunk, head, and in the natural folds of the skin. What disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Furunculosis
b. Herpes infection
c. Pemphigus of newborns
d. Pseudofurunculosis
*e. Vesicopustular eruptions

55. A newborn child has symptoms of intoxication. There is also asymmetrical enlargement and infiltration of one mammary gland. The skin over the gland is hot, there are purulent discharges from the duct. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Toxic erythema of a newborn
*b. Suppurative mastitis of a newborn
c. Physiological swelling of mammary glands
d. Abscess
e. Phlegmon

56. An 11-month-old child had been given whole cow milk in the morning. In the evening the child became inert, body temperature rose up to 38°C, there were repeated vomiting and defecation 8 times a day with liquid mucous and blood-streaked stool. This state is interpreted as:
a. Acute enteritis
*b. Acute gastroenterocolitis
c. Acute gastroenteritis
d. Acute gastritis
e. Ulcerative colitis

57. A 5-year-old child has intoxication symptoms and cough. The percussion reveals dullness of percussion sound under the right scapula. The auscultation reveals quiet breath sounds and crepitations. What disease are these symptoms most typical for?
a. Tracheitis
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Bronchopneumonia
d. Acute stenosing laryngitis
e. Bronchitis

58. An 8-year-old child has rash on the trunk, face and scalp in form of papulae, maculae and vesicles with turbid contents. Such condition is typical for the following disease:
a. Allergic dermatitis
*b. Chickenpox
c. Rubella
d. Measles
e. Epidemic parotiditis

59. A 5-year-old child with pyelonephritis has been administered nitrofurans. What drugs should be prepared?
a. Levamisole, thymogen
*b. Furaginum, furadonin
c. Nalidixic acid, nevigramon
d. Biseptol, aethazolum
e. Voltaren, ortophenum

60. To normalize intestinal microflora and treat dysbiosis in children with hypotrophy eubiotics are usually administred, namely:
a. Tavegyl, suprastin
*b. Bifiform, linex, yogurt
c. Festal, enzystal
d. Polysorb
e. Albumin, plasma

