1. Patient with hypersecretion of the gastric juices was recomended to exclude from the diet concentrated bouillons and vegetable decoctions because of their stimulation of gastric secretion. What is dominating mechanism of stimulation of secretion in this case?
a. Stimulation of excretion of secretin in the duodenum
b. Irritation of mechanoreceptors of the stomach
*c. Stimulation of gastrin production by G-cells
d. Irritation of taste receptors
e. Irritation of mechanoreceptors of the oral cavity

2. Buffer capacity of blood was decreased in the worker due to exhausting muscular work. Entry of what acid substance to the blood can this state be explained?
*a. Lactate
b. Pyruvate
c. 3-phosphoglycerate
d. 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate
e. α-ketoglutarate

3. Extensive thromboembolic infarction of the left cerebral hemispheres, large septic spleen, immunocomplex glomerulonephritis, ulcers on the edges of the aortic valves, covered with polypous thrombus with colonies of staphylococcus were revealed on autopsy of the young man who died in com
a. Septic bacterial endocarditis
b. Septicopyemia
c. Rheumatic thromboendocarditis
*d. Acute rheumatic valvulitis
e. What disease caused cerebral thromboemboly?

4. On the empty stomach in the patients blood glucose level was 5,65 mmol/L, in an hour after usage of sugar it was 8,55 mmol/L, in a 2 hours - 4,95 mmol/L. Such indicators are typical for:
a. Patient with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
b. Patient with tireotoxicosis
*c. Healthy person
d. Patient with hidden diabetes mellitus
e. Patient with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus

5. Inhibition of alpha-motoneuron of the extensor muscles was noticed after stimulation of alpha-motoneuron of the flexor muscles during the experiment on the spinal column. What type of inhibition can this process cause?
a. Depolarizational
*b. Reciprocal
c. Recurrent
d. Presynaptic
e. Lateral

6. A 68-year-old woman cant move by the upper and lower right extremities due to insult. Muscle tone of these extremities and reflexes are increased. There are pathological reflexes. What form of the paralysis is it?
a. Paraplegia
*b. Hemiplegia
c. Monoplegia
d. Tetraplegia
e. Dissociation

7. A 10-year-old child complains of weakness, nausea, irritability. Helminthes of white color and 5-10 mm long were found on the underwear. On microscopy of the scrape from the perianal folds achromic ova of the unsymmetrical form were revealed. Indicate what helminth is parasiting on the child?
a. ancylostoma duodenalis
*b. Enterobins vermicularis
c. Trichina
d. Ascaris lumbricoides
e. Trichuris

8. Fatty of phospholipids is disordered due to fat infiltration of the liver. Indicate which of the presented substances can enhance the process of methylation during phospholipids synthesis?
a. Glucose
b. Citrate
c. Glycerin
*d. Methionine
e. Ascorbic acid

9. Analeptical remedy of reflective type from the H-cholinomimetics group was given to the patient for restoration of breathing after poisoning with carbon monoxide. What medicine was prescribed to the patient?
a. Mesaton
b. Atropine sulphate
*c. Lobeline hydrochloride
d. Adrenalin hydrochloride
e. Pentamin

10. Scraps of the mycelium of a fungus, spores, air bubbles and fat drops were discovered on microscopy of the patients hair excluded from the infected areas. For what fungus disease is this microscopic picture characteristic?
a. Microspory
b. Trichophytosis
c. Sporotrichosis
d. Epidermophytosis
*e. Favus

11. Upper neck node of sympathetic trunk was removed from the rabbit on experiment. Reddening and increased temperature of the skin of head is observed. What form of peripheral circulation of the blood developed in the rabbit?
*a. Neuroparalytic arterial hyperemia
b. Venous hyperemia
c. Neurotonic arterial hyperemia
d. Stasis
e. Metabolic arterial hyperemia

12. The cell of the laboratory animal was overdosed with Roentgen rays. As a result albuminous fragments formed in the cytoplasm. What cell organoid will take part at their utilization?
*a. Lysosomes
b. Golgi complex
c. Ribosome
d. Endoplasmic reticulum
e. Cells centre

13. Lung of premature infant is presented on electronic photomicrography of biopsy material. Collapse of the alveolar wall caused by the deficiency of surfactant was revealed. Disfunction of what cells of the alveolar wall caused it?
*a. Alveocytes type II
b. Alveocytes type I
c. Alveolar macrophages
d. Secretory cells
e. Fibroblasts

14. In a patient with clinical signs of immunodeficiency the number and functional activity of T and B lymphocytes are not changed. Defect with dysfunction of antigen-presentation to the immunocompetent cells was found during investigation on the molecule level. Defect of what cells is the most probable?
a. 0-lymphocytes
b. NK-cells
*c. Macrophages, monocytes
d. Т-lymphocytes, В-lymphocytes
e. Fibroblasts, Т-lymphocytes, В-lymphocytes

15. Processes of repolarisation are disturbed in ventricular myocardium in examined person. It will cause amplitude abnormalities of configuration and duration of the wave:
a. Q
b. P
c. R
d. S
*e. Т

16. Patient with hypochromic anemia has splitting hair and loss of hair, increased nail brittling and taste alteration. What is the mechanism of the development of these symptoms?
a. Decreased production of parathyrin
b. Deficiency of vitamin В12
*c. Deficiency of iron-containing enzymes
d. Deficiency of vitamin А
e. Decreased production of thyroid hormones

17. Larvae were detected occasionally on the microscopic examination of the sputum of the patient with pneumonia. Eosinophiles were detected on the blood examination. What helminthiasis can be diagnosed?
*a. Ascariasis
b. Opistorchis
c. Paragonimiasis
d. Trichocephaliasis
e. Enterobiosis

18. Patient with bronchial asthma was taking tablets which caused insomnia, headache, increased blood pressure. What medecine can cause such complications?
a. Adrenaline
b. Chromolin sodium
c. Izadrine
d. Euphyline
*e. Ephedrine

19. A 2-year-old child experienced convulsions because of lowering calcium ions concentration in the blood plasma. Function of what structure is decreased?
a. Hypophysis
b. Thymus
*c. Parathyroid glands
d. Pineal gland
e. Adrenal cortex

20. Tuberculine was injected intracutaneously to the child for tuberculin test. Marked hyperemia, tissue infiltration developed on the place of injection in 24 hours. What mechanism caused these modifications?
a. Reagin type cytotoxity
b. Immunocomplex cytotoxity
c. Antibody cytotoxity
*d. Cells cytotoxity
e. Granuloma formation

21. During investigation of patient, it was found formation in the white substance of cerebral hemispheres with location in the knee and frontal part of posterior crus of internal capsule. Fibres of what conductive tract of the brain will be disrupted?
a. Tr. frontothalamicus
*b. Tr. pyramidalis
c. Tr. frontopontinus
d. Tr. parietooccipitopontinus
e. Тr. thalamocorticalis

22. Three separate bones connected with cartilage in the area of pelvis cavity are noticed on the X-ray of the pelvis. What are these bones?
a. Iliac, sacral, coccyx
b. Sciatic, femoral, sacral
c. Pubic, sciatic, femoral
d. Sacral, pubic, coccyx
*e. Iliac, pubic, sciatic

23. A13-year-old boy complains of general weakness, dizziness, tiredness. He is mentally retarded. Increased level of valine, isoleucine, leucine is in the blood and urine. Urine has specific smell. What is the diagnosis?
a. Tyrosinosis
b. Histidinemia
*c. Maple syrup urine disease
d. Addisons disease
e. Graves disease

24. Aspirin has antiinflammatory effect due to inhibition of the cyclooxygenase activity. Level of what biological active acids will decrease?
a. Biogenic amines
*b. Prostaglandins
c. Iodinethyronyns
d. Leucotriens
e. Catecholamines

25. Child inspired button. Where is it likely to be?
*a. In the right main bronchus
b. In the gullet
c. In the larynx
d. In the left main bronchus
e. In the trachea

26. Young man felt sharp pain in the back during active tightening on the horizontal bar. Objectively: pain while moving of upper extremity, limited pronation and adduction functions. Sprain of what muscle is presented?
a. М. levator scapulae
b. М. romboideus major
*c. М. latissimus dorsi
d. М. trapezius
e. М. subscapularis

27. An aged patient complains of headache, dizziness, quick tiredness, worsening of memory. Anamnesis: craniocerebral injury. Medicine of what group should be prescribed?
a. Analgetics
b. Somnific
*c. Nootropics
d. Neuroleptics
e. Sedatives

28. Patient with diabetes didnt get insulin injection in time that caused hyperglycemic coma (glucose in the blood 50mmol/L). What mechanism is prevalent in the development of the coma?
a. Hypoxia
b. Hyponatremia
c. Acidosis
d. Hypokaliemia
*e. Hyperosmia

29. Patient with injured muscles of the lower extremities was admitted to the traumatological department. Due to what cells is reparative regeneration of the muscle fibers and restoration of the muscle function possible?
a. Myofibroblasts
*b. Satellite-cells
c. Myoepithelial cells
d. Fibroblasts
e. Myoblasts

30. Spasm of smooth muscle of bronchi developed in the patient. Usage of activators of what membrane cytoreceptors is fisiologically valid to decrease attack?
a. М-cholinoreceptors
*b. beta-adrenoreceptors
c. N-cholinoreceptors
d. beta- alpha-аdrenoreceptors
e. alpha-аdrenoreceptors

31. Patient was admitted to the infection unit with diagnosis of bacterial dysentery. On laboratory studies it was revealed that causative element is sensative to the many antimicrobial medicines, but patient has anemia. What medicine is contra-indicated to the patient?
a. Ampicillin
b. Furazolidone
c. Phthalazol
*d. Levomycetin
e. Enteroseptol

32. On autopsy of a still-born infant it is revealed heart development abnormalities: ventricles are not separated, originates from the right part single arterial trunk. For what class of vertebrate is such heart construction characteristic?
*a. Amphibian
b. Mammals
c. Fishes
d. Birds
e. Reptiles

33. A 50-year-old patient with typhoid fever was treated with Levomycetin, the next day his condition became worse, temperature rised to 39,60С. What caused worthening?
a. Allergic reaction
b. Irresponsiveness of an agent to the levomycetin
c. Reinfection
*d. The effect of endotoxin agent
e. Secondary infection addition

34. Inflamation is characterised by increasing penetration of vessels of microcirculation stream, increasing of their fluid dynamic blood pressure. Increasing of the osmotic concentration and dispersity of protein structures present in the intercellular fluid. What kind of edema will appear in this case?
a. Hydrodynamic
b. Membranogenic
*c. Mixed
d. Colloid-osmotic
e. Lymphogenic

35. Patient complains of frequent and difficult urination. Imperfection of what formation can cause it?
*a. Prostate
b. Sperm bubbles
c. Testicle adnexa
d. Testicles
e. Bulb-uretic glands

36. Live vaccine is injected into the human body. Increasing activity of what cells of connective tissue can be expected?
a. Macrophages and fibroblasts
b. Adipocytes and adventitious cells
c. Fibroblasts and labrocytes
*d. Plasmocytes and lymphocytes
e. Pigmentocytes and pericytes

37. Methotrexate (structural analogue of the folic acid which is competitive inhibitor of the dihydrofolatreductase) is prescribed for treatment of the malignant tumour.On which level does methotrexate inhibit synthesis of the nucleic acids?
a. Reparation
*b. Mononucleotide synthesis
c. Transcription
d. Replication
e. Processing

38. Patient was on glucocorticoids for a long time, discontinuation of usage caused exacerbation of the illness, decreased BP, weakness. How can you explain it?
a. Cumulation
b. Sensitization
*c. Insufficiency of adrenal glands
d. Adaptation to the medicine
e. Hyperproduction of ACTH

39. Arterial hypertention is caused by the stenosis of the renal arteries in the patient. Activation of what system is the main link in the pathogenesys of this form of hypertension?
a. Sympathoadrenal
b. Hypothalamic-pituitary
c. Kallikrein-kinin
*d. Renin-angiotensin
e. Parasympathetic

40. Patient with complaints of dryness in the mouth, photophobia and vision violation was admitted to the reception-room. Skin is hyperemic, dry, pupils are dilated, tachycardia. Poisoning with belladonna alkaloids was diagnosed on further examination. What medicine should be prescribed?
a. Armine
*b. Prozerin
c. Dipyroxim
d. Diazepam
e. Pilocarpine

41. A 27- year-old woman has dropped penicillin containing eye drops. In few minutes there appeared feeling of itching, burning of the skin, lips and eyelids edema, whistling cough, decreasing of BP. What antibodies take part in the development of this allergic reaction?
a. IgG and IgD
*b. IgE and IgG
c. IgM and IgG
d. IgM and IgD
e. IgA and IgM

42. Highly injured person gradually died. Please choose the indicator of biological death:
a. Absence of palpitation
*b. Autolysis and decay in the cells
c. Absence of movements
d. Loss of consciousness
e. Disarray of chemical processes

43. On autopsy of the 58-year-old man it is revealed: mitral valve is deformed, thickened, not totally closed. Microscopically: centers of collagen fibers are eosinophilic, have positive fibrin reaction. The most likely it is:
a. Mucoid swelling
b. Amyloidosis
c. Fibrinoid inflammation
d. Hyalinosis
*e. Fibrinoid swelling

44. Child asked you to puff up the balloon as much as possible for a one exhalation.What air volume will you use?
*a. Vital volume of the lungs
b. Functional residual volume
c. Total volume of the lungs
d. Inspiration volume
e. Backup volume of the inspiration

45. While studing of the family tree with history of hypertrichosis (hyperhirsutism of the ear) this sign was founded only in the men and it was inherited from father to the son. Define the type of hypertrichosis inheritance?
a. Connected with Х-chromosome recessive
b. Autosomal-dominant
*c. Connected with Y-chromosome
d. Autosomal- recessive
e. Connected with Х-chromosome dominant

46. The person was selling "homemade pork" sausages on the market. State sanitary inspector suspected falcification of the sausages.With help of what serological immune reaction can food substance be identified?
a. Indirect hemagglutination test
*b. Precipitation test
c. Complement- fixation test
d. Immunofluorescence test
e. Agglutination test

47. Vegetative abnormalities in the sleep, heat regulation, all kinds of metabolism, diabetes insipidus are developing in the patient due to grouth of the tumour in the III ventricle of brain. Irritation of the nucleus of what part of the brain can cause this symptoms?
*a. Hypothalamus
b. Medulla
c. Pons cerebelli
d. Cerebral peduncles (cruces cerebri)
e. Mesencephalic tegmentum

48. A 45-year-old man applied to the trauma unit because of domestic shoulder trauma. Objectively: flexibility, reduction and pronation functions of the shoulder are absent. What muscle was injured?
*a. Teres major muscle
b. Infraspinous muscle
c. Subscapular muscle
d. Teres minor muscle
e. Supraspinous muscle

49. A 60-year-old patient was admitted to the surgical department because of infection caused by blue pus bacillus (Pseudomonas aeruginosa) which is sensative to penicillin antibiotics. Indicate which of the given penicillins has marked activity to the Pseudomonas aeruginosa?
a. Methicillin
b. Phenoxymethylpenicillin
c. Oxacillin
*d. Carbenicillin disodium
e. Benzylpenicillin

50. On microscopic examination of the enlarged neck gland of a 14-year-old girl it was revealed destruction of the tissue structure of the node, absence of the lymph follicles, sclerotic and necrosis parts, cell constitution of the node is polymorphous, lymphocites, eosinophiles, atypical cells of the large size with multiple-lobule nuclei (Beresovsky-Shternberg cells) and onenucleus cells of the large size are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lympholeucosis
b. Fungous mycosis
*c. Lymphogranulomatous
d. Chronic lympholeucosis
e. Berkitts lymphoma

51. In the experiment on the animal the part of the cerebral cortex hemispheres was removed. It caused elimination of previously formed conditioned reflex to the light irritation. What part ot the cortex was removed?
*a. Occipital cortex
b. Limbic cortex
c. Postcentral convolution
d. Temporal lobe
e. Precentral convolution

52. Marked increase of activity of МВ-forms of CPK (creatinephosphokinase) and LDH-1 were revealed on the examination of the patients blood. What is the most likely pathology?
a. Hepatitis
*b. Miocardial infarction
c. Rheumatism
d. Pancreatitis
e. Cholecystitis

53. The patient with acute miocardial infarction was given intravenously different solutions during 8 hours with medical dropper 1500ml and oxygen intranasally. He died because of pulmonary edema. What caused the pulmonary edema?
a. Inhalation of the oxygen
b. Neurogenic reaction
*c. Volume overload of the left ventricular
d. Allergic reaction
e. Decreased oncotic pressure due to hemodilution

54. Shock and signs of acute renal failure (ARF) developed in the patient due to permanent injury. What is the leading cause of development of ARF in the case?
a. Increased pressure in the renal arteries
b. Decreased oncotic BP
c. Increased pressure in the nephron capsule
d. Urine excretion violation
*e. Decreased arterial pressure

55. Index of pH of the blood changed and became 7,3 in the patient with diabetus mellitus. Detecting of the components of what buffer system is used while diagnosing disorder of the acid-base equilibrium?
a. Oxyhemoglobin
b. Hemoglobin
*c. Bicarbonate
d. Protein
e. Phosphate

56. On examination of the person it was revealed that minute volume of heart is 3500mL, systolic volume is 50 mL. What is the frequency of cardiac contraction?
a. 80 bpm
b. 60 bpm
c. 50 bpm
d. 90 bpm
*e. 70 bpm

57. Chronic glomerulonephritis was diagnosed in a 34-year-old patient 3 years ago. Edema has developed in the last 6 monthes. What caused it?
a. Hyperaldosteronism
b. Hyperosmolarity of plasma
*c. Proteinuria
d. Disorder of albuminous kidneys function
e. Hyperproduction of vasopressin

58. The alternate usage of dichlotiazide, etacrin acid and lasex didnt cause marked diuretic effect in patient with marked peripheral edema. Increased amount of aldosterone is in the blood. Indicate the medicine to be prescribed
a. Clopamid
b. Amilorid
c. Urea
d. Mannit
*e. Spironolacton

59. A 65-year-old suffering from the gout man complains of the pain in the kidneys region. On ultrasonic examination the renal calculi were revealed. As a result of what process were they formed?
a. Ornithine cycle
b. Heme decay
*c. Decay of purine nucleotides
d. Restoration of cysteine
e. Protein catabolism

60. 46 chromosomes were revealed on karyotype examination of the 5-year-old girl. One of the 15th pair of chromosomes is longer than usual due to connected chromosome from the 21 pair. What type of mutation does this girl have?
*a. Translocation
b. Deletion
c. Inversion
d. Insufficiency
e. Duplication

61. On autopsy of the man with alcohol abuse for a long time it was revealed: dense, small-knobby, small size liver. Microscopically: small pseudo-lobules, divided with thin layers of connective tissue with lymphomacrophagial infiltrates; hepatocytes in the state of globular fatty dystrophy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic persistent alcohol hepatitis
b. Fatty hepatosis
*c. Alcohol cirrhosis
d. Toxic liver dystrophy
e. Chronic active alcohol hepatitis

62. Galactosemia is revealed in the child. Concentration of glucose in the blood is not considerably changed. Deficiency of what enzyme caused this illness?
a. Hexokinase
b. Amylo-1,6-glucosidase
c. Galactokinase
*d. Galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase
e. Phosphoglucomutase

63. Due to activation of ion channels of external membrane of excitable cell its rest potential has significantly increased. What channels were activated?
a. Natrium and calcium channels
b. Slow calcium channels
c. Natrium channels
*d. Potassium channels
e. Fast calcium channels

64. In the microspecimen of red bone marrow there were revealed multiple capillares through the walls of which mature blood cells penetrated. What type of capillares is it?
a. Visceral
*b. Sinusoidal
c. Fenestrational
d. Lymphatic
e. Somatical

65. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) increased for 20% due to prolonged starvation of the person. The most likely cause of filtration changes under this conditions is:
a. Increase of renal plasma stream
b. Increase of penetration of the renal filter
c. Increase of systemic blood pressure
d. Increase of filtration coefficient
*e. Decrease of oncotic pressure of blood plasma

66. Patient with encephalopathy was admitted to the neurological in-patient department. Correlation of increasing of encephalopathy and substances absorbed by the bloodstream from the intestines was revealed. Whatsubstances that are created in the intestines can cause endotoxemia?
a. Biotin
*b. Indole
c. Ornithine
d. Acetacetate
e. Butyrate

67. Patient in the unconscious state was admitted to the emergency room. Skin is cold, pupils are delayed, breathing is heavy, with cycles of the Cheyne-Stokes type, blood pressure is decreased, urinary bladder is overloaded. Poisoning with what substance is the most likely?
*a. Narcotic analgesics
b. Non-narcotic analgesics
c. Sedatives
d. -
e. М-cholinergic antagonists

68. In a 45-year-old patient on ECG it was revealed: sinus rhythm, the number of auricular complexesexceeds number of ventricular complexes; progressing extension of the P-Q interval from complex to complex; fallout of some ventricular complexes; Р waves and QRST complexes are without changes. Name the type of heart rhythm disfunction
*a. Atrioventricular block of the II degree
b. Synoauricular block
c. Intraatrial block
d. Complete atrioventricular block
e. Atrioventricular blockade of the I degree

69. While emotional excitement the heart rate in a 30-year-old person run up to 112 Bpm. What part of the conducting system of the heart caused it?
a. Intraventricular node
b. His bundle branches
c. Purkinjes fibers
d. His bundle
*e. Synoatrial node

70. Genetic structure of eukaryote is "exon-intron-exon". This structure-functional organization of gene caused transcription peculiarities. What will be pro-i-RNA according to the schema?
a. Exon-intron
*b. Exon-intron-exon
c. Intron-exon
d. Exon-exon-intron
e. Exon-exon

71. A 63-year-old woman developed signs of rheumatoid arthritis. Increase of which indicated blood values level could be helpful in proving diagnosis?
a. Lipoproteids
b. General cholesterol
c. Acid phosphatase
d. R-glycosidase
*e. Additive glycosaminoglycans

72. Daltonism was diagnosed in a 7-year-old boy while prophylactic medical examination. Parents are healthy, color vision is normal. Grandfather from the mothers side has the same disorder. What is the type of inheriting of this anomaly?
a. Dominant, connected with sex
b. Autosomal-recessive
c. Incomplete domination
*d. Recessive, connected with sex
e. Autosomal-dominant

73. Patient with vomiting, dizziness, sensation of double vision, difficult swallowing was admitted to the hospital. Doctor suspects botulism. What diagnostic methods should be used for diagnosis approving?
a. Allergic test, serological
b. Protozoological, microscopical
c. Bacteriological, mycological
*d. Biological test, bacteriological
e. -

74. Local lymphonodules enlarged near the infected wound. Increased amount of macrophages, lymphocytes, lymphatic follicles in the cortical layer and large amount of plasma cells were revealed on histological examination. What process in the lymphatic nodules represent these histological changes?
a. Innate insufficiency of the lymphoid tissue
*b. Antigen stimulation
c. Tumour transformation
d. Hypersensibility reaction
e. Acquired insufficiency of the lymphoid tissue

75. Middle part of cochlear of internal ear was destroyed in animal during experiment. It will cause abnormalities of the sound perception of the following frequencies:
a. Low
b. High and low
c. High
d. No abnormalities
*e. Middle

76. During metabolic process active forms of the oxygen including superoxide anion radical are formed in the human body. With help of what enzyme is this anion activated?
a. Glutathioneperoxidase
b. Glutathionereductase
c. Peroxidase
*d. Superoxide dismutase
e. Catalase

77. A 50-year-old patient complains of thirst, drinking of a lot of water, marked polyuria. Blood glucose is 4,8mmol/L, urine glucose and acetone bodies are absent, urine is colorless, specific gravity is 1,002-1,004. What is the cause of polyuria?
a. Thyrotoxicosis
b. Insulin insufficiency
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Aldosteronism
*e. Vasopressin insufficiency

78. Decreased blood supply to the organs causes hypoxia that activates fibroblasts function. Volume of what elements is increased in this case?
*a. Intercellular substance
b. Vessels of microcircular stream
c. Nerve elements
d. Lymphatic vessels
e. Parenchymatous elements of the organ

79. From the defecation of a 6-year-old ill child, who has artificial feeding, the intestinal bacillus with antigen structure 0-111 is excreted. What is the diagnosis?
a. Food poisoning
b. Gastroenteritis
c. Cholera-like diseasis
*d. Coli-enteritis
e. Disentery-like diseasis

80. Arterial hypertension, hyperglycemia, glucosuria were observed clinically for a long time in the patient with upper type of obesity. Death was due to the cerebral haemorrhage. Basophilic hypophysis adenoma, hyperplasia of adrenal gland cortex were revealed on pathomorphological examination. What is the likely diagnosis?
a. Acromegaly
b. Hypophysis nanism
*c. Cushing disease
d. Adiposogenitalis dystrophy
e. Diabetes mellitus

81. A 45-year-old patient was admitted to the surgical department with complaints of abrupt sharp pain in the epigastric region. After examination it was diagnosed: perforated ulcer of the posterior wall of the stomach. Where did content of the stomach flow out while perforation?
a. To the proventriculus sack
b. To the left mesenteric sinus
c. To the liver bursa
d. To the right mesenteric sinus
*e. To the omental bursa

82. Obturative jaundice developed in a 60-year-old patient because of malignant tumour of the big papillary of the duodenal. Lumen of what anatomical structure is squeezed with tumour?
*a. Hepatopancreatic ampulla
b. Right hepatic duct
c. Common hepatic duct
d. Left hepatic duct
e. Cystic duct

83. Part of the DNA chain turned about 180 degree due to gamma radiation. What type of mutation took place in the DNA chain?
a. Deletion
b. Replication
*c. Inversion
d. Translocation
e. Doubling

84. Diuretic drug was prescribed to the patient with hypertension in the course of complex treatment. In a few days BP decreased but signs of hypokaliemia developed. What drug could cause such complications?
*a. Lasix
b. Enalapril
c. Spironolactone
d. Triamterene
e. Clophelin

85. Pathological changes of the liver and brain were revealed in a 27-year-old patient.The copper concentration is abruptly decreased in blood plasma and increased in the urine. Wilsons disease was diagnosed. Activity of what enzyme in the blood serum should be examined to prove diagnisis?
a. Xanthioxidase
*b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Alcoholdehydrogenaze
d. Carboanhydraze
e. Leucinamineopeptidaze

86. On autopsy of the 40-year-old woman suffering from rheumatic arthritis, the enlarged solid spleen was revealed. On section its tissue is of the mahogany color with enlarged follicles, which look like semi-transparent grayish-whitish grains. What pathological process is the most likely?
a. Glaze spleen
b. Porphyric spleen
*c. Sago spleen
d. Waxy spleen
e. Hyaline spleen

87. The person has decreased diuresis, hypernatremia, hypokalemia. Hypersecretion of what hormon can cause such changes?
a. Auricular sodiumuretic factor
b. Parathormone
c. Adrenalin
*d. Aldosterone
e. Vasopressin

88. It is planned to use the territory of an old cattle burial ground (which is not used for more than 50 years) for building houses. But ground analysis revealed presence of the pathogen of the very dangerous illness. Which of the indicated microorgonisms is likely to remain in the ground for such a long time?
a. Brucella abortus
b. Francisella tularensis
*c. Bacillus anthracis
d. Mycobacterium bovis
e. Yersinia pestis

89. A 5-year-old child was admitted to the otorhinolaryngological department with diagnosis - suppurative inflammation of the middle ear. Disease started from the inflammation of the nasopharynx. Through the what canal of the temporal bone did the infection get into the tympanic cavity?
a. Tympanic Canaliculus tympanicus
b. Carotid canal
*c. Musculortubal canal
d. Canaliculus chordal tympani
e. Canaliculi caroticotympanici

90. The patient with thymoma (thymus gland tumour) has cyanosis, extention of subcutaneous venous net and edema of the soft tissues of face, neck, upper part of the trunk and upper extremities. What venous trunk is pressed with tumour?
a. Clavicular vein
b. Frontal jugular vein
*c. Superior vena cava
d. Internal jugular vein
e. External jugular vein

91. What heat transfer mechanism is the most effective while the man being at 80% of air moisture and the temperature +350С?
a. Convection
b. Radiation
c. -
*d. Evaporation
e. Heat conduction

92. While having the dinner the child choked and aspirated the food. Meavy cough has started, skin and mucose are cyanotic, rapid pulse, rear breathing, expiration is prolonged. What disorder of the external breathing developed in the child?
a. Biots breathing
b. Alternating breathing
c. Stenotic breathing
d. Stage of inspiratory dyspnea on asphyxia
*e. Stage of expiratory dyspnea on asphyxia

93. A 42-year man suffering from gout has increased level of urinary acid in the blood. Allopurinol was prescribed to decrease the level of urinary acid. Competitive inhibitor of what enzyme is allopurinol?
a. Adeninephosphoribosiltransferase
b. Hypoxantinphosphoribosiltransferase
c. Guaninedeaminase
d. Adenosinedeaminase
*e. Xanthinoxidase

94. Anapriline therapy caused positive effect in the dynamic of the disease of a 44-year-old woman suffering from stenocardia. What is the main mechanism of the effect of this medicine?
a. Decreased power inputs of myocardium due to reduced loading
*b. Blockade of beta-adrenoreceptors and decrease myocardial requirements to the oxygen
c. Decreased need in increasing of oxygen supply to the myocardium
d. Increased oxygen supply to the myocardium
e. Decrease of oxidative exchange in myocardium due to enzyme blockade of Krebs cycle

95. Testosterone and its analogs increase the mass of skeletal muscles that allows to use them for treatment of dystrophy. Due to interaction of the hormon with what cell substance is this action caused?
*a. Nuclear receptors
b. Proteins- activators of transcription
c. Ribosomes
d. Chromatin
e. Membrane receptors

96. Patient with diarrhoea was admitted to the infection unit. Gramnegative curved rod-like bacteria were founded on bacterioscopic examination of faecal masses. What is the most likely disease in this patient?
a. Intestinal form of plague
*b. Cholera
c. Salmonellosis gastroenteritis
d. Typhoid fever
e. Diphtheria

97. On autopsy it is revealed that kidneys are enlarged, surface is large-granular because of multiple cavities with smooth wall, which are filled with clear fluid. What kidney disease did the patient have?
a. Pyelonephritis
*b. Polycystic kidney
c. Necrotic nephrosis
d. Infarction
e. Glomerulonephritis

98. Substitution of the glutamic acid on valine was revealed while examining initial molecular structure. For what inherited pathology is this typical?
a. Minkowsky-Shauffard disease
*b. Sickle-cell anemia
c. Thalassemia
d. Favism
e. Hemoglobinosis

99. On experiment on the dog the peripheral part of nervus vagus of the neck was irritated. What changes of the heart function would be observed?
a. Increased atrioventricular conduction
b. Increased contraction force
*c. Decreased contraction rate
d. Increased myocardial excitability
e. Increased contraction force and rate

100. A 43-year-old patient has thrombopenia, reduction of fibrinogen, products of degradation of fibrin presented in the blood, petechial haemorrhage along with septic shock. What is the most likely cause of the changes?
*a. DIC-syndrom
b. Disorder of thrombocytes production
c. Haemorrhagic diathesis
d. Autoimmune thrombocytopenia
e. Exogenous intoxication

101. A 30-year-old patient with bacteriologically proved dysentery developed the signs of paraproctitis. What is the stage of local changes in this patient?
*a. Ulceration stage
b. Follicular colitis
c. Catarrhal colitis
d. Fibrinous colitis
e. Healing of the ulcers stage

102. On autopsy it was revealed: large (1-2 cm) brownish-red, easy crumbling formations covering ulcerative defects on the external surface of the aortic valve. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Polypus-ulcerative endocarditis
b. Acute warty endocarditis
c. Recurrent warty endocarditis
d. Diffusive endocarditis
e. Fibroplastic endocarditis

103. Tuberculine was injected intraperitoneally to the animal sensibilized with tuberculine. Venous hyperemia and peritonial edema were detected on the laparotomy in 24 hours. Increased amount of lymphocytes and monocytes were in the smear-print from the peritonium. What pathological process is in the animal?
a. Fibrinous inflammation
b. Aseptic inflammation
*c. Allergic inflammation
d. Suppurative inflammation
e. Serous inflammation

104. Diagnostic scraping was performed to the woman with dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Multiple convoluted glands, ganglially dilated cavities of some glands were revealed histologically in the scrape. Name the type of general pathological process
a. Metaplasia
b. Hypertrophic excrescence
c. Displasia
*d. Glandulo-gangliac hyperplasia
e. Atrophy

105. A 25-year-old patient complained of the decreased vision. Accommodation disorders, dilated pupil, not reacting on the light were revealed on examination. Function of what muscles is disturbed?
a. Pupil narrowing and dilating muscle
b. Pupil dilating muscle, ciliary
c. Lateral rectus muscle, pupil narrowing
*d. Pupil narrowing muscle, ciliary
e. Inferior oblique muscle, ciliary

106. A 60-year-old man after cerebral hemorrhage felt asleep for a long time. Damage of what structure caused this state?
*a. Reticular formation
b. Hippocampus
c. Nuclears of the cerebral nerves
d. Cortex of the large hemispheres
e. Black substances

107. Gramnegative bin-shaped diplococcus inside and outside of leucocytes were detected on bacteriological examination of the purulent exudates from the cervix of the uterus. Name the causative agent of purulent inflammation of the cervix of the uterus
a. Trichomonas vaginalis
b. Haemophilus vaginalis
c. Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
d. Chlamidia trachomatis
*e. Neisseria gonorroeae

108. In the ovary specimen colored with hematoxylin-eosin, follicle is determined where cubic-shaped follicle epithelium cells are placed in 1-2 layers, and scarlet covering is seen around ovocyte. Name this follicle:
a. Mature
*b. Primary
c. Atretic
d. Secondary
e. Primordial

109. For a long time a 49-year-old woman was suffering from glomerulonephritis which caused death.On autopsy it was revealed that kidneys size was 7х3х2.5 sm, weight is 65,0 g, they are dense and small-grained. Microscopically: fibrinogenous inflammation of serous and mucous capsules, dystrophic changes of parenchymatous organs, brain edema. What complication can cause such changes of serous capsules and inner organs?
a. Thrombopenia
b. Anemia
c. DIC-syndrome
d. Sepsis
*e. Uraemia

110. Accelerated frequency of the heart rate and increased blood pressure were marked in the sportsman on the start before the competitions. Influence of what parts of the CNS can explain these changes?
a. Hypothalamus
*b. Cortex of the large hemispheres
c. Medulla
d. Diencephalon
e. Mesencephalon

111. The donor who for a long time didnt donate the blood was investigated with IFA method. Anti-HBs antibodies were revealed. What does positive result of IFA in this case mean?
*a. Previous hepatitis B
b. Chronic hepatitis В
c. Acute hepatitis C
d. Acute hepatitis B
e. Chronic hepatitis С

112. Respiratory coefficient was studied in the patient who strictly kept certain diet for 10 days. It was determined that it is 1. What diet does the patient follow?
a. Mixed
b. With domination of proteins and fat
c. With domination of proteins and carbohydrates
*d. With domination of carbohydrates
e. With domination of fat and carbohydrates

113. On autopsy it is revealed enlarged dense right lung, fibrin layers on the pleura. Lung tissue is light green color on incision with muddy liqued exudates. What lung disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Bronchopneumonia,
b. Pulmonary gangreneі
c. Interstitial pneumonia
*d. Lung-fever
e. Fibrosing alveolitis

114. Patient with mercury poisoning was admitted to the toxicological department from the chemical industry. What medicine should be used?
a. Isonitrozin
b. Activated carbon
c. Enterosorbent
*d. Unithiol
e. Naloxone

115. On some diseases it is observed aldosteronism with hypertension and edema due to sodium retention in the organism. What organ of the internal secretion is affected on aldosteronism?
a. Hypophysis
*b. Adrenal glands
c. Ovaries
d. Testicle
e. Pancreas

116. Person felt thirsty after staying in heat for a long time. Signals of what receptors caused it first of all?
a. Baroreceptors of aortic arch
b. Osmoreceptorsof the liver
c. Sodium receptors of hypothalamus
d. Glucoreceptors of hypothalamus
*e. Osmoreceptors of hypothalamus

117. Due to action of electric current on the exitable cell there appeared depolarization of its membrane. Movement of what ions through the membrane caused depolarisation?
a. Сl-
*b. Na+
c. НСО3-
d. К+
e. Са2+

118. On blood grouping on the system ABO, standart serum of the I and II groups caused erythrocytes agglutination of the examined blood and serum group of the III didnt. What agglutinogens are in this erythrocytes?
a. А
*b. В
c. А and В
d. D and C
e. С

119. A 54-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with complaints of pain in the right subcostal region, vomiting with blood. Objectively: enlarged liver, varicose veins in the stomach and esophagus. Disfunction of what vessel is likely to be?
a. Aorta abdominalis
b. Vena hepatica
*c. Vena porta
d. Vena cava superior
e. Vena cava inferior

120. After trauma a 44-year-old patient had a rupture of left palm muscle tendons and of the surface of blood vessels. After operation and removal of the most part of the necrotically changed muscle tissue the bloodstream was normalized. What vessels have helped with restoration of bloodstream?
*a. Arcus palmaris profundus
b. Arcus palmaris superficialis
c. Aa. digitales palmares communes
d. Aa. perforantes
e. Aa. metacarpeae palmares

121. Due to cranial trauma the patient developed the symptoms: intention tremor, dysmetry, adiadochokinesis, dysarthria. What structure of the brain is injured?
a. Striatum
b. Motor cortex
*c. Cerebellum
d. Black substance
e. Pale sphere

122. A 37-year-old man was admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of acute pancreatitis: vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, hypotention, weakness, dehydration of the organism. What medicine should be used first of all?
a. Etaperazine
b. Platyphylline
*c. Contrycal
d. No-spa
e. Ephedrine

123. A 12-year-old boy often suffers from virus and bacterial infections and eczematous skin lesions. Enlargement of T-lymphocytes and IgM with normal IgA and IgG was revealed on examination. What type of immune system pathology is presented in the patient?
a. Hereditary immundeficiency of the complement system
b. Hypoplasia of thymus
c. Turners syndrome
d. Brutons hypogammaglobulinemia
*e. Composite immunedefficiency

124. Dystrophic changes of the heart muscle are accompanied with cardiac cavity enlargement, decrease of the strength of heart contraction, increased amount of blood, which remains in the heart during systolic phase, overfilled veins. For what state of heart is it characteristic?
a. Tamponage of the heart
b. Tonogenic dilatation
*c. Myogenic dilatation
d. Emergency stage of hyperfunction and hypertrophy
e. Cardiosclerosis

125. Usage of oral contraceptives with sex hormones inhibits secretion of the hypophysiae hormones. Secretion of which of the indicated hormones is inhibited while using oral contraceptives with sex hormones?
a. Oxytocin
b. Vasopressin
*c. Follicle-stimulating
d. Thyrotropic
e. Somatotropic

126. Person has stable HR, not more than 40 bpm. What is the pacemaker of the heart rhythm in this person?
a. Branches of His bundle
b. His bundle
c. Purkinye fibers
*d. Atrioventricular node
e. Sinoatrial node

127. A 56-year-old patient with complains of thirst and frequent urination was diagnosed to have diabete mellitus and butamin was prescribed. What is the mechanism of action of this medicine?
a. It inhibits absorption of glucose in the intestines
b. It relieves transport of glucose through the cells membranes
*c. It stimulates beta-cells of Langergans islets
d. It helps to absorb the glucose by the cells of the organism tissues
e. It inhibits alpha cells of Langergans islets

128. A 62-year-old patient was admitted to the neurological department due to cerebral haemorrage. Condition is grave. There is observed progression of deepness and frequency of breath that turnes into reduction to apnoea,and the cycle repeates. What respiration type has developed in the patient?
*a. Cheyne-Stockes respiration
b. Biots respiration
c. Gasping respiration
d. Apneustic respiration
e. Kussmaul respiration

129. While registering the child to the school Mantus test was made to define whether revaccination was needed test result is negative. What does this result of the test mean?
*a. Absence of cell immunity to the tuberculosis
b. Absence of antitoxic immunity to the tuberculosis
c. Absence of antibodies for tubercle bacillus
d. Presence of antibodies for tubercle bacillus
e. Presence of cell immunity to the tuberculosis

130. Patient experienced increased susceptibility of the skin to the sunlight. His urine after some time became dark-red. What is the most likely cause of this?
a. Albinism
b. Hemolytic jaundice
c. Alkaptonuria
*d. Porphyria
e. Pellagra

131. Necrosis focus appeared in the area of hyperemia and skin edema in few hours after burn. What mechanism strengthens destructive events in the inflammation area?
a. Emigration of lymphocytes
b. Diapedesis of erythrocytes
*c. Secondary alteration
d. Primary alteration
e. Proliferation of fibroblasts

132. On simulation of inflammation of the lower extremity the animal experienced rise in temperature, increase of amount of antibodies and leukocytes in the blood. What substances caused this general reaction of the organism on inflammation?
a. Leucotriens
b. Mineralcorticoid
c. Somatomedins
d. Glucocorticoid
*e. Interleukin

133. Transmural myocardial infarction in the patient was complicated with progressive acute left ventricle insufficiency. What is the most typical for this state?
a. Edema of the extremities
*b. Edema of the lungs
c. Ascites
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Cyanosis

134. A 46 year-old man complains of difficult nose breathing. Mikulich cells, storage of epithelioid cells, plasmocytes, lymphocytes, hyaline balls are discovered in the biopsy material of the nose thickening. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
b. Rhinovirus infection
c. Virus rhinitis
d. Allergic rhinitis
*e. Scleroma

135. A 59-year-old man has signs of the parenchymatous jaundice and portal hypertension. On histological examination of the puncture of the liver bioptate, it was revealed: beam-lobule structure is affected, part of hepatocytes has signs of fat dystrophy, port-portal connective tissue septa with formation of pseudo-lobules,with periportal lympho-macrophage infiltrations. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Viral hepatitis
b. Chronic hepatosis
c. Toxic dystrophy
*d. Liver cirrhosis
e. Alcohol hepatitis

136. A 70-year-old man, who suffered from chronic bronchitis, was prescribed medicine for the cough - codeine. What is the mechanism of anticoughing effect?
a. Competitive
b. Peripheral effect
c. Local effect
*d. Central
e. Reflex

137. A 32-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital with gross bloodloss due to auto accident trauma. Ps - 110Bpm, RR- 22 pm, BP- 100/60mm Hg. What changes in the blood will occur in an hour after the bloodloss?
a. Hypoproteinemia
b. Leukopenia
c. Erythropenia
*d. Hypovolemia
e. Hypochromia of erythrocytes

138. Where should the cathetor for evacuation of the lymph from the thoracic lymph duct be inserted?
a. To the right venous corner
b. To the inferior vena cava
c. To the superior vena cava
d. To the left inguinal vein
*e. To the left venous corner

139. Woman applied to the medico-genetic consulting centre for information about the risk of haemophilia in her son. Her husband has been suffering from this disease since birth. Woman and her parents are healthy (dont have haemophilia). Is the boy likely to have the disease in this family?
a. 75% of the boys will be ill
b. 25% of the boys will be ill
c. 50% of the boys will be ill
*d. All boys will be healthy
e. All boys will be ill

140. A 7-year-old child cant abduct the shoulder, raise it to the horizontal level. He can raise the hand to the face only with dorsal side with abduction of the shoulder (with help of supraspinous muscle ) - "bugler" arm. Active function of what muscle is absent?
a. Teres minor
b. Pectoral major
*c. Deltoid
d. Infraspinous
e. Teres major

141. The specimens present sections of haemopoetic and immunogenetic organs. Organ has lymph tissue forming different structures (lymph nodes,lobules, bars). In what organ does antigen-independent proliferation and differantiation take place?
*a. Thymus
b. Hemolymph nodes
c. Spleen
d. Tonsil
e. Lymphatic nodes

142. Concentration of pyruvate is increased in the patients blood, the most of which is excreted with urine. What avitaminosis is observed in the patient?
a. Avitaminosis E
b. Avitaminosis B6
c. Avitaminosis В2
*d. Avitaminosis В1
e. Avitaminosis В3

143. On bacteriological examination of the defecation of a 4-months-old baby with the symptoms of acute bowel infection there were revealed red colonies spread in the large quantity in the Endo environment. What microorganism can it be?
a. Streptococcus
b. Salmonella
*c. Escherichia
d. Staphylococcus
e. Shigell

144. The ventral roots of 5 frontal segment of spinal cord were cut during experiment in the animal. What changes will take place in the innervation region?
a. Hypersensitivity
b. Loss of temperature sensitivity
*c. Loss of movements
d. Loss of touch sensitivity
e. Loss of proprioceptive sensitivity

145. Secretion of which gastrointestinal hormones is primerily decreased in patient with removed duodenum?
a. Histamine
b. Gastrin and histamine
c. Neurotensin
d. Gastrin
*e. Cholecystokinin and secretin

146. The guide of the scientific expedition in India was native who always was with his dog. What invasive diseases can be transmitted by the dog if it is the source of invasion?
a. Paragonimiasis
b. Fascioliasis
*c. Echinococcosis
d. Teniasis
e. Dicroceliasis

147. RNA-polymeraseB(II) is blocked due to amanitine poisoning (poison of death-cup). It disturbes:
a. Synthesis of t-RNA
*b. Synthesis of m-RNA
c. Reverse transcription
d. Maturation of m-RNA
e. Primers synthesis

148. Patient with pneumonia has intolerance to antibiotics. Which of the conbined sulfanilamide medicines should be prescribed to the patient?
a. Sulfadimethoxine
b. Natrium sulfacyl
c. Aethazol
d. Streptocid
*e. Biseptol

149. Isolated muscle of a frog is rhythmically irritated with electric impulses. Every next impulse is in a period of relaxation from the previus contraction. What contraction of the muscle appears?
*a. Waved tetanus
b. Asynchronous
c. Single
d. Tonic
e. Continuous(smooth) tetanus

150. Moving of the daughter chromatids to the poles of the cell is observed in the mitotically dividing cell. On what stage of the mitotic cycle is this cell?
a. Metaphase
b. Prophase
c. Telophase
d. Interfase
*e. Anaphase

151. On autopsy it is revealed: soft arachnoid membrane of the upper parts of cerebral hemisphere is plethoric, it is of yellowish-green color, soaked with purulent and fibrose exudate, it lookes like cap. For what disease is it characteristical picture
a. Meningitis at anthrax
*b. Meningococcal meningitis
c. Tuberculous meningitis
d. Meningitis at typhus
e. Influenza meningitis

152. Profuse foam appeared when dentist put hydrogen peroxide on the mucous of the oral cavity. What enzyme caused such activity?
*a. Catalase
b. Glucose-6-phosphatdehydrogenase
c. Acetyltransferase
d. Methemoglobinreductase
e. Cholinesterase

153. Periodic renal colics attackes are observed in the woman with primery hyperparathyroidizm. Ultrasonic examination revealed small stones in the kidneys. What is the cause of the formation of the stones?
a. Hyperuricemia
b. Hypercholesterinemia
*c. Hypercalcemia
d. Hyperkalemia
e. Hyperphosphatemia

154. Disorder of the airways passage in small and middle bronchi was revealed in the patient. What disorder of the acid-base equilibrium can be detected in the blood?
*a. Respiratory acidosis
b. -
c. Metabolic alkalosis
d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Respiratory alkalosis

155. Gonorrhoea was revealed in the patient on bacterioscopy of the smear from urethra. Taking into account that medecines for gonorrhoea are fluorquinolones, patient should be prescribed:
*a. Ciprofloxacin
b. Cefazoline
c. Furazolidone
d. Urosulfan
e. Fluorouracil

156. Patient with diabetes mellitus experienced loss of consciousness and convulsions after injection of insulin. What is the result of biochemical blood analysis for concentration of the sugar?
a. 8,0 mmol/L
*b. 1,5 mmol/L
c. 5,5 mmol/L
d. 10,0 mmol/L
e. 3,3 mmol/L

157. A 45-year-old woman suffers from allergic seasonal coryza caused by the ambrosia blossoming. What medicine from the stabilizer of the adipose cells group can be used for prevention of this disease?
a. Tavegyl
b. Phencarol
c. Dimedrol
*d. Ketotifen
e. Diazoline

158. During histological examination of the stomach it was found out that glands contain very small amount of parietal cells or they are totally absent. Mucous membrane of what part of the stomach was studied?
a. -
b. Body of stomach
*c. Pyloric part
d. Cardiak part
e. Fundus of stomach

159. The patient has taken the mixture prescribed by neuropathologist for neurasthenia for 2 weeks. Patient felt better but developed coryza, conjunctivitis, rash, inertia, decrease of memory. Bromizm was diagnosed. What should be prescribed to decrease symptoms?
a. Asparcam
b. Glucose solution 5%
c. -
d. Polyglucin
*e. Natrium chloride

160. During surgery in a 17-year-old patient it was revealed the tumor of 4,5х5,0х3,5 cm in size on the lower surface of the liver with sub-serous localization, of dark-red color. On the section tumor has cavities with marked amount of blood. What is preliminary diagnosis?
a. Hemangioendothelioma
*b. Cavernous hemangioma
c. Hemangiopericytoma
d. Lymphangioma
e. Capillar hemangioma

161. Low level of albumins and fibrinogen was detected in the patients blood. Decreased activity of what organelle of the liver hepatocytes can cause it?
a. Agranular endoplasmatic net
b. Golgi complex
*c. Granular endoplasmatic net
d. Mitochondrions
e. Lysosomes

162. Increased production of thyroidal hormones T3 and T4, weight loss, tachycardia, psychic excitement and so on present on thyrotoxicosis. How do thyroidal hormones effect energy metabolism in the mitochondrion of cells?
a. Stops respiratory chain
b. Activates oxidated phosphorylation
c. Activates phosphorylation of substance
*d. Disconnect oxidation and oxidated phosphorylation
e. Stops phosphorylation of substance

163. Increased amount of free fat acids is observed in the blood of the patients with diabetes mellitus. It can be caused by:
a. Decreased activity of phosphatidylcholine-cholesterol-acyltransferase blood plasma
*b. Increased activity of triglyceridelipase adipocytes
c. Activation of the synthesis of the apolipoproteins
d. Storage of palmitatoil-CoA
e. Activation of the ketone bodies utilization

164. Parents with ill child came to the infectionist. They worked in one of the Asian countries for a long time. Child has eathy colored skin, loss of appetite, laxity, enlarged liver, spleen, peripheral glands. What protozoan illness can this child have?
*a. Visceral leishmaniasis
b. Balantidiasis
c. Amebiasis
d. Lambliasis
e. Toxoplasmosis

165. A 10-year-old girl often experiences acute respiratory infections with multiple spotty haemorrages in the places of clothes friction. Hypovitaminosis of what vitamin is present at the girl?
a. В6
*b. С
c. В1
d. В2
e. А

166. While examining the child the doctor revealed symmetric cheeks roughness, diarrhea, disfunction of the nervous system. Lack of what food components caused it?
*a. Nicotinic acid, tryptophane
b. Phenylalanine, pangamic acid
c. Lysine, ascorbic acid
d. Threonine, pantothenic acid
e. Methionine, lipoic acid

167. Unpainfull formation without marked borders appeared in the soft tissues of the thigh of a young man. On the tissue bioptate the formation looks like the meat of a fish, consisting of immature fibroblast-like cells with multiple mitosis, which grow through the muscles. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibroma
b. Cancer
*c. Fibrosarcoma
d. Myosarcoma
e. Myoma

168. In result of the damage of one of the Atomic Power Plant reacttor the run-out of radioelements happened. People in the increased radiation zone were radiated with approximately 250-300 r. They were immediately hospitalized. What changes in the blood count would be typical?
a. Anemia
b. Leukopenia
c. Neutropenia
d. Thrombopenia
*e. Lymphopenia

169. The increased intraocular tension is observed in the patient with glaucoma. Secretion of aqueous humor by the ciliar body is normal. Injury of what structure of the eyeball wall caused the disorder of flow-out from the anterior chamber?
a. Choroid
b. Ciliary muscle
c. Back epithelium of cornea
*d. Venous sinus
e. Ciliar body

170. Ovarian tumour was diagnozed in the woman. Surgery was indicated. What ligament should be cut by the surgeon to disconnect the ovary and the uterus?
*a. The ovarial ligament
b. Broad ligament of uterus
c. Round ligament of uterus
d. Lateral umbilical ligament
e. Suspensory ligament of ovary

171. During the fetal period of the development in the vascular system of the fetus large arterial (Botallos) duct is functioning which converts into lig. arteriosum after birth. What anatomical formations does this duct connect between each other?
a. Pulmonary trunk and superior vena cava
b. Aorta and superior vena cava
*c. Pulmonary trunk and aorta
d. Aorta and inferior vena cava
e. Right and left auricle

172. A 57-year-old patient was admitted to the gastroenterological department with suspicion on Zollinger-Ellison syndrom because of rapid increase of gastrin level in the blood serum. What disorder of the secretory function of the stomach is the most likely?
a. Hypoacid hyposecretion
*b. Hyperacid hypersecretion
c. Achylia
d. Hyperacid hyposecretion
e. Hypoacid hypersecretion

173. Carnitine including drug was recomended to the sportsman for improving results. What process is activated most of all with help of carnitine?
a. Synthesis of ketone bodies
b. Synthesis of lipids
c. Tissue respiration
*d. Transport of fatty acids to the mitochondria
e. Synthesis of steroid hormones

174. Patient complaines of weakness, dyspnea, low extremities oedema. Diagnosis: chronic cardiac insufficiency. What medicine should be prescribed first of all?
a. Propranolol
b. Caffeine
*c. Digitoxin
d. Papaverine
e. Raunatin

175. Chronic inflammation and transformation of the one-layer ciliated epithelium into multiple-layers flat epithelium was revealed in the thickened mucous membrane of the bronchus bioptate of the patient with smoke abuse. Which of the processes is the most likely?
a. Epithelium hypertrophy
b. Hyperplasia of the epithelium
c. Leucoplacia
*d. Metaplasia
e. Squamous cancer

176. The intraoperational biopsy of mammal gland has revealed the signs of atypical tissue with disorder of parenchyma stroma proportion with domination of the last, gland structures of the different size and shape, lined with single-layer proliferative epithelium. What is the most appropriate diagnosis?
a. Infiltrative cancer
b. Mastitis
c. Noninfiltrative cancer
d. Papilloma
*e. Fibroadenoma

177. Pain along large nervous stems and increased amount of pyruvate in the blood were revealed in the patient. Insufficiency of what vitamin can cause such change?
*a. В1
b. Biotin
c. В2
d. Pantothenic acid
e. РР

178. Purulent endometritis with fatal outcome was progressing in the woman after abortion performed not at the hospital. On autopsy multiple lung abscesses, subcapsule ulcers in the kidneys, spleen hyperplasia were revealed. What form of sepsis developed in the patient?
a. Chroniosepsis
b. Lung sepsis
c. Urosepsis
d. Septicemia
*e. Septopyemia

179. Signs of gastropathy develop in the patient with rheumatoid arthritis who was treated with indometacin. With what activity of the drug can this complication be connected?
a. Antiserotonin
*b. Anticyclooxygenase
c. Antikinine
d. Local irritating
e. Antihistamine

180. On bacteriological study of rinsing water of the patient with food poisoning, the pure bacterial culture was inoculated with the following properties: gram-negative motile bacillus in the Endo environment grows like achromic colony. Representative of what genus has caused the illness?
a. Escherichia
b. Yersinia
*c. Salmonella
d. Citrobacter
e. Shigella

181. From the nasopharynx of a 5-year-old child it was excreted amicroorganism which is identical to Corynebacterium diphtheriae dose according to morphological and biochemical signs.Microorganism does not produce exotoxin. As a result of what process can this microorganism become toxigenic?
a. Chromosome mutation
*b. Phage conversion
c. Growing with antitoxic serum
d. Cultivation in the telluric environment
e. Passing through the organism of the sensative animals

182. Increased breaking of vessels, enamel and dentine destruction in scurvy patients are caused by disorder of collagen maturing. What stage of modification of procollagen is disordered in this avitaminosis?
a. Removal of C-ended peptide from procollagen
b. Detaching of N-ended peptide
c. Glycosylation of hydroxylysine residues
d. Formation of polypeptide chains
*e. Hydroxylation of proline

183. From the group of children who were eating sweet sappy watermelon two kids developed the signs of poisoning: rapid weakness, dizziness, headache, vomiting, edema, tachycardia, cyanosis of mouth, ears, tips of the fingers cyanosis. High concentration of nitrates was detected. What is the leading mechanism of the pathogenesis of the poisoning in the two children?
a. Insufficiency glutathione pyroxidase
b. Block cytochrome oxidase
*c. Insufficiency of met-Hb-reductase
d. Insufficiency of superoxiddismutase
e. Insufficiency of catalase

184. A 38-year-old woman was admitted to the admission-diagnostic department with uterine bleeding. What are the most likely changes of blood?
a. Leukopenia
b. Increase of haematocrite rate
c. Leucocytosis
d. Polycythemia
*e. Reduction of haematocrite rate

185. For serological diagnostics of the whooping cough it was made large-scale reaction with parapertussis and pertussis diagnosticums. At the bottom of the test-tubes with diagnosticum of Bordetella parapertussis grain-like sediment formed. What antibodies have this reaction revealed?
a. Precipitins
b. Bacteriolysins
c. Antitoxins
*d. Agglutinins
e. Opsonins

186. The patient was treated medically for psychosis for 2 weeks. Patients condition improved but rigidity, tremor, hypokinesia developed. Which of the drugs can cause such complications?
a. Chlordiazepoxide
*b. Aminazine
c. Diphenine
d. Imipramine
e. Sydnocarb

187. Punctata hemorrhage was found out in the patient after application of a tourniquet. With disfunction of what blood cells is it connected?
a. Eosinophiles
b. Monocytes
*c. Platelets
d. Neutrophiles
e. Lymphocytes

188. Intrapleural pressure is being measured in a person. In what phase has a person hold his breath if the pressure is - 25 cm H2O?
*a. Speed up inspiration
b. -
c. Speed up expiration
d. Calm expiration
e. Calm inspiration

189. In the blood of a 26-year-old man it was revealed 18% of erythrocytes of the spherical, ball-shaped, flat and thorn-like shape. Other eritrocytes were in the form of the concavo-concave disks. How is such phenomenon called?
a. Physiological anisocytosis
b. Pathological poikilocytosis
*c. Physiological poikilocytosis
d. Erytrocytosis
e. Pathological anisocytosis

190. Tere is observed inhibited fibrillation in the patients with bile ducts obstruction, bleeding due to low level of absorbtion of some vitamin. What vitamin is in deficit?
a. Carotene
*b. К
c. D
d. А
e. Е

191. Victim has elbow joint trauma with avulsion of medial epicondyle of humerus. What nerve can be damaged in this trauma?
a. Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
b. Musculocutaneous nerve
c. Radial
*d. Ulnar
e. Cardiac cutaneous nerve

192. Systemic amebiasis with involvment of intestines, liver, lungs was diagnosed in a 52-year-old patient. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Enteroseptol
b. Tetracycline
c. Quingamine
d. Quiniofone
*e. Metronidasol

193. A man with internal abdominal right side injury and suspicion of liver rupture was admitted to the traumatological department. In what peritonial structure will blood accumulate?
a. Recessus intersigmoideus
*b. Excavatio rectovesicalis
c. Fossa ischio-analis
d. Bursa omentalis
e. Recessus duodenalis inferior

194. The patient with complaints of permanent thirst applied to the doctor. Hyperglycemia, polyuria and increased concentration of 17-ketosteroids in the urine were revealed. What disease is the most likely?
a. Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
b. Myxoedema
c. Addisons disease
*d. Steroid diabetes
e. Type I glycogenosis

195. Patients with similar complaints applied to the doctor: weakness, pain in the intestines, disorder of GIT. Examination of the faeces revealed that one patient with four nucleus cysts should be hospitalized immidiately. For what protozoa are such cysts typical?
*a. Dysenteric amoeba
b. Trichomonas
c. Intestinal amoeba
d. Lamblia
e. Balantidium

196. A man who was bitten by the unknown dog applied to the surgeon. Wide ragged woundes were localised on the face. What curative-prophylactic aid should be given to prevent rabies?
a. Hospitalize the patient and keep under the doctors supervision
b. Immediate injection of DPT(Diphtheria, Pertusis, Tetanus) vaccine
*c. Start immunisation with rabies vaccine
d. Immediately inject normal gamma globulin
e. Prescribe combine antibiotic therapy

197. Patient with abscess of the cut wound applied to the traumatological department. Doctor for the cleaning of the wound from the pus washed it with 3% hydrogen peroxide. Foam was absence. What caused the absents on the drug activity?
a. Inherited insufficiency phosphatdehydrogenase of erythrocyte
b. Pus in the wound
c. Low concentration H2O2
d. Shallow wound
*e. Inherited insufficiency of catalase

198. Multiple oval ulcers along the intestine were revealed on autopsy of the person, who died from diffuse peritonitis in the distal part of the small intestine. Bottom parts of the ulcers are clear, smooth, formed with muscular or serous covering, edges of ulcers are flat, rounded. There are perforations up to 0,5 cm in diameter in two ulcers. What disease can be diagnosed?
*a. Typhoid fever
b. Typhus
c. Tuberculosis
d. Dysentery
e. Cholera

199. White-haired, with blue eyes girl was born in healthy parents. Irritability, anxiety, troubled sleep and feeding developed in the first months of life of the infant. What method of genetic investigation should be used for the exact diagnosis?
a. Cytological
*b. Biochemical
c. Genealogical
d. Twin
e. Population-statistical

200. Patient suffering from trombophlebitis of the deep veins suddenly died. Autopsy has shown freely lying red friable masses with dim crimped surface in the trunk and bifurcation of the pulmonary artery. What pathologic process was revealed by morbid anatomist?
a. Fat embolism
b. Embolism with foreign body
c. Tissue embolism
*d. Tromboembolism
e. Thrombosis

