1. The examination of skin biopsy of a patient with hemorrhage vasculitis revealed the next: the vessel wall was thickened, homogenous, stained in yellow colour by means of picrofuchsin, PAS-positive. What pathologic process has developed in the vessels walls?
a. Lipidosis
b. Mucoid swelling
c. Amyloidosis
*d. Fibrinoid swelling
e. Hyalinosis

2. Patients with collagenosis have the destruction of the connective tissue. It is confirmed by increasing in the blood of:
a. Contents of creatine and creatinine
*b. Contents of oxyprolin and oxylysin
c. Contents of urates
d. Activity of transaminases
e. Acyivity of isoenzymes of LDH

3. Patients with diabetes mellitus and people during starvation have the increased contents of acetone bodies in their blood, which are used as energy material. What substance are they synthesized from?
a. Malate
b. Citrate
c. Succinyl-CoA carboxylase
d. Ketoglutarate
*e. Acetyl-CoA carboxylase

4. The penetration of the irritable cell membrane for potassium ions has been increased experimentally. What changes of membrane electric status can occur?
a. Action potential
b. Local response
*c. Hyperpolarization
d. No changes
e. Depolarization

5. An old man had infarction of the right cerebrum hemisphere. One year later, taking into consideration the absence of movements of his left extremities, the patient underwent computer tomography of the cerebrum, which revealed a smooth-walled cavity, full of liquor. What pathological process is found out in the cerebrum?
*a. Postinfarction cyst
b. Gray maceration of the brain
c. Brain infarction
d. Hematoma
e. Hydrocephaly

6. On bacteriological examination of the defecation of a 4-months-old baby with the symptoms of acute bowel infection there were revealed red colonies spread in the large quantity in the Endo medium. What microorganism can it be?
*a. Escherichia
b. Shigell
c. Streptococcus
d. Staphylococcus
e. Salmonella

7. In case of enterobiasis acrihine - the structural analogue of vitamin В2 - is administered. The synthesis disorder of which enzymes does this medicine cause in microorganisms?
a. NAD - dependent dehydrogenases
*b. FAD - dependent dehydrogenases
c. Cytochromeoxidases
d. Aminotransferases
e. Peptidases

8. A 42-year-old man was administered prymahin in order to prevent the distant results of quartan malaria. 3 days since the beginning of the treatment with therapeutic dosage of this medicine the patient has developed pain in the cardiac and abdominal regions, dyspepsia and general cyanosis. What could cause such side effects?
a. Reduced activity of microsomal liver enzymes
b. Delay preparation excretion with urine
c. Accumulation of the medication
d. Potential activity with other preparations
*e. Genetic insufficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase

9. A 6-month-old child is suffocating while lying on his back.The palpation on the anterior wall of trachea up to jugular notch of the sternum revealed tumor-like mass, stretching into the anterior mediastinum. What from the belowmentioned can squeeze trachea?
a. Parathyroid glands
*b. Thymus gland
c. Peritracheal lymph nodes
d. Parathyroid lymph nodes
e. Thyroid gland

10. Synthesis of phospholipids is disordered due to fat infiltration of liver. Indicate which of the presented substances can enhance the process of methylation during phospholipids synthesis?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Glucose
*c. Methionine
d. Citrate
e. Glycerin

11. Dystrophic changes of the heart muscle are accompanied with cardiac cavity enlargement, decrease of the strength of heart contraction, increased amount of blood, which remains in the heart during systolic phase, overfilled veins. For what state of heart is it characteristic?
a. Tamponage of the heart
b. Emergency stage of hyperfunction and hypertrophy
c. Cardiosclerosis
d. Tonogenic dilatation
*e. Myogenic dilatation

12. In the blood smear, stained according to Romanovsky-Giemsa method, there are 20% big (20 mcm in diametre), rounded cells with pale-basophilic cytoplasm and bean-shaped nucleus. How is this condition characterised clinically?
a. Leukopenia
b. Lymphocytosis
*c. Monocytosis
d. Neutrophilosis
e. Reticulocytosis

13. Person has stable HR, not more than 40 bpm. What is the pacemaker of the heart rhythm in this person?
a. Branches of His bundle
b. Purkinye fibers
c. Sinoatrial node
*d. Atrioventricular node
e. His bundle

14. Child asked you to puff up the balloon as much as possible for a one exhalation.What air volume will you use?
a. Functional residual volume
b. Backup volume of the inspiration
c. Total volume of the lungs
d. Inspiration volume
*e. Vital volume of the lungs

15. A female patient complaining of indigestion and diffuse abdominal pain came to the doctor. During the examination the doctor found out considerably decreased hemoglobulin level in the blood. During the inquiry it turned out that the woman, living in the Far East, was frequently eating lightly salted caviar. Some relatives, who were living with her, had the same complaints. What was the diagnosis?
a. Trichinosis
b. Echinococcosis
*c. Diphyllobothriasis
d. Thenyosis
e. Ascariasis

16. During the staining of sputum smear of a patient with suspected croupous pneumonia the following reactives and stainers were used: gential violet solution, Lugols solution, 960 spiritus and water fuchsin. What method of staining is used in this case?
a. Lefflers
b. Ziehl-Neelsens
c. Romanovskys
d. Neissers
*e. Grams

17. A patient complaining of weight loss (10 kg during 2 months), pallpitation and exophthalmos came to the endocrinologist. For the hyperfunction of what endocrine gland (glands) are these complaints the most typical?
a. Ovaria
b. Adrenal glands
*c. Thyroid
d. Pancreas
e. Parathyroid glands

18. A 56-year-old patient with cardiac failure notices edematous feet and shins, the skin in the place of edema is pale and cold. What is the leading pathogenesis of this patients edema?
a. Reduced oncotic pressure in capillaries
b. Increased capillary penetration
c. Positive water balance
*d. Increased hydrostatic pressure in venulaes
e. Lymph outflow impairment

19. The intraoperative biopsy of mammal gland has revealed the signs of atypical tissue with disorder of parenchyma-stroma proportion with domination of the last, gland structures of different size and shape, lined with single-layer proliferative epithelium. What is the most appropriate diagnosis?
a. Mastitis
b. Noninfiltrative cancer
c. Infiltrative cancer
*d. Fibroadenoma
e. Papilloma

20. A 50-year-old man had been blocked up for 2 days because of earthquake. After he was rescued, the diagnosis of compression syndrome was made. What further complication is the most likely to develop in this case?
a. Acute vascular failure
*b. Acute renal failure
c. Acute respiratory failure
d. Acute hepatic failure
e. Acute cardiac failure

21. A patient because of pathological process has thickened alveolar membrane. What will be reduced directly as a result this?
a. Minute respiratory capacity
b. Oxygen capacity of blood
*c. Diffuse lung capacity
d. Alveolar lung ventilation
e. Reserve expiratiory capacity

22. A doctor made the diagnosis of gonorrhoea. It was known from the anamnesis that a patient had had gonorrhoea before and he had been treated completely. What type of infection can this new disease be attributed to?
a. Superinfection
b. Secondary infection
c. Autoinfection
d. Relapse
*e. Reinfection

23. A 58-year-old woman complaints of increased tiredness, decreased capasity for work, somnolence and dyspnea during fast walking. Blood test revealed: erythrocytes - 4,61012/l, hemoglobin - 92 g/l, colour index - 0,6. Blood smear demonstrated high contents of microcytes and anulocytes. What anemia is it typical for?
a. Penicious
b. Sickle cell
c. Hemolytic
*d. Iron deficiency
e. Acute posthemorrhagic

24. A patient, who had been blowing a cloud (smoking tobacco) for a long time developed lung cancer. Which of the suggested cancerogenic substances is contained in the tobacco smoke and is attributed to the polyunsaturated aromatic carbohydrates (PAC)?
a. ?- naphthylamine
*b. Benzpyrene
c. Diethylnitrosamine
d. Dimethylaminoazobenzene
e. Orthoaminoazotoluene

25. Patient with vomiting, dizziness, sensation of dubble vision, difficult swallowing was admitted to the hospital. Doctor suspects botulism. What diagnostic methods should be used for diagnosis approving?
*a. Biological test, bacteriological
b. -
c. Protozoological, microscopical
d. Bacteriological, mycological
e. Allergic test, serological

26. A patient after hypertension stroke has no voluntary movements in his right arm and leg, muscle tone in these extremites is increased. What type of dysfunction of nervous system is it?
a. Peripheral paralysis
b. Central paresis
c. Peripheral paresis
*d. Central paralysis
e. Reflex paresis

27. The person was selling "homemade pork" sausages on the market. State sanitary inspector suspected falcification of the sausages.With help of what serological immune reaction can food substance be identified?
a. Agglutination test
b. Complement- fixation test
*c. Precipitation test
d. Indirect hemagglutination test
e. Immunofluorescence test

28. The autopsy of the mans body, that was working for a long time as a miner and died beacuse of chronic pulmonary-cardiac insufficiency, revealed that lungs were not in their ful volume, significantly thickened, sclerotic, the apexis were emphysematously changed, the surface was gray-black in colour, on section the lung tissue was aspid-black in colour. What disease caused the death?
a. Asbestosis
b. Aluminosis
c. Talcosis
d. Silicosis
*e. Anthracosis

29. In the microspecimen of red bone marrow there were revealed multiple capillares through the walls of which mature blood cells penetrated. What type of capillares is it?
a. Somatical
b. Fenestrational
c. Lymphatic
d. Visceral
*e. Sinusoidal

30. The alternate usage of dichlotiazide, etacrin acid and lasex didnt cause substantial diuretic effect in patient with evident peripheral edema. There is increased amount of aldosterone in the blood. Indicate the medicine to be prescribed
a. Clopamid
b. Amilorid
*c. Spironolacton
d. Urea
e. Mannit

31. Unpainfull formation without marked borders appeared in the soft tissues of the thigh left of the young man. On the tissue bioptate the formation lookes like a meat of a fish, consisting of the immature fibroblast-like cells with multiple mitosis, which grow through the muscles. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Fibrosarcoma
b. Cancer
c. Myoma
d. Myosarcoma
e. Fibroma

32. The auscultation of a patient with dry pleuritis has revealed plueral friction rub. What epithelium type can cause such signs?
a. Transitional epithelium
*b. Simple flat epithelium
c. Simple cubical epithelium
d. Simple prismatic epithelium
e. Laminated epithelium

33. The autopsy a 35-year-old man body revealed in the second segment of the right lung the focus of carnification, which was 5 cm in diametre and was enclosed in a thin capsule. The focus was a tough dry friable tissue with a dim surface. What disease are such morphological changes typical for?
a. Chondroma
b. Lung cancer
*c. Tuberculoma
d. Postinflammatory pneumosclerosis
e. Tumorous form of silicosis

34. During metabolic process active forms of the oxygen including superoxide anion radical are formed in the human body. With help of what enzyme is this anion activated?
*a. Superoxide dismutase
b. Glutathioneperoxidase
c. Glutathionereductase
d. Peroxidase
e. Catalase

35. A patient has myocardial infarction in the region ofanterior wall of the left ventricle. What artery basin has the circulatory impairment occured in?
a. Circumflex branch of left coronal artery
*b. Anterior interventricular branch of left coronal artery
c. Anterior ventricular branches of right coronal artery
d. Atrioventricular branch of left coronal artery
e. Left marginal branch of left coronal artery

36. A patient underwent the surgical removal of pathologically disordered distal quarter of small intestine. How will it influense the absorption of nutritional substances in case of patients ordinary diet?
a. Lipids absorption will be reduced
*b. Absorption will not be altereded
c. Proteins absorption will be reduced
d. Water absorption will be reduced
e. Carbohydrates absorption will be reduced

37. The study of mitotic cycle phases of onion root revealed the cell, in which the chromosomes are situated in the equatorial plane, forming a star. What stage of the cell mitosis is it?
a. Anaphase
b. Interphase
*c. Metaphase
d. Prophase
e. Telophase

38. A patient with paroxysmal attacks of asphyxia, which appear after inhalation of different aromatic substances has been made a diagnosis of bronchial asthma. Ig E rate is elevated. What type of reaction is it the most typical for?
a. Delayed type of hypersensitivity
b. Cytotoxic
c. Immunocomplex
*d. Anaphylactic
e. Autoimmune

39. Substitution of the glutamic acid on valine was revealed while examining initial molecular structure. For what inherited pathology is this typical?
a. Thalassemia
b. Favism
c. Minkowsky-Shauffard disease
*d. Sickle-cell anemia
e. Hemoglobinosis

40. A patient was admitted to the hospital with a wound in the region of his neck. The examination revealed the damaged nerve, situated in front of the anterior ladder muscle. What nerve is damaged?
a. Sublingual
b. Glossopharyngeal
*c. Phrenic
d. Cervical part of sympathetic trunk
e. Vagus

41. A patient during a visit to his dentist developed severe hypotension. Which of the medicines, stimulating adrenergic structures, should be used to normalise blood pressure?
a. Doxazozin
b. Ergotamine
*c. Mesaton
d. Sanorin
e. Xylomethazolin hydrochloride

42. A student is thoroughly summarising a lecture. When his groupmates began talking the quality of the summarising worsened greatly. What type of the inhibition in the cerebral cortex is the cause of this?
a. Dying
*b. External
c. Protective
d. Differential
e. Delayed

43. Galactosemia is revealed in a child. Concentration of glucose in the blood is not considerably changed. Deficiency of what enzyme caused this illness?
*a. Galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase
b. Hexokinase
c. Galactokinase
d. Phosphoglucomutase
e. Amylo-1,6-glucosidase

44. Careless student occasionaly met his dean. The concentration of what hormone will most likely increase in the blood of the student?
a. Cortisol
b. Corticotropin
*c. Adrenalin
d. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
e. Somatotropin

45. Analeptical remedy of reflective type from the H-cholinomimetics group was given to the patient for restoration of breathing after poisoning with carbon monoxide. What medicine was prescribed to the patient?
*a. Lobeline hydrochloride
b. Mesaton
c. Adrenalin hydrochloride
d. Pentamin
e. Atropine sulphate

46. Some time later after the intensive physical training a sportman activates his gluconeogenesis. What is its main substance?
a. ?-ketoglutarate
b. Aspartic acid
c. Glutamic acid
d. Serine
*e. Lactate

47. Because of suspected intrahospital infection in the neonatal department of the maternity home the inspection was carried out. In some children and on some general things Staphylococcus aureus was revealed. What properties of these cultures allow to establish their origin from one source?
a. Biochemical activity
b. Antigenic structure
c. Antibioticogramma
*d. Phagotype
e. Chromogenesis

48. The patient with complaints of permanent thirst applied to the doctor. Hyperglycemia, polyuria and increased concentration of 17-ketosteroids in the urine were revealed. What disease is the most likely?
a. Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
*b. Steroid diabetes
c. Myxoedema
d. Type 1 glycogenosis
e. Addisons disease

49. A 40-year-old pregnant woman underwent amniocentesis. The examination of fetus karyotype revealed 47ХУ+21. What pathology of the fetus was found out?
*a. Downs syndrome
b. Klinefelters syndrome
c. Pataus disease
d. Phenylketonuria
e. Schereschevsky-Terners disease

50. In the micropreparation made from patients regional lymph node punctate and stained according to Romanovsky-Giemsa method, the doctor found out thin microorganisms with 12-14 equal ringlets and pale-pink sharp pointes 10-13 mkm in length. The pathogen of what disease is it about?
a. Relapsing fever
b. Leishmaniasis
c. Surra
d. Leptospirosis
*e. Syphilis

51. A 50- year-old man suddenly began having severe palpitation, pain in the heart, sharp weakness, high blood pressure; arrhythmic pulse, with deficiency. The ECG revealed no P waves and there was different duration of R-R intervals. What disorder of heart rhythm did the patient have?
a. Respiratory arrhythmia
b. Paroxysmal tachicardia
*c. Atrial fibrillation
d. Sinus extrasystolia
e. Transversal heart block

52. The heart rate and the systemic arterial blood pressure of a man have increased due to voluntary respiratory delay for 40 c. Realisation of what regulation mechanism caused these changes?
a. -
*b. Unconditioned sympathetic reflexes
c. Conditioned sympathetic reflexes
d. Conditioned parasympathetic reflexes
e. Unconditioned parasympathetic reflexes

53. A patient with diabetes mellitus suddenly began having sharp pain in his right foot. The examination revealed black hallux, swallen foot tissues, focuses of epidermis detachment, secreta with unpleasant smell. What clinico-morphological form of necrosis developed in a patient?
*a. Moist gangrene
b. Sequester
c. Dry gangrene
d. Bedsore
e. Infarction

54. A patient who had been suffering for many years from bronchial asthma died from asphyxia. The histological examination of his lungs revealed the following: much mucus with eosinophiles contents in the lumen of bronchioles and small bronci, sclerosis of interalveolar septa, dilation of alveolar lumen. Which of the mechanisms of allergy development is it?
*a. Reagin
b. Granulomatosis
c. Cytolysis, caused by lymphocytes
d. Cytotoxic
e. Immunocomplex

55. 2 weeks since the blood transfusion a recepient has developed fever. What protozoal disease can it be?
a. Trypanosomiasis
b. Amebiasis
c. Leishmaniasis
d. Toxoplasmosis
*e. Malaria

56. A patient died 3 days after the operation because of perforated colon with the manifestations of diffuse purulent peritonitis. The autopsy demonstrated: colon mucos membrane was thickened and covered with a fibrin film, isolated ulcers penetrated into different depth. Results of histology: mucous membrane necrosis, leukocytes infiltration with hemorrhages focuses. The complication of what disease caused the patients death?
a. Crohns disease
b. Typhoid
c. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
d. Amebiasis
*e. Dysentery

57. The examination of a foreigner revealed intestinal schistosomiasis. How could the patient be infected?
a. Through insects bites
b. While eating fish
*c. During river swimming
d. While eating meat
e. Through dirty hands

58. For serological diagnostics of the whooping cough there was made a large-scale reaction with parapertussis and pertussis diagnostici. At the bottom of the test-tubes with diagnosticum of Bordetella parapertussis grain-like sediment was formed. What antibodies have this reaction revealed?
a. Precipitins
b. Antitoxins
*c. Agglutinins
d. Opsonins
e. Bacteriolysins

59. Isolated muscle of a frog is rhythmically irritated with electric impulses. Every next impulse is in a period of relaxation from the previus contraction. What contraction of the muscle appears?
*a. Waved tetanus
b. Single
c. Asynchronous
d. Tonic
e. Continuous (smooth) tetanus

60. A woman with myasthenia developed respiratory disorders, which required artificial ventilation. What type pf respiratory insufficiency did the woman have?
*a. Neuromuscular
b. Restrictive
c. Centrogenic
d. Thoracophrenic
e. Obstructive

61. A 59-year-old man has signs of the parenchymatous jaundice and portal hypertension. On histological examination of the puncture of the liver bioptate, it was revealed: beam-lobule structure is affected, part of hepatocytes has signs of fat dystrophy, port-portal connective tissue septa with formation of pseudo-lobules,with periportal lympho-macrophage infiltrations. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Liver cirrhosis
b. Toxic dystrophy
c. Alcohol hepatitis
d. Viral hepatitis
e. Chronic hepatosis

62. A 46-year-old man on his head skin has got a little bulged out nevus pigmentosis of a dark colour which didnt trouble him. For the last time the nevus began growing in size, a pain developed, the colour became black-brown; the palpation of it demonstrated a node at its base. The histological examination of the removed tissue revealed spindle-shaped and polymorphic cells, the cytoplasm of which contained the pigment of fulvous colour. What tumor is it about?
a. Hemangioma
b. Hematoma
*c. Melanoma
d. Basalioma
e. Carcinoid

63. A 26-year-old woman is complaining of thirst and dryness in her mouth. The examination has revealed glucosuria and blood glucose content of 6,5 mmol/l. What condition are these symptoms the most typical for?
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Steroid diabetes
c. Diabetes insipidus
*d. Renal diabetes
e. Alimentary glucosuria

64. After the radiactive exposure a patient has stem cells disorder. The regeneration of what cells of friable connective tissue will be damaged?
*a. Macrophages
b. Fibroblasts
c. Adipocytes
d. Pigment cells
e. Pericytes

65. The study of the genealogy of a family with hypertrichosis (helix excessive pilosis) demonstrated, that this feature is manifested in all generations only in men and is inherited by son from his father. What is the type of hypertrichosis inheritance?
a. Autosome-dominant
b. X-linked dominant chromosome
c. X-linked recessive chromosome
d. Autosome-recessive
*e. Y-linked chromosome

66. The speed of excitement conduction through the atrioventricular node in a healthy adult is 0,02-0,05 mps. What does artrioventricular delay supply?
a. Sufficient force of ventricles contraction
b. Simultaneous contraction of both atria
*c. Sequence of atria and ventricles contraction
d. Simultaneous contraction of both ventricles
e. Sufficient force of atria contraction

67. A patient has got frequent internal organs and mucosal hemorrhages. The analysis indicated insufficiency of hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine in the collagenous fibres. The insufficiencuy of what vitamin caused the impairment of hydroxylysation of abovementioned aminoacids in a patient?
a. Vitamin А
b. Vitamin Н
*c. Vitamin С
d. Vitamin К
e. Vitamin РР

68. Patient in the unconscious state was admitted to the emergency room. Skin is cold, pupils are delayed, breathing is heavy, with cycles of the Cheyne-Stokes type, blood pressure is decreased, urinary bladder is overloaded. Poisoning with what substance is the most likely?
*a. Narcotic analgesics
b. Sedatives
c. -
d. М-cholinergic antagonists
e. Non-narcotic analgesics

69. A 65-year-old man with signs of profuse obesity and risk of fatty liver dystrophy was recommended high-lipotropic diet. The contents of what substance in his diet is the most effective in this case?
a. Glycin
b. Glucose
c. Vitamin C
d. Cholesterol
*e. Methionine

70. A patient died from acute cardiac insufficiency.The histological examination of his heart revealed in myocardium of the left ventricle the necrotized section, which was separated from undamaged tissue by the zone of hyperimic vessels, small hemorrhages and leukocytic infiltration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocardial ischemic dystrophy
b. Productive myocarditis
*c. Myocardial infarction
d. Focal exudate myocarditis
e. Diffuse exudate myocarditis

71. Ion cells have been blocked in the excitative cell. It doesnt change significantly the quiet potential, but the cell has lost its capacity to the generation of AP (action potential). What canals have been blocked?
*a. Sodium
b. Sodium and potassium
c. Calcium
d. Chlorine
e. Potassium

72. A 44-year-old woman was admitted to the therapeutic department because of right-side pleuritis. The examination confirmed the presence of liquid in the pleural cavity. What sinus of the pleura will have the biggest accumulation of the serosity?
a. Left mediastinodiaphragmatic
b. Left costomediastinal
*c. Right costodiaphragmatic
d. Right costomediastinal
e. Right mediastinodiaphragmatic

73. Patient was admitted to the infection unit with diagnosis of bacterial dysentery. On laboratory studies it was revealed that causative element is sensitive to many antimicrobial medicines, but patient had anemia. What medicine was contra-indicated to the patient?
*a. Levomycetin
b. Enteroseptol
c. Phthalazol
d. Furazolidone
e. Ampicillin

74. A 63-year-old man, suffering from cancer of esophagus, has metastases to mediastenum, lymph nodes and cancer cachexy. What is the pathogenetic stage of the given tumorous process?
a. -
b. Transformation
*c. Progression
d. Initiation
e. Promotion

75. A 58-year-old man has a clinical picture of acute pancreatitis. The increase of what substance in the urine from belowmentioned will confirm the diagnosis?
a. Urea
b. Nonprotein (rest) nitrogen
c. Albumin
d. Uric acid
*e. Amylase

76. A patient after tooth extraction developed persistent substernal pain. Sublingual antianginal substance releaved the substernal pain, but the patient complained of headache and dizziness. What medicine did the patient use?
*a. Nytroglycerin
b. Anapriline
c. Verapamil
d. Validol
e. Metoprolol

77. During ultrasound examination of the heart the doctor observes the leaves of the mitral valve. What happends to them during the systole?
*a. They turn inside the cavity of the ventricle
b. They clasp with the walls of the atrium
c. They clasp with wall of the vessel
d. They close up covering the lumen of the orifice
e. They turn inside the cavity of the atrium

78. Blood sampling for bulk analysis is recommended to be performed on an empty stomack and in the morning. What changes in blood count can occur if to perform blood sampling after food intake?
a. Increased contents of erythrocytes
*b. Increased contents of leukocytes
c. Increased plasma proteins
d. Reduced contents of thrombocytes
e. Reduced contents of erythrocytes

79. A patient with ascariasis was administered a medicine which influenses the immune system and is used as immunomodulator. What medicine was administered?
*a. Levamisole
b. Pyrantel
c. Phenasol
d. Piperazine adipinate
e. Naphthamon

80. Systemic amebiasis with involvment of intestines, liver, lungs was diagnosed in a 52-year-old patient. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Tetracycline
b. Quiniofone
c. Quingamine
*d. Metronidasol
e. Enteroseptol

81. A 39-year-old man has got an increased risk of infectious processes development, hyperkeratinizattion, disorder of mesopic vision. What vitamin should be administered?
*a. Retinol acetate
b. Pyridoxine hydrochloride
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Riboflavine
e. Ergocalciferol

82. During the complicated labour the symphysis pubis ruptured. What organ can be damaged the most?
a. Ovaria
b. Rectum
c. Uterus
*d. Urinary blader
e. Uterine tubes

83. The electrocardiogramme analysis demonstrated that the duration of mans heart cycle is 1sec. What is the heart rate per minute?
a. 80
*b. 60
c. 70
d. 50
e. 100

84. A patient suffers from arterial hypertension strokes, accompanied by tachycardia, excessive sweat, sharp pain in the epigastric region. Which of the mentioned tumorous diseases are these symptoms the most typical for?
a. Pituitary basophil adenoma
b. Glomerular adrenal adenoma
*c. Pheochromocytoma
d. Ovarian tumor
e. Thyroid adenoma

85. A 42-year-old man suffering from gout has increased level of urinary acid in the blood. Allopurinol was prescribed to decrease the level of urinary acid. Competitive inhibitor of what enzyme is allopurinol?
*a. Xanthinoxidase
b. Adenosinedeaminase
c. Hypoxantinphosphoribosiltransferase
d. Guaninedeaminase
e. Adeninephosphoribosiltransferase

86. A patient has increased contents of uric acid in his blood, what is clinically manifested by pain syndrome due to accumulation of urates in his joints. What process does the formation of this acid result from?
*a. Purine nucleotide decay
b. Proteolysis
c. Purine bases re-using
d. Heme catabolism
e. Pyrimidine nucleotide decay

87. A patient with chronic heart failure being treated by digitalis drugs developed the symptoms, which confirmed the beginning of cardiac glycosides toxic activity. What drug should be administered to reduce the negative effect of cardiac glycosides?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Ethymizol
c. Dipiroxim
d. Sodium caffeine-benzoate
*e. Potassium chloride

88. A child was diagnosed to have fracture of humerus. The broken arm began retarding in growth. What part of the bone was damaged?
a. Apophysis
*b. Metaphysis
c. Diaphysis
d. Marrow canal
e. Epiphysis

89. Extensive thromboembolic infarction of the left cerebral hemispheres, large septic spleen, immunocomplex glomerulonephritis, ulcers on the edges of the aortic valves, covered with polypous thrombus with colonies of staphylococcus were revealed on autopsy of the young man who died in coma. What disease caused cerebral thromboemboly?
*a. Septic bacterial endocarditis
b. Septicemia
c. Acute rheumatic valvulitis
d. Rheumatic thromboendocarditis
e. Septicopyemia

90. A patient in winter fall down into ice-hole, froze and fall ill. The temperature increased up to 39,70С and ranged from 39,0°C tо 39,80С . Name the type of temperature curve of this patient
a. Febris intermittens
*b. Febris continua
c. Febris recurrens
d. Febris remittens
e. Febris hectica

91. After the genealogy analysis a geneticist came to the conclusion: a feature is manifested in each generation, men and women inherit the feature with equal frequency, parents in the equal way give this feature to their offspring. What type of inheritance does the investigated feature have?
a. Autosomal-recessive
*b. Autosomal-dominant
c. Х-linked recessive inheritance
d. Х-linked dominant inheritance
e. Y-linked inheritance

92. The examination of blood serum of a patient with immunodeficiency signs revealed antybodies to gP120 i gP41 proteins. The presence of what infection of this patient does it confirm?
a. НLTV-1-infection
b. ЕСНО-infection
*c. HIV-infection
d. НВV-infection
e. TORCH-infection

93. The increased intraocular tension is observed in the patient with glaucoma. Secretion of aqueous humor by the ciliar body is normal. Injury of what structure of the eyeball wall caused the disorder of fluid flow-out from the anterior chamber?
*a. Venous sinus
b. Ciliary muscle
c. Ciliar body
d. Back epithelium of cornea
e. Choroid

94. A patientl liver can not normally detoxify its natural metabolites and xenobiotics.The reduced activity of what cytochrome can cause this?
a. Hemoglobulin
*b. Cytochrome Р- 450
c. Cytochrome B
d. Cytochromoxidase
e. Cytochrome C-1

95. A patient with prolonged bronchopneumonia was admitted to the therapeutic department. Antibiotic therapy was ineffective. What medicine should be added to the complex therapy of the patient to increase the immune status?
a. Analgin
b. Sulfocamphocain
c. Dimedrol
*d. Timalin
e. Paracetamol

96. During the examination of a patient with bleeding wounds the doctor found out that the tissue was damaged by maggots, there were local maturations. The diagnosis was obligate myiasis. The maggots of what insect caused the disease?
a. Triatomic bug
b. Filth (house) fly
*c. Blow fly (Musca Volfarti)
d. Tsetse fly (Glossina)
e. Stable fly

97. Woman applied to the medico-genetic consulting centre for information about the risk of haemophilia in her son. Her husband has been suffering from this disease since birth. Woman and her parents are healthy (dont have haemophilia). Is the boy likely to have the disease in this family?
a. 75% of the boys will be ill
b. All boys will be ill
*c. All boys will be healthy
d. 50% of the boys will be ill
e. 25% of the boys will be ill

98. Local lymphonodules enlarged near the infected wound. Increased amount of macrophages, lymphocytes, lymphatic follicles in the cortical layer and large amount of plasma cells were revealed on histological examination. What process in the lymphatic nodules represent these histological changes?
a. Hypersensibility reaction
b. Acquired insufficiency of the lymphoid tissue
c. Innate insufficiency of the lymphoid tissue
*d. Antigen stimulation
e. Tumour transformation

99. The patient has taken the mixture prescribed by neuropathologist for neurasthenia for 2 weeks. Patient felt better but developed coryza, conjunctivitis, rash, inertia, decrease of memory. Bromizm was diagnosed. What should be prescribed to decrease symptoms?
a. Asparcam
b. Polyglucin
*c. Natrium chloride
d. -
e. Glucose solution 5%

100. During the intraoperative biopsy of thyroid gland the histological examination revealed lymphoid structures with growth centers, which were among the folliculi full of colloid. What disease was it?
a. Sporadic goiter
b. Endemic goiter
c. Thyrotoxicosis (Basedows goiter)
*d. Hashimotos thyroiditis (lymphadenoid goiter)
e. Ridels goiter

101. On blood grouping on the system ABO, standart serum of the I and II groups caused erythrocytes agglutination of the examined blood and serum group of the III didnt. What agglutinogens are in this erythrocytes?
a. А and В
b. А
c. D and C
d. С
*e. В

102. The microscopic examination of wound lavage of a patient with acute woundy process of his shin revealed big contents of irregular extended-formed cells, with tough nucleus, the basophilic cytoplasm of which includes many lysosomes, phagosomes and pinocytotic bubbles. What cells are found out in the wound?
a. Plasmocytes
b. Tissue basophils
c. Fibrocytes
*d. Connective tissue macrophages
e. Fibroblasts

103. To anaesthetize the manipulation connected with burn surface treatment, a patient was intravenously injected a medication for short-acting narcosis. 1 minute later the patient being under anaesthesia had elevated blood pressure, tachycardia, increased tone of sceletal muscles; the reflexes were reserved. After awakening the patient had desorientation and visual hallucinations. What medication was injected to the patient?
a. Nitrous oxide
b. Thiopental sodium
c. Diethyl ether
d. Sombrevin
*e. Ketamine

104. A patient, undergoing a course of curative starvation, has a normal glucose level of the blood mainly due to glucogenesis. What aminoacid in human liver the most actively synthesizes glucose?
a. Glutamic acid
b. Leucine
*c. Alanine
d. Valine
e. Lysine

105. During the football match a player injuried his knee joint. The X-ray examination showed fracture of the bone, which is situated in the tendon thickness of musculus quadriceps femoris. What of the mentioned groups does this bone belong to?
a. Hollow
b. Combined
c. Flat
d. Tubular
*e. Sesamoid

106. A 27-year-old man has purulent inflammation of gallblader. What region of the peritoneal cavity will the pus fall into if gallblader ruptures in his typical position?
a. Into pancreatic bursa
*b. Into hepatic bursa
c. Into the superior duodenal sinus
d. Into epiploic bursa
e. Into the left lateral duct

107. A man because of 1,5 litre blood loss has suddenly reduced diuresis. The increased secretion of what hormone caused such diuresis alteration?
a. Corticotropin
b. Cortisol
*c. Vasopressin
d. Natriuretic
e. Parathormone

108. A 60-year-old man after cerebral hemorrhage felt asleep for a long time. Damage of what structure caused this state?
a. Black substances
b. Hippocampus
*c. Reticular formation
d. Cortex of the large hemispheres
e. Nuclears of the cerebral nerves

109. A woman, who was keeping a diet for a long time and eating refined rice, has developed polyneuritis (beriberi disease). The absence of what vitamin in the diet causes the development of such disease?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Riboflavin
*c. Thiamine
d. Folic acid
e. Pyridoxal

110. A 16-year-old patient died because of diffuse fibrinopurulent peritonitis. The autopsy in the inferior region of small intestine revealed an ulcer with a form of Peyers plaque, with the perforation of intestine wall. The microscopic examination revealed lymph tissue pattern vagueness, the displacement of this tissue with proliferating monocytes, which were forming granulomata. Complication of what disease caused the death?
a. Cholera
b. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
c. Brucellosis
*d. Typhoid
e. Dysentry

111. After the usage of acetylsalicylic acid a patient developed epigastric pain because of exacerbation of his ulcer. What are the principles of this medication ulcerogenity?
a. Cholagogic effect
b. Stimulation of pepsin secretion
c. Spasm of vessels
d. Immunodepressive effect
*e. Antiprostaglandinic effect

112. Because of present gallstone in the common bile duct, a patient has no bile excretion into duodenum. What disorder can it cause?
a. Proteins digestion
b. Proteins absorption
c. Carbohydrates digestion
d. Carbohydrates absorption
*e. Lipids digestion

113. In the microspacemen of spinal medulla it is necessary to analyse the condition of the nucleus, neurons of which form the motor endings in the skeletal musculature. What nucleus of the spinal medulla is it about?
a. Nucleus intermediolaterallis
*b. Disseminate nucleus
c. Gray substance proper nucleus
d. Nucleus thoracicus (Clarkesnucleus)
e. Posterior horn proper nucleus

114. A patient suffers from nocturnal paroxysms of bronchial asthma accompanied by bradycardia, spastic intestinal pains and diarrhea. Medicine of what group can releave these symptoms?
a. H-cholinergic receptors
b. Saluretics
c. ?-adrenoblockers
d. Sympatholytics
*e. M-cholinergic receptors

115. A patient becomes quickly tired during his work. In vertical position with closed eyes he is dizzying and loosing equilibrium. Skeletal muscle tone is reduced. Which of the belowmentioned brain structures is damaged?
*a. Cerebellum
b. Precentral gyrus of cerebral hemispheres cortex
c. Thalamus
d. Basal ganglia
e. Hypothalamus

116. A young man increased his energy inputs from 500 to 2000 kJ per hour. What from the suggested can cause it?
a. Food taking
b. Mental activity
c. Rising of external temperature
*d. Physical activity
e. Change of sleeping for waking

117. A 30-year-old patient with bacteriologically proved dysentery developed the signs of paraproctitis. What is the stage of local changes of this patient?
a. Healing of the ulcers stage
*b. Ulceration stage
c. Catarrhal colitis
d. Fibrinous colitis
e. Follicular colitis

118. Genetic structure of eukaryote is "exon-intron-exon". This structure-functional organization of gene caused transcription peculiarities. What will be pro-i-RNA according to the scheme?
*a. Exon-intron-exon
b. Exon-exon-intron
c. Exon-exon
d. Exon-intron
e. Intron-exon

119. A 42-year-old woman with trigeminal nerve neuralgia complaints of redness of right part of her face and neck, feeling of heat rush and increased dermal sensitiveness. What is the arterial hyperemia in this case according to pathophysiological mechanism?
a. Metabolic
b. Neuroparalytic
c. Working
d. Reactive
*e. Neurotonic

120. A 56-year-old patient with complains of thirst and frequent urination was diagnosed to have diabetes mellitus and butamin was prescribed. What is the mechanism of action of this medicine?
a. It inhibits alpha cells of Langergans islets
b. It relieves transport of glucose through the cells membranes
c. It helps to absorb the glucose by the cells of the organism tissues
d. It inhibits absorption of glucose in the intestines
*e. It stimulates beta-cells of Langergans islets

121. Shock and signs of acute renal failure (ARF) developed in the patient due to severe injury. What is the leading cause of development of ARF in the case?
a. Increased pressure in the renal arteries
b. Urine excretion violation
c. Increased pressure in the nephron capsule
d. Decreased oncotic BP
*e. Decreased arterial pressure

122. A malarial plasmodium (haemamoeba) - the pathogene of vivax malaria - has two strains: southern and northern. They differ by the duration of their incubation period: the southern has short and the northern - long one. What selection works in this case?
*a. Cutting
b. Artificial
c. Sexual
d. Moving
e. Stabilizing

123. A patient with bronchial asthma is administered inhalation of 0,5% isadrine solution. Bronchospasm was releaved, but the patient began complaining of pain in the heart region and palpitation. It is connected with the stimulation of:
a. ?1 -adrenoreceptors
b. ?2 -adrenoreceptors
c. M-cholinergic receptors
d. Acetylcholine synthesis
*e. ?1 -adrenoreceptors

124. During the expirement performed on a rabbit the superior cervical node of sympathatic stem was removed. On the side of the extraction there is redness and rising temperature of the head skin. What form of peripheral circulation disorder developed in this case?
a. Metabolic arterial hyperemia
*b. Neuroparalytic arterial hyperemia
c. Stasis
d. Venous hyperemia
e. Neurotonic arterial hyperemia

125. A woman complaining of coryza, phonastenia, eyelids redness and lacrymation during spring period came to the doctor. What type of allergic reaction by Gell ano Coombs classification develops in this case?
a. Delayed type of hypersensitivity
b. Stimulating
*c. Anaphylactic
d. Cytotoxic
e. Immunocomplex

126. A patient with burn disease died due to progressive septicaemia. The autopsy in the anterior abdominal wall by means of microscopic examination revealed diffuse infiltration of intermuscular spaces by segmentonuclear leukocytes, tissues edema and lysis of muscular fibres. Determine the nature of the pathological process
a. Catarrhal inflammation
*b. Phlegmon
c. Necrosis
d. Abscess
e. Diphtheritic inflammation

127. During investigation of patient, it was found formation in the white substance of cerebral hemispheres with location in the knee and frontal part of posterior crus of internal capsule. Fibres of what conductive tract of the brain will be disrupted?
a. Tr. frontopontinus
b. Тr. thalamocorticalis
c. Tr. parietooccipitopontinus
*d. Tr. pyramidalis
e. Tr. frontothalamicus

128. A 25-year-old patient complained of vision reduction. Accommodation disorder, dilated pupil, not reacting on the light were revealed on examination. Function of what muscles is disturbed?
a. Lateral rectus muscle, pupil narrowing
b. Pupil narrowing and dilating muscle
c. Inferior oblique muscle, ciliary
*d. Pupil narrowing muscle, ciliary
e. Pupil dilating muscle, ciliary

129. A patient with iron deficiency anemia has been treated at the in-patient hematological department of the regional childrens hospital during 13 years. What hypoxia type does this patient have?
a. Combined
b. Respiratory
*c. Hemic
d. Circulatory
e. Tissue

130. Decreased blood supply to the organs causes hypoxia that activates fibroblasts function. Volume of what elements is increased in this case?
a. Vessels of microcircular stream
*b. Intercellular substance
c. Parenchymatous elements of the organ
d. Nerve elements
e. Lymphatic vessels

131. A 6-months-old baby has got frequent and extensive subdermal hemorrhages. The administration of the synthetic analogue of vitamin K (vicasol) was effective. ?-carboxylation of glutamic acid of what protein of blood coagulation system does this vitamin take part in?
a. Antihemophilic globulin A
*b. Prothrombin
c. Rosentals factor
d. Hagemans factor
e. Fibrinogen

132. A 45-year-old man with domestic apper arm injuiry applied to the trauma unit. The objective data are: no extension, adduction and pronation functions of the arm. What muscle damage caused this condition?
a. Teres minor
b. Subscapular
*c. Teres major
d. Supraspinous
e. Subspinous

133. A 30-year-old man with cutting wound of his forearm has got an impairment of his fingers extension. What nerve is damaged?
a. Muscularcutaneous
b. Ulnar
c. Middle
*d. Radial
e. Medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve

134. The energy inputs of a healthy man have been identified. What position was the patient if his energy inputs were less than the main exchange?
a. Rest
b. Nervous exertion
*c. Sleep
d. Calmness
e. Easy work

135. A patient with brain bloodstream disorder has got difficulties with swallowing, he can choke over while eating liquid food. What part of the brain is damaged?
a. Cerebellum
b. Midbrain
*c. Medulla
d. Thalamencephalon
e. Cervical part of the spinal medulla

136. During total (with water) alimentary starvation the generalized edemata have developed. Which of the pathogenic factors is dominant in this case?
*a. Reduced oncolitic pressure of blood plasma
b. Reduced osmotic pressure of blood plasma
c. Increased osmotic pressure of interstitial fluid
d. Increased oncolitic pressure of interstitial fluid
e. Reduced hydrostatic pressure of interstitial fluid

137. While examining the child the doctor revealed symmetric cheeks roughness, diarrhea, disfunction of the nervous system. Lack of what food components caused it?
a. Lysine, ascorbic acid
b. Phenylalanine, pangamic acid
c. Threonine, pantothenic acid
*d. Nicotinic acid, tryptophane
e. Methionine, lipoic acid

138. Highly injured person gradually died. Please choose the indicator of biological death:
a. Absence of palpitation
b. Disarray of chemical processes
c. Loss of consciousness
d. Absence of movements
*e. Autolysis and decay in the cells

139. Collagen, elastin and reticulin belong to the fibrillar elements of connective tissue. Indicate the aminoacid which constitutes only collagen, and identification of which in biological fluids is used for the diagnosing of the connective tissue diseases
a. Lysine
*b. Hydroxyproline
c. Glycine
d. Phenylalanine
e. Proline

140. A patient suffers from hemeralopia. Which of the suggested substances will have curable effect?
a. Carnosine
*b. Carotene
c. Creatine
d. Carnitine
e. Keratin

141. The examination of an youth with mental retardation revealed eunuchoid body construction and genitals underdevelopment. The cells of the oral cavity cantained chromatine. What method of genetic investigation should be performed to make more specified diagnosis?
a. Clinico-genealogical
*b. Cytological
c. Dermatoglyphics
d. Population-statistic
e. Biochemical

142. 4 months ago a 43-year-old man underwent traumatic amputation of his left lower extremity. At the time of his examination the patient complaints of feeling of present amputated extremity and constant sometimes unbearable pain in it. What pain type does the patient have?
a. Reflex
b. Causalgia
c. Thalamic
d. Neuralgia
*e. Phantom limb

143. On examination of the person it was revealed that minute volume of heart is 3500mL, systolic volume is 50 mL. What is the frequency of cardiac contraction?
a. 90 bpm
*b. 70 bpm
c. 60 bpm
d. 50 bpm
e. 80 bpm

144. An 18-year-old man with asthenic body constitution: tall, narrow shoulders, broad pelvis and with poor hair on his face came to the geneticist. There was marked mental retardatoin. The preliminary diagnosis was Klinefelters syndrome. What method of medical genetics can confirm the diagnosis?
a. Gemellary
b. Genealogic
c. Dermatoglyphics
*d. Cytogenic
e. Population-statistic

145. A patient with fibrillation, who has had bronchial asthma in his anamnethis, should be administered antiarrhythmic drug. Which preparation from the suggested group is contraindicated for this patient?
*a. Anapriline (Propranolol)
b. Nifedipine
c. Ajmaline
d. Novocainamid
e. Verapamil

146. A histological spacemen presents parenchymal organ, which has cortex and medulla. Cortex consists of epitheliocytes bars, between them there are blood capillaries; the bars form three zones. Medulla consists of chromaffinocytes and venous sinusoids. What organ has these morphological features?
*a. Adrenal gland
b. Thyroid
c. Thymus
d. Lymph node
e. Kidney

147. Complaints and objective data allow to suggest that a patient has inflammation in his gallblader, bile colloidoclasia, probability of gallstones formation. What can be the main cause of gallstones formation?
a. Chlorides
b. Urates
c. Phosphates
d. Oxolates
*e. Cholesterol

148. The microscopic examination of liver biopsy revealed granulomata, consisting of plasmatic, lymphoid, giant polynuclear cells of Pirogov-Lachgans type, small vessels with the signs of endo- and perivasculitis, and there were focuses of caseation necrosis. What disease are these granulomata typical for?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Rhinoscleroma
c. Leprosy
d. Glanders
*e. Syphilis

149. A patient after trauma has developed paralyses, algesthia impairment on the righf; there are no paralyses on the left but temperature and pain sensivity are also impaired. What is the cause of this?
a. Cerebellum injuiry
b. Motor zone brain cortex injuiry
c. Midbrain injuiry
d. Brainstem injuiry
*e. Unilateral right-side spinal cord injuiry

150. Buffer capacity of blood was decreased in the worker due to exhausting muscular work. Entry of what acid substance to the blood can this state be explained by?
a. Pyruvate
*b. Lactate
c. α-ketoglutarate
d. 3-phosphoglycerate
e. 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate

151. After trauma a 44-year-old patient had a rupture of left palm muscle tendons and of the surface of blood vessels. After operation and removal of the most part of the necrotically changed muscle tissue the bloodstream was normalized. What vessels helped to restore the bloodstream?
a. Aa. metacarpeae palmares
b. Aa. perforantes
*c. Arcus palmaris profundus
d. Arcus palmaris superficialis
e. Aa. digitales palmares communes

152. A patient died with uremia.The autopsy demonstrated kidneys to be enlarged, of flabby consistence, cortex was broad, edematous, with red spots; medulla was dark red in colour. Microscopic examination in the glomeruli capsule cavity revealed "semilunar formations", squeezing capillaries, nephrocytes dystrophy, edema and infiltration of stroma. What disease caused the death of the patient?
a. Pyelonephrosis
b. Nephrotic syndrome
*c. Glomerulonephrosis
d. Renal amyloidosis
e. Nephrolithiasis

153. During the postsynthetic period of mitotic cycle the synthesis of proteins - tubulines, which take part in the mitosis formation, was destroyed. It can cause the impairment of:
a. Duration of mitosis
b. Cytokinesis
c. Chromosome despiralization
*d. Chromosome separation
e. Chromosome spiralization

154. A 35-year-old woman with chronic renal disease has developed osteoporosis. Deficiency of which from the belowmentioned substances causes such complication?
a. 25OHD3
b. D2
*c. 1.25(OH)2 D3
d. D3
e. Cholesterol

155. A 43-year-old man suffers from chronic atrophic gastritis and megaloblastic hyperchromic anemia. He also has methylmalonic aciduria. Insufficiency of what vitamin led to the development of such complex of symptoms?
*a. Vitamin В12
b. Vitamin В1
c. Vitamin В5
d. Vitamin В3
e. Vitamin В2

156. On autopsy of the 58-year-old man it is revealed: mitral valve is deformed, thickened, not totally closed. Microscopically: centers of collagen fibers are eosinophilic, have positive fibrin reaction. The most likely it is:
*a. Fibrinoid swelling
b. Mucoid swelling
c. Amyloidosis
d. Fibrinoid inflammation
e. Hyalinosis

157. A man in a quiet condition has increased activity of the muscles, responsible for the inspiration. What from the belowmentioned can cause this?
a. Superficial breathing
b. Negative intrapleural pressure
c. Reduction of minute respiratory capacity
d. Infrequent breathing
*e. Airways narrowing

158. A child with diphtheria 10 days after injection of antitoxic antidiphtherial serum has developed skin rash, accompanied by severe itch, rising temperature up to 38°C and joints pain. What is the cause of these symptoms?
a. Delayed type of hypersensitivity
b. Contact allergy
*c. Serum sickness
d. Atopia
e. Anaphylactic reaction

159. The autopsy of the dead body revealed enlarged, solid with rounded margins liver, on section the tissue was yellow-brown in colour with dark red spots and stripes, which resembled nutmeg. What pathological process led to such liver changes?
*a. Chronic venous polyemia
b. Arterial polyemia
c. Arterial anemia
d. Chronic hemorrhage
e. Acute venous polyemia

160. A 40-year-old man was admitted to the surgical department with spleen rupture. What anatomic formation will accumulate the blood?
a. Rectovesical excavation
b. Omental bursa
c. Right lateral canal
d. Hepatic bursa
*e. Bursa pregastrica

161. A child, suffering from pylorostenosis accompanied by frequent vomiting, developed signs of dehydration. What form of acid-base disbalance can develop in this case?
a. Nongaseous acidosis
b. Gaseous acidosis
c. Gaseous alkalosis
*d. Nongaseous alkalosis
e. Metabolic acidosis

162. A 33- year-old woman who has been treated for a long time from chronic polyarthritis complains of increased blood pressure, changes in the distribution of the adipose tissue and dysmenorrhea. The usage of what medicine could cause such complaints?
a. Sinaflan
*b. Prednisolone
c. Butadion
d. Indometacin
e. Beclometasone

163. A 2-year-old child has got intestinal dysbacteriosis, which results in hemorrhagic syndrome. What is the most likely cause of hemorrhage of this child?
a. РР hypovitaminosis
b. Hypocalcemia
*c. Vitamin К insufficiency
d. Fibrinogen deficiency
e. Activation of tissue thromboplastin

164. A woman came to the surgeon because of the solid mass in her mamma. What direction should the surgeon make an incision in during the operation to injure the lobe less?
a. -
b. Vertical
c. Transverse
*d. Radial
e. Arcuate

165. Chronic glomerulonephritis was diagnosed in a 34-year-old patient 3 years ago. Edema has developed for the last 6 months. What caused it?
*a. Proteinuria
b. Hyperproduction of vasopressin
c. Hyperosmolarity of plasma
d. Disorder the livers protein formation function
e. Hyperaldosteronism

166. During the examination of blood gases a patient with chronic respiratory diseases accompanied by dyspnea, tachycardia and cyanosis demonstrated the development of hypoxemia and hypercapnia. What disorder of the external respiration does the patient have?
a. Hypoperfusion
*b. Hypoventilation
c. Hyperdiffusion
d. Hyperventilation
e. Hyperperfusion

167. An experimental dog by means of stomach tube was given 150 ml of meat broth. The concentration of which of the belowmentioned substances will be increased in animals blood?
a. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
b. Somatostatin
c. Insulin
*d. Gastrin
e. Neurotensin

168. Testosterone and its analogs increase the mass of skeletal muscles that allows to use them for treatment of dystrophy. Due to interaction of the hormon with what cell substance is this action caused?
*a. Nuclear receptors
b. Chromatin
c. Membrane receptors
d. Ribosomes
e. Proteins-activators of transcription

169. A group of men applied to the doctor complaining of rising temperature, headache, swelling of face and eyelids, myalgia. From the history it became known that they all were hunters and they often ate meat of wild animals. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Teniasis
*b. Trichinosis
c. Filariasis
d. Teniarrhinchosis
e. Cysticercosis

170. A patient, who suffers from congenital erythropoietic porphyria, has skin photosensitivity. The accumulation of which compound in the skin can cause it?
a. Uroporphyrinogen 2
b. Heme
c. Protoporphyrin
*d. Uroporphyrinogen 1
e. Coproporphyrinogen 3

171. A patient who came to the doctor because of his infertility was administered to make tests for toxoplasmosis and chronic gonorrhoea. Which reaction should be performed to reveal latent toxoplasmosis and chronic gonorrhoea in this patient?
*a. (R)CFT- Reiters complement fixation test
b. RIHA - Reverse indirect hemagglutination assay
c. RDHA - Reverse direct hemagglutination assay
d. IFA - Immunofluorescence assay
e. Immunoblot analysis

172. A 48-year-old patient after severe psychoemotional exertion suddenly began feeling sharp pain in the heart region, irradiating into left arm. Nitroglycerin releaved pain 10 minutes later. What pathogenetic mechanism is responsible for the development of pain in this case?
*a. Spasm of coronary vessels
b. Occlusion of coronary vessels
c. Increase of myocardial needs in oxygen
d. Compression of coronary vessels
e. Dilation of peripheral vessels

173. A 38-year-old patient after taking aspirin and sulphanilamides has profound hemolysis of erythrocytes, which is caused by glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase insufficiency. The disorder of formation of what coenzyme causes this pathology?
*a. NADPH
b. FADH2
c. Pyridoxalphosphate
d. FMNH2
e. Ubiquinone

174. During the breakout of acute respiratory infection in order to diagnose influenza the express-diagnosis, based on revealing of specific viral antigen in the examined material (nasopharyngial lavage), is carried out. Which reaction is used for this?
a. Opsonization
b. Complement binding
c. Agglutination
d. Precipitation
*e. Immunofluorescence

175. A patient with symmetric dermatitis of open dermal areas came to the doctor. Talking to the patient the doctor found out that the patient mostly eats cereals and eats little meat, milk and eggs. The deficiency of which of the mentioned vitamins is dominant in this patient?
a. Calciferol
b. Tocopherol
c. Folic acid
*d. Nicotinamide
e. Biotin

176. During the examination of a patient, who had been to the mountain pasture and had been hospitalized in a bad condition with fever, the doctor found out the enlargement of inguinal lymph nodes to 8 cm, which were attached to the surrounding tissues, immovable, the skin above them was red and tender. The microscopic examination of the node revealed acute serohemorrhagic inflammation. What disease is it typical for?
a. Anthrax
b. Syphilis
c. Brucellosis
d. Tularemia
*e. Plague

177. A patient with acute myeloblast leucosis has developed liver and spleen enlargement, anemia, myeloblasts in peripheral blood. What principal sign allows to differ myeloblast leukosis from chronic one?
a. Blast cells in peripheral blood
b. Thrombocytopenia
c. Pancytopenia
d. Anemia
*e. Leukemic collapse

178. A patient with thrombophlebitis is administered the complex therapy, which influences different stages of clotforming. Which of the given substances contributes to the restoration of the vascular permeability?
*a. Fibrinolysin
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Neodykumarin
d. Dipiridamol
e. Heparin

179. Karyotyping of healthy man cells is carried out. In the karyotype there was found out a fine acrocentric odd chromosome. What chromosome is it?
a. Group B chromosome
b. Group A chromosome
c. Х-chromosome
d. Group C chromosome
*e. Y-chromosome

180. A patient with liver disease revealed the decreasing of prothrombin level in the blood. It can, first of all, result in the impairment of:
a. Fibrinolysis
b. The first phase of the coagulatory hemostasis
c. Vascular-thrombocytic hemostasis
*d. The second phase of the coagulatory hemostasis
e. Anticoagulative properties of the blood

181. Patient with pneumonia has intolerance to antibiotics. Which of the combined sulfanilamide medicines should be prescribed to the patient?
a. Sulfadimethoxine
*b. Biseptol
c. Aethazol
d. Streptocid
e. Natrium sulfacyl

182. On the 8th day since the patient was inoculated with antitetanic serum because of dirty wound of his foot he has developed rising temperature up to 380С , pains in the joints, rash and itch. The blood tests revealed leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. Allergic reaction of what type has developed in this case?
a. Stimulating
*b. Immunocomplex
c. Cytotoxic
d. Delayed type of hypersensitivity
e. Anaphylactic

183. A 2-year-old boy has some enlargement of his liver and spleen and cataract. Sugar concentration in blood is elevated but glucose tolerance test is normal. The congenital metabolic disorder of what substance is the cause of this condition?
a. Sucrose
b. Glucose
c. Maltose
*d. Galactose
e. Fructose

184. A 50-year-old patient complains of thirst, drinking of a lot of water, marked polyuria. Blood glucose is 4,8mmol/L, urine glucose and acetone bodies are absent, urine is colorless, specific gravity is 1,002-1,004. What is the cause of polyuria?
*a. Vasopressin insufficiency
b. Insulin insufficiency
c. Thyrotoxicosis
d. Aldosteronism
e. Hypothyroidism

185. After brain injuiry a patient has lost his vision. What zone of the brain cortex is damaged in this case?
a. Frontal
b. Parietal
c. Temporal
*d. Occipital
e. Temporal and parietal

186. A patient with urolithiasis after the examination was administered allopurinol - competitive inhibitor of xanthine oxidase. It was influenced by chemical analysis of the calculuses, which consisted mainly of:
*a. Sodium urate
b. Calcium sulphate
c. Calcium oxolate dihydrate
d. Calcium oxolate monohydrate
e. Calcium phosphate

187. Prozerin, given systematically to the rat, increases skeletal muscles tone. Halothane (phthorothan) causes the relaxation of the skeletal muscles and weakens the effect of prozerin. Determine the nature of interactivity of prozerin and halothane
a. Competitive antagonism
*b. Indirect functional antagonism
c. Direct functional antagonism
d. Independent antagonism
e. Incompetitive antagonism

188. Processes of repolarisation are disturbed in ventricular myocardium in examined person. It will cause amplitude abnormalities of configuration and duration of the wave:
a. S
*b. Т
c. R
d. Q
e. P

189. A 40-year-old man ran 10 km per 60 minutes. What changes of energy exchange will take place in his muscular tissue?
*a. Increase of fatty acids oxidation rate
b. Proteolysis intensification
c. Glycogenolysis intensification
d. Glycolysis intensification
e. Glyconeogenesis intensification

190. During the merry-go-round riding a 25- year-old woman began having nausia, vomiting and intensive sweat. Activation of which receptors caused the reflex development of these symptoms?
a. Proprioreceptors of skeletal muscles
b. Otolith vestibular receptors
c. Optic receptors
d. Receptors of Cortis organ
*e. Vestibular receptors of semicircular duct

191. The electronic microphoto of kidney fragment has demonstrated the afferent glomerular arteriole, which under its endothelium has giant cells, containing secretory granules. Name the type of these cells:
*a. Juxtaglomerular
b. Interstitial
c. Smoothmuscular
d. Mesangial
e. Juxtavascular

192. During the bacteriological tests of the purulent secreta from urethra there were found bacteria, which according to Gramm were negatively staining, looked like coffee beans. These bacteria were splitting glucose and maltose to acid, they were located inside the leucocytes. The aetiological agent of what disease are these microorganisms?
a. Melioidosis
b. Syphilis
*c. Gonorrhoea
d. Venereal lymphogranulomatosis
e. Chancroid

193. A patient with bronchial asthma during 2 months was taking pills of prednisolon. After she began feeling much better she suddenly stopped taking the medicine. What complication can develop in this case?
a. Obesity of upper part of the body
*b. Abstinence syndrome
c. Hypotension
d. Gastric hemorrhage
e. Itsenko-Cushing syndrome

194. A 39-year-old patient after radiotherapy because of hepatoma developed ulcer of small intestine. It was caused by the inhibition of mytotic activity of the cells, which are responsible for regeneration of small intestine surface epithelium. Inhibition of what cells mitotic activity does this patient have?
*a. Crypt columnar cells without margins
b. Endocrine cells
c. Exocryocytes with acidophilic granules
d. Caliciform exocrynocytes
e. Columnar cells

195. Where should the cathetor for evacuation of the lymph from the thoracic lymph duct be inserted?
a. To the superior vena cava
b. To the inferior vena cava
*c. To the left venous corner
d. To the right venous corner
e. To the left inguinal vein

196. Patients with similar complaints applied to the doctor: weakness, pain in the intestines, disorder of GIT. Examination of the faeces revealed that one patient with four nucleus cysts should be hospitalized immidiately. For what protozoa are such cysts typical?
a. Lamblia
b. Balantidium
*c. Dysenteric amoeba
d. Intestinal amoeba
e. Trichomonas

197. A 42-year-old man was admitted to the cardiological department because of angina pectoris. Among the medicines administered to the patient there was inhibitor of phosphodiesterase. The concentration of what substance in the heart muscle will be increased?
a. AMP
b. ADP
*c. Cyclo-AMP
d. GMP
e. ATP

198. A patient has a suspected pneumonia. In his sputum there were revealed grampositive diplococci, prolonged with the slightly pointed opposite ands. What microorganisms are revealed in the sputum?
a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Neisseria meningitidis
*c. Streptococcus pneumoniae
d. Klebsiella pneumoniae
e. Neisseria gonorrhoeae

199. A patient has tissue ischemia lower the knee joint, accompanied with "intermittent claudication". Which artery is occluded in this case?
a. Proximal part of the femoral
*b. Popliteal
c. Fibial
d. Posterior tibial
e. Anterior tibial

200. A patient with clinical signs of encephalitis was admitted to the infectious hospital. In his anamnesis there is information about tick bite. During the hemagglutination ihibition reaction there were found antybodies against the pathogen of tick-borne encephalitis in diluton 1:20, which is not diagnostic. What should the doctor do next, after he has got such results?
a. Use more sensitive reaction
b. Reexamine the same serum
*c. Remake the examination of the serum taken 10 days later
d. Canceal the diagnosis of tick-borne encephalitis
e. Remake the examination with another diagnosticum

