1. Buffer capacity of a workers blood was decreased due to exhausting muscular work. By coming of what acid substance in the blood can this state be explained?
a. 3-phosphoglycerate
*b. Lactate
c. β-ketoglutarate
d. 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate
e. Pyruvate

2. A doctor administered Allopurinol to a 26-year-old young man with the symptoms of gout. What pharmacological action of Allopurinol ensures therapeutical effect?
a. By general analgetic effect
b. By inhibiting leucocyte migration into the joint
c. By general anti-inflammatory effect
*d. By inhibiting uric acid synthesis
e. By increasing uric acid excretion

3. A 25-year-old patient complained of the decreased vision. Accommodation disorders, dilated pupil, lack of reaction for the light were revealed on examination. What muscles function is disturbed?
a. Pupil dilating muscle, ciliary
*b. Pupil narrowing muscle, ciliary
c. Lateral rectus muscle, pupil narrowing
d. Inferior oblique muscle, ciliary
e. Pupil narrowing and dilating muscles

4. A 38-year-old man who poisoned himself with mercury dichloride was taken to the admission room in grave condition. What antidote should be immediately introduced?
a. Nalorphine
b. Atropine
*c. Unithiol
d. Isonitrosine
e. Dipiroxim

5. An old woman was hospitalized with acute pain, edema in the right hip joint; the movements in the joint are limited. Which bone or part of it was broken?
a. Pubic bone
b. Condyle of the thigh
c. Ischial bone
*d. The neck of the thigh
e. The body of the thigh bone

6. For a long time a 49-year-old woman had suffered from glomerulonephritis which caused death. The autopsy revealed that the size of her kidneys was 7 х 3 х 2,5 cm, weight 65,0 g, they were dense and small-grained. Microscopically: fibrinogenous inflammation of serous and mucous membranes, dystrophic changes of parenchymatous organs, brain edema. What complication can cause such changes of serous membranes and inner organs?
a. Sepsis
b. DIC-syndrome
c. Thrombopenia
*d. Uraemia
e. Anemia

7. A man who was bitten by the unknown dog applied to the surgeon. Wide ragged woundes were localized on the face. What curative-prophylactic aid should be given to prevent rabies?
a. Prescribe combined antibiotic therapy
b. Immediately inject normal gamma globulin
*c. Start immunisation with rabies vaccine
d. Immediate injection of DPT(Diphtheria, Pertusis, Tetanus) vaccine
e. Hospitalize the patient and keep under the doctors supervision

8. Different functional groups can be presented in the structure of L-amino acids radicals. Identify the group that is able to form ester bond:
a. -NH2
b. -CONH2
c. -CH3
d. -SH
*e. -OH

9. A 50-year-old patient was injured on the occipital region of the head. The closed skull trauma was diagnosed. She was taken to the hospital. The medical examination: deregulation of walking and balance, trembling of arms. What part of brain was injured?
a. The mind-brain
b. The medulla oblongata
c. The spinal cord
d. The inter-brain
*e. The cerebellum

10. A patient with infectious mononucleosis had been taking glucocorticoids for two weeks. He was brought into remission, but he fell ill with acute attack of chronic tonsillitis. What action of glucocorticoids caused this complication?
a. Antishock
b. Anti-inflammatory
*c. Immunosuppressive
d. Antitoxic
e. Antiallergic

11. An individual is characterized by rounded face, broad forehead, a mongolian type of eyelid fold, flattened nasal bridge, permanently open mouth, projecting lower lip, protruding tongue, short neck, flat hands, and stubby fingers. What diagnosis can be put to the patient?
a. Klinefelters syndrome
b. Turners syndrome
*c. Downs syndrome
d. Supermales
e. Alkaptonuria

12. The process of heart transplantation determined the viability of myocardial cells. The determination of what myocardium parameter is the most important?
*a. Rest potential of cardiomyocytes
b. Concentration of oxygen in heart vessels
c. Concentration of Ca-ions in heart vessels
d. Heart temperature
e. Concentration of calcium-ions in myofibrils

13. A tissue sample of benign tumor was studied under the electron microscope. A lot of small (15-20 nm) spherical bodies, consisting of 2 unequal subunits were detected. These are:
a. Golgi complex
b. Microtubules
c. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
*d. Ribosomes
e. Mitochondria

14. Patient with injured muscles of the lower extremities was admitted to the traumatological department. Due to what cells is reparative regeneration of the muscle fibers and restoration of the muscle function possible?
a. Myoblasts
*b. Satellite-cells
c. Myoepithelial cells
d. Fibroblasts
e. Myofibroblasts

15. A patient visited a dentist with complaints of redness and edema of his mouth mucous membrane in a month after dental prosthesis. The patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis. What type of allergic reaction by Gell and Cumbs underlies this disease?
a. Stimulating
b. Immunocomplex
*c. Delayed type hypersensitivity
d. Anaphylactic
e. Cytotoxic

16. Donor skin transplantation was performed to a patient with extensive burns. On the 8-th day the graft became swollen and changed colour; on the 11-th day graft rejection started. What cells take part in this process?
a. Eosinophils
b. B-lymphocytes
*c. T-lymphocytes
d. Erythrocytes
e. Basophils

17. A patient has tissue ischemia below the knee joint accompanied with intermittent claudication. What artery occlusion should be suspected?
a. Peroneal artery
b. Proximal part of femoral artery
c. Posterior tibial artery
d. Anterior tibial artery
*e. Popliteal artery

18. A patient with suspected diphtheria went through bacterioscopic examination. Examination of throat swab revealed rod-shaped bacteria with volutin granules. What etiotropic preparation should be chosen in this case?
*a. Antidiphtheric antitoxic serum
b. Eubiotic
c. Bacteriophage
d. Diphtheria antitoxin
e. Interferon

19. Autopsy of a 12-year-old girl revealed: multiple cutaneous hemmorhages (mostly into the skin of buttocks, lower extremities), serous and mucous memrane hemmorhages, cerebral hemmorhages. Adrenal glands show focal necrosis and massive hemmorhages; kidneys show necrotic nephrosis, suppurative arthritis, iridocyclitis, vasculitis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Periarteritis nodosa
b. Epidemic typhus
*c. Meningococcemia
d. Radiation sickness
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

20. Hypertrychosis of auricles is caused by a gene that is localized in Y-chromosome. Father has this feature. What is the probability to give birth to a boy with such anomaly?
a. 75%
*b. 100%
c. 0%
d. 35%
e. 25%

21. As a result of craniocerebral trauma a patient reveals the following symptoms: intention tremor, dysmetry, adiadochokinesis, dysarthria. What structure of the brain is injured?
a. Black substance
b. Motor cortex
*c. Cerebellum
d. Pale sphere
e. Striatum

22. A patient working at a chemical plant was admitted to the toxicological department with mercury poisoning. What medicine should be used?
a. Naloxone
*b. Unithiol
c. Enterosorbent
d. Activated carbon
e. Isonitrozin

23. Most participants of Magellan expedition to America died from avitominosis. This disease declared itself by general weakness, subcutaneous hemmorhages, falling of teeth, gingival hemmorhages. What is the name of this avitaminosis?
*a. Scurvy
b. Biermers anemia
c. Rachitis
d. Pellagra
e. Polyneuritis (beriberi)

24. The preventive radioprotector was given to a worker of a nuclear power station. What mechanism from the below mentioned is considered to be the main mechanism of radioprotection?
a. Increasing of tissue blood supply
b. Increasing of respiration
*c. Inhibition of free radicals formation
d. Prevention of tissues hypoxia
e. Activation of oxidation reactions

25. Apatient died from acute cardiac insufficiency. The histological examination of his heart revealed the necrotized section in myocardium of the left ventricle, which was separated from undamaged tissue by the zone of hyperimic vessels, small hemorrhages and leukocytic infiltration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocardial ischemic dystrophy
b. Focal exudate myocarditis
*c. Myocardial infarction
d. Diffuse exudate myocarditis
e. Productive myocarditis

26. Objective examination of a patient revealed: slender figure, big skull, highly developed frontal region of face, short extremities. What constitutional type is it characteristic for?
a. Mixed
b. Cerebral
c. Muscular
*d. Respiratory
e. Digestive

27. An isolated muscle of a frog is rhythmically irritated with electric impulses. Every next impulse is in a period of relaxation from the previus contraction. What contraction of the muscle occurs?
a. Asynchronous
*b. Waved tetanus
c. Continuous (smooth) tetanus
d. Single
e. Tonic

28. A 60-year-old patient has reduced perception of high-frequency sounds. What structures disorder of auditory analizer caused these changes?
a. Tympanic membrane
b. Main membrane of cochlea near helicotrema
c. Eustachian tube
*d. Main membrane of cochlea near the oval window
e. Muscles of middle ear

29. Diagnostic scraping was performed to the woman with dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Multiple convoluted glands, ganglially dilated lumens of some glands were revealed histologically in the scrape. Name the type of general pathological process in endometry:
a. Hypertrophic excrescence
b. Metaplasia
*c. Hyperplasia glandulocystica
d. Atrophy
e. Displasia

30. To prevent long-term effects of 4-day malaria a 42-year-old patient was prescribed primaquine. On the 3-rd day from the begin of treatment there appeared stomach and heart pains, dyspepsia, general cyanosis, hemoglobinuria. What caused side effects of the preparation?
*a. Genetic insufficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
b. Drug potentiation by other preparations
c. Delayed urinary excretion of the preparation
d. Cumulation of the preparation
e. Decreased activity of microsomal liver enzymes

31. An intraoperational biopsy of mammary gland has revealed the signs of atypical tissue presented by disorder of parenchyma stroma proportion with domination of the last, gland structures of different size and shape, lined with single-layered proliferative epithelium. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Infiltrative cancer
b. Papilloma
*c. Fibroadenoma
d. Noninfiltrative cancer
e. Mastitis

32. Inhibition of б-motoneuron of the extensor muscles was noticed after stimulation of б-motoneuron of the flexor muscles during the experiment on the spinal cord. What type of inhibition is this process based upon?
a. Depolarizational
b. Lateral
*c. Reciprocal
d. Presynaptic
e. Recurrent

33. Desulfiram is widely used in medical practice to prevent alcocholism. It inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase. Increased level of what metabolite causes aversion to alcochol?
a. Malonyl aldehyde
*b. Acetaldehyde
c. Methanol
d. Ethanol
e. Propionic aldehyde

34. A 60-year-old patient fell ill with obturative jaundice as a result of malignant tumour of the big papillary of the duodenum. Lumen of what anatomical structure is compressed by tumour?
a. Cystic duct
b. Left hepatic duct
c. Common hepatic duct
d. Right hepatic duct
*e. Hepatopancreatic ampulla

35. A 38-year-old patient died during intractable attack of bronchial asthma. Histologic examination revealed mucus accumulation in bronchial lumen, a lot of fat cells (labrocytes) in the wall of bronches, many of them are in the state of degranulation, there are also a lot of eosinophils. What pathogenesis of bronchial changes is it?
a. Immunocomplex mechanism
b. Cellular cytolysis
c. Cytotoxic, cytolytic action of antibodies
d. Granulomatosis
*e. Atrophy

36. Part of alveoles of a preterm infant didnt spread because of enhanced elastic recoil of lungs. How can this recoil be reduced?
*a. By surfactant introduction
b. By fluid suction from the respiratory tracts
c. By glycose introduction
d. By pure oxygene inhalation
e. By artificial pulmonary ventilation

37. Autopsy of a man who died from chronic cardiaovascular collapse revealed "tiger heart". Sidewards of endocardium a yellowish-white banding can be seen; myocardium is dull, dark-yellow. What process caused this pathology?
a. Carbohydrate degeneration
b. Amyloidosis
c. Hyaline degeneration
*d. Fatty parenchymatous degeneration
e. Fatty vascular-stromal degeneration

38. A patients blood was analyzed and the decreased erythrocytes sedimentation rate (ESR) was discovered. What disease from the listed below is accompanied with decreased ESR?
a. Myocardial infarction
b. Hepatitis
c. Vitamin B deficiency
*d. Polycytemia
e. Splenomegaly

39. Tuberculine was introduced intracutaneously to the child for tuberculin test. Marked hyperemia, tissue infiltration developed on the place of injection in 24 hours. What mechanism caused these modifications?
a. Granuloma formation
b. Reagin type cytotoxity
c. Antibody cytotoxity
d. Immunocomplex cytotoxity
*e. Cell cytotoxity

40. A 34-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic glomerulonephritis 3 years ago. Edema have developed within the last 6 months. What caused the edema?
a. Liver dysfunction of protein formation
b. Hyperosmolarity of plasma
*c. Proteinuria
d. Hyperproduction of vasopressin
e. Hyperaldosteronism

41. A 57-year-old patient was admitted to the gastroenterological department with suspicion of Zollinger-Ellison syndrom because of rapid increase of gastrin level in the blood serum. What is the most probable disorder of the secretory function of stomach?
a. Hypoacidic hypersecretion
b. Hypoacidic hyposecretion
c. Hyperacidic hyposecretion
d. Achylia
*e. Hyperacidic hypersecretion

42. A 54-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with complaints of pain in the right subcostal region, vomiting with blood. Objectively: enlarged liver, varicose veins in the stomach and esophagus. Disfunction of what vessel is likely to have taken place?
a. Aorta abdominalis
b. Vena cava inferior
c. Vena cava superior
*d. Vena porta
e. Vena hepatica

43. Kidneys of a man under examination show increased resorbtion of calcium ions and decreased resorbtion of phosphate ions. What hormone causes this phenomenon?
*a. Parathormone
b. Thyrocalcitonin
c. Hormonal form D3
d. Vasopressin
e. Aldosterone

44. In the specimen of one of the parts of respiratory system a tubular organ was found. It has low epithelium, well developed muscular tunic, glands and cartilage are absent. Name this organ:
*a. Minor bronchs
b. Trachea
c. Larynx
d. Major bronchs
e. Median bronchs

45. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) increased by 20% as a result of prolonged starvation of an individual. The most evident cause of filtration changes under this conditions is:
a. Increase of filtration coefficient
b. Increase of renal plasma stream
c. Increase of penetration of the renal filter
*d. Decrease of oncotic pressure of blood plasma
e. Increase of systemic blood pressure

46. Microspecimen of red bone marrow contains multiple capillares through the walls of which mature blood cells penetrate into the bloodstream. What type of capillares are these?
a. Fenestrational
b. Somatical
c. Lymphatic
d. Visceral
*e. Sinusoidal

47. Secretion of what gastrointestinal hormones will be primarily decreased as a result of iduodenum removal?
a. Gastrin and histamine
b. Neurotensin
*c. Cholecystokinin and secretin
d. Histamine
e. Gastrin

48. A person was selling "homemade pork" sausages at the market. State sanitary inspector suspected falcification of the sausages. What serological immune reaction can identifiy food substance?
a. Immunofluorescence test
b. Agglutination test
c. Indirect hemagglutination test
*d. Precipitation test
e. Complement-fixation test

49. Microscopic examination of the enlarged neck gland of a 14-year-old girl revealed destruction of the tissue structure of the node, absence of the lymph follicles, sclerotic areas and necrosis foci, cell constitution of the node is polymorphous, lymphocites, eosinophiles, big atypical cells with multilobular nuclei (Beresovsky-Sternberg cells) and mononuclear cells of the large size are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic lympholeucosis
b. Acute lympholeucosis
c. Fungoid mycosis
d. Berkitts lymphoma
*e. Lymphogranulomatosis

50. During the operation on the hip joint of a 5-year-old child her ligament was damaged which caused bleeding.What ligament was damaged?
*a. The head of the thigh
b. Perpendicular of the acetabule
c. Pubofemoral
d. Ischiofemoral
e. Iliofemoral

51. A mother of a newborn complains of her babys constant belching with undigested milk. Which developmental anomaly is it an evidence of?
*a. Esophageal atresia
b. Anal atresia
c. Faux lupinum
d. Esophageal fistula
e. Labium leporium

52. A patient suffering from trombophlebitis of the deep crural veins suddenly died. Autopsy has shown freely lying red friable masses with dim crimped surface in the trunk and bifurcation of the pulmonary artery. What pathologic process was revealed by morbid anatomist?
a. Fat embolism
b. Thrombosis
c. Tissue embolism
*d. Tromboembolism
e. Embolism with foreign body

53. A person has reduced diuresis, hypernatremia, hypokalemia. Hypersecretion of what hormone can cause such changes?
a. Auricular sodiumuretic factor
b. Parathormone
c. Vasopressin
d. Adrenalin
*e. Aldosterone

54. During examination of a patient, there was found a neoplasm in the white substance of cerebral hemispheres with localization in the knee and frontal part of posterior crus of internal capsule. Fibres of what conductive tract of the brain will be disrupted?
a. Тr. thalamocorticalis
b. Tr. frontothalamicus
*c. Tr. pyramidalis
d. Tr. parietooccipitopontinus
e. Tr. frontopontinus

55. Inflammatory process of modified subserous layer around cervix of the uterus caused an intensive pain syndrome. In what region of genitals does the pathological process take place?
a. Myometrium
b. Mesometrium
c. Endometrium
*d. Parametrium
e. Perimetrium

56. A patient with suspicion on epidemic typhus was admitted to the hospital. Some arachnids and insects have been found in his flat. Which of them may be a carrier of the pathogen of epidemic typhus?
a. Bed-bugs
b. Spiders
c. Houseflies
*d. Lice
e. Cockroaches

57. The calcium canals of cardiomyocytes have been blocked on an isolated rabbits heart. What changes in the hearts activity can result from it?
a. Decreased heart beat rate
b. Heart stops in systole
c. Decreased force of the contraction
*d. Decreased rate and force of heart beat
e. Heart stops in diastole

58. While enrolling a child to school Mantus test was made to define whether revaccination was needed. The test result is negative. What does this test result mean?
*a. Absence of cell immunity to the tuberculosis
b. Absence of antitoxic immunity to the tuberculosis
c. Absence of antibodies for tubercle bacillus
d. Presence of antibodies for tubercle bacillus
e. Presence of cell immunity to the tuberculosis

59. A 5-year-old child who often fells ill with respiratory diseases has eczematous appearances after consumption of some food products, tendency to prolonged course of inflammatory processes. What kind of diathesis can be suspected in this case?
a. Lymphohypoplastic
*b. Exudative-catharral
c. Arthritism
d. Asthenic
e. Hemmorhagic

60. Under some diseases it is observed aldosteronism accompanied by hypertension and edema due to sodium retention in the organism. What organ of the internal secretion is affected under aldosteronism?
a. Pancreas
b. Hypophysis
*c. Adrenal glands
d. Testicle
e. Ovaries

61. While having the dinner the child choked and aspirated the food. Meavy cough has started, skin and mucose are cyanotic, pulse is rapid, respiration is infrequent, expiration is prolonged. What disorder of the external respiration has the child?
a. Stenotic respiration
b. Biots respiration
c. Stage of inspiratory dyspnea on asphyxia
d. Alternating respiration
*e. Stage of expiratory dyspnea on asphyxia

62. ATP synthesis is totaly blocked in a cell. How will the value of membrane rest potential change?
*a. It will disappear
b. First it will increase, then decrease
c. It will be considerably increased
d. First it will decrease, then increase
e. It will be slightly increased

63. Children often have heavy nasal breathing resulting from excessive development of lymphoid tissue of pharyngeal mucous membrane. What tonsils growth may cause this effect?
a. All above mentioned tonsils
b. Tonsilla tubaria
c. Tonsilla lingualis
*d. Tonsilla pharyngea
e. Tonsilla palatina

64. A 2-year-old child has got intestinal dysbacteriosis, which resultsed in hemorrhagic syndrome. What is the most likely cause of hemorrhage of the child?
a. PP hypovitaminosis
b. Hypocalcemia
*c. Vitamin K deficiency
d. Fibrinogen deficiency
e. Activation of tissue thromboplastin

65. Necrosis focus appeared in the area of hyperemia and skin edema in few hours after burn. What mechanism strengthens destructive effect in the inflammation area?
a. Diapedesis of erythrocytes
b. Proliferation of fibroblasts
c. Primary alteration
d. Emigration of lymphocytes
*e. Secondary alteration

66. A duodenal content smear of a patient with indigestion contains protosoa 10-18 mcm large. They have piriform bodies, 4 pairs of filaments, two symmetrically located nuclei in the broadened part of body. What kind of the lowest organisms is it?
*a. Lamblia
b. Balantidium
c. Dysentery ameba
d. Intestinal ameba
e. Trichomonas

67. A 35-year-old man under the treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis has acute pain onset of right big toe, swelling, and low-grade fever. The gouty arthritis was diagnosed and high serum uric acid level was found. Which of the following antituberculous drugs are known for causing high uric acid levels?
*a. Pyrazinamide
b. Cycloserine
c. Aminosalicylic acid
d. Thiacetazone
e. Rifampicin

68. A patient with complaints of dryness in the mouth, photophobia and vision impairment was admitted to the reception-room. Skin is hyperemic, dry, pupils are dilated, tachycardia. Poisoning with belladonna alkaloids was diagnosed on further examination. What medicine should be prescribed?
*a. Prozerin
b. Dipiroxim
c. Pilocarpine
d. Diazepam
e. Armine

69. From the nasopharynx of a 5-year-old child it was excreted a microorganism which is identical to Corynebacterium diphtheriae dose according to morphological and biochemical signs. But this microorganism does not produce exotoxin. As a result of what process can this microorganism become toxigenic?
*a. Phage conversion
b. Cultivation in the telluric environment
c. Passing through the organism of the sensative animals
d. Chromosome mutation
e. Growing with antitoxic serum

70. A patient with tissue trauma was taken a blood sample for the determination of blood clotting parameters. Specify the right sequence of extrinsic pathway activation:
a. III - IV - Xa
b. III - VIII: TF - Xa
c. IV - VIII: TF - Xa
*d. III - VIIa - Xa
e. IV - VIIa - Xa

71. The pulmonalis embolism has suddenly developed in a 40-year-old patient with opened fracture of the hip. Choose the possible kind of embolism:
a. Tissue
*b. Fat
c. Thrombus-embolus
d. Air
e. Foreign body

72. A 63-year-old woman shows symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. The increase of what blood indices could be the most significant for proving the diagnosis?
a. Lipoproteids
*b. Additive glycosaminoglycans
c. R-glycosidase
d. Acid phosphatase
e. General cholesterol

73. A patient with rheumatoid arthritis who had been treated with indometacin has got signs of gastropathy. What activity of the drug can this complication be connected with?
a. Antiserotonin
b. Antikinine
*c. Anticyclooxygenase
d. Antihistamine
e. Locally irritating

74. A 58-year-old patient with acute cardiac insufficiency has decreased volume of daily urine - oliguria. What is the mechanism of this phenomenon?
a. Reduced permeamility of renal filter
*b. Decreased glomerular filtration
c. Rise of hydrostatic blood pressure in capillars
d. Decreased number of functioning glomerules
e. Drop of oncotic blood pressure

75. A 50-year-old patient with typhoid fever was treated with Levomycetin, next day his condition became worse, temperature rose to 39,60С. What caused the complication?
a. Reinfection
b. Secondary infection addition
*c. The effect of endotoxin agent
d. Allergic reaction
e. Irresponsiveness of an agent to the levomycetin

76. A patient operated on complicated appendicitis has the following changes of blood count: erythrocytes - 4,0.1012l, Нb - 120 g/l, color index - 0,9, leukocytes – 18.109l, basophils - 0, eosinophils - 0, myelocytes - 0, juvenile - 0, stab neutrophils - 20, segmentonuclear neutrophils - 53, lymphocytes - 21, monocytes - 5. How is such nuclear shift of leukocytic formula called?
*a. Degenerative left shift
b. Hyperregenerative
c. Regenerative left shift
d. Regeneratively-degenerative
e. Right shift

77. A patient with diabetes mellitus experienced loss of consciousness and convulsions after injection of insulin. What is the result of biochemical blood analysis for concentration of the sugar?
a. 5,5 mmol/L
b. 10,0 mmol/L
*c. 1,5 mmol/L
d. 8,0 mmol/L
e. 3,3 mmol/L

78. A 45-year-old woman suffers from seasonal allergic rhinitis caused by the ambrosia blossoming. What medicine from the stabilizer of the adipose cells group can be used for prevention of this disease?
a. Phencarol
*b. Ketotifen
c. Tavegyl
d. Diazoline
e. Dimedrol

79. Examination of a newborn boys genitals revealed a cleft of urethra that opens on the inferior surface of his penis. What developmental anomaly is meant?
a. Epispadia
b. Cryptorchism
c. Hermaphroditism
d. Monorchism
*e. Hypospadia

80. A 46-year-old man complains of difficulties with nasal breathing. Mikuliczs cells, accumulation of epithelioid cells, plasmocytes, lymphocytes, hyaline balls were discovered in the biopsy material of the thickened nasal mucosa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
*b. Scleroma
c. Virus rhinitis
d. Rhinovirus infection
e. Allergic rhinitis

81. Decreased blood supply to the organs causes hypoxia that activates fibroblasts function. Volume of what elements is increased in this case?
a. Lymphatic vessels
b. Parenchymatous elements of an organ
c. Nerve elements
*d. Intercellular substance
e. Vessels of microcircular stream

82. A 40-year-old woman was admitted to the infectious diseases department with high body temperature. Objectively: marked meningeal symptoms. A spinal cord punction was made. What anatomic formation was puncturated?
a. Cisterna cerebellomedullaris posterior
*b. Spatium subarachnoideum
c. Spatium epidurale
d. Spatium subdurale
e. Cavum trigeminale

83. A large-scale reaction with parapertussis and pertussis diagnosticums was made in order to make serological diagnostics of the whooping cough. At the bottom of the test-tubes with diagnosticum of Bordetella parapertussis a granular sediment formed. What antibodies did this reaction reveal?
*a. Agglutinins
b. Bacteriolysins
c. Antitoxins
d. Precipitins
e. Opsonins

84. A patient who has been treated with diazepam on account of neurosis complains of toothache. Doctor administered him an analgetic, but its dose was lower than average therapeutic dose. What phenomenon did the doctor take into account while prescribing the patient an underdose?
a. Drug dependence
b. Summation
*c. Potentiation
d. Tolerance
e. Cumulation

85. Patient with abscess of the cut wound applied to the traumatological department. In order to clean the wound from the pus doctor washed it with 3% hydrogen peroxide. Foam was absent. What caused the absence of the drug activity?
a. Pus in the wound
b. Low concentration H2O2
c. Inherited insufficiency of erythrocyte phosphatdehydrogenase
*d. Inherited insufficiency of catalase
e. Shallow wound

86. A physician examined a patient and found inguinal hernia. Through what anatomic formation does it penetrate into the skin?
a. Canalis adductorius
*b. Hiatus saphenus
c. Anulus inguinalis superficialis
d. Anulus femoralis
e. Lacuna musculorum

87. A 60-year-old patient was admitted to the surgical department because of infection caused by blue pus bacillus (Pseudomonas aeruginosa) which is sensative to penicillin antibiotics. Indicate which of the given penicillins has marked activity to the Pseudomonas aeruginosa?
a. Phenoxymethylpenicillin
*b. Carbenicillin disodium
c. Oxacillin
d. Benzylpenicillin
e. Methicillin

88. A patient with continious bronchopneumonia was admitted to the therapeutic department. Antibiotic therapy didnt give much effect. What medication for improvement of immune state should be added to the complex treatment of this patient?
a. Paracetamol
b. Benadryl
*c. Timaline
d. Sulfocamphocaine
e. Analgin

89. A 46-year-old patient has complained of headache, fatigue, thirst, pains in the spine and joints for the last 2 years. Clinically observed disproportional enlargement of hands, feet, nose, superciliary arches. He notes that he needed to buy bigger shoes three times. What is the main reason of such disproportional enlargement of different parts of the body?
a. Joints dystrophy development
*b. Cartilaginous tissue proliferation under growth hormone influence
c. Increased sensitivity of the tissues to insulin
d. Increased sensitivity of the tissues to growth hormone
e. Joints chronic inflammation development

90. Analeptical remedy of reflective type from the H-cholinomimetics group was given to the patient for restoration of breathing after poisoning with carbon monoxide. What medicine was prescribed to the patient?
a. Adrenalin hydrochloride
b. Atropine sulphate
c. Pentamin
*d. Lobeline hydrochloride
e. Mesaton

91. During the endoscopy the inflammation of a major papilla of the duodenum and the disturbances of bile secretion were found. In which part of duodenum were the problems found?
a. Bulb
*b. Descendent part
c. Upper horizontal part
d. Lower horizontal part
e. Ascendant part

92. Scraps of the mycelium of a fungus, spores, air bubbles and fat drops were discovered on microscopy of the patients hair excluded from the infected areas. What fungus disease is characterised by this microscopic picture?
a. Trichophytosis
b. Epidermophytosis
c. Microspory
*d. Favus
e. Sporotrichosis

93. Albinos cant stand sun impact - they dont aquire sun-tan but get sunburns. Disturbed metabolism of what aminoacid underlies this phenomenon?
*a. Phenilalanine
b. Tryptophan
c. Glutamic acid
d. Methionine
e. Histidine

94. Autopsy of a 46-year-old man revealed multiple brown-and-green layers and hemmorhages on the mucous membrane of rectum and sigmoid colon; slime and some blood in colon lumen; histologically - fibrinous colitis. In course of bacteriological analysis of colon contents S.Sonne were found. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Crohns disease
b. Salmonellosis
c. Cholera
d. Yersiniosis
*e. Dysentery

95. A patient who has been strictly keeping to a certain diet for 10 days went through examination of respiratory coefficient. It was determined that it was equal 1. What have the patient been keeping to?
a. With domination of proteins and carbohydrates
b. Mixed
c. With domination of fat and carbohydrates
*d. With domination of carbohydrates
e. With domination of proteins and fat

96. Dystrophic alterations of heart are accompanied with dilation of heart cavities, decreased force of heart contractions, increased blood volume that remains during systole in the heart cavity, vein overfill. What heart condition is it typiccal for?
a. Tonogenic dilatation
b. Cardiosclerosis
c. Emergency stage of hyperfunction and hypertrophy
d. Cardiac tamponade
*e. Myogenic dilatation

97. A considerable increase of activity of МВ-forms of CPK (creatinephosphokinase) and LDH-1 was revealed on the examination of patients blood. What is the most likely pathology?
*a. Miocardial infarction
b. Cholecystitis
c. Rheumatism
d. Hepatitis
e. Pancreatitis

98. Intrapleural pressure of an individual is being measured. In what phase did he hold his breath if the pressure is - 25 cm H2O?
a. -
b. Quiet inspiration
c. Forced expiration
d. Quiet expiration
*e. Forced inspiration

99. Moving of the daughter chromatids to the poles of the cell is observed in the mitotically dividing cell. At what stage of the mitotic cycle is this cell?
a. Interphase
*b. Anaphase
c. Telophase
d. Metaphase
e. Prophase

100. Intake of oral contraceptives containing sex hormones inhibits secretion of the hypophysiae hormones. Secretion of which of the indicated hormones is inhibited while taking oral contraceptives with sex hormones?
a. Oxytocin
b. Vasopressin
*c. Follicle-stimulating
d. Somatotropic
e. Thyrotropic

101. A sick man with high temperature and a lot of tiny wounds on the body has been admitted to the hospital. Lice have been found in the folds of his clothing. What disease can be suspected?
a. Plague
b. Scabies
*c. Epidemic typhus
d. Tularemia
e. Malaria

102. A genetics specialist analyzed the genealogy of a family and found that both males and females may have the illness, not across all the generations, and that healthy parents may have ill children. What is the type of illness inheritance?
a. X-linked recessive
*b. Autosomal recessive
c. Y-linked
d. Autosomal dominant
e. X-linked dominant

103. Inflamation is characterised by increased permeability of vessels of microcirculation stream, increase of their hydrodynamic blood pressure. Increasing of the osmotic concentration and dispersity of protein structures is present in the intercellular fluid. What kind of edema will appear in this case?
a. Hydrodynamic
b. Membranogenic
c. Lymphogenic
d. Colloid-osmotic
*e. Mixed

104. A patient has elbow joint trauma with avulsion of medial epicondyle of humerus. What nerve can be damaged in this trauma?
*a. Ulnar
b. Radial
c. Musculocutaneous nerve
d. Cardiac cutaneous nerve
e. Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm

105. Patients with bile ducts obstruction suffer from inhibition of blood coagulation, bleedings as a result of low level of vitamin assimilation. What vitamin is in deficiency?
a. Е
b. D
*c. К
d. Carotene
e. А

106. After a trauma a 44-year-old patient had a rupture of left palm muscle tendons and of the superficial blood vessels. After operation and removal of the most part of the necrotically changed muscle tissue the bloodstream was normalized. What vessels have helped to restore the bloodstream?
a. Aa. metacarpeae palmares
b. Aa. perforantes
c. Aa. digitales palmares communes
d. Arcus palmaris superficialis
*e. Arcus palmaris profundus

107. A 52-year-old patient has the following diagnosis: systemic amebiasis with involvment of intestines, liver, lungs. What drug should be prescribed?
*a. Metronidasol
b. Enteroseptol
c. Tetracycline
d. Quingamine
e. Quiniofone

108. A child has inhaled a button. Where is it likely to be?
a. In the esophagus
*b. In the right main bronchus
c. In the trachea
d. In the left main bronchus
e. In the larynx

109. Microscopic examination of the sputum of a patient with pneumonia occasionally revealed some larvae. Eosinophiles were detected on blood examination. What helminthiasis can be diagnosed?
*a. Ascariasis
b. Opisthorchosis
c. Trichocephaliasis
d. Paragonimiasis
e. Enterobiosis

110. Concentration of pyruvate is increased in the patients blood, the most of which is excreted with urine. What avitaminosis has the patient?
a. Avitaminosis B6
b. Avitaminosis В3
*c. Avitaminosis В1
d. Avitaminosis E
e. Avitaminosis В2

111. A 40-year-old patient complains of intensive heartbeats, sweating, nausea, visual impairment, arm tremor, hypertension. From his anamnesis: 2 years ago he was diagnosed with pheochromocytoma. Hyperproduction of what hormones causes the given pathology?
a. Thyroidal hormones
b. ACTH
*c. Catecholamines
d. Glucocorticoids
e. Aldosterone

112. A patient who came to the doctor because of his infertility was administered to make tests for toxoplasmosis and chronic gonorrhoea. Which reaction should be performed to reveal latent toxoplasmosis and chronic gonorrhoea of the patient?
*a. (R)CFT- Reiters complement fixation test
b. IFA - Immunofluorescence assay
c. RDHA - Reverse direct hemagglutination assay
d. Immunoblot analysis
e. RIHA - Reverse indirect hemagglutination assay

113. A 27-year-old woman has dropped penicillin containing eye drops. In a few minutes there appeared feeling of itching, burning of the skin, lips and eyelids edema, whistling cough, decrease of BP. What imunoglobulins take part in the development of this allergic reaction?
a. IgM and IgD
b. IgA and IgM
c. IgM and IgG
*d. IgE and IgG
e. IgG and IgD

114. As a result of the damage of one of the Atomic Power Plant reactors the run-out of radioelements took place. People in the high-radiation area were radiated with approximately 250-300 r. They were immediately hospitalized. What changes in the blood count would be typical for the victims?
a. Anemia
*b. Lymphopenia
c. Thrombopenia
d. Neutropenia
e. Leukopenia

115. A student is writing a thorough summary of a lecture. Quality of summarizing has considerably worsened when his neighbours started talking. What kind of inhibition in the cerebral cortex caused this effect?
a. Fading
b. Delayed
c. Protective
*d. External
e. Differentiated

116. A child has got galactosemia. Concentration of glucose in blood has not considerably changed. Deficiency of what enzyme caused this illness?
a. Galactokinase
b. Amylo-1,6-glucosidase
c. Hexokinase
*d. Galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase
e. Phosphoglucomutase

117. A 60-year-old man felt asleep after cerebral hemorrhage for a long time. Damage of what structure caused this state?
a. Cortex of the large hemispheres
*b. Reticular formation
c. Nuclears of the cerebral nerves
d. Hippocampus
e. Black substance

118. A patient with thrombophlebitis of lower extremities had got chest pains, blood spitting, growing respiratory failure that caused his death. Autopsy revealed multiple pulmonary infarctions. What is the most probable reason of their development?
a. Pulmonary artery thrombosis
b. Bronchial artery embolism
c. Pulmonary venous thrombosis
d. Bronchial artery thrombosis
*e. Pulmonary artery embolism

119. Diabetes mellitus causes ketosis as a result of activated oxidation of fatty acids. What disorders of acid-base equilibrium may be caused by excessive accumulation of ketone bodies in blood?
a. Respiratory acidosis
b. Any changes wount happen
c. Respiratory alcalosis
*d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Metabolic alcalosis

120. To anaesthetize the surgical treatment of burn surface, a patient was intravenously injected a medication for short-acting narcosis. 1 minute later the patient being under anaesthesia showed increased blood pressure, tachycardia, increased tone of skeletal muscles; reflexes remained. After recovering from anaesthesia the patient had disorientation and visual hallucinations. What medication was the patient injected?
a. Thiopental sodium
b. Sombrevin
c. Nitrous oxide
d. Diethyl ether
*e. Ketamine

121. A 42-year-old man suffering from gout has increased level of urinary acid in blood. Allopurinol was prescribed to decrease the level of urinary acid. Competitive inhibitor of what enzyme is allopurinol?
a. Adenine phosphoribosiltransferase
b. Guanine deaminase
c. Hypoxanthine phosphoribosiltransferase
*d. Xanthine oxidase
e. Adenosine deaminase

122. During the fetal period of the development in the vascular system of the fetus a large arterial (Botallos) duct is functioning which converts into lig.arteriosum after birth. What anatomical formations does this duct connect?
a. Pulmonary trunk and superior vena cava
b. Aorta and superior vena cava
c. Aorta and inferior vena cava
*d. Pulmonary trunk and aorta
e. Right and left auricles

123. Cerebral trauma caused increase of ammonia formation. What aminoacid takes part in removal of ammonia from cerebral tissue?
a. Valine
b. Tyrosine
*c. Glutamic
d. Lisine
e. Tryptophan

124. Upper neck node of sympathetic trunk was removed from the rabbit on experiment. Reddening and increased temperature of the skin of head is observed. What disorder of peripheral circulation of the blood has developed?
a. Metabolic arterial hyperemia
b. Venous hyperemia
c. Neurotonic arterial hyperemia
d. Stasis
*e. Neuroparalytic arterial hyperemia

125. An 18-year-old patient has enlarged inguinal lymphnodes, they are painless, thickened on palpation. In the area of genital mucous membrane there is a small-sized ulcer with thickened edges and "laquer" bottom of greyish colour. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Gonorrhea
b. Tuberculosis
c. Trophic ulcer
*d. Syphilis
e. Lepra

126. It is planned to use the territory of an old cattle burial ground (which is not used for more than 50 years) for building houses. But ground analysis revealed presence of the pathogen of a very dangerous illness. Which of the indicated microorgonisms is likely to remain in the ground for such a long time?
*a. Bacillus anthracis
b. Yersinia pestis
c. Francisella tularensis
d. Brucella abortus
e. Mycobacterium bovis

127. A 30-year-old woman was diagnosed with insufficiency of exocrinous function of pancreas. Hydrolisis of what nutrients will be disturbed?
a. Proteins, fats
b. Proteins
c. Proteins, carbohydrates
*d. Proteins, fats, carbohydrates
e. Fats, carbohydrates

128. On autopsy of the 58-year-old man it was revealed: mitral valve is deformed, thickened, not totally closed. Microscopically: foci of collagen fibers are eosinophilic, have positive fibrin reaction. The most likely it is:
a. Mucoid swelling
b. Fibrinoid inflammation
c. Amyloidosis
d. Hyalinosis
*e. Fibrinoid swelling

129. A 39-year-old woman has madescence in the region of mammilla, a small ulcer with inflammatory hyperemia and cutaneous edema. Histologic examination of tissue sampling from this area revealed in the malpighian layer of thickened epidermis atypical cells with light and optically empty cytoplasm, with no intracellular bridges. Such cells were also found in the orifice of big mammal gland ducts. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Melanocarcinoma
b. Basal cell carcinoma
c. Intraductal cancer
d. Epidermoid cancer
*e. Pagets disease

130. A 37-year-old man was admitted to the surgical department with the symptoms of acute pancreatitis: vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, hypotention, weakness, dehydration of the organism. What medicine should be used first of all?
*a. Contrycal
b. Etaperazine
c. No-spa
d. Ephedrine
e. Platyphylline

131. In course of metabolic process active forms of oxygen including superoxide anion radical are formed in the human body. By means of what enzyme is this anion inactivated?
a. Glutathionereductase
*b. Superoxide dismutase
c. Glutathioneperoxidase
d. Catalase
e. Peroxidase

132. A patient who was previously ill with mastectomy as a result of breast cancer was prescribed radiation therapy. What vitamin preparation has marked radioprotective action caused by antioxidant activity?
*a. Tocopherol acetate
b. Thiamine chloride
c. Ergocalciferol
d. Folic acid
e. Riboflavin

133. Tuberculosis can be treated by means of combined chemotherapy that includes substances with different mechanisms of action.What antituberculous medication inhibits transcription of RNA into DNA in mycobacteria?
a. Para-aminosalicylic acid
b. Streptomycin
c. Isoniazid
*d. Rifampicin
e. Ethionamide

134. In course of prophylactic medical examination a 7-year-old boy was diagnosed to have daltonism. Parents are healthy, color vision is normal. But grandfather from the mothers side has the same disorder. What is the type of inheriting of this anomaly?
a. Autosomal-dominant
b. Incomplete domination
c. Dominant, sex-linked
*d. Recessive, sex-linked
e. Autosomal-recessive

135. A 25-year-old woman with red and itchy eczematoid dermatitis visits your office. She had a dental procedure one day earlier with administration of a local anesthetic. There were no other findings, although she indicated that she had a history of allergic reactions. Which of the following drugs is most likely involved?
*a. Procaine
b. Etidocaine
c. Bupivacaine
d. Cocaine
e. Lidocaine

136. Synthesis of phospholipids is disturbed as a result fatty infiltration of liver. Indicate which of the following substances can enhance the process of methylation during phospholipids synthesis?
a. Glycerin
*b. Methionine
c. Glucose
d. Ascorbic acid
e. Citrate

137. An 18-year-old patient came to the out-patient department with the complaints of bleeding trauma in the vestibule of his nose. On examination: the mechanical injury of the mucous layer of the vestibule without continuation into nasal cavity proper. What is the boundary between the vestibule and nasal cavity proper?
a. Nasal septa
b. Choanes
c. Nostrils
d. Nasal roller
*e. Nasal limen

138. Low level of albumins and fibrinogen was detected in the patients blood. Decreased activity of what organelle of the liver hepatocytes can most probably cause it?
a. Lysosomes
*b. Granular endoplasmatic reticulum
c. Agranular endoplasmatic reticulum
d. Mitochondrions
e. Golgi complex

139. A patient with diabetes mellitus has been delivered in hospital in the state of unconsciousness. Arterial pressure is low. The patient has acidosis. Point substances, which accumulation in the blood results in these manifestations:
a. High fatty acids
b. Cholesterol esters
c. Monosaccharides
*d. Ketone bodies
e. Amino acids

140. A patient experienced a sudden temperature rise up to 390С. After 6 hours the temperature normalized. On the 2-nd day the attack recurred: in the period of paroxysm the temperature reached 410С, apyrexial period began after 8 hours. What type of temperature profile is it?
a. Recurrent
b. Septic
*c. Intermitting
d. Continued
e. Hectic

141. Healthy parents have got a fair-haired, blue-eyed girl. Irritability, anxiety, sleep and feeding disturbance developed in the first months of the infants life. Neurological examination revealed developmental lag. What method of genetic investigation should be used for the exact diagnosis?
a. Genealogical
b. Population-statistical
c. Gemellary
d. Cytological
*e. Biochemical

142. A woman who was infected with toxoplasmosis during the pregnancy has born a child with multiple congenital defects.This is a result of:
a. Cancerogenesis
*b. Teratogenesis
c. Biological mutogenesis
d. Recombination
e. Chemical mutogenesis

143. A 38-year-old woman was admitted to the admission-diagnostic department with uterine bleeding. What are the most likely changes of blood?
a. Polycythemia
b. Leukopenia
*c. Reduction of haematocrite rate
d. Leucocytosis
e. Increase of haematocrite rate

144. The ovary specimen colored with hematoxylin-eosin contains a follicle, in which cubic-shaped follicle epithelium cells are placed in 1-2 layers, and scarlet membrane is seen around the ovocyte. Name this follicle:
a. Atretic
*b. Primary
c. Primordial
d. Secondary
e. Mature

145. In the blood of a 26-year-old man 18% of erythrocytes of the spherical, ball-shaped, flat and spinous shape have been revealed. Other eritrocytes were in form of the concavo-concave disks. How is this phenomenon called?
a. Pathological poikilocytosis
b. Erytrocytosis
*c. Physiological poikilocytosis
d. Physiological anisocytosis
e. Pathological anisocytosis

146. A patient has undergone an amputation of lower extremity. Some time later painful nodules appeared in a stump. Amputatious neuromas were found out at the microscopic examination. To what pathological processes do those formations relate?
a. Inflammation
b. Metaplasia
c. Dystrophy
d. Hyperemia
*e. Regeneration

147. Thyrotoxicosis leads to increased production of thyroidal hormones T3 and T4, weight loss, tachycardia, psychic excitement and so on. How do thyroidal hormones effect energy metabolism in the mitochondrion of cells?
a. Activate substrate phosphorylation
b. Stop respiratory chain
*c. Disconnect oxidation and oxidative phosphorylation
d. Stop substrate phosphorylation
e. Activate oxidative phosphorylation

148. Microspecimen of spinal cord contains a nucleus that should be analyzed. Its neurons form motor endings in the skeletal muscles. What nucleus of spinal cord is meant?
a. Intermediate lateral nucleus
b. Proper nucleus of gray substance
c. Proper nucleus of the posterior horn
d. Thoracic nucleus
*e. Proper nucleus of the anterior horn

149. A 45-year-old man applied to the trauma station because of domestic shoulder trauma. Objectively: extension, reduction and pronation functions of the shoulder are absent. What muscle was injured?
a. Subscapular muscle
b. Supraspinous muscle
*c. Teres major muscle
d. Teres minor muscle
e. Infraspinous muscle

150. On autopsy it was revealed: pia mater of the upper parts of cerebral hemisphere is plethoric, of yellowish-green color, soaked with purulent and fibrose exudate, looks like a cap. What disease is it typical for?
a. Meningitis connected with anthrax
*b. Meningococcal meningitis
c. Tuberculous meningitis
d. Grippal meningitis
e. Meningitis connected with typhus

151. A 16-year-old boy was performed an appendectomy. He has been hospitalized for right lower quadrant abdominal pain within 18 hours. The surgical specimen is edematous and erythematous. Infiltration by what of the following cells is the most typical for the process occuring here?
*a. Neutrophils
b. Basophils
c. Limphocytes
d. Monocytes
e. Eosinophils

152. A patient had been ill with bronchial asthma for many years and died from asthmatic fit. Histologic lung examination revealed: lumen of bronchioles and small bronches contain a lot of mucus with some eosinophils, there is sclerosis of alveolar septums, dilatation of alveole lumen. What mechanism of development of hypersensibility reaction took place?
*a. Reagin reaction
b. Granulomatosis
c. Cytotoxic reaction
d. Immunocomplex reaction
e. Cytolysis determined by lymphocytes

153. A young man felt acute pain in the back during active drawing up on the horizontal bar. Objectively: pain while moving upper extremity, reduced pronation and adduction functions. Sprain of what muscle can be observed here?
a. М.romboideus major
b. М.levator scapulae
c. М.trapezius
*d. М.latissimus dorsi
e. М.subscapularis

154. An experiment proved that UV-radiated cells of patients with xeroderma pigmentosum restore the native DNA structure slower than cells of healthy individuals as a result of reparation enzyme defection. What enzyme helps this process?
a. DNA polymerase III
b. RNA ligase
c. Primase
d. DNA gyirase
*e. Endonuclease

155. A 56-year-old patient complaining of thirst and frequent urination was diagnosed with diabete mellitus. Butamin was prescribed. How does the medicine act?
a. It inhibits б-cells of Langergans islets
b. It relieves transport of glucose through the cells membranes
c. It helps to absorb the glucose by the cells of the organism tissues
d. It inhibits absorption of glucose in the intestines
*e. It stimulates в-cells of Langergans islets

156. While preparing a patient to the operation the heart chambers pressure was measured. In one of them the pressure changed during one heart cycle from 0 to 120 mm Hg. What chamber of heart was it?
a. Right ventricle
b. Left atrium
c. -
d. Right atrium
*e. Left ventricle

157. A 10-year-old girl often experiences acute respiratory infections with multiple punctate haemorrages in the places of clothes friction. Hypovitaminosis of what vitamin has the girl?
a. В2
b. В1
*c. С
d. А
e. В6

158. Analysis of amniotic fluid that was obtained as a result of amniocentesis (puncture of amniotic sac) revealed cells the nuclei of which contain sex chromatin (Barrs body). What can it be evidence of?
a. Polyploidy
b. Development of male fetus
*c. Development of female fetus
d. Genetic disorders of fetus development
e. Trisomy

159. A 68-year-old woman cant move her upper and lower right extremities due to the stroke. Muscle tone of these extremities and their reflexes are increased. There are pathological reflexes. What form of paralysis is it?
a. Monoplegia
*b. Hemiplegia
c. Paraplegia
d. Dissociation
e. Tetraplegia

160. A 17-year-old boy fell seriously ill, body temperature rose up to 38,50С, there is cough, rhinitis, lacrimation, nasal discharges. What kind of inflammation is it?
a. Hemorrhagic inflammation
*b. Catarrhal inflammation
c. Serous inflammation
d. Fibrinous inflammation
e. Suppurative inflammation

161. Nowadays about 50 minor bases have been found in the t-RNA structure besides the main four nitrogenous bases. Choose the minor nitrogenous base:
*a. Dihydrouracil
b. Cysteine
c. Adenine
d. Uracil
e. Cytosine

162. The energy inputs of a healthy man have been measured. In what state was the patient if his energy inputs were less than the main exchange?
a. Rest
b. Calmness
c. Nervous exertion
d. Easy work
*e. Sleep

163. A patient, who suffers from congenital erythropoietic porphyria, has skin photosensitivity. The accumulation of what compound in the skin cells can cause it?
a. Heme
b. Coproporphyrinogen 3
*c. Uroporphyrinogen 1
d. Uroporphyrinogen 2
e. Protoporphyrin

164. A woman with 0 (I) bllod group has born a child with AB blood group. This womans husband has A blood group. What genetic interaction explains this phenomenon?
a. Incomplete dominance
b. Complementation
c. Codominance
d. Polymery
*e. Recessive epistasis

165. The donor who didnt donate the blood for a long time was investigated with IFA method. Anti-HBs antibodies were revealed. What does positive result of IFA in this case mean?
*a. Previous hepatitis B
b. Acute hepatitis C
c. Chronic hepatitis В
d. Chronic hepatitis С
e. Acute hepatitis B

166. The effect of electric current on the exitable cell caused depolarization of its membrane. Movement of what ions through the membrane caused depolarisation?
a. К+
*b. Na+
c. НСО3-
d. Сl-
e. Са2+

167. A patient with clinical signs of immunodeficiency has no changes of the number and functional activity of T- and B- lymphocytes. Defect with disfunction of antigen-presentation to the immunocompetent cells was found during examinatio on the molecule level. Defect of what cells is the most probable?
a. 0-lymphocytes
*b. Macrophages, monocytes
c. NK-cells
d. Т-lymphocytes, В-lymphocytes
e. Fibroblasts, Т-lymphocytes, В-lymphocytes

168. A patient with encephalopathy was admitted to the neurological in-patient department. There was revealed a correlation between increasing of encephalopathy and substances absorbed by the bloodstream from the intestines. What substances that are formed in the intestines can cause endotoxemia?
a. Ornithine
b. Biotin
*c. Indole
d. Butyrate
e. Acetacetate

169. A 1-year-old child with symptoms of muscle involvement was admitted to the hospital. Examination revealed carnitine deficiency in his muscles. What process disturbance is the biochemical basis of this pathology?
a. Regulation of Ca2+ level in mitochondrions
b. Lactic acid utilization
*c. Transporting of fatty acids to mitochodrions
d. Substrate phosphorylation
e. Actin and myosin synthesis

170. A 44-year-old woman complains of common weakness, heart pain, considerable increase of body weigt. Objectively: moon-like face, hirsutism, AP- 165/100 mm Hg, height - 164 cm, weight - 103 kg; fat is mostly accumulated in the region of neck, upper shoulder girdle, stomach. What is the main pathogenetic mechanism of obesity?
a. Increased production of insulin
b. Decreased production of thyroidal hormones
*c. Increased production of glucocorticoids
d. Increased production of mineralocorticoids
e. Decreased production of glucagon

171. Examination of initial molecular structure revealed substitution of the glutamic acid by valine. What inherited pathology is it typical for?
a. Thalassemia
b. Minkowsky-Shauffard disease
c. Favism
*d. Sickle-cell anemia
e. Hemoglobinosis

172. A patient with serious damage of muscular tissue was admitted to the traumatological department. What biochemical urine index will be increased in this case?
a. Mineral salts
b. Glucose
c. Uric acid
*d. Creatinine
e. Common lipids

173. Increased fragility of vessels, enamel and dentine destruction resulting from scurvy are caused by disorder of collagen maturation. What stage of procollagen modification is disturbed under this avitaminosis?
a. Formation of polypeptide chains
*b. Hydroxylation of proline
c. Removal of C-ended peptide from procollagen
d. Glycosylation of hydroxylysine residues
e. Detaching of N-ended peptide

174. After a serious viral infection a 3-year-old child has repeated vomiting, loss of consciousness, convulsions. Examination revealed hyperammoniemia. What may have caused changes of biochemical blood indices of this child?
*a. Disorder of ammonia neutralization in ornithinic cycle
b. Inhibited activity of transamination enzymes
c. Activated processes of aminoacids decarboxylation
d. Increased purtefaction of proteins in intestines
e. Disorder of biogenic amines neutralization

175. When a patient with traumatic impairment of the brain was examined, it was discovered that he had stopped to distinguish displacement of an object on the skin. What part of the brain was damaged?
a. Frontal central gurus
b. Frontal zone
*c. Posterior central gurus
d. Parietal zone of the cortex
e. Occipital zone of the cortex

176. A 7-year-old girl has signs of anemia. Laboratory examination revealed pyruvate kinase deficiency in erythrocytes. What process disturbance plays the main role in anemia development?
a. Oxidative phosphorylation
b. Tissue respiration
*c. Anaerobic glycolysis
d. Peroxide decomposition
e. Aminoacids desamination

177. A pregnant woman had been having toxicosis with severe repeated vomiting for 24 hours. In the end of the day there appeared tetanic convulsions and fluid loss. What shift of acid-base state caused these changes?
a. Gaseous acidosis
*b. Excretory alkalosis
c. Excretory acidosis
d. Gaseous alkalosis
e. Metabolic acidosis

178. A 55-year-old patient with continuing ventricular arrhythmias was admitted to the hospital. The patient is taking timolol drops for glaucoma, daily insulin injections for diabetes mellitus, and an ACE inhibitor for hypertension. You have decided to use phenytoin instead of procainamide. What is the reason?
*a. The anticholinergic effect of procainamide would aggravate glaucoma
b. The local anesthetic effect of procainamide would aggravate the hypertension
c. The local anesthetic effect of procainamide would potentiate diabetes
d. The hypertensive effects of procainamide would aggravate the hypertension
e. The cholinergic effects of procainamide would aggravate the diabetes

179. A businessman came to India from South America. On examination the physician found that the patient was suffering from sleeping-sickness. What was the way of invasion?
a. After contact with sick dogs
b. Through dirty hands
c. With contaminated fruits and vegetables
*d. As a result of bugs bites
e. As a result of mosquitos bites

180. A young man has a painlessl formation without marked borders in the soft tissues of his thigh. On the tissue bioptate the formation looks like flesh of fish and consists of immature fibroblast-like cells with multiple mitosis growing through the muscles. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myoma
b. Fibroma
*c. Fibrosarcoma
d. Myosarcoma
e. Cancer

181. A person has steady HR not exceeding 40 bpm. What is the pacemaker of this persons heart rhythm?
a. His bundle
b. Sinoatrial node
c. Branches of His bundle
*d. Atrioventricular node
e. Purkinjes fibers

182. Live vaccine was injected into the human body. Increasing activity of what connective tissue cells can be expected?
a. Pigmentocytes and pericytes
b. Macrophages and fibroblasts
c. Fibroblasts and labrocytes
*d. Plasmocytes and lymphocytes
e. Adipocytes and adventitious cells

183. RNA-polymerase B(II) is blocked due to amanitine poisoning (poison of death-cup). It disturbs:
a. Reverse transcription
b. Maturation of m-RNA
c. Primers synthesis
d. Synthesis of t-RNA
*e. Synthesis of m-RNA

184. An isolated cell of human heart automatically generates excitation impulses with frequency 60 times pro minute. What structure does this cell belong to?
a. Atrium
b. Ventricle
c. His bundle
d. Atrioventricular node
*e. Sinoatrial node

185. Autopsy revealed that right lung is enlarged, solid, there are fibrin layers on the pleura. Lung tissue is light grey color on incision with muddy liqued exudates. What lung disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Croupous pneumonia
b. Bronchopneumonia
c. Pulmonary gangrene
d. Fibrosing alveolitis
e. Interstitial pneumonia

186. Testosterone and its analogs increase the mass of skeletal muscles that allows to use them for treatment of dystrophy. Due to interaction of the hormone with what cell substrate is this action caused?
a. Proteins-activators of transcription
b. Chromatin
c. Ribosomes
*d. Nuclear receptors
e. Membrane receptors

187. An autopsy revealed large (1-2 cm) brownish-red, easy crumbling formations covering ulcerative defects on the external surface of the aortic valve. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute verrucous endocarditis
b. Fibroplastic endocarditis
c. Recurrent warty endocarditis
*d. Polypous-ulcerative endocarditis
e. Diffusive endocarditis

188. A 50-year-old man has felt vague abdominal discomfort within past 4 months. Physical examination revealed no lymphadenopathy, and no abdominal masses or organomegaly at palpation. Bowel sounds are heard. An abdominal CT scan shows a 20 cm retroperitoneal soft tissue mass obscuring the left psoas muscle. A stool specimen tested for occult blood is negative. Which of the following neoplasms is this man most likely to have?
*a. Lipoma
b. Hamartoma
c. Lymphoma
d. Melanoma
e. Adenocarcinoma

189. A patient had been taking glucocorticoids for a long time. When the preparation was withdrawn he developed the symptoms of disease aggravation, decreased blood pressure and weakness. What is the reason of this condition?
a. Habituation
b. Cumulation
c. Sensibilization
*d. Appearance of adrenal insufficiency
e. Hyperproduction of ACTH

190. While shifting the gaze to the closely situated object the refracting power of eyes optical mediums will increase by 10 diopters. It results from changing of such eye structure:
a. Muscle that dilatates pupil
b. Vitreous body
c. Liquid of the anterior chamber of eye
d. Cornea
*e. Lens

191. Parents with an ill child consulted an infectionist. They had been working in one of Asian countries for a long time. The child has sallow skin, loss of appetite, laxity, enlarged liver, spleen, peripheral lymph nodes. What protozoal illness can be suspected?
a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Amebiasis
c. Balantidiasis
*d. Visceral leishmaniasis
e. Lambliasis

192. A person felt thirsty after staying under the conditions of hot weather for a long time. Signals of what receptors caused it first of all?
a. Glucoreceptors of hypothalamus
b. Baroreceptors of aortic arch
*c. Osmoreceptors of hypothalamus
d. Osmoreceptors of liver
e. Sodium receptors of hypothalamus

193. Blood analysis of a patient showed signs of HIV infection (human immunodeficiency virus). Which cells does HIV-virus primarily affect?
a. Specialized nervous cells (neurons)
b. Cells that contain receptor IgM (B-lymphocytes)
*c. Cells that contain receptor T4 (T-helpers)
d. Proliferating cells (stem hematoplastic cells)
e. Mast cells

194. Blood sampling for the haematology is recommended to carry out on an empty stomach and in the morning. What changes in blood formula are possible if blood sampling was carried out after food intake?
a. Increase of plasm proteins
b. Increase of erythrocyte number
*c. Increase of leukocyte number
d. Decrease of erythrocyte number
e. Decrease of thrombocyte number

195. Part of the DNA chain turned 180 degree as a result of gamma radiation. What type of mutation took place in the DNA chain?
*a. Inversion
b. Replication
c. Deletion
d. Translocation
e. Doubling

196. A patient has got a spasm of smooth muscles of bronchi. Activators of what membrane cytoreceptors are phisiologically reasoned to stop an attack?
a. Н-cholinoreceptors
b. б- and в -аdrenoreceptors
*c. в-adrenoreceptors
d. б -аdrenoreceptors
e. М-cholinoreceptors

197. A patient with hypochromic anemia has splitting hair and loss of hair, increased nail brittling and taste alteration. What is the mechanism of the development of these symptoms?
a. Decreased production of thyroid hormones
b. Deficiency of vitamin А
*c. Deficiency of iron-containing enzymes
d. Decreased production of parathyrin
e. Deficiency of vitamin В12

198. A 22-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of heavy nasal breathing. During the examination of her nasal cavity the doctors found thickened mucous membrane, a lot of mucus and nodular infiltrates without erosions in the nose.The nasal rhinoscleroma was diagnosed. The biopsy was taken. What typical morphological changes may be found?
a. Interstitial inflammation
b. Granulomas with foreign body cells
c. Granulomas with Langhans cells
d. Granulomas with Virchows cells
*e. Granulomas with Mikuliczs cells

199. The alternate usage of dichlotiazide, etacrin acid and lasex did not influence diuretically upon the patient with marked peripheral edemata. The aldosterone rate in the blood is increased. Indicate which medicine should be prescribed:
a. Amilorid
b. Mannit
c. Clopamid
d. Urea
*e. Spironolacton

200. Slime, blood and protozoa 30-200 microns long have been revealed in a mans feces. The body is covered with cilias and has correct oval form with a little bit narrowed anterior and wide round shaped posterior end. At the anterior end a mouth is visible. In cytoplasm there are two nucleui and two short vacuoles. What are the described features typical for?
a. Trichomonas
*b. Balantidium
c. Lamblia
d. Dysenteric amoeba
e. Intestinal amoeba

