1. A patient is followed up in an endocrinological dispensary on account of hyperthyreosis. Weight loss, tachycardia, finger tremor are accompanied by hypoxia symptoms ­ headache, fatigue, eye flicker. What mechanism of thyroid hormones action underlies the development of hypoxia?
*a. Disjunction, oxydation and phosphorilation
b. Inhibition of respiratory ferment synthesis
c. Competitive inhibition of respiratory ferments
d. Specific binding of active centres of respiratory ferments
e. Intensification of respiratory ferment synthesis

2. A laboratory received a material from a patients wound. Ppreliminary diagnosis is gaseous gangrene. What microbiological method should be applied to determine species of causative agent?
a. Serological
b. Allergic
*c. Bacteriological
d. RIA
e. Bacterioscopic

3. A 4 y.o. child with signs of durative proteinic starvation was admitted to the hospital. The signs were as follows: growth inhibition, anemia, edemata, mental deficiency. Choose a cause of edemata development:
a. Reduced synthesis of hemoglobin
b. Reduced synthesis of globulins
c. Reduced synthesis of lipoproteins
*d. Reduced synthesis of albumins
e. Reduced synthesis of glycoproteins

4. A 45 y.o. patient consulted a doctor about plaque­shaped formation on his neck. Histological examination of biopsy skin material revealed tumourous cells of round and oval form with thin ring of basophilic cytoplasma that resemble of cells of basal epidermal layer. What tumour is it?
a. Hydradenoma
b. Basalioma
c. Syringoadenoma
*d. Epidermal cancer
e. Trichoepithelioma

5. A boy is 7 y.o. Objectively: against the background of hyperemic skin there is knobby bright­pink rash on his forehead, neck, at the bottom of abdomen, in the popliteal spaces; nasolabial triangle is pale. Examination of oropharyngeal surface revealed localized bright­red hyperemia; tonsils are swollen, soft, lacunas contain pus, tongue is crimson. Cervical lymph nodes are enlarged, dense and painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Whooping cough
b. Diphtheria
c. Rubella
d. Infectious mononucleosis
*e. Scarlet fever

6. A 45 y.o. woman suffers from Cushings syndrome ­ steroid diabetes. Biochemical examination revealed: hyperglycemia, hypochloremia. Which of the undermentioned processes is the first to be activated?
a. Glycogenolysis
b. Glycolysis
*c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Glucose transport to the cell
e. Glucose reabsorption

7. Examination of an isolated cardiomyocyte revealed that it didnt generate excitation impulses automatically. This cardiomyocyte was obtained from:
a. Purkinjes fibers
b. Sinoatrial node
*c. Ventricles
d. Atrioventricular node
e. His bundle

8. Inhabitants of territories with cold climate have high content of an adaptive thermoregulatory hormone. What hormone is meant?
a. Cortisol
b. Somatotropin
c. Insulin
d. Glucagon
*e. Thyroxin

9. As a result of damage to certain structures of brainstem an animal lost orientation reflexes. What structures were damaged?
a. Medial nuclei of reticular formation
b. Black substance
c. Red nuclei
*d. Vestibular nuclei
e. Quadritubercular bodies

10. According to the data of WHO, for about 250 mln of Earth population fall ill with malaria. This disease is mostly spread in tropical and subtropical regions. Range of its spread falls into the areal of the following mosquitoes:
a. Aedes
b. Culex
c. Culiseta
*d. Anopheles
e. Mansonia

11. A 35 y.o. patient who often consumes alcohol was treated with diuretics. There appeared serious muscle and heart weakness, vomiting, diarrhea, AP­ 100/ 60 mm Hg, depression. This condition is caused by intensified excretion with urine of:
a. Calcium
*b. Potassium
c. Chlorine
d. Phosphates
e. Sodium

12. On the 6th day of treatment a patient with acute renal insufficiency developed polyuria. Diuresis intensification at the beginning of polyuria stage of acute renal insufficiency is caused by:
a. Reduction of vasopressin content in plasma
b. Volume expansion of circulating blood
c. Growth of natriuretic factor
d. Reduction of aldosteron content in plasma
*e. Renewal of filtration in nephrons

13. Osmotic pressure of a mans blood plasma is 350 mosmole/1 (standard pressure is 300 mosmole/1). First of all it will result in high secretion of the following hormone:
a. Adrenocorticotropin
b. Natriuretic
c. Aldosteron
*d. Vasopressin
e. Cortisol

14. Neurological examination of a 65 y.o. patient revealed a haemorrhage within the superior temporal gyrus. In the blood supplyarea of which artery is it?
a. Anterior cerebral artery
b. Anterior communicating artery
*c. Middle cerebral artery
d. Basilar artery
e. Posterior cerebral artery

15. A 32 y.o. man is tall, he has gynecomastia, adult woman pattern of hair distribution, high voice, mental deficiency, sterility. Provisional diagnosis is Klinefelters syndrome. In order to specify diagnosis it is necessaryto analize:
a. Spermatogenesis
*b. Caryotype
c. Genealogy
d. Leukogram
e. Blood group

16. A patient was diagnosed with active focal pulmonary tuberculosis. What drug should be prescribed in the first place?
a. Ethoxide
b. Ethionamide
*c. Isoniazid
d. Sulfalen
e. Cyclocerine

17. Examination of a young man in the AIDS centre produced a positive result of immune­enzyme assay with HIV antigens. Patients complaints about state of his health were absent. What can the positive result of immune­enzyme assay be evidence of?
a. HBV persistence
*b. Having had AIDS recently
c. Being infected with HBV
d. HIV infection
e. Being ill with AIDS

18. RNA that contains AIDS virus penetrated into a leukocyte and by means of reverse transcriptase forced a cellto synthetize a viral DNA. This process is based upon:
*a. Reverse transcription
b. Operon depression
c. Reverse translation
d. Convariant replication
e. Operon repression

19. A patient is ill with diabetes mellitus that is accompanied by hyperglycemia of over 7,2 millimole/1 on an empty stomach. The level of what blood plasma protein allows to estimate the glycemia rate retrospectively (4­8 weeks before examination)?
a. C­re active protein
*b. Glycated hemoglobin
c. Fibrinogen
d. Ceruloplasmin
e. Albumin

20. A sportsman was recommended to take a medication that contains carnitine in order to improve his results. What process is activated by carnitine the most?
a. Synthesis of steroid hormones
b. Synthesis of ketone bodies
*c. Fatty acids transport to mitochondrions
d. Tissue respiration
e. Synyhesis of lipids

21. A patient consulted a doctor about bowels disfunction. The doctor established symptoms of duodenitis and enteritis. Laboratory examination helped to make the following diagnosis: lambliosis. What medication should be administered?
a. Tetracycline
b. Erythromycin
c. Chingamin
*d. Metronidazole
e. Monomycin

22. A man took a quiet expiration. Name an air volume that is meanwhile contained in his lungs:
a. Vital lung capacity
b. Respiratory volume
c. Expiratory reserve volume
d. Residual volume
*e. Functional residual capacity

23. During pubescence the cells of male sexual glands begin to produce male sex hormon testosterone that calls forth secondary sexual characters. What cells of male sexual glands produce this hormone?
*a. Leidig cells
b. Sustentocytes
c. Supporting cells
d. Spermatozoa
e. Sertolis cells

24. A 16 y.o. boy from a countryside entered an educational establishment. Scheduled Manteux test revealed that the boy had negative reaction. What are the most reasonable actions in this case?
a. To perform rapid Price diagnostics
b. To repeat the reaction in a month
c. To isolate the boy temporarily from his mates
d. To perform serodiagnostics of tuberculosis
*e. To perform BCG vaccination

25. Autopsy of a 56 y.o. man revealed in the right temporal part of brain a big focus of softened grey matter that was semi­liquid and light grey. Arteries of cerebral tela contain multiple whitish­yellow thickenings of intima that abruptly narrow the lumen. What is your diagnosis?
a. Brain abscess
b. Brain edema
*c. Ischemic stroke
d. Hemorrhage
e. Hemorrhagic infarction

26. Autopsy of a man who died from chronic cardiovascular collapse revealed "tiger heart". Sidewards of endocardium a yellowish­white banding can be seen; myocardium is dull, dark­yellow. What process caused this pathology?
a. Hyaline degeneration
b. Fatty vascular­stromal degeneration
c. Amyloidosis
*d. Fatty parenchymatous degeneration
e. Carbohydrate degeneration

27. Labeled aminoacids alanine and tryptophane were introducted to a mouse in order to study localization of protein biosynthesis in its cells. Around what organellas will the accumulation of labeled aminoacids be observed?
a. Agranular endoplasmic reticulum
b. Golgi apparatus
*c. Ribosomes
d. Cell centre
e. Lysosomes

28. 48 hours after performing tuberculin test (Mantoux test) to a child a 10 mm papule appeared on the spot of tuberculin introduction. What hypersensitivity mechanism underlies these changes?
*a. Antibody­dependent cytotoxicity
b. Cellular cytotoxicity
c. Anaphylaxis
d. Immune complex cytotoxicity
e. Granulomatosis

29. A patient who has been suffering from cardiac insufficiency for several months has been taking digoxin on an outpatient basis. At a certain stage of treatment there appeared symptoms of drug overdose. What phenomenon underlies the development of this complication?
a. Habituation
b. Sensibilization
c. Functional cumulation
d. Tachyphylaxis
*e. Material cumulation

30. Examination of a patient revealed reduced contents of magnesium ions that are necessary for attachment of ribosomes to the granular endoplasmatic reticulum. It is known that it causes disturbance of protein biosynthesis. What stage of protein biosynthesis will be disturbed?
a. Replication
b. Transcription
c. Aminoacid activation
d. Termination
*e. Translation

31. A child complains of general weakness, loss of appetite, a troubled sleep, itching in the perianal area. The provisional diagnosis is enterobiasis. In order to specify this diagnosis it is necessary to perform:
a. Roentgenoscopy
b. Immune diagnostics
c. Biopsy of muscle tissue
*d. Scraping from perianal folds
e. Duodenal contents analysis

32. In some regions of South Africa there is a spread sickle­shaped cell anemia, in which erythrocytes have shape of a sickle as a result of substitution of glutamin by valine in the hemoglobin molecule. What is the cause of this disease?
a. Genomic mutations
b. Transduction
c. Disturbance of mechanisms of genetic information realization
*d. Gene mutation
e. Crossingover

33. A patient suffers from vision impairment ­ hemeralopy (night blindness). What vitamin preparation should be administered the patient in order to restore his vision?
a. Thiamine chloride
b. Vicasol
c. Pyridoxine
*d. Retinol acetate
e. Tocopherol acetate

34. A patient presents high activity of LDi/12, aspartate aminotransferase, creatine phosphokinase. In what organ (organs) is the development of a pathological process the most probable?
a. In liver and kidneys
b. In connective tissue
c. In skeletal muscles (dystrophy, atrophy)
d. In kidneys and adrenals
*e. In the heart muscle (initial stage of myocardium infarction)

35. A woman who has been keeping to a clean­rice diet for a long time was diagnosed with polyneuritis (beriberi). What vitamin deficit results in development of this disease?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Pyridoxine
*c. Thiamine
d. Folic acid
e. Riboflavin

36. Colonoscopy of a patient ill with dysentery revealed that mucous membrane of his large intestine is hyperemic, edematic, its surface was covered with grey­and­green coats. Name the morphological form of dysenteric collitis:
a. Fibrinous
*b. Catarrhal
c. Purulent
d. Ulcerous
e. Necrotic

37. A 70 y.o. man has cut an abscess off in the area of mammiform process during shaving. Two days later he was admitted to the hospital with inflammation of arachnoid membranes. How did the infection penetrate into the cavity of skull?
a. V.v .tympanicae
*b. V.emissariae mastoideae
c. V.v.labyrinthi
d. V.v.auriculares
e. V.facialis

38. 24 hours after appendectomy blood of a patient presents neutrophilic leukocytosis with regenerative shift. What is the most probable mechanism of leukocytosis development?
a. Redistribution of leukocytes in the organism
b. Decelerated leukocyte destruction
*c. Amplification of leucopoiesis
d. Deceleratied emigration of leukocytes to the tissues
e. Amplification of leukopoiesis and decelerated emigration of leukocytes to the tissues

39. Examination of cell culture got from a patient with lysosomal pathology revealed accumulation of great quantity of lipids in the lysosomes. What of the following diseases is this disturbance typical for?
*a. Tay­Sachs disease
b. Galactosemia
c. Wilson disease
d. Gout
e. Phenylketonuria

40. A group of mountain climbers went through the blood analysis at the height of 3000 m. It revealed decrease of HCO3- to 15 micromole/1 (standard is 22­26 micromole/1). What is the mechanism of HCO3 decrease?
*a. Hyperventilation
b. Intensification of acidogenesis
c. Decrease of ammoniogenesis
d. Decrease of bicarbonate reabsorption in kidneys
e. Hypoventilation

41. A patient ill with diabetes mellitus felt acute pain in his right foot. Objectively: foot thumb is black, foot tissues are edematous, there are foci of epidermis desquamation, stinking discharges. What clinicopathological form of necrosis is it?
a. Infarction
b. Bedsore
c. Sequestrum
*d. Moist gangrene
e. Dry gangrene

42. Power inputs of a boy increased from 500 to 2000 kJ pro hour. What can be the cause of it?
a. Raise of outer temperatute
b. Food intake
*c. Physical exercise
d. Mental activity
e. Transition from sleep to wakefulness

43. For the preparation of a patients burn skin surface a certain medication was used. Its antiseptic action is provided by free oxygen that segregates in presence of organic substances. Choose the right answer:
a. Boric acid
b. Furacilin
c. Chlorhexidine
d. Sodium bicarbonate
*e. Potassium permanganate

44. Bacteriological examination of a patient with food poisoning required inoculation of a pure culture of bacteria with the following properties: gram­negative movable bacillus that grows in the Endos medium in form of colourless colonies. A representative of which species caused this disease?
a. Iersinia
*b. Salmonella
c. Shigella
d. E sherichia
e. Citrobacter

45. A lymph node punctate of a patient with suspected protozoal disease was examined. Examination of the stained specimen (Romanovskys stain) revealed some crescent bodies with pointed end, blue cytoplasm and red nucleus. What protozoan were revealed in the smears?
a. Viscerotropic leishmania
b. Malarial plasmodiums
c. Dermotropic leishmania
*d. Trypanosomes
e. Toxoplasms

46. Long­term starvation cure of a patient resulted in diminished ratio of albumines and globulines in plasma. What of the following will be result of these changes?
a. Hypercoagulation
b. Increase of ESR
c. Decrease of hematocrit
d. Increase of hematocrit
*e. Decrease of ESR

47. Histological examination of a 40 y.o. mans thymus revealed decreased share of parenchymatous gland elements, increased share of adipose and loose connective tissue, its enrichment with thymus bodies. The organs mass was unchanged. What phenomenon is it?
*a. Age involution
b. Atrophy
c. Hypotrophy
d. Dystrophy
e. Accidental involution

48. A patient who suffers from cancer of back of tongue has an intense bleeding as a result of affection of dorsal lingual artery by the tumour. What vessel should be ligatedto stop bleeding?
a. Dorsal lingual artery
b. Facial artery
*c. Lingual artery
d. Ascending pharyngeal artery
e. Deep lingual artery

49. In course of indirect histogenesis of tubular bone tissue a plate is formed between epiphyseal and diaphyseal ossification centres that provides further lengthwise growth of bones. What structure is it?
a. Layer of interior general plates
*b. Metaphyseal plate
c. Osteon
d. Osseous plate
e. Osseous cuff

50. A man with cut wound of his right foot sole was admitted to the hospital ward. The patient has limited elevation of the lateral foot edge. In course of wound management the injury of a muscle tendon was revealed. What muscle is injured?
a. Short peroneal
b. Anterior tibial
c. Triceps muscle of crus
d. Long extensor muscle of toes
*e. Long peroneal

51. After resection of the middle third of femoral artery obliterated by a thromb the lower extremity is supplied with blood due to the surgical bypass. Name an artery that plays the main role in reestablishment of blood flow:
*a. Deep femoral artery
b. Descending genicular artery
c. Superficial epigastric artery
d. Superficial circumflex artery of hip bone
e. Deep external pudendal artery

52. An experimental animal was first sensibilized whereupon an antigen dose was introduced subcutaneously. This injection resulted in the development of a fibrinous inflammation with alteration of vessel walls, basal substance and fibrous structures of connective tissue in form of mucoid and fibrinoid swelling and necrosis. What immunological reaction took place?
a. Reaction of transplantation immunity
b. Normergic reaction
c. Immediate hypersensitivity
d. Granulomatosis
*e. Delayed­type hypersensitivity

53. Autopsy of a patient who suffered from croupous pneumonia and died from pneumococcal sepsis revealed 900 ml of turbid greenish­yellow liquid in the right pleural cavity. Pleural leaves are dull, plephoric. Name the clinicopathological form of inflammation in the pleural cavity:
a. Acute abscess
b. Fibrinous inflammation
c. Chronic abscess
*d. Empyema
e. Phlegmon

54. A patient was delivered to the hospital by an emergency team. Objectively: grave condition, unconscious, adynamy. Cutaneous surfaces are dry, eyes are sunken, face is cyanotic. There is tachycardia and smell of acetone from the mouth. Analysis results: blood glucose ­ 20,1 micromole/1 (standard is 3,3­5,5 micromole/1), urine glucose ­ 3,5% (standard is ­ 0). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute heart failure
b. Hypoglycemic coma
*c. Hyperglycemic coma
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Acute alcoholic intoxication

55. A patient has a disturbed absorbtion of fat hydrolysates. It might have been caused by a deficit in the small intestine cavity:
a. Of bile pigments
b. Of lipolytic enzymes
c. Of liposoluble vitamins
*d. Of bile acids
e. Of sodium ions

56. An injured man has bleeding from branches of carotid artery. For a temporary arrest of bleeding it is necessary to press the carotid artery to the tubercle of a cervical vertebra. Which vertebra is it?
a. IV
b. II
*c. VI
d. III
e. V

57. Reaction of passive hemagglutination conducted with erythrocytic typhoid Vidiagnosticum helped to reveal some antibodies in the dilution of the patients serum at a ratio of 1:80 that exceeds the diagnostic titer. Such result witnesses of:
a. Typhoid fever recurrence
b. Incubation period of typhoid fever
c. Reconvalescence of a patient ill with typhoid fever
*d. Being a potential carrier of typhoid bacilli
e. Being ill with acute typhoid fever

58. A patient with clinical presentations of immunodeficiency went through immunological examinations. They revealed significant loss of cells that form rosettes with erythrocytes of a ram. What conclusion can be made according to the analysis data?
a. Decrease of complement system rate
*b. Decrease of T­lymphocytes rate
c. Insufficiency of effector cells of humoral immunity
d. Decrease of natural killer cell rate
e. Decrease of B­lymphocytes rate

59. Examination of a 60 y.o. patient revealed hyperglycemia and glucosuria. A doctor administered him a medication for internal use. What medication is it?
*a. Glibenclamid
b. Corglycon
c. Pancreatine
d. Furosemide
e. Oxytocin

60. In order to estimate toxigenity of diphtheria agents obtained from patients the cultures were inoculated on Petri dish with nutrient agar on either side of a filter paper strip that was put into the centre and moistened with antidiphtheric antitoxic serum. After incubation of inoculations in agar the strip­like areas of medium turbidity were found between separate cultures and the strip of filter paper. What immunological reaction was conducted?
a. Opsonization reaction
b. Agglutination reaction
c. Rings precipitation reaction
*d. Precipitation gel reaction
e. Coombs test

61. A woman with III (B), Rh blood group born a child with II (A) blood group. The child is diagnosed with hemolytic disease of newborn as a result of rhesus incompatibility. What blood group is the childs father likely to have?
a. I (0), Rf-
b. II (A), Rh-
c. I (0), Rh+
d. III (B), Rh+
*e. II (A), Rh+

62. A 12 y.o. boy who suffers from bronchial asthma has an acute attack of asthma: evident expiratory dyspnea, skin pallor. What type of alveolar ventilation disturbance is it?
a. Restrictive
*b. Obstructive
c. Neuromuscular
d. Central
e. Throracodiaphragmatic

63. A patient diagnosed with carcinoid of bowels was admitted to the hospital. Analysis revealed high production of serotonin. It is known that this substance is formed of tryptophane aminooacid. What biochemical mechanism underlies this process?
a. Transamination
*b. Decarboxylation
c. Formation of paired compounds
d. Microsomal oxydation
e. Desamination

64. Examination of a patient revealed an abscess of pterygopalatine fossa. Where can the infection spread to unless the disease is managed in time?
a. To the frontal sinus
*b. To the interpterygoid space
c. To the subgaleal temporal space
d. To the orbit
e. To the tympanic cavity

65. Examination of a man established that cardiac output equaled 3500 ml, systolic output - 50 ml. What is the mans heart rate pro minute?
a. 90
*b. 70
c. 50
d. 60
e. 80

66. A 40 y.o. patient complains of intensive heartbeats, sweating, nausea, vision impairment, arm tremor, hypertension. From his anamnesis: 2 years ago he was diagnosed with pheochromocytoma. Hyperproduction of what hormones causes the given pathology?
a. Glucocorticoids
*b. Catecholamines
c. Thyroid hormones
d. ACTH
e. Aldosterone

67. Mucous membrane of the right palatine tonsil has a painless ulcer with smooth lacquer fundus and regular cartilagenous edges. Microscopically: inflammatory infiltration that consists of lymphocytes, plasmocytes, a small number of neutrophils and epithelioid cells; endovasculitis and perivasculitis. What disease is it?
a. Actinomycosis
b. Ulcerous necrotic Vincents angina
c. Tuberculosis
*d. Syphilis
e. Pharyngeal diphtheria

68. For trie purpose of retrtospective diagnostics of recent bacterial dysentery it was decided to perform serological examination of blood serum in order to determine antibody titer towards Shiga bacilli. What of the following reactions should be applied?
*a. Passive hemagglutination
b. Hemolysis
c. Bacteriolysis
d. Precipitation
e. Bordet­Gengou test

69. Autopsy of a 48 y.o. man revealed a round formation 5 cm in diameter with clear­cut outlines in the region of the 1st segment of his right lung. This formation was encircled with a thin layer of connective tissue full of white brittle masses. Make a diagnosis of the secondary tuberculosis form:
*a. Fibrous cavernous tuberculosis
b. Acute focal tuberculosis
c. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
d. Caseous pneumonia
e. Tuberculoma

70. A mans intrapleural pressure is being measured. In what phase did the man hold his breath, if his pressure is 7,5 cm Hg?
a. Forced expiration
b. -
c. Forced inspiration
*d. Quiet expiration
e. Quiet inspiration

71. In the surgical department of a hospital there was an outbreak of hospital infection that showed itself in often postoperative wound abscesses. Bacteriological examination of pus revealed aurococcus. What examination shall be conducted to find out the source of this causative agent among the department personnel?
a. Biochemical identification
b. Estimation of antibiotic susceptibility
c. Serologicaf identification
d. Microscopical examination
*e. Phagotyping

72. Heart rate of a man permanently equals 40 beats pro minute. What is the pacemaker?
a. His bundle
b. His bundle branches
c. Sinoatrial node
*d. Atriventricular node
e. Purkinjes fibers

73. A 4 y.o. boy has had recently serious viral hepatitis. Now there are such clinical presentations as vomiting, loss of consciousness, convulsions. Blood analysis revealed hyperammoniemia. Disturbunce of which biochemical process caused such pathological condition of the patient?
a. Increased putrefaction of proteins in bowels
b. Inhibition of transamination enzyms
*c. Disturbed neutralization of ammonia in liver
d. Activation of aminoacid decarboxylation
e. Disturbed neutralization of biogenic amines

74. An experimental rat with extremity paralysis has no tendon and cutaneous reflexes, muscle tone is decreased, but muscles of the affected extremity maintain their ability to react with excitation to the direct action of continious current. What type of paralysis is it?
a. Spastic peripheral
b. Extrapyramidal
c. Flaccid peripheral
*d. Flaccid central
e. Spastic central

75. Autopsy of a 58 y.o. man revealed that bicuspid valve was deformed, thickened and unclosed. Microscopically: foci of collagen fibrilla are eosinophilic, react positivelyto fibrin. The most probably it is:
a. Mucoid swelling
b. Amyloidosis
c. Fibrinous inflammation
d. Hyalinosis
*e. Fibrinoid swelling

76. In course of an operation surgeon removed a part of a lung that was ventilated by a tertiary bronchus accompanied by branches of pulmonary artery and other vessels. What part of a lung was removed?
a. Inferior lobe
b. Pulmonary lobule
c. Middle lobe
d. Superior lobe
*e. Bronchopulmonary segment

77. Vitamin A deficit results in the impairment of twilight vision. Name the cells that have the above­mentioned photoreceptor function:
a. Bipolar neurons
*b. Rod receptor cell
c. Cone receptor cells
d. Ganglion neurocytes
e. Horizontal neurocytes

78. Microscopical examination of a removed appendix revealed an edema, diffuse neutrophilic infiltration of appendix wall along with necrosis and defect of mucous membrane with affection of its muscle plate. What appendicitis form was developed?
a. Gangrenous
b. Apostematous
c. Superficial
*d. Phlegmonous
e. Ulcerophlegmonous

79. Introduction of a pharmaceutical substance to an experimental animal resulted in reduction of salivation, pupil mydriasis. Next intravenous introduction of acetylcholine didnt lead to any significant changes of heart rate. Name this substance:
a. Adrenaline
b. Salbutamol
c. Proserin
d. Propranolol
*e. Atropine

80. Examination of a 43 y.o. anephric patient revealed anemia symptoms. What is the cause of these symptoms?
a. Enhanced destruction of erythrocytes
*b. Reduced synthesis of erythropoietins
c. Iron deficit
d. Folic acid deficit
e. Vitamin B12 deficit

81. Examination of a newborn boys genitals revealed a cleft of urethra that opens on the inferior surface of his penis. What developmental anomaly is it?
a. Cryptorchism
b. Monorchism
c. Hermaphroditism
*d. Hypospadia
e. Epispadia

82. A patient ill with collagenesis has been taking prednisolone for a long time. Hypokaliemia development caused spastic pain of skeletal muscles. What medication should be used in order to correct potassium exchange?
a. Diazepam
b. Noshpa
c. Dithylinum
d. Thyrocalcitonin
*e. Panangin

83. From pharynx of a child with suspected diphtheria a pure culture of microorganisms was isolated. Their morphological, tinctorial, cultural and biochemical properties appeared to be typical for diphtheriacausative agents. What study should be conducted in order to drow a conclusion that this is a pathogenic diphtheria bacillus?
a. Estimation of urease activity
b. Estimation of proteolytic properties
*c. Estimation of toxigenic properties
d. Estimation of cystinous activity
e. Estimation of ability to decompose starch

84. A man was admitted to the hospital on the 5th day of disease that manifested itself by jaundice, muscle aching, chill, nose bleedings. In course of laboratory diagnostics a bacteriologist performed dark­field microscopy of the patients blood drop. Name a causative agent of this disease:
a. Bartonella bacilloformis
b. Rickettsia mooseri
c. Borrelia dutlonii
*d. Leptospira interrogans
e. Calyrnmatobacterium granulomatis

85. Nappies of a newborn have dark spots that witness of formation of homogentisic acid. Metabolic imbalance of which substance is it connected with?
*a. Thyrosine
b. Galactose
c. Cholesterine
d. Tryptophane
e. Methionine

86. 12 hours after an accute attack of retrosternal pain a patient presented a jump of aspartate aminotransferase activity in blood serum. What pathology is this deviation typical for?
*a. Myocardium infarction
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Diabetes insipidus
d. Collagenosis
e. Viral hepatitis

87. A peripheral segment of vagus nerve on a dogs neck was being stimulated in course of an experiment. The following changes of cardiac activity could be meanwhile observed:
*a. Heart rate fall
b. Enhancement of atrioventricular conduction
c. Increased excitability of myocardium
d. Heart hurry
e. Heart rate and heart force amplification

88. A 39 y.o. woman went through an operation in course of which surgeons removed her uterine tube that was enlarged and a part of an ovary with a big cyst. Histological examination of a tube wall revealed decidual cells, chorion villi. What was the most probable diagnosis made after examination of the uterine tube?
*a. Tubal pregnancy
b. Papyraceous fetus
c. Choriocarcinoma
d. Lithopedion
e. Placental polyp

89. A forensic medical expert examines the body of a 58 y.o. man who had been consuming large amounts of alcochol for a long time and died at home. Microscopicaly: the right lung is dense and enlarged, its incision revealed that the tissue is greyish and homogenous, pleura is covered with greyish layers. Microscopically ­ alveolar cavities contain fibrin, hemolyzed erythrocytes. Make a diagnosis:
a. Focal pneumonia
b. Interstitial pneumonia
c. Primary pulmonary tuberculosis
*d. Croupous pneumonia
e. Caseous pneumonia

90. A 40 y.o. woman was admitted to the infectious diseases department with high body temperature. Objectively: evident meningeal symptoms. A spinal cord punction was made. What anatomic formation was punctured?
a. Cisterna cerebellomedullaris posterior
b. Spatium epidurale
c. Cavum trigeminale
*d. Spatium subarachnoideum
e. Spatium subdurale

91. A patient with II stage hypertension has been taking one of hypotensive medications for the purpose of treatment. After a time arterial pressure decreased, but the patient started complaining of flaccidity, sleepiness, indifference. A bit later he felt stomach pain. He was diagnosed with ulcer. What hypotensive medication has the patient been taking?
a. Captopril
b. Furosemide
c. Verapamil
*d. Reserpine
e. Dibazole

92. A patient had to go through an operation. Doctors introduced him dithylinum (listenone) and performed intubation. After the end of operation and cessation of anesthesia the independent respiration wasnt restored. Which enzyme deficit prolongs the action of muscle relaxant?
a. K­iVa­adenosine triphosphatase
b. Succinate dehydrogenase
c. Carbanhydrase
*d. Psendocholinesterase
e. iV­acetyltransferase

93. Ammonia is a very toxic substance, especially for nervous system. What substance takes the most active part in ammonia detoxication in brain tissues?
a. Alanine
b. Histidine
c. Lysine
*d. Glutamic acid
e. Proline

94. A childs blood presents high content of galactose, glucose concentration is low. There are such presentations as cataract, mental deficiency, adipose degeneration of liver. What disease is it?
a. Fructosemia
*b. Galactosemia
c. Lactosemia
d. Steroid diabetes
e. Diabetes niellitus

95. In course of an experiment a big number of column cells of red bone marrow was in some way destructed. Regeneration of which cell populations in the loose connective tissue will be inhibited?
a. Of pigment cells
b. Of lipocytes
c. Of fibroblasts
d. Of pericytes
*e. Of macrophags

96. 6 months after delivery a woman had uterine bleeding. Gynecological examination revealed in the uterine cavity a dark­red tissue with multiple cavities that resembled of "sponge". Microscopic examination of the tumour revealed some atypic light epithelial Langhans cells and giant cells of cyncytiotrophoblast in blood lacunas. What tumour is it?
a. Vesicular mole
b. Adenocarcinoma
c. Squamous cell nonkeratinous carcinoma
*d. Chorioepithelioma
e. Fibromyoma

97. A 50 y.o. patient with chronic cardiac insufficiency and tachyarrythmia was prescribed a cardiotonic drug. What drug was prescribed?
a. Dopamine
*b. Digoxin
c. Mildronate
d. Dobutamine
e. Amyodarone

98. A young man consulted a doctor about disturbed urination. Examination of his external genitals revealed that urethra is split on top and urine runs out of this opening. What anomaly of external genitals development is the case?
a. Hypospadia
b. Paraphimosis
*c. Epispadia
d. Hermaphroditism
e. Phimosis

99. Violation of safety rules resulted in calomel intoxication. Two days later the daily diuresis was 620 ml. A patient experienced headache, vomiting, convulsions, dyspnea, moist rales in lungs. What pathology is it?
a. Uraemic coma
b. Chronic renal insufficiency
*c. Acute renal insufficiency
d. Pyelonephritis
e. Glomerulonephritis

100. A patient has a transverse disruption of spinal cord below the IV thoracic segment. What changes of respiration will it cause?
a. Respiration will become more frequent
b. Respiration will become less frequent
c. Respiration will become deeper
*d. Respiration will stay unchanged
e. Respiration will stop

101. A patient with a stab wound of the anterior stomach wall is in surgical care. What formation of abdominal cavity did the stomach contents get into?
a. Hepatic bursa
b. Right mesenteric sinus
*c. Antegastrial bursa
d. Omental bursa
e. Left mesenteric sinus

102. A patient with infectious mononucleosis has been taking glucocorticoids for two weeks. He was brought into remission, but he fell ill with acute attack of chronic tonsillitis. What action of glucocorticoids caused this complication?
a. Antishock
b. Antitoxic
c. Anti­inflammatory
d. Antiallergic
*e. Immunosuppressive

103. Removal of gall bladder of a patient has disturbed processes of Ca absorption through the intestinal wall. What vitamin will stimulate this process?
a. B12
b. K
c. PP
d. C
*e. D3

104. A 9 m.o. child has delayed dentition, it is also out of order. Upper jaw configuration is horizontal ("high"palate); microscopically ­ irregular mineralization of tooth enamel, wrinkled enamel prisms, some of them are vacuolized. Predentin zone is extended; there are solitary denticles. What disease is it?
a. Late rickets
b. Gout
c. Osteomalacia
*d. Early rickets
e. Hypervitaminosis D

105. Examination of a patient revealed a strong, balanced, inert type of higher nervous activity according to Pavlov. What temperament type does the patient have (according to Hippocrates classification)?
a. Melancholic
b. Choleric
*c. Phlegmatic
d. Sanguine
e. 

106. A patient suffers from hepatic cirrhosis. Examination of which of the following substances excreted by urine can characterize the state of antitoxic function of liver?
a. Aminoacids
b. Ammonium salts
*c. Hippuric acid
d. Kreatinine
e. Uric acid

107. Examination of a child revealed some whitish spots looking like coagulated milk on the mucous membrane of his cheeks and tongue. Analysis of smears revealed grampositive oval yeast­like cells. What causative agents are they?
a. Diphtheria bacillus
*b. Candida
c. Staphylococci
d. Actinomycetes
e. Fusobacteria

108. A patients knee joint doesnt extend, there is no knee­jerk reflex, skin sensitivity of the anterior femoral surface is disturbed. What nerve structures are damaged?
a. Obturator nerve
*b. Femoral nerve
c. Big fibular nerve
d. Superior gluteal nerve
e. Inferior gluteal nerve

109. A patient has pain, edema and reddening of his skin in the anterosuperior area of his thigh and his foots thumb. What lymph nodes of his lower extremity respondedto the inflammatory process?
a. Superficial longitudinal
b. Deep inguinal
*c. Superficial inguinal
d. Internal longitudinal
e. General longitudinal

110. Examination of a 43 y.o. patient revealed that his stomach has difficulties with digestion of protein food. Gastric juice analysis revealed low acidity. Function of which gastric cells is disturbed in this case?
*a. Parietal exocrinocytes
b. Mucous cells (mucocytes)
c. Cervical mucocytes
d. Endocrinous cells
e. Main exocrinocytes

111. The permeability of the irritable cell membrane has been increased for potassium ions during an experiment. What changes of membrane electric status can occur?
a. Action potential
b. Local response
c. Depolarization
*d. Hyperpolarization
e. No changes

112. An ovary specimen stained by hematoxylin­eosin presents a follicle, where cells of follicular epithelium are placed in 1­2 layers and have cubic form, there is a bright­red membrane around the ovocyte. What follicle is it?
a. Mature
*b. Primary
c. Atretic
d. Secondary
e. Primordial

113. Utilization of arachidonic acid via cyclooxigenase pathway results in formation of some bioactive substances. Name them:
a. Somatomedins
b. Thyroxine
c. Biogenic amins
d. Insulin­like growth factors
*e. Prostaglandins

114. A woman has been applying a new cosmetic preparation for a week that resulted in eye­lid inflammation accompanied by hyperemia, infiltration and painfulness. What type of allergic reaction was developed?
a. III
b. IV
*c. I
d. V
e. II

115. A doctor administered a patient with allergic dermatitis a i/i­histamine blocker as a part of complex treatment. Name this medication:
a. Cromolyn sodium
b. Prednisolone
*c. Loratadine
d. Hydrocortisone
e. Adrenaline

116. A 1 y.o. child with symptoms of muscle affection was admitted to the hospital. Examination revealed carnitine deficit in muscles. Biochemical base of this pathology is disturbed process of:
*a. Transporting of fatty acids to mitochondrions
b. Actin and myosin synthesis
c. Substrate phosphorylation
d. Regulation of Ca2+ rate in mitochondrions
e. Lactic acid utilization

117. A 30 y.o. woman­ had been ill for a year when she felt pain in the area of joints for the first time, they got swollen and skin above them became reddened. Provisional diagnosis is rheumatoid arthritis. One of the most probable causes of this disease is a structure alteration of a connective tissue protein:
a. Mucin
b. Myosin
c. Troponin
d. Ovoalbumin
*e. Collagen

118. A 56 y.o. patient has been suffering from thyreotoxicosis for a long time. What type of hypoxia can be developed?
a. Mixed
*b. Tissue
c. Circulatory
d. Hemic
e. Respiratory

119. A 48 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints about weakness, irritability, sleep disturbance. Objectively: skin and scleras are yellow. In blood: conjugated bilirubin, cholalemia. Feces are acholic. Urine is of dark colour (bilirubin). What jaundice is it?
a. Parenchymatous
b. Gilberts syndrome
c. Crigler­Najjar syndrome
d. Hemolytic
*e. Mechanic

120. A lightly dressed man is standing in a room, air temperature is +14°C, windows and doors are closed. In what way does he emit heat the most actively?
a. Convection
b. Evaporation
c. Perspiration
d. Heat conduction
*e. Heat radiation

121. A patient complains of pain in the area of his liver. Duodenal intubation revealed yellowish, oval, narrowed at the poles eggs with an operculum at the end. Size of these eggs is the smallest among all helminth eggs. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Echinococcosis
b. Teniasis
c. Beef tapeworm infection
d. Diphyllobothriasis
*e. Opisthorchosis

122. A patient who suffers from severe disorder of water­salt metabolism experienced cardiac arrest in diastole. What is the most probable mechanism of cardiac arrest in diastole?
*a. Hyperkaliemia
b. Hyponatremia
c. Organism dehydratation
d. Hypokaliemia
e. Hypernatremia

123. A 36 y.o. man has a craniocerebral trauma. Objectively: diminished breath sounds, thready pulse, no reflexes. What way of pyracetam introduction will be the most apropriate in this case?
a. Subcutaneous
b. Rectal
c. Peroral
*d. Intravenous
e. Inhalation

124. Short­term physical activity resulted in reflex amplification of heart rate and raise of systemic arterial pressure. What receptors activation was the main cause of pressor reflex realization?
a. Vascular chemoreceptors
b. Hypothalamus thermoreceptors
c. Vascular baroceptors
*d. Proprioreceptors of active muscles
e. Vascular volume receptors

125. A patient with neuritis of femoral nerve has disturbed flexion of thigh as well as disturbed crus extension in the knee joint. What muscles function is disturbed?
*a. Quadriceps muscle of thigh
b. Triceps muscle of thigh
c. Semimembranous muscle
d. Biceps muscle of thigh
e. Semitendinous muscle

126. A 55 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about having continuous cyclic uterine hemorrhages for a year, weakness, dizziness. Examination revealed skin pallor. Hemogram: Hb­ 70 g/1, erythrocytes 3,2×1012/l, color index ­ 0,6, leukocytes 6,0×109/l, reticulocytes ­ 1%; erythrocyte hypochromia. What anemia is it?
a. Iron­deficiency anemia
b. Aplastic anemia
c. Hemolytic anemia
d. B12­folate­deficiency anemia
*e. Chronic posthemorrhagic anemia

127. As a result of exhausting muscular work a worker has largely reduced buffer capacity of blood. What acidic substance that came to blood caused this phenomenon?
a. 3­phosphoglycerate
b. Pyruvate
c. -
d. 1,3­bisphosphoglycerate
*e. Lactate

128. Bacteriological laboratory examines canned meat whether it contains botulinum toxin. For this purpose an extract of test specimen and antitoxic antibotulinic serum of A, B, E types were introducted to a group of mice under examination; a control group of mice got the extract without antibotulinic serum. What serological reaction was applied?
a. Precipitation
b. Opsono­phagocytic
c. Double immune diffusion
*d. Neutralization
e. Complement binding

129. Parents of a 10 y.o. boy consulted a doctor about extension of hair­covering, growth of beard and moustache, low voice. Intensified secretion of which hormone must be assumed?
a. Of somatotropin
b. Of oestrogen
c. Of progesterone
*d. Of testosterone
e. Of cortisol

130. A 60 y.o. patient has a reduced perception of high­frequency sounds. What structures disorder of auditory analizer caused these changes?
*a. Main membrane of cochlea near the oval window
b. Muscles of middle ear
c. Tympanic membrane
d. Eustachian tube
e. Main membrane of cochlea near helicotrema

131. In course of an experiment a skeletal muscle is being stimulated by a series of electric impulses. What type of muscle contraction will arise, if every subsequent impulse comes in the period of relaxation of single muscle contraction?
a. Holotetanus
b. Asynchronous tetanus
c. Muscle contructure
d. A series of single contractions
*e. Partial tetanus

132. A liquidator of a breakdown at a nuclear power plant who was irradiated complained about vomiting that occurs all of a sudden. What medication should be prescribed?
a. Atropine
*b. Metoclopramide
c. Reserpine
d. Aeron
e. De­Nol

133. A patient got a craniocerebral trauma that resulted in right­side convergent strabismus. Damage of which craniocerebral nerve caused such consequences?
a. n.trigeminus
b. n.facialis
*c. n.abducens
d. n.aculomotorius
e. n.trochlearis

134. A patient ill with bronchial asthma didnt inform his doctor that he had attacks of stenocardia. Doctor administered him a medication, which taking resulted in less frequent attacks of bronchial asthma, but stenocardia attacks became more frequent. What medication was administered?
a. Cromolyn sodium
b. Aminophylline
c. Phenotherol
*d. Isadrin
e. Salbutamol

135. Autopsy of a man who died from influenza revealed that his heart was slightly enlarged, pastous, myocardium was dull and had specks. Microscopical examination of myocardium revealed signs of parenchymatous adipose and hydropic dystrophy; stroma was edematic with poor macrophagal and lymphocytic infiltration, vessels were plethoric; perivascular analysis revealed petechial hemorrhages. What type of myocarditis was developed in this case?
*a. Serous diffuse
b. Purulent
c. Serous focal
d. Interstitial proliferative
e. Granulomatous

136. In course of practical training students studied a stained blood smear of a mouse with bacteria phagocyted by leukocytes. What cell organella completes digestion of these bacteria?
a. Mytochondrions
b. Golgi apparatus
c. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
*d. Lisosomes
e. Ribosomes

137. A 22 y.o. woman has enlarged lymph nodes. Histologically: a lymph node contains lymphocytes, histiocytes, reticular cells, small and big Hodgkins cells, multinucleated Sternberg cells, isolated foci of caseous necrosis. What disease are thesechanges typical for?
*a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Chronic leukosis
c. Lymphosarcoma
d. Acute leukosis
e. Lung cancer metastasis

138. A 49 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about heightened fatigue and dyspnea during physical activity. ECG: heart rate is 50/min, PQ is extended, QRS is unchanged, P wave quanity exceeds quantity of QRS complexes. What type of arrhythmia does the patient have?
a. Sinoatrial block
b. Extrasystole
*c. Atrioventricular block
d. Sinus bradycardia
e. Ciliary arhythmia

139. A patient who suffers from pneumonia has high body temperature. What biologically active substance plays the leading part in origin of this phenomenon?
a. Histamine
b. Serotonin
c. Bradykinin
d. Leukotrienes
*e. Interleukin­I

140. A teenager was irradiated with high radiation dose that resulted in serious damages of lymphoid system, lysis of many lymphocytes. Restoration of normal hemogram is possible due to the functioning of the following gland:
*a. Thymus
b. Adrenal
c. Pancreas
d. Liver
e. Thyroid

141. In course of histidine catabolism a biogenic amin is formed that has powerful vasodilatating effect. Name it:
a. Dopamine
b. Noradrenalin
c. Serotonin
*d. Histamine
e. Dioxyphenylalanine

142. According to audiometry data a patient has a disturbed perception of mediumfrequency sounds. It might have been caused by a damage of:
*a. Middle part of helix
b. Quadritubercular structure
c. Spiral ganglion
d. Lateral geniculate bodies
e. Cochlear nuclei

143. A patient with fracture of his lower jaw was admitted to the maxillofacial department. It was decided to fix his bones surgically under anaesthetic. After intravenous introduction of muscle relaxant there arose short fibrillar contractions of the patients facial muscles. What muscle relaxant was applied?
a. Pipecuronium bromide
b. Melictine
c. Tubocurarin chloride
*d. Dithylinum
e. Diazepam

144. Analysis of blood serum of a patient revealed increase of alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase level. What cytological changes can cause such a situation?
a. Disturbance of genetic apparatus of cells
b. Disturbed function of energy supply of cells
c. Disturbance of cellular interrelations
d. Cellular breakdown
*e. Disorder of enzyme systems of cells

145. A 63 y.o. man fell ill with acute tracheitis and bronchitis accompanied by bronchial pneumonia. On the 10th day the patient died from cardiopulmonary insufficiency. Autopsy revealed fibrinous hemorrhagic laryngotracheobronchitis; lungs were enlarged, their incision revealed the "coalminers "effect caused by interlacing of sections of bronchial pneumonia, hemorrhages into the pulmonary parenchyma, acute abscesses and atelectases. Internal organs have discirculatory and dystrophic changes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Respiratory syncytial infection
*b. Influenza, severe form
c. Adenoviral infection
d. Moderately severe influenza
e. Parainfluenza

146. As a result of spinal­cord trauma a 33 y.o. man has a disturbed pain and temperature sensitivity that is caused by damage of the following tract:
a. Posterior spinocerebellar
b. Lateral spinocortical
c. Medial spinocortical
d. Anterior spinocerebellar
*e. Spinothalamic

147. A patient who suffers from heart failure has enlarged liver, edemata of lower extremities, ascites. What is the leading mechanism in the development of this edema?
a. Colloid osmotic
*b. Hydrodynamic
c. -
d. Membranogenic
e. Lymphogenous

148. A rabbits nerve that innervates the right ear was cut and its right superior cervical ganglion was removed. Immediately after operation the temperature of ear skin was measured. It was revealed that the temperature of the rabbits ear skin on the side of denervation was by 1,5°C higher than on the opposite intact side. What of the following is the most probable explanation of the above­mentioned effects?
a. Atrerial hyperemia induced by metabolic factors
b. Reactive arterial hyperemia
c. Physiological arterial hyperemia
*d. Arterial neuroparalytic hyperemia
e. Arterial neurotopical hyperemia

149. Inflammation of a patients eye wasaccompanied by accumulation of turbid liquid with high protein at the bottom of anterior chamber that was called hypopyon. What process underlies the changes under observation?
*a. Secondary alteration
b. Proliferation
c. Disturbance of microcirculation
d. -
e. Primary alteration

150. A patient was ill with burn disease that was complicated by DIC syndrome. What stage of DIC syndrome can be suspected if it is known that the patients blood coagulates in less than 3 minutes?
*a. Hypercoagulation
b. Transition phase
c. Fibrinolysis
d. Hypocoagulation
e. Terminal

151. An experimental animal has been given excessive amount of carbon­labeled glucose for a week. What compound can the label be found in?
*a. Palmitic acid
b. Arachidonic acid
c. Vitamin A
d. Choline
e. Methionine

152. A patient complains of dryness of head skin, itching, fragility and loss of hair. After examination he was diagnosed with seborrhea. Disturbed activity of which cells caused this condition?
a. Epithelial cells
*b. Cells of sebaceous glands
c. Melanocytes
d. Cells of sudoriferous glands
e. Adipocytes

153. A patient who had been working hard under conditions of elevated temperature of the environment, has now a changed quantity of blood plasma proteins. What penomenon is the case?
a. Absolute hypoproteinemia
*b. Paraproteinemia
c. Disproteinemia
d. Absolute hyperproteinemia
e. Relative hyperproteinemia

154. Examination of a patient revealed extremely myotic pupils, sleepiness, infrequent Chain­Stokes respiration, urinary retention, slowing­down of heart ate, enhancement of spinal reflexes. What substance caused the poisoning?
*a. Morphine
b. Phosphactole
c. Barbital
d. Caffeine
e. Atropine

155. Examination of a patient with frequent hemorrhages from internals and mucous membranes revealed proline and lysine being a part of collagene fibers. What vitamin absence caused disturbance of their hydroxylation?
a. Thiamine
*b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin E
d. Vitamin K
e. Vitamin A

156. The first grade pupils were examined in order to sort out children for tuberculosis revaccination. What test was applied for this purpose?
a. Schick test
b. Burnet test
c. Anthraxine test
*d. Mantoux test
e. Supracutaneous tularin test

157. A patient has extrasystole. ECG shows no P wave, QRS complex is deformed, there is a full compensatory pause. What extrasystoles are these?
a. -
*b. Ventricular
c. Sinus
d. Atrioventricular
e. Atrial

158. After intake of rich food a patient feels nausea and sluggishness; with time there appeared signs of steatorrhea. Blood cholesterine concentration is 9,2 micromole/1. This condition was caused by lack of:
a. Fatty acids
b. Chylomicrons
c. Triglycerides
*d. Bile acids
e. Phospholipids

159. A 27 y.o. patient put eye drops that contain penicillin. After a few minutes she felt itching and burning of her body, there appeared lip and eye­lid edemata; arterial pressure began to drop. What immunoglobulins took part in the development of this allergic reaction?
a. IgM and IgG
b. IgA and IgM
c. IgG and IgD
d. IgM and IgD
*e. IgE and IgG

160. A patient suffers from severe postoperative pseudomonadous infection.What of the following antibiotics should beadministered in this case?
a. Benzylpenicillin
*b. Amicacin sulfate
c. Doxycycline
d. Erythromycin
e. Cephazolin

161. A patient complains of frequent diarrheas, especially after consumption of fattening food, and of body weight loss. Laboratory examination revealed steatorrhea; hypocholic feces. What can be the cause of this condition?
a. Unbalanced diet
b. Mucous membrane inflammation of small intestine
*c. Obturation of biliary tracts
d. Lack of pancreatic phospholipase
e. Lack of pancreatic lipase

162. Having helped to eliminate consequences of a failure at a nuclear power plant, a worker got an irradiation doze of 500 roentgen. He complains of headache, nausea, dizziness. What changes in leukocytes quantity can be expected 10 hours after irradiation?
*a. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
b. Leukopenia
c. Lymphocytosis
d. Leukemia
e. Agranulocytosis

163. In case of a penetrating wound of the anterior abdominal wall the wound tract went above the lesser curvature of stomach. What peritoneum formation is most likely to be injured?
a. Ligamentum hepatoduoduodenale
*b. Ligamentum hepatogastricum
c. Ligamentum hepatorenale
d. Ligamentum triangulate sinistrum
e. Ligamentum gastrocolicum

164. An electron micrograph of a kidney fragment presents an afferent arteriole. Under its endothelium some big cells can be seen that contain secretory granules. Whattype of cells is it?
a. Smooth muscle cells
b. Juxtavascular
c. Mesangeal
*d. Juxtaglomerular
e. Interstitial

165. Arterial pressure of a surgeon who performed a long operation rised upto 140/110 mm Hg. What changes of humoral regulation could have caused the rise of arterial pressure in this case?
a. Activation of renin angiotensive system
b. Activation of formation and excretion of aldosterone
c. Activation of kallikrein kinin system
*d. Activation of sympathoadrenal system
e. Inhibition of sympathoadrenal system

166. A patient with chronic cardiac insufficiency has been treated with cardiotonic drugs and a thiazide diuretic, but in spite of it there are still edemata and risk of ascites. What medication should be prescribed to amplify diuretic effect of the applied drugs?
a. Furosemide
b. Clopamide
c. Amyloride
*d. Spironolactone
e. Manitole

167. A newborn child with pylorostenosishas often repeating vomiting accompaniedby apathy, weakness, hypertonicity, sometimes convulsions. What disorder form of acid­base balance is it?
a. Excretory acidosis
b. Metabolic acidosis
c. Gaseous alkalosis
*d. Nongaseous alkalosis
e. Gaseous acidosis

168. After a 2 y.o. child has had flu, there appeared complaints about ear ache. A doctor revealed hearing impairment and inflammation of the middle ear. How did the infection penetrate into the middle ear?
a. Through atrium mastoideum
*b. Through the auditory tube
c. Through canalis caroticus
d. Through foramen jugularis
e. Through canalis nasolacrimalis

169. In course of an experiment a skeletal muscle is being stimulated by a series of electric impulses. What type of muscle contraction will arise, if every subsequent impulse comes in the period of shortening of the previous single muscle contraction?
a. Asynchronous tetanus
*b. Partial tetanus
c. A series of single contractions
d. Holotetanus
e. Muscle contracture

170. Examination of a miner revealed pulmonary fibrosis accompanied by disturbance of alveolar ventilation. What is the main mechanism of this disturbance?
a. Constriction of superior respiratory tracts
b. Disturbance of neural respiration control
c. Limitation of breast mobility
*d. Limitation of respiratory surface of lungs
e. Bronchi spasm

171. A patient has symptoms of inflammation of urogenital tracts. Examination of a vaginal smear revealed big monocellular, pear­shaped organisms with the pointed spike at the posterior end of body, big nucleusand undulating membrane. What protozoawere found in the smear?
a. Trichomonas buccalis
b. Lamblia intestinalis
c. Trypanosoma gambiense
d. Trichomonas hominis
*e. Trichomonas vaginalis

172. A child is languid, apathetic. Liver is enlarged and liver biopsy revealed a significant excess of glycogene. Glucose concentration in the blood stream is below normal. What is the cause of low glucose concentration?
a. Low (absent) activity of glycogene phosphorylase in liver
*b. Low (absent) activity of glucose 6phosphatase
c. Low (absent) activity of hexokinase
d. Deficit of a gene that is responsible for synthesis of glucose 1­phosphaturidine transferase
e. High activity of glycogen synthetase

173. A man who went for a ride on a roundabout had amplification of heart rate, sweating and nausea. What receptors stimulation is it primarily connected with?
a. Tactors
*b. Vestibular
c. Visual
d. Proprioceptors
e. Auditory

174. Two days after consumption of smoked pork a patient got face and eyelid edemata, gastrointestinal disturbances, abrupt temperature rise, muscle pain. Blood analysis showed full­blown eosinophilia. What helminth could the patient be infected with?
a. Whipworm
b. Pinworm
c. Trichina
d. Hookworm
*e. Ascarid

175. Examination of a patient revealed hyperkaliemia and hyponatremia. Low secretion of which hormone may cause such changes?
*a. Aldosteron
b. Parathormone
c. Vasopressin
d. Cortisol
e. Natriuretic

176. After a tooth extraction a patient felt persistent pain behind his breast bone. After sublingual intake of an antianginal drug the pain behind the breast bone disappeared, but the patient complained of headache and dizziness. What drug are these properties typical for?
a. Verapamil
b. Validol
*c. Nitroglycerin
d. Metoprolol
e. Propranolol

177. A 63 y.o. man with collapse symptoms was delivered to the emergency hospital. A doctor chose noradrenaline in orderto prevent hypotension. What is the action mechanism of this medication?
a. Activation of /3­adrenoreceptors
*b. Activation of ai­adrenoreceptors
c. Block of M­cholinoreceptors
d. Activation of dopamine receptors
e. Activation of serotonin receptors

178. Urine examination of a patient with acute cystitis revealed leukocytes and a lot of gram­negative bacilli. Inoculation resulted in growth of colonies of mucous nature that formed green soluble pigment. What microorganism is the most probable cause of the disease?
*a. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
b. Escherihia coli
c. Klebsiella pneumoniae
d. Salmonella enteritidis
e. Proteus mirabilis

179. An isolated cell of human heart automatically generates excitation impulses with frequency 60 times pro minute. Whatheart structure was this cell obtained from?
a. Ventricle
b. Atrioventricular node
c. His bundle
*d. Sinoatrial node
e. Atrium

180. A patient died under conditions of cardio vascular insufficiency. Autopsy results: postinfarction cardiosclerosis, myocardium hypertrophy and dilatation of its cavities, especially of its right ventricle. Liver is enlarged, its surface is smooth, incision revealed that it was plethoric, with dark­red specks against the background of brownish tissue. Histologically: plethora of central parts of lobules; peritheral parts around portal tracts contain hepatocytes in a stateof adipose degeneration. How are these liver changes called?
a. Amyloidosis
*b. Nutmeg liver
c. Liver steatosis
d. Liver cirrhosis
e. Pseudonutmeg liver

181. Autopsy of a newborn boy revealed polydactylia, microcephalia, cheiloschisis and uranoschisis as well as hypertrophy of parenchimatous organs. These defects correspond with the description of Pataus syndrome. What is the most probable cause of this pathology?
*a. Trisomy of the 13th chromosome
b. Trisomy of the 21st chromosome
c. Partial monosomy
d. Nondisjunction of sex chromosomes
e. Trisomy of the 18th chromosome

182. Glutamate decarboxylation results in formation of inhibitory transmitter in CNS. Name it:
a. Histamine
b. Serotonin
*c. GABA
d. Glutathione
e. Asparagine

183. A patient who suffers from acute myocarditis has clinical signs of cardiogenic shock. What of the under­mentioned pathogenetic mechanisms plays the main part in shock development?
a. Increase of peripheral vascular resistance
*b. Disturbance of pumping ability of heart
c. Reduction of diastolic flow to the heart
d. Depositing of blood in organs
e. Decrease of vascular tone

184. A patient who has been treated with diazepam on account of neurosis complains of toothache. Doctor administered him an analgetic, but its dose was lower than average therapeutic dose. What phenomenon did the doctor take into account while prescribing the patient an underdose?
*a. Potentiation
b. Cumulation
c. Drug dependence
d. Tolerance
e. Summation

185. A 23 y.o. patient complains of weakness, temperature rise up to 38 ­ 40°C. Objectively: liver and spleen are enlarged. Hemogram: Hb­100 g/1, erythrocytes ­ 2,9×1012/l, leukocytes ­4,4­ 109/l, thrombocytes ­ 48×109/l, segmentonuclear neutrophils 17%, lymphocytes ­ 15%, blast cells ­ 68%. All cytochemical reactions are negative. Make a hematological conclusion:
a. Acute lymphoblastic leukosis
b. Undifferentiated leukosis
*c. Acute erythromyelosis
d. Chronic myeloleukosis
e. Acute myeloblastic leukosis

186. Continious taking of a drug can result in osteoporosis, erosion of stomach mucous membrane, hypokaliemia, retention of sodium and water, reduced content of corticotropin in blood. Name this drug:
a. Indometacin
b. Digoxin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Reserpine
e. Hydrochlorothiazide

187. A patient has a haemorrhage into the posterior central gyrus. What type of sensitivity on the opposite side will be disturbed?
a. Visual
b. Auditory
c. Olfactory
*d. Skin and proprioceptive
e. Auditory and visual

188. As a result of an accident a patient has intense painfullness and edema of the anterior crus surface; dorsal flexion of footis hindered. Function of which crus muscle is most likely to be disturbed?
*a. M.tibialis anterior
b. Ad.flexor digitorum longus
c. M.peroneus brevis
d. M.flexor halluds longus
e. M.peroneus longus

189. A 2 y.o. child has convulsions as a result of lowered concentration of calcium ions in blood plasma. It is caused by reduced function of:
a. Adrenal cortex
b. Hypophysis
c. Thymus
*d. Parathyroid glands
e. Pineal gland

190. Histological specimen presents a vessel the wall of which consists of endothelium, basal membrane and loose connective tissue. What type of vessel is it?
a. Artery
*b. Vein of muscular type
c. Lymphocapillary
d. Hemocapillary
e. Vein of non­muscular type

191. Examination of a man who hadnt been consuming fats but had been getting enough carbohydrates and proteins for a long time revealed dermatitis, poor wound healing, vision impairment. What is the probable cause of metabolic disorder?
*a. Lack of linoleic acid, vitamins A, D,E,K
b. Lack of vitamins PP, H
c. Lack of oleic acid
d. Lack of palmitic acid
e. Low caloric value of diet

192. Analysis of a punction biopsy material of liver revealed hepatocyte dystrophy with necroses as well as sclerosis with disorder of beam and lobulous structure, with formation of pseudolobules and regenerative nodes. What is the most probable diagnosis:
a. Acute hepatitis
b. Chronic hepatosis
c. Chronic hepatitis
*d. Liver cirrhosis
e. Progressive massive liver necrosis

193. A 50 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints about pain behind his breastbone, asphyxia during physical activity. Angiography revealed pathological changes in the posterior interventricular branch of the right coronary artery. What heart parts are affected?
a. Right atrioventricular valve
b. Left atrium
c. Anterior wall of the right and left ventricles
*d. Posterior wall of the right and left ventricles
e. Right atrium

194. A hepatitis outbreak was registered in a settlement. This episode is connected with water factor. What hepatitis virus could have caused the infective outbreak in this settlement?
*a. C
b. B
c. G
d. D
e. E

195. Examination of coronary arteries revealed atherosclerotic calcific plaques that close vessel lumen by ⅓. The muscle has multiple whitish layers of connective tissue. What process was revealed in myocardium?
*a. Diffuse cardiosclerosis
b. Tiger heart
c. Myocarditis
d. Myocardium infarction
e. Postinfarction cardiosclerosis

196. Microscopical renal examination of a 36 y.o. woman who died from renal insufficiency revealed in the glomerules proliferation of capsule nephrothelium as well as of podocytes and phagocytes accompanied by formation of "crescents", capillary loop necrosis, fibrinous thrombs in their lumens; sclerosis and hyalinosis of glomerules, atrophy of tubules and fibrosis of renal stroma. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Membranous nephropathy
*c. Subacute glomerulonephritis
d. Focal segmentary sclerosis
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

197. To prevent postoperative bleeding a 6 y.o. child was administered vicasol that is a synthetic analogue of vitamin K. Name post­translational changes of blood coagulation factors that will be activated by vicasol:
a. Glycosylation
*b. Carboxylation of glutamin acid
c. Polymerization
d. Phosphorylation of serine radicals
e. Partial proteolysis

198. According to clinical indications a patient was administered pyridoxal phosphate. What processes is this medication intended to correct?
a. Desamination of purine nucleotide
b. Oxidative decarboxylation of ketonic acids
*c. Transamination and decarboxylation of aminoacids
d. Synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases
e. Protein synthesis

199. A 62 y.o. woman complains of frequent pains in the area of her chest and backbone, rib fractures. A doctor assumed myelomatosis (plasmocytoma). What of the following laboratory characteristics will be of the greatest diagnostical importance?
a. Hypoglobulinemia
b. Hypoproteinemia
c. Hyperalbuminemia
d. Proteinuria
*e. Paraproteinemia

200. A hypertensive glucose solution was introduced to a patient. It will intensify water movement:
a. There will be no changes of water movement
b. From the capillaries to the intercellular liquid
*c. From the intercellular liquid to the capillaries
d. From the intercellular liquid to the cells
e. From the cells to the intercellular liquid

