1. A patient with massive burns developed acute renal insufficiency characterized by a significant and rapid deceleration of glomerular filtration. What is the mechanism of its development?
a. Damage of glomerular filter
b. Reduction of functioning nephron number
c. Renal artery embolism
*d. Reduction of renal blood flow
e. Rise of pressure of tubular fluid

2. Sanitary bacteriological research on water by the membrane filter method revealed two red colonies on a membrane filter (Endo agar) through which 500 ml of analyzed water were passe d. Calculate the coli index and coli titer of the analyzed water:
a. 250 and 4
b. 2 and 500
*c. 4 and 250
d. 250 and 2
e. 500 and 2

3. A patient with drug intoxication presented with the dryness of oral mucous membrane and mydriatic pupils. Such action of this drug is associated with the following effect:
*a. Muscarinic cholinoreceptor block
b. Nicotinic cholinoreceptor stumulation
c. Muscarinic cholinoreceptor stumulation
d. Adrenoreceptor stimulation
e. Adrenoreceptor block

4. A patient has been given high doses of hydrocortisone for a long tim e. This caused atrophy of one of the adrenal cortex zones. Which zone is it?
a. -
b. Glomerular
c. Glomerular and reticular
d. Reticular
*e. Fascial

5. A girl has been diagnosed with adrenogenital syndrome (pseudohermaphroditism). This pathology is caused by hypersecretion of the following adrenal hormone:
a. Glucocorticoids
b. Estrogens
c. Mineralocorticoids
*d. Androgens
e. Catecholamines

6. A 12-year-old adolescent suffering from bronchial asthma has a severe attack of asthma: he presents with marked expiratory dyspnea, skin pallor. What type of alveolar ventilation disorder is observed?
a. Thoracodiaphragmatic
b. Neuromuscular
c. Restrictive
*d. Obstructive
e. Central

7. A patient consulted a physician about muscle rigidity, constrained movements, permanent arm tremor. The patient was diagnosed with Parkinsons diseas e. What preparation should be administered?
*a. Levodopa
b. Phenytoin
c. Ethosuximide
d. Phenobarbital
e. Diazepam

8. Depressions and emotional insanities result from the deficit of noradrenalin, serotonin and other biogenic amines in the brain. Their concentration in the synapses can be increased by means of the antidepressants that inhibit the following enzyme:
*a. Monoamine oxidase
b. D-amino-acid oxidase
c. L-amino-acid oxidase
d. Phenylalanine-4-monooxygenase
e. Diamine oxidase

9. A man has normal sensitivity of his finger skin, however he doesn’t sense his wedding ring around the finger. What process induced by wearing of the ring has caused this phenomenon?
a. Impaired circulation
b. Abnormality of the epidermis structure
*c. Receptor adaptation
d. Abnormality of the receptor structure
e. Development of the fibrous tissue

10. A patient suffering from syphilis has been treated with bismuth preparations. As a result of it some grey spots turned up on the mucous membrane of the oral cavity; nephropathy symptoms were also present. What drug should be used for treatment of bismuth intoxication?
a. Nalorphine
b. Bemegride
*c. Unithiol
d. Methylene blue
e. Naloxone

11. While studying a microslide obtained from the punctuate of a regional lymph node and stained by Romanovsky-Giemsa method a physician revealed some light-pink thin microorganisms with 12-14 regular spiral coils and pointed ends, up to 10-13 micrometer long. This might be the causative agent of the following disease:
a. Relapsing fever
*b. Syphilis
c. Leishmaniasis
d. Leptospirosis
e. Trypanosomiasis

12. Nappies of a newborn have dark spots being the evidence of homogentisic acid formation. This is caused by the metabolic disorder of the following substance:
a. Cholesterol
b. Galactose
c. Tryptophan
*d. Tyrosine
e. Methionine

13. Products of some proteins hydrolysis and modification are the biologically active substances called hormones. Lipotropin, corticotropin, melanotropin and endorphins are synthesized in the hypophysis of the following protein:
a. Thyreoglobulin
b. Neuroglobulin
c. Neurostromin
d. Neuroalbumin
*e. Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)

14. Examination of a patient revealed overgrowth of facial bones and soft tissues, tongue enlargement, wide interdental spaces in the enlarged dental arch. What changes of the hormonal secretion are the most likely?
a. Hyposecretion of thyroxin
b. Hypersecretion of insulin
*c. Hypersecretion of the somatotropic hormone
d. Hyposecretion of insulin
e. Hyposecretion of the somatotropic hormone

15. A 58-year-old patient suffers from the cerebral atherosclerosis. Examination revealed hyperlipoidemi a. What class of lipoproteins will most probably show increase in concentration in this patient’s blood serum?
a. Chylomicrons
b. Cholesterol
c. Fatty acid complexes with albumins
*d. Low-density lipoproteins
e. High-density lipoproteins

16. In patients with the biliary tract obstruction the blood coagulation is inhibited; the patients have frequent haemorrhages caused by the subnormal assimilation of the following vitamin:
a. E
*b. K
c. A
d. D
e. C

17. Vagus nerves of an experimental animal have been cut on the both sides. What respiratory changes will result from this?
a. Respiration will become deep and frequent
b. There will be no respiratory changes
c. Respiration will become shallow and infrequent
*d. Respiration will become deep and infrequent
e. Respiration will become shallow and frequent

18. A 62-year-old female patient has developed a cataract (lenticular opacity) secondary to the diabetes mellitus. What type of protein modification is observed in case of diabetic cataract?
a. Methylation
b. Limited proteolysis
c. ADP-ribosylation
d. Phosphorylation
*e. Glycosylation

19. Study of bacteriological sputum specimens stained by the Ziel-Neelsen method revealed some bright-red acid-resistant bacilli that were found in groups or singularly. When inoculated onto the nutrient media, the signs of their growth show up on the 10-15 day. These bacteria relate to the following family:
a. Histoplasma dubrosii
b. Klebsiella rhinoscleromatis
c. Coxiella burnettii
*d. Micobacterium tuberculosis
e. Yersinia pseudotuberculosis

20. A microspecimen of the submandibular salivary gland shows some basket-shaped cells concentrated around the acines and excretory ducts. These cells surround bases of the serous cells and are called myoepitheliocytes. These cells relate to the following tissue:
*a. Muscular tissue
b. Special connective tissue
c. Loose fibrous connective tissue
d. Epithelial tissue
e. Neural tissue

21. As a result of a road accident a driver has gotten a trauma. Now he is in shock condition and presents with a decrease in daily diuresis down to 300 ml. What is the main pathogenetic factor of such alteration in the diuresis?
*a. Arterial pressure drop
b. Decrease in number of the functioning glomerules
c. Secondary hyperaldosteronism
d. Oncotic blood pressure drop
e. Increase in vascular permeability

22. A patients organism has decreased concentration of magnesium ions that are necessary for attachment of ribosomes to the granular endoplasmatic reticulum. It is known that this causes protein biosynthesis disturbanc e. What stage of protein biosynthesis will be disturbed?
a. Termination
*b. Translation
c. Amino acid activation
d. Replication
e. Transcription

23. A histological specimen presents a receptor zone of a sensoepithelial sense organ. Cells of this zone are placed upon the basal membrane and include the following types: external and internal receptor cells, external and internal phalangeal cell, stem cells, external limiting cells and external supporting cell. The described receptor zone belongs to the following sense organ:
a. Equilibrium organ
b. Olfactory organ
c. Visual organ
d. Gustatory organ
*e. Acoustic organ

24. In a healthy adult speed of the excitement conduction through the atrioventricular node is 0,02-0,05 m/se c. Atrioventricular delay enables:
a. Simultaneity of both ventricles contractions
*b. Sequence of atrial and ventricular contractions
c. Simultaneity of both atria contractions
d. Sufficient force of ventricular contractions
e. Sufficient force of atrial contractions

25. Following exposure to radiation a lot of mutant cells appeared in a patient. Some time later most of them were detected and destroyed by the following cells of the immune system:
a. T-lymphocytes-supressors
b. B-lymphocyte
*c. T-lymphocytes-killers
d. Plasmoblasts
e. Stem cells

26. Autopsy of a man who died from sepsis revealed a phlegmonous inflammation in the femoral bone of lower extremity. The inflammation was seen in the bone marrow, haversian canals and periosteum. There were also multiple abscesses underneath the periosteum; the surrounding soft tissues of the thigh were also affected by the phlegmonous inflammation. What pathological process is it?
a. Osteoporosis
b. Chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis
c. Osteopetrosis
*d. Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis
e. -

27. While determining power inputs of a patient’s organism it was established that the respiratory coefficient equaled 1,0. This means that in the cells of the patient the following substances are mainly oxidized:
a. Fats
b. Proteins and carbohydrates
c. Proteins
d. Carbohydrates and fats
*e. Carbohydrates

28. After a serious psycho-emotional stress a 45-year-old patient suddenly felt constricting heart pain irradiating to the left arm, neck and left scapul a. His face turned pale, the cold sweat stood out on it. The pain attack was stopped with nitroglycerin e. What process has developed in this patient?
a. Psychogenic shock
b. Myocardial infarction
*c. Stenocardia
d. Stroke
e. Stomach ulcer perforation

29. During an experiment the myotatic reflex has been studied in frogs. After extension in a skeletal muscle its reflectory contraction was absent. The reason for it might be a dysfunction of the following receptors:
a. Articular
*b. Muscle spindles
c. Tactile
d. Nociceptors
e. Golgi tendon organs

30. A patient suffering from chronic bronchitis takes a synthetic mucolytic drug that facilitates the sputum thinning. What drug is it?
a. Heparin
b. Furosemide
c. Enalapril
*d. Acetylcysteine
e. Diazepam

31. While playing volleyball a sportsman jumped and then landed across the external edge of his foot. This caused acute pain in the talocrural articulation, active movements became limited, passive movements remained unlimited but painful. In the region of the external ankle a swelling appeared, the skin turned red and became warmer to the touch. What type of peripheral circulation disorder has developed in this case?
*a. Arterial hyperaemia
b. Venous hyperaemia
c. Embolism
d. Thrombosis
e. Stasis

32. After the prior sensibilization an experimental animal was given a subcutaneous injection of an antigen. The place of injection exhibited a fibrinous inflammation with alteration of the vessel walls, basal substance and fibrous structures of the connective tissue in form of mucoid and fibrinoid swelling and necrosis. What immunological reaction is it?
a. Normergic reaction
b. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
*c. Immediate hypersensitivity
d. Granulomatosis
e. Reaction of transplantation immunity

33. Two weeks after lacunar tonsillitis a 20-year-old man started complaining about general weakness, lower eyelid edemat a. After examination the patient was diagnosed with acute glomerulonephritis. What are the most likely pathological changes in the urine formula?
*a. Proteinuria
b. Presence of fresh erythrocytes
c. Pyuria
d. Natriuria
e. Cylindruria

34. Life cycle of a cell includes a process of DNA autoreduplication. As a result of this process monochromatid chromosomes become bichromati d. This phenomenon is observed within the following period of the cell cycle:
a. G1
b. G0
c. M
d. G2
*e. S

35. A patient with myocardial infarction was admitted to the cardiological department. For pain relief it was decided to potentiate fentanyl action with a neurolepti c. Which of the following neuroleptics is the most suitable for neuroleptanalgesia?
a. Sulpiride
*b. Droperidol
c. Triftazine
d. Aminazine
e. Haloperidol

36. A 35-year-old patient complains about having severe rhinitis and loss of sense of smell for a week. Objectively: the nasal cavity contains a lot of mucus covering the mucous membrane and blocking olfactory receptors. In what region of the nasal cavity are these receptors located?
*a. Superior nasal concha
b. Vestibule of nose
c. Inferior nasal concha
d. Median nasal concha
e. Common nasal meatus

37. A man suffering from a hereditary disease married a healthy woman. They got 5 children, three girls and two boys. All the girls inherited their father’s diseas e. What is the type of the disease inheritance?
a. Asutosomal dominant
*b. Dominant, X-linked
c. Autosomal recessive
d. Recessive, X-linked
e. Y-linked

38. A patient with coronary artery disease was admitted to the cardiological department. For stenocardia prevention a drug from the group of beta-adrenoceptor blockers was administere d. What drug is it?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Morphine hydrochloride
*c. Metoprolol
d. Oxytocin
e. Furosemide

39. A 12-year-old teenager has significantly put off weight within 3 months; glucose concentration rose up to 50 millimolel. He fell into a com a. What is the main mechanism of its development?
a. Lactacidemic
b. Hypoglycemic
c. Ketonemic
d. Hypoxic
*e. Hyperosmolar

40. After a disease a 16-year-old boy is presenting with decreased function of protein synthesis in the liver as a result of vitamin K deficiency. This may cause disorder of:
a. Anticoagulant production
b. Erythropoietin production
c. Osmotic blood pressure
d. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
*e. Blood coagulation

41. An 18-year-old man was delivered to the hospital after a road accident. Examination at the traumatological department revealed multiple injuries of soft tissues of face in the region of the medial eye angl e. The injuries caused massive haemorrhag e. What arterial anastomosis might have been damaged in this region?
*a. A. carotis externa et A. carotis interna
b. A. carotis externa et A. subclavia
c. A. carotis interna et A. ophthalmica
d. A. subclavia et A. ophthalmica
e. A. carotis interna et A. subclavia

42. A mother consulted a doctor about her 5-year-old child who develops erythemas, vesicular rash and skin itch under the influence of sun. Laboratory studies revealed decreased iron concentration in the blood serum, increased uroporphyrinogen I excretion with the urin e. What is the most likely inherited pathology in this child?
*a. Erythropoietic porphyria
b. Coproporphyria
c. Methemoglobinemia
d. Hepatic porphyria
e. Intermittent porphyria

43. Pharmacological effects of antidepressants are based upon blocking (inhibiting) the enzyme that acts as a catalyst for the breakdown of biogenic amines noradrenalin and serotonin in the mitochondria of cephalic neurons. What enzyme takes part in this process?
a. Decarboxylase
*b. Monoamine oxidase
c. Transaminase
d. Peptidase
e. Lyase

44. After taking poor-quality food a patient developed repeated episodes of diarrhea. On the next day he presented with decreased arterial pressure, tachycardia, extrasystole. Blood pH is 7,18. These abnormalities were caused by the development of:
*a. Nongaseous acidosis
b. Metabolic alkalosis
c. Gaseous acidosis
d. Gaseous alkalosis
e. Nongaseous alkalosis

45. A man has worked in an African country for 3 years. A month after his return to Ukraine he consulted an ophthalmologist and complained about eye ache, eyelid edema, lacrimation and temporary visual impairment. Underneath the eye conjunctiva the doctor revealed helminths 30-50 mm long with elongated filiform body. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Enterobiasis
b. Trichocephaliasis
*c. Filariasis
d. Diphyllobothriasis
e. Ascaridiasis

46. A patient with clinical presentations of immunodeficiency has undergone immunological tests. They revealed significant decrease in number of cells that form rosettes with sheep erythrocytes. What conclusion can be drown on the ground of the analysis data?
*a. Decrease in T-lymphocyte level
b. Decrease in complement system level
c. Decrease in natural killer level (NK-cells)
d. Decrease in B-lymphocyte level
e. Lack of effector cells of the humoral immunity

47. A patient underwent a surgery for excision of a cyst on pancreas. After this he developed haemorrhagic syndrome with apparent disorder of blood coagulation. Development of this complication can be explained by:
a. Activation of anticoagulation system
b. Reduced number of thrombocytes
c. Insufficient fibrin production
d. Activation of Christmas factor
*e. Activation of fibrinolytic system

48. An elderly female patient suffers from the type 2 diabetes mellitus accompanied by obesity, atherosclerosis, coronary artery diseas e. Basal hyperinsulinemia is also present. What treatment would be the most appropriate?
*a. Glibenclamid
b. Amlodipine
c. Lovastatin
d. Insulin
e. Retabolil

49. Examination of a young woman revealed a tumour up to 3 cm in diameter in form of a knot localized along the acoustic nerve. The tumour is homogenous, soft and elastic, of pink-and-white colour. Microscopically the tumour contains clusters of cells with oval nuclei. Fibrous cell clusters form regular structures made up by parallel rows of regularly oriented cells arranged in form of a palisade. Zones between the rows of cells are acellular and homogenous (Verocai bodies). What tumour is it?
a. Malignant neurinoma
b. Neuroblastoma
c. Ganglioneuroma
d. Ganglioneuroblastoma
*e. Neurinoma

50. Examination of a patient revealed a dense, movable skin tumour that is standing out distinctly from the surrounding tissues. Its section is found to be white and composed of fibrous tissue. Microscopic examination revealed interlacing collagen fibers and few cells. What tumour is it?
a. Histiocytoma
b. Myoma
*c. Fibroma
d. Dermatofibroma
e. Desmoid

51. In the pubertal period cells of the male sexual glands start producing the male sexual hormone testosterone that is responsible for formation of the secondary sexual characters. What cells of the male sexual glands produce this hormone?
a. Sustentacular cells
b. Spermatozoa
c. Sertolis cells
*d. Leidig cells
e. Sustenocytes

52. A patient who has been taking a drug for a long time cannot abruptly stop its use, because this may lead to psychic and somatic dysfunctions. Name the syndrome of different disorders caused by a drug withdrawal:
a. Sensibilization
*b. Abstinence
c. Cumulation
d. Idiosyncrasy
e. Tachyphylaxis

53. After a surgery a 36-year-old woman was given an intravenous injection of concentrated albumin solution. This has induced intensified water movement in the following direction:
*a. From the intercellular fluid to the capillaries
b. From the cells to the intercellular fluid
c. From the capillaries to the intercellular fluid
d. From the intercellular fluid to the cells
e. No changes of water movement will be observed

54. A patient has an increased pyruvate concentration in bloo d. A large amount of it is excreted with the urin e. What vitamin is lacking in this patient?
a. E
b. B6
c. B3
*d. B1
e. B2

55. A man had worked in a coal mine for over 20 years. After his death autopsy revealed that his lungs were dense, grayish-black and had large areas of neogenic connective tissue containing a lot of microphages with black pigment in the cytoplasm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Talcosis
b. Siderosis
c. Anthracosilicosis
d. Silicoanthracosis
*e. Anthracosis

56. A man who is riding the carousel presents with increased heart rate, sweating, nause a. This condition is caused primarily by the stimulation of the following receptors:
a. Auditory
b. Vestibular otolithic
c. Proprioceptors
*d. Vestibular ampullar
e. Visual

57. A patient has pellagr a. Interrogation revealed that he had lived mostly on maize for a long time and eaten little meat. This disease had been caused by the deficit of the following substance in the maize:
a. Histidine
b. Proline
c. Tyrosine
*d. Tryptophan
e. Alanine

58. A patient presents with twilight vision impairment. Which of the following vitamins should be administered?
a. Ascorbic acid
*b. Retinol acetate
c. Pyridoxine hydrochloride
d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Nicotinic acid

59. A section of the left lung was found to have an area of dense red tissue. The area was cone-shaped, stood out distinctly from the healthy tissue, with its base directed to the pleura. The dissected tissue was granular, dark-red. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lung gangrene
b. Primary tuberculous affection
c. Lung abscess
d. Croupous pneumonia
*e. Haemorrhagic infarction

60. After a road accident a driver was delivered to the hospital with an injury of the medial epicondyle of humerus. What nerve might be damaged in this case?
a. n. muscolocutaneus
b. n. radialis
c. n. medianus
d. n. axillaris
*e. n. ulnaris

61. A 1,5-year-old child presents with both mental and physical lag, decolorizing of skin and hair, decrease in catecholamine concentration in bloo d. When a few drops of 5% solution of trichloroacetic iron had been added to the child’s urine it turned olive green. Such alteration are typical for the following pathology of the amino acid metabolism:
a. Xanthinuria
b. Tyrosinosis
*c. Phenylketonuria
d. Alkaptonuria
e. Albinism

62. A 9-month-old infant is fed with artificial formulas with unbalanced vitamin B6 concentration. The infant presents with pellagral dermatitis, convulsions, anaemi a. Convulsion development might be caused by the disturbed formation of:
a. Serotonin
b. DOPA
c. Dopamine
*d. GABA
e. Histamine

63. After a trauma a patient lost ability of elbow extension. This might have been caused by dysfunction of the following main muscle:
*a. m. triceps brachii
b. m. teres major
c. m. infraspinatus
d. m. subscapularis
e. m. levator scapulae

64. A man with a stab wound in the region of the quadrilateral foramen consulted a doctor about it. Examination revealed that the injured couldn’t abduct his arm from the body. What nerve is most likely damaged?
a. n. ulnaris
b. n. subclavius
c. n. medianus
d. n. radialis
*e. n. axillaris

65. A patient complains about dyspnea provoked by the physical activity. Clinical examination revealed anaemia and presence of the paraprotein in the zone of gamma-globulins. To confirm the myeloma diagnosis it is necessary to determine the following index in the patient’s urine:
a. Antitrypsin
b. Bilirubin
*c. Bence Jones protein
d. Haemoglobin
e. Ceruloplasmin

66. A man with an injury in the nuchal region (regio nuchae) was admitted to the resuscitation department. What muscle occupies this region?
*a. m. trapezius
b. m. scalenus anterior
c. m. rhomboideus minor
d. m. latissimus dorsi
e. m. sternocleidomastoideus

67. Stimulation of an excitable cell by the electric current has led to the depolarization of its membran e. The depolarization has been caused mainly by the following ions penetrating into the cell through its membrane:
*a. Na+
b. HCO3-
c. Cl-
d. Ca2+
e. K+

68. In a histological specimen parenchyma of an organ is represented by lymphoid tissue that forms lymph nodes; the latter are arranged in a diffuse manner and enclose a central artery. What anatomic formation has such morphological structure?
a. Red bone marrow
b. Thymus
c. Tonsil
*d. Spleen
e. Lymph node

69. An 8-year-old child was admitted to the infectious department with fever (up to 38°C) and punctuate bright-red skin rash. The child was diagnosed as having scarlet fever. Objectively: mucous membrane of pharynx is apparently hyperaemic and edematic, the tonsils are enlarged and have dull yellowish-grey foci with some black areas. What inflammation is the reason for the pharynx alterations?
*a. Purulent necrotic
b. Serous
c. Haemorrhagic
d. Catarrhal
e. Fibrinous

70. A patient with a limb fracture must be administered a depolarizing drug from the myorelaxant group for the purpose of a short-time surgery. What drug is it?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Tubocurarine chloride
c. Pentaminum
d. Cytitonum
*e. Dithylinum

71. A 32-year-old patient consulted a doctor about the absence of lactation after parturition. Such disorder might be explained by the deficit of the following hormone:
a. Vasopressin
b. Thyrocalcitonin
c. Somatotropin
*d. Prolactin
e. Glucagon

72. In an embryo the process of dorsal mesoderm segmentation and somite formation is disturbe d. What part of skin will probably have developmental abnormalities?
a. Hair
b. Perspiratory glands
*c. Dermis
d. Epidermis
e. Sebaceous glands

73. A patient has lost skin sensitivity in the region of the medial surface of his shoulder. This is the result of dysfunction of the following nerve:
a. Axillary nerve
*b. Medial brachial cutaneous nerve
c. Ulnar nerve
d. Radial nerve
e. Medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve

74. A man suffering from osteochondrosis got acute pain in the abdominal muscles (lateral and anterior). During objective examination a physician diagnosticated increased pain sensitivity of skin in the hypogastric region. This pain might be caused by affection of the following nerve:
a. Genitofemoral
*b. Iliohypogastric
c. Obturator
d. Femoral
e. Sciatic

75. After a craniocerebral trauma a patient lost the ability to execute learned purposeful movements (apraxia). The injury is most likely localized in the following region of the cerebral cortex:
a. Gyrus lingualis
b. Gyrus paracentralis
c. Gyrus parahippocampalis
*d. Gyrus supramarginalis
e. Gyrus angularis

76. Examination of a patient admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of acute appendicitis revealed the following changes in the white blood cells: the total count of leukocytes is 16*10^9/l. Leukocyte formula: basophils - 0, eosinophils - 2%, juvenile forms - 2%, stabnuclear - 8%, segmentonuclear - 59%, lymphocytes - 25%, monocytes- 4%. The described changes can be classified as:
a. Neutrophilia with hyperregenerative left shift
*b. Neutrophilia with regenerative left shift
c. Neutrophilic leukemoid reaction
d. Neutrophilia with degenerative left shift
e. Neutrophilia with right shift

77. An experimental animal has lost orientative reflexes as a result of destruction of certain brainstem structures. What structures had been destroyed?
a. Black substance
*b. Quadrigeminal plate
c. Medial nuclei of the reticular formation
d. Red nuclei
e. Vestibular nuclei

78. It was established that agglutination of the recipient’s blood erythrocytes had been caused by the standard sera from the I and II groups. Serum from the III group as well as anti-Rh serum hadn‘t provoke any agglutination. Which blood group and rhesus is allowed to be transfused this recipient?
a. AB (IV), Rh-
*b. B, ? (III) Rh-
c. A, ? (II) Rh-
d. 0, ?,?, (I) Rh+
e. AB (IV), Rh+

79. ECG of a patient shows such alterations: P-wave is normal, P-Q-interval is short, ventricular QRST complex is wide, R-wave is double-peak or two-phas e. What form of arrhythmia is it?
a. Fredericks syndrome (atrial flutter)
*b. WPW syndrome (Wolff-Parkinson-White)
c. Ventricular fibrillation
d. Ciliary arrhythmia
e. Atrioventricular block

80. A female patient consulted a doctor about pain and limited movements in the knee joints. Which of the following nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs should be administered taking into consideration that the patient has a history of chronic gastroduodenitis?
a. Butadiounum
b. Diclofenac sodium
*c. Celecoxib
d. Promedol
e. Acetylsalicilic acid

81. Preventive examination of a patient revealed an enlarged lymph node of metastatic origin on the medial wall of the left axillary creas e. Specify the most likely localization of the primary tumour:
a. Submandibular salivary gland
b. Lung
*c. Mammary gland
d. Thyroid gland
e. Stomach

82. A 63-year-old patient with collapse presentations was delivered to the emergency hospital. A physician has chosen noradrenalin against hypotension. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Activation of serotonin receptors
b. Block of M-cholinoreceptors
c. Activation of β-adrenoreceptors
*d. Activation of α1-adrenoreceptors
e. Activation of dopamine receptors

83. While examining a patient an otolaryngologist noticed hyperaemia and significantly edematous tonsils with a grayish film upon them. Microscopical examination of this film revealed some gram-positive bacilli placed at an angle with each other. What disease might be suspected?
a. Epidemic parotitis
b. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
c. Scarlet fever
*d. Diphtheria
e. Angina

84. Before tooth extraction a patient was advised to take a certain drug for haemorrhage prevention. What drug was advised?
*a. Vicasolum
b. Heparin
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Asparcam
e. Dimedrol

85. A patient who had myocardial infarction was administered 75 mg of acetylsalicinic acid a day. What is the purpose of this administration?
a. Temperature reduction
b. Inflammation reduction
*c. Reduction of thrombocyte aggregation
d. Coronary vessel dilatation
e. Pain relief

86. Examination of a patient 24 hours after appendectomy revealed neutrophilic leukocytosis with a regenerative shift. What is the most likely mechanism of leukocytosis development?
a. Deceleration of leukocyte migration to the tissues
b. Redistribution of the leukocytes in the organism
*c. Intensification of leukopoiesis
d. Intensification of leukopoiesis and deceleration of leukocyte migration to the tissues
e. Deceleration of leukocyte breakdown

87. During the regular sanitary-epidemiological inspection of a pharmacy, the bacteriological analysis of air was performe d. The air was found to have bacilli, yeast fungi, hemolytic streptococci, micrococci. Which of the detected microorganisms indicate the direct epidemic danger?
*a. Haemolytic streptococci
b. -
c. Micrococci
d. Yeast fungi
e. Bacilli

88. A patient has a massive haemorrhage caused by damage of the dorsal lingual artery by cancer of tongue back. What vessel should be ligated for the haemorrhage arrest?
*a. Lingual artery
b. Ascending pharyngeal artery
c. Facial artery
d. Dorsal lingual artery
e. Deep artery of tongue

89. A 60-year-old patient presents with weakened peristaltic activity of the bowels. Which of the following foodstuffs would stimulate peristalsis most of all?
a. Meat
b. Lard
c. Tea
d. White bread
*e. Brown bread

90. Examination of the anterior abdominal wall of a pregnant woman revealed a tumour-like formation that arose on the spot of a tumour that was removed two years ago. The neoplasm was well-defined, dense, 2х1 cm large. Histological examination revealed that the tumour was composed of differentiated connective tissue with prevailing collagen fibres. What tumour might be suspected?
a. Leiomyoma
b. Fibrosarcoma
c. Lipoma
*d. Desmoid
e. Hibernoma

91. A bacteriological laboratory has received smears from the sputum of a patient with a chronic pulmonary diseas e. Microscopical examination of the smears stained by the Ziehl-Neelsen technique revealed red bacilli. What property of the tuberculosis bacillus has shown itself?
a. Alcohol resistance
b. Capsule formation
c. Alkali resistance
*d. Acid resistance
e. Spore formation

92. A patient was admitted to the hospital with an asphyxia attack provoked by a spasm of smooth muscles of the respiratory tracts. This attack was mainly caused by alterations in the following parts of the airways:
*a. Small bronchi
b. Large bronchi
c. Median bronchi
d. Terminal bronchioles
e. Respiratory part

93. A 62-year-old female patient complains about frequent pains in the region of thorax and vertebral column, rib fractures. A physician suspected myelomatosis (plasmocytoma). Which of the following laboratory indices will be of the greatest diagnostic importance?
a. Proteinuria
b. Hypoproteinemia
c. Hyperalbuminemia
d. Hypoglobulinemia
*e. Paraproteinemia

94. An electronic microphotograph shows a macrophagic cell with erythrocytes at different stages of differentiation located along its processes. This is the cell of the following organ:
a. Thymus
*b. Red bone marrow
c. Tonsil
d. Spleen
e. Lymph node

95. Autopsy of a 1,5-year-old child revealed haemorrhagic skin rash, moderate hyperaemia and edema of nasopharyngeal mucous membrane, small haemorrhages in the mucous membranes and internal organs; dramatic dystrophic alterations in liver and myocardium; acute necrotic nephrosis; massive haemorrhages in the adrenal glands. What disease are these alterations the most typical for?
a. Measles
*b. Meningococcal infection
c. Diphtheria
d. Epidemic typhus
e. Scarlet fever

96. Which muscle contraction will be observed in the upper extremity during holding (not moving) a load in a certain position?
a. Auxotonic
b. Concentric
c. Excentric
*d. Isometric
e. Isotonic

97. Autopsy of a man, who had been suffering from the multiple bronchiectasis for 5 years and died from chronic renal insufficiency, revealed that kidneys were dense and enlarged, with thickened cortical layer of white colour with greasy lustre. What renal disease might be suspected?
*a. Secondary amyloidosis
b. Chronic pyelonephritis
c. -
d. Glomerulonephritis
e. Necrotic nephrosis

98. In response to a change in body position from horizontal to vertical blood circulation system develops reflectory pressor reaction. Which of the following is its compulsory component?
a. Decrease in the circulating blood volume
b. Weakening of the pumbing ability of heart
c. Systemic dilatation of the arterial resistive vessels
d. Increase in the heart rate
*e. Systemic constriction of the venous vessels

99. Quite often the cause of secondary immunodeficiency is an infection involvement, when the causative agents propagate directly in the cells of immune system and destroy it. The following diseases are characterized by:
a. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis
*b. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS
c. Q-febris, epidemic typhus
d. Poliomyelitis, type A hepatitis
e. Dysentery, cholera

100. A 50-year-old patient complains about general weakness, appetite loss and cardiac arrhythmia. The patient presents with muscle hypotonia, flaccid paralyses, weakened peristaltic activity of the bowels. Such condition might be caused by:
a. Hyponatremia
b. Hypoproteinemia
c. Hypophosphatemia
*d. Hypokaliemia
e. Hyperkaliemia

101. Continuous use of a certain drug may cause osteoporosis, erosions of stomach mucosa, hypokaliemia, retention of sodium and water in the organism, decreased concentration of corticotropin in bloo d. What drug is it?
*a. Prednisolone
b. Hypothiazide
c. Reserpine
d. Indometacin
e. Digoxin

102. A married couple came to the genetic counseling. The husband suffers from the insulin-dependant diabetes, the wife is healthy. What is the probability that this couple will have an insulin-dependant child?
a. 100%
b. 50%
c. Lower than throughout the population
*d. Higher than throughout the population
e. The same as throughout the population

103. While on holiday in the countryside a boy found a spider with the following morphological peculiarities: body length of 2 cm, round black abdomen with two rows of red dots on its dorsal surface, four pairs of segmented extremities covered with tiny black hairs. Identify this arthropod:
a. Tarantula
b. Scorpion
c. Solifugae
*d. Karakurt spider
e. Mite

104. ECG study showed that the T-waves were positive in the standard extremity leads, their amplitude and duration were normal. The right conclusion would be that the following process runs normally in the heart ventricles:
a. Relaxation
b. Contraction
*c. Repolarization
d. Depolarization
e. Excitement

105. A patient with high rate of obesity was advised to use carnitine as a food additive in order to enhance "fat burning". What is the role of carnitine in the process of fat oxidation?
a. FFA activation
*b. Transport of FFA (free fatty acids) from cytosol to the mitochondria
c. It takes part in one of reactions of FFA beta-oxidation
d. Transport of FFA from fat depots to the tissues
e. Activation of intracellular lipolysis

106. A 46-year-old patient suffering from the diffuse toxic goiter underwent resection of the thyroid glan d. After the surgery the patient presents with appetite loss, dyspepsia, increased neuromuscular excitement. The body weight remained unchange d. Body temperature is normal. Which of the following has caused such a condition in this patient?
a. Reduced production of thyroxin
b. Increased production of thyroliberin
*c. Reduced production of parathormone
d. Increased production of calcitonin
e. Increased production of thyroxin

107. In clinical practice tuberculosis is treated with izoniazid preparation - that is an antivitamin able to penetrate into the tuberculosis bacillus. Tuberculostatic effect is induced by the interference with replication processes and oxidation-reduction reactions due to the buildup of pseudo-coenzyme:
*a. NAD
b. TDP
c. FAD
d. FMN
e. CoQ

108. A 70-year-old patient suffers from atherosclerosis complicated by the lower limb thrombosis that has caused gangrene on his left toes. What is the most likely cause of the thrombosis origin?
a. Impaired heparin synthesis
b. Transformation of fibrinogen into fibrin
c. Transformation of prothrombin into thrombin
*d. Thrombocyte adhesion
e. Prothrombinase activation

109. A patient complains about edemata of legs, skin cyanosis, small ulcers on one side of the lateral condyle. Examination revealed a swelling, enlarged veins, formation of nodes. The pathological process has started in the following vein:
a. V. iliaca externa
b. V. femoralis
*c. V. saphena parva
d. V. saphena magna
e. V. profunda femoris

110. A married couple consulted a specialist at the genetic consultation about probability of having children with hemophilia. Both spouses are healthy, but the wife’s father has hemophilia. In this family hemophilia may be passed to:
a. All the children
b. Both sons and daughters
c. Half of daughters
*d. Half of sons
e. Daughters only

111. A 38-year-old patient with an uterine haemorrhage lasting for 2 days was delivered to the admission ward. Which of the following will be revealed in the patient’s blood?
a. Increase in the colour index
b. Deceleration in ESR
c. Eosinophilia
d. Leukocytosis
*e. Decrease in the haematocrite index

112. An injured person was delivered to the hospital with a penetrating wound in the left lateral region of abdomen. What part of the large intestine is most likely damaged?
a. Rectum
b. Colon transverses
c. Caecum
*d. Colon descendens
e. Colon ascendens

113. Bacteriological examination of purulent discharges from the urethra revealed gram-negative bacteria looking like coffee beans. They were localized in the leukocytes and could decompose glucose and maltose to aci d. These are the causative agents of the following disease:
*a. Gonorrhoea
b. Veneral lymphogranulomatosis
c. Melioidosis
d. Soft chancre
e. Syphilis

114. The minute blood volume in a patient with transplanted heart has increased as a result of physical activity. What regulative mechanism is responsible for these changes?
a. Sympathetic conditioned reflexes
b. Parasympathetic conditioned reflexes
c. Parasympathetic unconditioned reflexes
d. Sympathetic unconditioned reflexes
*e. Catecholamines

115. An animal has an increased tonus of extensor muscles. This the result of intensified information transmission to the motoneurons of the spinal cord through the following descending pathways:
a. Rubrospinal
b. Lateral corticospinal
*c. Vestibulospinal
d. Reticulospinal
e. Medial corticospinal

116. After inoculation of the material obtained from the pharynx of an angina patient onto the blood-tellurite agar, grey colonies could be observe d. They were 4-5 mm in diameter, radially striated (in form of rosettes). Microscopical examination revealed gram-positive bacilli with clavate swollen ends arranged in form of wide-spread fingers. Identify these microorganisms:
a. Streptococci
b. Diphtheroids
*c. Diphtheria corynebacteria
d. Clostridium botulinum
e. Streptobacilli

117. A patient suffering from stomach ulcer has been treated with an antacid drug almagel. For acute bronchitis treatment he was prescribed the antibiotic methacyclin e. However within next 5 days the fever didn’t fall, cough and sputum nature remained unchange d. A physician came to the conclusion that the drugs were incompatibl e. What type of drug incompatibility is the case?
*a. Pharmacokinetic, absorption stage
b. Pharmacodynamic
c. Pharmaceutic
d. Direct antagonism
e. Pharmacokinetic, biotransformation stage

118. A newborn child was found to have reduced intensity of sucking, frequent vomiting, hypotoni a. Urine and blood exhibit increased concentration of citrullin e. What metabolic process is disturbed?
a. Tricarboxylic acid cycle
b. Cori cycle
c. Glycolysis
d. Glyconeogenesis
*e. Ornithinic cycle

119. A 48-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints about weakness, irritability, sleep disturbance. Objectively: skin and scleras are of yellow colour. In blood: increased concentration of total bilirubin with prevailing direct bilirubin. The feces are acholic. The urine is dark (contains bile pigments). What type of jaundice is it?
a. Crigler-Najjar syndrome
b. Parenchymatous
c. Haemolytic
d. Gilberts syndrome
*e. Mechanic

120. A female patient suffering from bronchial asthma had got a viral infection that provoked status asthmaticus with fatal outcom e. Histological examination of lungs revealed spasm and edema of bronchioles, apparent infiltration of their walls with lymphocytes, eosinophils and other leukocytes; labrocyte degranulation. What mechanism of hypersensitivity underlies the described alterations?
*a. Reagin reaction
b. Immune cytolysis
c. Inflammatory
d. Immune complex
e. Autoimmune

121. As a result of increased permeability of the erythrocyte membrane in a patient with microspherocytic anaemia (Minkowsky-Shauffard disease) cells receive sodium ions and water. Erythrocytes take form of spherocytes and can be easily broken down. What is the leading mechanism of erythrocyte damage in this case?
a. Nucleic
b. Acidotic
c. Calcium
d. Protein
*e. Electrolytic osmotic

122. A man died from an acute infectious disease accompanied by fever, jaundice, haemorrhagic rash on the skin and mucous membranes as well as by acute renal insufficiency. Histological examination of renal tissue (stained by Romanovsky-Giemsa method) revealed some convoluted bacteria looking like C und S letters. What bacteria were revealed?
a. Borrelia
b. Campilobacteria
c. Spirilla
d. Treponema
*e. Leptospira

123. Examination of a 2-year-old child revealed physical developmental lag, the child often has pneumonias. The child was diagnosed with nonclosure of ductus arteriosus. Haemodynamics disorder was caused by the intercommunication of the following vessels:
a. Superior cava and aorta
b. Aorta and pulmonary veins
*c. Aorta and pulmonary trunk
d. Pulmonary trunk and pulmonary veins
e. Superior cava and pulmonary trunk

124. During a prophylactic medical examination a 7-year-old boy was diagnosed with daltonism. His parents are healthy and have normal colour vision, but his grandfather on his mother’s side has the same abnormality. What is the type of the abnormality inheritance?
a. Autosomal recessive
*b. Recessive, sex-linked
c. Dominant, sex-linked
d. Semidominance
e. Autosomal dominant

125. Gynecological examination of the uterine cervix in a 30-year-old woman revealed some bright-red lustrous spots that easily bleed when touched. Biopsy showed that a part of the uterine cervix was covered with cylindrical epithelium with papillary outgrowths; in the depth of tissue the growth of glands was present. What pathology of the uterine cervix was revealed?
a. Glandular hyperplasia
*b. Pseudoerosion
c. Leukoplakia
d. Endocervicitis
e. True erosion

126. It is necessary to take the cerebrospinal fluid from a patient with suspected inflammation of brain tunics. Diagnostic puncture was performed between the arches of the lumbar vertebras. During the puncture the needle went through the following ligament:
a. Intertransverse
b. Iliolumbar
c. Anterior longitudinal
d. Posterior longitudinal
*e. Yellow (flaval)

127. Medical examination at the military registration and enlistment office revealed that a 15-year-old boy was high, with eunuchoid body proportions, gynecomastia, female pattern of pubic hair distribution. The boy had also fat deposits on the thighs, no facial hair, high voice, subnormal intelligence quotient. Which karyotype corresponds with this disease?
a. 46, XX
b. 47, XXX
c. 46, XY
*d. 47, XXY
e. 45, XO

128. A stillborn child was found to have thickened skin resembling of the tortoise shell, underdeveloped auricles. Histological examination of skin revealed hyperkeratosis, atrophy of the granular epidermis layer; inflammatory changes were not present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatomyositis
b. Leukoplakia
c. Xerodermia
*d. Ichthyosis
e. Erythroplakia

129. A patient presents with icteritiousness of skin, scleras and mucous membranes. Blood plasma the total bilirubin is increased, stercobilin is increased in feces, urobilin is increased in urin e. What type of jaundice is it?
a. Cholestatic
b. Obturational
c. Gilberts disease
d. Parenchymatous
*e. Haemolytic

130. A patient suffers from the haemorrhagic syndrome that shows itself in frequent nasal bleedings, posttraumatic and spontaneous intracutaneous and intra-articular haemorrhages. After a laboratory study a patient was diagnosed with the type B haemophilia. This disease is provoked by the deficit of the following factor of blood coagulation:
a. XI
b. V
c. VII
d. VIII
*e. IX

131. A 10-year-old child had the mantoux tuberculin test administere d. 48 hours later a papule up to 8 mm in diameter appeared on the site of the injection. What type of hypersensitivity reaction developed after the tuberculin injection?
a. Atopic reaction
b. Arthus phenomenon
c. Type II hypersensitivity reaction
*d. Type IV hypersensitivity reaction
e. Seroreaction

132. A 49-year-old patient consulted a doctor about increased fatigability and dyspnea provoked by physical activity. ECG results: heart rate - 50/min, PQ-interval is prolonged, QRS- complex is unchanged, the number of P-waves exceeds the number of QRS-complexes. What type of arrhythmia is it?
a. Sinoatrial block
b. Extrasystole
c. Sinus bradycardia
*d. Atrioventricular block
e. Ciliary arrhythmia

133. Examination of a patient with frequent haemorrhages from the internal organs and mucous membranes revealed proline and lysine within the collagen fibers. Disorder of their hydroxylation is caused by lack of the following vitamin:
a. Vitamin A
*b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin B1
d. Vitamin E
e. Vitamin K

134. A 38-year-old patient came to a traumatology centre and complained about an injury of his right han d. Objectively: the patient has a cut wound in the region of the thenar eminence on the right hand; distal phalanx of the I finger cannot be flexe d. What muscle was injured?
a. Opposer muscle of thumb
*b. Long flexor muscle of thumb
c. Short abductor muscle of thumb
d. Short flexor muscle of thumb
e. Abductor muscle of thumb

135. A patient has a transversal laceration in the spinal cord. What respiratory changes will result from this?
a. Respiration will become deeper
b. Respiration will become more frequent
*c. Respiration will present no significant changes
d. Respiration will stop
e. Respiration will become less frequent

136. A patient suffering from myasthenia has been administered proserin. After its administration the patient has got nausea, diarrhea, twitch of tongue and skeletal muscles. What drug would help to eliminate the intoxication?
a. Mesatonum
b. Physostigmine
c. Pyridostigmine bromide
d. Isadrine
*e. Atropine sulfate

137. A 28-year-old female patient consulted a gynecologist about sterility. Examination revealed underdeveloped ovaries and uterus, irregular menstrual cycl e. Analysis of the sex chromatin revealed 2 Barr’s bodies in most somatic cells. What chromosome disease is most likely?
a. Pataus syndrome
b. Turners syndrome
c. Klinefelters syndrome
*d. Triple X syndrome
e. Edwards syndrome

138. Autopsy of a 50-year-old man revealed the following changes: his right lung was moderately compact in all parts, the dissected tissue was found to be airless, fine-grained, dryish. Visceral pleura had greyish-brown layers of fibrin. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pneumofibrosis
b. Bronchopneumonia
c. Interstitial pneumonia
*d. Croupous pneumonia
e. Tuberculosis

139. After transfusion of 200 ml of blood a patient presented with body temperature rise up to 37,9°C. Which of the following substances is the most likely cause of temperature rise?
a. Interleukin-2
b. Interleukin-3
*c. Interleukin-1
d. Interleukin-4
e. Tumour necrosis factor

140. Examination of a patient suffering from chronic hepatitis revealed a significant decrease in the synthesis and secretion of bile acids. What process will be mainly disturbed in the patient’s bowels?
a. Amino acid absorption
b. Glycerin absorption
c. Protein digestion
*d. Fat emulsification
e. Carbohydrate digestion

141. During an experiment the dorsal roots of the spinal cord of an animal have been cut. What changes will be observed in the innervation zone?
a. Decrease in muscle tone
b. Increase in muscle tone
c. Loss of motor functions
*d. Sensitivity loss
e. Sensitivity loss and loss of motor functions

142. A histological specimen shows a blood vessel. Its inner coat is composed by endothelium, subendothelium and internal elastic membran e. The middle coat is enriched with smooth myocytes. Such morphological characteristics are typical for the following vessel:
a. Non-muscular vein
*b. Muscular-type artery
c. Capillary
d. Elastic-type artery
e. Muscular-type vein

143. As a result of a trauma a patient has developed traumatic shock that led to the following disorders: AP is 140/90 mm Hg, Ps is 120 bpm. The patient is fussy, talkative, pal e. Such state relates to the following shock phase:
a. Latent period
b. Torpid
c. -
d. Terminal
*e. Erectile

144. Autopsy of a 73-year-old man who had been suffering from the coronary heart disease along with cardiac insufficiency for a long time revealed: nutmeg liver, brown induration of lungs, cyanotic induration of kidneys and spleen. What kind of circulation disorder was the cause of such effects?
a. Chronic anaemia
b. Acute anaemia
c. General acute venous congestion
*d. General chronic venous congestion
e. Arterial hyperaemia

145. As a result of durative antibiotic therapy a 37-year old patient developed intestinal dysbacteriosis. What type of drugs should be used in order to normalize intestinal microflora?
a. Bacteriophages
b. Autovaccines
c. Sulfanilamides
d. Vitamins
*e. Eubiotics

146. A 49-year-old driver complains about unbearable constricting pain behind the breastbone irradiating to the neck. The pain arose 2 hours ago. Objectively: the patient’s condition is grave, he is pale, heart tones are decrease d. Laboratory studies revealed high activity of creatine kinase and LDH1. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Acute pancreatitis
c. Stenocardia
d. Cholelithiasis
e. B. Diabetes mellitus

147. The temperature of the ambient environment is 38°C and relative air humidity is 50%. What ways of heat emission provide maintaining a constant temperature of the human body?
a. Convection and conduction
b. Heat conduction
c. Radiation
*d. Evaporation
e. Convection

148. A patient consulted an urologist about pain during urination. Analysis of his urine taken in the daytime revealed eggs with a characteristic sharp point. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient has recently returned from Australi a. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Opisthorchiasis
b. Intestinal schistosomiasis
c. Japanese schistosomiasis
d. Dicroceliasis
*e. Urogenital schistosomiasis

149. In spite of treatment with cardiotonics and thiazide diuretic a patient suffering from chronic cardiac failure still presents with edemata and faces a risk of ascites. What medication should be administered in order to increase the diuretic effect of the above mentioned drugs?
a. Clopamide
b. Manithol
c. Furosemide
d. Amiloride
*e. Spironolactone

150. A female patient consulted a physician about digestive disorder, extended abdominal pain. Examination revealed drastic decrease in hemoglobin concentration. It is known from the anamnesis that while living in the Far East the patient used to eat freshly-salted caviar. Some relatives living with her had the similar condition. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ascaridiasis
b. Echinococcosis
c. Teniasis
*d. Diphyllobothriasis
e. Trichiniasis

151. A 45-year-old patient suffers from neurosis characterized by irritability, sleeplessness, motiveless anxiety. What drug would eliminate all the symptoms?
a. Valerian extract
b. Pyracetam
c. Levodopa
*d. Diazepam
e. Caffeine sodium benzoate

152. A 53-year-old female patient was diagnosed with liver rupture resulting from a blunt abdominal injury. The escaped blood will be assembled in the following anatomic formation:
a. Vesicouterine pouch
b. Left mesenteric sinus
*c. Rectouterine pouch
d. Omental bursa
e. Right mesenteric sinus

153. Vitamin B1 deficiency causes disturbance of oxidative decarboxylation of ?-ketoglutaric aci d. This leads to the impaired synthesis of the following coenzyme:
a. Flavine adenine dinucleotide
*b. Thiamine pyrophosphate
c. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
d. Lipoic acid
e. Coenzyme A

154. A patient suffering from chronic hyperacidic gastritis takes an antacid drug for heartburn elimination. After its ingestion the patient feels better but at the same time he has a sensation of stomach swelling. Which of the following drugs might be the cause of such side effect?
a. Magnesium trisilicate
b. Aluminium hydrooxide
*c. Sodium hydrocarbonate
d. Magnesium oxide
e. Pepsin

155. A patient suffering from coronary artery disease had taken a certain drug many times a day in order to arrest stenocardia attacks. Overdose of this drug finally caused intoxication. Objectively: cyanotic skin and mucous membranes, dramatic fall in the arterial pressure, tachycardia, respiration inhibition. Blood has increased concentration of methemoglobin. The drug the patient had taken relates to the following group:
a. alpha-adrenoceptor blockers
b. Calcium channel blockers
c. Myotropic spamolytics
d. Adenosine drugs
*e. Organic nitrates

156. A baby refuses the breast, he is anxious, presents with arrhythmic respiration. The urine smells of "brewers yeast" or "maple syrup". This pathology was caused by the inherited defect of the following enzyme:
a. Glycerol kinase
*b. Dehydrogenase of branched-chain alpha-keto acids
c. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
d. UDP-glucuronil transferase
e. Aspartate aminotransferase

157. A student came to see a doctor and asked to administer him a drug for treatment of allergic rhinitis that occurs in the period of linden flowering. What drug may be used?
*a. Loratadine
b. Propanolol
c. Losartan
d. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
e. Ambroxol

158. A worker of a cattle farm fell acutely ill and then died from the progressing intoxication. Autopsy revealed enlarged, hyposthenic spleen of dark-cherry colour when dissected; excessive pulp scraping. At the base and fornix of brain pia maters are edematous, soaked with blood, dark-red ("scarlet hat"). Microscopic examination revealed serous haemorrhagic inflammation of brain tissues and tunics along with destruction of small vessel walls. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Plaque
b. Cholera
c. Brucellosis
d. Tularemia
*e. Anthrax

159. ECG of a 44-year-old patient shows signs of hypertrophy of both ventricles and the right atrium. The patient was diagnosed with the tricuspid valve insufficiency. What pathogenetic variant of cardiac dysfunction is usually observed in case of such insufficiency?
a. Cardiac tamponade
b. Coronary insufficiency
*c. Heart overload by volume
d. Primary myocardial insufficiency
e. Heart overload by resistance

160. Examination of a patient revealed autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (cytotoxic type). What substances act as antigens in the II-type allergic reactions?
*a. Modified receptors of cell membranes
b. Serum proteins
c. Antibiotics
d. Hormones
e. Inflammation modulators

161. The greater amount of nitrogen is excreted from the organism in form of ure a. Inhibition of urea synthesis and accumulation of ammonia in blood and tissues are induced by the decreased activity of the following liver enzyme:
*a. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
b. Aspartate aminotransferase
c. Amylase
d. Pepsin
e. Urease

162. A 65-year-old man has purulent abscess on his neck. Analyses revealed a culture of gram-positive cocci with plasmocoagulase activity. This culture relates most likely to:
*a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Streptococcus pyogenes
c. -
d. Staphylococcus epidermidis
e. Staphylococcus saprophyticus

163. Autopsy of a man with a malignant stomach tumour who had died from cancer intoxication revealed in the posteroinferior lung fields some dense, grayish-red irregular foci protruding above the section surface. Microscopic examination revealed exudate containing a large amount of neutrophils in the lumen and walls of small bronchi and alveoles. Such pulmonary alterations indicate the following disease:
a. Intermittent pneumonia
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Croupous pneumonia
d. Acute serous bronchopneumonia
*e. Acute purulent bronchopneumonia

164. A histological specimen of a kidney shows a part of the distal tubule going between the afferent and efferent arteriol e. The cells building the tubule wall have dense nuclei; basal membrane is absent. Such structural formation is called:
a. -
*b. Macula densa
c. Juxtavascular cells
d. Mesangial cells
e. Juxtaglomerular cells

165. A patient with a hypertensive crisis was admitted to the cardiological department. He was given an intravenous injection of an antihypertensive drug - alkali-earth metal salt. What drug was injected?
a. Potassium chloride
b. Calcium lactate
c. Benzohexonium
d. Sodium hydrocarbonate
*e. Magnesium sulfate

166. To prevent the transplant rejection after organ transplantation it is required to administer hormonotherapy for the purpose of immunosuppression. What hormones are used for this purpose?
a. Thyroid
b. Sexual hormones
c. Catecholamines
*d. Glucocorticoids
e. Mineralocorticoids

167. Autopsy of a man who died from influenza revealed that the heart was slightly enlarged and pastose. The surface of the incision of myocardium appeared to be pale, with specks. Microscopic examination revealed signs of parenchymatous adipose and hydropic degeneration, edematic stroma with scant lymphocytic and macrophage infiltration; plethoric vessels; perivascular petechial haemorrhages. What type of myocarditis is it?
*a. Serous diffuse
b. Serous focal
c. Interstitial proliferative
d. Granulomatous
e. Purulent

168. While examining the oral cavity a stomatologist revealed inflammation of papillae on the border of the median and posterior third of the back of tongu e. What papillae are inflamed?
a. Papillae fungiformes
b. Papillae foliatae
*c. Papillae vallatae
d. Papillae conicae
e. Papillae filiformes

169. Lung ventilation in a person is increased as a result of physical activity. Which of the following indices of the external respiration is much higher than in a state of rest?
a. Inspiratory reserve volume
b. Expiratory reserve volume
c. Vital capacity of lungs
*d. Respiratory volume
e. Total lung capacity

170. During an experiment vagus branches that innervate heart are being stimulated. This has stopped conduction of excitement from the atria to the ventricles. The reason for it are electrophysical changes in the following structures:
a. His bundle
*b. Atrioventricular node
c. Sinoatrial node
d. Ventricles
e. Atria

171. An oncological patient was administered methotrexat e. With the lapse of time the target cells of the tumour lost sensitivity to this preparation. We can observe changes in the gene expression of the following enzyme:
a. Folate oxidase
b. Desaminase
c. Folate decarboxylase
*d. Dihydrofolate reductase
e. Thiminase

172. During examination of an 11-month-old infant a pediatrician revealed osteoectasia of the lower extremities and delayed mineralization of cranial bones. Such pathology is usually provoked by the deficit of the following vitamin:
a. Riboflavin
*b. Cholecalciferol
c. Bioflavonoids
d. Pantothenic acid
e. Thiamin

173. A middle-aged man went to a foreign country because he had been offered a job ther e. However he had been unemployed for quite a long tim e. What endocrine glands were exhausted most of all in this man?
a. Seminal glands
b. Thyroid gland
c. Substernal gland
d. Parathyroid glands
*e. Adrenal glands

174. After a sprint an untrained person develops muscle hypoxi a. This leads to the accumulation of the following metabolite in muscles:
*a. Lactate
b. Oxaloacetate
c. Acetyl CoA
d. Glucose 6-phosphate
e. Ketone bodies

175. Autopsy of a 49-year-old woman who died from chronic renal insufficiency, revealed: kidneys were dense, reduced, multicoloured, with haemorrhagic areas. Microscopic examination revealed some hematoxylin bodies in the nuclei of the renal tubule epithelium; "wire-loop" thickening of the glomerular capillary basement membrane; here and there in the capillaries some hyaline thrombi and foci of fibrinoid necrosis were present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Arteriosclerotic pneumosclerosis
c. Rheumatism
d. Atherosclerotic nephrosclerosis
e. Amyloidosis

176. Cooling of the human body in water is much more faster than in the air. What way of heat emission in water is much more effective?
*a. Heat conduction
b. -
c. Convection
d. Sweat evaporation
e. Heat radiation

177. Microscopical examination of an enlarged cervical lymph node revealed blurring of its structure, absence of lymphoid follicles; all the microscopic fields showed cells with roundish nuclei and thin limbus of basophil cytoplasm. It is known from the clinical data that other groups of lymph nodes are also enlarged as well as spleen and liver. What disease might be suspected?
a. Multiple myeloma
*b. Lymphoid leukosis
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Myeloid leukosis
e. Lymphosarcoma

178. As a result of continuous starvation the glomerular filtration rate has increased by 20%. The most probable cause of the glomerular filtration alteration under the mentioned conditions is:
a. Increase of the renal blood flow
b. Increase in the permeability of the renal filter
c. Increase in the systemic arterial pressure
*d. Decrease in the oncotic pressure of blood plasma
e. Increase of the filtartion quotient

179. In a 2-year-old child with catarrhal presentations and skin rash a pediatrician suspected scarlet fever. The child was given intracutaneously a small dose of serum antibody to the streptococcal erythrogenic toxin; on the site of injection the rash disappeare d. What do the reaction results mean?
a. The whole serum dose may be injected intravenously
*b. The clinical diagnosis was confirmed
c. The disease wasnt caused by haemolytic streptococcus
d. The child has very weak immune system
e. The child has hypersensitivity to the erythrogenic toxin

180. While eating a child choked on food and aspirated it. The child has severe cough, cyanotic skin and mucous membranes, rapid pulse, infrequent respiration, prolonged expiration. The child has developed the following disorder of the external respiration:
a. Alternating respiration
b. Stenotic respiration
c. Biots respiration
*d. Expiratory dyspnea under asphyxia
e. Inspiratory dyspnea under asphyxia

181. On the ground of clinical presentations a patient was prescribed pyridoxal phosphat e. This medication is recommended for correction of the following processes:
a. Synthesis of purine and pyrimidin bases
b. Protein synthesis
*c. Transamination and decarboxylation of amino acids
d. Oxidative decarboxylation of ketonic acids
e. Desamination of purine nucleotides

182. After a hypertonic crisis a patient presents with lacking spontaneous movements in his right arm and leg, muscle tone of these extremities is increase d. What type of motor dysfunction has developed in this case?
a. Central paresis
b. Peripheral paresis
c. Reflectrory paresis
d. Peripheral paralysis
*e. Central paralysis

183. You are studying functioning of a bacteria operon. The operator gene has been released from the repressor gene. Immediately after this the following process will start in the cell:
a. Processing
b. Translation
c. Repression
d. Replication
*e. Transcription

184. Colonoscopy of a patient with dysentery revealed that the mucous membrane of the large intestine was hyperemic, edematic, and its surface was covered with grey-and-green layerings. What morphological form of dysenteric colitis is it?
a. Necrotic
*b. Fibrinous
c. Catarrhal
d. Ulcerous
e. Purulent

185. Pyeloureterography X-ray photo showed a renal pelvis with minor calyces only (major calyces were absent). What form of urinary tracts of a kidney was revealed?
a. Mature
b. -
c. Fetal
*d. Embryonal
e. Ampullar

186. A man presents with increased heart rate, mydriatic pupils, dry mouth. This condition results from the activation of the following system of function regulation:
a. Metasympathetic
b. Parasympathetic
c. Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal
*d. Sympathetic
e. Vago-insular

187. Proserin increases skeletal muscle tone when given systematically. Halothane induces relaxation of skeletal muscles and reduces proserin effects. What is the nature of proserin and halothane interaction?
a. Independent antagonism
b. Competitive antagonism
c. Noncompetitive antagonism
*d. Indirect functional antagonism
e. Direct functional antagonism

188. A 30-year-old patient complains about having abdominal pain and diarrhea for five days; body temperature rise up to 37,5°C along with chills. The day before a patient had been in a forest and drunk from an open water reservoir. Laboratory analyses enabled to make the following diagnosis: amebic dysentery. What is the drug of choice for its treatment?
a. Levomycetin
b. Furazolidonum
*c. Metronidazole
d. Phthalazol
e. Emetine hydrochloride

189. A patient with android-type obesity had been suffering from arterial hypertension, hyperglycemia, glycosuria for a long time and died from the cerebral haemorrhag e. Pathologic examination revealed pituitary basophil adenoma, adrenal cortex hyperplasi a. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pituitary nanism
*b. Itsenko-Cushings syndrome
c. Adiposogenital dystrophy
d. Acromegalia
e. Diabetes mellitus

190. A pathology-histology laboratory received a vermiform appendix up to 2,0 cm thick. Its serous membrane was pale, thick and covered with yellowish-green films. The wall was flaccid, of grayish-red colour. The appendix lumen was dilated and filled with yellowish-green substanc e. Histological examination revealed that the appendix wall was infiltrated with neutrophils. Specify the appendix disease:
*a. Acute phlegmonous appendicitis
b. Acute superficial appendicitis
c. Acute gangrenous appendicitis
d. Acute simple appendicitis
e. Chronic appendicitis

191. Examination of a 27-year-old patient revealed pathological changes in liver and brain. Blood plasma analysis revealed an abrupt decrease in the copper concentration, urine analysis revealed an increased copper concentration. The patient was diagnosed with Wilson’s degeneration. To confirm the diagnosis it is necessary to study the activity of the following enzyme in blood serum:
a. Xanthine oxidase
b. Leucine aminopeptidase
*c. Ceruloplasmin
d. Carbonic anhydrase
e. Alcohol dehydrogenase

192. A woman delivered a dead child with multiple developmental defects. What protozoan disease might have caused the intrauterine death?
a. Lambliasis
b. Malaria
c. Leishmaniasis
d. Amebiasis
*e. Toxoplasmosis

193. A patient with severe course of respiratory viral infection presented with clinical signs of progressing heart failure that led to his death in the 2nd week of disease. Autopsy revealed that the heart cavities were significantly dilated, the heart was flabby. Histological examination of the myocardium revealed microvascular plethora and diffuse stroma infiltration with lymphocytes and histiocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Stenocardia
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Acute coronary insufficiency
d. Cardiomyopathy
*e. Myocarditis

194. A patient has osmotic pressure of blood plasma at the rate of 350 mOsmol/l (norm is 300 mOsmol/l). This will cause hypersecretion of the following hormone:
*a. Vasopressin
b. Adrenocorticotropin
c. Cortisol
d. Natriuretic
e. Aldosterone

195. Cytoplasm of the myocytes contains a lot of dissolved metabolites resulting from glucose oxidation. Name the metabolite that turns directly into lactate:
a. Oxaloacetate
b. Fructose-6-phosphate
c. Glycerophosphate
d. Glucose-6-phosphate
*e. Pyruvate

196. Treatment course of bacterial pneumonia included benzylpenicillin sodium salt. What is the mechanism of its antimicrobial action?
a. Inhibition of the intracellular protein synthesis
*b. Inhibition of cell wall synthesis of the microorganism
c. Antagonism with the paraaminobenzoic acid
d. Inhibition of the cholinesterase activity
e. Inhibition of the SH enzyme groups of the microorganisms

197. In the perianal folds of a 5-year-old girl her mother has found some white "worms" that caused itch and anxiety in the chil d. The "worms" were sent to the laboratory. During examination the physician saw white filiform helminths 0,5-1 cm long, with pointed ends, some helminths had twisted ends. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ascaridiasis
*b. Enterobiasis
c. Teniasis
d. Opisthorchiasis
e. Diphyllobothriasis

198. A newborn develops dyspepsia after the milk feeding. When the milk is substituted by the glucose solution the dyspepsia symptoms disappear. The newborn has the subnormal activity of the following enzyme:
a. Maltase
b. Isomaltase
*c. Lactase
d. Amylase
e. Invertase

199. Retrospective diagnostics of bacterial dysentery involved serological analysis of blood serum intended for determination of Shigella antibody titr e. Which of the following reactions should be applied for this purpose?
a. Bacteriolysis
b. Haemolysis
*c. Passive haemagglutination
d. Complement binding
e. Precipitation

200. A young man complains about urination disorder. Examination of the external genitals revealed that the urethra was split and urine could flow out of this orifice. What anomaly of the external genitals development is it?
*a. Epispadia
b. Paraphimosis
c. Hermaphroditism
d. Phimosis
e. Hypospadia

