1. Two hours after an exam a student had a blood count done and it was revealed that he had leukocytosis without significant leukogram modifications. What is the most probable mechanism of leukocytosis development?
a. Deceleration of leukocyte lysis
b. Leukopoiesis intensification
*c. Redistribution of leukocytes in the organism
d. Deceleration of leukocyte migration to the tissues
e. Leukopoiesis intensification and deceleration of leukocyte lysis

2. A patient was stung by a bee. Examination revealed that his left hand was hot, pink, edematic, there was a big red blister on the site of sting. What is the leading mechanism of edema development?
a. Injury of vessels caused by the sting
b. Drop of oncotic pressure in tissue
c. Drop of osmotic pressure in tissue
*d. Increased vessel permeability
e. Reduced vessel filling

3. A patient caught a cold after which there appeared facial expression disorder. He cannot close his eyes, raise his eyebrows, bare his teeth. What nerve is damaged?
a. Glossopharyngeal
b. Vagus
*c. Facial
d. Infraorbital
e. Trigeminus

4. A newborn child has convulsions that have been observed after prescription of vitamin B6. This most probable cause of this effect is that vitamin B6 is a componet of the following enzyme:
a. Glycogen phosphorylase
b. Netoglubarate dehydromine
*c. Glutamate decarboxylase
d. Pyruvate dehydrostase
e. Aminolevulinate synthase

5. Bacterioscopic examination of a smear from the pharynx of a diphtheria suspect revealed bacilli with volutine granules. What etiotropic drug should be chosen in this case?
a. Eubiotic
b. Diphtheritic anatoxin
c. Bacteriophage
d. Interferon
*e. Antidiphtheritic antitoxic serum

6. A patient has a decreased vasopressin synthesis that causes polyuria and as a result of it evident organism dehydratation. What is the mechanism of polyuria development?
a. Reduced tubular reabsorption of Na ions
b. Acceleration of glomerular filtration
c. Reduced tubular reabsorption of protein
*d. Reduced tubular reabsorption of water
e. Reduced glucose reabsorption

7. A 62 year old patient who previously worked as stoker was admitted to a hospital with complaints about general weakness, abrupt weight loss, hoarse voice, dyspnea, dry cough. Laryngoscopy revealed a tumour in the pharynx that invaded vocal cords and epiglottis. What is the most probable cause of tumour development?
a. Retroviruses
*b. Polycyclic aromatic carbohydrates
c. Nitrosamines
d. Ionizing radiation
e. Aromatic amines and amides

8. Patients who suffer from severe diabetes and dont receive insulin have metabolic acidosis. This is caused by increased concentration of the following metabolites:
a. Fatty acids
*b. Ketone bodies
c. Cholesterol
d. Unsaturated fatty acids
e. Triacylglycerols

9. A 62 year woman complains of frequent pain attacks in the area of her chest and backbone, rib fractures. Her doctor suspected myeloma (plasmocytoma). What of the following laboratory characteristics will be of the greatest diagnostic importance?
a. Hypoglobulinemia
b. Hyperalbuminemia
*c. Paraproteinemia
d. Hypoproteinemia
e. Proteinuria

10. A 2 year old child had acute respiratory viral infection and died from cardiopulmonary decompensation. Autopsy revealed that his right lung was hyperemic; in the 2nd, 6th and 10th segments and on the incision there were airless yellowish foci of irregular form, from several mm up to 1 cm larg E. Microscopical examination revealed exudate consisting mainly of neutrophils in the given areas of pulmonary tissue in the alveoles, bronchioles and bronchial tubes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Focal pneumonia
b. Interstitial pneumonia
c. Acute bronchitis
d. Croupous pneumonia
e. Pulmonary abscess

11. Autopsy of a 17 year old girl who died from pulmonary failure revealed a small area of caseous necrosis in the inferior lobe of the right lung, and occurences of caseous necrosis in the bronchopulmonary, bronchial and bifurcational lymph nodes. What is the most probable postmortem diagnosis?
a. Hematogenous tuberculosis with predominant lung affection
b. Tuberculoma
*c. Primary tuberculosis
d. Hematogenous progression of primary tuberculosis
e. Caseous pneumonia under secondary tuberculosis

12. People adapted to high external temperatures have such pecularity: profuse sweating isnt accompanied by loss of large volumes of sodium chlorid E. This is caused by the effect of the following hormone upon the perspiratory glands:
a. Natriuretic
b. Tgyroxin
c. Vasopressin
*d. Aldosterone
e. Cortisol

13. An experimantal animal that was kept on protein-free diet developed fatty liver infiltration, in particular as a result of deficiency of methylating agents. This is caused by disturbed generation of the following metabolite:
a. DOPA
b. Cholesterol
c. Acetoacetate
*d. Choline
e. Linoleic acid

14. A man weighs 80 kg, after long physical activity his circulating blood volume is reduced down to 5,4 l, hematocrit makes up 50%, whole blood protein is 80 g/l. These blood characteristics are determined first of all by:
a. Increased diuresis
b. Increased circulating blood volume
c. Increased protein concentration in plasm
*d. Water loss with sweat
e. Increased number of erythrocytes

15. Examination of a patient with impaired blood coagulation revealed thrombosis of a branch of inferior mesenteric artery. What bowel segment is damaged?
a. Ileum
b. Colon ascendens
*c. Colon sigmoideum
d. Caecum
e. Colon transversum

16. A 42 year old woman with neuralgia of trifacial nerve complains about periodical reddening of the right part of her face and neck, sense of warmth gush, increased skin sensitivity. These effects can be explained by the following type of arterial hyperemia:
a. Neuroparalytic
*b. Neurotonic
c. Functional
d. Metabolic
e. Reactive

17. A 7 year old child often suffers from streprococcic angin A. Doctor suspected development of rheumatism and administered serological examination. The provisional diagnosis will be most probably confirmed by presence of antibodies to the following streptococcic antigen:
a. M-protein
b. C-carbohydrate
c. Erythrogenic toxin
*d. O-streptolysin
e. Capsular polysaccharide

18. Clinical diagnosis of a female patient was gonorrhoe A. What examination method can be applied for confirmation of this diagnosis?
a. Infection of laboratory animals
*b. Microscopy of pathological material
c. Immobilization reaction
d. Hemagglutination reaction
e. Test with bacteriophage

19. A patient staggers and walks astraddl E. He has hypomyotonia of arm and leg muscles, staccato speech. In what brain section is this affection localized?
*a. Cerebellum
b. Caudate nucleus
c. Putamen
d. Motor cortex
e. Red nucleus

20. A bacteriological laboratory received sputum sample of a patient suffering from tuberculosis. Bacterioscopic examination of smears and detection of tuberculosis bacillus can be realized by one of enrichment methods that involves processing of sputum only with solution of caustic sod A. What is this method called?
a. Filtration
b. Inactivation
*c. Homogenization
d. Neutralization
e. Flotation

21. Examination of an ovary specimen stained by hematoxylin-eosine revealed a follicle in which follicular epithelium consisted of 1-2 layers of cubic cells. There was also a bright red membrane around the ovocyte . What follicle is it?
a. Primordial
b. Mature
c. Secondary
*d. Primary
e. Atretic

22. Laboratory examination of a child revealed increased concentration of leucine, valine, isoleucine and their ketoderivatives in blood and urin E. Urine smelt of maple syrup. This disease is characterized by the deficit of the following enzyme:
*a. Dehydrogenase of branched amino acids
b. Aminotransferase
c. Phosphofructokinase
d. Glucose-6-phosphatase
e. Phosphofructomutase

23. Autopsy of a man who died from burn disease revealed brain edema, liver enlargement as well as enlargement of kidneys with wide light-grey cortical layer and plethoric medullary are A. Microscopic examination revealed necrosis of tubules of main segments along with destruction of basal membranes, intersticium edema with leukocytic infiltration and haemorrhages. What is the most probable postmortem diagnosis?
a. Pyelonephritis
*b. Necrotic nephrosis
c. Myeloma kidney
d. Gouty kidney
e. Tubulointerstitial nephritis

24. A couple had a child with Downs diseas E. Mother is 42 years ol D. This disease is most probably caused by the following impairment of prenatal development:
a. Specific fetopathy
b. Blastopathy
c. Embryopathy
*d. Gametopathy
e. Non-specific fetopathy

25. A patient suffering from pheochromocytoma complains of thirst, dry mouth, hunger. Blood test for sugar revealed hyperglycemi A. What type of hyperglycemia is it?
a. Hypercorticoid
b. Alimentary
*c. Adrenal
d. Somatotropic
e. Hypoinsulinemic

26. Examination of a newborn boys genitalia revealed an urethral hiatus that opens on the undersite of his penis. What malformation is it?
a. Cryptorhidism
b. Epispadia
*c. Hypospadias
d. Hermaphroditism
e. Monorchism

27. Blood of a 12 year old boy presents low concentration of uric acid and accumulation of xanthine and hypoxanthin E. This child has genetic defect of the following enzyme:ok
a. Urease
b. Ornithine carbamoyltransferase
*c. Xanthine oxidase
d. Arginase
e. Glycerylkinase

28. Cytogenetic examination of a patient with reproductive dysfunction revealed normal karyotype 46 ХY in some cells, but most cells have karyotype of Klinefelters syndrome - 47 ХХY. Such cell heterogenity is called:
a. Transposition
*b. Mosaicism
c. Inversion
d. Duplication
e. Monomorphism

29. A patient got an injury of spinal marrow in a road accident that caused loss of tactile sensation, posture sense, vibration sens E. What conduction tracts are damaged?
a. Tectospinal tract
b. Rubrospinal tract
c. Reticulospinal tract
d. Anterior spinocerebellar tract
*e. Fascicle of Goll and cuneate fascicle

30. A 15 year old girl has pale skin, glossitis, gingivitis. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,31012/l, hemoglobin - 70 g/l, colour index - 0,5. Examination of blood smear revealed hypochromia, microcytosis, poikilocytosis. What type of anemia is it?
a. Thalassemia
b. Hemolytic
*c. Iron-deficient
d. Sickle-cell
e. B12-folic acid-deficient

31. Blood group of a 30 year old man was specified before an operation. His blood is Rh-positiv E. Reaction of erythrocyte agglutination was absent with standard sera of 0α β (I), Аβ (II), Вβ (III) groups. The blood under examination is of the following group:
a. Вα (III)
b. -
*c. 0αβ (I)
d. АВ (IV)
e. Аβ (II)

32. A female patient underwent liver transplantation. 1,5 month after it her condition became worse because of reaction of transplant rejection. What factor of immune system plays the leading part in this reaction?
a. B-lymphocytes
b. Interleukin-1
c. Natural killers
*d. T-killers
e. T-helpers

33. A patient was admitted to the surgical department with inguinal herni A. During the operation the surgeon performs plastic surgery on posterior wall of inguinal canal. What structure forms this wall?
*a. Transverse fascia
b. Aponeurosis of abdominal external oblique muscle
c. Peritoneum
d. Loose inferior edge of transverse abdominal muscle
e. Inguinal ligament

34. A patient suffers from pulmonary tuberculosis. During treatment neuritis of visual nerve aros E. What drug has caused this by-effect?
*a. Isoniazid
b. Rifampicin
c. Kanamycin
d. Streptomycin
e. Ethambutol

35. A patient with chronic cardiac insufficiency has been taking foxglove (Digitalis) preparations for a long tim E. Due to the violation of intake schedule the woman got symptoms of intoxication. These symptoms result from:
a. Idiosyncrasy
*b. Material cumulation
c. Tachyphylaxis
d. Antagonism
e. Sensibilization

36. A patient had been suffering from profuse diarrhea and vomiting for 2 days. He died from acute dehydration. Autopsy revealed that the intestinal wall was edematic and hyperemic, with multiple haemorrhages in the mucous membran E. Intestine lumen contains whitish fluid resembling of rice water. What disease caused death?
a. Enterocolitis
b. Salmonellosis
c. Typhoid fever
*d. Cholera
e. Dysentery

37. A 30 year old man had been suffering from acute respiratory disease and died from cardiopulmonary decompensation. Autopsy revealed fibrinous-haemorrhagic inflammation in the mucous membrane of larynx and trachea, destructive panbronchitis, enlarged lungs that look black due to the multiple abcesses, haemorrhages, necrosis. What is the most probable postmortem diagnosis?
*a. Influenza
b. Respiratory syncytial infection
c. Measles
d. Adenoviral infection
e. Parainfluenza

38. A patient was diagnosed with bartholinitis (inflammation of greater vulvovaginal glands). In which organ of urogenital system are these glands localized?
a. Clitoris
b. Uterus
*c. Large lips of pudendum
d. Vagina
e. Small lips of pudendum

39. Examination of a patient revealed typical presentations of collagenosis. This pathology is characterized by increase of the following urine index:
a. Glucose
*b. Hydroxyproline
c. Arginine
d. Mineral salts
e. Ammonium salts

40. After destruction of CNS structures an animal lost orientative reflexes. What structure was destroyed?
*a. Quadrigeminal plate
b. Red nucleus
c. Black substance
d. Lateral vestibular nuclei
e. Medial reticular nuclei

41. A patient has been syffering from diarrhea for 5 day. On the fith day colonoscopy revealed that membrane of rectum was inflamed, there were greyish-green films closely adhering to the subjacent tissu E. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Typhoid fever
c. Nonspecific ulcerous colitis
d. Crohns disease
*e. Dysentery

42. A cerebral trauma caused increased ammonia generation. What amino acid participates in the excretion of ammonia from the cerebral tissue?
a. Lysine
b. Valine
*c. Glutamic
d. Tyrosine
e. Tryptophan

43. A patient suffers from diabetes melitus. After the regular insulin injection his condition grew worse: there appeared anxiety, cold sweat, tremor of limbs, general weakness, dizziness. What preparation can eliminate these symptoms?
*a. Adrenaline hydrochloride
b. Butamide
c. Caffeine
d. Glibutide
e. Noradrenaline

44. Examination of a child who frequently suffers from infectious diseases revealed that IgG concentration in blood serum was 10 times less than normal, IgA and IgM concentration was also significantly reduce D. Analysis showed also lack of B-lymphocytes and plasmocytes. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Di George syndrome
*b. Brutons disease
c. Louis-Bar syndrome
d. Dysimmunoglobulinemia
e. Swiss-type agammaglobulinemia

45. A patient suffering from stenocardia was taking nitroglycerine which caused restoration of blood supply of myocardium and relieved pain in the cardiac are A. What intracellular mechanism provides restoration of energy supply of insulted cells?
a. Reduction of ATP resynthesis
b. Intensification of RNA generation
c. Intensification of oxygen transporting into the cell
*d. Intensification of ATP resynthesis
e. Increased permeability of membranes

46. A 66 year old female patient got intravenous injection of magnesium sulfate solution for the purpose of elimination of hypertensive crisis. But arterial pressure didnt go down and after repeated introduction of the same preparation there appered sluggishness, slow response, inhibition of consciousness and respiration. What preparation is antagonist of magnesium sulfate and can eliminate symptoms of its overdose?
a. Sodium chloride
b. Activated carbon
*c. Calcium chloride
d. Potassium chloride
e. Potassium permanganate

47. A 19 year old woman suffers from primary syphilis. Doctor administered her complex therapy that includes benzylpenicillin sodium salt. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
*a. It blocks synthesis of peptidoglycan of microbal membrane
b. It blocks DNA synthesis
c. It blocks synthesis of cytoplasm proteins
d. It blocks RNA synthesis
e. It blocks thiol enzymes

48. Students who are taking examinations often have dry mouth. The mechanism that causes this state is the realization of the following reflexes:
a. Unconditioned peripheral
*b. Conditioned sympathetic
c. Conditioned parasympathetic
d. Unconditioned parasympathetic
e. Unconditioned sympathetic

49. A patient is 44 years ol D. Laboratory examination of his blood revealed that content of proteins in plasma was 40 g/l. What influence will be exerted on the transcapillary water exchange?
a. Exchange will stay unchanged
*b. Filtration will be increased, reabsorption - decreased
c. Both filtration and reabsorption will be decreased
d. Both filtration and reabsorption will be increased
e. Filtration will be decreased, reabsorption - increased

50. A viral infection has damaged cells that form walls of bile capillaries. This stimulated conditions for inflow of bile into the blood of sinusoidal capillaries. What cells are damaged?
*a. Hepatocytes
b. Pit-cells
c. Kupffers cells
d. Endotheliocytes
e. Ito cells

51. A healthy man is in a region with high risk of catching malari A. What drug should be administered for individual chemoprophylaxis of malaria?
a. Sulfalen
b. Metronidazole
*c. Chingamin
d. Biseptol
e. Tetracycline

52. A child is pale, pastose, muscular tissue is bad developed, lymph nodes are enlarge D. He often suffers from angina and pharyngitis, blood has signs of lymphocytosis. The child is also predisposed to autoallergic diseases. What type of diathesis can be presumed in this case?
a. Asthenic
b. Gouty
c. Exudative
d. Hemorrhagic
*e. Lymphohypoplastic

53. Autopsy of a 5 year old child revealed in the area of vermis of cerebellum a soft greyish-pink node 2 cm in diameter with areas of haemorrhag E. Histologically this tumour consisted of atypical monomorphous small roundish cells with big polymorphous nuclei. What tumour is it?
a. Meningioma
*b. Medulloblastoma
c. Oligodendroglioma
d. Glioblastoma
e. Astrocytoma

54. Surface with an intact toad on it was inclined to the right. Tone of extensor muscles became reflectory higher due to the activation of the following receptors:
a. Vestibuloreceptors of semicircular ducts
b. Photoreceptors of retina
c. Proprioreceptors
d. Mechanoreceptors of foot skin
*e. Vestibuloreceptors of utricle and saccule

55. Lungs of a preterm infant have areas of atelectasis (pulmonary collapse). The main cause is:
a. Increased viscous resistance
b. Diminished force of surface tension of lungs
c. Underdeveloped inspiration muscles
d. Surfactant excess
*e. Surfactant deficiency

56. A patient got a trauma that caused dysfunction of motor centres regulating activity of head muscles. In what parts of cerebral cortex is the respective centre normally localized?
a. Angular gyrus
b. Superior part of precentral gyrus
c. Supramarginal gyrus
*d. Inferior part of precentral gyrus
e. Superior parietal lobule

57. A patient suffers from stenocardia and takes isosorbide mononitrat E. He was prescribed a complementary drug with disaggregating effect. What drug is it?
a. Nifedipine
b. Propranolol
*c. Acetylsalicinic acid
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Validol

58. A patient in a transplantation centre underwent heart transplantation. The organ was taken from a donor who died in a road accident. Foreign heart can be rejected as a result of development of transplantation immunity. It is usually prevented by means of:
a. Chemotherapy
b. X-ray therapy
*c. Immunosuppressors
d. Enzymes
e. Ultrasound

59. A woman was delivered to a hospital for trachea intubation. What of the following drugs should be applied in this case?
a. Metronidazole
*b. Dithylinum
c. Gentamycin sulfate
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Nitroglycerine

60. A patient with skin mycosis has disorder of cellular immunity. The most typical characteristic of it is reduction of the following index:
a. B-lymphocytes
b. Plasmocytes
c. Immunoglobulin E
d. Immunoglobulin G
*e. T-lymphocytes

61. Examination of a patient suffering from frequent haemorrhages in the inner organs and mucous membranes revealed proline and lysine being included in collagen fibers. Impairment of their hydroxylation is caused by lack of the following vitamin:
a. K
b. E
c. A
*d. C
e. D

62. A patient complained about being unable to adduct and abduct fingers in the metacarpophalangeal articulations towards and away from the 3rd finger. Which muscles function is impaired?
a. Extensors
b. Long flexors of fingers
c. Lumbrical muscles
*d. Interosseous muscles
e. Breviflexors of fingers

63. A newborn child suffers from milk curdling in stomach, this means that soluble milk proteins (caseins) transform to insoluble proteins (paracaseins) by means of calcium ions and a certain enzym E. What enzyme takes part in this process?
a. Pepsin
b. Lipase
c. Gastrin
d. Secretin
*e. Renin

64. During preparation of a patient to a heart surgery it was necessary to measure pressure in heart chambers. In one of them pressure varied from 0(what's this?!) mm Hg up to 120 mm Hg within one cardiac cycle. What heart chamber is it?
a. -
b. Left atrium
*c. Left ventricle
d. Right ventricle
e. Right atrium

65. A 50 year old patient underwent resection of tumour of large intestine wall. Microscopically it presents itself as fascicles of divergent collagen fibers of different thickness and form and some monomorphous fusiform cells that are irregularly distributed among the fibers. Cellular atypia is not evident. What tumour is it?
*a. Hard fibroma
b. Desmoma
c. Fibrosarcoma
d. Soft fibroma
e. Fibromyoma

66. During regular examination of schoolchildren it was revealed that a 10 year old girl had asymmetric oval eggs with a larva in the scrape from her perianal folds. What diagnosis should be made?
a. Ascariasis
*b. Enterobiasis
c. Ankylostomiasis
d. Amebiasis
e. Trichocephalosis

67. Examination of a man who had been working hard under higher temperature of the environment revealed abnormal quantity of blood plasma proteins. What phenomenon is the case?
a. Absolute hyperproteinemia
b. Dysproteinemia
c. Absolute hypoproteinemia
d. Paraproteinemia
*e. Relative hyperproteinemia

68. A patient consumed a lot of reach in proteins food that caused increase of rate of proteolytic enzymes of pancreatic juice. It is also accompanied by increase of rate of the following enzyme:
a. Gastricsin
*b. Tripsin
c. Enterokinase
d. Pepsin
e. Renin

69. 6 months after labour a woman had uterine hemorrhag E. Gynaecological examination of uterine cavity revealed a dark-red tissue with multiple cavities resembling of a "sponge". Microscopic examination of a tumour revealed in blood lacunas atypic light epithelial Langhans cells and giant cells of syncytiotrophoblast. What tumour is it?
a. Squamous cell nonkeratinous carcinoma
b. Fibromyoma
c. Adenocarcinoma
d. Cystic mole
*e. Chorioepithelioma

70. A patient was diagnosed with paralysis of facial and masticatory muscles. The haematoma is inside the genu of internal capsule. What conduction tract is damaged?
a. Tr. cortico-temporo-parieto-occipito-pontinus
b. Tr. cortico-thalamicus
c. Tr. cortico-fronto-pontinus
d. Tr. cortico-spinalis
*e. Tr. cortico-nuclearis

71. A sportsman needs to improve his sporting results. He was recommended to take a preparation that contains carnitine. What process is activated the most by this compound?
a. Amino acids transporting
b. Calcium ions transporting
c. Glucose transporting
*d. Fatty acids transporting
e. Vitamin K transporting

72. An unconscious young man with signs of morphine poisoning entered admission offic E. His respiration is shallow and infrequent which is caused by inhibition of respiratory centr E. What type of respiratory failure is it?
a. Diffusive
b. Ventilative restrictive
c. Perfusive
d. Ventilative obstructive
*e. Ventilative dysregulatory

73. A patient has delayed conduction of excitement through the atrioventricular nod E. What changes of ECG will be observed?
a. Prolongation of Q-T interval
*b. Prolongation of P-Q interval
c. Prolongation of Q-S interval
d. Negative T wave
e. S-T-segment displacement

74. Roentgenological examination of skull base bones revealed enlargement of sellar cavity, thinning of anterior clinoid processes, destruction of different parts, destruction of different parts of sella turcic A. Such bone destruction might be caused by a tumour of the following wndocrinous gland:
a. Thymus gland
b. Thyroid gland
c. Adrenal glands
*d. Hypophysis
e. Epiphysis

75. A 33 year old man died from uraemi A. Autopsy revealed enlarged kidneys weighing 500,0 each and consisting of multiple cavities 0,5-2 cm in diameter. The cavities were full of light-yellow transparent liqui D. Renal pelvis and ureters had no pecularities. What renal disease caused uraemia?
a. Chronic pyelonephritis
b. Renal tumour
c. Rapidly progressing glomerulonephritis
d. Renal tuberculosis
*e. Bilateral polycystic renal disease

76. Inflammatory processes cause synthesis of protein of acute phase in an organism. What substances stumulate their synthesis?
*a. Interleukin-1
b. Interferons
c. Biogenic amins
d. Immunoglobulins
e. Angiotensin

77. In order to determine toxigenicity of diphtheria bacilli a strip of filter paper impregnated with antitoxic diphtherial serum was put on the dense nutrient medium. There were also inoculated a microbal culture under examination and a strain that is known to be toxigeni C. If the microbal culture under examination produces exotoxin, this wil result in formation of:
a. Haemolysis zones
b. Precipitin ring
*c. Precipitin lines
d. Zones of diffuse opacification
e. Zones of lecithovitellinous activity

78. A patient was admitted to the infectious department. His symptoms: dry skin, decreased skin turgor, rice-water stool. The patient was diagnosed with cholera. What disorder of water-electrolytic balance is most often observed in this disease?
a. Hyperosmotic hyperhydration
b. Hypoosmotic hypohydration
*c. Isoosmotic hypohydration
d. Hypoosmotic hyperhydration
e. Hyperosmotic hypohydration

79. A patient has herpetic rash. What medication should be administered?
a. Clotrimazole
*b. Acyclovir
c. Gentamycin
d. Biseptol
e. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt

80. Inflammation of the tympanic cavity (purulent otitis media) was complicated by inflammation of mammillary process sockets. What wall of tympanic cavity did the pus penetrate into the sockets through?
a. Medial
b. Anterior
c. Lateral
*d. Posterior
e. Superior

81. ECG of a patient shows prolongation of T-wav E. This is caused by deceleration in ventricles of:
a. Relaxation
*b. Repolarization
c. Contraction
d. Depolarization
e. Depolarization and repolarization

82. A patient suffers from chronic left-ventricular insufficiency. What medication should be administered?
a. Etimizole
b. Pyracetam
c. Bemegride
d. Vinpocetine
*e. Digoxin

83. A patient suffering from infectious mononucleosis has been taking glucocorticosteroids for two weeks. This resulted in remission but the patient got exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. This complication is induced by the following effect of glucocorticosteroids:
a. Antitoxic
*b. Immunosuppressive
c. Anti-inflammatory
d. Anti-shock
e. Antiallergenic

84. An alcoholic woman has born a girl with mental and physical developmental lag. Doctors diagnosed the girl with fetal alcohol syndrom E. What effect is the cause of the girls state?
a. Malignization
b. Mechanic
c. Mutagenic
*d. Teratogenic
e. Carcinogenic

85. A patient complained about dizziness, memory impairment, periodical convulsions. It was revealed that these changes were caused by a product of decarboxylation of glutamic aci D. Name this product:
a. ATP
b. Pyridoxal phosphate
c. TDP
*d. GABA
e. THFA

86. During an experiment a skeletal muscle is stimulated by a series of electric impulses. What type of muscle contraction will be observed provided that each subsequent impulse comes in the period of shortening of the previous single muscle contraction?
a. Partial tetanus
b. Muscle contracture
c. A series of single contractures
d. Asynchronous tetanus
*e. Holotetanus

87. Vagus branches that innervate heart are being stimulated during an experiment. This caused reduction of heart rate due to the intensification of the following process (through the cell membrane of cardiac pacemaker):
a. Calcium ion yield
b. Calcium ion entry
*c. Potassium ion yield
d. Potassium ion entry
e. Calcium and potassium ion yield

88. Untrained people often have muscle pain after sprints as a result of lactate accumulation. This might be caused by intensification of the following biochemical process:
a. Glycogenesis
*b. Glycolysis
c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Lipogenesis
e. Pentose phosphate pathway

89. A patient complains of frequent diarrheas, especially after consumption of rich food, weight loss. Laboratory examination revealed steatorrhea; his feces were hypocholi C. What might have caused such condition?
a. Lack of pancreatic lipase
b. Lack of pancreatic phospholipase
c. Unbalanced diet
d. Inflammation of mucous membrane of small intestine
*e. Obturation of biliary tracts

90. A 30 year old woman has face edemat A. Examination revealed proteinuria (5,87 g/l), hypoproteinemia, dysproteinemia, hyperlipidemi A. What condition is the set of these symptoms typical for?
a. Chronic renal failure
b. Nephritic syndrome
*c. Nephrotic syndrome
d. Chronic pyelonephritis
e. Acute renal failure

91. A scheme presents an exocrinous gland that has unbranched excretory duct with a terminal part in form of a saccule openining into the duct. How is this gland called according to the morphological classification of exocrinous glands?
*a. Simple unbranched alveolar
b. Compound branched alveolar
c. Compound unbranched alveolar
d. Simple branched tubular
e. Compound unbranched alveolar tubular

92. In course of laparotomy a surgeon revealed gangrenous lesion of descending colon. It was caused by thrombosis of the following artery:
a. Median colic
b. Dexter colic
c. Ileocolic
d. Superior mesenteric artery
*e. Sinister colic

93. Brain tomography revealed a tumour in the region of red nucleus. What part of brain isdamaged?
a. Cerebellum
b. Pons cerebelli
c. Interbrain
d. Medulla oblongata
*e. Midbrain

94. A patient has been suffering from elevated temperature and attacks of typical cough for 10 days. Doctor administered inoculation of mucus from the patients nasopharynx on the agar. What microorganism is presumed?
a. Staphylococcus
b. Pfeiffers bacillus
c. Klebsiella
d. Listeria
*e. Pertussis bacillus

95. A 44 year old woman complains of general weakness, heart pain, significant increase of body weight. Objectively: moon face, hirsutism, AP is 165/100 mm Hg, height - 164 cm, weight - 103 kg; the fat is mostly accumulated on her neck, thoracic girdle, belly. What is the main pathogenetic mechanism of obesity?
a. Reduced glucagon production
b. Increased mineralocorticoid production
c. Reduced production of thyroid hormones
*d. Increased production of glucocorticoids
e. Increased insulin production

96. A patient in postoperative period was prescribed an anticholinesterase drug for stimulation of intestinal peristalsis and tonus of urinary bladder. What drug is it?
a. Dichlothiazide
*b. Proserin
c. Propanolol
d. Reserpine
e. Mannitol

97. A patient suffering from initial hypertension has been taking an antihypertensive preparation for a long tim E. Suddenly he stopped taking this preparation. After this his condition grew worse, this led to development of hypertensive crisis. This by-effect can be classified as:
a. Tolerance
b. Cumulation
c. Sensibilization
d. Dependence
*e. Abstinence syndrome

98. Hepatitis has led to the development of hepatic failur E. Mechanism of edemata formation is activated by the impairment of the following liver function:
a. Chologenetic
*b. Protein-synthetic
c. Glycogen-synthetic
d. Antitoxic
e. Barrier

99. A patient has acne on his fac E. Microspcopic examination of scrapings from the affected areas revealed living porrect vermiform arthropoda 0,2-0,5 mm large with four pairs of short extremities in the front part of their bodies. What is the laboratory diagnosis?
a. Phthiriasis
b. Myiasis
*c. Demodicosis
d. Scabies
e. Pediculosis

100. A 64 year old woman has impairment of twilight vision (hemeralopy). What vitamin should be recommended in the first place?
a. Vitamin B6
b. Vitamin B2
*c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin C
e. Vitamin E

101. A patient has difficulties with hand movement. Examination revealed inflammation of common synovial sheath of flexor muscles. It is known from the patients anamnesis that he got a stab wound of finger a week ago. Which finger was most probably damaged?
a. Digitus medius
b. Digitus anularis
c. Index
*d. Digitus minimus
e. Pollex

102. A patient with obliterating atherosclerosis underwent sympathectomy of femoral artery in the region of femoral trigon E. What type of arterial hyperemia was induced by the operation?
a. Metabolic
b. Neurotonic
c. Functional
*d. Neuroparalytic
e. Reactive

103. A 47 year old man with myocardium infarction was admitted to the cardiological department. What changes of cellular composition of peripheral blood are induced by necrotic changes in the myocardium?
a. Monocytosis
*b. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Lymphopenia
e. Eosinophilic leukocytosis

104. A 60 year old patient has impaired perception of high-frequency sounds. These changes were caused by damage of the following auditory analyzer structures:
a. Eustachian tube
b. Tympanic membrane
c. Middle ear muscles
*d. Main cochlea membrane near the oval window
e. Main cochlea membrane near the helicotrema

105. Examination of a 42 year old patient revealed a tumour of adenohypophysis. Objectively: the patients weight is 117 kg, he has moon-like hyperemic face, red-blue striae of skin distension on his belly. Osteoporosis and muscle dystrophy are present. AP is 210/140 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Cushings disease
b. Conns disease
c. Cushings syndrome
d. Essential hypertension
e. Diabetes mellitus

106. A histological specimen presents an artery. One of the membranes of its wall has flat cells lying on the basal membran E. What type of cells is it?
a. Macrophages
b. Fibroblasts
*c. Endothelium
d. Smooth myocytes
e. Mesothelium

107. A patient with hip fracture was prescribed a narcotic analgeti C. Its anesthetic action is determined by interaction with the following receptors:
a. Adrenoreceptors
b. GABA-ergic receptors
c. Benzodiazepine receptors
*d. Opiate receptors
e. Cholinoreceptors

108. A 46 year old woman suffering from chololithiasis developed jaundic E. Her urine became dark-yellow and feces became colourless. Blood serum will have the highest concentration of the following substance:
a. Biliverdin
b. Urobilinogen
c. Mesobilirubin
*d. Conjugated bilirubin
e. Unconjugated bilirubin

109. Normal, actively dividing cells of human red bone marrow are analyze D. What number of cells chromosomes is typical for G1 period?
a. 48
b. 45
c. 47
*d. 46
e. 23

110. A patient is ill with diabetes mellitus accompanied by hyperglycemia on an empty stomach (7,2 millimole/l). The hyperglycemia rate can be retrospectively estimated (over the last 4-8 weeks before the examination) on the ground of the rate of the following blood plasma protein:
*a. Glycated hemoglobin
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. C-reactive protein
d. Fibrinogen
e. Albumin

111. When blood circulation in the damaged tissue is restored, then lactate accumulation comes to a stop and glucose consumption decelerates. These metabolic changes are caused by activation of the following process:
a. Anaerobic glycolysis
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Glycogen biosynthesis
*d. Aerobic glycolysis
e. Lipolysis

112. During influenza epidemic 40% of pupils who didnt go in for sports were affected by the disease, and among the pupils who regularly did physical exercises this index was only 20%. What adaptative mechanisms determined such a low sickness rate of pupils participating in the sports?
a. Biochemical adaptation
*b. Cross adaptation
c. Genetic adaptation
d. Specific adaptation
e. Physiological adaptation

113. A 65 year old female patient suffers from chronic renal insufficiency accompanied by evident edemata caused by chronic glomerulonephritis. What diuretic should be administered for forced diuresis?
a. Acetazolamide
b. Chlorthalidone
*c. Furosemide
d. Cyclometazide
e. Hydrochlorothiazide

114. A patient suffering from chronic cardiac insufficiency was recommended to undergo a prophylactic course of treatment with a cardiological drug from the group of cardiac glycosides that is to be taken enterally. What drug was recommended?
a. Cordiamin
b. Strophanthine
c. Cordarone
d. Corglycon
*e. Digoxin

115. One of sections of central nervous system has layerwise arrangement of neurocytes. Among them there are cells of the following forms: stellate, fusiform, horizontal, pyramidal. What section of central nervous system is this structure typical for?
a. Spinal cord
b. Cerebellum
c. Hypothalamus
d. Medulla oblongata
*e. Cortex of cerebrum

116. A 4 year old child complained of pain during deglutition, indisposition. Objectively: palatine arches and tonsils are moderately edematic and hyperemic, there are greyish-white films up to 1 mm thick closely adhering to the subjacent tissues. What pathological process are these changes typical for?
a. Metaplasia
*b. Inflammation
c. Dystrophy
d. Organization
e. Necrosis

117. A foreign body (a button) closed space of the right superior lobar bronchus. What segments of the right lung wont be supplied with air?
a. Apical and posterior basal
b. Superior and inferior lingular
c. Apical and median basal
*d. Apical, posterior, anterior
e. Medial and lateral

118. A patient ill with thrombophlebitis of his lower limbs had chest pain, blood spitting, progressing respiratory insufficiency that led to his death. Autopsy diagnosed multiple lung infarctions. What is the most probable cause of their development?
*a. Thromboembolism of pulmonary artery branches
b. Thromboembolism of bronchial arteries
c. Thrombosis of bronchial arteries
d. Thrombosis of pulmonary artery branches
e. Thrombosis of pulmonary veins

119. A full-term newborn child has yellowish skin and mucous membranes. This might be probably caused by temporary deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Heme synthetase
b. Heme oxygenase
*c. UDPglucoronyltransferase
d. Biliverdin reductase
e. Uridine transferase

120. Ultrasonic examination of a patient revealed aneurism in the area of aortic arch that caused alteration of vocal function of larynx. What nerve was constricted?
*a. Recurrent laryngeal
b. Mandibular
c. Superior laryngeal
d. Sublingual
e. Diaphragmatic

121. Atria of an experimental animal were superdistended by blood that resulted in decreased reabsorption of Na+ and water in renal tubules. This can be explained by the influence of the following factor upon kidneys:
*a. Natriuretic hormone
b. Renin
c. Angiotensin
d. Vasopressin
e. Aldosterone

122. A patient suffers from hepatocirrhosis. State of antitoxic liver function can be characterized by examination of the following substance exreted by urine:
*a. Hippuric acid
b. Ammonium salts
c. Amino acids
d. Uric acid
e. Creatinine

123. Dietary intake of a 30 year old nursing woman contains 1000 mg of calcium, 1300 mg of phosphorus and 20 mg of iron per day. It is necessary to change content of these mineral substances in the following way:
a. To increase calcium content
b. To reduce iron content
*c. To increase phosphorus content
d. To increase iron content
e. To reduce fluorine content

124. A 25 year old patient was examined by a medical boar D. Examination revealed pathology of chest. Transverse dimensions were to small and the sternum was strongly protruding. What chest type is it?
a. Funnel chest
b. Barrel chest
c. Cylindrical chest
d. Flat chest
*e. Keeled chest

125. A 50 year old patient has been taking treatment thrice for the last 6 months because of fractures caused by domestic accidents. Microscopical examination of bony tissue revealed foci of lacunar resolution, giant-cell granulomas in the tumour-like formations, cysts. Bony tissue was substituted by fibrous connective tissu E. Examination revealed also adenoma of parathyroid gland and hypercalcemi A. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Osteopetrosis
b. Pagets disease
c. Myelomatosis
d. Osteomyelitis
*e. Parathyroid osteodystrophy

126. A young woman who entered a production department where it strongly smelt of paints and varnishes had a bronchospasm. This reflex was caused by irritation of the following receptors:
*a. Irritant
b. Juxtaglomerular
c. Peripheral chemoreceptors
d. Pleura receptors
e. Central chemoreceptors

127. An isolated muscle fiber is under examination. It was established that the threshold of stimulation force became significantly lower. What is the cause of this phenomenon?
a. Inactivation of potassium channels of membrane
b. Activation of potassium channels of membrane
*c. Activation of sodium channels of membrane
d. Inactivation of sodium channels of membrane
e. Block of energy production in the cell

128. Burned skin surface was treated with a certain preparation. Its antiseptic properties are provided by atomic oxygen that is formed in presence of organic substances. What preparation was applied?
a. Alcoholic iodine solution
b. Furacillin
c. Chlorhexidine bigluconate
d. Sodium hydrocarbonate
*e. Potassium permanganate

129. Examination of a patient suffering from cancer of urinary bladder revealed high rate of serotonin and hydroxyanthranilic aci D. It is caused by excess of the following amino acid in the organism:
a. Alanine
*b. Tryptophan
c. Histidine
d. Methionine
e. Tyrosine

130. A man was intoxicated with mushrooms. They contain muscarine that stimulates muscarinic cholinoreceptors. What symptoms signalize intoxication with inedible mushrooms?
a. Mydriatic pupils
*b. Myotic pupils
c. Bronchi dilatation
d. Increased heart rate
e. Rise of arterial pressure

131. A patient who suffers from insomnia caused by emotional disorder was prescribed a hypnotic drug with tranquillizing effect. What hypnotic was prescribed?
*a. Nitrazepam
b. Chloral hydrate
c. Bromisoval
d. Phenobarbital
e. Sodium ethaminal

132. Examination of a 66 year old patient revealed a lytic tumour in the locus of pathological rib fractur E. Histologically this tumour consists of atypical plasmoblasts. Further examination revealed osteoporosis in the bones of vertebral column and pelvis. These changes are typical for:
a. Neuroblastoma
b. Tuberculous osteomyelitis
c. Metastatic lung cancer
d. Ewings osteosarcoma
*e. Myelomatosis

133. A 46 year old patient who had been suffering from tuberculosis for 6 years died from massive pulmonary haemorrhage. Autopsy revealed different-sixed foci of sclerosis and caseous necrosis in lungs, in the upper part of the right lung there was a cavity 5 cm in diameter with dense grey walls, the cavity contained liquid blood and blood clots. What type of tuberculosis is it?
a. Acute cavernous
b. Fibrous focal
c. Infiltrative
*d. Fibrocavernous
e. Acute focal

134. During the repeated Widals agglutination test it was noticed that the ratio of antibody titers and O-antigens S.typhi in the patients serum had increased from 1:100 to 1:400. How would you interpret these results?
a. The patient is an acute carrier of typhoid microbes
*b. The patient has typhoid fever
c. The patient was previously vaccinated against typhoid fever
d. The patient is a chronic carrier of typhoid microbs
e. The patient previously had typhoid fever

135. A patient complained about muscle rigidity, constrained motions, constant tremor of arms. On the grounds of examination his disease was diagnosed as Parkinsons diseas E. What drug should be administered?
*a. Levodopa
b. Diphenylhydantoin
c. Phenobarbital
d. Diazepam
e. Ethosuximide

136. Labelled amino acids alanine and tryptophane were injected to a mouse in order to study localization of protein synthesis in its cells. The labelled amino acids will be accumulated near the following organellas:
a. Cell centre
b. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
*c. Ribosomes
d. Golgi apparatus
e. Lysosomes

137. A 56 year old patient suffering from cardiac insufficiency has edema of feet and shins, edematous skin is pale and col D. What is the leding mechanism of edema pathogenesis?
a. Drop of oncotic pessure in capillaries
*b. Rise of hydrostatic pressure in venules
c. Increase of capillary permeability
d. Disorder of lymph outflow
e. Positive water balance

138. A 50 year old man who was referred to the hospital for treatment of cervical lymphadenitis underwent test for induvidual sensitivity to penicillin. 30 seconds after he went hot all over, AP dropped down to 0 mm Hg that led to cardiac arrest. Resuscitation was unsuccessful. Autopsy results: acute venous plethora of internal organs; histological examination of skin (from the site of injection) revealed degranulation of mast cells (tissue basophils). Degranulation was also revealed in myocardium and lungs. What type of hypersensitivity reaction is it?
a. -
b. Immunocomplex-mediated
c. Complement-mediated cytotoxic
*d. Anaphylactic
e. Delayed-type hypersensitivity

139. During examination of a patient a dentist revealed a lot of "white spots" - zones of enamel demineralization. What microorganisms take part in the development of this process?
a. Veilonella parvula
b. Streptococcus pyogenes
*c. Streptococcus mutans
d. Staphylococcus epidermidis
e. Streptococcus salivarius

140. A patient who has been abusing tobacco smoking for a long time has got cough accompanied by excretion of viscous mucus; weakness after minor physical stress, pale skin. The patient has also lost 12,0 kg of body weight. Endoscopic examination of biosy material his illness was diagnosed as squamous cell carcinom A. Name a pathological process that preceded formation of the tumour:
*a. Metaplasia
b. Hypoplasia
c. Necrosis
d. Sclerosis
e. Hyperplasia

141. In course of an experiment thalamocortical tracts of an animal were cut. What type of sensory perception remained intact?
a. Visual
b. Auditory
c. Nociceptive
d. Exteroreceptive
*e. Olfactory

142. Among junior children of an orphanage an outbreak of intestinal infection with signs of colienteritis was registere D. In order to identify isolated causative agent it is necessary to:
*a. Study antigenic properties of the causative agent
b. To study virulence of the causative agent
c. To determine sensitivity to antibiotics
d. To study biochemical properties of the causative agent
e. To study sensitivity to bacteriophages

143. Vitamin A together with specific cytoreceptors penetrates through the nuclear membranes, induces transcription processes that stimulate growth and differentiation of cells. This biological function is realized by the following form of vitamin A:
*a. Trans-retinoic acid
b. Cis-retinal
c. Retinol
d. Carotin
e. Trans-retinal

144. A 4 year old child with hereditary renal lesion has signs of rickets, vitamin D concentration in blood is normal. What is the most probable cause of rickets development?
a. Increased excretion of calcium
*b. Impaired synthesis of calcitriol
c. Hypofunction of parathyroid glands
d. Lack of calcium in food
e. Hyperfunction of parathyroid glands

145. A 35 year old man consulted a dentist about reduced density of dental tissue, high fragility of teeth during eating solid foo D. This patient suffers the most probably from the deficiency of the following mineral element:
*a. Calcium
b. Iron
c. Magnesium
d. Potassium
e. Sodium

146. A patient working at a pig farm complains about paroxysmal abdominal pain, liquid feces with admixtures of mucus and blood, headache, weakness, fever. Examination of large intestine revealed ulcers from 1 mm up to several cm large, feces contained oval unicellular organisms with cili A. What disease should be suspected?
a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Trichomoniasis
c. Lambliasis
*d. Balantidiasis
e. Amebiasis

147. A 25 year old Palestinian woman complains of weakness, dizziness, dyspne A. In anamnesis: periodically exacerbating anemi A. In blood: Hb - 60 g/l, erythrocytes - 2,51012/l, reticulocytes - 35o/oo, anisocytosis and poikilocytosis of erythrocytes, a lot of target cells and polychromatophils. What type of anemia is it?
a. Sickle-cell anemia
b. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficient anemia
*c. Thalassemia
d. Minkowsky-Shauffard disease
e. Addison-Biermer disease

148. A woman works as railway traffic controller. She suffers from seasonal vasomotor rhinitis and gets treatment in the outpatient setting. She was prescribed an antihistamine that has no effect upon central nervous system. What drug is it?
a. Suprastin
*b. Loratadine
c. Dimedrol
d. Tavegil
e. Promethazine

149. Examination of a patient with pustular skin lesions allowed to isolate a causative agent that forms in the blood agar roundish yellow middle-sized colonies surrounded by haemolysis zon E. Smears from the colonies contain irregular-shaped clusters of gram-positive cocci. The culture is oxidase- and catalase-positive, ferments mannitol and synthesizes plasmocoagulas E. What causative agent was isolated?
*a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
c. Streptococcus pyogenes
d. Staphylococcus epidermidis
e. Streptococcus agalactiae

150. A patient complains about impaired evacuatory function of stomach (long-term retention of food in stomach). Examination revealed a tumour of initial part of duodenum. Specify localization of the tumour:
a. Pars descendens
b. Pars ascendens
c. Flexura duodeni inferior
*d. Pars superior
e. Pars inferior

151. Histological examination of a 40 year old mans thymus revealed reduced share of parenchymatous elements, increased share of adipose and loose connective tissue, its enrichment with thymus bodies. The organs mass was unchange D. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Hypotrophy
b. Dystrophy
c. Atrophy
d. Accidental involution
*e. Age involution

152. An infectious disease caused contractive activity of muscles that contract and dilate eye pupil (paralytic state). What functional eye system was damaged?
a. Lacrimal apparatus
*b. Accomodative
c. Photosensory
d. Dioptric
e. Ancillary

153. Study of conversion of a food colouring agent revealed that neutralization of this xenobiotic takes place only in one phase - microsomal oxydation. Name a component of this phase:
a. Cytochrome A
b. Cytochrome B
c. Cytochrome C
*d. Cytochrome
e. Cytochrome oxidase

154. Study of fingerprints (dactylography) is used by criminalists for personal identification as well as for diagnostics of genetic abnormalities, particularly Dawns diseas E. What layer of skin determines individuality of fingerprints?
a. Reticular
*b. Dermopapillary
c. Basal
d. Clear (stratum lucidum epidermidis)
e. Horny

155. A 23 year old man has perforation of hard palat E. In the area of this perforation there was a compact well-defined formation. Microscopic examination of the resected formation revealed a large focus of caseous necrosis surrounded by granulation tissue with endovasculitis, cellular infiltration composed of lymphocytes, epithelioid cells (mainly plasmocytes). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Leprosy
b. Scleroma
c. Tuberculosis
d. Sarcoma
*e. Syphilis

156. A clinic observes a 49 year old patient with significant prolongation of coagulation time, gastrointestinal haemorrhages, subcutaneous hematomas. These symptoms might be explained by the deficiency of the following vitamin:
a. B6
b. H
c. E
d. B1
*e. K

157. A doctor revealed tissues injury on patients scalp with localized suppurations and diagnosed his disease as myiasis. This infestation is caused by larvae of the following insect:
a. Malarial mosquito
*b. Wohlfahrt fly
c. Stable fly (Stomoxys calcitrans)
d. Mosquito
e. Kissing bug

158. A 4 year old child was admitted to the orthopaedic department with shin fracture together with displacement. Bone fragments reposition requires preliminary analgesi A. What preparation should be chosen?
a. Morphine hydrochloride
b. Panadol
c. -
d. Analgin
*e. Promedol

159. Emotional stress causes activation of hormon-sensitive triglyceride lipase in the adipocytes. What secondary mediator takes part in this process?
a. Adenosine monophosphate
b. Diacylglycerol
c. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
d. Ions of Са2+
*e. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate

160. A patient suffering from periodical attacks caused by inhalation of different flavoring substances was diagnosed with atopic bronchial asthm A. IgE level was increase D. This is typical for the following type of reactions:
a. Cytotoxic reactions
b. delayed-type hypersensitivity
*c. Anaphylactic reactions
d. Immunocomplex reactions
e. Autoimmune reactions

161. Researchers of a bacteriological laboratory examine tinned meat for botulinic toxin. For this purpose a group of mice was injected with an extract of the material under examination and antitoxic antibotulinic serum of A, B, E types. A control group of mice was injected with the same extract but without antibotulinic serum. What serological reaction was applied?
*a. Neutralization
b. Complement binding
c. Double immune diffusion
d. Precipitation
e. Opsonocytophagic

162. Cardinal symptoms of primary hyperparathyroidism are osteoporosis and renal lesion along with development of urolithiasis. What substance makes up the basis of these calculi in this disease?
a. Cholesterol
*b. Calcium phosphate
c. Bilirubin
d. Cystine
e. Uric acid

163. A 45 year old man consulted a doctor about a plaque-like formation on his neck. Histological examination of a skin bioptate revealed clusters of round and oval tumour cells with a narrow border of basophilic cytoplasm resembling of cells of basal epidermal layer. What tumour is it?
a. Hydroadenoma
*b. Basal cell carcinoma
c. Epidermal cancer
d. Syringoadenoma
e. Trichoepithelioma

164. A cell at the stage of mitosis anaphase was stimulated by colchicine that inhibits chromosome separation to the poles. What type of mutation will be caused?
a. Duplication
b. Translocation
c. Deletion
*d. Polyploidy
e. Inversion

165. 48 hours after tuberculine test (Mantoux test) a child had a papule 10 mm in diameter on the spot of tuberculine injection. What hypersensitivity mechanism underlies these changes?
a. Anaphylaxy
*b. Cellular cytotoxicity
c. Antibody-dependent cytotoxicity
d. Immunocomplex cytotoxicity
e. Granulomatosis

166. Introduction of a big dose of histamine to an experimental animal caused abrupt drop of arterial pressure as a result of:
a. Constriction of resistance vessels
b. Increase of heart rate
c. Decrease of heart rate and force
d. Decrease of heart rate
*e. Dilatation of resistance vessels

167. A patient died from acute cardiac insufficiency, among clinical presentations there was gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Examination of mucous membrane of sromach revealed some defects reaching myenteron; their edges and bottom were mostly even and loose, some of them contained dark-red blood. What pathological process was revealed?
a. Erosions
b. Inflammation
c. Thrombosis
d. Chronic ulcers
*e. Acute ulcers

168. Electronic microphotography of pulmonary alveoles wall presents a big cell. Its cytoplasm has a lot of mitochondria, developed Golgi apparatus, osmiophil lamellated corpuscles. What is the main function of this cell?
a. It absorbs microorganisms
b. It purifies the air
*c. It produces surfactant
d. It is a component of blood-air barrier
e. It warms the air

169. A patient underwent an operation on account of gall bladder excision that resulted in obstruction of Ca absorption through the bowels wall. What vitamin wil stimulate this process?
a. PP
*b. D3
c. B12
d. C
e. K

170. A 48 year old patient complained about intense pain, slight swelling and reddening of skin over the joints, temperature rise up to 38oC. Blood analysis revealed high concentration of urates. This condition might be caused by disturbed metabolism of:
a. Collagen
b. Cholesterol
*c. Purines
d. Carbohydrates
e. Pyrimidines

171. A 17 year old boy fell seriously ill, the body temperature rose up to 38,5oC, there appeared cough, rhinitis, lacrimation, nasal discharges. What inflammation is it?
a. Serous
b. Purulent
c. Hemorrhagic
*d. Catarrhal
e. Fibrinous

172. It is known that the gene responsible for development of blood groups according to AB0 system has three allele variants. If a man has IV blood group, it can be explained by the following variability form:
a. Genocopy
b. Phenotypic
c. Phenocopy
d. Mutational
*e. Combinative

173. Characteristic sign of glycogenosis is muscle pain during physical work. Blood examination reveals usually hypoglycemia. This pathology is caused by congenital deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Alpha amylase
*b. Glycogen phosphorylase
c. Gamma amylase
d. Lysosomal glycosidase
e. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase

174. A concentrated solution of sodium chloride was intravenously injected to an animal. This caused decreased reabsorption of sodium ions in the renal tubules. It is the result of the following changes of hormonal secretion:
a. Vasopressin reduction
b. Reduction of atrial natriuretic factor
*c. Aldosterone reduction
d. Aldosterone increase
e. Vasopressin increase

175. An unconscious patient was delivered to the admission war D. Objectively: the patients skin is cold, pupils are myotic, he has laboured Cheyne-Stokes respiration, arterial pressure is low, urinary bladder is full. What substance has caused intoxication?
*a. Narcotic analgetics
b. Tranquilizers
c. -
d. Non-narcotic analgetics
e. Muscarinic receptor blockers

176. A 22 year old patient from the West Ukraine complains of laboured nasal breathing. Morphological examination of biopsy material of nasal mucous membrane revealed lymphoid, epithelioid, plasma cells as well as Mikuliczs cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Syphilis
b. Glanders
*c. Rhinoscleroma
d. Tuberculosis
e. Leprosy

177. An isolated cell of human heart automatically generates excitement impulses with frequency of 60 times per minut E. This cell was taken from the following heart structure:
a. Ventricle
b. Atrium
c. Atrioventricular node
*d. Sinoatrial node
e. His bundle

178. Voluntary breath-holding caused increase of respiration depth and frequency. The main factor stimulating these changes of external respiration is:
a. Increased tension of O2 in blood
b. Decreased tension of CO2 in blood
c. Decreased tension of O2 in blood
d. Decreased concentration of H+ in blood
*e. Increased tension of CO2 in blood

179. A patient has low rate of magnesium ions that are necessary for affixion of ribosomes to the endoplasmic reticulum. It is known that it causes disturbance of protein biosynthesis. At what stage is protein biosynthesis impaired?
a. Termination
*b. Translation
c. Replication
d. Amino acid activation
e. Transcription

180. A 45 year old patient was admitted to the cardiological department. ECG data: negative P wave overlaps QRS complex, diastolic interval is prolonged after extrasystol E. What type of extrasystole is it?
a. Bundle-branch
b. Ventricular
*c. Atrioventricular
d. Atrial
e. Sinus

181. A 5 year old child is ill with measles. Blood analysis revealed increase of total number of leukocytes up to 13*10^9/l. Leukogram: basophils - 0, eosinophils - 1, myelocytes - 0, juvenile neutrophils - 0, band neutrophils - 2, segmented neutrophils - 41, lymphocytes - 28, monocytes - 28. Name this phenomenon:
a. Lymphocytosis
b. Eosinopenia
c. Neutropenia
*d. Monocytosis
e. Agranulocytosis

182. Surgical approach to the thyroid gland from the transverse (collar) approach involves opening of interaponeurotic suprasternal spac E. What anatomic structure localized in this space is dangerous to be damaged?
a. Inferior thyroid arthery
b. Subclavicular vein
*c. Jugular venous arch
d. External jugular vein
e. Superior thyroid arthery

183. During an operation a patient got injection of muscle relaxant dithylinum. Relaxation of skeletal muscles and inhibition of respiration lasted two hours. This condition was caused by absence of the following enzyme in blood serum:
a. Catalase
*b. Butyrylcholin esterase
c. Glucose 6-phosphatase
d. Glutathione peroxidase
e. Acetylcholinesterase

184. Microscopical examination of a microbal culture revealed fusiform spore-forming microorganisms that get violet-blue Grams stain. What microorganisms were revealed?
a. Spirochaete
b. Actinomycete
*c. Clostridia
d. Streptococci
e. Diplococci

185. A 63 year old male patient who had been suffering from chronic diffuse obstructive disease, pulmonary emphysema, for 15 years died from cardiac insufficiency. Autopsy revealed nutmeg liver cirrhosis, cyanotic induration of kidneys and spleen, ascites, edemata of lower limbs. These changes of internal organs are typical for the following disease:
a. Chronic left-ventricular insufficiency
b. General cardiac insufficiency
c. Acute right-ventricular insufficiency
d. Acute left-ventricular insufficiency
*e. Chronic right-ventricular insufficiency

186. A patient staying in the pulmonological department was diagnosed with pulmonary emphysema accompanied by reduced elasticity of pulmonary tissu E. What type of respiration is observed?
a. Superficial respiration
b. Periodic respiration
c. Inspiratory dyspnea
d. Infrequent respiration
*e. Expiratory dyspnea

187. A virological laboratory obtained pathological material (mucous discharges from nasal meatuses) taken from a patient with provisional diagnosis "influenza". What quick test will allow to reveal specific viral antigen in the material under examination?
a. Radioimmunoassay
*b. Direct and indirect immunofluorescence test
c. Direct and indirect fluorescence immunoassay
d. Hemagglutination inhibition assay
e. -

188. A patient ill with neurodermatitis has been taking prednisolone for a long tim E. Examination revealed high rate of sugar in his bloo D. This complication is caused by the drug influence upon the following link of carbohydrate metabolism:
a. Inhibition of glycogen synthesis
b. Glycogenogenesis activation
c. Activation of insulin decomposition
d. Intensification of glucose absorption in the bowels
*e. Gluconeogenesis activation

189. Examination of coronary arteries revealed atherosclerotic calcified plaques closing vessel lumen by ⅓. The muscle has multiple whitish layers of connective tissu E. What process was revealed in the myocardium?
a. Postinfarction cardiosclerosis
*b. Diffusive cardiosclerosis
c. Myocardium infarction
d. Tiger heart
e. Myocarditis

190. A 34 year old woman was diagnosed with hereditary microspherocytic hemolytic anemia (Minkowsky-Shauffard disease). What mechanism caused haemolysis of erythrocytes?
*a. Membranopathy
b. Hemoglobinopathy
c. Bone marrow hypoploasia
d. Enzymopathy
e. Autoimmune disorder

191. Examination of a patient revealed hypertrophy and inflammation of lymphoid tissue, edema of mucous membrane between palatine arches (acute tonsillitis). What tonsil is normally situated in this area?
a. -
b. Tonsilla lingualis
*c. Tonsilla palatina
d. Tonsilla tubaria
e. Tonsilla pharyngealis

192. Material taken from a patient with provisional diagnosis "influenza" was referred to a laboratory. For virological examination the hemadsorption reaction was applie D. This reaction can be applied for detection of the following viruses:
a. All the simple viruses
*b. Viruses containing hemagglutinins
c. Any viruses
d. DNA-genomic viruses
e. All the complex viruses

193. During hypersensitivity test a patient got subcutaneous injection of an antigen which caused reddening of skin, edema, pain as a result of histamine action. This biogenic amine is generated as a result of transformation of the following histidine amino acid:
a. Deaminization
*b. Decarboxylation
c. Phosphorylation
d. Isomerization
e. Methylation

194. A patient with cholelithiasis fell ill with mechanic jaundic E. Examination revealed that the stone was in the common bile duct. What bile-excreting ducts make up the obturated duct?
*a. Ductus hepaticus communis et ductus cysticus
b. Ductus hepaticus communis et ductus choledochus
c. Ductus hepaticus sinister et ductus cysticus
d. Ductus hepaticus dexter et ductus cysticus
e. Ductus hepaticus dexter et sinister

195. A 25 year old man has spent a long time in the sun under high air humidity. As a result of it his body temperature rose up to 39oC. What pathological process is it?
*a. Hyperthermia
b. Hypothermia
c. Infectious fever
d. Noninfectious fever
e. Burn disease

196. A 70 year old female patient was diagnosed with fracture of left femoral neck accompanied by disruption of ligament of head of femur. The branch of the following artery is damaged:
*a. Obturator
b. Internal pudendal
c. External iliac
d. Inferior gluteal
e. Femoral

197. Examination of a pregnant woman revealed twice as much concentration of fibrinogen in blood plasm. What ESR can this woman have?
*a. 40-50 mm/h
b. 10-15 mm/h
c. 5-10 mm/h
d. 2-12 mm/h
e. 0-5 mm/h

198. A family of students who came from Africa got a child with anemia signs. The child died soon. Examination revealed that the childs erythrocytes have abnormal semilunar shap E. Specify genotypes of the childs parents:
a. Аа х аа
b. АА х АА
*c. Аа х Аа
d. аа х аа
e. Аа х АА

199. According to the model of double DNA helix that was suggested by Watson and Creek, it was established that one of chains would not be lost during replication and the second chain would be synthesized complementary to the first on E. What way of replication is it?
*a. Semiconservative
b. Dispersed
c. Conservative
d. Identical
e. Analogous

200. A patient underwent appendectomy. In the postoperative period he has been taking an antibioti C. The patient complains about hearing impairment and vestibular disorders. What group of antibiotics has such by-effects?
a. Penicillins
b. Cephalosporins
c. Macrolides
d. Tetracyclines
*e. Aminoglycosides

