1. Characteristic sign of glycogenosis is muscle pain during physical work. Blood examination usually reveals hypoglycemia. This pathology is caused by congenital deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Lysosomal glycosidase
*b. Glycogen phosphorylase
c. Alpha-amylase
d. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
e. Gamma-amylase

2. Histologic specimen of a kidney demonstrates cells closely adjoined to the renal corpuscle in the distal convoluted tubule. Their basement membrane is extremely thin and has no folds. These cells sense the changes in sodium content of urine and influence renin secretion occurring in juxtaglomerular cells. Name these cells:
a. Juxtaglomerular cells
b. Podocytes
c. Glomerular capillary endothelial cells
*d. Macula densa cells
e. Mesangial cells

3. A 46-year-old female patient has continuous history of progressive muscular (Duchenne’s) dystrophy. Which blood enzyme changes will be of diagnostic value in this case?
a. Adenylate cyclase
*b. Creatine phosphokinase
c. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
d. Lactate dehydrogenase
e. Glutamate dehydrogenase

4. A laboratory experiment on a dog was used to study central parts of auditory system. One of the mesencephalon structures was destroyed. The dog has lost the orienting response to auditory signals. What structure was destroyed?
a. Superior colliculi of corpora quadrigemina
b. Reticular formation nuclei
c. Red nucleus
*d. Inferior colliculi of corpora quadrigemina
e. Substantia nigra

5. A patient has decreased concentration of magnesium ions that are required for ribosomes connection to granular endoplasmic reticulum. This condition is known to disrupt the process of protein biosynthesis. Disruption occurs at the following stage:
a. Replication
b. Transcription
*c. Translation
d. Amino acids activation
e. Processing

6. A 6-year-old child with suspected active tuberculous process has undergone diagnostic Mantoux test. What immunobiological preparation was injected?
a. DTP vaccine
b. BCG vaccine
*c. Tuberculin
d. Tularinum
e. Td vaccine

7. During postembryonal haemopoiesis in red bone marrow the cells of one of the cellular differons demonstrate gradual decrease in cytoplasmic basophilia as well as increase in oxyphilia, the nucleus is being forced out. Such morphological changes are typical for the following haemopoiesis type:
a. Lymphopoiesis
b. Eosinophil cytopoiesis
c. Basophil cytopoiesis
*d. Erythropoiesis
e. Neutrophil cytopoiesis

8. When taking exams students often have dry mouth. The mechanism that causes this state results from the following reflexes:
a. Unconditioned parasympathetic
b. Unconditioned sympathetic
c. Unconditioned peripheral
*d. Conditioned sympathetic
e. Conditioned parasympathetic

9. A 67-year-old patient with clinical diagnosis of chronic bronchitis, pneumosclerosis, and cardiopulmonary decompensation has the biopsy material taken from the suspicious area in his right bronchus mucosa. Cellular and tissue atypism along with pearly bodies can be histologically detected. What pathologic process is characterized by the described histological changes?
a. Squamous cell metaplasia of bronchial mucosa
*b. Squamous cell carcinoma of bronchus with keratinization
c. Bronchiectasis
d. Polypoid chronic bronchitis
e. Acute bronchitis

10. A microspecimen of heart shows rectangular cells from50 to 120 micrometers large with central position of nucleus and developed myofibrils. The cells are connected by intercalated discs. These cells are responsible for the following function:
*a. Function of heart contractions
b. Endocrine
c. Regeneratory
d. Protective
e. Function of impulse conduction

11. Untrained people often have muscle pain after sprints as a result of lactate accumulation. This can be caused by intensification of the following biochemical process:
*a. Glycolysis
b. Pentose phosphate pathway
c. Glycogenesis
d. Lipogenesis
e. Gluconeogenesis

12. Poisoning caused by botulinum toxin that prevents calcium ions from entering axone nerve endings of motoneurons is lifethreatening because it can lead to:
a. Vomiting
b. Diarrhea
c. Cardiac arrest
d. Vasotonic disorder
*e. Respiratory arrest

13. Increased HDL levels decrease the risk of atherosclerosis.What is themechanism of HDL anti-atherogenic action?
a. They promote absorption of cholesterol in the intestine
*b. They remove cholesterol from tissues
c. They are involved in the breakdown of cholesterol
d. They supply tissues with cholesterol
e. They activate the conversion of cholesterol to bile acids

14. It has been found out that one of a pesticide components is sodium arsenate that blocks lipoic acid. Which enzyme activity is impaired by this pesticide?
a. Methemoglobin reductase
b. Microsomal oxidation
*c. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
d. Glutathione peroxidase
e. Glutathione reductase

15. A drycleaner’s worker has been found to have hepatic steatosis. This pathology can be caused by the disruption of synthesis of the following substance:
a. Cholic acid
*b. Phosphatidylcholine
c. Urea
d. Tristearin
e. Phosphatidic acid

16. A 35-year-old man with peptic ulcer disease has undergone antrectomy. After the surgery secretion of the following gastrointestinal hormone will be disrupted the most:
a. Cholecystokinin
b. Neurotensin
c. Histamine
d. Secretin
*e. Gastrin

17. Atretic bodies and developed yellow body can be observed along with follicles of various orders in an ovary specimen. What stage of ovarian and menstrual cycle is characterized by the described ovary condition?
a. Menstrual
b. Regeneration
c. Follicle growth
*d. Premenstrual
e. Postmenstrual

18. A 16-year-old adolescent is diagnosed with hereditary UDP (uridine diphosphate) glucuronyltransferase deficiency. Laboratory tests revealed hyperbilirubinemia caused mostly by increased blood content of the following substance:
*a. Unconjugated bilirubin
b. Urobilinogen
c. Biliverdine
d. Stercobilinogen
e. Conjugated bilirubin

19. Prior to glucose utilization in cells it is transported inside cells from extracellular space through plasmatic membrane. This process is stimulated by the following hormone:
a. Glucagon
b. Aldosterone
c. Adrenalin
*d. Insulin
e. Thyroxin

20. After implantation of a cardiac valve a young man systematically takes indirect anticoagulants. His state was complicated by hemorrhage.What substance content has decreased in blood?
a. Haptoglobin
b. Creatin
c. Ceruloplasmin
*d. Prothrombin
e. Heparin

21. A 12-year-old patient has white nonpigmented spots on the skin. The spots appeared after the patient became 10 years old, and they constantly grow. This spots appeared due to the lack of the following skin cells:
a. Adipocytes
b. Plasmocytes
c. Labrocytes
*d. Melanocytes
e. Fibrocytes

22. A group of Ukrainian tourists returning from Samarqand was bringing with them gerbils. During examination in customs office ulcers were detected on the skin of the animals. What protozoa is the most likely to cause the disease in the animals, if mosquitos are the carriers?
a. Toxoplasma gondii
*b. Leishmania tropica major
c. Plasmodium falciparum
d. Balantidium coli
e. Trypanosoma cruzi

23. A 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with acute right distal pneumonia. Sputum inoculation revealed that the causative agent is resistant to penicillin and senstive to macrolides. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Tetracycline
b. Streptomycin
c. Ampicillin
*d. Azithromycin
e. Gentamycin

24. To an emergency ward a 7-year-old child was delivered in the condition of allergic shock caused by a bee sting. High concentration of histamine is observed in blood. Production of this amine is the result of the following reaction:
*a. Decarboxylation
b. Dehydrogenation
c. Reduction
d. Deaminization
e. Hydroxylation

25. A 65-year-old man suffering from gout complains of pain in his kidneys. Ultrasonic examination revealed kidney stones. A certain substance in increased concentration can cause kidney stones formation. Name this substance:
a. Bilirubin
b. Cholesterol
*c. Uric acid
d. Urea
e. Cystine

26. Sex chromatin was detected during examination of a man’s buccal epithelium. It is characteristic of the following chromosome disease:
a. Down’s disease
b. Triple X syndrome
c. Hypophosphatemic rickets
*d. Klinefelter’s syndrome
e. Turner’s syndrome

27. Pure culture of microorganisms was obtained from pharynx of a child with suspected diphtheria.Morphologic, tinctorial, cultural, and biochemical properties of the microorganisms were studied and revealed to be characteristic of diphtheria agents. What investigation should be additionally performed to make a conclusion, that these microorganisms are pathogenic diphtheria bacilli?
a. Determine proteolytic properties
b. Determine cystinase activity
c. Determine amylolytic activity
*d. Determine toxigenic properties
e. Determine urease activity

28. Autopsy of a man who had tuberculosis revealed a 3x2 cm large cavity in the superior lobe of the right lung. The cavity was interconnected with a bronchus, its wall was dense and consisted of three layers: the internal layer was pyogenic, themiddle layer was made of tuberculous granulation tissue and the external one was made of connective tissue.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibrous focal tuberculosis
b. Acute focal tuberculosis
c. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
*d. Fibrous cavernous tuberculosis
e. Tuberculoma

29. A 7-year-old child has acute onset of disease: temperature rise up to 38°C, rhinitis, cough, lacrimation, and large-spot rash on the skin. Pharyngeal mucosa is edematous, hyperemic, with whitish spots in the buccal area. What kind of inflammation causes the changes in the buccal mucosa?
a. Suppurative inflammation
b. Hemorrhagic inflammation
c. Serous inflammation
*d. Catarrhal inflammation
e. Fibrinous inflammation

30. Analysis of sputum taken from a patient with suspected pneumonia revealed slightly elongated gram-positive diplococci with pointed opposite ends. What microorganisms were revealed in the sputum?
a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Neisseria meningitidis
c. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
*d. Streptococcus pneumoniae
e. Klebsiella pneumoniae

31. Serological diagnostics of infectious diseases is based upon specific interaction with antigenes. Specify the serological reaction that underlies adhesion of microorganisms when they are affected by specific antibodies in presence of an electrolyte:
a. Hemadsorption reaction
b. Neutralization reaction
c. Precipitation reaction
d. Complement-binding reaction
*e. Agglutination reaction

32. A 4-year-old child was admitted to an orthopaedic department with displaced shin fracture. Bone fragments reposition requires analgesia. What drug should be chosen?
*a. Promedol
b. Morphine hydrochloride
c. -
d. Panadol
e. Analgin

33. Doctors make mostly radial incisions during mammary gland surgery. What particulars of anatomical organizationmake such surgical technique preferable?
a. Lobe bases radiate from nipples
b. Vertical position of gland lobes
c. -
*d. Lobe apexes converge towards nipples
e. Transversal position of gland lobes

34. A 41-year-old man has a history of recurrent attacks of heartbeats (paroxysms), profuse sweating, headaches. Examination revealed hypertension, hyperglycemia, increased basal metabolic rate, and tachycardia. These clinical presentations are typical for the following adrenal pathology:
*a. Hyperfunction of the medulla
b. Hyperfunction of the adrenal cortex
c. Primary aldosteronism
d. Hypofunction of the adrenal cortex
e. Hypofunction of the medulla

35. A 12-year-old child has developed nephritic syndrome (proteinuria, hematuria, cylindruria) 2 weeks after the case of tonsillitis, which is a sign of affected glomerular basement membrane in the kidneys. What mechanism is the most likely to cause the basement membrane damage?
a. Cytotoxic
*b. Immune complex
c. Antibody-mediated
d. Granulomatous
e. Reaginic

36. Several minutes after a dentist administered novocaine for local anaesthesia of a patient’s tooth, the following symptoms sharply developed in the patient: fatigue, skin itching. Objectively the following can be observed: skin hyperemia, tachycardia, BP dropped down to 70/40 mm Hg. What kind of allergic reaction is this pathology?
a. Cell-mediated immune reaction
b. Immune complex
c. Cytotoxic
d. Stimulating
*e. Anaphylactic

37. A patient with probable liver abscess was delivered to a surgical department. The patient for a long time had been on an assignment in an African country and had recurrent cases of acute gastrointestinal disturbance. What protozoan disease can it be?
a. Leishmaniasis
b. Trypanosomiasis
*c. Amebiasis
d. Malaria
e. Toxoplasmosis

38. Work in a mine is known to cause inhalation of large amounts of coal dust. Inhaled coal dust can be detected in the following pulmonary cells:
a. Pericapillary cells
*b. Alveolar macrophages
c. Secretory epithelial cells
d. Respiratory epithelial cells
e. Capillary endothelial cells

39. Electrical activity of neurons is being measured. They fire prior to and at the beginning of inhalation. Where are these neurons situated?
a. Spinal cord
b. Cerebral cortex
c. Diencephalon
d. Mesencephalon
*e. Medulla oblongata

40. Electrocardiogramanalysis demonstrates that cardiac cycle of a human equals 1 second. It means that heart rate per minute equals:
a. 70
b. 50
*c. 60
d. 80
e. 100

41. Glomerular filtration of a person, who has been starving for a long time, has increased by 20%. The most likely cause of filtration changes in the given conditions is:
a. Increase of renal plasma flow
*b. Decrease of blood plasma oncotic pressure
c. Increase of renal filter permeability
d. Increase of systemic blood pressure
e. Increase of filtration factor

42. Cells of healthy liver actively synthesize glycogen and proteins. What organelles are the most developed in them?
a. Cell center
b. Mitochondria
c. Peroxisomes
*d. Granular and agranular endoplasmic reticulum
e. Lysosomes

43. Atria of an experimental animal were superdistended with blood, which resulted in decreased reabsorption of Na+ and water in renal tubules. This can be explained by the influence of the following factor on kidneys:
a. Aldosterone
b. Angiotensin
c. Vasopressin
*d. Natriuretic hormone
e. Renin

44. A patient with hypertensic crisis has increased content of angiotensin II in blood. Angiotensin pressor effect is based on:
a. Vasopressin production stimulation
b. Activation of kinin–kallikrein system
c. Activation of biogenic amine synthesis
d. Prostaglandin hyperproduction
*e. Contraction of arteriole muscles

45. A 43-year-old-patient has arterial hypertension caused by increase in cardiac output and general peripheral resistance. Specify the variant of hemodynamic development of arterial hypertension in the given case:
a. Hypokinetic
b. Hyperkinetic
*c. Eukinetic
d. Combined
e. -

46. A patient has been hospitalised with provisional diagnosis of virus B hepatitis. Serological reaction based on complementation of antigen with antibody chemically bound to peroxidase or alkaline phosphatase has been used for disease diagnostics. Name this serological reaction:
a. Bordet-Gengou test
b. Antigen-binding assay
c. Radioimmunoassay technique
d. Immunofluorescence test
*e. Immune-enzyme analysis

47. A surgeon has to find the common hepatic duct during operative intervention for treatment of concrements in the gall ducts. The common hepatic duct is located between the leaves of:
a. Venous ligament
*b. Hepatoduodenal ligament
c. Hepatorenal ligament
d. Hepatogastric ligament
e. Round ligament of liver

48. It is known that the gene responsible for development of blood groups according to AB0 system has three allele variants. Existence of the IV blood group can be explained by the following variability form:
a. Genocopy
b. Phenocopy
c. Mutational
d. Phenotypic
*e. Combinative

49. When measuring power inputs of a person by the method of indirect calorimetry the following results were obtained: oxygen consumption is 1000 ml and carbon dioxide production is 800 ml per minute. The person under examination has the following respiratory coefficient:
a. 1,25
b. 0,84
c. 1,0
*d. 0,8
e. 0,9

50. On examination of a newborn boy’s external genitalia a fissure in the urethra opening on the inferior surface of his penis is detected.What maldevelopment is it?
a. Monorchism
b. Cryptorchidism
c. Hermaphroditism
d. Epispadia
*e. Hypospadias

51. Poisoning caused by mercury (II) chloride (corrosive sublimate) occurred in the result of safety rules violation. In 2 days the patient’s diurnal diuresis became 620 ml. The patient developed headache, vomiting, convulsions, dyspnea; moist crackles are observed in the lungs. Name this pathology:
a. Glomerulonephritis
b. Pyelonephritis
c. Chronic renal failure
d. Uremic coma
*e. Acute renal failure

52. For people adapted to high external temperatures profuse sweating is not accompanied by loss of large volumes of sodium chloride. This is caused by the effect the following hormone has on the perspiratory glands:
*a. Aldosterone
b. Cortisol
c. Natriuretic
d. Thyroxin
e. Vasopressin

53. Along with normal hemoglobin types there can be pathological ones in the organism of an adult. Name one of them:
a. HbA2
b. HbO2
c. HbF
d. HbA1
*e. HbS

54. Emotional stress causes activation of hormon-sensitive triglyceride lipase in the adipocytes. What secondary mediator takes part in this process?
a. Adenosine monophosphate
b. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
*c. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
d. Diacylglycerol
e. Ions of Fe2+

55. A patient has been diagnosed with alkaptonuria. Choose an enzyme that can cause this pathology when deficient:
a. Dioxyphenylalanine decarboxylase
*b. Homogentisic acid oxidase
c. Glutamate dehydrogenase
d. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
e. Pyruvate dehydrogenase

56. As a result of a continuous chronic encephalopathy a patient has developed spontaneous motions and disorder of torso muscle tone. These are the symptoms of the disorder of the following conduction tract:
a. Tractus corticospinalis
b. Tractus spinothalamicus
c. Tractus tectospinalis
*d. Tractus rubrospinalis
e. Tractus corticonuclearis

57. A child is 10 years old. The following presentations have developed: sharp pain during swallowing, swollen neck, body temperature rise up to 39,0°C, bright-red finely papular rash all over the body. Pharynx and tonsils are sharply hyperemic ("flaming pharynx"), "crimson tongue". On the tonsils surface there are isolated greyish necrosis focuses.What disease it might be?
a. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
b. Influenza
c. Measles
*d. Scarlet fever
e. Diphtheria

58. A patient suffers from intermittent fevers and normalizations of body temperature that occur during the day. The temperature rise is observed regularly every fourth day. Specify the type of temperature curve:
a. Febris continua
b. Febris hectica
c. Febris remitens
*d. Febris internuttens
e. Febris reccurens

59. A woman with the III (В), Rh–blood group gave birth to a child with the II (А) blood group. The child is diagnosed with hemolytic disease of newborn caused by rhesus incompatibility. What blood group and Rh can the father have?
a. III (B), Rh+
b. I (0), Rh+
*c. II (А), Rh+
d. I (0), Rh-
e. II (A), Rh-

60. A patient is diagnosed with hereditary coagulopathy that is characterised by factor VIII deficiency. Specify the phase of blood clotting during which coagulation will be disrupted in the given case:
a. Thrombin formation
b. Clot retraction
c. -
*d. Thromboplastin formation
e. Fibrin formation

61. Angiocardiography of a 60-year-old man revealed constriction of the vessel located in the left coronary sulcus of his heart. Name this pathological vessel:
a. Ramus interventricularis anterior
*b. Ramus circumflexus
c. A. coronaria dextra
d. Ramus interventricularis posterior
e. V. cordis parva

62. A patient complains of pain in the right lateral abdomen. Palpation revealed a dense, immobile, tumor-like formation. The tumor is likely to be found in the following part of the digestive tube:
a. Colon descendens
b. Colon transversum
*c. Colon ascendens
d. Colon sigmoideum
e. Caecum

63. During regular check-up a child is detected with interrupted mineralization of the bones. What vitamin deficiency can be the cause?
a. Cobalamin
*b. Calciferol
c. Tocopherol
d. Riboflavin
e. Folic acid

64. During hystological analysis of the lymph node situated in the posterior neck triangle of an 18-year-old patient a morphologist detected a cluster of cells including the following: isolated multinucleate Reed-Sternberg cells, large and small Hodgkin’s cells and numerous lymphocytes, isolated plasma cells, eosinophils. What disease has developed in the patient?
*a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Burkitt’s lymphoma
c. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
d. Lymphocytic lymphoma
e. Nodular lymphoma

65. An infant has pylorospasm, weakness, hypodynamia, convulsions as a result of frequent vomiting. What kind of acid-base disbalance is it?
a. Excretory acidosis
b. Exogenous nongaseous acidosis
c. Gaseous alkalosis
*d. Excretory alkalosis
e. Metabolic acidosis

66. A 39-year-old man who had been operated for the stomach ulcer died 7 days after the surgery. Autopsy revealed that peritoneal leaves were dull, plephoric, covered with massive yellow-greenish films, the peritoneal cavity contained about 300 ml of thick yellow-greenish liquid. What pathologic process was revealed in the peritoneal cavity?
a. Fibrinous haemorrhagic peritonitis
*b. Fibrinous suppurative peritonitis
c. Fibrinous serous peritonitis
d. Serous peritonitis
e. Peritoneal commissures

67. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors are widely used as psychopharmacological drugs. They change the level of nearly all neurotransmitters in synapses, with the following neurotransmitter being the exception:
*a. Acetylcholine
b. Adrenaline
c. Serotonin
d. Dopamine
e. Noradrenaline

68. A patient with urolithiasis has developed severe pain attacks. For pain shock prevention he was administered an antispasmodic narcotic analgesic along with atropine. Name this drug:
*a. Promedol
b. Tramadol
c. Morphine hydrochloride
d. Ethylmorphine hydrochloride
e. Nalorphine

69. A patient with acute myocardial infarction has been administered heparin as a part of complex therapy. Some time after heparin injection the patient developed hematuria. What heparin antagonist should be injected to remove the complication?
a. Neodicumarin
b. Fibrinogen
c. Vicasol
d. Aminocaproic acid
*e. Protamine sulfate

70. A 37-year-old woman complains of headache, vertigo, troubled sleep, numbness of limbs. For the last 6 years she has been working at a gas-discharge lamp-producing factory in a lead-processing shop. Blood test findings: low hemoglobin and RBC level, serum iron concentration exceeds the norm by several times. Specify the type of anemia:
a. Minkowsky-Shauffard disease
b. Iron-deficiency anemia
*c. Iron refractory anemia
d. Hypoplastic anemia
e. Metaplastic anemia

71. Despite the administration of cardiotonics and thiazide diuretic a patient with chronic heart failure has persistent edemas and the risk of ascites arose.What medication should be administered to enhance the diuretic effect of the administered drugs?
a. Amiloride
b. Furosemide
*c. Spironolactone
d. Clopamide
e. Manithol

72. Acute renal impairment caused death of a patient with hemorrhage. Autopsy revealed enlarged kidneys with broad palepink cortical layer expressively demarcated from dark-red renal pyramids. Macroscopic examination revealed lack of epithelial nuclei of convoluted tubules, tubulorrhexis, phlebostasis. The cell nuclei of choroid glomus and straight tubules were present. What pathology is it?
a. Nephrosis
*b. Necronephrosis
c. Glomerulonephritis
d. Infarction
e. Pyelonephritis

73. A 3-year-old child with meningeal symptoms died. Postmortem macroscopy of the pia matter revealed miliary nodules which were microscopically represented by a focus of caseous necrosis with masses of epithelioid and lymphoid cells with large cells containing crescent-shaped peripheral nuclei situated between them. Specify the type of meningitis in the child:
a. Syphilitic
b. Grippal
c. Meningococcal
*d. Tuberculous
e. Brucellar

74. A 66-year-old woman had intravenous injection of magnesium sulfate solution to stop hypertensive crisis. However her arterial pressure did not decrease and after repeated introduction of the same preparation she developed sluggishness, slow response to stimuli; the patient is unconsciousness and her respiration is inhibited. What preparation is antagonist of magnesium sulfate and can remove the symptoms of its overdose?
a. Potassium permanganate
*b. Calcium chloride
c. Sodium chloride
d. Potassium chloride
e. Activated carbon

75. A patient working at a pig farm complains of paroxysmal abdominal pain, liquid feces with mucus and blood, headache, weakness, fever. Examination of large intestine revealed ulcers from 1 mm up to several cm in diameter, feces contained oval unicellular organisms with cilia. What disease can be suspected?
a. Amebiasis
b. Lambliasis
c. Trichomoniasis
*d. Balantidiasis
e. Toxoplasmosis

76. An unconscious patient was delivered by ambulance to the hospital. On objective examination the patient was found to present no reflexes, periodical convulsions, irregular breathing. After laboratory examination the patient was diagnosed with hepatic coma. Disorders of the central nervous system develop due to accumulation of the following metabolite:
a. Urea
b. Bilirubin
c. Histamine
*d. Ammonia
e. Glutamine

77. When playing a child received a hit to the presternum region.As a result of this trauma an organ located behind the presternumwas damaged. Name this organ:
a. Heart
b. Thyroid gland
*c. Thymus
d. Pericardium
e. Larynx

78. A child suffers from dry cough. What non-narcotic antitussive drug will relieve the patient’s condition?
a. Althaea officinalis root extract
*b. Glaucine hydrochloride
c. Morphine hydrochloride
d. Codeine phosphate
e. Potassium iodide

79. A patient complains of acute pain attacks in the right lumbar region. During examination a nephrolithic obturation of the right ureter in the region between its abdominal and pelvic segments has been detected. What anatomical boundary exists between those two segments?
a. Linea inguinalis
*b. Linea terminalis
c. Linea arcuata
d. Linea semilunaris
e. Linea transversa

80. A patient has insufficient blood supply to the kidneys, which has caused the development of pressor effect due to constriction of arterial resistance vessels. This condition results from the vessels being strongly affected by the following substance:
a. Angiotensinogen
b. Catecholamines
c. Norepinephrine
*d. Angiotensin II
e. Renin

81. In a village a case of anthrax has been registered. Medical services began epidemiologically indicated specific prophylaxis of population against anthrax.What preparation was used for this purpose?
a. Anatoxin
*b. Live vaccine
c. Chemical vaccine
d. Inactivated vaccine
e. Genetically engineered vaccine

82. Experimental stimulation of the sympathetic nerve branches that innervate the heart caused an increase in the force of heart contractions because the membrane of typical cardiomyocytes permitted an increase in:
a. Potassium ion entry
b. Calcium and potassium ion exit
c. Calcium ion exit
d. Potassium ion exit
*e. Calcium ion entry

83. According to the results of glucose tolerance test a patient has no disorder of carbohydrate tolerance. Despite that glucose is detected in the patients’s urine (5 mmol/l). The patient has been diagnosed with renal diabetes. What renal changes cause glucosuria in this case?
a. Increased glucose filtration
*b. Decreased activity of glucose reabsorption enzymes
c. Exceeded glucose reabsorption threshold
d. Increased activity of glucose reabsorption enzymes
e. Increased glucose secretion

84. Alveolar space of acinus was invaded by bacteria that interacted with the surfactant. This led to the activation of the cells that are localized in the alveolar walls and on the surface. Name these cells:
a. Alveolocytes type I
b. Clara cells
c. Alveolocytes type II
*d. Alveolar macrophages
e. Endothelial cells

85. Parents of a 5-year-old boy report him to have frequent colds that develop into pneumonias, presence of purulent rashes on the skin. Laboratory tests have revealed the following: absence of immunoglobulins of any type, and naked cells are absent from the lymph nodes punctate. What kind of immune disorder is it?
a. Louis-Barr syndrome
*b. X-linked hypogammaglobulinemia (Bruton type agammaglobulinemia)
c. Hypoplastic anemia
d. Autosomal recessive agammaglobulinaemia (Swiss type)
e. Agranulocytosis

86. Examination of a 42-year-old patient revealed a tumour of adenohypophysis. Objectively: the patient’s weight is 117 kg, he has moon-like hyperemic face, redblue striae of skin distension on his belly. Osteoporosis and muscle dystrophy are present. AP is 210/140 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Essential hypertension
c. Cushing’s syndrome
d. Conn’s disease
*e. Cushing’s disease

87. 2 days after labour a woman developed shock along with DIC syndrome that caused her death. Autopsy revealed purulent endomyometritis, regional purulent lymphangitis, lymphadenitis and purulent thrombophlebitis. There were also dystrophic alterations and interstitial inflammation of parenchymal organs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chorioadenoma destruens
b. Hydatid mole
c. Syphilis
d. Tuberculosis of genital organs
*e. Septicemia

88. In case of alkaptonuria, homogentisic acid is excreted in urine in large amounts. The development of this disease is associated with metabolic disorder of the following amino acid:
a. Alanine
b. Phenylalanine
*c. Tyrosine
d. Methionine
e. Asparagine

89. When blood circulation in the damaged tissue is restored, lactate accumulation stops and glucose consumption decelerates. These metabolic changes are caused by activation of the following process:
a. Gluconeogenesis
b. Glycogen biosynthesis
c. Anaerobic glycolysis
d. Lipolysis
*e. Aerobic glycolysis

90. Adoctor examined a patient, studied the blood analyses, and reached a conclusion, that peripheral immunogenesis organs are affected. What organs are the most likely to be affected?
a. Thymus
b. Red bone marrow
c. Yellow bone marrow
*d. Tonsils
e. Kidneys

91. A doctor asked a patient to make a deep exhalation after a normal inhalation. What muscles contract during such exhalation?
a. External intercostal muscles
b. Trapezius muscles
c. Pectoral muscles
*d. Abdominal muscles
e. Diaphragm

92. A 4-year-old child with hereditary renal lesion has signs of rickets; vitamin D concentration in blood is normal. What is the most probable cause of rickets development?
a. Hypofunction of parathyroid glands
b. Lack of calcium in food
c. Increased excretion of calcium
d. Hyperfunction of parathyroid glands
*e. Impaired synthesis of calcitriol

93. In a cat with decerebrate rigidity the muscle tone is to be decreased. This can be achieved by:
a. Stimulation of the otolithic vestibular receptors
b. Stimulation of the vestibulocochlear nerve
c. Stimulation of the ampullar vestibular receptors
*d. Destruction of the vestibular nuclei of Deiters
e. Stimulation of the vestibular nuclei of Deiters

94. Autopsy of a 5-year-old child revealed in the area of vermis of cerebellum a soft greyish-pink node 2 cm in diameter with blurred margins and areas of haemorrhage. Histologically this tumour consisted of atypical monomorphous small round cells with large polymorphous nuclei. What tumour is it?
a. Oligodendroglioma
*b. Medulloblastoma
c. Glioblastoma
d. Meningioma
e. Astrocytoma

95. Surface with an intact toad on it was inclined to the right. Tone of extensor muscles became reflectory higher due to the activation of the following receptors:
a. Proprioreceptors
*b. Vestibuloreceptors of utricle and saccule
c. Mechanoreceptors of foot skin
d. Vestibuloreceptors of semicircular ducts
e. Photoreceptors of retina

96. A patient with high-titer antinuclear antibodies died from progressing renal impairment. Autopsy revealed mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis and abacterial polypous endocarditis. Periarterial bulbar sclerosis was detected in spleen and productive proliferative vasculitis in skin.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Rheumatism
c. Periarteritis nodosa
d. Dermatomyositis
e. Nephrotic syndrome

97. When studying the signs of pulmonary ventilation, reduction of forced expiratory volume has been detected. What is the likely cause of this phenomenon?
*a. Obstructive pulmonary disease
b. Increase of inspiratory reserve volume
c. Increase of functional residual lung capacity
d. Increase of pulmonary residual volume
e. Increase of respiratory volume

98. A specimen of a parenchymal organ shows poorly delineated hexagonal lobules surrounding a central vein, and the interlobular connective tissue contains embedded triads (an artery, a vein and an excretory duct).What organ is it?
a. Spleen
b. Thyroid
c. Pancreas
d. Thymus
*e. Liver

99. A patient had a trauma that caused dysfunction of motor centres regulating activity of head muscles. In what parts of cerebral cortex can the respective centre normally be located?
a. Superior parietal lobule
b. Angular gyrus
c. Superior part of precentral gyrus
d. Supramarginal gyrus
*e. Inferior part of precentral gyrus

100. During intravenous saline transfusion a patient’s condition deteriorated drastically, and the patient died from asphyxiation. Autopsy revealed acute venous congestion of internal organs with sharp right heart dilatation. When the right ventricle was punctured underwater, the bubbles escaped. What pathological process occurred in the patient?
a. Adipose embolism
b. Gaseous embolism
*c. Air embolism
d. Tissue embolism
e. Thromboembolism

101. Diseases of respiratory system and circulatory disorders impair the transport of oxygen, thus causing hypoxia. Under these conditions the energy metabolism is carried out by anaerobic glycolysis. As a result, the following substance is generated and accumulated in blood:
a. Fumaric acid
*b. Lactic acid
c. Glutamic acid
d. Pyruvic acid
e. Citric acid

102. Examination of a 6-month-old child revealed a delay in closure of the occipital fontanelle.When should it normally close?
a. Before the end of the second year of life
*b. Before 3 months
c. Before 6 months
d. Before the child is born
e. Before the end of the first year of life

103. Sex chromosomes of a woman didn’t separate and move to the opposite poles of a cell during gametogenesis (meiosis). The ovum was impregnated with a normal spermatozoon.Which chromosomal disease can be found in her child?
a. Down’s syndrome
b. Edwards’ syndrome
c. Cat cry syndrome
*d. Turner’s syndrome
e. Patau’s syndrome

104. A patient was prescribed loratadine to treat allergic cheilitis. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Suppresses activity of Na+/K+-ATPase
b. Suppresses activity of choline esterase
c. Blockade of adrenergic receptors
d. Increases activty of monoamine oxidase
*e. Blockade of H1-histamine receptors

105. During introduction of local anesthesia a patient has gone into anaphylactic shock. What drug must be administered to the patient?
a. Propranolol
b. Nitroglycerin
c. Diazepam
d. Atropine sulfate
*e. Epinephrine hydrochloride

106. A patient has been diagnosed with influenza. His condition drastically worsened after taking antipyretic drugs. He is unconscious, AP is 80/50 mm Hg, Ps is 140/m, body temperature dropped down to 35, 8°C. What complication developed in this patient?
a. Hypovolemia
b. Hyperthermia
*c. Collapse
d. Acidosis
e. Alkalosis

107. An alcoholic has alcoholic psychosis with evident psychomotor agitation. What neuroleptic drug should be administered for emergency aid?
a. Reserpine
b. Halothane
c. Diazepam
d. Sodium bromide
*e. Aminazine

108. During blood transfusion a patient has developed intravascular erythrocyte hemolysis. What kind of hypersensitivity does the patient have?
a. IV type (cellular cytotoxicity)
b. IV type (granulomatosis)
c. I type (anaphylactic)
d. III type (immune complex)
*e. II type (antibody-dependent)

109. In the course of an experiment thalamocortical tracts of an animal were cut. What type of sensory perception remained intact?
a. Nociceptive
*b. Olfactory
c. Exteroreceptive
d. Auditory
e. Visual

110. A 4-year-old child presents with general weakness, sore throat and deglutitive problem. After his examination a doctor suspected diphtheria and sent the material to a bacteriological laboratory. To determine the diphtheria causative agent the material should be inoculated into the following differential diagnostic medium:
*a. Blood tellurite agar
b. Ploskyrev’s agar
c. Levenshtein-Yessen agar
d. Sabouraud’s agar
e. Endo’s agar

111. When treating a patient with chronic cardiac failure a doctor detected bradycardia and deterioration of the patient’s general state. Such condition is caused by cumulative effect of a drug. Which drug of those listed below has cumulative action?
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Diphenhydramine (Dimedrol)
*c. Digoxin
d. Isosorbide
e. Retinol acetate

112. A doctor was addressed by a 30-yearoldman. There is a probability of the patient being HIV-positive. To clarify the diagnosis the doctor proposed to perform polymerase chain reaction. The basic process in this kind of investigation is:
a. Genomic mutation
b. Chromosome mutation
c. Transcription
d. Genetic recombination
*e. Gene amplification

113. Due to the use of poor-quality measles vaccine for preventive vaccination, a 1year-old child developed an autoimmune renal injury. The urine was found to contain macromolecular proteins. What process of urine formation was disturbed?
a. Reabsorption
b. Reabsorption and secretion
c. Secretion and filtration
*d. Filtration
e. Secretion

114. A 26-year-old female patient with bronchitis has been administered a broad spectrum antibiotic as a causal treatment drug. Specify this drug:
a. BCG vaccine
b. Interferon
*c. Doxycycline
d. Ambroxol
e. Dexamethasone

115. A 65-year-old man suddenly lost vision in one eye due to the retinal detachment. The patient underwent enucleation. Histological examination of the removed eye retina and choroid revealed clusters of atypical cells with marked polymorphism of cells and nuclei, with a moderate number of mitoses including the pathological ones. The cell cytoplasm and intercellular medium contained brown pigment resulting in positive DOPA reaction. Perls’ reaction was negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhage
b. Pigmented mole
*c. Melanoma
d. Cysticercosis
e. Wilson’s disease

116. During determining the blood group according to the AB0 systemwith salt solutions of monoclonal antibodies agglutination did not occur with any of the solutions.What blood group is it?
a. АВ (IV)
b. -
c. А (II)
d. В (III)
*e. 0 (I)

117. One of the factors that cause obesity is inhibition of fatty acids oxidation due to:
*a. Low level of carnitine
b. Excessive consumption of fatty foods
c. Lack of carbohydrates in the diet
d. Choline deficiency
e. Impaired phospholipid synthesis

118. During ventricular systole the cardiac muscle does not respond to additional stimulation because it is in the phase of:
a. Relational refractoriness
b. Subnormal excitability
c. There is no correct answer
*d. Absolute refractoriness
e. Hyperexcitability

119. A patient is diagnosed with acute morphine hydrochloride intoxication. Prescribe the oxidizing agent for gastric lavage:
a. Chlorhexidine (bi)gluconate
*b. Potassium permanganate
c. Sulfocamphocainum (Procaine + Sulfocamphoric acid)
d. Chloramine
e. Cerigel

120. During cell division DNA replication occurs after a signal is received from the cytoplasm, then a certain portion of the DNA helix unwinds and splits into two individual strains. What enzyme facilitates this process?
a. Restrictase
b. DNA polymerase
c. RNA polymerase
d. Ligase
*e. Helicase

121. A patient has been given atropine sulfate for rapid relief of spastic colon symptoms. The use of this drug is contraindicated during the followng disease:
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Hypotension
c. Gastric ulcer
*d. Glaucoma
e. Bradycardia

122. As an example of specific human parasites one can name Plasmodium falciparum, human pinworm and some others. The source of parasite invasion in these cases is always a human. Such specific human parasites cause the diseases that are called:
a. Zoonoses
b. Infections
c. Multifactorial diseases
*d. Anthroponoses
e. Anthropozoonoses

123. In the course of an experiment there has been increase in nerve conduction velocity. This may be caused by increase in concentration of the following ions that are present in the solution around the cell:
a. K+ and Na+
b. K+ and Cl?
*c. Na+
d. Ca2+ and Cl?
e. Ca2+

124. An HIV-positive patient’s cause of death is acute pulmonary insufficiency resulting frompneumonia. Pathohistological investigation of lungs has revealed interstitial pneumonia, alveolocyte desquamation and methamorphoses: alveolocyte enlargement, large intranuclear inclusions surrounded by lightly-coloured areas. Transformed cells resemble owl’s eye. Name the causative agent of pneumonia:
*a. Cytomegalovirus
b. Influenza virus
c. Toxoplasma
d. Candida fungi
e. Pneumococcus

125. The organisms to be identified have a nucleus surrounded by a nuclear membrane. Genetic material is concentrated predominantly in the chromosomes that consist of DNA strands and protein molecules. These cells divide mitotically. Identify these organisms:
a. Prokaryotes
b. Bacteriophages
*c. Eukaryotes
d. Viruses
e. Bacteria

126. A 2-year-old boy is diagnosed with Down syndrome. What chromosomal changes may be the cause of this disease?
a. Trisomy 13
b. Trisomy 18
c. Monosomy X
*d. Trisomy 21
e. Trisomy X

127. After a road accident a victim has tachycardia, arterial blood pressure 130/90 mm Hg, tachypnoe, the skin is pale and dry, excitation of central nervous system is observed. What shock stage is the patient most likely in?
*a. Erectile
b. Torpid
c. Agony
d. Preshock (compensation stage)
e. Terminal

128. As a result of a mechanical injury an over 10 cm long portion of a peripheral nerve was damaged. This caused an impairment of the upper limb activity. The patient was offered nerve transplantation.What glial cells will participate in regeneration and provide the trophism of the injured limb?
*a. Schwann cells
b. Protoplasmic cells
c. Ependymal cells
d. Microglia
e. Fibrous cells

129. A 47-year-old man developed intestinal colic against the background of essential hypertension. In this situation it would be most efficient to arrest the colic by administering drugs of the following group:
a. Adrenomimetics
*b. Myotropic antispasmodics
c. Sympathomimetics
d. Anticholinesterase agents
e. M-cholinomimetics

130. Microscopy of a female patient’s swabs made from vaginal secretion revealed gramnegative bean-shaped diplococci. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Clamidiosis
b. Syphilis
*c. Gonorrhoea
d. Mycoplasmosis
e. Toxoplasmosis

131. A 54-year-old woman was brought to a casualty department after a car accident. A traumatologist diagnosed her with multiple fractures of the lower extremities. What kind of embolism is most likely to develop in this case?
a. Thromboembolism
b. Tissue
*c. Adipose
d. Gaseous
e. Air

132. A therapeutist has an appointment with a 40-year-old patient complaining of recurrent pain attacks in his hallux joints and their swelling. Urine analysis revealed its marked acidity and pink colour. What substances can cause such changes in the urine?
*a. Uric acid salt
b. Ammonium salts
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Calcium phosphate
e. Chlorides

133. A 30-year-old man with diabetes mellitus type I was hospitalised. The patient is comatose. Laboratory tests revealed hyperglycemia and ketonemia. What metabolic disorder can be detected in this patient?
a. Respiratory acidosis
b. Metabolic alkalosis
*c. Metabolic acidosis
d. Respiratory alkalosis
e. Normal acid-base balance

134. A 15-year-old patient has fasting plasma glucose level 4,8 mmol/l, one hour after glucose challenge it becomes 9,0 mmol/l, in 2 hours it is 7,0 mmol/l, in 3 hours it is 4,8 mmol/l. Such parameters are characteristic of:
a. Diabetes mellitus type 1
b. Healthy person
c. Cushing’s disease
*d. Subclinical diabetes mellitus
e. Diabetes mellitus type 2

135. A patient has undergone surgical removal of a cavitary liver lesion 2 cm in diameter. It was revealed that the cavity wall was formed by dense fibrous connective tissue; the cavity contained murky thick yellowish-green fluid with an unpleasant odor. Microscopically the fluid consisted mainly of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. What pathological process are these morphological changes typical for?
a. Acute abscess
b. Empyema
c. -
*d. Chronic abscess
e. Phlegmon

136. A patient consulted a physician about chest pain, cough, fever. Roentgenography of lungs revealed eosinophilic infiltrates which were found to contain the larvae. What kind of helminthiasis are these presentations typical for?
a. Fascioliasis
b. Echinococcosis
*c. Ascariasis
d. Cysticercosis
e. Trichinosis

137. During appendectomy a patient had the a. appendicularis ligated. This vessel branches from the following artery:
a. A. mesenterica inferior
*b. A. Ileocolica
c. A. colica media
d. A. colica dextra
e. A. sigmoidea

138. A 28-year-old patient undergoing treatment in a pulmonological department has been diagnosed with pulmonary emphysema caused by splitting of alveolar septum by tissular tripsin. The disease is caused by the congenital deficiency of the following protein:
a. Transferrin
*b. ?1-proteinase inhibitor
c. Cryoglobulin
d. ?2-macroglobulin
e. Haptoglobin

139. A patient, who has been suffering for a long time from intestine disbacteriosis, has increased hemorrhaging caused by disruption of posttranslationalmodification of blood-coagulation factors II, VII, IХ, and Х in the liver. What vitamin deficiency is the cause of this condition?
a. С
b. 
c. B12
d. B_9
*e. К

140. During a surgery for femoral hernia a surgeon operates within the boundaries of femoral trigone. What structure makes up its upper margin?
a. Arcus iliopectineus
b. Lig. pectinale
c. Fascia lata
*d. Lig. inguinale
e. Lig. lacunare

141. An obstetrician-gynecologist measures pelvis size of a pregnant woman. A caliper was used to measure the distance between the two iliac crests. What measurement of large pelvis was made?
a. Distantia spinarum
b. Distantia throchanterica
*c. Distantia cristarum
d. Conjugata vera
e. Conjugata anatomica

142. A patient has arterial hypertension. What long-acting drug from the group of calcium channel blockers should be prescribed?
a. Reserpine
*b. Amlodipine
c. Pyrroxanum
d. Octadine
e. Atenolol

143. A patient has been diagnosed with URTI. Blood serum contains immunoglobulin M. What stage of infection is it?
a. Incubation
b. Prodromal
*c. Acute
d. Reconvalescence
e. Carriage

144. A43-year-old patient suffers fromacute pancreatitis with disrupted common bile duct patency. What condition can develop in this case?
a. Hemolytic jaundice
b. Hepatic coma
c. Portal hypertension
*d. Mechanical jaundice
e. Hepatocellular jaundice

145. A patient has a tumor of the eyesocket tissues behind the eyeball. Disruption of accomodation and pupil constriction is observed. What anatomical structure is damaged?
a. N. opticus
b. N. trochlearis
c. N. nasociliaris
d. N. lacrimalis
*e. Ganglion ciliare

146. Lymphocytes and other cells of our body synthesize universal antiviral agents as a response to viral invasion. Name these protein factors:
a. Interleukin –4
b. Tumor necrosis factor
c. Interleukin –2
d. Cytokines
*e. Interferon

147. A patient consulted a dentist about restricted mouth opening (trismus). Anamnesis states a stab wound of the lower extremity. What infection may cause these symptoms?
a. Tularemia
*b. Tetanus
c. Whooping cough
d. Brucellosis
e. Wound anaerobic infection

148. A patient has damaged spinal cord white matter in the middle area of the posterior white column, disrupted proprioceptive sensibility of the lower limb joints and muscles.What fibers are affected?
a. Fasciculus cuneatus
*b. Fasciculus gracilis
c. Tr. spinocerebellaris anterior
d. Tr. spinothalamicus lateralis
e. Tr. spinocerebellaris posterior

149. In an elderly person the change in heart force and vessels physical properties were detected; they can be clearly observed on graphic recording of carotid pulse waves. What method was applied?
*a. Sphygmography
b. Rheography
c. Phlebography
d. Myography
e. Plethysmography

150. A patient has developed paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia against the background of cardiac infarction.What antiarrhythmic drug should be chosen to avoid lowering cardiac output?
*a. Lidocaine hydrochloride
b. Verapamil
c. Potassium chloride
d. Propranolol
e. Procainamide

151. Electrocardiogram of a young man reveals deviation of his electrical axis of heart to the left. This phenomenon can be caused by:
a. Dilation of the left atrium
*b. Hypersthenic body type
c. Dilation of the right atrium
d. Asthenic body type
e. Dilation of the right ventricle

152. A 6-year-old child suffers from delayed growth, disrupted ossification processes, decalcification of the teeth.What can be the cause?
*a. Vitamin D deficiency
b. Insulin deficiency
c. Vitamin C deficiency
d. Hyperthyroidism
e. Decreased glucagon production

153. A 30-year-old patient’s blood test revealed the following: erythrocyte count is 6×1012/l, hemoglobin is 10,55ммоль/l. Vaquez’s disease was diagnosed. Name the leading part of pathogenesis:
a. B12-deficiency
b. Iron-deficiency
*c. Neoplastic erythroid hyperplasia
d. Hypoxia
e. Acidosis

154. A 25-year-old patient complains of increasing pain in his leg muscles occurring during walking and forcing him to make frequent stops. Objectively: skin of legs is pale, no hair-covering, toenails are with trophic changes, no pulsation of pedal arteries. The most probable cause of these changes is:
*a. Ischemia
b. Arterial hyperemia
c. Embolism
d. -
e. Venous hyperemia

155. This year influenza epidemic is characterised by patients’ body temperature varying from 36, 9°C to 37, 9°C. Such fever is called:
a. Hyperpyretic
b. High
*c. Subfebrile
d. Apyretic
e. Moderate

156. A woman complains of visual impairment. Examination revealed obesity in the patient and her fasting plasma glucose level is hyperglycemic. What diabetes complication can cause visual impairment/blindness?
*a. Microangiopathy
b. Atherosclerosis
c. Glomerulopathy
d. Neuropathy
e. Macroangiopathy

157. Prolonged treatment of hypothyroidism has caused general dystrophy, dental caries, tachycardia, tremor of extremities. What drug is the cause of these side effects?
a. Parathyreoidinum
b. Humulin (Human insulin)
*c. L-thyroxin
d. Thyrocalcitonin
e. Prednisolone

158. A 3-year-old child has eaten some strawberries. Soon he developed a rash and itching. What was found in the child’s leukogram?
a. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
b. Hypolymphemia
*c. Eosinophilia
d. Monocytosis
e. Lymphocytosis

159. A patient has been found to have a marked dilatation of the saphenous veins in the region of anterior abdominal wall around the navel. This is symptomatic of pressure increase in the following vessel:
a. V. mesenterica superior
*b. V. portae hepatis
c. V. cava inferior
d. V. cava superior
e. V. mesenterica inferior

160. Cholesterol content in blood serum of a 12-year-old boy is 25 mmol/l. Anamnesis states hereditary familial hypercholesterolemia caused by synthesis disruption of receptor-related proteins for:
a. High-density lipoproteins
b. Very low-density lipoproteins
c. Middle-density lipoproteins
*d. Low-density lipoproteins
e. Chylomicrons

161. Obesity is a common disease. The aim of its treatment is to lower content of neutral fats in the body. What hormonsensitive enzyme is the most important for intracellular lipolysis?
a. Diacylglycerol lipase
b. Monoacylglycerol lipase
c. Protein kinase
d. Adenylate kinase
*e. Triacylglycerol lipase

162. A 40-year-old woman was diagnosed with glomerulonephritis based on her clinical symptoms and the results of urine analysis. Anamnesis states chronic tonsillitis. What microorganisms are the most likely cause for her kidney damage?
*a. Streptococci
b. Escherichia
c. Meningococci
d. Mycoplasma
e. Staphylococci

163. A man is suffering from diarrhea. In summer he spent his vacation in the south at the sea coast. Bacteria with the following properties were detected in his feces: gramnegative curved mobile monotrichous bacilli that do not produce spores or capsules. They are undemanding to nutrient medium but require alkaline reaction (рН 8,5-09,5). Described are the agents of the following enteric infection:
a. Colienteritis
b. Pseudotuberculosis
c. Shigellosis
d. Typhoid fever
*e. Cholera

164. A patient is diagnosed with chronic atrophic gastritis attended by deficiency of Castle’s intrinsic factor.What type of anemia does the patient have?
*a. B12-deficiency anemia
b. Hemolytic anemia
c. Protein-deficiency anemia
d. Iron-deficiency anemia
e. Iron refractory anemia

165. A pregnant woman was detected with IgM to rubella virus. An obstetriciangynecologist recommended therapeutic abortion due to the high risk of teratogenic affection of the fetus. Detection of IgM was of great importance as it is these specific immunoglobulins that:
a. Penetrate placental barrier
b. Are associated with anaphylactic reactions
c. Are the main factor of antiviral protection
*d. Indicate recent infection
e. Have the largest molecular weight

166. A patient is diagnosed with cardiac infarction. Blood test for cardiospecific enzymes activity was performed. Which of the enzymes has three isoforms?
a. Pyruvate kinase
*b. Creatine kinase
c. Aspartate transaminase
d. Lactate dehydrogenase
e. Alanine transaminase

167. A 50-year-old man, who has been suffering from chronic hepatic failure for several years, has developed ascites. What is the main mechanism of this disorder development?
*a. Increased pressure in portal vein system
b. Increased content of low-density and very low-density lipoproteins in blood
c. Increase of blood oncotic pressure
d. Neurotoxins appearing in blood
e. Decrease of albumin and globulin synthesis in liver

168. A 30-year-old man has sustained an injury to his thorax in a traffic incident, which caused disruption of his external respiration. What type of ventilatory difficulty can be observed in the given case?
a. Restrictive pulmonary ventilatory impairment
b. Impaired ventilation regulation dysfunction
c. Cardiovascular collapse
*d. Restrictive extrapulmonary ventilatory impairment
e. Obstructive ventilatory impairment

169. A 53-year-old man suffering from diabetes mellitus has developed a painful conical induration, bluish-red with yellow center, on the skin of his neck. Such changes are characteristic of:
*a. Furuncle
b. Carbuncle
c. Empyema
d. Phlegmon
e. Abscess

170. Biochemical analysis of an infant’s erythrocytes revealed evident glutathione peroxidase deficiency and low concentration of reduced glutathione. What pathological condition can develop in this infant?
a. Sicklemia
b. Iron-deficiency anemia
c. Pernicious anemia
d. Megaloblastic anemia
*e. Hemolytic anemia

171. In winter a 3-year-old child has sharp rise of body temperature up to 40°C. Hemorrhagic rash is observed on the skin and mucosa. Bean-shaped gramnegative microorganisms situated in pairs are detected in the blood. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
*a. Meningococcosis
b. Scarlet fever
c. Diphtheria
d. Influenza
e. Gonorrhea

172. Microelectrode analysis of nerve fiber biolectrical activity revealed, that its membrane potential equals 90 mV. Its initial rest potential was 85 mV. What process occurs in this case?
*a. Hyperpolarization
b. Repolarization
c. Supernormality
d. Overshoot
e. Depolarization

173. Parkinson’s disease is caused by disruption of dopamine synthesis. What brain structure synthesizes this neurotransmitter?
a. Corpora quadrigemina
b. Globus pallidus
*c. Substantia nigra
d. Red nucleus
e. Hypothalamus

174. Determining a patient’s blood group with monoclonal test-reagents revealed positive agglutination reaction to anti-A and anti-B reagents, and negative reaction to anti-D. What blood group does this patient have?
a. I (0) Rh+
*b. IV (АВ) Rh-
c. III (В) Rh-
d. II (А) Rh+
e. IV (АВ) Rh+

175. A patient visited a dentist to extract a tooth. After the tooth had been extracted, bleeding from the tooth socket continued for 15 minutes. Anamnesis states that the patient suffers from active chronic hepatitis. What phenomenon can extend the time of hemorrhage?
a. Increased activity of anticoagulation system
b. Decrease of albumine content in blood
c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Hypocalcemia
*e. Decrease of fibrinogen content in blood

176. Name the halogen-containing antiseptic with fungicidal properties, which is used to treat dermatomycosis:
a. Methylene blue
b. Formalin solution
*c. Iodine solution
d. Brilliant green
e. Boric acid solution

177. Due to severe pain syndrome a patient was prescribed a narcotic analgesic. Name this drug:
a. Dimethyl sulfoxide
b. Indometacin
c. Metamizole (Analgin)
d. Nimesulide
*e. Morphine

178. During pathomorphological kidney investigation of a patient, who for a long time had been suffering from osteomyelitis and died from progressing renal failure, the following was revealed: deposits of homogeneous eosinophilic masses in glomerular mesangium, arterial and arteriolar walls, and stroma, which became red when stained with Congo red. What pathological process is this?
a. Hyalinosis
*b. Amyloidosis
c. Calcinosis
d. Mucoid swelling
e. Carbohydrate degeneration

179. A microslide presents a tissue with spherical cells, each of them containing a large fat drop covered with thin cytoplasm layer in its center. Nucleus is compressed and situated at the cell periphery. What tissue is it?
a. Pigmented tissue
b. Reticular tissue
c. Brown adipose tissue
d. Mucous tissue
*e. White adipose tissue

180. To treat rheumatoid arthritis a 65-year-old woman was prescribed an immunosuppressive hormonal drug as a part of her complex therapy. Name this drug:
a. Fercovenum
*b. Prednisolone
c. Chloropyramine (Suprastin)
d. Thymus cytomedins (Thymalin)
e. Riboflavin

181. An experiment was aimed at testing flexor reflex in a spinal frog, which was initiated by simultaneous stimulation with isolated pre-threshold electrical impulses. The frequency of those impulses was such, that the reflex occurred.What process in the nerve centers can be observed during this experiment?
*a. Temporal summation
b. Presynaptic summation
c. Threshold summation
d. Postsynaptic summation
e. Spatial summation

182. A patient diagnosed with acute dysentery has been treated for 3 days in an infectious diseases hospital. On admission there were complaints of high temperature, stomachache and fluid excrements with mucus as often as 8-10 times a day. What sample should be taken for analysis?
*a. Feces
b. Bile
c. Blood
d. Liquor
e. Urine

183. An 18-year-old woman has body disproportion, wing-like folds on the skin of her neck, underdeveloped ovaries, nuclei of her buccal epithelium cells have no Barr bodies. Dermatoglyphics method revealed that her adt angle is 66°. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Edwards’ syndrome
*b. Turner’s syndrome
c. Kleinfelter’s syndrome
d. Cri du chat (cat cry) syndrome
e. Patau’s syndrome

184. A 27-year-old patient with injury to the neck has lost approximately 30% of the blood volume. The patient’s condition is severe: blood pressure is 60/40 mmHg, heart rate is 140/min., respiratory rate is 30/min., conscious. Characterize the condition of the patient’s circulatory system:
a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Coma
c. Arterial hypertension
*d. Hypovolemic shock
e. Collapse

185. A soldier with explosion-caused trauma was delivered to a hospital. Examination revealed his tympanic membrane to be intact. What defense reflex prevented the tympanic membrane from rupturing?
a. Relaxation of m. stapedins
*b. Contraction of m. tensor tympani
c. Contraction of m. auricularis arterior
d. Relaxation of m. tensor tympani
e. Relaxation of m. auricularis arterior

186. A person with the fourth blood group (genotype IAIB) has in erythrocytes both antigen A controlled by allele IA and antigen B controlled by allele IB. This phenomenon is an example of the following gene interation:
a. Polymery
b. Epistasis
c. Complementarity
d. Semidominance
*e. Codominance

187. During narcosis a patient developed a risk of cerebral edema.What drug should be administered in this case?
*a. Furosemide
b. Phenazepam
c. Sodium bromide
d. Triamterene
e. Dopamine

188. During surgery performed in abdominal cavity a surgeon located ligament of liver stretching from anterior abdominal wall (navel) to inferior surface of liver. What ligament is it?
a. Coronary ligament of the liver
b. Falciform ligament of the liver
*c. Round ligament of the liver
d. Venous ligament of the liver
e. Triangular ligament of the liver

189. A 9-year-old boy has acute onset of disease: sore throat, body temperature rise up to 39, 5°C; on the second day diffuse skin rash was detected all over his skin exept for nasolabial triangle. On examination of oral cavity: crimson tongue, "flaming pharynx", necrotic tonsillitis. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Meningococcemia
*b. Scarlet fever
c. Diphtheria
d. Measles
e. Influenza

190. A 49-year-old man complains of pain in his metatarsophalangeal joints and joint deformation. In blood hyperuricemy can be observed. X-ray has revealed metatarsophalangeal joint space narrowing, erosion, periarticular calcification of the both joints, osteoporosis. Microscopy has revealed inflammatory granulomatous reaction surrounding necrotizing masses in the area of the first metatarsophalangeal joint. Choose the most likely diagnosis:
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
b. Pyrophosphate arthropathy
*c. Gout (podagra)
d. Hyperparathyroidism
e. Urolithiasis

191. Granulomas containing lymphocytes and macrophages were detected during analysis of skin biopsy material. Among macrophages there are large cells with fat inclusions, which contain microorganisms in spheric packages (Virchow’s cells). The following disease is based on the described type of hypersensitivity:
*a. Leprosy
b. Tuberculosis
c. Epidemic typhus
d. Rhinoscleroma
e. Syphilis

192. A patient with suspected necrosis of the upper abdominal cavity organs was delivered to a surgical department. This condition is associated with acute circulatory disturbance of the following vessel:
a. A. mesenterica inferior
b. A. iliaca communis
c. A. renalis
*d. Tuncus coeliacus
e. A. mesenterica superior

193. Name the drug that inhibits excretory function of pancreas during treatment of acute pancreatitis:
a. Allochol
b. Pancreatin (Mezym forte)
c. Festal
*d. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
e. Раnzynorm

194. An 18-year-old patient has developed candidiasis after the case of pneumonia treated with ?-lactam antibiotic. What antimycotic agent should be prescribed?
a. Streptomycin
b. Phthalylsulfathiazole
c. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Biseptol)
*d. Fluconazole
e. Ampicillin

195. During autopsy of a 9-month-old girl’s body, who died due to severe pneumonia complicated with sepsis, lack of thymus is observed. In the lymph nodes the lymphoid follicles and cortical substance are absent; follicles of spleen are reduced in size with no light zones and plasma cells. What is the cause of such structural changes?
*a. Thymus agenesis
b. Thymus hypoplasia
c. Thymus aplasia
d. Thymus atrophy
e. Accidental involution of thymus

196. A patient with femoral neck fracture, who for a long time had to remain in bed in a forced (supine) position, has developed dark-brown lesions along the backbone; soft tissues are swollen, in the areas of maceration there is a foul-smelling liquid. Name the clinicopathologic type of necrosis:
a. Infarction
b. Coagulation necrosis
c. Dry gangrene
*d. Bedsore
e. Sequestrum

197. A woman poisoned with unknown substance was hospitalised in a toxicological department. What group of drugs can be administered to decrease absorption and introduction of the poison to her body?
*a. Adsorbents
b. Antioxidants
c. Cholinesterase inhibitors
d. Organic nitrates
e. Neuroleptics

198. A patient after disrupted cerebral circulation has developed paralysis. Choose the anticholinesterase drug to be prescribed in this case:
a. Cordiamin
b. Methacin
c. Hexamethonium (Benzohexonium)
*d. Proserin
e. Aceclidine

199. A 50-year-old woman is being treated for shingles in a neurology unit.What reactivated virus causes this disease?
a. Herpes simplex virus type 1
b. Measles virus
c. Cytomegalovirus
*d. Varicella zoster virus (chickenpox virus)
e. Herpes simplex virus type 2

200. During examination of a patient a doctor should use anatomical division of anterior abdominal wall into regions for more precise diagnostics. How many such regions can abdomen be divided into?
a. 5
b. 4
c. 8
d. 6
*e. 9

