1. An 8 year old child has low-grade fever, arthritis, colicky abdominal pain and a purpuric rash llocalized on the lower extremities. laboratory studies reveal a guaiac-positive stool, urinalysis with red blood cell (RBC) casts and mild proteinuria, and a normal platelet count. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
b. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
*d. Henoch-Schonleins vasculitis
e. Rocky Mountain spotted fever

2. A young man has painful indurations in the peripapillary regions of both mammary glands. The most reasonable action will be:
a. To remove them
b. To take an aspirate for bacterial inoculation and cytology
c. To administer steroids locally
*d. To leave these indurations untouched
e. To cut and drain them

3. A 9 year old girl with a history of intermittent wheezing for several years is brought to the pediatrician. The child has been taking no medications for some time. Physical examination reveals agitation and perioral cyanosis. Intercostal and suprasternal retractions are present. The breath sounds are quiet, and wheezing is audible bilaterally. The child is admitted to the hospital. Appropriate interventions might include all of the following EXCEPT:
a. Prescribe intravenous corticosteroids
b. Prescribe nebulized metaproterenol
c. Prescribe intravenous aminophylline
d. Administer supplemental oxygen
*e. Prescribe nebulized cromolyn sodium

4. Routine examination of an otherwise healthy child with a history of bronchial asthma reveals AP of 140/90 mm Hg. The most likely cause of the hypertension is:
a. Obesity
*b. Renal disease
c. Chronic lung disease
d. Theophylline toxicity
e. Coarctation of the aorta

5. Patient with thyreotoxicosis is in the 2 beds hospital ward of therapeutic department. The area of the ward is 18 m2, height 3 m, ventilation rate 2,5/hr. Air temperature - 200С, relative humidity - 45%, air movement velocity - 0,3 m/s, light coefficient - ⅕, noise level - 30 dB. Do hygienic evaluation of the conditions meet the standards?
a. High level of noise
b. All conditions meet the requirements
c. Non-effective ventilation
d. Poor lighting
*e. Discomfortable microclimate

6. The child is 11 m.o. He suffers from nervous-arthritic diathesis. The increased synthesis of what acid is pathogenic at nervous-arthritic diathesis?
a. Acetic acid
b. Hydrochloric acid
c. Sulfuric acid
*d. Uric acid
e. Phosphoric acid

7. A 10-year-old child complains of fever (temperature is 39OC), frequent painful urination (pollakiuria). Urine test: proteinuria (0,066 g/L), leukocytouria (entirely within eyeshot), bacteriuria (105 colony forming units/mL). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Urolithiasis
*b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Acute cystitis

8. A 8-year-old boy has suffered from tonsilitis. In 2 weeks he started complaining of migratory joint pain, edema of joints, restriction of movements, fever. On examination, an acute rheumatic heart disease, activity of the III-rd degree, primary rheumocarditis, polyarthritis; acute course of disease, cardiovascular failure IIA. What medication is to be prescribed?
a. Diprazinum
b. Erythromycin
c. Cefazolin
d. Delagil
*e. Prednisone

9. The 10 y.o. boy has complains on headache, weakness, fever 400С, vomiting, expressed dyspnea, pale skin with flush on right cheek, lag of right hemithorax respiratory movement, dullness on percussion over low lobe of right lung, weakness of vesicular respiration in this zone. The abdomen is painless and soft at palpation. Which disease lead to these symptoms and signs?
a. Flu
*b. Pneumonia croupousa
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Intestinal infection
e. Acute cholecystitis

10. A patient with acute respiratory viral infection (3rd day of disease) complains of pain in lumbar region, nausea, dysuria, oliguria. Urinalysis - hematuria (100-200 RBC in eyeshot spot), specific gravity - 1002. The blood creatinin level is 0,18 millimole/l, potassium level - 6,4 millimole/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute renal colic
*b. Acute interstitial nephritis
c. Acute glomerylonephritis
d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute cystitis

11. A neonate was born from the 1st gestation on term. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it became more acute. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were observed. Indirect bilirubin level was 275?mol/L, direct bilirubin level - 5?mol/L, Hb - 150 g/l. Mother’s blood group – 0(I), Rh+, child’s blood group- A(II), Rh+. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Physiological jaundice
b. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (Rh – incompatibility)
c. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder
d. Hepatitis
*e. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (АВО incompatibility), icteric type

12. A baby boy was born in time, it was his mothers 1st pregnancy. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it progressed. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were presented. The indirect bilirubin level was 275 mcmol/L, the direct bilirubin level - 5 mcmol/L, Hb- 150 g/L. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. Make a diagnosis
*a. Hemolytic disease of newborn (АВО incompatibility), icteric type
b. Hepatitis
c. Hemolytic disease of newborn (Rh - incompatibility)
d. Physiological jaundice
e. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder

13. A 3 month old infant suffering from acute segmental pneumonia has dyspnea (respiration rate - 80 per minute), paradoxical breathing, tachycardia, total cyanosis. Respiration and pulse - ratio is 1:2. The heart dullness under normal size. Such signs characterise:
a. Myocarditis
b. Congenital heart malformation
c. Respiratory failure of I degree
d. Respiratory failure of II degree
*e. Respiratory failure of III degree

14. The 7 m.o. infant is suffering from acute pneumonia which was complicated by cardiovascular insufficiency and respiratory failure of II degree. The accompanied diagnosis is malnutrition of II degree. Choose the best variant of therapy:
a. Macropen and Penicillin
b. Gentamycin and Macropen
c. Ampiox and Polymixin
*d. Ampiox and Amicacin
e. Penicillin and Ampiox

15. A 3 year old child has been suffering from fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis for 4 days. He has been taking sulfadimethoxine. Today it has fever up to 39oC and maculopapular rash on its face. Except of rash the childs skin has no changes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Rubella
b. Allergic rash
*c. Measles
d. Scarlet fever
e. Pseudotuberculosis

16. A 2 year old girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Scarlet fever
*c. Rubella
d. Adenoviral infection
e. Pseudotuberculosis

17. A 3 year old boy fell ill abruptly: fever up to 39oC, weakness, vomitng. Haemorrhagic rash of various size appeared on his lower limbs within 5 hours. Meningococcemia with infective - toxic shock of the 1 degree was diagnosed. What medications should be administered?
a. Penicillin and immunoglobulin
b. Penicillin and prednisone
*c. Chloramphenicol succinate and prednisone
d. Chloramphenicol succinate and interferon
e. Ampicillin and immunoglobulin

18. A 7 year old girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
a. Neurotoxic syndrome
*b. Encephalitis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Meningitis
e. Myelitis

19. A 7 y.o. girl fell ill abruptly: fever, headache, severe sore throat, vomiting. Minute bright red rash appear in her reddened skin in 3 hours. It is more intensive in axillae and groin. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is hyperemic. Greyish patches is on the tonsills. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. What is your diagnosis?
a. Rubella
b. Measles
*c. Scarlet fever
d. Pseudotuberculosis
e. Enteroviral infection

20. An 8-year-old boy fell ill acutely: he presents with fever, weakness, headache, abdominal pain, recurrent vomiting, then diarrhea and tenesmus. Stools occur 12 times daily, are scanty, contain a lot of mucus, pus, streaks of blood. His sigmoid gut is tender and hardened. What is your diagnosis?
*a. Dysentery
b. Cholera
c. Escherichiosis
d. Staphylococcal gastroenteritis
e. Salmonellosis

21. The child has complains of the "night" and "hungry" abdominal pains. At fibroscopy in area a bulbus ofa duodenum the ulcerrative defect of 4 mms diameter is found, the floor is obtected with a fibrin, (H.p +). Administer the optimum schemes of treatment:
a. Trichopolum
*b. Omeprasole - Trichopolum - Claritromicin
c. Maalox - Ranitidin
d. De-nol
e. Vicalinum - Ranitidin

22. A woman delivered a child. It was her fifth pregnancy but the first delivery. Mothers blood group is A(II)Rh-, newborns - A(II)Rh+. The level of indirect bilirubin in umbilical blood was 58 micromole/l, haemoglobin - 140 g/l, RBC- 3,81012/l. In 2 hours the level of indirect bilirubin turned 82 micromole/l. The hemolytic disease of newborn (icteric-anemic type, Rh-incompatibility) was diagnosed. Choose the therapeutic tactics:
a. Blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
b. Conservative therapy
*c. Replacement blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
d. Symptomatic therapy
e. Antibiotics

23. A mother with an infant visited the pediatrician for expertise advice. Her baby was born with body weight 3,2 kg and body length 50 cm. He is 1 year old now. How many teeth the baby should have?
a. 10
b. 20
c. 6
*d. 8
e. 12

24. A mother consulted a pediatrician about her son. Her son was born with body mass of 3 kg and length of 48 cm. Hes 1 year old now. What is the required normal mass?
a. 15,0 kg
*b. 10,5 kg
c. 11,0 kg
d. 9,0 kg
e. 12,0 kg

25. 6 m.o. infant was born with bodys mass 3 kg and length 50 cm. He is given natural feeding. How many times per day the infant should be fed?
a. 7
b. 8
c. 4
*d. 5
e. 6

26. Infant is 6,5 months now and is given natural feeding since birth. Body mass was 3,5 kg, with length 52 cm at birth. How many times per day the supplement (up feeding) should be given?
*a. 2
b. 1
c. 4
d. 0
e. 3

27. A 2 month old healthy infant with good appetite is given artificial feeding since he turned 1 month old. When is it recommended to start the corrective feeding (fruit juice)?
a. 1,0 months
*b. 4,0 months
c. 2,0 months
d. 1,5 months
e. 3,0 months

28. An infant was born with body mass 3 kg and body length 50 cm. Now he is 3 years old. His brother is 7 years old, suffers from rheumatic fever. Mother asked the doctor for a cardiac check up of the 3-year-old son. Where is the left relative heart border located?
a. 1 cm left from he left parasternal line
b. 1 cm right from the left parasternal line
c. 1 cm right from the left medioclavicular line
d. Along the left medioclavicular line
*e. 1 cm left from the left medioclavicular line

29. A boy of 7 y.o. had an attack of asthma and distant whistling rales after playing with a dog. In the medical hystory: atopic dermatitis caused by eating eggs, chicken, beef. What group of allergens is the reason of the development of bronchial astma attacks?
a. Chemical
*b. Epidermal
c. Pollen
d. Dust
e. Itch mite

30. A 14-year-old boy has rheumatism. Over the last 2 years he has had 3 rheumatic attacks. What course of rheumatism does the patient have?
a. Subacute
b. Acute
*c. Prolonged
d. Latent
e. Persistent-reccurent

31. The patient with aquired heart failure has diastolic pressure of 0 mm Hg. What heart failure does the child have?
a. Rheumatism
*b. Aortal insufficiency
c. Aortal stenosis
d. Mitral stenosis
e. Mitral insufficiency

32. A 12 year old child has the ulcer disease of stomach. What is the etiology of this disease?
a. Helicobacter pylory
b. Lambliosis
c. Influenza
*d. Intestinal bacillus
e. Salmonella

33. A nine year old child is at a hospital with acute glomerulonephritis. Clinical and laboratory examinations show acute condition. What nutrients must not be limited during the acute period of glomerulonephritis?
a. Salt
b. Proteins
c. Fats
*d. Carbohydrates
e. Liquid

34. An 18-month-old child was taken to a hospital on the 4-th day of the disease. The disease began acutely with temperature 39, weakness, cough, breathlessness. He is pale, cyanotic, has had febrile temperature for over 3 days. There are crepitative fine bubbling rales on auscultation. Percussion sound is shortened in the right infrascapular region. X-ray picture shows non-homogeneous segment infiltration 8-10 mm on the right, the intensification of lung pattern. Your diagnosis:
a. Interstitial pneumonia
*b. Segmentary pneumonia
c. Bronchitis
d. Grippe
e. Bronchiolitis

35. A 9-year-old girl has attacks of abdominal pain after fried food. No fever. She has pain in Cera point. The liver is not enlarged. Portion B (duodenal probe) - 50 ml. What is your diagnosis?
a. Chronic duodenum
b. Peptic ulcer
c. Hepatocirrhosis
d. Acute colitis
*e. Biliary tracts dyskinesia, hypotonic type

36. A baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation. Delivery was normal, by natural way. The baby has a large cephalohematoma. The results of blood count are: Hb- 120g/l, Er- 3,51012/l, total serum bilirubin - 123 mmol/l, direct bilirubin - 11 mmol/l, indirect - 112 mmol/l. What are causes of hyperbilirubinemia in this case?
a. Disturbance of the conjugative function of liver
b. Intravascular hemolysis
*c. Erythrocyte hemolysis
d. Bile condensing
e. Mechanical obstruction of the bile outflow

37. A 4-month-old girl with blond hair and blue eyes has "mousy" odor of sweat and urine, delayed psychomotoric development. The most typical laboratory data for this disorder is:
*a. Positive urine ferric chloride test
b. High level of glycosaminoglycanes in urine
c. Low level of thyroid gland hormones in blood
d. High concentration of chlorides in sweat
e. High level of oxyproline in urine

38. A neonate is 5 days old. What vaccination dose of BCG vaccine (in мg) is necessary for vaccination of this child?
a. 0,025 мg
b. 0,1 мg
c. 0,2 мg
*d. 0,05 мg
e. 0,075 мg

39. 7 y.o. boy with chronic sinusitis and rercurent pulmonary infections has chest X-ray demonstrating a right-sided cardiac silhouette. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. alpha-antitrypsin deficiency
*b. Kartagener syndrome
c. Bronchiolitis obliterans
d. Cystic fibrosis (mucoviscidosis)
e. Laryngotracheomalacia

40. A 2,9-kg term male infant is born to a mother who developed polyhydramnios at 34 weeks gestation. At birth, the Apgar scores were 9 and 9. The infant develops choking and cyanosis with the first feed. In addition, is unable to place a nasogastric tube. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tracheal atresia
b. Respiratory distress syndrome
c. Choanal atresia
d. Laryngomalacia
*e. Esophageal atresia

41. A 4 year old girl was playing with her toys and suddenly she got an attack of cough, dyspnea. Objectively: respiration rate - 45/min, heart rate - 130/min. Percussion revealed dullness of percutory sound on the right in the lower parts. Auscultation revealed diminished breath sounds with bronchial resonance on the right. X-ray pictue showed shadowing of the lower part of lungs on the right. Blood analysis revealed no signs of inflammation. The child was diagnosed with foreign body in the right bronchus. What complication caused such clinical presentations?
*a. Atelectasis
b. Pneumothorax
c. Pneumonia
d. Bronchitis
e. Emphysema

42. Full term newborn has developed jaundice at 10 hours of age. Hemolytic disease of newborn due to Rh-incompatibility was diagnosed. 2 hours later the infant has indirect serum bilirubin level increasing up to 14 mmol/L. What is most appropriate for treatment of hyperbilirubinemia in this infant?
a. Infusion therapy
*b. Exchange blood transfusion
c. Phenobarbital
d. Phototherapy
e. Intestinal sorbents

43. A man, 42 years old, died in a road accident after the hemorrhage on the spot, because of acute hemorrhagic anemia. What minimum percent of the whole blood volume could result in death by acute hemorrhage?
a. 15-20%
b. 35-50%
c. 6-9%
d. 10-14%
*e. 25-30%

44. A 6 week old child is admitted because of tachypnea. Birth had been uneventful, although conjunctivitis developed on the third day of life and lasted for about 2 weeks. Physical examination reveals tachypnea, bilateral inspiratory crackles and single expiratory wheezing. Bilateral pneumonia is evident on chest X-ray. The child is afebrile and has no history of fever. White blood cell count is 15109/l, with 28% of eosinophils. The most likely cause of this childs symptoms is:
a. Varicella
*b. Clamydia trachomanis
c. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
d. Pneumocystis carinii
e. Visceral larva migrans

45. A 6 y.o. asthmatic child was taken to the emergency hospital because of severe coughing and wheezing for the last 24 hours. Physical examination reveals that the child is excitable, has intercostal and suprasternal retractions, expiratory wheezing throughout all lung fields, RR- 60/min. Initial treatment may include the prescription of:
a. N-acetyl cysteine and cromolyn by inhalation
b. Parenteral gentamicyn
c. Parenteral phenobarbital
d. Intravenous fluids in the first 2 h to compensate water deficiency
*e. Subcutaneous epinephrine

46. A full term infant was born after a normal pregnancy, delivery, however, was complicated by marginal placental detachment. At 12 hours of age the child, although appearing to be in good health, passes a bloody meconium stool. For determining the cause of the bleeding, which of the following diagnostic procedures should be performed first?
*a. Barium enema
b. Gastric lavage with normal saline
c. Platelet count, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time
d. An upper gastrointestinal series
e. An Apt test

47. In the 43rd week of gestation a long, thin infant was delivered. He is apneic, limp, pale, and covered with "pea soup" amniotic fluid. The first step in the resuscitation of this infant at delivery should be:
a. Artificial ventilation with endotracheal tube
b. Artificial ventilation with bag and mask
*c. Suction of the trachea under direct vision
d. Administration of 100% oxygen by mask
e. Catheterization of the umbilical vein

48. A newborn infant has mild cyanosis, diaphoresis, poor peripheral pule, hepatomegaly and cardiomegaly. Respiratory rate is 60 breaths per minute, and heart rate is 230 beats per minute. The child most likely has congestive heart failure caused by:
a. Atrial flutter and partial atrioventricular block
b. A ventricular septal defect and transposition of the great vessels
*c. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
d. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
e. A large atrial septal defect and valvular pulmonary stenosis

49. A 6-year-old boy was brought to the emergency room with a 3-hour history of fever up to 39,5oC and sore throat. The child looks alert, anxious and has a mild inspiratory stridor. You should immediately:
a. Obtain an arterial blood gas and start an IV line
b. Examine the throat and obtain a culture
c. Admit the child and place him in a mist tent
*d. Prepare to establish an airway
e. Order a chest x-ray and lateral view of the neck

50. A 7 d.o. boy is admitted to the hospital for evaluation of vomiting and dehydration. Physical examination is otherwise normal except for minimal hyperpigmentation of the nipples. Serum sodium and potassium concentrations are 120 meq/L and 9 meq/L respectively. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
b. Secondary hypothyroidism
c. Hyperaldosteronism
d. Panhypopituitarism
e. Pyloric stenosis

51. A 7 y.o. boy has crampy abdominal pain and a rash on the back of his legs and buttocks as well as on the extensor surfaces of his forearms. Laboratory analysis reveals proteinuria and microhematuria. He is most likely to be affected by:
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Polyarteritis nodosa
c. Dermatomyositis
*d. Anaphylactoid purpura
e. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis

52. A 5-year-old boy was progressively getting worse compared to the previous 2 months. A chest x-ray has shown right middle lobe collapse. A tuberculin skin test was strongly positive. What is the most characteristic finding in primary tuberculosis?
a. Hematogenous dissemination leading to extrapulmonary tuberculosis
*b. Hilar or paratracheal lymph node enlargement
c. Cavity formation
d. Atelectasis with obstructive pneumonia
e. Miliary tuberculosis

53. A girl is 12 y.o. Yesterday she was overcooled. Now she is complaining on pain in suprapubic area, frequent painful urination by small portions, temperature is 37,8°C. Pasternatsky symptom is negative. Urine analysis: protein - 0,033 g/L, WBC- 20-25 in f/vis, RBC- 1-2 in f/vis. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
*c. Acute cystitis
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

54. The girl of 11 y.o. She is ill for 1 month. She has "butterfly"-type rash on face (spots and papules), pain and swelling of small joints on arms and legs, signs of stomatitis (small-sized ulcers in mouth). CBC: Нb– 80 g/L, RBC– 2,91012/L, WBC– 15109/L, ESR- 40 mm/hour. Urinalysis: protein– 0,33 g/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dermatomyositis
*b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Periarteriitis nodosa
d. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, systemic type
e. Acute rheumatic fever

55. An infant aged 1 year on the third day of common cold at night developed inspiratory stridor, hoarse voice and barking cough. Physical examination revealed suprasternal and intercostal chest retractions. There is a bluish skin discoloration moistly seen over the upper lip. The respiratory rate is 52 per min and pulse- 122 bpm. The body temperature is 37,5°C. What disease does the infant have?
a. Acute laryngitis
b. Acute bronchiolitis with respiratory distress
c. Acute epiglottitis
*d. Acute infectious croup due to viral laryngotracheitis
e. Bronchopneumonia without complications

56. A newborn aged 3 days with hyperbilirubinemia (428 mkmol/L) developed following disorders. From beginning there were severe jaundice with poor suckling, hypotomia and hypodynamia. Little bit later periodical excitation, neonatal convulsions and neonatal primitive reflexes loss are noted. Now physical examination reveals convergent squint, rotatory nystagmus and setting sun eye sign. How to explain this condition?
a. Spastic cerebral palsy
*b. Encephalopathy due to hyperbilirubinemia
c. Brain tumour
d. Skull injury
e. Hydrocephalus

57. A 3-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital because of ostealgia and body temperature rise up to 39oC. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, unable to stand for ostealgia, there is apparent intoxication, lymph nodesare enlarged up to 1,5 cm. Liver can be palpated 3 cm below the costal margin, spleen - 2 cm below the costal margin. In blood: RBCs - 3,01012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, colour index - 0,9, thrombocytes - 190109/l, WBCs - 3,2109/l, eosinophils - 1, stab neutrophils - 1, segmented neutrophils - 0, lymphocytes - 87, monocytes - 2, ESR - 36 mm/h. What examination should be conducted in order to specify the diagnosis?
a. Ultrasound
b. Lymph node biopsy
c. Computer tomography
*d. Sternal puncture
e. Lymph node puncture

58. Apgar test done on a newborn girl at 1st and 5th minute after birth gave the result of 7-8 scores. During the delivery there was a short-term difficulty with extraction of shoulder girdle. After birth the child had the proximal extremity dysfunction and the arm couldnt be raised from the side. The shoulder was turned inwards, the elbow was flexed, there was also forearm pronation, obstetric palsy of brachial plexus. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Intracranial haemorrhage
b. Trauma of right hand soft tissues
c. Trauma of thoracic spine
d. Right hand osteomyelitis
*e. Duchenne-Erb palsy

59. Examination of a 9-month-old girl revealed skin pallor, cyanosis during excitement. Percussion revealed transverse dilatation of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed continuous systolic murmur on the left from the breastbone in the 3-4 intercostal space. This murmur is conducted above the whole cardiac region to the back. What congenital cardiac pathology can be suspected?
a. Pulmonary artery stenosis
*b. Defect of interventricular septum
c. Coarctation of aorta
d. Defect of interatrial septum
e. Fallots tetrad

60. A worker was temporarily off work because of illness for 16 days, was under out-patient treatment. The doctor in charge issued a sick-list first for 5 days, then prolonged it for 10 days. Who can further prolong the sick-list of this patient?
a. The doctor in charge of the case with the permission of the head of department
b. Working ability expertise committee
*c. The doctor in charge of the case together with the head of department
d. Deputy head physician on the working ability expertise
e. The head of department

61. A 13 y.o. patient was treated in dermatological hospital for atopic dermatitis exacerbation. He was discharged in the condition of clinical remission. What recommendations should the doctor give to prevent exacerbations?
*a. Use of neutral creams to protect skin
b. Systematic use of local corticosteroids
c. Avoidance of skin insolation
d. Systematic skin disinfection
e. Frequent skin washing with detergents

62. On the 21 day after appearance of vesiculous chickenpox rash a 7-year-old child developed ataxia, nystagmus, intention tremor, muscle hypotonia. Liquor analysis shows insignificant lymphocytic pleocytosis, slightly increased protein rate. What complication is it?
a. Acute nephritis
b. Postherpetic neuralgia
c. Purulent meningitis
d. Pneumonitis
*e. Encephalitis

63. An 8 year old boy suffering from haemophilia was undergoing transfusion of packed red cells. Suddenly he got pain behind the breastbone and in the lumbar area, dyspnea, cold sweat. Objectively: pale skin, heart rate - 100/min, AP- 60/40 Hg; oliguria, brown urine. For treatment of this complication the following drug should be administered:
a. Adrenaline
b. Lasix
*c. Prednisolone
d. Aminophylline
e. Analgine

64. After objective clinical examination a 12 year old child was diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse. What complementary instrumental method of examination should be applied for the diagnosis confirmation?
a. Veloergometry
*b. Echocardiography
c. Phonocardiography
d. Roentgenography of chest
e. ECG

65. A full-term child survived antenatal and intranatal hypoxia, it was born in asphyxia (2-5 points on Apgar score). After birth the child has progressing excitability, there are also vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, strabismus, spontaneous Moros and Babinskys reflexes. What localization of intracranial hemorrhage is the most probable?
a. Subdural hemorrhage
b. Small cerebral tissue hemorrhages
*c. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
d. Periventricular hemorrhages
e. Hemorrhages into the brain ventricles

66. A 15 y.o. boy was twice attacked by bees, as a result he had severe anaphylactic shock. What is the most effective prophylaxis method?
a. Protective clothing
*b. Desensibilisation by means of bee venom extract
c. Long-term prophylactic treatment with antihistamines
d. Prescription of corticosteroids for summer
e. Limitation of outside staying during summer months

67. A 9-year-old boy has been suffering from bronchoectasis since he was 3. Exacerbations occur quite often, 3-4 times a year. Conservative therapy results in short periods of remission. The disease is progressing, the child has physical retardation. The childs skin is pale, acrocyanotic, he has "watch glass" nail deformation. Bronchography revealed saccular bronchiectases of the lower lobe of his right lung. What is the further treatment tactics?
*a. Surgical treatment
b. Physiotherapeutic treatment
c. Tempering of the childs organism
d. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
e. Further conservative therapy

68. A child with tetralogy of Fallot is most likely to exhibit:
a. Normal oxygen tension (PaO2) in the left ventricle
*b. Increased pressure in the right ventricle
c. Increased pulse pressure
d. Increased pulmonary blood flow
e. Normal pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve

69. A 2-months-old child after preventive vaccination had a prolonged hemorrhage from the vaccination place and due to those an intramuscular hematoma. During examination of the child a considerable rise of prothrombin consumption and a significant prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastic time were found. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Inborn afibrinogenemia
*b. Hemophilia
c. Henoch-Schoenlein disease
d. Werlhofs disease
e. Hemorrhagic disease of the neonate

70. A 10 y.o. boy with hemophilia has signs of acute respiratory viral infection with fever. What of the mentioned antifebrile medications are contraindicated to this patient?
a. Panadol extra
*b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Pipolphen
d. Analgin
e. Paracetamol

71. A 7-year-old child is sick for 2 weeks with running nose, was taking nasal drops. The boy suffers with alimentary allergy. He applied to doctor due to suppurative and bloody discharges from nose, maceration of ala nasi and upper lip. Rhinoscopy results: there are whitish-greyish areas at nasal septum. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is not changed. What is the most probable disease?
a. Adenovirus
b. Allergic rhinitis
c. Sinusitis (maxillar sinus)
*d. Diphtheria of the nose
e. Rhinovirus

72. A child is 4 years old, has been ill for 5 days. There are complaints of cough, skin rash, t°38,2oC, face puffiness, photophobia, conjunctivitis. Objectively: there is bright, maculo-papulous, in some areas confluent rash on the face, neck, upper chest. The pharynx is hyperemic. There are seropurulent discharges from the nose. Auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Measles
b. Scarlet fever
c. Enterovirus exanthema
d. Rubella
e. Adenoviral infection

73. A 10 month old boy has been ill for 5 days after consumption of unboiled milk. Body temperature is 38-39oC, there is vomiting, liquid stool. The child is pale and inert. His tongue is covered with white deposition. Heart sounds are muffled. Abdomen is swollen, there is borborygmus in the region of ubbilicus, liver is enlarged by 3 cm. Stool is liquid, dark-green, with admixtures of mucus, 5 times a day. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute shigellosis
b. Rotaviral infection
c. Staphylococcal enteric infection
d. Escherichiosis
*e. Salmonellosis

74. A 3 year old child with weight deficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 millimol/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary hypoplasia
*b. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
c. Recurrent bronchitis
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Bronchiectasis

75. A 12 y.o. child with acute glomerulonephritis presented with hypertensive syndrom during first days of the disease. What is the role of angiotesin II in the pathogenesis?
a. Increases erythropoetin production
b. Increases renine level
c. Increases heart output
d. Infibits deppresive action of prostaglandins
*e. Intensifies production and secretion of aldosterone

76. A full-term infant is 3 days old. On the different parts of skin there are erythemas, erosive spots, cracks, areas of epidermis peeling. The infant has scalded skin syndrome. Nikolskys symptom is positive. General condition of the infant is grave. Anxiety, hyperesthesia, febrile temperature are evident. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of newborn
b. Impetigo neonatorum
c. Mycotic erythema
*d. Exfoliative dermatitis
e. Fingers pseudofurunculosis

77. District pediatrician examines a healthy carried 1-month-old child. The child is breast-fed. Prophylaxis of what disease will the doctor recommend to do first?
a. Hypotrophia
b. Anemia
*c. Rachitis
d. Spasmophilia
e. Parathropy

78. A 7 y.o. boy has been treated in a hospital for a month. At the time of admission he had evident edemata, proteinuria - 7,1 g/L, protein content in the daily urine - 4,2 g. Biochemical blood analysis reveals permanent hypoproteinemia (43,2 g/L), hypercholesterolemia (9,2 mmol/L). What variant of glomerulonephritis is the most probable?
a. Isolated urinary
b. Nephritic
*c. Nephrotic
d. Hematuric
e. Mixed

79. A 3 y.o. girl has had a temperature rise up to 380С, rhinitis, dry superficial cough, flabbiness, appetite loss. Palpation didnt reveal any changes over her lungs. Percussion sound has a wooden resonance, auscultation revealed puerile breathing, no rales. In blood: leukopenia, lymphocytosis, increased ESR. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Recurrent bronchitis, acute condition
b. Acute obstructive bronchitis
*c. Acute simple tracheitis
d. Acute simple bronchitis
e. Bilateral microfocal pneumonia

80. A 5-year-old girl with the transitory immunodeficiency according to T-system has a clinical picture of a right-sided pneumonia during 2 months. How pneumonia progress can be described?
*a. Delaying
b. Chronic
c. Acute
d. Wavelike
e. Recidivating

81. A 12 y.o. girl took 2 pills of aspirine and 4 hours later her body temperature raised up to 39-400С. She complains of general indisposition, dizziness, sudden rash in form of red spots and blisters. Objectively: skin lesions resemble of second-degree burns, here and there with erosive surface or epidermis peeling. Nikolskys symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Polymorphous exudative erythema
b. Pemphigus vulgaris
*c. Acute epidermal necrolisis
d. Bullous dermatitis
e. Duhrings disease

82. A 5-year-old child had an attack of palpitation with nausea, dizziness, generalized fatigue. On ECG: tachycardia with heartbeat rate of 220/min. Ventricle complexes are deformed and widened. P wave is absent. What medication is to be prescribed to provide first aid?
*a. Lydocain
b. Seduxen
c. Strophantin
d. Novocainamides
e. Isoptin

83. Examination of a 4 month old child revealed some lemon-yellow squamae with fatty crusts on the scalp. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pseudofurunculosis
b. Infantile eczema
c. Milk crust
d. Strophulus
*e. Gneiss

84. A neonate from gestation with severe gestosis of the second half was born on the 41st week with 2400 g birth weight and 50cm long. On physical examination: skin is flaccid, subcutaneous fatty cellular tissue is thin, muscle hypotonia, new-born period reflexes are decreased. Internal organs are without pathological changes. How would you estimate this child?
a. Postmature infant
b. Term infant with normal body weight
c. Premature infant
d. Immature infant
*e. Term infant with pre-natal growth retardation

85. A child was taken to a hospital with focal changes in the skin folds. The child was anxious during examination, examination revealed dry skin with solitary papulous elements and ill-defined lichenification zones. Skin eruption was accompanied by strong itch. The child usually feels better in summer, his condition is getting worse in winter. The child has been artificially fed since he was 2 months old. He has a history of exudative diathesis. Grandmother by his mothers side has bronchial asthma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atopic dermatitis
b. Seborrheal eczema
c. Urticaria
d. Strophulus
e. Contact dermatitis

86. A boy, aged 9, was examined: height - 127 cm (-0,36), weight - 28,2 kg (+0,96), chest circumference - 64,9 cm (+0,66), lung vital capacity - 1520 ml (-0,16). What is the complex assessment of the childs physical development?
a. Excessive
b. Below the average
c. Disharmonious
d. Apparently disharmonious
*e. Harmonious

87. 2 weeks after recovering from angina an 8-year-old boy developed edemata of face and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Urine is of dark brown colour. Oliguria is present. On urine analysis: relative density - 1,015, protein - 1,2 g/l, RBCs are leached and cover the whole vision field, granular casts - 1-2 in the vision field, salts are represented by urates (big number). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome, hematuria and hypertension
b. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome
*c. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephritic syndrome
d. Acute glomerulonephritis with isolated urinary syndrome
e. Nephrolithiasis

88. A 14 year old child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for attack reduction?
a. Corglicone
*b. Obsidan
c. Amysyl
d. No-shpa
e. Aminophylline

89. A 4 month old child fell seriously ill: body temperature rose up to 38,5oC, the child became inert and had a single vomiting. 10 hours later there appeared rash over the buttocks and lower limbs in form of petechiae, spots and papules. Some haemorrhagic elements have necrosis in the centre. What is the most probable disease?
a. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
b. Scarlet fever
c. Rubella
d. Influenza
*e. Meningococcemia

90. A 5-year-old child had strong headache, vomiting, ataxy, dormancy, discoordination of movements, tremor of the extremities on the 8th day of the disease. It was followed by rise in body temperature, vesiculosis rash mainly on the skin of the body and the hairy part of the head. At the second wave of the fever a diagnosis of encephalitis was given. What disease complicated encephalitis in this case?
a. Enterovirus ifection
b. Herpetic infection
c. Measles
d. German measles
*e. Chicken pox

91. A 13 year old girl was admitted to the cardiological department because of pain in the muscles and joints. Examination of her face revealed an edematic erythema in form of butterfly in the region of nose bridge and cheeks. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dermatomyositis
b. Rheumatism
*c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Periarteritis nodosa

92. A 4 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with complaints of dyspnea, rapid fatigability. His anamnesis registers frequent respiratory diseases. On percussion: heart borders are dilatated to the left and upwards. On auscultation: amplification of the SII above pulmonary artery, a harsh systolodyastolic "machine" murmur is auscultated between the II and the III rib to the left of breast bone, this murmur is conducted to all other points including back. AP is 100/20 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Isolated stenosis of pulmonary arterial orifice
b. Interventricular septal defect
*c. Opened arterial duct
d. Interatrial septal defect
e. Valvar aortic stenosis

93. A 12 year old girl complains about abrupt weakness, nausea, dizziness, vision impairment. The day before she ate home-made stockfish, beef. Examination revealed skin pallor, a scratch on the left knee, dryness of mucous membranes of oral pharynx, bilateral ptosis, mydriatic pupils. The girl is unable to read a simple text (mist over the eyes). What therapy would be the most adequate in this case?
a. Parenteral disintoxication
b. Gastric lavage
c. Parenteral introduction of antitetanus serum
*d. Parenteral introduction of polyvalent antibotulinic serum
e. Parenteral introduction of antibiotics

94. A child from the first non-complicated pregnancy but complicated labor had cephalhematoma. On the second day there developed jaundice. On the 3th day appeared changes of neurologic status: nystagmus, Graefes sign. Urea is yellow, feces- golden-yellow. Mothers blood group is А(II)Rh-, child- А(II)Rh+. On the third day childs Hb is 200 g/L, RBC- 6,11012/L, bilirubin in blood - 58 mk mol/L due to unconjugated bilirubin, Ht- 0,57. What is the childs jaundice explanation?
*a. Brain delivery trauma
b. Hemolytic disease of newborn
c. Fetal hepatitis
d. Bile ducts atresia
e. Physiologic jaundice

95. A child was delivered severely premature. After the birth the child has RI symptoms, anasarca, fine bubbling moist rales over the lower lobe of the right lung. Multiple skin extravasations, bloody foam from the mouth have occured after the 2 day. On chest X-ray: atelectasis of the lower lobe of the right lung. In blood: Hb-100 g/L, Ht- 0,45. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Edematous-hemorrhagic syndrome
b. Pulmonary edema
c. Congenital pneumonia
d. Hyaline membrane disease
e. Disseminated intravascular clotting syndrome

96. An infant is 2 d.o. It was full-term born with signs of intrauterine infection, thats why it was prescribed antibiotics. Specify, why the gap between antibiotic introductions to the new-born children is longer and dosage is smaller compared to the older children and adults?
a. The newborns have diminished blood pH
b. The newborns have bigger hematocrit
c. The newborns have lower concentration of protein and albumins in blood
d. The newborns have reduced activity of glucuronil transferase
*e. The newborns have a lower level of glomerular filtration

97. A 10-year-old child is sick with chronic viral hepatitis B with marked activity of the process. Total bilirubin - 70?mol/L, direct - 26?mol/L, indirect - 44?mol/L. АSТ - 6,2 mmol/L, АLТ - 4,8 mmol/L. What mechanism underlies the transaminase level increase of this patient?
*a. Cytolysis of hepatocytes
b. Hypersplenism
c. Failure of bilirubin conjugation
d. Intrahepatic cholestasis
e. Failure of the synthetical function of the liver

98. A 12-year-old girl applied to doctor with complaints of swelling on the front part of the neck. The doctor diagnosed hyperplasia of the thyroid gland of the second degree, euthyroidism. Ultrasound suspected autoimmune thyroiditis. Blood was taken for titre of antibodies to thyroglobulin. What titre of antibodies will be diagnostically important?
a. 1:250
*b. 1:100
c. 1:150
d. 1:50
e. 1:200

99. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl didnt undergo any treatment. The girls irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl got puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin got a waxen hue. What disease may be assumed?
*a. Autoimmune thyroiditis
b. Thyroid carcinoma
c. Juvenile basophilism
d. Subacute thyroiditis
e. Diffuse toxic goiter

100. In the anamnesis of a 2-year-old girl there are recurrent pneumonias with signs of obstruction. There are heterogeneous moist and dry rales, respiration is weakened. Dense, viscous secretion is difficult to hawk. There are "drumsticks", physical retardation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Recidivating bronchitis
*c. Mucoviscidosis, pulmonary form
d. Congenital pulmonary polycystosis
e. Pulmonary tuberculosis

101. A 2 month old full-term child was born with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
a. Hypotrophy of the II grade
b. Paratrophy of the I grade
c. 150 g less than necessary
d. Hypotrophy of the I grade
*e. Corresponding to the age

102. A 2 m.o. breast-fed child suffers from cheek skin hyperemia, sporadic papulous elements on the skin of the chest and back following the apple juice introduction. The child is restless. What is the initial pediatritians tactics?
a. Apply ointment with corticosteroids to affected skin areas
*b. Clarify mothers diet and exlude obligate allergens
c. Administer general ultraviolet irradiation
d. Refer to prescribe dermathologist
e. Treat with claritine

103. A 5 month old boy was born prematurely, he didnt suffer from any disease at the infant age and later on. Examination at an outpatients hospital revealed paleness of skin, sleepiness. Blood count: Hb - 95 g/l, erythrocytes - 3,51012/l, reticulocytes - 90/00, colour index - 0,7, osmotic stability of erythrocytes - 0,44-0,33%, serum iron - 4,9 micromole/l. What is the most probable cause of anemia?
a. Hemogenesis immaturity
b. Erythrocyte hemolysis
c. B12 deficit
*d. Iron deficit
e. Infectious process

104. A 7 y.o. child had elevation of temperature tol 40°C in anamnesis. For the last 3 months he presents fusiform swelling of fingers, ankle joints and knee joint, pain in the upper part of the sternum and cervical part of the spinal column. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Juvenile rheumatic arthritis
b. Toxic synovitis
c. Osteoarthrits
d. Septic arthritis
e. Rheumatism

105. An 8 year old girl complains about joint pain, temperature rise up to 38oC, dyspnea. Objectively: the left cardiac border is deviated by 2,5 cm to the left, tachycardia, systolic murmur on the apex and in the V point are present. Blood count: leukocytes - 20,0109/l, ESR - 18 mm/h. What sign gives the most substantial proof for rheumatism diagnosis?
a. Fever
b. Accelerated ESR
c. Arthralgia
d. Leukocytosis
*e. Carditis

106. A 5 y.o. child with stigmas of dysembryogenesis (small chin, thick lips, opened mouth, hyperthelorismus) has systolic murmur in the second intercostal to the right of the sternum. The murmur passes to the neck and along the sternum left edge. The pulse on the left brachial artery is weakened. BP on the right arm is 110/60 mm Hg, on the left - 100/60 mm Hg. ECG results: hypertrophy of the right ventricle. What defect is the most probable?
a. Defect of interatrial septum
b. Defect of interventricular septum
*c. Aortic stenosis
d. Coarctation of the aorta
e. Open aortic duct

107. A 1,5 y.o. child fell ill acutely with high temperature 38°C, headache, fatigue. The temperature declined on the fifth day, muscular pain in the right leg occured in the morning, there were no movements and tendon reflexes, sensitivity was reserved. What is the initial diagnosis?
a. Osteomyelitis
b. Hip joint arthritis
c. Viral encephilitis
d. Polyartropathy
*e. Polyomyelitis

108. A 2 m.o. child with birth weight 5100 g has jaundice, hoarse cry, umbilical hernia, physical development lag. Liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not enlarged. In anamnesis: delayed falling-away of umbilical cord rest. In blood: Hb- 120 g/L, erythrocytes - 4,51012/L, ESR- 3 mm/h. Whole serum bilirubin is 28 mcmole/L, indirect - 20 mcmole/L, direct - 8 mcmole/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cytomegalovirus infection
*b. Congenital hypothyreosis
c. Hemolitic anemia
d. Congenital hepatitis
e. Conjugated jaundice

109. A 3 year old child fell acutely ill, body temperature rose up to 39,5oC, the child became inert, there appeared recurrent vomiting, headache. Examination revealed positive meningeal symptoms, after this lumbal puncture was performed. Spinal fluid is turbid, runs out under pressure, protein concentration is 1,8 g/l; Pandy reaction is +++, sugar concentration is 2,2 millimole/l, chloride concentration - 123 millimole/l, cytosis is 2,35109 (80% of neutrophils, 20% of lymphocytes). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brain tumour
*b. Purulent meningitis
c. Serous tuberculous meningitis
d. Serous viral meningitis
e. Subarachnoid haemorrhage

110. A 13 y.o. girl complains of having temperature rises up to febrile figures for a month, joint ache, periodical skin rash. Examination revealed steady enhancing of ESR, LE-cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Rheumatics
*b. Systematic lupus erythematosus
c. Systematic scleroderma
d. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
e. Acute lymphoblast leukosis

111. A child is 1 y.o. Within the last months after the begining of supplemental feeding the child has appetite loss, diarrhea with massive defecation, sometimes vomiting. Objectively: body temperature is normal. Body weight is 7 kg. Evident pallor of skin, leg edemata, enlarged abdomen. Coprogram shows a lot of fatty acids and soaps. The child was diagnosed with celiac disease and prescribed gluten-free diet. What shoul be excluded from the dietary intake in this case?
a. Digestible carbohydrates
*b. Cereals - wheat, oats
c. Fruit
d. Milk and dairy produce
e. Animal protein

112. An 8 y.o. boy complains of constant cough along with discharge of greenish sputum, dyspnea during physical activities. At the age of 1 year and 8 months he fell ill for the first time with bilateral pneumonia that had protracted course. Later on there were recurrences of the disease 5-6 times a year, during the remission periods there was constant productive cough. What examination results will be the most important for making a final diagnosis?
a. Spirography
*b. Bronchography
c. Bacterial inoculation of sputum
d. Roentgenography of thorax organs
e. Bronchoscopy

113. A mother of a 5 y.o. girl consulted a doctor about doughters involuntary urination at night, nightmares, sleep disorders, slow gaining of body weight. Objectively: malnutrition, intellectual development is good, the girl can read and explains common situations quite adultly. Her skin is very pale, liver is enlarged in size. Her mother suffers from holetithiasis. What type of diathesis is the most probable in the childs case?
a. Urine acid diathesis
b. Allergic diathesis
c. Lymphohypoplastic diathesis
*d. Gouty diathesis
e. Exudative diathesis

114. A 10 year old girl complains about abdominal pain that is arising and getting worse after eating rough or spicy food. She complains also about sour eructation, heartburn, frequent constipations, headache, irritability. She has been suffering from this for 12 months. Objectively: the girls diet is adequate. Tongue is moist with white deposit at the root. Abdomen is soft, painful in its epigastric part. What study method will help to make a diagnosis?
a. Fractional examination of gastric juice
b. Intragastral pH-metry
*c. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
d. Contrast roentgenoscopy
e. Biochemical blood analysis

115. A 40 h.o. child age has hyperosthesia, CNS depression, dyspepsia. Sepsis is suspected. What should the differential diagnosis be made with?
a. Hyperkaliemia
b. Hypomagnesemia
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Hyperbilirubinemia
*e. Hypoglycemia

116. A 1,5 y.o. child fell seriously ill: chill, body temperature rise up to 40,10С, then rapid dropping to 36,20С, skin is covered with voluminous hemorrhagic rash and purple cyanotic spots. Extremities are cold, face features are sharpened. Diagnosis: meningococcosis, fulminant form, infection-toxic shock. What antibiotic must be used at the pre-admission stage?
a. Penicillin
b. Gentamycin
c. Sulfamonometoxin
*d. Soluble Levomycetine succinate
e. Lincomycin

117. A 10 year old boy suffers from chronic viral hepatitis type B with maximal activity. What laboratory test can give the most precise characteristic of cytolysis degree?
a. Test for whole protein
*b. Transaminase test
c. Takata-Ara test
d. Weltmans coagulation test
e. Prothrombin test

118. A 6 y.o child complains of thirst, polyuria, increased appetite for 2 months with weight loss for 3 kg. There has been nocturnal enuresis during last week. On examination: hyperglycemia 14 mol/L. The diagnosis is diabetis mellitus I type. What is the genesis of this disease?
a. Viral
b. Neurogenic
c. Virus-bacterial
*d. Autoimmune
e. Bacterial

119. A 10 y.o. child who is at oligoanuretic stage of acute renal insufficiency has got sensations of pricking in the mucous membrane of oral cavity and tongue, extremities numbness, reduced reflexes, respiratory disturbance, arrhythmia. What are these symptoms caused by?
a. Hyperazotemia
b. Hyponatremia
*c. Hyperkaliemia
d. Acidosis
e. Alkalosis

120. Examination of a 12 year old child revealed diffuse thyroid enlargement of the II degree. Heart auscultation revealed dullness of heart sounds, heart rate was 64/min. The child has frequent constipations, anemia. Concentration of thyreoglobulin antibodies is increased. What disease might have caused such symptoms?
a. Endemic goiter
*b. Autoimmune thyroiditis
c. Thyroid carcinoma
d. Diffuse toxic goiter
e. Thyroid hyperplasia

121. A 13 y.o. teenager who suffers from hemophilia A was taken to the hospital after a fight at school. His diagnosis is right-sided hemarthros of knee joint, retroperitoneal hematoma. What should be primarily prescribed?
*a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Washed thrombocytes
c. Dry plasma
d. Placental albumin
e. Aminocapronic acid

122. A 3 m.o. child fell seriously ill, body temperature rised up to 37,8°C, there is semicough. On the 3-rd day the cough grew worse, dyspnea appeared. On percussion: tympanic sound above lungs, on auscultation: a lot of fine moist and wheezing rales during expiration. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis with asthmatic component
b. Acute respiratory viral infection, focal pneumonia
c. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchopneumonia
d. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis
*e. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchiolitis

123. A mother of a newborn child suffers from chronic pyelonephritis. She had acute respiratory viral disease before the labor. Labor in time, with prolonged period without waters. A child had erythematous eruption on the 2 day, then there were seropurulent vesicles for about 1cm large. Nikolskys symptom is positive. Erosions have occured after vesicle rupture. The child is flabby. The temperature is subfebrile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Vesiculopustulosis
b. Sepsis
c. Ritters dermatitis
*d. Newborn pemphigus
e. Pseudofurunculosis

124. Mother of a newborn child suffers from chronic pyelonephritis. She survived acute respiratory viral infection directly before labour. Delivery was at term, the period before discharge of waters was prolonged. On the 2-nd day the child got erythematous rash, later on - vesicles about 1 cm large with seropurulent content. Nikolskys symptom is positive. Dissection of vesicles results in erosions. The child is inert, body temperature is subfebrile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pseudofurunculosis
b. Vesicular pustulosis
*c. Impetigo neonatorum
d. Sepsis
e. Ritters dermatitis

125. A child was born at 34 weeks of gestation in bad condition. The cardinal symptoms show respiratoty disorders: sound prolonged expiration, additional muscles taking part in breathing, crepitation rales on the background of the rough breath sounds. Assesment according to Silvermans scale was 0, in 3 hours- 6 with presence of clinical data. What diagnostic method can determine pneumopathys type in the child?
a. Proteinogram
b. Immunologic investigation
c. Blood test
d. Blood gases
*e. Chest X-ray

126. A 9 year old boy has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for a year. He gets insulin injections (humulin R, NPH), the dose makes up 0,4 units per 1 kg of body weight a day. Insulin is untroduced subcutaneously (into the shoulder) by means of a syringe. What measures should be taken in order to prevent lipodystrophy?
a. To reduce insulin dose
b. To limit fats in the boys diet
*c. To change point of introduction
d. To apply periodically other types of insulin
e. To administer antioxidants

127. During intramuscular DTP vaccination in clinic, a 3 m.o. child developed signs of laryngospasm, paleness of skin, cyanosis of lips, "cock cry", stop of respiration, tension of the whole body with overturned backward head. Allergological history of the child is not complicated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Anaphylactic shock, clonic spasms
b. Cerebral haemorrhage, tonic spasms
c. Meningism, clonic and tonic spasms
*d. Spasmophilia, tonic spasms
e. Meningoencephalitic reaction, clonic and tonic spasms

128. A child was born with body weight 3250 g and body length 52 cm. At the age of 1,5 month the actual weight is sufficient (4350 g), psychophysical development corresponds with the age. The child is breast-fed, occasionally there are regurgitations. What is the cause of regurgitations?
a. Pylorospasm
b. Pylorostenosis
*c. Aerophagia
d. Acute gastroenteritis
e. Esophageal atresia

129. A 10-year-old girl consulted a doctor about thirst, frequent urination, weight loss. She has been observing these symptoms for about a month. Objectively: no pathology of internal organs was revealed. What laboratory analysis should be carried out in the first place?
a. Glucose tolerance test
b. Glucosuric profile
c. Glucose in urine test on the base of daily diuresis
d. Acetone in urine test
*e. Blood glucose analysis on an empty stomach

130. A 2 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with weight loss, unstable feces, anorexia, following the semolinas introduction (since 5 months). The child is adynamic, flabby, his skin is pale and dry, subcutaneous fat layer is emaciated. Distended and tensed abdomen, tympanitis on percussion of the upper part of abdomen, splashing sounds, feces are foamy, of light color, foul. On coprocytogram: a lot of neutral fat. What is the most probable cause of the disease?
a. Disaccharidase insufficiency
*b. Celiakia (celiac disease)
c. Intestinal dysbacteriosis
d. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
e. Chronic enteritis

131. A child with chronic cardialtis, cardial insufficiency ІІА that is being treated with digoxin has got progressing bradycardia, nausea, vomiting. dizziness, sleep disorders. ECG results: extrasystole, PQ- 0,18. What is the most probable cause of this condition?
a. Acute enteric infection
b. Hypokaliemia
c. Pulmonary edema
d. Atrioventricular heart block of the І degree
*e. Cardiac glucosides overdose or intolerance

132. A child is 1 day old. During delivery there had been problems with extraction of shoulders. Body weight is 4300,0. Right arm hangs down along the body, hand is pronated, movement in the arm is absent. "Scarf" symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tetraparesis
*b. Total right-sided obstetric paralysis
c. Distal right-sided obstetric paralysis
d. Proximal right-sided obstetric paralysis
e. Hemiparesis

133. A 10 y.o. child has average indices of body length and her chest circumference exceeds average indices, body weight index is heightened due to lipopexia. Functional characteristics of physical development are below average. Physical development of this child can be estimated as:
a. Deeply disharmonic
*b. Disharmonic
c. Below average
d. Average
e. Harmonic

134. An 11-yearold girl was taken by an acute disease: she got pain in the lumbar region, nausea, vomiting, frequent urination, body temperature 39oC. Objectively: the abdomen is soft, painful on palpation in the lumbar region. Common urine analysis revealed considerable leukocyturia, bacteriuria. The urine contained colibacilli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute vulvovaginitis
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*e. Acute pyelonephritis

135. A 3 year old boy has petechial eruption. Examination revealed no other pathological changes. Thrombocyte number is 20x109g/l; haemoglobin and leukocyte concentration is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Schonlein-Henoch disease
d. Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
*e. Immune thrombocytopenic purpura

136. A 4-year-old boy in 2 weeks after the tonsillitis had edema, headache, vomiting three times per day. On physical exam: rise of blood pressure, urine is of meat slops color. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pyelonephritis
b. Cystitis
c. Urethritis
*d. Glomerulonephritis
e. Interstitial nephritis

137. A newborn child has purulent discharges from the umbilical wound, skin around the umbilicus is swollen. Objectively: the childs skin is pale, of yellow-greyish colour, generalized hemorrhagic rash. Body temperature is of hectic nature. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Sepsis
b. Hemolytic disease of newborn
c. Omphalitis
d. Thrombocytopathy
e. Hemorrhagic disease of newborn

138. A 7 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital. He complains of unpleasant sensations in the heart region, pain in the epigastrium, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: evident paleness of skin, dyspnea, jugular pulse. Heart borders are within the normal range. Heart sounds are clear, HR- 170/min, small pulse. AP- 90/50 mm Hg. EKG showed: paroxysm of ventricular tachycardia. The paroxysm can be suppressed by:
a. Strophanthine
*b. Lidocain
c. Enalapril
d. Morphine
e. Nifedipine

139. A child is 2 m.o. Inguinofemoral folds contain acutely inflamed foci with distinct borders in form of spots that are slightly above the surrounding areas due to skin edema. The rash has appeared during the week. Vesiculation and wetting are absent. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Infantile eczema
b. Psoriasis
c. Complicated course of scabies
*d. Napkin-area dermatitis
e. Dermatomycosis

140. 15 minutes after the second vaccination with diphteria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine a 4 month old boy manifested symptoms of Quinckes edema. What medication should be applied for emergency aid?
a. Seduxen
*b. Prednisolone
c. Adrenalin
d. Heparin
e. Furosemide

141. An 8 y.o. boy was ill with B hepatitis one year ago. In the last 2 months he has complaints of  fatiguability, sleep disorder, appetite loss, nausea, especially in the mornings. Skin isnt icterious, liver and spleen are 1 cm below the costal margins, painless. Alanine aminotransferase activity is 2,2 mcmol/L. How can this condition be estimated?
*a. Development of chronic hepatitis
b. Biliary dyskinesia
c. Development of liver cirrhosis
d. Residual effects of old viral hepatitis type B
e. Recurrance of viral hepatitis type B

142. On the third day of life an infants skin got icteric colouring. The child was born with body weight of 3,200 kg, body length of 52 cm. The child is active. There is puerile respiration above the lungs. Respiratory rate is 36/min, heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 130/min. Abdomen is soft, liver comes out from the edge of costal arch by 2 cm, spleen is not palpable. Feces are in form of meconium. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemolytic disease of newborn
b. Minkowsky-Shauffard disease
c. Biliary tracts atresia
*d. Physiologic jaundice
e. Neonatal sepsis

143. A 1,5-year-old child was taken by an acute disease: body temperature up to 39oC, frequent vomiting up to 5 times. Nervous system tests revealed positive Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs. The given symptoms relate to:
*a. Meningeal signs
b. Motor disorder syndrome
c. Infectious toxicosis signs
d. Encephalic syndrome
e. Discoordination syndrome

144. A pediatrician had a conversation with a mother of a 7-month-old breast-fed boy and found out that the child was fed 7 times a day. How many times should the child of such age be fed?
*a. 5 times
b. 4 times
c. 7 times
d. 6 times
e. 3 times

145. A 3 month old child has occiput alopecia, anxious sleep, excessive sweating. What disease might be suspected?
a. Anemia
b. Spasmophilia
*c. Rachitis
d. Phosphate diabetes
e. Chondrodystrophy

146. A 2,5 m.o. child has got muscle hypotony, sweating, occipital alopecia. Along with massage and therapeutic exercises the child was prescribed vitamin D. What dosage and frequency are correct?
a. 1000 IU every day
b. 500 IU every day
*c. 3000 IU every day
d. 500 IU every other day
e. 1000 IU every other day

147. On the 15-th day after a minor trauma of the right foot a patient felt malaise, fatigability, irritability, headache, high body temperature, feeling of compression, tension and muscular twitching of his right crus. What disease can it be?
a. Acute thrombophlebitis
b. Thromboembolism of popliteal artery
c. Anaerobic gas gangrene
d. Erysipelas
*e. Tetanus

148. A 10-year-old girl was admitted to a hospital with carditis presentations. It is known from the anamnesis that two weeks ago she had exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. What is the most likely etiological factor in this case?
a. Pneumococcus
b. Staphylococcus
*c. Streptococcus
d. Klebsiella
e. Proteus

149. A full-term infant has respiratory rate of 26/min, heart rate of 90/min, blue skin, muscle hypotonia. During catheter suction of mucus and amniotic fluid from the nose and mouth the child reacted with a grimace. Low reflexes. Auscultation revealed weakened vesicular respiration above lungs. Heart sounds are loud. After 5 minutes the respiration became rhythmic, at the rate of 38/min, heart rate of 120/min. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Inborn pneumonia
b. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
c. Respiratory distress syndrome
*d. Asphyxia
e. Birth trauma

150. A 9 year old boy had acute respiratory viral infection. After it there appeared polydipsia, polyuria, weakness, nausea. Examination revealed the following symptoms: mental confusion, dry skin, soft eyeballs, Kussmauls respiration, acetone smell from the mouth, muffled heart sounds, soft and painless abdomen. Blood sugar was 19 millimole/l. What acute condition is it?
a. Cerebral coma
b. Hyperosmolar coma
*c. Ketoacidotic coma
d. Hepatic coma
e. Acute renal insufficiency

151. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in its volume and composition. Muscle tone is within norm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meningitis
b. Microcephaly
c. Craniostenosis
*d. Pylorospasm
e. Pylorostenosis

152. On the second day after preventive vaccination a 2-year-old boy presented with abdominal pain without clear localization, body temperature rose up to 38oC. On the third day the child got red papular haemorrhagic eruption on the extensor surfaces of limbs and around the joints. Knee joints were edematic and slightly painful. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meningococcemia
b. Thrombocytopenic purpura
*c. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
d. Urticaria
e. DIC syndrome

153. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
a. Impetigo neonatorum
b. Impetigo
c. Epidermolysis bullosa
*d. Vesiculopustulosis
e. Miliaria

