1. A patient complains of nycturia, constant boring pain in perineum and suprapubic region, weak urine jet, frequent, obstructed and painful urination. He has been ill for several months, pain in perineum appeared after getting problems with urination. Rectal examination revealed that prostate is enlarged (mostly owing to the right lobe), dense, asymmetric, its central sulcus is flattened, the right lobe is dense, painless, tuberous. What disease can it be?
a. Chronic congestive prostatitis
*b. Cancer of prostate
c. Urolithiasis, stone of the right lobe of prostate
d. Prostate sclerosis
e. Prostate tuberculosis

2. Surgical department admitted a 37-year-old patient with a big crushed wound of his left thigh 4 hours after he got this trauma. What is the main provision for successful prevention of gaseous gangrene?
a. Injection of specific serum 3 000 U
b. Infiltration of soft tissues around the wound with antibiotic solution
c. Wound lavage with 6% solution of hydrogen peroxide
*d. Removal of necrotic tissues and timely surgical processing of the wound
e. Injection of specific serum 30 000 U

3. A 40 year old patient was bitten by a stray dog for about an hour ago. The bite can be seen on the patients left shin in form of a wound 4х2х0,5 cm large. What kind of aid would be recommended in this case?
a. Blind suture
b. Retension sutures
c. Aseptic bandage
d. Salve bandage
*e. Wound lavage with soapsuds, retension sutures

4. A 60 y.o. man complains of significant pain in the right eye, photophobia, lacrimation, reduced vision of this eye, headache of the right part of the head. Pain occured 2 days ago. On examination: Vis OD- 0,03, congested injection of the eye ball, significant cornea edema, front chamber is deep, pupil is narrow, athrophic iris, there is optic nerve excavation on the eye fundus, intraocular pressure- 38 mm Hg. Vis OS- 0,8 unadjustable. The eye is calm, healthy. Intraoccular pressure- 22 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right eyes keratitis
b. Right eyes uveitis
*c. Acute glaucoma attack
d. Eye nerves neuritis
e. Maculodystrophy

5. A patient came to the traumatology centre and complained about a trauma of the lower third of the volar forearm surface caused by cut on a piece of glass. Objectively: flexion of the IV and V fingers is impaired, sensitivity of the interior dorsal and palmar surface of hand as well as of the IV finger is reduced. What nerve is damaged?
a. Median
b. Radial
*c. Ulnar
d. Musculoskeletal
e. Axillary

6. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Pyrogenous reaction
c. Citrate shock
d. Allergic reaction
*e. Citrate intoxication

7. A patient was delivered to the admission ward 40 minutes after a minor trauma with complaints of pain in the thoracic spine. He has a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. Roentgenography results: suspected compression fracture of the VIII and IX thoracic vertebrae. What pathological process in spine might have stimulated pathological fracture of vertebral bodies?
a. Traumatic fracture
*b. Tuberculous spondylitis
c. Malignant tumour metastasis
d. Syphilis
e. Osteomyelitis

8. A 20 y.o. patient suddely felt ill 12 hours ago. There was pain in epigactric area, nausea, sporadic vomiting. He had taken alcohol before. In few hours the pain localized in the right iliac area. On examination: positive rebound tenderness symptoms. WBC- 12,2109/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Rightside kidney colic
c. Acute cholecystitis
*d. Acute appendicitis
e. Perforated ulcer

9. A patient, aged 58, was fishing in the winter. On return home after some time felt some pain in the feet. Consulted a doctor. On examination: feet skin was pale, then after rewarming became red, warm to the touch. Edema is not significant, limited to the toes. All types of sensitivity are preserved. No blisters. What degree of frostbite is observed?
a. III degree
b. II degree
*c. I degree
d. IV degree
e. V degree

10. On the next day after esophagoscopy and biopsy a 44-year-old female patient developed emphysema of both supraclavicular regions, deglutition pain and pain behind the breastbone, cyanosis. Body temperature - 39oC. In blood: WBCs – 16109/l, left shift in the neutrophils. X-ray picture shows a limited shadow of the posterior mediastinum at a level with trachea bifurcation. The patient was diagnosed with esophagus rupture. What treatment tactics would be the most rational?
a. Surgical: gastric fistula establishment
*b. Surgical: mediastinum drainage, gastric fistula establishment
c. Conservative antibacterial treatment
d. Surveillance
e. Radical surgical treatment with esophagus suturing

11. Three weeks after acute angina the patient is still weak, inert, subfebrile, his retromaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged. Tonsils are flabby, stick together with arches, there are purulent plugs in lacunae. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Paratonsillitis
b. Tonsillar tumour
c. Chronic pharyngitis
d. Acute lacunar tonsillitis
*e. Chronic tonsillitis

12. A 43 year old patient had right-sided deep vein thrombosis of iliofemoral segment 3 years ago. Now he is suffering from the sense of heaviness, edema of the lower right extremity. Objectively: moderate edema of shin, brown induration of skin in the lower third of shin, varix dilatation of superficial shin veins are present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome, varicose form
b. Lymphedema of lower right extremity
c. Acute thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
d. Parkes-Weber syndrome
e. Acute thrombosis of right veins

13. A 98 y.o. male patient complains of pain in the left lower limb which intensifies on walking, feeling of cold and numbness in both feet. He has been ill for 6 years. On examination: pale dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Hairy covering is poorly developed on the left shin. "Furrow symptom " is positive on the left. Pulse on foot arteries and popliteal artery isnt palpated, on the femoral artery its weak. On the right limb the artery pulsation is reserved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Obliterating endarteritis
b. Raynaulds disease
c. Buergers disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
*d. Arteriosclerosis obliterans
e. Hemoral arthery thombosis

14. A 65-year-old patient complains about pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). Prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Excretory urography
b. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
*c. Computer tomography of pelvis
d. Bone scintigraphy
e. Roentgenography of chest

15. A 72 year old female patient has been treated for urolithiasis in the urological department. After atropine injection she got acute pain in her left eye and abrupt vision impairment. Objectively: visual acuity of the left eye is 0,01, the eye is dense but painful on palpation, cornea is opaque, there is cyanotic induration of eyeball vessels. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Degeneration of the left eye cornea
*b. Acute attack of primary glaucoma of the left eye
c. Secondary glaucoma of the left eye
d. Acute iridocyclitis of the left eye
e. Acute keratitis of the left eye

16. A 30 y.o. patient had deep burn covering 30% of body 30 days ago. Now he presents with continued fever, loss of appetite, night sweats. Burned surface weakly granulates. What is the stage of burn disease?
a. Secondary burn shock
b. Primary burn shock
*c. Septicotoxemia
d. Acute burn toxemia
e. Convalescence

17. A 27-year-old military servant was delivered to the regimental aid post 1,5 hour after getting an abdominal injury with an aerial bomb splinter. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, pale, Ps- 132/min, AP- 80/60 mm Hg. Subcostal area has a bandage on from the first-aid pack, the bandage is soaked with blood. The abdomen is tense. Percussion revealed dullness in flat parts that changes its location with the change of body position. There are symptoms of peritoneal irritation. What department of the regimental aid post should provide medical care?
a. Isolation ward
b. Admission-and-sorting tent
*c. Dressing ward
d. Evacuation
e. In the manner of self-help

18. A sergeant got injured with a shell splinter in the left subcostal region. He was bandaged by his fellow soldiers with an individual field dressing. Afterwards he was delivered to the regimental medical station. The patient complains of dizziness, weakness, thirst, abdominal pain. His general condition is grave, he is pale, Ps- 120 bpm. The abdomen is painful, soft on palpation. The dressing is well-fixed but slightly soaked with blood. The victim should be evacuated to the collecting battalion with the following type of transport and in the following turn:
a. With a passing vehicle in the 1st turn
b. With a passing vehicle in the 2nd turn
c. With a passing vehicle in the 3rd turn
*d. With ambulance vehicle in the 1st turn
e. With ambulance vehicle in the 2nd turn

19. A 29 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute girdle pain in epigastric area, vomiting in 1 hour after the meal. On examination: pale, acrocyanosis. Breathing is frequent, shallow. Abdominal muscles are tensed, positive Schotkin-Blumbergs symptom. What is the maximal term to make a diagnosis?
*a. In 2 hours
b. In 1 hour
c. In 6 hours
d. In 3 hours
e. In 0,5 hours

20. A surgeon examined a 42-year-old patient and diagnosed him with right forearm furuncle, purulo-necrotic stage. The furuncle was lanced. At the hydration stage the wound dressing should enclose the following medication:
a. Chloramine
b. Dimexide
c. Vishnevsky ointment
d. Ichthyol ointment
*e. Hypertonic solution

21. A 37-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital in unconscious state. He got a closed abdominal injury. He is suspected to have internal haemorrhage, intraabdominal injury. He is being prepared an emergency operation. By means of standard sera a physician determined his blood group and got the following results: 0(І) - no agglutination, А(ІІ) - no agglutination, В(ІІІ) - no agglutination. What is the patients blood group?
a. А(ІІ)
b. АВ(ІV)
c. -
*d. 0(І)
e. В(ІІІ)

22. A 30 year old patient undergoes treatment because of Werlhofs disease. Objectively: the patient is pale, there are petechial haemorrhages on the extension surfaces of forearms. Ps is 92 bpm, AP is 100/60 mm Hg. The lower edge of spleen is at a level with umbilicus. Blood count: erythrocytes: 2,8x1012/l, Hb - 90 g/l, Ht - 0,38, thrombocytes - 30x109/l. The patient is being prepared for splenectomy. What transfusion medium should be chosen in the first place for the preoperational preparation?
a. Native erythrocytic mass
b. Stored blood
*c. Thrombocytic mass
d. Erythrocytic suspension
e. Washed erythrocytes

23. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. A laboratory physician
b. A traumatologist
c. An anaesthesilogist
*d. A doctor of any speciality
e. A surgeon

24. A 36-year-old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
a. Mediastinitis
*b. Valvular pneumothorax
c. Closed pneumothorax
d. Open pneumothorax
e. Subcutaneous emphysema

25. A victim of the car crash was brought to neurosurgery due to craniocerebral trauma. During examination symptoms of focused injury of the cerebrum are found, cerebrum contusion is suspected. What method of examination is to be used?
a. Antiography of vessels of the cerebrum
b. X- ray of cranium bones
*c. Computed tomography of the cerebrum
d. Ultrasound examination of vessels of the cerebrum
e. Eye-ground examination

26. A 35 y.o. female patient was admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of ulcerative gastric hemorrhage. Its been the third hemorrhage for the last 2 years. After conservative treatment vomiting with blood stopped, hemoglobin elevated from 60 till 108 g/L. General condition became better. But profuse vomiting with blood reoccured in 2-3- hours. Hemoglobin decreased to 93,1 g/L then to 58,1 g/L. What is the tactics of treatment?
a. Conservative treatment with following surgery
b. Taylors treatment
c. Deferred surgery
d. Conservative treatment
*e. Urgent surgery

27. An unconscious victim in severe condition is brought to clinic. It is known that the patient touched the bare wire with his hand and during 5 minutes was under the influence of an alternating current with voltage of 220 V. Physical exam: skin is pale, cold by touch. Breath is weakened, BP - 90/50 mm Hg, Ps - 60 bpm, arrhythmical. There are fields of necrosis of the skin on the right hand and on the right foot. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Electroburn of the right foot and right hand
b. Vascular collapse due to electric current lesion
c. Electroburn of the right foot and right hand
d. High voltaged electroburn of the right foot and shank
e. Electrotrauma, acute cardiovascular failure

28. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
*a. Bronchography
b. Survey radiograph of lungs
c. Bacteriological analysis of sputum
d. Pleural puncture
e. Bronchoscopy

29. A victim of a road accident, aged 44, is operated on account of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. In which case can the patients blood from the abdominal cavity be used for autotransfusion?
a. Splenic rupture
b. Small intestines rupture
c. Bladder rupture
d. Liver rupture
*e. Stomach rupture

30. A man with a stab-wound of the right foot applied to doctor. He stepped on the board with nail two hours ago. In the patient medical chart it is stated that 3 years ago he passed the whole course of vaccination against tetanus. What is the tactics of doctor to prevent tetanus in this case?
a. Administer 3000 U of anti-tetanic serum
b. Administer 1 ml tetanus toxoid and 3000 U of anti-tetanic serum
c. Administer 0,5 ml of tetanus toxoid
d. Administer 1,0 ml of tetanus toxoid
*e. Do not conduct specific prophylaxis

31. A 40-year-old woman with acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage was transfused 400 ml of the preserved blood after having conducted all compatibility tests. After hemotransfusion the condition of the patient became worse. She started having headache, muscles pain, her temperature has risen up to 38,8OC. What is the reason for such condition of the patient?
a. Hemotransfusional shock development
b. Bacterial and toxic shock development
c. Air embolism
*d. Pyrogenic reaction of medium severity
e. Allergic reaction

32. An infant is full-term. Delivery was pathological, with breech presentation. Examination of the infant revealed limited abduction of the right leg to 50o, positive "clicking" symptom on the right, asymmetric inguinal folds. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right hip dysplasia
*b. Inborn dislocation of the right hip
c. Varus deformity of both femoral necks
d. Inborn dislocation of both hips
e. Fracture of both femoral necks

33. A patient, aged 25, suffering from stomach ulcer. Had a course of treatment in the gastroenterological unit. 2 weeks later developed constant pain, increasing and resistant to medication. The abdomen is painful in epigastric area, moderate defence in pyloroduodenal area. Which complication development aggravated the patients state?
a. Haemorrhage
b. Stenosis
c. Penetration
d. Perforation
*e. Malignisation

34. A patient complains about pyrosis and permanent pain behind his breastbone. When he bends forward after eating there appears regurgitation. Roentgenological examination revealed extrasaccular cardiofunctional hernia of esophageal opening of diaphragm. Esophagoscopy revealed signs of reflux-esophagitis. What is the necessary tretment tactics?
a. Conservative treatment in the therapeutic hospital
b. Conservative treatment in an outpatients clinic
*c. Operation in a surgical department
d. Conservative treatment in a surgical department
e. Treatment at a health resort

35. A 47-year-old male patient got a flame burn of trunk and upper extremities and was delivered to the hospital. The patient is in grave condition, confused mental state, with fever. AP- 80/50 mm Hg, Ps- 118 bpm. It was locally stated that the patient got III B degree burns with total area of 20%. What medical actions should be taken?
a. Administration of detoxicating blood substitutes
b. Initial surgical d-bridement
*c. Injection of narcotic analgetics and powdered blood substitutes
d. Necrotomy of burn surface, haemotransfusion
e. Antibacterial and detoxicating therapy

36. A patient aged 18 with a cranial injury was in comatose state during several hours. In post-comatose period gets tired quickly, non-productive in dialog - in the beginning answers 2-3 questions, then gets tired and can not understand the point of the question. Which psychotropic should be given to the patient to prevent psychoorganic syndrome?
a. Stimulators
b. Neuroleptics
*c. Nootropics
d. Tranquillisers
e. Antidepressants

37. A 54-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with evident acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins, enlarged liver, ascites. Cardiac borders are dilated. Heart sounds cannot be auscultated, apical beat is undetectable. AP is 100/50 mm Hg. X-ray picture of chest shows enlarged heart shadow in form of a trapezium. What pathology might have caused these symptoms?
*a. Cardiac tamponade
b. Complex heart defect
c. Hiatal hernia
d. Acute cardiac insufficiency
e. Exudative pleuritis

38. Examination of a 26 year old female patient revealed a node in the right lobe of thyroid gland. The node appeared no earlier than 3 months ago. The patient associates this node with stress. She doesnt complain either about pain or enlargement of the node. Ultrasonic scanning revealed a 2x2,5 cm large node in the inferior part of the right lobe of thyroid gland. What treatment should be administered?
a. Conservative therapy
b. No need for treatment
c. -
*d. Surgical intervention
e. Dynamic observation

39. A 25 y.o. patient was admitted with chest trauma. Clinical and X-ray examination have revealed tense pneumothorax on the left. What emergency treatment should be undertaken?
*a. Pleural cavity drainage
b. Oxigenotherapy
c. Analgetics
d. Intubation
e. Intravenous infusions

40. A 38 y.o. patient complains of pain in lumbar part of spinal column with irradiation to the back surface of the left leg following the lifting of a heavy object. Pain is increasing on change of the body position and in vertical position. positive stretching symptoms were revealed on examination. What is an initial diagnosis?
a. Spinal cord tumor
b. Polyneuritis
c. Myelopathy
*d. Intervertebral ligaments disorder
e. Arachnomielitis

41. A 38 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in pain in the lumbar part of spine irradiating to the posterior surface of his left leg. The pain increases during changing body position and also in the upright position. Examination revealed positive symptoms of tension. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Polyneuritis
b. Myelopathy
c. Spinal cord tumor
d. Arachnomyelitis
*e. Pathology of intercostal disks

42. A patient complains about evaginations in the region of anus that appear during defecation and need to be replaced. Examination with anoscope revealed 1x1 cm large evaginations of mucosa above the pectineal line. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Internal hemorrhoids
b. External hemorrhoids
c. -
d. Anal fissure
e. Acute paraproctitis

43. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
a. Feces observation
b. Common cold prophilaxis
*c. Strict following of feeding regimen
d. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention
e. Hardening of the child

44. 1 day ago a 19-year old male patient got a trauma after a fall from 1,5 m height when he "bestrode" a wooden beam. Urination is extremely difficult, there is macrohematuria, urethrorrhagia. There is a hematoma in the perineum and on the scrotum. Urethrography revealed flowing of contrast medium into the membranous part of urethra. What is the treatment tactics of choice?
*a. Epicystostomy
b. Urethra bougienage
c. Primary suturing of urethra
d. Cold to the perineum, hemostatic therapy
e. Urine bladder catheterization for urine diversion

45. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38oC, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Erysipeloid
*b. Sepsis
c. Erysipelas
d. Putrid phlegmon
e. Allergic reaction

46. A 40-year-old female patient has a history of rheumatism. She complains about acute pain in her left eye, especially at night, vision impairment, photophobia, lacrimation. The patient cannot suggest any reasons for the disease. Objectively: weak pericorneal injection, flattening of iris relief, iris discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Iritis
b. Choroiditis
c. Acute attack of glaucoma
*d. Iridocyclitis
e. Keratitis

47. A patient, aged 81, complains of constant urinary excretion in drops, feeling of fullness in the	lower abdomen. On examination: above pubis there is a spherical protrusion, over which there is a dullness of percussion sound, positive suprapubic punch. What symptom is observed in this patient?
a. Dysuria
b. Urinary incontinence
*c. Paradoxal ischuria
d. Enuresis
e. Pollakiuria

48. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: t°- 37,30С, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lung cancer
b. Bronchoectatic disease
c. Exudative pleuritis
d. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Macrofocal pneumonia

49. A 52 year old patient complains about pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with a lot of foul-smelling albuminoid sputum in form of "meat slops". Objectively: the patients condition is grave, cyanosis is present, breathing rate is 31/min, percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed different rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung abscess
b. Multiple bronchiectasis
c. Chronic pneumonia
*d. Lung gangrene
e. Pleura empyema

50. A 15 year old patient suffers from headache, nasal haemorrhages, sense of lower extremity coldness. Objectively: muscles of shoulder girdle are developed, lower extremities are hypotrophied. Pulsation on the pedal and femoral arteries is sharply dampened. AP is 150/90 mm Hg, 90/60 on the legs. Systolic murmur can be auscultated above carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Aorta aneurism
b. Aortal insufficiency
c. Coarctation of pulmonary artery
*d. Aorta coarctation
e. Aortal stenosis

51. A 15 y.o. patient has developmental lag, periodical skin yellowing. Objectively: spleen is 16х12х10 cm large, holecistolithiasis, skin ulcer on the lower third of his left crus. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,01012/L, Hb- 90 g/L, C.I.- 1,0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Blood bilirubin - 56 mmole/L, indirect bilirubin - 38 mmole/L. Choose the way of treatment:
a. Portocaval anastomosis
b. Spleen transplantation
*c. Splenectomy
d. Omentosplenopexy
e. Omentohepatopexy

52. A prematurely born girl is now 8 months old. She has dyspnea, tachycardia, hepatosplenomegaly, physical developmental lag, limb cyanosis. There is also parasternal cardiac hump, auscultation revealed systolodiastolic murmur in the II intercostal space on the left. AP is 90/0 mm Hg. What disease should be suspected?
a. Stenosis of pulmonary artery
b. Nonclosure of interventricular septum
c. Coarctation of aorta
d. Stenosis of aortal valve
*e. Patent ductus arteriosus

53. Three days ago a boy underwent removal of a foreign body from under a nail plate. 2 days later he felt acute pulsating pain at the end of the nail bone which was getting worse at pressing. Nail fold became hyperemic, body temperature rose up to 37,5°С, there was a change in nail plate colour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Paronychia
b. Erysipelas
*c. Subungual panaritium
d. Erysipeloid
e. Abscess

54. A 72 year old patient complains about pain and bleeding during defecation. Digital rectal investigation revealed a tumour of anal canal. After verification of the diagnosis the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma. The secondary (metastatic) tumour will be most probably found in:
a. Mediastinum
b. Brain
c. Liver
d. Pelvic bones
*e. Lungs

55. A patient with frostbite of both feet was delivered to the admission ward. What actions should be taken?
a. To put feet into hot water
b. To administer cardiac medications
*c. To apply a bandage, to introduce vasodilating medications
d. To rub feet with snow
e. To apply an alcohol compress

56. 10 years ago a patient had a fracture in the middle one-third of his left femoral bone, and during the last 7 years he has been having acute inflammation in the area of old fracture accompanied by formation of a fistula through which some pus with small fragments of bone tissue is discharged. After a time the fistula closes. What complication of the fracture is it?
*a. Chronic osteomyelitis
b. Soft tissue phlegmon
c. Trophic ulcer
d. False joint
e. Bone tuberculosis

57. A patient has a stab wound on his right foot. On the fourth day after injury the patients body temperature rose up to 38oC, inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and painful, skin over them reddened. What complication might be suspected?
*a. Lymphadenitis
b. Phlegmon
c. Erysipelas
d. Tetanus
e. Lymphangitis

58. A 25-year-old patient complains of burning and pain during urination, purulent discharges from the urethra that turned up 2 days ago. Objectively: the urethral labia are edematic, hyperemic, there are profuse purulent discharges from the urethra. Provisional diagnosis: recent acute gonorrheal urethritis. What supplemental data of clinical examinations will alow to specify the diagnosis?
a. Serological blood analysis
b. Coccal cells detection during discharge microscopy
c. Yeast cells detection during discharge microscopy
*d. Microscopy of the urethral discharges
e. Common urine analysis

59. A boy is 8 year old. His physical development is compliant with his age. The child has had cardiac murmur since birth. Objectively: skin and visible mucous membranes are of normal colour. AP- 100/70 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolo-diastolic murmur and diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery. ECG shows overload of the left heart. Roentgenoscopy shows coarsening of the lung pattern, heart shadow of normal form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fallots tetrad
b. Patent ductus arteriosus
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
d. Aorta coarctation
*e. Atrioseptal defect

60. A 52 year old patient complains about headache, weakness of his upper left extremity. Neurological symptoms become more intense during physical stress of the left extremity. Pulsation on the arteries of the left extremity is sharply dampened but it remains unchanged on the carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Takayasus disease
b. Occlusion of brachiocephalic trunk
c. Thoracal outlet syndrome
d. Raynauds syndrome
*e. Occlusion of the left subclavicular artery, steal syndrome

61. A 45-year-old patient with urolithiasis had an attack of renal colic. What is the mechanism of the attack development?
a. Increase in relative density of urine
b. Destruction of glomerules
c. Renal artery spasm
*d. Disturbed urine outflow from the kidney
e. Ureteric twists

62. A 57 year old patient abruptly lost the sight of one eye. Examination revealed that his sight made up 0,02 excentrically, eye fundus has haemorrhages of different forms and sizes ("squashed tomato" symptom). Disc of optic nerve is hyperemic. In anamnesis general vascular pathology is recorded. Direct-acting anticoagulants were administered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive angiopathy
b. Embolism of central artery of retina
c. Diabetic retinopathy
*d. Thrombosis of central vein of retina
e. Hypertensive angioneuropathy

63. A 35 year old female patient suffering from cholelithiasis has broken her diet, and this caused an acute pain attack in the right subcostal are. The pain eased off on the third day, but the patient got progressing jaundice. What non-invasive diagnostic method should be applied?
a. Test for bilirubin
b. Infusive cholecystocholangiography
*c. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
d. Duodenal probing
e. Survey radiography of abdominal organs

64. A 68 year old patient complains about acute pain in his right foot, toe edema and darkening of skin of the IV toe. He has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years, doesnt receive regular treatment. What complication of diabetes mellitus is it?
*a. Gangrene of the IV toe on the right foot
b. Haematoma
c. Fracture of the IV toe on the right foot
d. Erysipelas
e. Panaritium

65. A 55 year old patient felt suddenly sick in a hospital corridor, he was immediately examined by a doctor. Examination revealed that the patients skin was pale, autonomous respiration was absent, pulse on carotid arteries couldnt be felt, pupils were mydriatic. What action should be taken at the beginning of cardiac resuscitation?
a. Restoration of airway patency
b. Defibrillation
c. Mouth-to-mouth ventilation
d. Closed-chest cardiac massage
*e. Precordial thump

66. A 34 year old patient complains of profuse sweating at night, skin itching, weight loss (9 kg within the last 3 months). Examination revealed malnutrition, skin pallor. Palpation of neck and inguinal areas revealed dense elastic lymph nodes for about 1 cm in diameter, nonmobile, non-adhering to skin. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymphosarcoma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
*c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Burkitts lymphoma
e. Cancer metastases

67. A 20-year-old man complains about pain arising in the lower third of femoral bone under stress and at rest. He denies having a trauma. Objectively: the skin is of normal colour, deep palpation reveals pastosity and pain, knee joint motions are limited. X-ray picture of the meta-epyphisis of distal femur shows a destruction zone and spicules. In blood: immature cell forms, no signs of inflammation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hyperparathyroid dystrophy
b. Myelomatosis
c. Marble-bone disease
*d. Osteogenic sarcoma
e. Chronic osteomyelitis

68. Esophagus wall of a 72 year old patient with severe concomitant pathology was injured during urgent fibroesophagogastroscopy. This resulted in progressing of acute respiratory failure and collapse of the left lung. What aid should be rendered?
a. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus wound
b. Endoscopic closure of esophagus wound, drainage
c. Buelaus drainage of pleural cavity, antibacterial therapy
d. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus and mediastinum wound
*e. Drainage of pleural cavity by Bullaux method, mediastinum drainage, antibacterial therapy

69. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. To make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone
*b. To perform the Heimlich manoever
c. To send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him
d. To perform conicotomy immediately
e. To use an inhalation of ?2-adrenoceptor agonist

70. A 4 month old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, there was also one-time vomiting. Objectively: the childs condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctors finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pylorostenosis
*b. Ileocecal invagination
c. Wilms tumour
d. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
e. Helminthic invasion

71. A 3-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
a. Wound abscess
b. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
*c. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
d. Posttraumatic phlegmon
e. Suture sinus

72. Forensic medical expertise of corpse of a newborn revealed: body weight 3500 g, body length 50 cm, the umbilical cord was smooth, moist, glossy, without any signs of drying. Hydrostatic tests were positive. The test results are the evidence of:
a. Stillbirth
b. Secondary atelectasis
c. Hyaline membrane disease
*d. Live birth
e. Primary atelectasis

