1. A 76 y.o. woman complains of progressing swallowing disorder, mostly she has had problems with solid food for the last 6 weeks. Sometimes she has regurgitation of solid masses. Swallowing is not painful. She lost 6 kg. 10 years ago she had myocardiac infarction, she takes constantly aspirine and prolonged nitrates. She consumes alcochol in moderate proportions, smokes. Objectively: icteric skin, neck has no pecularities, lymph nodes are not enlarged. Thorax has no changes, cardiovascular system has no evident changes. Liver is +3 cm. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Diffuse constriction of esophagus
b. Diaphragmatic hernia
*c. Cancer of esophagus
d. Myasthenia
e. Esophageal achalasia

2. A 65 y.o. man who has problems with urination as a result of benign prostate gland adenoma dveloped fever and chill, hypotension, sinus tachycardia. Skin is warm and dry. Clinical blood analysis revealed absolute granulocytopenia. These hemodynamic changes are most likely to be caused by:
a. Secondary endothelial changes as a result of bacterial lesion
*b. Endotoxemia with activation of complement system
c. Secondary circulation insufficiency with retained systolic function as a result of peripheral vasoconstriction
d. Secondary reflex vasodilatation as a result of lowered cardiac output
e. Reflex vagus stimulation with lowered cardiac output

3. A 60 y.o. man complains of sense of heaviness in the region of scrotum. Objectively: scrotum edema in the left part. Testicle is of normal size, but there is a soft, scrotum limited edema over it that can be pressed and disappears when the patient lies down. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Varicocele
b. Ectopic testicle
c. Varicosity of subcutaneous veins
d. Inguinal hernia
e. Inguinal lymphadenopathy

4. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax, it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made in:
*a. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
b. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
c. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion
d. In the projection of pleural sinus
e. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line

5. A 40 year old woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Painless movable induration
b. Painful movable induration
*c. Skin induration with inverted nipple
d. Bloody discharges from the nipple
e. Pure discharges from the nipple

6. Name a statistical observation unit for determination of influence amount of bloodsugar on the healing of wounds surface in a postoperative period:
a. An amount of bloodsugar
b. The patient who has a wound surface
c. The patient who was discharged on an after-care
*d. The patient in a postoperative period
e. Blood analysis

7. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved application of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
a. 180 minutes
*b. 120 minutes
c. 30 minutes
d. 15 minutes
e. 60 minutes

8. A 9 y.o. child with diagnosis "chronic tonsillitis" stands dispanserization control. Within 1 year of observation there was one exacerbation of disease. Physical condition is satisfactory. The general state is not infringed. Define group of health:
a. I-st
b. II-d
*c. III (a)
d. III (b)
e. III (c)

9. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Leftsided renal colic
b. Sigmoid diverticulitis
c. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
d. Torsion of the left testicle
e. Herpes zoster

10. A 40 year old woman has a self-detected hard breast mass. The procedure of choice for confirming the diagnosis is:
*a. Excision biopsy
b. Thermography
c. Aspiration biopsy with cytology
d. Ultrasonography
e. Mammography

11. During investigation for chronic, severe, epigastric pain, a 40 year old alcoholic man is found to have multiple areas of narrowing alternating with dilatation ("chain of lakes" appearance) of the main pancreatic duct. The operation of choice is:
a. Distal pancreaticojejunostomy
b. Distal pancreatectomy
c. Total pancreatectomy
*d. Lateral pancreaticojejunostomy
e. Sphincterotomy

12. The treatment of choice for duodenal obstruction caused by secondary duodenal hematoma that developed a few days after blunt abdominal injury is:
a. Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy
b. Immediate exploration
c. Tube duodenostomy
*d. Nasogastric decompression and parenteral alimentation
e. Duodenojejunostomy

13. An anestesiologist gives narcosis to the patient, he uses a non-reversive contour. Anesthetic is halothane. Air temperature in the operation room is 210С, humidity 50%, level of noise 30 dB. What occupational hazard is the principal one under these conditions?
a. Improper occupational microclimate
b. Mental overfatigue
c. Compelled working pose
*d. Air pollution with anesthetic
e. High level of noise

14. A 37-year-old patient has come to clinic being wounded in the area of umbilicus an hour ago.On physical exam, there is a prick and cut painful wound of about 0,5x1 cm around umbilicus on the abdominal skin with slight bleeding.How would you help this patient?
*a. Laparotomy, abdominal cavity organs inspection. Primary surgical processing of the wound
b. Inspection of the wound with canal probe
c. Suture on the wound
d. Aseptic bandage
e. Drainage of the wound with rubber strip

15. If a child has adherent fingers on his right hand, then what will be your diagnosis?
a. Polydactyly
b. Ectrodactyly
c. Ectromelia
*d. Syndactyly
e. Macrodactyly

16. A 34-year-old patient was bitten by a dog 3 hours ago.There is a wound by dog teeth without bleeding in the left arm. What surgical help would you provide to this patient?
a. Complete suture of the wound
b. Incomplete suture of the wound
c. Aseptic bandage
d. Cream bandage
*e. Clean wound with detergent water and apply anti-septic

17. A 63 year old patient was diagnosed with purulent mediastinitis. What of the below listed diseases are NOT the cause of purulent mediastinitis?
a. Perforation of the thoracic part of the oesophagus
b. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
c. Deep neck phlegmon
d. Perforation of the cervical part of the oesophagus
*e. Cervical lymphadenitis

18. Purulent mediastinitis is diagnosed at a 63-year-old patient. What diseases from the stated below CANNOT cause the purulent mediastinitis?
a. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
*b. Cervical lymphadenitis
c. Perforation of the cervical part of the easophagus
d. Deep neck phlegmon
e. Perforation of the thoracic part of the easophagus

19. The diagnosis of a right-sided pneumothorax is made to a 36- year-old patient. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Thoracotomy
*b. Drainage of the pleural cavity
c. Symptomatic therapy
d. Antiinflammation therapy
e. Pleural puncture

20. A 36 year old patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Antiinflammation therapy
b. Pleural puncture
c. Thoracotomy
*d. Surgical treatment: drainage of the pleural cavity
e. Symptomatic therapy

21. A 16 year old patient with complaints of frequent pain in the abdomen was diagnosed with melanoma, examination revealed also pigmentation of the mucosa and skin, polyp in the stomach and large intestine. It is know that the patients mother has an analogous pigmentation and has been often treated for anemia. What disease is suspected?
a. Chrons disease
b. Adolescent polyposis
c. Hirschprungs disease
*d. Peytz-Egerss polyposis
e. Tuberculosis of the intestine

22. A 41 year old patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with haemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
a. Hemostatic therapy
b. Intravenous administration of pituitrin
*c. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube
d. Operation
e. Administration of plasma

23. It is suspected that a 34 year old patient has an abscess of Douglas pouches. What diagnostic method is to be chosen?
a. Laparoscopy
b. Rectoromanoscopy
*c. Digital examination of rectum
d. Percussion and auscultation of stomach
e. R-scopy of abdominal cavity

24. A patient has restrained umbilateral hernia complicated by phlegmon hernia, it is necessary to take following actions:
*a. Herniotomy by Mayo-Sapezhko
b. Herniotomy by Sapezhko
c. Herniotomy by Grenov
d. Herniotomy by Lekser
e. Herniotomy by Mayo

25. A 52 year old man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detected murmur. What diagnostic method is to be applied in the first place?
a. Cerebral angiography
b. Electroencephalography
c. CT of the brain
d. MRI of the brain
*e. Ultrasound dopplerography

26. For the persons who live in a hot area after an accident at a nuclear object, the greatest risk within the first decade is represented by cancer of:
*a. Thyroid gland
b. Reproduction system organs
c. Lungs
d. Breast
e. Skin

27. A 10 year old boy complains about pain in his left eye and strong photophobia after he had injured his left eye with a pencil at school. Left eye examination: blepharospasm, ciliary and conjunctival congestion, cornea is transparent, other parts of eyeball have no changes. Visus 0,9. Right eye is healthy, Visus 1,0. What additional method would you choose first of all?
*a. Staining test with 1% fluorescein
b. Tonometria
c. Cornea sensation-test
d. Gonioscopia
e. X-ray examination of orbit

28. A patient had disorder of nasal respiration, mucopurulent discharges from nose, headache for 3 weeks. At anterior rhinoscopy in middle nasal meathus the stria of pus, edema, hyperemia of the mucosa of the nose have been determined. What diagnostic method is necessary to administer first of all?
a. CT of a skull
b. Punction of the maxillar sinus
c. General blood test
*d. An X-ray of paranasal sinuses
e. Bacteriology analysis of the nasal mucous

29. A patient with acute purulent otitis media complicated by mastoiditis was admitted to a hospital. Roentgenogram of mastoid processes showed the shadiowing of the cellular system on the lesion, absence of bone septa was present. What are the necessary therapeutic actions at the second stage of mastoiditis?
a. Cateterization of the Eustachian tube
*b. Mastoidotomy
c. Radical operation on the middle ear
d. Paracentesis of the drum
e. Tympanoplasty

30. A 35-year-old woman was admitted to resuscitation department in asthmatic status. What is the most trustworthy criterion of breath effectiveness?
a. Respiration rate
b. Respiratory volume
*c. РаСО2 and РаО2
d. Minute respiratory volume
e. Determination of “dead” space

31. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
a. Increase of bleeding speed
*b. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
c. Shunting
d. Depositing of blood in venous channel
e. Presence of hypervolemia

32. The most available and informative diagnostic method for closed trauma of the urinary bladder is:
a. Pelvic arteriography
b. Sonography of the urinary bladder
c. Palpation and percussion of abdomen
*d. Retrograde cystography
e. Cystography

33. A 22 year old patient was admitted to trauma center with complaints of pain in the left ankle joint that was getting worse during moving and weight bearing. On the clinical examination it was found that the patient had the closed fracture of medial malleolus without displacement. In which position should the foot be fixed in plaster cast?
a. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
*b. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot
c. In position of pronation
d. In position of planter flexion of foot
e. In position of supination

34. Female 45 year old patient was admitted to the traumatological ward with the closed fracture of the medial malleolus with its displacement up to 3 mm. The foot is to be fixed with a plaster cast in the following position:
a. In position of planter flexion of foot
b. In position of supination
c. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
*d. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot
e. In position of pronation

35. A 74 y.o. patient has been ill with benign prostate hyperplasy for the last 5 years. 4 days ago, after alcochol consumption, there was an acute retention of urination. At the pre-admission stage his urinary bladder was catheterized with metallic catheter. Examination revealed: right epididymis is enlarged, thick and painful, there are purulent discharges from urethra. What way of emergency care must be chosen?
a. Transuretral resection or prostatectomy
b. Microwave thermotherapy of prostate
c. Placing of intraprostatic stent
*d. Trocar or open epicystostomy
e. Introduction of permanent urethral catheter

36. Examination of a 3-month-old child revealed scrotum growth on the right. This formation has elastic consistency, its size decreases during sleep and increases when the child is crying. What examination will be helpful for making a correct diagnosis?
a. Examination of the formation in Trendelenburgs position
*b. Palpation of the thickened cord crossing the pubical tubercule (sign of the silk glove)
c. Palpation of the external inguinal ring
d. Diaphanoscоpy
e. Punction of the scrotum

37. A rounded well-defined shadow was found in the costo-vertebral angle on the chest roentgenogram of an otherwise healthy 9 year old girl. Make a preliminary diagnosis:
a. Sympatoblastoma
b. Sympatogonioma
c. Sarcoma of the vertebra
*d. Ganglioneuroma
e. Ganglioneuroblastoma

38. A 4 y.o. child attends the kindergarten. Complains of poor appetite, fatigue. Objective examination: skin and mucous membrane are pale, child is asthenic. In the hemogram: hypochromatic anemia 1st, leucomoide reaction of the eosinophile type. What pathology must be excluded first of all?
a. Lymphoprolipherative process
b. Duodenal ulcer
c. Atrophic gastritis
*d. Helminthic invasion
e. Hypoplastic anemia

39. A 33 year old male patient was brought to Emergency Department with the signs of cardiovascular collapse: BP - 60/30 mm Hg, Ps - 140 bpm, the skin is pale and moist, diuresis 20 ml/h, Hb - 80 g/l, red blood cell count - 2,51012/l. The reduction of blood volume averages:
*a. 30-40%
b. 15-20%
c. 25-30%
d. 20-25%
e. 10-15%

40. A 19 year old girl was admitted to emergency department: unconsciousness, cyanosis, myotic pupils are present, superficial breathing is 12/min. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action necessary in this clinical situation:
a. Caffeine injection
b. Cordiamine injection
c. Gastric lavage
d. Oxygen inhalation
*e. Controlled respiration

41. What preparations are used for prevention of fungal infection?
a. Captopril, Enalapril
b. Isoniazid, Ftibazid, Pyrazinamid
c. Rubomycin, Bleomycin, Mytomycin C
d. Cytosar, Cormyctin, Lomycitin
*e. Fluconozol, Orungol, Nisoral

42. What developes most often after accidental intake of Hydrochloric acid?
*a. Cardiac insufficiency
b. Kutlings syndrome
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Deyladss syndrome
e. Cushings syndrome

43. 30 y.o. woman, had mild trauma of 5th finger of the left hand 15 days ago. She has treated her self at home. She presents to the hospital due to deterioration of the condition and temperature rise. Objectively: hyperemia and swelling on the ventral surface of finger. Restricted movements of the finger. X-ray of the left hand: an early stage of оsteomyolitis of the fifth finger could not be excluded. The diagnosis: panaris of 5th finger of the left hand. What form of panaris has occurred in the patient?
a. Paronychia
b. Hypodermic
*c. Bony
d. Tendon type
e. Joints type

44. A 36 y.o. patient is diagnosed with right sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
*a. Surgical drainage of the pleural cavity
b. Symptomatic therapy
c. Thoracotomy
d. Pleural puncture
e. Antiinflammation therapy

45. A male patient, 60 years old, tobacco smoker for 30 years, alcoholic, has dysphagia and weight loss since 4 months. Suggested diagnosis?
a. Hanters disease
b. Esophageal achalasia
*c. Cancer of the esophagus
d. Esophagitis
e. Esophageal diverticulum

46. For a patient with a stab injury to the femoral artery, the treatment of choice is:
a. Interposition of Dacron graft
*b. End- to-end anastomosis
c. Ligation of both transected ends
d. Interposition of autogenous vein graft
e. Interposition of homologous arterial graft

47. A 28 year old woman was admitted to the emergency room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot" 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Subcutaneous hematoma
*b. Superficial venous thrombosis
c. Insect bite
d. Early deep vein thrombosis
e. Cellulitis

48. Which of the following best summarizes indications for operation on an abdominal aortic aneurysm?
a. Only ruptured aneurysm
*b. Any aneurysm greater than 5 cm in diameter
c. Only symptomatic aneurysm
d. Any abdominal aortic aneurysm
e. Only symptomatic aneurysm greater than 5 cm in diameter

49. A 25 year old patient complains of pain in the I finger on his right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain is getting worse. Acute pain appears during the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Bone panaritium
b. Paronychia
c. Subcutaneous panaritium
d. Articular (joint) panaritium
*e. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)

50. Which of the following symptoms is the most typical for the adenoid hypertrophy?
a. Giddiness
b. Headache
c. Deglutition disturbance
d. Olfaction disturbance
*e. Nasal obstruction

51. A 30 year old man complains of acute pain in his right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 mm, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
*a. Acute purulent otitis media
b. Chronic secretory otitis media
c. Eustachian tube disfunction
d. Chronic purulent otitis media
e. Acute mastoiditis

52. A 22 y.o. man complains of acute throat pain, increasing upon swallowing during 3 days. Body temperature 38,30С, neck lymph nodules are slightly enlarged and painful. Pharyngoscopically - tonsilar hyperemia, enlargement and edema, tonsils are covered by round yellow fibrinous patches around crypts openings. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus in swab analysis. What is the diagnosis?
a. Іnfectious mononucleosis
b. Pharyngeal candidosis
c. Acute follicular tonsilitis
d. Pharyngeal diphtheria
*e. Acute membranous tonsilitis

53. A 30-year-old woman complains of nasal blockage, sneezing, watery nasal discharges. The body temperature is normal. Objectively - edema of nasal mucous membrane on both sides, especially of the lower turbinate (with cyanosis). Blood test data - mild leukocytosis and eosinophilia. What is the diagnosis?
a. Foreign body in the nose
b. Atrophic rhinitis
c. Acute sinusitis
*d. Allergic rhinitis
e. Infective rhinitis

54. A patient is staying in the hospital with the diagnosis of abdominal typhus. During the 3-d week from the beginning of the disease the patient stopped keeping diet and confinement to bed. As a result the body temperature and rapid pulse decreased and melena appeared. What kind of complications should we think about first of all?
a. Thrombophlebitis
b. Nephroso-nephritis
c. Hepatite
*d. Intestinal haemorrhage
e. Meningitis

55. A 45-year-old woman, mother of four children, comes to the emergency room complaining of a sudden onset of the epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, radiating to the back, accompanied by vomiting. On examination, tenderness is elicited in the right upper quadrant, bowel sounds are decreased, and laboratory data shows leukocytosis, normal serum levels of amylase, lipase, and bilirubin. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Sigmoid diverticulitis
e. Perforated peptic ulcer disease

56. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Ileocecal tuberculosis
b. Acute ileitis
c. Perforated Meckels diverticulum
d. Ulcerative colitis
*e. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum

57. A 50-year-old man comes to the emergency room with a history of vomiting of 3 days duration. His past history examination reveals that for about 20 years he has been suffering from epigasric pain lasting for 2 to 3 weeks, during early spring and autumn. He remembers getting relief from pain by taking milk and antacids. Physical examination showed a fullness in the epigastric area with visible peristalsis, absence of tenderness, and normal active bowel sounds. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Gastric outlet obstruction
b. Volvulus of the colon
c. Cholecystitis
d. Incarcerated umbilical hernia
e. Small bowel obstruction

58. A 50 year old woman with a 2-year history of mild, diffuse, tender thyroid enlargement complains of 10 pound weight gain and fatigue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Papillary thyroid carcinoma
*b. Hashimotos thyroiditis
c. Subacute thyroiditis
d. Riedels thyroiditis
e. Suppurative thyroiditis

59. A 24-year-old law student is brought to the emergency room complaining of severe abdominal pain of 6-8 hours duration. He had been to a party the night before. The pain is in the epigastrium radiating to the back and is accompanied by nausea. The patient had vomited twice prior to coming to the emergency room. Clinical examination revealed that the young man was anxious, with acute condition, with a regular pulse rate of 100/min, blood pressure of 100/68 mm Hg, and body temperature of 38,1oC. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Acute cholecystitis
*c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Acute diverticulitis
e. Mesenteric adenitis

60. In which of the following disorders does the pathophysiology of portal hypertension involve presinusoidal intrahepatic obstruction?
a. Budd-Chiari syndrome
b. Cavernomatous transformation of the portal vein
c. Alcoholic cirrhosis
d. Hemochromatosis
*e. Congenital hepatic fibrosis

61. A severely traumatized patient who has been receiving prolonged parenteral alimentation develops diarrhea, mental depression, alopecia and perioral and periorbital dermatitis. Administration of which of the following trace elements is most likely to reverse these complications?
a. Iodine
b. Silicon
c. Copper
*d. Zinc
e. Selenium

62. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with vomiting and acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease should be suspected?
a. Renal colic
b. Perforated gastric ulcer
c. Acute appendicitis
*d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Acute enterocolitis

63. The 67 y.o. patient had 5 recurrent fractures of the lower extremities without considerable cause within 5 years. O-shaped deformity of the legs in the knee joints has appeared. The skull, pelvis and lower extremities X-Ray shows the thickening of flat bones. In the long bones there is a hyperostosis along the bone axis.The blood test has not revealed any inflammation activity. Serum calcium is normal. What disease do you consider in this case?
a. Myeloma
b. Mottled disease (marble disease)
c. Hyperparathyoid dystrophy
d. Chronic osteomyelitis
*e. Pagets disease

64. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the reception room of the Central District Hospital. He complains of a severely painful swelling localized on posterior neck, fever up to 38,4°C and general weakness. In anamnesis: diabetes mellitus within 5 years. On physical examination on the posterior neck surface there is an infiltrate elevated above surrounding skin. The tissues affected by swelling are tense and blue reddish discoloration in central area. There are also several purulent necrotic pustules which are connected with each other and form a large skin necrosis. A thinned necrotic skin of this swelling has holes looking like sieve, pus discharges through out. What disease should a doctor consider first of all?
a. Acute skin cellulitis
b. Furuncle
*c. Carbuncle
d. Carbuncle associated with anthrax
e. Skin abscess

65. A 19 y.o. man was admitted to the reception department in 20 minutes after being wounded with the knife to the left chest. The patient is confused. The heart rate is 96 bpm and BP- 80/60 mm Hg. There are the dilated neck veins, sharply diminished apical beat and evident heart enlargement What kind of penetrative chest wound complications has developed in patient?
*a. Pericardium tamponade
b. Open pneumothorax
c. Valve-likes pneumothorax
d. Closed pneumothorax
e. Massive hemothorax

66. A 35 y.o. patient complains of a difficult swallowing, pain behind the breastbone. He can eat only liquid food. While swallowing sometimes he has attacks of cough and dyspnea. Above mentioned complaints are progressing. It is known that the patient has had a chemical burn of esophagus one month ago. What complication does the patient have?
a. Esophageal diverticula
b. Esophagitis
*c. Corrosive esophagitis and stricture
d. Cardiac achalasia
e. Cardiac insufficiency

67. Survey radiograph of chest of a 62 year old smoker who often suffers from "pneumonias" showed a triangle shadow in the right lung, its vertex is pointing towards the lung root. It also showed deviation of heart and mediastinum shadows towards the lesion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Peripheral cancer of lung
b. Atelectasis
c. Lung abscess
d. Lung cyst
*e. Cenral cancer of lung

68. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, t°35,0oC. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypothermia
b. Apparent death
c. -
d. Frostbite of trunk and extremities
e. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency

69. 1,5 hour after start of gullet bougienage a 48 year old patient suffering from corrosive stricture felt acute abdominal pain. Previously he had been suffering from duodenal ulcer. Examination revealed that abdomen was very tense and painful; Ps- 110 bpm, painful sialophagia, skin pallor. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
*b. Perforation of abdominal part of esophagus
c. Strangulation of diaphragmal hernia
d. Acute myocardium infarction
e. Perforation of duodenal ulcer

70. While making a round, a doctor had noticed the edema of the right shoulder of a 26-day-old child with diagnosis of "umbilical sepsis". Active movements in the shoulder joint were absent, right hand was hanging down. Mother stated that her childs condition had worsened for the last 24 hours what resulted in childs refusal to be breast-fed, restlessness, weeping while swaddling, rise in body temperature up to 38,8°C. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Epiphysial osteomyelitis of the humerus
b. Traumatic brachioplexitis
c. Fracture of the clavicle
d. Phlegmon of the shoulder
e. Fracture of the humerus

71. A 65-year-old patient complains of dull pain in the rectum during and after defecation, discharge of mucus and small amount of blood mixed up with mucus and faeces. The discharged blood is of dark red color, sometimes with small amount of clots. The patient is sick for 8 months, has lost some weight. On digital examination, there is a round constriction of the rectum with infiltrate at a height of 4-5 cm from the anus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cicatricial stenosis of the rectum
b. Crohns disease
c. Non-specific ulcer colitis
*d. Cancer of the medium-ampullar section of the rectum
e. Chronic paraproctitis

72. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Multiple kidneys ruptures
b. Subcapsular kidneys rupture
*c. Kidneys contusion
d. Paranephral hematoma
e. Kidneys abruption

73. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6oC. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5х2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cystous liver cancer
b. Paravesical liver abscesses
c. Liver cancer
d. Liver abscess
*e. Alveolar echinococcus of liver

74. A 14 y.o. patient suddenly fell ill when high fever, acute pain in the right shin. In two weeks X-ray showed translucent spaces (destructive focuses) with unevel countours in the middle third of tibia diaphysis. Along the bone edge there was a narrow line of shadow (periostitis) 1-2 mm from the surface. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bone cyst of tibia
b. Right shin trauma
c. Right shin tuberculosis
d. Right shin syphilis
*e. Right shin osteomielitis

75. A 36-year-old woman applied to doctor with complaints of the enlargement of the right mammary gland. On physical exam: the right mammary gland is enlarged, hardened; nipple with areola is pasty and hydropic, looks like "lemon peel". There palpates a lymph node in the right axilla, 1,5 cm in diameter, dense consistence, not mobile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Diffusive mastopathy
*b. Hydropic and infiltrative cancer of the mammary gland
c. Erysipelatouslike cancer of the mammary gland
d. Pagets cancer
e. Acute mastitis

76. A 43 year old patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenosing papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
a. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs
b. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
c. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
*d. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
e. To perform external choledoch drainage

77. A 46-year-old patient is to be prepared to the operation on account of stomach cancer. Preoperative preparation involves infusion therapy. It was injected up to 3,0 l of solutions into his right lunar vein. On the next day he got tensive pain in the region of his right shoulder. Examination of interior brachial surface revealed a stripe of hyperemia, skin edema and a painful cord. What complication is it?
a. Vein puncture and edema of paravenous cellular tissue
b. Acute lymphangitis
c. Phlegmon of paravenous cellular tissue
*d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Necrosis of paravenous cellular tissue

78. A 54-year-old patient applied with complaints of acute pain in the shoulder-joint. 10 minutes earlier he fell in the street with his arms stretched. Doctor of the traumatological unit noticed an acute deformation of the right shoulder-joint, the impossibilty of active movement in the right extremity. Roentgenologically: uncoincidence of articulating surfaces. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dislocation of the scapula
b. Fracture of the humerus
c. Dislocation of the humerus
d. Contusion of the humerus
*e. Dislocation of the clavicle

79. On the 4th day after suturing the perforative stomach ulcer a patient with pulmonary emphysema developed spontaneous pneumothorax. What is the best place for pleural drainage?
*a. The second intercostal space along the medioclavicular line
b. The seventh intercostal space along the anterior axillary furrow
c. The fifth intercostal space along the medioclavicular line
d. The sixth intercostal space along the anterior axillary furrow
e. The eighth intercostal space along the posterior axillary furrow

80. Parents of a 2-year-old boy applied to clinic complaining of right testicle absence in the scrotum of a boy. While examining the boy, hypoplasia of the right half of the scrotum was revealed, absence of the testicle. Testicle is miniaturized, it palpitates along the inguinal canal but it could not be moved down to scrotum. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Right-sided cryptorchism, inguinal form
b. Left-sided monorchism
c. Ectopia of the right testicle, pubic form
d. Right-sided cryptorchism, abdominal form
e. Retraction of the right testicle (pseudocryptorchism)

81. A 62-year-old patient complains of the pain behind the sternum, bad passing of solid and liquid food, bad breath, increased salivation weight, loss of 15 kg during the period of 2 months. Appetite is retained. On physical exam: face features are sharpened. The skin is pale, with sallow tint, its turgor is decreased. The liver is not enlarged. Blood Hb - 86g/L. Gregersen reaction is positive. What kind of pathology caused the given clinical situation?
a. Chronic non-specific esophagitis
*b. Esophagus cancer
c. Cicatricial constriction of esophagus
d. Benign growth of esophagus
e. Achalasia of esophagus

82. A patient suffers from suddenly arising crampy pain in the right loin area. 2 hours after the pain had started, hematuria took place. Loin X-ray: no pathological shadows. Ultrasound: pyelocaliectasis on the right, the left part is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tumour of the right kidney pelvis
*b. Stone of the right kidney, renal colic
c. Intestine invagination
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Twist of the right ovary cyst

83. A patient complains of an extremely intense pain in epigastrium. He has peptic ulcer disease of duodenum for 10 years. The patient is in the forced position being on the right side with legs abducted to stomach. Abdomen has acute tenderness in the epigastrium. Guarding contraction of the abdominal wall muscles is observed. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
*b. Perforation of ulcer
c. Acute condition of peptic ulcer disease
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Penetration of ulcer into pancreas

84. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain, hyperemia along subcutaneous veins, rise in body temperature. While examining the large shin subcutaneous vein, there is hyperemia, pain by pressing. Homanss and Lusess symptoms are negative. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of aorta
*b. Acute thrombophlebitis of subcutaneous veins
c. Lymphostasis
d. Acute ileophemoral phlebothrombosis
e. Embolism of aorta

85. A 30-year-old man has suffered from traffic accident. Consciousness is absent. Pulse on the carotid artery is undeterminable, no respiration. There is a wide leather belt on mans waist. What measures are to be taken?
a. Start immediate artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage
b. Do not touch the victim until the arrival of the police
c. Put the victim with his back on the shield
*d. Conduct an artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage after having released from the belt
e. Turn the victim to the right side

86. A 65-year-old patient complains of gradual worsening of the left eye vision during 10 months. On physical examination: acuty of vision of the left eye is 0,01, not correctable. The eye is quiet, pupil of the eye is grayish, reflex from the eye-ground is absent. Intraocular pressure is 18 mm/Hg. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Exfoliation of the retina
*b. Senile cataract
c. Disorder of blood circulation in retina vessels
d. Open-angle glaucoma
e. Leukoma of the cornea

87. A 36 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with sharp pain in substernal area following occasional swallowing of a fish bone. On esophagoscopy the foreign body wasnt revealed. The pain increased and localized between scapulas. In a day temperature elevated, condition became worse, dysphagia intensified. What complication has developed?
a. Aspirative pneumonia
*b. Perforation of esophagus with mediastinitis
c. Obstruction of esophagus
d. Esophageal hemorrhage
e. Pulmonary atelectasis

88. A 19 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia of B type. What antihemophilic medications should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Fresh frozen blood
b. Cryoprecipitate
*c. Fresh frozen plasma
d. Native plasma
e. Dried plasma

89. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patients condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min, Ps- 96 bpm, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are moist rales of different types above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal pneumonia
b. Exudative pleuritis
*c. Acute pulmonary abscess
d. Pleural empyema
e. Pyopneumothorax

90. A 24 y.o. male patient was transferred to the chest surgery department from general surgical department with acute post-traumatic empyema of pleura. On the X-ray: wide level horizontal of fluid on the right. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. Decortication of pleura
b. Thoracoplasty
c. Lobectomy
*d. Punction and drainage of pleural cavity
e. Pneumoectomy

91. A patient complains of intense pressing pain in the pharynx, mainly to the right, impossibility to swallow even liquid food. The illness started 5 days ago. The patients condition is grave. Body temperature - 38,9°C, speech is difficult, voice is constrained, difficulties in opening the mouth. Submaxillary glands to the right are painful, enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
*b. Peritonsillar abscess
c. Pharyngeal tumour
d. Diphtheria
e. Vincents disease

92. In a 65 y.o. female patient a tumor 13х8 сm in size in the umbilical area and above is palpated, mild tenderness on palpation, unmovable, pulsates. On ausculation: systolic murmur. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Stomach tumor
b. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
c. Mitral insufficiency
*d. Abdominal aortic aneurism
e. Arterio-venous aneurism

93. A patient with suspicion of pelvic bones fraction is under examination conducted by the doctor who presses alae ilii in medial direction with his both hands. What causes painful syndrome of the patient?
*a. Disorder of continuity of the pelvic ring
b. Traumatic injury of the intrapelvic organs
c. Retroperitoneal hematoma
d. Fracture of the sacrum
e. Fracture of sciatic bones

94. A boy is 1 year old. Previously he had purulent otitis. After that he started complaining about pain in the upper third of his left thigh, body temperature rose up to 39oC. Objectively: the thigh is swollen in its upper third, inguinal fold is smoothed. Extremity is in half-bent position. Active and passive movements are impossible because of acute pain. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brodies abscess
*b. Acute haematogenic osteomyelitis
c. Intermuscular phlegmon
d. Acute coxitis
e. Osteosarcoma

95. A 30 y.o. victim of fire has thermal burns of III-A and III-B degree that amount 20% of total skin coverlet. AP is 110/70 mm Hg, HR- 120/min. What transfusion means shoul be used for blind infusion correction during transportation?
a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Albumin
c. Polyglucine
d. 10% glucose solution
*e. Salines

96. A 24 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about continued fever, night sweating. She lost 7 kg within the last 3 months. She had casual sexual contacts. Objectively: enlargement of all lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome. Blood count: leukocytes - 2,2109/L. What disease can be suspected?
*a. HIV-infection
b. Tuberculosis
c. Chroniosepsis
d. Infectionous mononucleosis
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

97. A patient suffering from acute posttraumatic pain received an injection of morphine that brought him a significant relief. Which of the following mechanisms of action provided antishock effect of morphine in this patient?
*a. Stimulation of opiate receptors
b. Stimulation of benzodiazepine receptors
c. Intensification of GABA-ergic reactions
d. Inhibition of dopamine mediation
e. Block of central cholinergic receptors

98. A 27-year-old patient was brought to clinic with a crashed wound of the posterior surface of the right shin in 2 hours after the accident happened. During surgical treatment pieces of dirty clothes and gravel were removed. What actions from the given below are the decisive ones to prevent an anaerobic infection?
a. Rational antibiotic therapy
b. Hyperbaric oxygenation
c. Introduction of the preventive dose of an anti-gangrene serum
d. Introduction of the medical dose of the anti-gangrene serum
*e. Radical surgical treatment

99. In morgue there are dead bodies with the following causes of death: electrotrauma; rupture of the spleen with acute anemia. There is one unknown person; one ethyl alcohol poisoned person and one drowned man. What dead body should the blood group be determined for?
a. Body of poisoned person
b. Body of person with internal hemorrhage
c. Body of person with a sudden death
*d. All dead bodies of the unknown persons
e. Body of drowned man

100. A 50 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of blood in urine. There was no pain or urination disorders, hematuria has lasted for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys are not palpable, suprapubic region has no pecularities, external genitals have no pathology. Rectal examination revealed: prevesical gland is not enlarged. Cytoscopy revealed no changes. What disease would you think about first of all?
a. Varicocele
b. Tuberculosis of urinary bladder
*c. Cancer of kidney
d. Kidney dystopy
e. Necrotic papillitis

