1. An 18 y.o. patient was admitted to the hematologic department with complaints of headache, general weakness, poor appetite, body temperature rise up to 390С, neck swelling. Objectively: skin and mucous membranes are extremely pale, lymph nodes on the both sides of neck are up to 1 cm large, painless. Liver is enlarged +1 cm, painless, spleen +0,5 cm, t°- 380С. Blood count: Нb- 98g/L, RBC- 2,91012/L, leukocytes - 32109/L, stab neutrophils - 0%, segmental leukocytes - 28%, monocytes - 2%, lymphocytes - 39%, blasts - 31%, reticulocytes - 31%, thrombocytes - 120109/L, ESR- 36 mm/h. What form of leukosis does the patient have?
a. Chronic myeloleukosis
b. Undifferentiated leukosis
c. Acute myeloblastic leukosis
d. Chronic lympholeukosis
*e. Acute lymphoblastic leukosis

2. After manual reposition and application of plaster splint a patient with fractures of forearm bones had an edema of hand and fingers, he felt pain and lack of sensitivity. What tactics should the doctor choose?
a. To prescribe analgetics and diuretics
b. Its a natural phenomena, the edema will dissipate in a day
c. To repeat reposition
*d. To cut the bandage that fastens the splint
e. To remove the plaster

3. A 33 year old patient was delivered to the infectious diseases department on the 7-th day of disease. He complained about great weakness, high temperature, pain in the lumbar area and leg muscles, icteritiousness, dark colour of urine, headache. The acute disease started with chill, body temperature rise up to 40oC, headache, pain in the lumbar area and sural muscles. Icterus turned up on the 4th day, nasal and scleral haemorrhages came on the 5th day. Fever has lasted for 6 days. Diuresis - 200 ml. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Yersiniosis
*b. Leptospirosis
c. Virus A hepatitis
d. Typhoid fever
e. Sepsis

4. After supercooling a 38-year-old woman developed muscle pain, body temperature rise up to 39oC, headache, dysuria, positive Pasternatskys symptome. In the urine: leukocyturia, bacteriuria. In blood: Decrease in Hb rate down to 103 g/l, left shift leukocytosis, ESR acceleration up to 32 mm/h. Blood urea - 6,0 millimole/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute cystitis
*b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Renal tuberclosis
e. Urolithiasis

5. A 35 year old patient who suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis and has been hemodialysis-dependent for the last three years developed intermissions of heart activity, hypotension, progressing weakness, dyspnea. ECG showed bradycardia, atrioventricular block type I, high pointed waves T. The day before the flagrant violation of diet took place. What is the most probable cause of these changes?
a. Hypokaliemia
b. Hyperhydratation
*c. Hyperkaliemia
d. Hypernatriemia
e. Hypocalciemia

6. A 60 y.o. patient complains of pain in interphalangeal joints of hand that gets worse during working. Objectively: distal and proximal joints of the II-IV fingers are defigured, with Heberdens and Bouchards nodes, painful, stiff. X-ray picture of joints: joint spaces are constricted, there are marginal osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bechterews disease
b. Reiters disease
*c. Osteoarthritis
d. Rheumatic arthritis
e. Psoriatic arthritis

7. A 20 daily y.o. female patient is suffering from chronic bronchitis. Recently there has been production about 0,5 L of purulent sputum with maximum discharge in the morning. Fingers are like "drum sticks", there are "watching glass" nails. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic bronchitis
b. Pneumonia
*c. Bronchiectasia
d. Gangrene of lungs
e. Tuberculosis

8. A 42 y.o. man who has been ill with duodenal ulcer for 20 years complains of getting a sense of heaviness in stomach after meal, foul-smelling eructation, vomiting, weight loss. Objectively: his state is relatively satisfactory, tissue turgor is diminished. On palpation the belly is soft, there are no symptoms of peritenium irritation, "splashing sounds" in epigastrium. Defecation - once in 3 days. What complication corresponds with the patients state and described clinical presentations?
a. Ulcer penetration
b. Chronic pancreatitis
c. Concealed ulcer perforation
d. Stomach cancer
*e. Ulcerative pyloric stenosis

9. A 60 y.o. patient cpmplains of weakness, dizziness, heaviness in the upper part of abdomen, paresthesia of toes and fingers. Objectively: skin icteritiousness, tongue is crimson, smooth. Hepatomegaly. In blood: Hb- 90 g/l, erythrocytes - 2,31012/l, reticulocytes - 0,2%; color index - 1,2, macrocytosis; Jollys bodies, Cabots ring bodies. What medication is the most appropriate for treatment?
a. Prednisolone
b. Dyspherol
c. Feroplex
d. Packed red blood cells
*e. Vitamin В12

10. An 18 y.o. girl complains of weakness, dizziness, loss of appetite, menorrhagia. There are many-coloured petechiae on the skin of the upper extremities. Blood test: Hb- 105 g/l; RBC- 3,21012/L; C.I.- 0,95; thromb.- 20109/L. The sedimentation time according to Lee White is 5; hemorrhagia duration according to Duke is 8, "pinch and tourniquet" test is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic diathesis
b. Hemophilia
*c. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Iron deficiency anemia
e. Marchiafava-Michelis disease

11. A 46 y.o. patient complains of skin itch, sweating, especially at night, body temperature rise up to 38,60С. Objectively: chest skin has marks of scratching, supraclavicular lymph nodes are as big as a pigeon egg, they are not matted together with skin. What test is the most reasonable?
a. Whole protein and protein fractions
*b. Punction of an enlarged lymph node
c. Plan radiography of thorax
d. Common blood count
e. Immunogram

12. A 32 y.o. patient lives in an endemic echinococcous region. For the last 6 months he has been having pain in the right hypochondrium, temperature rise. An echinococcus liver affection is suspected. What type of examination will be the most informative in this case?
*a. USI examination
b. Biochemical laboratory analysis
c. Liver scanning
d. Angiography
e. Plan radiography of abdominal cavity

13. A 28 y.o. male patient was admitted to the hospital because of high temperature 39°C, headache, generalized fatigue, constipation, sleep disorder for 9 days. There are sporadic roseolas on the abdomen, pulse- 78 bpm, liver is enlarged for 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brucellosis
b. Leptospirosis
c. Typhus
d. Sepsis
*e. Abdominal typhoid

14. A 50-year-old patient complains about having pain attacks in the right subcostal area for about a year. He pain arises mainly after taking fattening food. Over the last week the attacks occurred daily and became more painful. On the 3rd day of hospitalization the patient presented with icteritiousness of skin and scleras, light-colored feces and dark urine. In blood: neutrophilic leukocytosis - 13,1109/l, ESR - 28 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent pancreatitis
b. Chronic cholangitis, exacerbation stage
c. Hypertensive dyskinesia of gallbladder
*d. Chronic calculous cholecystitis
e. Fatty degeneration of liver

15. A 20 y.o. patient with bronchial asthma experiences dyspnea attacks 3-4 times a week. Nocturnal attacks are 1 time a week. FEV1- 50% of necessary figures, during the day its variations is 25%. What is the severity of bronchial asthma condition?
a. Asthmatic status
b. Intermittent flow
c. Mild condition
d. Serious condition
*e. Moderate severity condition

16. A 40 y.o. man complains of headache in occipital area. On physical examination: the skin is pale; face and hand edema, BP- 170/130 mm Hg. On EchoCG: concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle. Ultrasound examination of the kidneys reveals thinned cortical layer. Urine analysis shows proteinuria of 3,5 g/day. What is the probable diagnosis?
*a. Essential arterial hypertension
b. Chronic glomerulonephritis
c. Cushings disease
d. Polycystic disease of the kidneys
e. Chronic pyelonephritis

17. A 34 year old coal miner who has been in service for 10 years was discharged from an occupational disease clinic after examination and treatment. He was diagnosed with the I stage of anthracosilicosis, peribronchitis, 0 stage of respiratory failure. What expert decision should be taken about his working capacity?
a. He can continue working as coal miner provided that sanitary and hygienic conditions are observed
b. He should stay on the sick-list to consolidate treatment results
c. He should be referred to the local medical expert comission for determination of percentage of working capacity loss
*d. He should be referred to the local medical expert comission for determination of his disability group for the period of re-training
e. He should be given medical certificate for the further out-patient treatment

18. A 72-year-old male patient complains about itch in his left shin, especially around a trophic ulcer. Skin is reddened and edematic, there are some oozing lesions, single yellowish crusts. The focus of affection is well-defined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic dermatitis
b. Cutaneous tuberculosis
c. Streptococcal impetigo
*d. Microbial eczema
e. Seborrheic eczema

19. A 29 year old female patient complains about periodical right-sided headache that is usually provoked by strong smells or excitement. The patients mother suffers from the same disease. Objectively: examination of internal organs revealed no pathology. During the attack there are general hyperesthesia and nausea, at the end of the attack polyuria is observed. Palpation of the right temporal artery during the attack revealed tension and painfulness of the artery. Complete blood count and urine analysis reveale dno pecularities. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Epilepsy
*b. Migraine
c. Neuralgia of trigeminus
d. Neuritis of the facial nerve
e. Menieres syndrome

20. A 52 year old woman complains about face distortion. It turned up 2 days ago after supercooling. Objectively: body temperature is 38,2oC. Face asymmetry is present. Frontal folds are flattened. Left eye is wider than right one and doesnt close. Left nasolabial fold is flattened, mouth corner is lowered. Examination revealed no other pathology. Blood count: leukocytes – 10109/l, ESR - 20 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brain tumour
*b. Facial neuritis
c. Hemicrania (migraine)
d. Trigeminus neuralgia
e. Ischemic stroke

21. A 43 y.o. patient complains of periodical pain attacks in the right half of her face. The attack is characterized by spasm of mimetic muscles of the right faces half, reddening of skin on this side. Blood has no pathologies. She was diagnosed with right-sided trifacial neuralgia. What medication should be prescribed?
*a. Finlepsin
b. Actovegine
c. Indometacin
d. Analgine
e. Prednisolone

22. A 35 y.o. patient experienced a strong nervous stress that resulted in formation of reddened and edematic areas on the back surface of her hands with further formation of small inflammated nodules, vesicles and then erosions accompanied by profuse discharge of serous liquid. The process is also accompanied by intense itching. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Toxicodermia
*b. Common eczema
c. Microbial eczema
d. Allergic dermatitis
e. Common contact dermatitis

23. A patient complained about general weakness, fever, painful rash on his trunk skin . He has been suffering from this for 3 days. Objectively: lateral surface of trunk on the left is hyperemic and edematic, there are some groups of vesicles with serous and haemorrhagic contents. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Contact dermatitis simplex
b. Microbial eczema
c. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatosis
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Contact allergic dermatitis

24. A patient complains of skin painfullness and reddness of the right gastrocnemius muscle. Objectively: body temperature is 38,50С, enlarged and painful inguinal lymph nodes on the right. Skin of extremity is edematic, hyperemic, covered with eruption in form of vesicles containing dark fluid; its palpation is painful. There is distinct border between normal and hyperemic skin. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Erysipelas, hemorrhagic form
b. Herpetic infection
c. Crus phlegmon
d. Chickenpox
e. Anthrax, dermal form

25. A 41 y.o. patient complains of acute pain in the right side of the thorax and sudden progress of dyspnea following the lifting of a heavy object. The patients condition is grave: lips and mucous membranes are cyanotic, BR- 28/min, Ps- 122 bpm., AP- 80/40 mm Hg. There is tympanitis on percussion and weakened breathing on auscultaion on the right. S2 sound is accentuated above pulmonary artery. What is the main urgent measure on the prehospital stage?
a. Epinephrine introduction
b. Call for cardiologic team
c. Oxygen inhalation
*d. Air aspiration from the pleural cavity
e. Euphilline introduction

26. A 42 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in acute pain in the right half of his chest, increased dyspnea. The patients condition is grave: cyanosis of lips and mucous membranes, RR is 28 pm, Ps- 122 bpm. On percussion there is tympanitis above the right half of chest, on auscultation - stongly diminished breath sounds; accent of the II heart sound above the pulmonary artery. AP is 80/40 mm Hg. What is the main emergency action at the pre-admission stage?
a. Adrenaline introduction
b. Calling a cardiological brigade
c. Oxygen inhalation
*d. Air aspiration from the pleural cavity
e. Aminophylline introduction

27. A 38 y.o. woman suffers from paroxysmal AP rises up to 240/120 mm Hg accompanied by nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, excessive sweating. During the onset blood is hyperglycemic. After the onset there is voluminous urination. Kidneys sonography revealed accessory mass bordering upon the upper pole of the right kidney, presumably it belongs to the adrenal gland. What laboratory test will allow to make a more precise diagnosis?
a. Estimation of thyroxin and thyrotropic hormon in blood
b. Estimation of renin content in blood
c. Estimation of insulin and C-peptide content in blood
d. Estimation of glomerular filtration rate
*e. Estimation of catecholamine and vanillylmandelic acid excretion with urine

28. A 30-year-old patient presented with body temperature rise up to 38,5oC, pain in the small articulations of hands; face edemata and erythema. In blood: RBCs - 2,61012/l; Hb- 98 г/л; WBCs – 2109/l; ESR - 58 mm/h. In the urine: protein - 3,1 g/l; RBCs - 10-15 in the vision field. What disease can be suspected in this case?
*a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Systemic scleroderma
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Periarteritis nodosa
e. Sepsis

29. A 5-grade pupil complains about extensive skin rash accompanied by intensive itch, especially at night. Objectively: there are small red papules set mostly in pairs in the region of interdigital folds on both hands, on the flexor surface of radicarpal articulations, abdomen and buttock skin as well as internal surface of thighs. In the centre of some papules vesicles or serohaemorrhagic crusts can be seen. There are multiple excoriations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatitis
b. Toxicoderma
c. Eczema
*d. Scabies
e. Ringworm of body

30. A 48 y.o. farmer was admitted to the hospital with complaints of headache, nausea, vomiting, cough with sputum, breath shortage, weak sight, sweating, salivation. He was cultivated the garden with phosphoorganic pesticides. Blood count: RBC- 4,11012/L, Нb- 136 g/L, C.I.- 0,9, leukocytes - 13,0109/L, ESR- 17 mm/h. His diagnosis is acute intoxication with phosphoorganic pesticides. What is the most important diagnostic criterion for this pathology?
*a. Low level of choline esterase
b. Leukocytosis
c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Anemia
e. Reticulocytosis

31. A 74 y.o. patient complains of abdomen pain and sweling, nausea. She suffers from ischemic heart disease, postinfarction and atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, abdomen is swollen, abdominal wall doesnt take active part in respiration. Laparoscopy revealed a small amount of muddy effusion in abdominal cavity, one of the loops of small intestine is dark-cyan. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Twisted bowels
b. Ischemic abdominal syndrome
c. Erysipelas
*d. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
e. Acute intestinal obstruction

32. A 56 y.o. man, who has taken alcoholic drinks regularly for 20 years, complains of intensive girdle pain in the abdomen. Profuse nonformed stool 2-3- times a day has appeared for the last 2 years, loss of weight for 8 kg for 2 years. On examination: abdomen is soft, painless. Blood amylase - 12g/L. Feces examination-neutral fat 15 g per day, starch grains. What is the most reasonable treatment at this stage?
a. Imodium
*b. Pancreatine
c. Aminocapron acid
d. Contrykal
e. Levomicytine

33. A 13 year old patient is suffering from an acute disease with the following symptoms: thirst, polyuria, weakness. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory, there is no smell of acetone. Glucose concentration in blood on an empty stomach is 32 micromole/l, in urine - 6%, acetone +. What treatment should be administered?
a. Biguanides
b. Long-acting insulin
*c. Short-acting insulin
d. Sulfonylurea
e. Diet

34. A 43-year-old female patiet complains of eruption on her right leg skin, pain, weakness, body temperature rise up to 38oC. The disease is acute. Objectively: there is an edema on the right leg skin in the region of foot, a well-defined bright red spot in form of flame tips which feels hot. There are isolated vesicles in focus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Toxicoderma
b. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
c. Microbial eczema
d. Contact dermatitis
*e. Erysipelas

35. A 75 y.o. man with IHD (atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis, atrial fibrillation, cardiac insufficiensy stage 2 B; chronic pyelonephritis) was prescribed digoxin. During the first 6 days the digoxin dose amounted 0,25 mg twice per day that let to abatement of dyspnea, edemata and cyanosis. But on the 7-th day the patient developed nausea and bradycardia. What is the most probable cause of digoxin intoxication?
a. Too long intake of saturating dose
b. Disturbed metabolism of digoxin in liver
c. Treatment complex doesnt include unitiole
*d. Disturbed elimination of the medication by kidneys
e. Exceeding daily saturating dose

36. A patient who has been contacting with benzol for 6 years has a nonevident leukopenia, moderate reticulocytosis, gingival hemorrhage, dizziness, asthenovegetative syndrome. What a severity degree of chronic intoxication with benzol corresponds with described symptoms?
*a. Minor
b. Severe
c. -
d. Disease is not connected with work conditions
e. Moderate

37. A 30 y.o. man was always reserved by nature. He never consulted psychiatrists. He complains of headache, sensation "as if something bursts, moves, bubbles under his skin". Objectively: no pathology was revealed. What is the most probable psychopathologic symptom in this case?
a. Hallucination
b. Paresthesia
*c. Cenestopathy
d. Hypersthesia
e. Dysmorphopsia

38. A 31 y.o. patient has had mental disorder for a long time. He suffers from insomnia for a long time. He has got fears, suicidal thoughts, tried to hang himself. His mood is depressed, he refuses from treatment. What measures are the most expedient for the prevention of suicide?
*a. Admission to the mental hospital
b. Out-patient treatment
c. Strict supervision at home
d. Psychotherapeutic conversation
e. Admission to the neurological department

39. A 43 y.o. woman complains of shooting heart pain, dyspnea, irregularities in the heart activity, progressive fatigue during 3 weeks. She had acute respiratory disease a month ago. On examination: AP- 120/80 mm Hg, heart rate 98 bpm, heart boarders +1,5 cm left side, sounds are muffled, soft systolic murmur at apex and Botkins area; sporadic extrasystoles. Liver isnt palpated, there are no edema. Blood test: WBC- 6,7109/L, sedimentation rate- 21 mm/hour. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Rheumatism, mitral insufficiency
b. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
c. Climacteric myocardiodystrophia
d. Ichemic heart disease, angina pectoris
*e. Acute myocarditis

40. A 63 y.o. woman complains of motiveless weakness, rapid fatigability, loss of appetite, aversion to meat. Two days ago she had stomach bleeding. Objectively: temperature - 37,5°С, BR- 20/min, Ps- 96/min, AP- 110/75 mm Hg. On palpation in epigastrium - pain and muscle tension. Blood count: Hb- 82 g/L, ESR- 35 mm/h. What examination will allow to make a diagnosis?
a. Coprology
*b. Cytologic
c. Endoscopy
d. Radiography
e. Stomach content examination

41. A 45 y.o. man complains of having intensive pain in the epigastric region 1,5-2 hours later after food intake. He has been suffering from ulcer for 11 years. Objectively: t°- 36,50С, RR- 16/min, Ps- 70 bpm, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. On palpation: local painfulness in the right epigastric region. What parameters of intragastric Ph-meter in the region of stomach body are the most typical for this patients disease?
a. рН = 5,0-6,0
b. рН = 6,0-7,0
c. рН = 3,0-4,0
d. рН = 4,0-5,0
*e. рН = 1,0-2,0

42. A 37-year-old woman is sick with bronchial asthma for 15 years. Recenlty asthmatic attacks occur 4-5 times per week, night attacks -2-3 times per month. To stop attacks, the patient takes salbutamol. On physical exam: condition is relatively satisfactory. RR - 20/min, Ps is 76 bpm, BP - 120/80 mm Hg. Respiration in lungs is vesicular. Cardiac sounds are muted, rhythm is normal. What medication should be prescribed to prevent attacks of bronchial asthma on the first stage?
a. Injection of corticosteroids
*b. Cromoglycat sodium
c. Inhalation corticosteroids
d. Regular dose of salbutamol
e. Tabletted corticosteroids

43. A 52 y.o. male patient has become ill gradually. There is pain in the left side of the thorax during 2 weeks, elevation of temperature till 38-39°C. On examination: left chest side falls behind in breathing movement no voice tremor over the left lung. Dullness that is more intensive in lower parts of this lung. Right heart border is deviated outside. Sharply weakened breathing over the left lung, no rales. Heart sounds are mufflet, tachycardia. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Infarction-pneumonia
*b. Exudative pleuritis
c. Atelectasis of lung
d. Spotaneous pneumothorax
e. Cirrhotic tuberculosis

44. A 24 year old patient complains about general weakness, dizziness, body temperature rise up to 37,5oC, sore throat, neck edema, enlargement of submaxillary lymph nodes. Objectively: mucous membrane of oropharynx is edematic and cyanotic, tonsils are enlarged and covered with films that spread beyond the tonsils and cannot be easily removed. What is the leading mechanism of this illness development?
a. Bacteriemia
*b. Action of bacterial exotoxin
c. Allergic
d. Action of bacterial endotoxin
e. Accumulation of suboxidated products

45. A 35-year-old patient was admitted to the in-patient psychiatric facility for the first time. He was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. What is the most rational treatment method?
a. Vitamin therapy
b. Psychotherapy
c. Reflex therapy
*d. Neuroleptic therapy
e. Physiotherapy

46. A 50-year-old patient was hospitalized in severe condition with complaints of chills, high grade temperature, dryness in the mouth, multiple vomiting, pain in the epigastrium, frequent watery, foamy, dirty green color stool of unpleasant odor. The tongue and the skin are dry. BP - 80/40 mm Hg. What first aid is necessary for the patient?
a. Fresh-frozen plasma transfusion
b. Sympathomimetics
c. Hemosorbtion
*d. Intravenous injection of sodium solutions
e. To prescribe polyglucin

47. A 42 y.o. woman suffers from micronodular cryptogenic cirrhosis. During the last week her condition has been worsening: she had spasms, consciousness aberration, jaundice. What examination may account for the worsening of the patients condition?
a. Estimation of alkaline phosphatase level
*b. Estimation of serum ammonia
c. Estimation of ?-fetoprotein content
d. Estimation of cholesterol esters
e. Estimation of alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase

48. A 38 year old man complains about mild pain and muscle weakness of shoulder and pelvic girdles and back that has been progressing for the last 3 weeks. He has also significant problems with getting up, going up and down the stairs and shaving. It is suspected that the patient is suffering from dermatomyositis. Blood count: Hb - 114 g/l, leukocytes - 10,8109/l, eosin - 9%, ESR - 22 mm/h, C-reactive protein (++). Change of the following laboratory factor will be of the greatest diagnostic importance:
a. Sialic acids
b. Ceruloplasmin
*c. Creatine phosphokinase
d. Antibodies to the native DNA
e. gamma-globulins

49. A worker at a porcelain factory who has been in service for 10 years complains of cough, dyspnea, ache in his chest. What occupational disease are these complaints most typical for?
a. Multiple bronchiectasis
b. Occupational bronchial asthma
c. Chronic cor pulmonale
*d. Silicosis
e. Chronic dust bronchitis

50. A patient has got acute macrofocal myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. The latter is progressing under conditions of weak general peripheric resistance and decreased cardiac output. What antihypotensive drug should be injected to the patient in the first place?
a. Adrenaline
b. Noradrenaline
*c. Dopamine
d. Mesatonum
e. Prednisolone

51. Medical examination of a man revealed "geographic tongue". This microsymptom is the evidence of the following vitamin deficiency:
*a. Vitamins of B group
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin PP
d. Vitamin D
e. Vitamin A

52. A 25 year old pediatrician fell ill a week ago: body temperature rose up to 37,6oC, there appeared a slight swelling on his neck. His illness was diagnosed as ARD, cervical lymphadenitis. Treatment course included erythromycin, hot compress on the neck. In course of treatment body tempearture rose up to 39oC, there appeared headache, repeated vomiting, meningeal syndrome. What studies are necessary for the final diagnosis?
a. Puncture of cervical lymph node
b. Sputum test for secondary flora
c. Roentgenological examination of lungs
*d. Cerebrospinal puncture
e. Complete blood count

53. A 37-year-old woman complains of generalized fatigue, irritability, dysphagia, chalk hunger. On physical exam: t- 36,5°C, respirations - 20/min, Ps - 96 bpm, BP - 110/70 mm Hg. Satisfactory nourishment. The skin and visible mucous membranes are pale. Blood test: Hb -70g/L, erythrocytes - 3,41012/L, CI - 0,7, reticulocytes - 2%, leucocytes - 4,7109/L, eosinophilis. - 2%, band neutrophils - 3%, segmented neutrophils - 64%, lymphocytes - 26%, monocytes - 5%, ESR - 15 mm/min. Serum ferrum - 7,3?mol/L, total protein - 70g/L. Deficit of what factor caused the development of the disease?
a. Folic acid
*b. Ferrum
c. Vitamin B12
d. Vitamin B6
e. Protein

54. It was noticed that a 7 year old pupil had been innattentive several times during the lessons. The teacher also noticed that the child had been smacking his lips and had vacant look. There were no falls and convulsions. During such short periods of absence the child didnt react to calling his name. His mother notic such phenomena before but didnt pay much attention to them thinking that the child was deep in thought. What type of epileptic attack (according to the standard classification) is it?
a. Jacksonian partial epilepsy
*b. Absentia
c. Simple partial epilepsy
d. Generalized tonoclonic epilepsy
e. Complex partial epilepsy

55. A 41 year old woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis for 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: evident inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous membrane. In blood: WBC- 9,8109/l, RBC- 3,01012/l, ESR - 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
*a. Sulfosalasine
b. Vikasolum
c. Kreon
d. Linex
e. Motilium

56. A 38 year old female patient complains about body stiffness in the morning, especially in the articulations of her upper and lower limbs, that disappears 30-60 minutes later after active movements. She has also arthritis of metacarpophalangeal and proximal phalangeal articulations, subfebrile temperature. ESR- 45 mm/h. Roentgenography revealed osteoporosis and erosion of articular surface of small hand and foot articulations. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Reactive polyarthritis
c. Psoriatic arthropathy
d. Osteoarthrosis deformans
*e. Rheumatoid arthritis

57. A 49 year old female patient was admitted to a hospital with acute attacks of headache accompanied by pulsation in temples, AP rose up to 280/140 mm Hg. Pheochromocytoma is suspected. What mechanism of hypertensive atack does this patient have?
a. Increase of plasma renin activity
b. Increase of aldosterone level in blood
*c. Increase of catecholamine concentration
d. Increase of vasopressin secretion
e. Increase of thyroxine secretion

58. A patient with hepatic cirrhosis drank some spirits that resulted in headache, vomiting, aversion to food, insomnia, jaundice, fetor hepaticus, abdominal swelling. What complication of hepatic cirrhosis is meant?
a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
*b. Hepatocellular insufficiency
c. Portal hypertension
d. Hemorrhage from varicosely dilatated veins of esophagus
e. Acute stomach ulcer

59. On the 4-th day of injections a 60 y.o. patient felt pain and tissue induration in the left buttock. Objectively: the skin in the superexternal quadrant of the left buttock is red and hot, palpation reveals a painful infiltrate 6х6 cm large with softening in the centre. Body temperature is 37,90С. What action is necessary to diagnose an abscess?
a. X-ray investigation
b. Clinical blood analysis
c. Biopsy
d. Ultrasonic examination
*e. Punction

60. A 24 y.o. emotionally-labile woman presents with irritation, depressed mood, palpitation, shooting pain in the heart area, generalized fatigue following the divorce. On examination: palm hyperhydrosis, pulse rate- 72-78 bpm, labile, heart without changes. ECG is normal. What is the most probable pathology in this case?
a. Compulsive neurosis
b. Ipochondric neurosis
*c. Neurasthenia
d. Schizophrenia
e. Depressive neurosis

61. A 30-year-old woman with a long history of chronic pyelonephritis complains about considerable weakness, sleepiness, decrease in diuresis down to 100 ml per day. AP- 200/120 mm Hg. In blood: creatinine - 0,62 millimole/l, hypoproteinemia, albumines - 32 g/l, potassium - 6,8 millimole/l, hypochromic anemia, increased ESR. What is the first step in the patient treatment tactics?
a. Antibacterial therapy
b. Haemosorption
c. Blood transfusion
*d. Haemodialysis
e. Enterosorption

62. A 32 y.o. woman has been suffering for 5 months from pain in lumbar region, low grade fever, frequent urination. Urine analysis: moderate proteinuria, leukocytes occupy the whole field of sight, bacteriuria. Blood analysis: leukocytosis, increased ESR. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Urolithiasis
*d. Chronic pyelonephritis
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

63. A 23 year old patient fell ill 3 weeks ago when she noticed a very painful induration in her axillary crease. 4-5 days later it burst and discharged a lot of pus. After that some new infiltrations appeared around the affected area. The patient has never suffered from skin diseases before. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mycosis
b. Furuncle
*c. Hydradenitis
d. Herpes zoster
e. Streptococcal impetigo

64. A patient had macrofocal myocardial infarction. He is overweight for 36%, AP is 150/90 mm Hg, blood sugar- 5,9 mmol/L, general cholesterol- 4,9 mmol/L, uric acid- 0,211 mmol/L. Which risk factor should be urgently eradicated during the secondary prevention?
a. Hyperglycemia
b. Arterial hypertension
*c. Obesity
d. Hypercholesterolemia
e. Hyperuricemia

65. A 39 y.o. patient complains of having dyspnea during physical activity, crus edemata, palpitation, heart intermissions. Objectively: HR is 150 bpm, atrial fibrillation. Heart is both ways enlarged. Heart sounds are muted. Liver is 6 cm below the costal margin. Echocardiogram reveals dilatation of heart chambers (end diastolic volume of left ventricle is 6,8 cm) is 29% EF, valve apparatus is unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
b. Thyreotoxic cardiomyopathy
c. Exudative pericarditis
d. Restrictive cardiomyopathy
*e. Dilated cardiomyopathy

66. Examination of a hanged mans corpse revealed the following: livores mortis disappear when pressed, restore in 50 seconds, rigor mortis is moderately evident only in masseteric muscles, neck muscles and fingers. Body temperature is 31,00С. What is the prescription of death coming?
a. 10-18 hours
*b. 6-7 hours
c. 16-24 hours
d. 1-2 hours
e. 8-10 hours

67. In course of herniotomy of a 12 y.o. patient doctors revealed a testicle in the hernial sac. What type of hernia is it?
a. Obturator hernia
*b. Congenital oblique inguinal hernia
c. Direct inguinal hernia
d. Acquired oblique inguinal hernia
e. Femoral hernia

68. Ambulace brought to the hospital a patient with acute respiratory viral infection. The illness began suddenly with temperature rise up to 39,90С. He complains of headache in frontotemporal lobes, pain in eyeballs, aching of the whole body, nose stuffiness, sore throat, dry cough. At home he had a nasal hemorrhage twice. What type of acute respiratory viral infection is it?
a. Parainfluenza
b. Adenoviral infection
*c. Influenza
d. RS-infection
e. Enterovirus infection

69. A 19-year-old patient complains about skin rash that appeared 2 days ago after eating smoked fish. The rash disappears after 4-6 hours but then turns up again. It is accompanied by itch. Objectively: trunk and upper limbs are covered with multiple pink blisters as big as a pea or a bean. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Toxicodermia
b. Purigo
c. Allergic dermatitis
d. Quinckes edema
*e. Acute urticaria

70. A 52 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea caused even by moderate physical activity, cough with hardly secreted sputum. He has been ill for 12 years. Objectively: BR- 26/min. Lung examination: tympanitis, diminished vesicular breathing with prolonged expiration, disseminated dry rales. In the past he was taking only theopecym or aminophylline inravenously. Prescribe him the basic treatment after the exacerbation is suppressed:
a. Aminophylline
*b. Atrovent
c. Inhacort
d. Alupent
e. Tilade

71. A 42 year old man applied to a hospital 10 minutes after he got stung by a bee and complained about face edema and difficult respiration. Objectively: Ps- 98 bpm, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. A doctor on duty injected him 1 ml of 1% dimedrol solution intramuscularly and recommended to apply to his local therapeutist on the next day. What tactics of treatment should be chosen for this patient?
a. Intravenous introduction of calcium chloride and hospitalization
*b. Intravenous introduction of prednisolone and hospitalization
c. The patient needs no further medical aid
d. Intravenous introduction of calcium chloride
e. Hospitalization for observation

72. A 44-year-old man has been working in coke industry for 16 years. Dust concentration at his workplace is 5-10 times higher than maximum permissible concentration. Roentgenography of lungs revealed changes that are typical for pneumoconiosis. What is the most probable type of pneumoconiosis in this case?
a. Siderosis
*b. Anthracosis
c. Silicatosis
d. Anthracosilicosis
e. Asbestosis

73. X-ray pattern of thorax organs revealed a large intensive inhomogeneous opacity with indistinct outlines on the right side at the level of the 4-th rib. In the centre of this opacity there is a horizontal level and clearing of lung tissue above it. What disease does this X-ray pattern correspond with?
a. Tuberculoma of the right lung
b. Peripheral cancer
*c. Abscess of the right lung
d. Right-sided pneumothorax
e. -

74. Plan radiography of the patients abdominal cavity reveals some hemispherical lucent areas situated above distinct horizontal levels. What is the cause of such X-ray picture?
a. Perforative ulcer
b. Cancer of large intestine
c. Prices disease
*d. Intestinal obstruction
e. Meteorism

75. A 42 year old man works in a boiler room. He complains about girdle headache and recurring vomiting. There was also short-term consciousness loss. Objectively: increase of tendon reflexes, spontaneous myofibrillations. AP is 150/80 mm Hg, Ps- 104 bpm. Visible mucous membranes and cutaneous surfaces have crimson colouring. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Poisoning with methane
b. Poisoning with benzine
c. Poisoning with hydrocyanic acid
d. Poisoning with anilin colouring agents
*e. Poisoning with carbon monooxide

76. A 18-year-old patient had subtotal strumectomy due to malignant capillary cystadenoma of the thyroid gland. In 2 months there was a suspicion of	metastasis presence in the lungs. What rontgenological method is to be used first?
*a. Roentgenography of lungs
b. Angiopneumonography
c. Bronchoscopy
d. Bronchography
e. Roentgenoscopy of lungs

77. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed basal-cell skin cancer, 1st stage. Tumor is up to 1 cm in size and with up to 0,5 cm deep infiltration in tissues. Tumor is localized in the right nasolabial area. Choose the most optimal method of treatment
a. Chemotherapy
b. Surgical treatment
c. Long-distance roentgenotherapy
d. Long-distance gamma therapy
*e. Short-distance roentgenotherapy

78. A 63 year old patient complained about pain in the lumbar area. He underwent a course of physiological treatment on account of radiculitis but this led to no improvement of his condition. R-graphy of spinal column and pelvic bones revealed osteoporosis and serious bone defects. Blood analysis revealed moderate normochromic anaemia, urine analysis revealed proteinuria. Whole blood protein made up 10,7 g/l. What disease should be suspected?
a. Metastases in bones
b. Systemic osteoporosis
c. Urolithiasis
d. Acute radiculitis
*e. Myelomatosis

79. 2 days ago a patient presented with acute pain in the left half of chest, gneral weakness, fever and headache. Objectively: between the 4 and 5 rib on the left the skin is erythematous, there are multiple groups of vesicles 2-4 mm in diameter filled with transparent liquid. What diease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
b. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatosis
c. Pemphigus
d. Herpes simplex
*e. Herpes zoster

80. A woman while working in vegetable garden developed severe pain in the loin. Lasagues and Nery tension signs are obviously marked on the right. Lumbar lordosis is smoothed, movements are harshly restrained in lumbar part of the spine. Right ankle (Achilles) reflex is absent. What kind of disease can it be?
*a. Lumbar-sacral radiculitis
b. Hepatic colic
c. Neuritis of femoral nerve
d. Renal colic
e. Lumbalgia

81. A 30 y.o. patient has got multiple body skin rash consisting of small paired elements that are scattered on the skin diorderly and mostly focally, they are accompanied by itch. The rash appeared a few days after attending sport centre and sauna. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Scab
b. Contact dermatitis
c. Neurodermitis
d. Allergic dermatitis
e. Eczema

82. A patient is active, lively, fussy. He opposes the examination. His speech is fast and loud, his statements are spontaneous and inconsequent. Specify the psychopathological state of this patient:
a. Delirium
b. Catatonic agitation
*c. Psychomotor agitation
d. Behavioral disorder
e. Paranoid syndrome

83. A female, aged 20, after smoking notices a peculiar inebriation with the feeling of burst of energy, elation, irreality and changing of surroundings: the world gets full of bright colours, the objects change their dimensions, peoples faces get cartoon features, loss of time and space judgement. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nicotinism
b. Cannabism
c. Morphinism
d. Barbiturism
*e. Cocainism

84. A patient of a somatic hospital has got psychomotor agitation as a result of high fever: he tried to run about the department; thought that some water was running down the walls, he pretended to see rats and cockroaches on the floor. Claimed he were in a hostel, recognized his "aquaintances". After introduction of sedative drugs he fell asleep. In the morning he remembered this condition. What psychopathologic syndrome is it?
a. Maniacal syndrome
*b. Delirium
c. Twilight disorder of consciousness
d. Oneiric syndrome
e. Hallucinatory paranoid syndrome

85. A 75 y.o patient can not tell the month, date and season of the year. After long deliberations she manages to tellher name. She is in irritable and dissatisfied mood. She always carries a bundle with belongings with her, hides a parcel with bread, shoes in her underwear in her bosom as well as "invaluable books". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Behaviour disorder
b. Dissociated personality (psychopathy)
c. Atherosclerotic (lacunar) dementia
d. Presenile melancholia
*e. Senile dementia

86. A 56 y.o. patient ill with cholecystectomy suddenly had an intense hemorrhage. She needs blood transfusion. Her blood group is АВ(ІV) Rh-. Hemotransfusion station doesnt dispose of this group. What group of donors can be involved?
a. Donors of active group
b. Emergency donors
c. Reserve donors
*d. Donors of rare blood groups
e. Relatives

87. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with stopped repeated ulcerative bleeding. He was pale and exhausted. Blood count: Нb- 77 g/l, Нt- 0,25. In view of anemia there were made two attempts of blood transfusion of the same group - А(ІІ) Rh+. In both cases the transfusion had to be stopped because of development of anaphylactic reaction. What transfusion medium would be advisable in this case?
a. Erythrocytic mass poor in leukocytes and thrombocytes
*b. Washed erythrocytes
c. Erythrocytic mass (native)
d. Fresh citrate blood
e. Erythrocytic suspension

88. A 30-year-old patient presents with sudden loss of consciousness, tonoclonic spasms, AP- 150/100 mm Hg, heart rate - 100/min. Before the attack he felt dizziness, sense of irreality, inexplicable fear. After the attack the patient failed to remember it. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vestibular syncope
b. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome
*c. Epilepsy
d. Transitory ischemic attack
e. Hyperventilation ischemic attack

89. A 26-year-old male patient complains of piercing pain during breathing, cough, dyspnea. Objectively: t°37,3oC, respiration rate - 19/min, heart rate=Ps - 92/min; AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Vesicular respiration. In the inferolateral parts of chest auscultation in both inspiration and expiration phase revealed noise that was getting stronger at phonendoscope pressing and can be still heard after cough. ECG showed no pathological changes. What is the most likely giagnosis?
a. Subcutaneous emphysema
b. Intercostal neuralgia
*c. Acute pleuritis
d. Spontaneous pneumothorax
e. Pericarditis sicca

90. A 14 y.o. girl got a bad mark at the lesson of math as well as teachers reprimand that made her cry for a long time. At the end of the lesson she suddenly lost consciousness and fell down. Objectively: skin is of pale pink colour, Ps- 100 bpm, satisfactory, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Eyelids are closed and dont give away to the tries of their opening. There are no evident injuries. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Sympathicotonic collapse
*b. Hysteric syncope
c. Vagotonic syncope
d. Epilepsy
e. Long QT syndrome

91. HIV displays the highest tropism towards the following blood cells:
*a. T-helpers
b. T-killers
c. Erythrocytes
d. Thrombocytes
e. T-suppressors

92. A 22-year-old patient is a clerk. His working day runs in a conditioned room. In summer he was taken by an acute disease with the following symptoms: fever, dyspnea, dry cough, pleural pain, myalgia, arthralgia. Objectively: moist rales on the right, pleural friction rub. X-ray picture showed infiltration of the inferior lobe. In blood: WBC – 11109/l, stab neutrophils - 6%, segmented neutrophils - 70%, lymphocytes - 8%, ESR - 42 mm/h. What is the ethiological factor pneumonia?
a. Staphylococcus
b. Pneumococcus
c. Mycoplasm
d. Streptococcus
*e. Legionella

93. A 32-year-old female patient consulted a doctor about a skin affection of her body, face and extremities which turned up after peroral intake of biseptol. The patient was diagnosed with drug toxicoderma. What treatment methods would be the most effective for this patient?
a. Antihistamine therapy
b. Anti-inflammatory therapy
*c. Extracorporal therapy
d. Disintoxication therapy
e. Immunotherapy

94. Thrombosis of the coronary artery caused myocardial infarction. What mechanisms of injury will be the dominating ones in this disease?
a. Acidotic mechanisms
b. Electrolytoosmotic mechanisms
*c. Calcium mechanisms
d. Protein mechanisms
e. Lipid mechanisms

95. Elderly people develop tumors more frequently. One of the main causes is:
a. Decreased intensity of antibodies formation
b. Increased activity of cellular immunity
c. Increased intensity of antibodies formation
*d. Decreased activity of cellular immunity
e. Increased disfunctioning of mitoses

96. A 30 year old man complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39oC. There was an acute onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic and ill-defined, without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Gout
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Osteoarthritis
d. Erysipelatous inflammation
e. Infectious arthritis

97. Preventive examination of a 55 year old patient revealed diabetes mellitus. The patient hasnt received treatment for it. Objectively: height is 170 cm, weight is 106 kg, skin humidity is normal. Ps is 76 bpm, rhythmic, left border of relative heart dullness is deviated by 1 cm to the left from the middle clavicular line, heart sounds are quiet, AP is 140/80 mm Hg. Glycemia on an empty stomach is 6,9 millimole/l. Glucose rate in the daily urine is 0,5%, diuresis makes up 2,5 l. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. To administer repaglinide
b. To administer insulin
c. To administer metformin
d. To administer glibenclamid
*e. To administer dietotherapy

98. A 54 y.o. male patient suffers from dyspnea during mild physical exertion, cough with sputum which is excreted with diffculty. On examination: diffuse cyanosis. Is Barrel-chest. Weakened vesicular breathing with prolonged expiration and dry whistling rales. AP is 140/80 mm Hg, pulse is 92 bpm, rhythmic. Spirography: vital capacity (VC)/predicted vital capacity- 65%, FEV1/FVC– 50%. Determine the type of respiratory insufficiency (RI)
a. RI of mixed type with prevailing resriction
b. There is no RI
c. RI of restrictive type
d. RI of obstructive type
*e. RI of mixed type with prevailing obstruction

99. A 37 year old miner has lifted significant loads and afterwards felt pain in the lumbar area irradiating to his left leg. He walks slowly and carefully. Lumbar lordosis is flattened. There is also left-sided scoliosis and tension of paravertebral muscles. Neris and Dejerines symptoms are positive, there is Lasegues sign on the left from the angle of 350. What method will help to specify the diagnosis?
a. Renal sonography
b. Lumbal puncture
*c. CT of lumbosacral part of vertebral column
d. Descending myelography
e. Electromyography

100. A 5 y.o. girl was by accident closed in a dark room for several minutes. When the door was opened, the child was standing motionless in the middle of the room staring at one point, her face had a look of terror, she didnt respond to any stimuli. 40 minutes after her state changed into crying. On the next day she could remember nothing of this incident. What is the most probable mechanism of this reaction?
a. Exogenously organic
b. Endogenic
*c. Psychogenic
d. Endogenically organic
e. Conditioned reflex

101. A 16-year-old female patient underwent an operation on account of diffuse toxic goiter of the III-IV degree 12 years ago. Now she has recurrence of thyrotoxicosis. The patient was offered operative intervention, but it is necessary first to localize the functioning gland tissue. What method should be applied for this purpose?
a. Roentgenography of esophagus
*b. Gland scanning
c. Puncture aspiration biopsy
d. USI
e. Roentgenography of neck

102. A 42 y.o. patient was admitted 3 hours after a trauma with evident subcutaneous emphysema of the upper part of his body, dyspnea, tachycardia 120/min. X-ray examination revealed no pneumothorax, significant dilatation of mediastinum to the both sides. What emergency care is needed?
a. Pleural cavity punction
b. Toracoscopy
c. Toracotomy
*d. Drainage of anterior mediastinum
e. Pleural cavity drainage

103. During examination a patient is unconscious, his skin is dry and hot, face hyperemia is present. The patient has Kussmauls respiration, there is also smell of acetone in the air. Symptoms of peritoneum irritation are positive. Blood sugar is at the rate of 33 millimole/l. What emergency actions should be taken?
a. Intravenous infusion of glucose along with insulin
b. Intravenous infusion of neohaemodesum along with glutamic acid
c. Intravenous infusion of sodium chloride saline
*d. Intravenous infusion of short-acting insulin
e. Introduction of long-acting insulin

104. A 34 year old patient was delivered to the hospital because of follicular tonsillitis charactirized by high temperature. The patient has been abusing alcohol for 12 years. In the evening on the day of hospitalization he became anxious, couldnt stay in bed, left his ward several times and applied to the staff on duty with different complaints. He reported about seeing alot of spiders and flies in his ward as well as abou hearing threats from the corridor. He was exasperated by the fact that other patients didnt hear them. He lost also spatial orientation. What psychopathological syndrome is it?
a. Amentive
b. Oneiric
*c. Delirious
d. Twilight state
e. Asthenic confusion

105. A 35 y.o. patient was admitted to the local hospital a week after a road accident with clinical picture of clotted hemothorax. What is the most appropriate treatment tactic for prevention of acute pleural empyema?
*a. Surgical removal of clotted hemothorax
b. Complex conservative therapy
c. Active drainage of pleural cavity
d. Passive drainage of pleural cavity
e. Treatment by pleural punctions

106. A male patient presents with swollen ankles, face, eyelids, elevated AP- 160/100 mm Hg, pulse- 54 bpm, daily loss of albumine with urine- 4g. What therapy is pathogenetic in this case?
*a. Corticosteroids
b. NSAID
c. Antibiotics
d. Calcium antagonists
e. Diuretics

107. An aircraft factory processes materials with use of lasers. It is determined that the device radiates in the light spectrum and that levels of laser radiation at the workplaces exceed the alarm level. Specify, what organs will be affected in the first place?
a. Spleen
b. Kidneys
c. Skin
d. Liver
*e. Eyes

108. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
a. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
b. Depositing of blood in venous channel
c. Presence of hypervolemia
*d. Increase of bleeding speed
e. Shunting

109. A male patient complains of heartburn which gest stronger while bending the body, substernal pain during swallowing. There is a hiatus hernia on X-ray. What disoeder should be expected at gastroscopy?
a. Duodenal peptic ulcer
*b. Gastroesophageal reflux
c. Gastric peptic ulcer
d. Chronic gastritis
e. Acute erosive gastritis

110. A 43 y.o. male complains of stomach pain, which relieves with defecation, and is accompanied by abdominal winds, rumbling, the feeling of incomplete evacuation or urgent need for bowel movement, constipation or diarrhea in alternation. These symptoms have lasted for over 3 months. No changes in laboratory tests. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Colitis with hypertonic type dyskinesia
b. Spastic colitis
*c. Irritable bowel syndrome
d. Chronic enterocolitis, exacerbation phase
e. Atonic colitis

111. A 7 year old boy has periods of loss of attention that last 10-15 seconds and occur several times a day. During these periods he stands still in one position, doesnt answer the questions or react when he is called by his name. Neurological examination revealed no changes. What diagnostic method should be applied to specify his diagnosis?
*a. Electroencephalography
b. Computer tomogram
c. Examination of evoked potentials
d. Echoencephalography
e. Skull roentgenogram

112. People who live in the radiation polluted regions are recommended to include pectins into their dietary intake for the radioactive nuclides washout. What products are the main source of pectins?
a. Macaroni
*b. Fruit and vegetebles
c. Milk
d. Bread
e. Meat

113. The Transcarpathian region is characterized by constant high (over 80%) air moisture. Population of this region feels an intense cold in winter when the temperature is temperately low. What way of heat emission becomes more active?
a. Radiation
*b. Convection
c. Evaporation
d. Irradiation
e. Conduction

114. Medical examination of a 43 y.o. man revealed objectively pailness of skin and mucous membranes, smoothness of lingual papillas, transverse striation of nails, fissures in the mouth corners, tachycardia. Hemoglobin content amounts 90 g/l; there are anisocytosis, poikilocytosis. The most probable causative agent of this condition is deficiency of the following microelement:
a. Zinc
b. Copper
*c. Iron
d. Magnesium
e. Selenium

115. A 27 year old patient suffers from haemophilia. He was admitted to the hospital with melena and skin pallor. Objectively: Ps- 110 bpm, AP- 100/60 mm Hg. In blood: Hb- 80 g/l, erythrocytes - 2,81012/l. What medication should be administered in the first place?
a. Packed red blood cells
b. Stored blood
*c. Cryoprecipitate
d. Dicinone
e. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid

116. A 38-year-old patient complains about inertness, subfebrile temperature, enlargement of lymph nodes, nasal haemorrhages, ostealgia. Objectively: the patients skin and mucous membranes are pale, palpation revealed enlarged painless lymph nodes; sternalgia; liver was enlarged by 2 cm, spleen - by 5 cm, painless. In blood: erythrocytes - 2,71012/l, Hb- 84 g/l, leukocytes – 58109/l, eosinophils - 1%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 12%, lymphocytes - 83%, lymphoblasts - 2%, smudge cells; ESR- 57 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
*b. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
c. Acute lymphatic leukemia
d. Chronic myeloleukemia
e. Acute myeloleukemia

117. A 24 year old patient complained about putting on weight, limosis. Objectively: the patients constitution is of hypersthenic type, body weight index is 33,2 kg/m2, waist circumference is 100 cm. Correlation of waist circumference to the thigh circumference is 0,95. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the II stage, abdominal type
b. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the I stage, abdominal type
c. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the II stage, gynoid type
d. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the III stage, gynoid type
*e. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the I stage, abdominal type

118. A 58-year-old patient complains about sensation of numbness, sudden paleness of II-IV fingers, muscle rigidness, intermittent pulse. The patient presents also with polyarthralgia, dysphagia, constipations. The patients face is masklike, solid edema of hands is present. The heart is enlarged; auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. In blood: ESR - 20 mm/h, crude protein - 85/l, ?-globulines - 25%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatomyositis
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Raynauds disease
*d. Systemic scleroderma
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

119. A 36-year-old female patient complains of general weakness, edemata of her face and hands, rapid fatiguability during walking, difficult diglutition, cardiac irregularities. These symptoms turned up 11 days after a holiday at the seaside. Objectively: face erythema, edema of shin muscles. Heart sounds are muffled, AP is 100/70 mm Hg. In blood: ASAT activity is 0,95 millimole/hl, ALAT - 1,3 millimole/hl, aldolase - 9,2 IU/l, creatine phosphokinase - 2,5 millimole Р/gl. What method of study would be the most specific?
a. Electromyography
b. Determination of cortisol concentration in blood and urine
c. ECG
d. Echocardiogram
*e. Muscle biopsy

120. A 33-year-old patient has acute blood loss: erythrocytes - 2,21012/l, Hb- 55 g/l, blood group is A(II)Rh+. Accidentally the patient got a transfusion of donor erythrocyte mass of AB(IV)Rh+ group. An hour later the patient became anxious, got abdominal and lumbar pain. Ps- 134 bpm, AP- 100/65 mm Hg, body temperature - 38,6oC. After catheterization of urinary bladder 12 ml/h of dark-brown urine were obtained. What complication is it?
a. Citrate intoxication
b. Toxic infectious shock
c. Cardial shock
d. Allergic reaction to the donor erythrocyte mass
*e. Acute renal insufficiency

121. A 45-year-old man has been exhibiting high activity for the last 2 weeks, he became talkative, euphoric, had little sleep, claimed being able "to save the humanity" and solve the problem of cancer and AIDS, gave money the starangers. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Agitated depression
b. Panic disorder
*c. Maniacal onset
d. Schizo-affective disorder
e. Catatonic excitation

122. A 67-year-old female patient suffering from the essential hypertension suddenly at night developed headache, dyspnea that quickly progressed to asphyxia. Objectively: the patient is pale, with sweaty forehead, AP- 210/140 mm Hg, heart rate - 120/min, auscultation revealed solitary dry rales and moist rales in the lower parts. The shins are pastose. What kind of emergency aid would be the most efficient in this case?
a. Nitroglycerin intravenously and capoten internally
*b. Nitroglycerin and furosemide intravenously
c. Digoxin and nitroglycerin intravenously
d. Enalapril and furosemide intravenously
e. Labetalol and furosemide intravenously

123. A patient suffering from gastroesophageal reflux has taken from time to time a certain drug that "reduces acidity" over 5 years. This drug was recommended by a pharmaceutist. The following side effects are observed: osteoporosis, muscle asthenia, indisposition. What drug has such following effects?
a. Gastrozepin
*b. Aluminium-bearing antacid
c. H_2-blocker
d. Inhibitor of proton pump
e. Metoclopramide

124. A 26-year-old patient complains about considerable muscle weakness, dizziness, extended abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting giving no relief. The disease has been gradually developing within 6 months. There was progress of general weakness, skin darkening. The patient fell into grave condition after an ARD: there appeared abdominal pain and frequent vomiting. Objectively: the skin is dry with diffuse pigmentation. Heart sounds are significantly weakened, heart rate - 60/min, AP- 80/40 mm Hg. The abdomen is slightly painful in the epigastrial region. In blood: WBCs - 8,1109/l, glucose - 3,0 millimole/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Toxic infectious shock
b. Acute pancreatitis
*c. Chronic adrenal insufficiency. Addisonian crisis
d. Acute food poisoning
e. Acute cholecystitis

125. A 22 year old female patient complains about frequent and painful urination, urge to urinate at night, enuresis, pain in the suprapubic and lumbar area. Her urine often has beer colouring. She got married a month ago. Objectively: general state is satisfactory. Lung examination revealed vesicular respiration. Heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 78/min, AP- 128/68 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, painful in the suprapubic area. Urine contains 12-18 erythrocytes and 12-15 bacteria within eyeshot. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Primary syphilis
*b. Infection of inferior urinary tracts - cystitis
c. Infection of superior urinary tracts - pyelonephritis
d. Urolithiasis
e. Gonorrhoea

126. A 35-year-old man complains about intense lumbar pain irradiating to the inguinal area, external genitalia, thigh; frequent urination, chill, nausea, vomiting. Objectively: positive Pasternatskys symptom. Urine analysis revealed that RBCs and WBCs covered the total field of microscope; the urine exhibited high protein concentration. These clinical presentations were most likely caused by the following pathology:
a. Osteochondrosis, acute radicular syndrome
*b. Urolithiasis, renal colic
c. Renal infarct
d. Cholelithiasis, biliary colic
e. Intestinal obstruction

127. A 46 year old woman who has been suffering from hypertension for 5 years was diagnosed with hypertensive crisis. She complains about palpitation, sense of head pulsation; heart rate is 100/min, AP is 190/100 mm Hg (haemodynamics is of hyperkinetic type). What medication should be the medication of choice?
*a. ?-adrenoceptor blocker
b. Diuretic
c. Dihydropyridine calcium antagonist
d. ?-adrenoceptor blocker
e. Adenosine pyrophosphate inhibitor

128. A patient consulted a venereologist about painful urination, reddening of the external opening of urethra, profuse purulent discharges from the urethra. He considers himself to be ill for 3 days. He also associates the disease with a casual sexual contact that took place for about a week ago. If provisional diagnosis "acute gonorrheal urethritis" is confirmed, then bacteriological study of urethral discharges will reveal:
a. Proteus vulgaris
b. Mycoplasma
c. Gram-positive diplococci
d. Spirochaete
*e. Gram-negative diplococci

129. As a result of load lifting a 68-year-old female felt acute pain in the lumbar region, in a buttock, posterolateral surface of her right thigh, external surface of the right shin and dorsal surface of foot. Objectively: weakness of the anterior tibial muscle, long extensor muscle of the right toes, short extensor muscle of the right toes. Low Achilles reflex on the right. Positive Lasegues sign. What examination method would be the most effective for specification of the diagnosis of discogenic compression of L5 root?
a. Lumbar puncture
*b. Magnetic resonance scan
c. Electromyography
d. Spinal column X-ray
e. Angiography

130. A 28-year-old patient was delivered to the admission ward in the unconscious state with generalized epileptic attacks taking place every 15-20 minutes. During transportation the patient was given two injections of diazepam, magnesia sulphate, but they failed to bring the patient to consciousness. What department should render emergency aid?
a. Therapeutic department
b. Psychiatric department
c. Neurological department
d. Surgcal department
*e. Resuscitation department

131. A 60-year-old patient complains about asphyxia, palpitation, rapid fatiguability. He has 8 year history of essential hypertension. Objectively: the left cardiac border is 2 cm deviated to the left from the medioclavicular line, heart sounds are rhythmic and weak; there is diastolic shock above aorta. AP- 170/100 mm Hg. Liver - +2 cm; shin pastosity is present. ECG shows deviation of cardiac axis to the left, left ventricle hypertrophy. Ejection fraction - 63%. What type of cardiac insufficiency is observed?
a. Combined
b. Systolic
*c. Diastolic
d. Its a norm
e. Unspecified

132. During preventive examination a 16 year old patient presented no problems. Objectively: the patient has signs of malnutrition, he is asthenic, AP is 110/70 mm Hg, Ps is 80 bpm, cardiac border is normal, auscultation above the cardiac apex reveals three sounds, cardiac murmur is absent. ECG shows no pathological changes, phonocardiogram shows that the third sound comes 0,15 s after the second one above the apex. How are these changes called?
a. Atrial gallop rhythm
b. IV physiological sound
c. Fout-ta-ta-rou (reduplication of the 2nd sound)
d. Protodiastolic gallop rhythm
*e. III physiological sound

133. A patient is being prepared for the operation on account of varix dilatation of lower extremities veins. Examination of the patients soles revealed flour-like desquamation along the skin folds. All the toenails are greyish-yellow, thickened and partially decayed. What dermatosis should be suspected?
a. Pityriasis versicolor
b. Microsporia
c. Microbial eczema
*d. Rubromycosis
e. Candidosis

134. A 37 year old male patient was admitted to the resuscitation department because of attacks of tonoclonic spasms repeating every half an hour. Between the attacks the patient remains unconscious. AP is 120/90 mm Hg, Ps- 100 bpm. A day before the patient was at wedding and consumed alcohol. 5 years ago he had a closed craniocerebral trauma and brain contusion that later caused single convulsive attacks accompanied by loss of consciousness, but the patient didnt undergo antiepileptic treatment. What drug should be injected for emergency aid?
a. Sodium oxybutyrate
b. Magnesium sulfate
*c. Diazepam
d. Aminazine
e. Sodium thiopental

135. A 43-year-old female patient was delivered to the hospital in grave condition. She suffers from Addisons disease. The patient had been regularly taking prednisolone but a week before she stopped taking this drug. Objectively: sopor, skin and visible mucous membranes are pigmented, skin and muscle turgor is decreased. Heart sounds are muffled, rapid. AP- 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 96/min. In blood: Na - 120 millimole/l, K - 5,8 millimole/l. Development of this complication is primarily caused by the deficit of the following hormone:
a. Noradrenaline
b. Adrostendion
c. Corticotropin (ACTH)
d. Adrenaline
*e. Cortisol

136. A 52-year-old patient works as a secretary and has 30 year record of service. She complains of spasms in her right hand during working and inability to type and write. Up to 80% of her work involves hand load. The patient has been presenting with these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: the right hand is tense, there is an increase in muscle tone, attempts to write cause spasms. Examination revealed no pathological changes of CNS. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hysteric neurosis
b. Chronic manganese intoxication
c. Neuralgic form of coordination neurosis
d. Paretic form of coordination neurosis
*e. Spastic form of coordination neurosis

137. During examination at a military commissariat a 15-year-old teenager was found to have interval sysolic murmur on the cardiac apex, diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery, tachycardia. Which of the suuplemental examination methods will be the most informative for the diagnosis specification?
a. Phonocardiography
b. Rheography
c. Electrocardigraphy
d. Roengenography
*e. Echocardiography

138. A 52 year old patient with disseminated vertebral osteochondrosis lifted a significant load that resulted in lumbar pain and pain along the sciatic nerve. Objectively: positive Lasegues sign on the left, reduced Achilles reflex. What drug would be the most effective from the pathogenetic point of view?
a. Spasmalgon
*b. Diclofenac
c. Analgin
d. Aspirin
e. Novocaine

139. A 67-year-old female patient complains about edemata of face and legs, pain in the lumbar area that is getting worse at moving; great weakness, sometimes nasal haemorrhages, rise of body temperature up to 38,4oC. Objectively: painfulness of vertebral column and ribs on palpation. Laboratorial study revealed daily proteinuria of 4,2 g, ESR- 52 mm/h. What changes of laboratory indices are to be expected?
a. Leukocytes - 15,3 g/l
b. Albumins - 65%
c. ?-globulins - 14%
*d. Whole protein of blood serum - 101 g/l
e. Haemoglobin - 165 g/l

140. A female patient consulted a doctor about gain in weight, chill, edemata, dry skin, sleepiness, problems with concentration. Objectively: the patients height is 165 cm, weight is 90 kg, gynoid body proportions, t°35,8°C, ESR- 58/min, AP- 105/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds are weakened, bradycardia is present. Other internal organs have no changes. Thyroid gland is not palpable. Mammary glands ooze milk droplets. Hormonal study revealed rise of TSH and prolactin concentration, reduction of T4. What factor caused obesity?
a. Hypopituitarism
b. Adiposogenital dystrophy
c. Secondary hypothyroidism
d. Prolactinoma
*e. Primary hypothyroidism

