1. A 26-year-old patient undergoes a course of treatment due to chronic glomerulonephritis. The treatment was successful, normalization of all the characteristics was recorded. What sanitorium and health resort treatment could be recommended?
a. Myrhorod
b. Truskavets
c. Not recommended
d. Morshyn
*e. The south coast of the Crimea

2. After a wasp-bite there was an itching of skin, hoarse voice, barking cough, anxiety. On physical exam: there is edema of lips, eyelids, cyanosis. What medicine is to be taken first?
*a. Prednisolone
b. Euphylin
c. Seduxen
d. Lasix
e. Adrenalin

3. A 16-year-old adolescent was vaccinated with DTP. In eight days there was stiffness and pain in the joints, subfebrile temperature, urticarial skin eruption, enlargement of inguinal, cervical lymph nodes and spleen. What kind of allergic reaction is observed?
a. Hypersensitivity of immediate type
b. Hypersensitivity of delayed type
c. --
*d. Immunocomplex
e. Cytoxic

4. In autumn a 25-year-old patient developed stomach ache that arose 1,5-2 hours after having meals and at night. He complains about pyrosis and constipation. The pain is getting worse after consuming spicy, salty and sour food, it can be relieved by means of soda and hot-water bag. The patient has been suffering from this disease for a year. Objectively: furred moist tongue. Abdomen palpation reveals epigastrial pain on the right, resistance of abdominal muscles in the same region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Stomach ulcer
b. Chronic pancreatitis
c. Chronic cholecystitis
d. Diaphragmatic hernia
*e. Duodenal ulcer

5. A 51 y.o. woman complains of dull pain in the right subcostal area and epigastric area, nausea, appetite decline during 6 months. There is a history of gastric peptic ulcer. On examination: weight loss, pulse is 70 bpm, AP is 120/70 mm Hg. Diffuse tenderness and resistance of muscles on palpation.There is a hard lymphatic node 1x1cm in size over the left clavicle. What method of investigation will be the most useful?
a. Ureatic test
b. Stomach X-ray
c. Ultrasound examination of abdomen
d. pH-metry
*e. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsy

6. On the 20th of June a townsman was brought to clinic. The disease broke out acutely, starting with fever, rise in temperature to 38-39°C. There also was weakness, acute headache, nausea, vomiting, pain all over the body, sleep disorder. On physical examination: hyperemia of skin of face, neck, thorax. Meningeal signs are positive. 12 days ago the patient returned from the Siberia, from the forest. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Tick-borne encephalitis
b. Omsk hemorrhagic fever
c. Epidemic typhus
d. Pseudotuberculosis
e. Influenza

7. A 37-year-old patient has sudden acute pain in the right epigastric area after having fatty food. What method of radiological investigation is to be used on the first stage of examining the patient?
a. Roentgenological
b. Magnetic-resonance
c. Thermographic
*d. Ultrasonic
e. Radionuclid

8. A man, aged 68, complains of tiredness, sweating, enlargement of cervical, submaxillary and axillary lymph nodes. Blood test: WBC- 35109/L, lymphocytes - 60%, Botkin and Gumprecht bodies, level of haemoglobin and quantity of thrombocytes is normal. Myelogram showed 40% of lymphocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous lymphadenitis
*b. Chronic lympholeucosis
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Chronic myeloleucosis
e. Acute leucosis

9. Examination of a 32 y.o. patient who had apendectomy because of gangrenous appendicitis revealed clinical picture of pelvic abscess. What is the best way to expose pelvic abscess of this patient?
*a. Through the rectum
b. By means of the sacral approach
c. Through the obturator foramen
d. Through the anterior abdominal wall
e. Through the postoperative wound

10. A 38-year-old patient is under observation having polyneuritic syndrome with considerable loss of weight, fever, rise in BP. Blood test:: considerable inflammatory changes. What examination is the most expedient to make the diagnosis?
a. Blood culture
b. Determination of HLA antigens
c. Determination of antinuclear antibodies
d. Electromyography
*e. Muscular biopsy with histological investigation of the material

11. A 32-year-old male patient has been suffering from pain in the sacrum and coxofemoral joints, painfulness and stiffness in the lumbar spine for a year. ESR - 56 mm/h. Roentgenography revealed symptoms of bilateral sacroileitis. The patient is the carrier of HLA B27 antigen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Ankylosing spondylitis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Spondylosis
d. Reiters disease
e. Coxarthrosis

12. A 58-year-old female patient complains about periodical headache, dizziness and ear noise. She has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. Objectively: heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 76/min, there is diastolic shock above aorta, AP is 180/110 mm Hg. In urine: OD- 1,014. Daily loss of protein with urine is 1,5 g. What drug should be chosen for treatment of arterial hypertension?
*a. Ihibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme
b. Calcium channel antagonist
c. ?-blocker
d. Thiazide diuretic
e. ?-blocker

13. A 25 year old patient had pharyngitis 2 weeks ago. Now he complains about body temperature rise up to 38oC, general weakness, dyspnea during walking, swelling and shifting pain in the articulations. Objectively: cyanosis of lips, rhythmic pulse of poor volume - 100 bpm. Left cardiac border deviates outwards from the mediaclavicular line by 1 cm. The first heart sound is weakened on the apex, auscultation revealed systolic souffle. What is the most probable aetiological factor that caused this pathological process?
a. Virus
b. Fungi
c. Staphylococcus
d. Pneumococcus
*e. ?-haemolytic streptococcus

14. A 26 y.o. male patient with postoperative hypothyroidism take thyroxine 100 mg 2 times a day. He has developed tachycardia, sweating, irritability, sleep disorder. Determine further treatment tactics
a. To add mercasolil to the treatment
b. To administer sedatives
c. To increase thyroxine dosage
d. To administer betablockers
*e. To decrease thyroxine dosage

15. A 35 year old woman consulted a doctor about affection of arm skin and lower third of forearm in form of a large edema, hyperemia, vesiculation and maceration. The disease developed after using a laundry detergent "Lotos". The patient has been using it for a month. She hasnt suffered from dermatological diseases before. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Allergic dermatitis
b. Toxicoallergic dermatitis
c. Localized neurodermatitis
d. Microbial eczema
e. Dermatitis simplex

16. A 28-year-old man was discharged from the hospital after having an out-of -hospital pneumonia. He has no complaints. On physical exam: his temperature is -36,6°C, RR-18/min, Ps - 78 bpm, BP- 120/80 mm Hg. During ausculation there is harsh respiration to the right of the lower part of the lung. Roentgenologically: infiltrative changes are absent, intensification of the pulmonary picture to the right in the lower lobe. How long should the doctor keep the patient under observation?
a. Permanently
*b. 12 months
c. 3 months
d. 1 month
e. 6 months

17. A 32 year old patient complains about heartburn and dull pain in the epigastrium that appear 2-3 hours after meal. Exacerbations happen in spring and in autumn. The patient has food intolerance of eggs and fish. Objectively: stomach palpation reveals painfulness in the gastroduodenal area. Electrophasoduodenoscopy revealed a 5 mm ulcer on the anterior wall of duodenum. Urease test is positive. What is the most probable leading mechanism of disease development?
a. Dietary allergy
b. Reduced prostaglandin synthesis
c. Disorder of gastric motor activity
*d. Chelicobacterial infection
e. Autoantibody production

18. A 48 year old woman complains about weakness, weight loss, appetite loss, headache. The patient had acute glomerulonephritis when she was young. She has been suffering from arterial hypertension since she was 25. She didnt undergo systematic treatment, consulted a doctor rarely. Examination revealed signs of chronic renal insufficiency of the I stage (creatinine - 0,43 millimole/l). What dietary recommendations are the most reasonable?
a. Restriction of carbohydrate consumption
b. Restriction of fat consumption
*c. Restriction of protein consumption
d. Diet with high content of "alkaline" dishes
e. Consumption of higher amounts of liquid

19. A 20-year-old adolescent lives in the nidus of tuberculous infection. The tuberculine Mantoux test with 2 TU was determined as hyperergic. What signs determine the hyperergic test of this adolescent?
*a. 6 mm papula, necrosis
b. 24 mm hyperemia
c. 12 mm hyperemia
d. 4 mm papula
e. 20 mm papula

20. Chest X-ray of the miner (with 24- year-length of service; dust concentration on working place is 260-280 mg/m3, 15% of which is free silicon dioxide) showed the signs that are typical of pneumoconiosis. What kind of pneumoconiosis is this?
a. Silicatosis
b. Carboconiosis
*c. Anthraco-silicosis
d. Anthraco-silicatosis
e. Silicosis

21. A patient complains of pathological lump, appearing in the right inguinal region on exercise. The lump is round-shaped, 4 cm in diameter, on palpation: soft elastic consistency, is positioned near the medial part of Pouparts ligament. The lump is situated inwards from the spermatic cord. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Right-sided direct inguinal hernia
b. Right-sided femoral hernia
c. Lipoma of the right inguinal area
d. Varicose veins of the right hip
e. Right-sided oblique inguinal hernia

22. A 35-year-old man was operated on peptic ulcer of the stomach. Mass deficit of the body is 10 kg. The level of glucose after operation in the undiluted cellular blood on an empty stomach is 6,7 mmol. During repeated examination - 11,1 mmol (after meal), level of HbA1c - 10%. Could you please make an interpretation of the given data?
a. Disordered tolerance to glucose
b. Norm
c. Postoperative hyperinsulinemia
*d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Diabetes mellitus risk group

23. A 52 y.o. woman complains of weakness, painful itching after washing and bathing, sensation of heaviness in the head. On examination: hyperemia of skin of face, neck, extremities. АP- 180/100 mm Hg. Speeln is 4 cm below the rib arch edge. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Erythremia
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Systemic sclerodermia
d. Allergic dermatitis
e. Essential hypertension

24. A 37-year-old patient was brought to resuscitation unit. General condition of the patient is very serious. Sopor. The skin is grey, moist. Turgor is decreased. Pulse is rapid, intense. BP - 160/110 mm Hg, muscle tonus is increased. Hyperreflexia. There is an ammonia odor in the air. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Cerebral coma
c. Alcoholic coma
d. Hyperglycemic coma
*e. Uraemic coma

25. A 50 year old woman complains about dull cardiac pain, asphyxia, body temperature rise up to 38°C. She had influenza a week ago. Objectively: Ps - 100 bpm, dropped-beat pulse during inspiration. AP - 100/70 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. ECG: reduced voltage, ST segment is above the isoline in all leads. X-ray picture shows extensively enlarged cardiac silhouette. Palmus is of small amplitude. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dilatation cardiomyopathy
b. Myocardium infarction
*c. Exudative pericarditis
d. Myocarditis
e. Stenocardia

26. A 57-year-old man complains of shortness of breath, swelling on shanks, irregularity in cardiac work, pain in the left chest half with irradiation to the left scapula.Treatment is uineffective. On physical exam: hearts sounds are diminished, soft systolic murmur on the apex. Ps - 100/min, arrhythmical, BP - 115/75 mm Hg. The liver is +2 cm, painful. Roentgenoscopy: enlargement of heart shadow to all sides, pulsation is weak. Electrocardiogram (ECG): leftventricled extrasystolia, decreased voltage. What method of investigation is necessary to do to determine the diagnosis?
*a. Echocardiography
b. X-ray kymography
c. Coronarography
d. ECG in the dynamics
e. Veloergometria

27. A 55 y.o. patient complains of distended abdomen and rumbling, increased winds evacuation, liguid foamy feces with sour smell following the diary products consumption. What is the correct name of this syndrome?
a. Syndrome of fatty dyspepsia
b. Syndrome of decayed dyspepsia
*c. Syndrome of fermentative dyspepsia
d. Dyskinesia syndrome
e. Malabsorption syndrome

28. A patient suffers from chronic recurrent pancreatitis with evident disturbance of exocrinous function. After intake of rich spicy food and spirits his stool becomes fatty. Reduced production of what factor is the most probable cause of steatorrhea?
a. Amylase
b. Alkaline phosphatase
c. Tripsin
d. Acidity of gastric juice
*e. Lipase

29. A 54 y.o. woman has been ill with osteomyelitis of femoral bone for over 20 years. During the last month there appeared and have been steadily increasing edemata of lower extremities. Urine analysis revealed: proteinuria - 6,6 g/l. Blood analysis: disproteinemia in form of hypoalbuminemia, raise of ?2- and ?-globulines, ESR- 50 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Secondary renal amyloidosis
b. Myelomatosis
c. Systematic lupus erythematosus
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

30. In an inhabited locality there is an increase of diphtheria during the last 3 years with separate outbursts in families. What measure can effectively influence the epidemic process of diphtheria and reduce the morbidity rate to single cases?
a. Detection of carriers
b. Hospitalization of patients
*c. Immunization of the population
d. Early diagnostics
e. Disinfection in disease focus

31. A 50-year-old locksmith was diagnosed with typhoid fever. The patient lives in a separate apartment with all facilities. Apart of him there are also 2 adults in his family. What actions should be taken about persons communicating with the patient?
*a. Bacteriological study
b. Isolation
c. Vaccination
d. Dispensary surveillance
e. Antibiotic prophylaxis

32. A mineshaft is situated on the territory of homestead land, it is 20 m away from the house, 10 m - from the toilet and 15 m - from the neighbours house. What is the smallest distance that, according to the sanitary code, should be established between the well and the source of probable water pollution?
a. 25 m
b. 15 m
c. 10 m
*d. 30 m
e. 20 m

33. A 39 year old patient complained about morning headache, appetite loss, nausea, morning vomiting, periodic nasal haemorrhages. The patient had acute glomerulonephritis at the age of 15. Examination revealed rise of arterial pressure up to 220/130 mm Hg, skin haemorrhages on his arms and legs, pallor of skin and mucous membranes. What biochemical index has the greatest diagnostic importance in this case?
a. Fibrinogen
*b. Blood creatinine
c. Blood sodium
d. Blood bilirubin
e. Uric acid

34. A 14-year-old victim was drawn out of the water in winter after 15 minutes of being in the water. The victim shows no vital signs. What measures are to be taken?
*a. To release respiratory tract from water, to create drain position and to take on measures to restore respiration and blood circulation
b. To transport the victim to the nearest hospital to carry out reanimation measures
c. Not to carry out reanimation measures
d. Тo transport the victim to the nearest warm room to carry out reanimation measures
e. Not to waste time on the release of respiratory tract from water, to take on cardiopulmonary reanimation

35. A 43 year old patient was admitted to the infectious diseases hospital with high body temperature and intense headache. The iIlness has lasted for 2 days. Examination revealed a carbuncle on his forearm. The area around it was apparently edematic and slightly painful. Regional lymphadenitis and hepatolienal syndrome were also present. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient works at a cattle-breeding farm. What disease should be suspected in the first place?
a. Erysipelas
b. Skin cancer
c. Eczema
*d. Anthrax
e. Erysipeloid

36. After a long periode of subfebrility a patient registered increase of dyspnea, pain in the right hypochondrium, leg edemata. Objectively: neck veins are edematic. Ps is 120 bpm, sometimes it disappears during inspiration. Heart sounds are very weakened. ECG showed low-voltage waves of ventricular complex. A month ago there was raise of ST V1-V4 segment. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged, roundish. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Exudative pericarditis
b. Postinfarction cardiosclerosis
c. Primary rheumatic carditis
d. Metabolic postinfection myocardiopathy
e. Small-focal myocardial infarction

37. A woman complains of high temperature to 38°C, mild pain in the throat during 3 days. On examination: angle lymphatic nodes of the jaw are 3 cm enlarged, palatinel tonsils are enlarged and coated with grey plaque which spreads to the uvula and frontal palatinel arches. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Larynx dyphtheria
b. Vincents angina
c. Oropharyngeal candidosis
d. Agranulocytosis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

38. A 16 y.o. teenager complains of weakness, dizziness, sense of heaviness in the left hypochondrium. Objectively: skin and visible mucous membranes are icteric. Steeple skull. Liver +2 cm, the lower pole of spleen is at the level of navel. Blood test: RBC- 2,71012/L, Hb- 88 g/L, WBC- 5,6109/L, ESR- 15 mm/h. What is the most probable reason of bilirubin level change?
a. Decrease of conjugated bilirubin
b. Decrease of unconjugated bilirubin
c. Increase of conjugated bilirubin
d. Increase of unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin
*e. Increase of unconjugated bilirubin

39. A 28 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about edematic face, moderate legs edemata; occasionally her urine has colour of "meat slops". When she was a teenager she often fell ill with angina. Objectively: skin is pallor, body temperature is 36,80С, Ps- 68/min, rhythmic. AP- 170/110 mm Hg. What urine changes are the most probable?
a. Erythrocyturia and urinozuria
b. Decrease of relative density, proteinuria
c. Increase of relative density, hematuria, bacteriuria
d. Decrease of relative density, proteinuria, some urinary sediment
*e. Proteinuria, hematuria, cylindrouria

40. A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to a hospital for acute transmural infarction. An hour ago the patients contition got worse. She developed progressing dyspnea, dry cough. Respiratory rate - 30/min, heart rate - 130/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, diastolic shock on the pulmonary artery. There are medium moist rales in the lower parts of lungs on the right and on the left. Body temperature - 36,4oC. What drug should be given in the first place?
a. Heparin
b. Digoxin
c. Aminophylline
d. Dopamine
*e. Promedol

41. A 58 y.o. woman had voluminous bleeding from the ruptured varicous node on the left crus. What first aid should be provided?
*a. Heightened position of extremity, compressive sterile bandage
b. Proximal turniquet
c. Z-shaped stitch on the raptured varicose node
d. Troyanov-Trendelenburg operation
e. Distal tourniquet

42. A 52-year-old male patient complains about attacks of asphyxia, pain in his right side during respiration. These manifestations turned up all of a sudden. It is known from his anamnesis that he had been treated for thrombophlebitis of the right leg for the last month. In the admission ward the patient suddenly lost consciousness, there was a sudden attack of asphyxia and pain in his side. Objectively: heart rate - 102/min, respiratory rate - 28/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery, gallop rhythm, small bubbling rales above the lungs under the scapula on the right, pleural friction rub. What examination method will be the most informative for a diagnosis?
a. ECG
b. Coagulogram
c. Echocardioscopy
d. Study of external respiration function
*e. Angiography of pulmonary vessels

43. A 58 y.o. patient complains of weakness, leg edemata, dyspnea, anorexia. He has been suffering from chronic bronchitis for many years. During the last 5 years he has been noting intensified discharge of sputum that is often purulent. Objectively: RR- 80/min, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Disseminated edemata, skin is dry and pale, low turgor. In urine: intense proteinuria, cylindruria. Specify the most probable pathological process in kidneys:
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
*b. Renal amyloidosis
c. Chronic pyelonephritis
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
e. Interstitial nephritis

44. A 23 year old man complains about face edemata, headache, dizziness, reduced urination, change of urine colour (dark-red). These presentations appeared after pharyngitis. Objectively: face edemata, pale skin, temperature - 37,4°C; heart rate - 86/min, AP - 170/110 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, the II sound is accentuated above aorta. What etiological factor is probable in this case?
a. Pyogenic streptococcus
b. Saprophytic staphylococcus
c. Staphylococcus aureus
d. Alpha-hemolytic streptococcus
*e. Beta-hemolytic streptococcus

45. A 15 year old girl suddenly got arthralgia, headache, nausea, vomiting; pain and muscle tension in the lumbar area; body temperature rose up to 38-39oC. Pasternatskys symptom was distinctly positive on the right. In the urine: bacteriuria, pyuria. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Renal colic
*c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Pararenal abscess
e. Cystitis

46. A 18 y.o. male patient complains of pain in knee and ankle joints, temperature elevation to 39,5°C. He had a respiratory disease 1,5 week ago. On examination: temperature- 38,5°C, swollen knee and ankle joints, pulse- 106 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 90/60 mm Hg, heart borders without changes, sounds are weakened, soft systolic apical murmur. What indicator is connected with possible etiology of the process?
a. Creatinkinase
b. 1-antitrypsine
*c. Antistreptolysine-0
d. Rheumatic factor
e. Seromucoid

47. A 28 y.o. patient who has no permanent residence was admitted to the hospital with preliminary diagnosis "influenza", on the 5-th day of disease there are appeared maculopapular and petechial rash on his body and internal surfaces of his extremities. Body temperature is 41°C, euphoria, hyperemic face, scleras reddening, tongue tremor, tachycardia, splenomegaly, excitement. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Delirium alcoholicum
b. Measles
c. Typhoid fever
*d. Spotted fever
e. Leptospirosis

48. An 18 year old woman consulted a gynecologist about the pain in the lower part of abdomen, fever up to 37,5oC, considerable mucopurulent discharges from the genital tracts, painful urination. Vaginal and speculum examination results: the urethra is infiltrated, cervix of the uterus is hyperemic, erosive. The uterus is painful, ovaries are painful, thickened; fornixes are free. Bacterioscopy test revealed diplococcus. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Candydomycosis
b. Trichomoniasis
*c. Recent acute ascending gonorrhea
d. Chronic gonorrhea
e. Chlamydiosis

49. A 30 y.o. male patient complains of itching of the skin which intensifies in the evening. He has been ill for 1,5 months. On examination: there is rash with paired papules covered with bloody crusts on the abdomen, hips, buttocks, folds between the fingers, flexor surfaces of the hand. There are traces of line scratches. What additional investigations are necessary to make diagnosis?
*a. Examination of rash elements scrape
b. Serologic blood examination
c. Examination for helmints
d. Blood glucose
e. Determination of dermographism

50. A 28 y.o. patient complains of pain in legs during walking, chill of feet and toes. He has been ill for a year. Objectively: leg skin is pale, cool; turgor is decreased, hypotrichosis. Femoral and popliteal artery pulsation is weak, it is palpable on the foot arteries only after nitroglycerine test. Rheographic index is <1. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Obliterating aterosclerosis
b. Chronic thrombophlebitis
*c. Obliterating endarteritis
d. Raynauds disease
e. Buergers disease

51. A 58 y.o. male patient is examined by a physician and suffers from general weakness, fatigue, mild pain in the left subcostal area, sometimes frequent painful urination. Moderate splenomegaly has been revealed. Blood test: neutrophilic leukocytosis with the progress to myelocyte; basophil- 2%; eosinophil- 5%. There is a urate crystales in urine, erythrocyte- 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Leukemoid reaction
*c. Chronic myeloleucosis
d. Hepar cirrhosis
e. Urolithiasis

52. A 56-year-old patient with diffuse toxic goiter has ciliary arrhythmia with pulse rate 110 bpm, arterial hypertension, AP- 165/90 mm Hg. What preparation should be administered along with mercazolil?
a. Verapamil
b. Corinfar
c. Radioactive iodine
d. Procaine hydrochloride
*e. Propranolol

53. A 43 y.o. woman complains of severe pain in the right abdominal side irradiating in the right supraclavicular area, fever, dryness and bitterness in the mouth. There were multiple vomitings without relief. Patient relates the onset of pain to the taking of fat and fried food. Physical examination: the patient lies on the right side, pale, dry tongue, tachycardia. Right side of abdomen is painful during palpation and somewhat tense in right hypochondrium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Right-sided renal colic
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Acute bowel obstruction
*e. Perforative ulcer

54. A 46 y.o. patient complains of colicky pain in the right lumbar region that is irradiating to the lower part of abdomen, nausea. She didnt have such pains before. Survey radiograph of abdominal cavity organs didnt reveal any pathological stains. Ultrasonic sonogram revealed in the enlarged right renal pelvis a hyperechoic mass approximately 1,5 cm large that gives rise to an "ultrasonic track". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Renal tuberculosis
b. Malignant tumor of kidney
c. Benign tumor of kidney
d. Renal cyst
*e. Renal calculus

55. On the 5-th day of the respiratory disease a 24 y.o. man has developed progressive headaches systemic dizziness, feeling of seeing double, paresis of mimic muscles on the right, choking while swallowing. Acute viral encephalitis has been diagnosed. What is the main direction of urgent therapy?
a. Glucocorticoids
b. Lasix
c. Hemodesis
*d. Zovirax
e. Ceftriaxon

56. A 24-year-old man on the 5th day of acute respiratory disease with high grade temperature started having strong headaches, systemic dizziness, sensation of double vision, paresis of mimic muscles to the right, tickling by swallowing. Diagnosis: Acute viral encephalitis. Determine the basic direction of the emergent therapy
a. Cephtriaxon
b. Glucocorticoids
*c. Zovirax
d. Lasix
e. Hemodesis

57. A 65 y.o. woman complains of complicated mouth opening following foot trauma 10 days ago. Next day she ate with difficulties, there were muscles tension of back, the back of the head and abdomen. On the third day there was tension of all muscle groups, generalized convulsions every 10-15 min. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Epilepsy
*b. Tetanus
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Tetania
e. Hemorrhagic stroke

58. A 60 y.o. woman complains of unbearable pains in the right hypochondrium. In the medical hystory: acute pancreatitis. Body temperature is 38,20С. Objectively: sclera icteritiousness. No symptoms of peritonium irritation are present. There are positive Ortners and Hubergrits-Skulskis symptoms. Urine diastase is 320 g/h. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Chronic cholecystitis
b. Acute cholangitis
*c. Chronic pancreatitis
d. Acute cholecystitis
e. Cancer of pancreas

59. A 16-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital for the reason of intractable nasal haemorrhage and intolerable pain in the right cubital articulation. Objectively: the affected articulation is enlarged and exhibits defiguration and skin hyperaemia. There are manifestations of arthropathy in the other articulations. Ps- 90 bpm; colour index - 1,0, WBC - 5,6109/l, thrombocytes- 220109/l, ESR - 6 mm/h. Lee-White coagulation time: start - 24, finish - 2710. What drug will be the most effective for this patient treatment?
*a. Cryoprecipitate
b. Erythromass
c. Vicasol
d. Aminocapronic acid
e. Calcium chloride

60. A 42-year-old woman complains about bruises on her both legs and prolonged menstruation; general weakness, tinnitus cerebri. Objectively: multiple macular haemorrhages on the legs and body. The patient presents with tachypnoe, tachycardia, systolic murmur in all auscultatory points. AP- 75/50 mm Hg. Blood count: RBC - 1,91012/l, Нb- 60 g/l, colour index - 0,9, WBC - 6,5109/l, thrombocytes - 20109/l, ESR- 12 mm/h. Duke bleeding time - 12 minutes. Bone marrow analysis revealed plenty of juvenile immature forms of megacaryocytes without signs of thrombocyte pinch-off. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute megacaryoblastic leukemia
b. Tupe B haemophilia
c. Type A haemophilia
d. Willebrands disease
*e. True thrombocytopenic purpura

61. A 32 year old patient complains about pain in small joints of her hands, paresthesia at the tips of fingers, weakness, difficult diglutition. She has been suffering from this for 13 years. Objectively: face amimia, shortening of nail bones, skin indurations in the area of shoulder girdle are present. Roentgenological examination of lungs revealed basal pneumosclerosis. Fibrogastroscopy revealed esophagus constriction in its cardial part. Blood count: leukocytes - 9,8109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h, ?-globulin - 22%. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Systemic scleroderma
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Myxedema
d. Dermatomyositis
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

62. A 18 y.o. female student complains of dyspnea during the intensive exertion. The condition became worse half a year ago. On examination: pulse rate is 88 bpm, accelerated, AP- 180/20 mm Hg, pale skin, heart borders are dilated to the left and up. There is systolic-diastolic murmur in the 2hd intercostal space, S2 at pulmonary artery is accentuated. ECG has revealed both ventricles hypertrophy. Thoracic X-ray has revealed pulsation and protrusion of the left ventricle, lung trunk. What doctors tactics should be?
a. Continuation of investigation
b. Exemption from physical exercises
c. Dispensary observation
d. Administration of therapeutic treatment
*e. Cardiosurgeon consultation

63. A 42 y.o. patient complains of weakness, heartbeat, nasal hemorrhages, cutaneous hemorrhages. His condition has been worsening progressively for a month. Objectively: grave condition, the extremities and body skin has spotted and petechial hemorrhages, lymph nodes are not palpable, Ps- 116/min, liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not palpable. Blood has evident pancytopenia. What disease should you think about first of all?
a. Acute agranulocytosis
*b. Hypoplastic anemia
c. Werlhofs disease
d. Acute leukosis
e. Hemorrhagic vasculitis

64. A 24-year-old man on the second day of the disease with a sudden onset complains of a strong headache in temples and in the area of orbits, dull pain in the body, dry painful cough. His temperature is 39°C. Adynamic. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is "flaming", rales are not ausculated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Respiratory mycoplasmosis
b. Parainluenza
*c. Influenza
d. Pneumonia
e. Meningococcus infection

65. A 63 y.o. patient was operated on account of big multinodular euthyroid goiter. Despite of techical difficulties a forced subtotal resection of both parts of the thyroid gland was performed. On the 4-th day after the operation the woman had cramps of face muscles and upper extremities, stomach ache. Positive Chvosteks and Trousseaus signs. What is the most probable cause of such condition?
*a. Insufficiency of parathyroid glands
b. Thyrotoxic crisis
c. Tracheomalacia
d. Injury of recurrent nerve
e. Postoperative hypothyroidism

66. A 32 year old patient suffering from chronic viral hepatitis complains about dull pain in the right subcostal area, nausea, dry mouth. Objectively: liver dimensions are 13-21-11 cm (according to Kurlov), spleen is by 2 cm enlarged, aspartate aminotransferase is 3,2 micromole/lh, alanine aminotransferase - 4,8 millimole/lh. Serological study revealed HBeAg, high concentration of DNA HBV. What drug should be chosen for treatment of this patient?
a. Essentiale-forte
*b. ?-interferon
c. Remantadinum
d. Acyclovir
e. Arabinoside monophosphate

67. A 30 year old woman ill with influenza felt palpitation and dull cardiac pain during moderate physical exercise. Objectively: Ps - 96 bpm, AP - 100/60 mm Hg. The first sound is quiet above the apex, soft systolic murmur is present. What complication is indicated by these clinical presentations?
a. Neurocirculatory dystonia
*b. Acute viral myocarditis
c. Idiopathic myocarditis
d. Acute allergic infectious myocarditis
e. Myocardiopathy

68. A 43-year-old man who often contacts with ethyl gasoline was admitted to a hospital with complaints of general weakness, dizziness, memory impairment, sleepiness at daytime and insomnia at night, sense of hair in the mouth, colicky pains in the right subcostal region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic lead intoxication
*b. Chronic tetraethyl lead intoxication
c. Chronic mercury intoxication
d. Alcoholic delirium
e. Chronic manganese intoxication

69. A 48 y.o. patient has been staying in the emergency department for 2 days on account of acute anteroseptal myocardial infarction. In the course of examination he suddenly "snored". There was a tonic contraction of skeletal muscles; eye pupils dilatated. Pulse on a.carotis is absent. What is the immediate tactics?
a. Saphars triple airway maneuver
b. Intracardiac introduction of adrenalin with atropine
c. Precardiac stroke
*d. Electric defibrillation
e. ECG record

70. A 31 y.o. woman has complained for 3 years of pain and swelling of radiocarpal and metacarpophalangeal articulations, morning stiffness that lasts up to 1,5 hours. Two weeks ago she felt pain, swelling and reddening of knee joints, body temperature raised up to 37,50С. Examination of her internal organs revealed no pathologic changes. Her diagnosis was rheumatoid arthritis. What changes in X-ray pictures of her joints are the most probable?
a. Multiple marginal osteophytes
b. Epiphysis osteolysis
c. Constriction of joint space, subchondral osteosclerosis
d. Cysts in subchondral bone
*e. Constriction of joint space, usura

71. A 45-year-old man was brought to clinic with complaints of the pain that started suddenly in the left chest part and epigastric area, shortness of breath, nausea, one-time vomiting. The acute pain started after weight-lifting. On physical exam: shallow breathing, RR - 38/min, left chest part is behind during respiration, by percussion - tympanitic sound, respiration is not ausculated. Ps - 110 bpm, of weak filling. BP - 100/60 mm Hg, insignificant displacement of heart to the right, sounds are dull. What examination is the most expedient to do first?
*a. Roentgenography
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Ultrasound of the abdominal cavity
d. Esophagogastroscopy
e. Electrocardiography

72. A 35 y.o. woman is suspected of aplastic anemia. The bone marrow punction has been administered with the diagnostic purpose. What changes in the marrow punctatum are suggested?
a. Presence of blast cells
b. Absolute lymphocytosis
c. Replacement of marrow elements with fibrous tissue
d. Prevalence of megaloblasts
*e. Replacement of marrow elements with adipose tissue

73. 8 hours after a road accident an unconscious victim with closed craniocerebral trauma was admitted to the hospital. Objectively: anisocoria, wound in the parietal region - 3,0х1,0 cm, neck muscles rigidity, Ps- 58/min, tense. Convulsive syndrome. What is the most important indication for the immediate surgical procedure?
a. Anisocoria
b. Wounds
c. Intensification of convulsions
*d. Intracranial hemorrhage
e. Unconsciousness

74. A 30-year old woman taken by influenza has empty stomach glycemia at the rate of 11,3 millimole/l, glucosuria at the rate of 25 g/l. The patient is 168 cm tall and weighs 67 kg. What test would be the most informative for the diagnosis specification?
a. Glucose tolerance test
*b. Insulinemia on an empty stomach
c. Daily glucosuria variability
d. Daily glycemia variability
e. Glycemia test an hour after taking meals

75. A 52-year-old male patient has an 18 year history of diabetes mellitus. One year ago he had cystitis. The patient takes 0,005 g of maninil thrice a day. Objectively: height - 176 cm, weight - 82 kg. Glycemia variability on an empy stomach is at the rate of 10,3-12,4 millimole/l. Analyses revealed proteinuria at the rate of 0,033 g/l. The most efficient way to prevent diabetic nephropathy progress will be:
a. To administer antibacterial therapy
*b. To replace maninil with insulin
c. To decrease daily caloric content
d. To increase maninil dosage
e. To supplement the present therapy with insulin

76. A 34-year-old female patient complains about weakness, 12 kg weight loss within 6 months, sweating, palpitation, irritability. Objectively: III grade thyroid gland is elastic, diffuse enlargement is present, there is also a node in the right lobe. Cervical lymph nodes are not enlarged. What treatment tactics would be the most rational?
a. Radioactive iodine administration
b. Conservative antithyroid therapy
c. Immediate gamma-ray teletherapy
*d. Operation after antithyroid therapy
e. Immediate surgical intervention

77. A 55 y.o. male patient complains of weakness during 2 months, pain in the right side of the thorax, cough, blood-streaked sputum. On X-ray: intensive triangle shadow in the area of lower lobe that is connected to mediastinum. What is the most likely disorder in the lungs?
a. Pulmonary infarction
b. Pleuropneumonia
c. Tuberculosis of lungs
d. Bronchiectasia
*e. Central cancer of lungs

78. A 45 year old woman complains about unbearable pain attacks in the left part of face lasting 1-2 minutes. Such attacks are provoked by mastication. These symptoms appeared 2 months ago after exposure to cold. Objectively:the pain is localized in the ending points of trigeminus on the left. A touch near nose wing provokes another pain attack and tonic spasm of face muscles. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Maxillary sinusitis
*b. Neuralgia of trigeminus
c. Arthritis of mandibular joint
d. Neuralgia of glossopharyngeal nerve
e. Facial migraine

79. A 38 year old man was delivered to the hospital in unconscious state. The symptoms of illness turned up a day before: headache, nausea, vomiting, t°38,5°C, dizziness, delusion. For the last 4 days he had been complaining of pain and hearing loss in the left ear. Objectively: sopor, rigidity of occipital muscles, bilateral Kernigs symptom, general hyperesthesia, purulent discharges from the left ear. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Parenchymatous subarachnoidal haemorrhage
*b. Secondary purulent meningitis
c. Tuberculous meningitis
d. Primary purulent meningitis
e. Subarachnoidal haemorrhage

80. On the next day after being taken by influenza a 46-year-old woman presented with intensified headache, dizziness, nausea. Objectively: the patient is conscious, psychomotor excitement is present; there is general hyperesthesia, moderate meningeal syndrome, nystagmus. Tendon teflexes are higher on the right, right extremities display muscle weakness, right-sided pathological Babinskis sign is present. Liquor is transparent, pressure is 220 mm of water column; cytosis is 46/3 with prevailing lymphocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Parenchymatous subarachnoidal haemorrhage
b. Ischemic stroke
c. Bacterial meningoencephalitis
d. Subarachnoidal haemorrhage
*e. Influenzal meningoencephalitis

81. A 60 y.o. patient experiences acute air insufficiency following of the venoectomy due to subcutaneous vein thrombophlebitis 3 days ago. Skin became cianotic, with grey shade. Marked psychomotor excitement, tachypnea, substernal pain. What postoperative complication has occured?
a. Myocardial infarction
b. Valvular pneumothorax
c. Hemorrhagia
d. Hypostatic pneumonia
*e. Thromboembolia of pulmonary artery

82. A 19-year-old woman complains of pain in the abdomen and joints, asks for more analgetics and somnifacient injections. The patient was examined. Gynecological and urological pathologies are absent. There are signs of previous punctures along superficial veins of the extremities. The patient does not explain the origin of punctures. Tendon reflexes of upper and lower extremities are the same, quick. Photoreaction of the pupil of the eye is weak. The tongue is grey coated. During communication the patient in affectively not even-tempered. There is diarrhea without pathologic inclusions. What tactics is necessary to improve the condition of this patient?
a. Additional consultation of surgeon
b. Prescription of medications the patient asks for
*c. Consultation of an expert in narcology
d. Treatment with antibiotics
e. Consultation of infectious diseases doctor

83. A 34-year-old male patient was delivered to the neurological department with complaints of intense headache, double vision, light and noise intolerance. The attack came suddenly while load lifting. Objectively: torpor, moderate divergent strabismus, diplonia. Bilateral Kernigs symptoms. No paresises. Bloody liquor. What medication should be administered in the first line?
a. Heparin
b. Acetylsalicilic acid
*c. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
d. Nicotinic acid
e. Glutamic acid

84. A 25 y.o. man who has been suffering from disseminated sclerosis for 4 years complains of increasing unsteadyness, weakness of his lower extremities, urinary retention. Objectively: central tetraparesis. Cerebellar ataxia. Disturbed function of pelvic organs. What is the most appropriate therapy in this case?
a. Vitamins
*b. Glucocorticoids
c. Nootropics
d. Antibiotics
e. Desensitizing medications

85. A 70 year old man is suffering from coronary heart disease. His mood is evidently depressed, anxious. As a result of continious sleeplessness he has got fears, suicidal thoughts. He would sit for a long time in the same pose, answer after a pause, in a low, monotonous voice. His face has a look of suffering, pain, fear. What is the main psychopathologic syndrome?
*a. Depressive syndrome
b. Asthenic syndrome
c. Obsessive syndrome
d. Phobic syndrome
e. Paranoid syndrome

86. A 37 year old farmer complains about general weakness, spastic pain in the lower parts of his abdomen, mainly in the left iliac area, frequent defecations up to 18 times a day, feces contain admixtures of mucus and blood. The illness began abruptly 3 days ago with chill, fever, headache. General condition is moderately severe, body temperature is 37,8oC. Sigmoid colon is spasmed and painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
b. Amebiasis
*c. Dysentery
d. Yersiniosis
e. Salmonellosis

87. A 23 year old female patient complains about periodical chill and body temperature rise up to 40oC, sense of heat taking turns with profuse sweating. The patient has had already 3 attacks that came once in two days and lasted 12 hours. She has lived in Africa for the last 2 months. Liver and spleen are enlarged. In blood: erythrocytes - 2,51012/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Haemolytic anaemia
b. Leptospirosis
c. Spotted fever
d. Sepsis
*e. Malaria

88. A female rheumatic patient experiences diastolic thoracic wall tremor (diastolic thrill), accentuated S1 at apex, there is diastolic murmur with presystolic intensification, opening snap, S2 accent at pulmonary artery. What rind of heart disorder is observed?
a. Aortic valve insufficiency
b. Mitral valve insufficiency
c. Opened arterial duct
*d. Mitral stenosis
e. Pulmonary artery stenosis

89. A 32 y.o. patient has been suffering from systematic scleroderma for 14 years. She was repeatedly exposed to treatment in the in-patient department. Complains of periodical dull cardiac pain, dyspnea, headache, eyelid edemata, weight loss, pain and deformation of extremities joints. What organs lesion deteriorates the prognosis for the disease?
*a. Kidneys
b. Lungs
c. Skin and joints
d. Gastrointestinal tract
e. Heart

90. The doctors in maternity hospital made a newborn boy the following diagnosis: congenital heart disease (interventricular septal defect). At the age of 2 months the boy has got a dyspnea. Objectively: BR- up to 60/min, tachycardia up to 170/min, liver is 3 cm below the costal margin. What medicines must be immediately prescribed?
a. Beta-adrenoceptor blockers
b. Glucocorticoids
c. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
d. Potassium preparations
*e. Cardiac glycosides

91. A 50 y.o. woman who suffers from chronic pyelonephritis was prescribed a combination of antibiotics for the period of exacerbation - gentamicin (80 mg 3 times a day) and biseptol (960 mg twice a day). What consequences may be caused by such a combination of antibiotics?
a. Chronic renal insufficiency
b. Glomerulosclerosis
*c. Acute renal insufficiency
d. Antibiotic combination is optimal and absolutely safe
e. Acute suprarenal insufficiency

92. A patient has been suffering from morning cough accompanied by discharge of small amount of sputum, dyspnea for 8 years. He has been smoking for 10 years. Objectively: cyanosis, prolonged expiration, dry rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Multiple bronchiectasis
b. Bronchial asthma
c. Chronic non-obstructive bronchitis
d. Idiopatic fibrosing alveolitis
*e. Chronic obstructive bronchitis

93. A 60 y.o. patient complains of having passing reduction of strength in his left extremities for a month. Some time later he has got persistent weakness of extremities in the mornings. Objectively: AP- 140/90 mm Hg, conscious, central paresis of the VII and XII pair of left-side cranial nerves, central hemiparesis and hemihyperesthesia also on the left side. What medicines should be chosen for the differentiated treatment of the patient?
a. Diuretics
b. Corticosteroids
c. Hemostatics
d. Hypotensive
*e. Anticoagulants

94. A 70 y.o. male patient with mild headaches complains of speech disorder, weakness in right limbs. There was a history of miocardial infarction and arrhythmia. On nu eroligical examination there are elements of motor aphasia, central paresis of VII and XII cranial nerves pairs on the right side, cental type of hemiparesis and hemihyperesthisia on the same side. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cerebral tumor
*b. Ischemic stroke
c. Transitory ischemic attack
d. Hemorrhagic stroke
e. Epidural hematoma

95. A 52 y.o. male patient suffers from squeezing pain attacks in substernal area which irradiates to the left hand and occurs occasionally and on physical exercises. He has had it for 1 year. On examination: heart borders are enlargement to the left side, sounds are muffled, Ps- 76 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 155/80 mm Hg, ECG: the left type, the rest signs are normal. What additional examination is necessary to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Veloergometry
b. Lipoprotein test
c. Transaminases of blood
d. General blood count
e. Echocardiography

96. A 70 y.o. patient complains of weakness, dizziness, short periods of unconsciousness, pain in the cardiac area. Objectively: HR- 40 bpm, heart sounds are rhythmic, the S1 is dull, periodically amplified. AP is 180/90 mm Hg. What is the most probable cause of hemodynamic disturbances?
a. Atrioventricular block type I
b. Sinus bradycardia
c. Complete left bandle-branch block
*d. Atrioventricular block type III
e. Bradysystolic form of ciliary arrhythmia

97. A 32 y.o. patient who has been staying in a hospital on account of acute abscess of his right lung suddenly felt pain after coughing in the right half of thorax, he got heavy breathing, cyanosis. What complication is the most probable?
a. Myocardial infarction
b. Infarction-pneumonia
*c. Pyopneumothorax
d. Esophagus perforation
e. Exudative pleurisy

98. A 39 year old patient suffering from hypertension suddenly gotb intense headache in the region of occiput; there appeared recurrent vomiting. These presentations has been lasting for 5 hours. Objectively: Ps - 88 bpm, AP - 205/100 mm Hg, painfulness of occipital points, rigidity of occipital muscles are present. Kernigs symptom is bilaterally positive. Subarachnoid haemorrhage is also suspected. What diagnostic method will be of the greatest importance for confirmation of provisional diagnosis?
a. EEG
b. Computer tomography
c. Examination of eye fundus
d. Ultrasonic dopplerography
*e. Lumbar puncture

99. Fluorography of a 45 y.o. man revealed some little intensive foci with indistinct outlines on the top of his right lung for the first time. The patient doesnt feel worse. He has been smoking for many years. Objectively: pulmonary sound above lungs on percussion, respiration is vesicular, no rales. Blood count is unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Eosinophilic pneumonia
b. Peripheral cancer of lung
*c. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
d. Bronchopneumonia
e. Disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis

100. A 40-year-old man is ill with autoimmune hepatitis. Blood test: А/G ratio 0,8, bilirubin - 42?mol/L, transaminase: ALT- 2,3 mmol g/L, АSТ - 1,8 mmol g/L. What is the most effective means in treatment from the given below?
a. Antibacterial medication
b. Antiviral medications
c. Hemosorbtion, vitamin therapy
*d. Glucocorticoids, cytostatics
e. Hepatoprotectors

