1. A 47 y.o. woman complains of having paroxysmal headaches for the last 5 years. The pain is one-sided, intense, localised in frontal region of head, accompanied by nausea and stomach discomfort, begins one of a sudden. Onset is usually preceded by vision reduction. Anamnesis gives evidence of periodical AP rise, but at the moment the woman doesnt take any medicines. Inbetween the onsets of headache her state is satisfactory. Objectively: high-calorie diet (body weight index - 29), AP- 170/95 mm Hg. Neurologic state has no pecularities. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive encephalopathy
*b. Migraine
c. Epilepsy
d. Chronic subdural hematoma
e. Benign intracranial hypertension

2. A 7 y.o. boy suddenly felt pain in his right knee, it became edematic. The day before he took part in a cross-country race. Family anamnesis has no data about hemophilia and bleeding sickness. Objectively: body temperature is 37,50С. The knee is painful, hot to the touch, edematic with local tissue tension over it. Blood count: Нb- 123 g/L, leukocytes - 5,6109L, thrombocytes - 354109L, prothrombin time - 12 seconds (normally 10-15 seconds), partly activated thromboplastin time - 72 seconds (normally 35-45 seconds). Hemorrhage time is normal, VIII:C factor is 5% of norm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Vitamin K deficiency
b. Thrombocytopenia
c. Hemophilia B
d. Schoenlein-Henoch disease
*e. Hemophilia A

3. On the 3rd day after the acute anterior myocardial infarction a 55 y.o. patient complains of dull ache behind his breast bone, that can be reduced by bending forward, and of dyspnea. Objectively: AP- 140/180 mm Hg, heart sounds are dull. ECG results: atrial fibrillation with frequence of ventricular contractions at the rate of 110/min, pathological Q wave and S-T segment raising in the right chest leads. The patient refused from thrombolisis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dissecting aortic aneurysm
b. Dresslers syndrome
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Tietzes syndrome
*e. Acute pericarditis

4. A 54 y.o. man was admitted to the hospital with complaints of sudden intense headache in occipital region and vomiting. In the medical hystory: moderate arterial hypertension, the patient was taking hydrochlorothiazide. Three days ago he consulted a therapeutist about intense headache that was suppressed by an analgetic. Objectively: consciousness is confused, left pupil is mydriatic. Evident photophobia and tension of neck muscles. Left-side hemiparesis with increased muscle tonus and reflexes. Body temperature is low, rash is absent. AP- 230/130 mm Hg, Ps- 50 bpm, BR- 12/min. What is your preliminary diagnosis?
a. Migraine
b. Acute bacterial meningitis
c. Myasthenia
d. Disseminated sclerosis
*e. Acute subdural hematoma

5. A 51 y.o. women was taken to the emergency department in convulsive status epilepticus. The first means of medical management should be:
a. Inserting a tongue blade
b. Injecting 5 mg of diazepam followed by a loading dose of phenytoin
c. Inducing pentobarbital coma
*d. Ensuring that the airway is open and the patient is oxygenating
e. Administering an instravenous bolus of 50% dextrose

6. A 38 y.o. man complains of having occasional problems with swallowing of both hard and fluid food for many months. Sometimes he feels intense pain behind his breast bone, epecially after hot drinks. There are asphyxia onsets at night. He has not put off weight. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory, skin is of usual colour. Examination revealed no changes of gastrointestinal tract. X-ray picture of thorax organs presents esophagus dilatation with level of fluid in it. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Esophagus candidosis
b. Gastroesophageal reflux
c. Myastenia
d. Cancer of esophagus
*e. Esophagus achalasia

7. A 35 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about occasional pains in paraumbilical and iliac region that reduce after defecation or passage of gases. Defecation takes place up to 6 times a day, stool is not solid, with some mucus in it. Appetite is normal, she has not put off weight. First such symptoms appeared 1,5 year ago, but colonoscopy data reveals no organic changes. Objectively: abdomen is soft, a little bit painful in the left iliac region. Blood and urine are normal. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Dispancreatism
*b. Irritable bowels syndrome
c. Crohns disease
d. Celiac disease
e. Pseudomembranous colitis

8. A 21 y.o. man complains of having morning pains in his back for the last three months. The pain can be relieved during the day and after physical exercises. Physical examination revealed reduced mobility in the lumbar part of his spine, increase of muscle tonus in the lumbar area and sluch during moving. X-ray pattern of spine revealed bilateral sclerotic changes in the sacrolumbal part. What test will be the most necessary for confirming a diagnosis?
a. ESR
b. Uric acid in blood plasma
c. Antinuclear antibodies
*d. HLA-B27
e. Rheumatoid factor

9. The physician must undertake measures for primary prophylaxis of iron deficiency anemia. Which of the following categories of patient are subject to such primary prophylactic measures?
a. Patients after operation
b. Workers of industrial enterprises
c. Patients after 60
d. All children
*e. Pregnant women

10. A patient with unstable angina pectoris was given the following complex treatment: anticoagulants, nitrates, ?-adrenoblockers. However on the third day of treatment the pain still romains. Which in vestigation shoud be carried out to establish diagnosis?
a. Test with dosed physical exercises
b. Stress-echocardiogram
*c. Coronarography
d. Esophageal electrocardiac stimulator
e. Myocardial scintigraphy

11. A 44 y.o. man has acute disarthria, right-sided Horners syndrome, hiccup, right-sided ataxia, loss of pain sensation of his face to the right and of his body to the left. The man is conscious. Computer tomography of brain is normal. The most reasonable measure will be:
a. Endarterectomy of the right carotid artery
b. Out-patient observation
c. Surgical cerebral decompression
*d. Introduction of direct coagulants and observation
e. Endarterectomy of the left carotid artery

12. A 20 y.o. man has a stab knife wound in the left half of thorax close to nipple. AP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 130/min, BR- 32/min. During inspiration there is increase of pulse wave in the region of jugular vein, decrease of peripheral arterial pulse and reduction of AP. Respiratory murmurs are unchanged. X-ray pattern of thorax organs has no pecularities. After introduction of 2 l of isotonic solution the AP stayed low, CVP raised up to 32 cm of water column. The first step in further treatment of the patient will be:
a. Continued parenteral introduction of fliud in order to raise AP
b. Catheterization of left pleural cavity while the outer end of catheter is submerged in water
*c. Echocardiogram
d. Introduction of peripheral vasodilatators in order to reduce CVP
e. Introduction of loop diuretics in order to reduce CVP

13. A patient is 65 y.o. He has been a smoker for 40 years. He has lost 10 kg during the last 3 months. Complains of pain in the epigastric area after taking meals, diarrhea, jaundice. Physical examination revealed enlarged, painless gallbladder. Feces are light-coloured and clay-like. Blood analysis revealed increased level of whole and direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphotase and glutaminepyruvate transferase. Clinical urine analysis showed positive bilirubin reaction and negative urobilinogene reaction. Where is the initial process that caused these changes?
a. In liver
b. In common bile duct
*c. In pancreas
d. In duodenum
e. In gallbladder

14. A 75 y.o. man has acute pain in the paraumbilical region accompanied by vomiting and feeling of abdominal swelling in approximately 30 minutes after meals. He lost 10 kg during the last months because he doesnt eat in order to avoid pain. Abdomen examination reveals no changes in the periods between pain attacks. Above the right femoral artery a murmur can be auscultated, peripheral pulsation in the lower extrimities is weak. X-ray examination of stomach and colonoscopy revealed no changes. What is the leading factor of this pathogenesis?
a. Psychogenic changes
b. Inflammation
c. Transient obstruction
*d. Ischemia
e. Neoplastic process

15. A 75 y.o. woman with coronary heart disease constantly takes warfarin. She was taken to the acute care department with complaints of sudden sensation of weakness in the left half of her body and eyeball deviation to the left. What examination of the patient will be a primary task?
a. Magnetic resonance tomography of brain
b. Ultrasonic examination of carotid arteries
c. Spinal punction
*d. Computer tomography of brain
e. Electroencephalogram

16. A 65 y.o. patient has acute pain, paresthesia, paleness of his left extremity. Pulse in the a. dorsalis pedis is absent. There is skin coldness and paleness that gradually spreads upwards. These symptoms are most likely to be the evidence of:
a. Thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
b. Thrombophelebitis of deep veins
c. -
*d. Arterial occlusion
e. Hernia of lumbar disc

17. A 58 y.o. patient developed acute myocardium infarction 4 hours ago, now he is in the acute care department. ECG registers short paroxysms of ventricular tachycardia. The most appropriate measure will be to introduct:
a. Flecainid
b. Propafenone
c. Veropamil
*d. Lidocain
e. Amyodaron

18. A 23 y.o. woman who suffers from insulin-dependent diabetes was admitted to the acute care department with mental confusion, inadequate anxious behaviour, hyperhidrosis, excessive salivation, tachycardia. What examination will be a primary task?
a. Gaseous composition of arterial blood
b. Blood urea and creatinine test
c. Clinical blood analysis
d. Plasma electrolytes test
*e. Blood test for sugar

19. A patient who takes diuretics has developed arrhythmia as a result of cardiac glycoside overdose. What is the treatment tactics in this case?
a. Reduced magnesium concentration in blood
b. Increased sodium consentration in blood
*c. Increased potassium concentration in blood
d. Increased calcium concentration in blood
e. -

20. The 28 y.o. woman applied to doctor because of limited loss of the hair. In the anamnesis - she had frequent headache indisposition, arthromyalgia, fever, irregular casual sexual life, drug user. RW is negative. What examination must be done first?
*a. Examination for HIV
b. Examination for gonorrhea
c. Examination for trichomoniasis
d. Examination for fungi
e. Examination for neuropathology

21. Choose a method of graphic representation of monthly information about the number of registered cases of acute intestinal infection and their comparison to the average monthly values, obtained for 5 last years:
a. The figured diagram
b. Curvilinear diagram
c. The radial diagram
d. The sector diagram
*e. The linear diagram

22. Adenosine triphosphate may be expected to convert which of the following arrhythmias to sinus rhythm?
a. Atrial fibrillation
b. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
*c. Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
d. Atrial flutter
e. Ventricular fibrillation

23. A 48 year old man complains of fatique and shortness of breath. His Ht is 32%, and Hb - 103 g/l. Peripheral blood smear reveals macrocytosis. Serum vitamin B12 level is 90 pg/ml (normal is 170 to 940); serum folate level is 6 ng/ml (normal is 2 to 14). Possible causes to consider include all of the following EXCEPT:
a. Pancreatitis
b. Fish tapeworm infection
c. Vegetarianism
d. Regional enteritis
*e. Colonic diverticulitis

24. A 56 year old man complains of fatigue, dyspnea on exertion and palpitations. He has had a murmur since childhood. Examination reveals a lift at the left sternal border, split S1, and fixed splitting of S2. There is a grade 3/6 midsystolic pulmonic murmur and a ⅙ middiastolic tricuspid murmur at the lower left sternal border. Chest x-ray shows right ventricular enlargement and prominent pulmonary arteries. ECG demonstrates atrial fibrillation with a right bundle branch block. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Patent ductus arteriosus
b. Coarctation of the aorta
*c. Arterial septal defect
d. Tetralogy of Fallot
e. Ventricular septal defect

25. Generalized low voltage on an ECG (QRS deflection < 5 mm in limb leads and < 10 mm in precordial leads) may be a marker for all of the following disorders EXCEPT:
a. Coronary artery disease
*b. Hyperthyroidism
c. Cardiac transplant rejection
d. Pericardial effusion
e. Amyloidosis

26. Five days after a total hip joint replacement a 72 year old woman becomes acutely short of breath, diaphoretic and hypotensive. Both lung fields are clear to auscultation and percussion, but examination of the neck reveals mild jugular venous distension with prominent A waves. Heart sounds are normal. ECG shows sinus tachycardia with a new right bundle branch block and minor nonspecific ST-T wave changes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Aspiration
*b. Pulmonary thromboembolism
c. Aortic dissection
d. Acute myocardial infarction
e. Pericarditis

27. Which of the following IS NOT TYPICAL for Addisons disease?
a. Elevated hematocrit
*b. High serum Na+
c. Elevated BUN
d. High serum K+
e. Dilute urine

28. An employee has been invalid for 6 months as a result of a hip fracture. Who has the right to authorize the issue of the medical sick-list for the last 2 months?
a. DCC together with the head physician of a polyclinic
b. Deputy head physician on working capacity
c. Head physician of the polyclinic
d. DCC
*e. MSEC

29. An employee had an abortion by medical indications on the 6.03.2001 and she stayed in a hospital till 17.03.2001. What term is the medical sick-list issued for?
a. For 4 days
b. For 3 days
*c. For 12 days
d. For 10 days
e. For 11 days

30. A 25 year old man has a sudden onset of chest pain on the right and dyspnea. His trachea is deviated to the left. All of the following would be anticipated EXCEPT:
a. Distant breath sounds on the right
*b. Pleural friction rub on the left
c. Absence of rales
d. Absence of rhonchi
e. Hyperresonance over the right chest

31. A 33 y.o. patient, works as a secretary. Her diet contains 150 g of protein (including 100 g of animal protein), 200 g of fat, 600 g of carbohydrates. What pathology can result from this diet?
a. Uterine fibromyoma
*b. Obesity
c. Paradontosis
d. Schizophrenia
e. Common cold

32. A 15 year old adolescent was taken to the hospital with complaints of poor night vision. Objectively: increased darkness adaptation time, Bitots spots on conjuctiva. The patients skin is dry, scales off, folliculitis signs of the face skin are present. What is the cause of this disease?
a. Biotin deficit
b. Thiamine deficit
*c. Retinole deficit
d. Folic acid deficit
e. Napthtochynones deficit

33. What guarantees against the preconceived attitude to the physician in cases of professional law violations do you know?
a. Conduct an inquiry by preliminary investigator of police department
b. Draw up a statement about forensic medical examination
*c. Sanction of public prosecutor, inquiry by preliminary investigator of prosecutors office, committee of experts
d. Utilisation copy of medical documents
e. Conduct forensic medical examination by district forensic medicine expert

34. A 23 y.o. patient has a gunshot wound of his left arm.The bones of the arm are not damaged. What appropriate surgical care must be provided to the patient?
a. Wound saturing and drying
b. Wound saturing
*c. Primary surgical processing with a flowing suction
d. Wound drying with towel gauzes
e. Aseptic dressing of the wound

35. A 34 y.o. patient 3 hours ago was bitten by a dog. He has got a non-bleeding wound in his left arm caused by the dogs bite. What surgical care would you provide to the patient?
a. Complete suturing of the wound
b. Incomplete suturing of the wound
c. Aseptic bandage
d. Cream bandage
*e. Wound bathing with detergent water and antiseptic application

36. A 37 y.o. patient complains of pain in the right arm which increases during motion, raised body temperature up to 39°C. In the right cubital fossa there is a trace of injection, hyperemia and thickening along the vein. Your diagnosis?
*a. Phlebit
b. Abscess
c. Erysipelas
d. Inflammation of lymph
e. Phlegmon

37. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine and vomiting. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease is suspected?
*a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Acute enterocolitis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Perforative gastric ulcer
e. Renal colic

38. A 35 y.o. woman was admitted to thoracic surgery department with fever up to 40°C, onset of pain in the side caused by deep breathing, cough with considerable quantity of purulent sputum and blood with bad smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary tuberculosis
*b. Abscess of the lung
c. Bronchiectatic disease
d. Complication of liver echinococcosis
e. Actinomycosis of lungs

39. A 40 weeks pregnant woman in intrinsic obstetric investigation: the cervix of a uterus is undeveloped. The oxytocin test is negative. Upon inspection at 32 weeks it is revealed: AP- 140/90 mm Hg, proteinuria 1 g/l, peripheric edemata. Reflexes are normal. Choose the most correct tactics of guiding the pregnant:
*a. Laborstimulation after preparation
b. Complex therapy of gestosis for 2 days
c. Complex therapy of gestosis for 7 days
d. Cesarean section immediately
e. Strict bed regimen for 1 month

40. A laboratory obtained a milk sample sent for analysis. Analysis gave the following data: color - whitish, smell - has no pecularities, taste - typical for milk, density - 1,038, acidity - Turners 350, fat - 3,2%. What is the quality level of this milk?
*a. The milk is of poor quality
b. The milk is of reduced quality
c. The milk is nominally qualified
d. The milk is falsificated
e. The milk is of high quality

41. A 40 y.o. patient was diagnosed: 1. Medular thyroid gland cancer. 2. Feochromocytoma. What operation should be performed at first?
a. Krails operation
b. Operation on thyroid gland
*c. Operation on account of feochromocytoma
d. Subtotal resection of thyroid gland and fascicular resection of limphatic nodes
e. Vanachs operation

42. A 28 y.o. woman consulted a doctor with the complaints of enlargening in size of an inborn pigment nevus, it was also wetting and itching. What test should not be used for diagnostics in this case?
*a. Incision biopsy
b. Radioisotope diagnostics
c. Glass-print
d. Termography
e. Yakss reaction

43. A 67 y.o. patient complains of palpitation, dizziness, noise in ears, feeling of shortage of air. Objectively: pale, damp skin. Vesicular respiration, respiratory rate- 22 per min, pulse- 200 bpm, AP- 100/70 mm Hg. On ECG: heart rate- 200 bmp, ventricular complexes are widened, deformed, location of segments ST and of wave T is discordant. The wave Р is not changed, superimposes QRST, natural conformity between Р and QRS is not present. What kind of arrhythmia is present?
a. Atrial tachycardia
*b. Paroxismal ventricular tachycardia
c. Atrial flutter
d. Sinus tachycardia
e. Ventricular extrasystole

44. Ambulance was called to a 48 y.o. man. According to the relatives he has had three episodes of lost consciousness and attacks during the day. Patient is unconscious, fell on the floor, tonic and then clonic convulsions of trunk and extremities happened. The attack lasted for 4 minutes, ended by involuntary urination. What type of attack was observed?
a. Episode of hysteria
b. Fainting
c. Vegetatic crisis
d. Absence
*e. Major epileptic seizure

45. Male 30 y.o., noted growing fingers and facial scull, changed face. Complains of poor eyesight, weakness, skin darkening, loss of body weight. X-ray shows broadening of sella turcica, thinning of tuberculin sphenoidale, signs of increased intracranial pressure. What diagnosis can you make?
a. Adrenal gland tumor
b. Tumor of pondo-cerebellar corner
c. Encephalitis of truncus
d. Optico - hiasmatic arachnoiditis
*e. Adenoma of hypophysis

46. A patient complains of a tormental (agonizing) cough with expectoration of up to 600 ml/daily purulent chocolatecolor sputum with a decay smell. Onset of illness was abrupt, t°- 39°C, fever of irregular type. There is the area of darkening with a cavity in a center on X-ray film, with irregular contours and level of liquid. What disease is the question?
*a. Gangrene of lung
b. Bronchiectatic illness
c. Lobar pneumonia
d. Pneumonia complicated by an abscess
e. Tuberculosis

47. A 14 year old patient complains of chest pain, temperature up to 38,5°C, breathlessness. He had acute tonsillitis 2 weeks ago. He is in grave condition. The skin is pale. Heart borders are dilated, heart sounds are quiet. Above total heart area you can hear pericardium friction sound. Electrocardiogram: the descent of QRS voltage, the inversion T. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm. ESR - 4 mm/h, ASL - 0 - 1260, C-reactive protein +++. Your diagnosis:
a. Rheumatic myocarditis
b. Rheumatic pericarditis
*c. Rheumatic pancarditis
d. Rheumatic endocarditis
e. Septic endocarditis

48. A 24 y.o. patient complains of nausea, vomiting, headache, shortness of breath. He had an acute nephritis being 10 y.o. Proteinuria was found out in urine. Objectively: a skin is grey-pale, the edema is not present. Accent of II tone above aorta. BP 140/100-180/100 mm Hg. Blood level of residual N2- 6,6 mmol/L, creatinine- 406 mmol/L. Days diuresis- 2300 ml, nocturia. Specific density of urine is 1009, albumin- 0,9 g/L, WBC- 0-2 in f/vis. RBC.- single in f/vis., hyaline casts single in specimen. Your diagnosis?
a. Stenosis of kidney artery
*b. Chronic nephritis with violation of kidney function
c. Hypertensive illness of the II degree
d. Feochromocitoma
e. Nephrotic syndrome

49. A 33 y.o. male patient was admitted to a hospital. A patient is pale, at an attempt to stand up he complains of strong dizziness. There was vomiting like coffee-grounds approximately hour ago. BP- 90/60 mm Hg., pulse- 120 b/min. In anamnesis, a patient has suffered from ulcer of the stomach, painless form during 4 years. An ulcer was exposed at gastrofiberoscopy. Your diagnosis:
a. Acute pleurisy
b. Acute myocardial infarction, abdominal form
c. Ulcer of duodenum, complicated with bleeding
d. Erosive gastritis
*e. Ulcer of stomach, complicated with bleeding

50. A 40 y.o. patient with rheumatic heart disease complains of anorexia, weakness and loss of weight, breathlessness and swelling of feet. The patient had tooth extraction one month ago. On examination: t°- 39°C, Ps- 100/min. Auscultation: diastolic murmur in the mitral area. Petechial lesion around the clavicle; spleen was palpable
a. Thrombocytopenia purpura
b. Recurrence of rheumatic fever
*c. Subacute bacteria endocarditis
d. Mitral stenosis
e. Aortic stenosis

51. A 52 year old patient with history of functional Class II angina complains of having intense and prolonged retrosternal pains, decreased exercise tolerance for 5 days. Angina is less responsive to nitroglycerine. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. IHD. Unstable angina
b. IHD. Functional Class II angina
c. Myocardial dystrophy
d. Myocarditis
e. Cardialgia due to spine problem

52. A 52 year old patient has hypervolaemic type of essential hypertension. Which of the following medications is to be prescribed either as monotherapy or in complex with other antihypertensive drugs?
a. Nifedipin
*b. Hypothiazid
c. Clonidine
d. Dibazol
e. Kapoten

53. A 62 year old patient complains of rest dyspnea, heart pains. 3 years ago he had myocardial infarction. Physical examination: orthopnea, acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins. Ps - 92, total heart enlargement, the liver is enlarged by 7 cm, shin edema. What is the stage of chronic heart failure (CHF)?
a. CHF- 0
b. CHF- 3
c. CHF- 1
d. CHF- 2 А
*e. CHF- 2 B

54. A patient, aged 49, complains of fever of 37,5oC, heart pain, dyspnea. S1 is clapping; S2 is accentuated in the aortic area; opening snap, presystolic murmur can be auscultated. What is the most efficient examination for valvular disorder assessment?
a. ECG
*b. Echocardiography+Doppler-Echocardiography
c. Ballistocardiogram
d. Phonocardiography
e. Chest X-ray

55. A patient with nosocomial pneumonia presents signs of collapse. Which of the following pneumonia complications is most likely to be accompanied by collapse?
a. Emphysema
*b. Septic shock
c. Bronchial obstruction
d. Exudative pleuritis
e. Toxic hepatitis

56. A 38 y.o. patient has been treated in a hospital. A fever of 39°C, chest pain which is worsened by breathing, cough, brownish sputum appeared on the 7-th day of the treatment. Chest X- ray shows left lower lobe infiltrate. Which of the following is the treatment of choice for this patient?
a. Streptomycin
*b. Cephalosporins of the III generation
c. Erythromycin
d. Penicillin
e. Tetracycline

57. A 48-year-old patient complains of heaviness in the right hypochondrium, itching of the skin.He had been treated in infectious diseases hospital repeatedly due to icterus and itch. On physical exam: meteorism, ascitis, dilation of abdominal wall veins, protruded umbilicus, spleen enlargement. What can be diagnosed in this case?
a. Cancer of the liver
b. Gallstones
c. Viral hepatitis B
*d. Liver cirrhosis
e. Cancer of the head of pancreas

58. A 27 year old man complains of pains in epigastrium which are relieved by food intake. EGDFS shows antral erosive gastritis, biopsy of antral mucous presents Hеlicobacter Pylori. Diagnosis is:
*a. Gastritis of type B
b. Reflux-gastritis
c. Rigid antral gastritis
d. Menetriers gastritis
e. Gastritis of type A

59. A 25-year-old man has facial edema, moderate back pains. His temperature is 37,5OС, BP 180/100 mm Hg,	hematuria (up to 100 in v/f), proteinuria (2,0 g/L), hyaline casts - 10 in v/f., specific gravity -1020. The onset of the disease is probably connected with acute tonsillitis that started 2 weeks ago. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cancer of the kidney
b. Acute pyelonephritis
*c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Urolithiasis
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

60. A 62 year old patient suffers from DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. The patient has to undergo an operation on inguinal hernia. What tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be chosen?
a. Prescribe long-acting insulin
b. Prescribe guanyl guanidines
c. Give Glurenorm instead of Maninilum
d. Continue with the current therapy
*e. Prescribe fast-acting insulin

61. A 33 y.o. woman has been suffering from DM (diabetes mellitus) for 5 years. For the last 3 years she has been taking more than 100 units of insulin per day. Body weight has increased up to 10 kg. Fasting blood glucose is 13 mmol/L, glucoseuria - 3%. Generalized microangiopathy. By increasing the dose of insulin the parameters of glycemia do not change. The diagnosis is:
*a. DM 1st type, severe form, decompensation, insulin resistant
b. DM st type, severe form, subcompensation, Somoji phenomenon
c. DM 1st type, severe form, decompensation, allergic reaction to insulin
d. DM 2nd type, moderate form, Zabrodi phenomenon
e. DM 2nd type, severe form, decompensation

62. A patient of 32 y.o. complains of severe weakness, tremor of extremities. Objective examination: body weight loss, wet and warm skin. The thyroid gland is enlarged up to the 3-rd degree, painless, elastic. Ps- 108/min. BP- 160/55 mm Hg. There are no other abnormalties. The diagnosis is:
a. Chronic fibrous thyroiditis
b. Toxiferous adenoma of the thyroid gland
c. Diffuse euthyroid goiter of the 3-rd degree
d. Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, hypertrophic type
*e. Diffuse toxic goiter of the 3-rd degree, thyrotoxicosis of the average degree

63. In the development of the inflammation processes glucocorticoids reduce the level of certain most important active enzyme. It results also in the reducing of the synthesis of prostaglandins and leucotrienes which have a key role in the development of inflammation processes. What is the exact name of this enzyme?
a. Cyclooxygenase – 1
b. Cyclooxygenase – 2
c. Arachidonic acid
d. Lipoxygenasе
*e. Phospholipase A2

64. A 30 y.o. female with rheumatoid arthritis of five years duration complains of pain in the frist three fingers of her right hand over past 6 weeks. The pain seems especially severe at night often awakening her from sleep.The most likelly cause is?
*a. Carpal tunnel syndrome
b. Sensory peripheral neuropathy
c. Rheumatoid arthritis without complication
d. Rheumatoid vasculitis
e. Atlanto-axial sublaxation of cervical spine

65. Prophylactic photoroentgenography examination of a 25 year old man revealed focal shadowings of small and medium intensity with irregular contours in the 1st and 2nd segments of the right lung. Which clinical form can be suspected?
a. Fibro-cavernous
b. Tuberculoma
c. Disseminated
d. Miliary
*e. Focal

66. A 32 y.o. man is divorced, has an irregular sexual life. He complains of falling out of hair in the region of eyelashes, eyebrows, scalp. Objectively: diffuse alopecia is observed, eyebrow margin is absent, eyelashes are stair-like (Pinkus sign). What examination should be carried out first of all?
a. Consultation of neuropathist
b. CBC
c. T.pallidum Immobilization Test (TPI)
d. Detection of the nasal mucous membrane for Micobacterium Leprae Hansen
*e. Wasserman test, IFT

67. A triad of symptoms ("stearing spot", "terminal film", "blood dew") has been revealed on examination of a patient. What disease should you think about?
*a. Psoriasis
b. Vasculitis
c. Ritters disease
d. Seborrhea
e. Lichen ruber planus

68. A woman 26 years old has abused alcohol for 7 years. She has psychological dependence on alcohol, but no withdrawal syndrome. Drinks almost every day approximately 50-100 g of wine. She is in her 4-th week of pregnancy. Primary prevention of fetal alcohol syndrome requires:
a. Participation in the A-ANON group
b. Gyneacological observation
c. Medical abortion
d. Decrease of alcohol use
*e. Treatment of alcoholism and full abstinance from alcohol during all the period of pregnancy

69. Patient 27 y.o. was hospitalized to the psychiatric hospital for the 4-th time during 2 years. Heard voices commenting on his actions, had delusions of persecution (was sure that the Mafia wanted to kill him). After a course of treatment with neuroleptics was discharged from hospital with the diagnosis of schizophrenia, state of remission. The secondary prevention of the relapses of schizophrenia requires:
a. Participation in a self-help group
b. Psychoanalytic treatment
c. Long-term hospitalization
d. Psychiatric observation
*e. Supportive treatment with neuroleptics of prolonged action

70. A 19-year-old man has suffered from moderate mental retardation since childhood. The patient is illiterate, can take care of himself, do simple household work and other kinds of easy work under supervision. What does his rehabilitation (tertiary prevention) require?
a. None of the above mentioned
*b. All the above mentioned
c. Physical work under supervision
d. Supervision of a social worker
e. Supervision of relatives (if any)

71. Patient, male, 16 years old was behind other children in development since early childhood and still has moderate mental retardation. He is short, has dismorphic body, his face is round, flattened, his eyes are narrow and slanted, and there are epicantial folds in the corners of his eyes. There is only one transversal flexor line on his palms. What is the probable etiology of this state?
a. Infection in mother during pregnancy
*b. Chromosome abnormality
c. Maternal alcohol abuse during pregnancy
d. Gene abnormality
e. Pathological delivery

72. A 38 y.o. patient was urgently admitted to the hospital with complaints of sudden weakness, dizziness, loss of consciousness, body weight loss, nausea, vomiting, severe pain in epigastric area, diarrhea, skin hyperpigmentation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pellagra
*b. Addisonic crisis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Acute gastroenteritis
e. Scleroderma

73. A female 28 years old patient became depressed, her mood is melancholic; this state is accompanied by hypobulia, hypokinesia, slow speed of thinking. Her attitude towards her past, present and future is pessimistic. The pathogenetic mechanism of this state is supposed to involve dysfunction in the:
a. Pituitary
b. Frontal lobes
*c. Hypothalamus
d. Hippocampus
e. Corpus callosum

74. The observed patients movements are retarded, she answers no questions. Sometimes she spontaneously stiffens in strange postures. It is possible to set her body and limbs into different positions artificially. If the psychiatrist lifts her arm or leg, so that she remains standing on the other leg, the patient can stay in such a position for quite a long time. Name the probable disorder:
a. Apathetic stupor, schizophrenia
b. Depressive stupor, bipolar disorder
*c. Catatonic stupor, schizophrenia
d. Psychogenic stupor, stress disorder
e. Dissociative stupor, dissociative psychosis

75. An unconscious patient presents with moist skin, shallow breathing. There are signs of previous injection on the shoulders and hips. BP- 110/70 mm Hg. Tonus of skeletal muscles and reflexes are increased. Cramps of muscles of the extremities are seen. What is the most likely disorder?
*a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Hyperosmolar coma
c. Stroke
d. Hyperlactacidotic coma
e. Hyperglycemic coma

76. A patient who works as a nightman was diagnosed with of chronic arsenious intoxication. What form of anemia is characteristic for this disease?
a. Hyper sideric anemia
b. Normochromic anemia
c. Aplastic anemia
d. Iron deficiency anemia
*e. Haemolytic anemia

77. The man, aged 42, applied to the therapeutist with complaints of pricking pains in scapulas area, dyspnea on physical exertion, cough with discharge of small amount of sputum. During 10 years he works in coal mining. On percussion-box-note sound in the lower parts, on auscultation- a harsh breathing. There were no changes in the heart. Possible diagnosis?
*a. Silicosis
b. Silicatosis
c. Chronic bronchitis
d. Bronchiectatic disease
e. Tuberculosis of lungs

78. A patient, aged 52, works as a street cleaner. He has been suffering from pneumoconiosis for 2 years. What treatment should be recommended?
a. Antibiotics
*b. Alkaline inhalations
c. Oil inhalations
d. Broncholitics
e. Sulfonilamides

79. A 42 y.o. woman works at the factory on the fabrication of mercury thermometers, complains of the headache, swoons, reduction of memory, small and frequent flutter of fingers of drawn hands, the eyelids and the tongue, bleeding gums, gingivitis. What preparation is it nessesary to use for the elimination of mercury from the organism?
a. Pentoxil
b. Sodium hydrate of carbon
c. Seduxen
*d. Unithiol
e. Magnesium sulphate

80. A man, aged 37, working on the collective farm on sowing, was admitted to the infectious hospital with the clinical symptoms: miosis, labored breathing, sweating.What kind of poisoning is it and what is the first aid?
*a. Poisoning by POC. Treatment: atropine
b. Poisoning by the methylic alcohol. Treatment: ethylic alcohol
c. -
d. Poisoning by vapours of mercury. Treatment: unithiol
e. Poisoning by lead. Treatment: tetacine Calcii

81. A 36 y.o. woman is in the 12-th week of her first pregnancy. She was treated for infertility in the past. She contacted a child who fell ill with rubella 2 days after their meeting. Woman doesnt know if she has ever been infected with rubella. What is the adequate tactics?
*a. Monitoring of the specific IgG IgM with the ELISA
b. Immunoglobulin injection
c. Interferon prescription
d. Cyclovin prescription
e. Fetus wastage

82. A 50 year old patient has been admitted to the clinics with atrophic gastritis. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,81012/l, Hb - 68 g/l, c.i. - 1, macroanisocytosis, poikilocytosis. There is megaloblastic type of haemopoesis. A number of leukocytes, reticulocytes and thrombocytes is lreduced. Which pathology is suspected?
*a. B12-deficiency anemia
b. Hemolytic anemia
c. Thalassaemia
d. Post-hemorrhagic anemia
e. Irondeficiency anemia

83. A 32 y.o. woman has got the Laiels syndrome after taking the biceptol. What immunotrope medicines are to be prescribed in this situation?
*a. Steroid immunosupressants
b. Specific immune modulators
c. Non-steroid immunosupressants
d. Interferons
e. Non-specific immune modulators

84. The 25 year old patient was admitted on the 1st day of the disease with complaints of double vision in the eyes, difficult respiration. The day before the patient ate home-made mushrooms. On objective examination: paleness, widened pupils, disorder of swallowing, bradycardia, constipation are marked. What is the diagnosis?
a. Lambliasis
*b. Botulism
c. Leptospirosis
d. Yersiniosis
e. Salmonellosis, gastrointestinal form

85. A 28 y.o. man fell seriously ill, he feels chill, has got a fever, body temperature raised up to 38,50С, paroxysmal pain in the left iliac region, frequent defecation in form of fluid bloody and mucous mass. Abdomen palpation reveals painfulness in its left half, sigmoid colon is spasmed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Malignant tumors of large intestine
*b. Acute dysentery
c. Colibacillosis
d. Amebiasis
e. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis

86. A 28 year old patient was admitted to the clinic with complaints of the temperature rise up to 39,0oC, headache, weakness, constipation on the 9th day of the disease. On examination: single roseolas on the skin of the abdomen are present. The pulse rate is 78 bpm. The liver is enlarged by 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Leptospirosis
b. Sepsis
c. Malaria
*d. Typhoid fever
e. Brucellosis

87. A patient has been in a hospital. The beginning of the disease was gradual: nausea, vomiting, dark urine, аcholic stools, yellowness of the skin and scleras. The liver is protruded by 3 cm. Jaundice progressed on the 14th day of the disease. The liver diminished in size. What complication of viral hepatitis caused deterioration of the patients condition?
*a. Hepatic encephlopathy
b. Relapse of viral hepatitis
c. Infectious-toxic shock
d. Cholangitis
e. Meningitis

88. A patient was admitted to the hospital on the 7th day of the disease with complaints of high temperature, headache, pain in the muscles, especially in calf muscles. Dermal integuments and scleras are icteric. There is hemorrhagic rash on the skin. Urine is bloody. The patient was fishing two weeks ago. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Brucellosis
b. Trichinellosis
c. Yersiniosis
d. Salmonellosis
*e. Leptospirosis

89. An 18 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with complaints of headache, weakness, high temperature, sore throat. Objectively: enlargement of all groups of lymph nodes was revealed. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm, spleen - by 1 cm. In blood: leukocytosis, atypical lymphocytes - 15%. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Angina
b. Adenoviral infection
c. Acute lymphoid leukosis
d. Diphtheria
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

90. A 28-year-old patient was hospitalized with preliminary diagnosis "influenza". Roseolous-petechial rash appeared on the 5th day of disease on the trunk. The temperature is 41oC. Hyperemia of face, reddening of scleras, tremor of tongue, tachycardia, splenomegaly are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leptospirosis
b. Typhoid fever
c. Measles
d. Alcohol delirium
*e. Epidemic typhus

91. A 43 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of high temperature of the body and severe headache. On examination: carbuncle is revealed on the forearm. There are intense edema around it, insignificant pain, regional lymphadenitis. The patient is a worker of cattle-ranch. What disease is it necessary to think about first?
a. Erysipeloid
b. Eczema
c. Carcinoma of skin
d. Erysipelas
*e. Anthrax

92. The disease of a 21 y.o. patient began with raise of temperature up to 39,00С, headache, chill, repeated vomiting. Rigidity of occipital muscles is determined. The analysis of liquor revealed: cytosis - 1237 in 1 ml, including: 84% of neutrophils, 16% of lymphocytes. On bacterioscopy: gram-negative cocci are found in liquor. What is the most probable disease?
a. Meningococcal infection: serous meningitis
b. Serous meningitis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
*d. Meningococcal infection: purulent meningitis
e. Secondary purulent meningitis

93. The diagnostics of the AIDS epidemic initially was made in the USA by means of:
a. The bacteriological method
b. The viroscopic method
c. The serological method
*d. The epidemiological method
e. The virological method

94. A 20-year-old woman has a 3-4 month history of bloody diarrhoea; stool examination proved negative for ova and parasites; stool cultures negative for clostridium, campylobacter and yersinia; normal small bowel series; edema, hyperemia and ulceration of the rectum and sigmoid colon seen on sigmoidoscopic examination. Select the most likely diagnosis:
a. Granulomatous colitis
*b. Ulcerative colitis
c. Carcinoid syndrome
d. Gastroenteritis
e. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome

95. A 75 year old man who has been suffering from diabetes for the last six months was found to be jaundiced. He was asymptomatic except for weight loss at the rate of 10 pounds in 6 months. Physical examination revealed a hard, globular, right upper quadrant mass that moves during respiration. A CT scan shows enlargement of the head of the pancreas, with no filling defects in the liver. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Malignant biliary stricture
b. Metastatic disease of liver
c. Infectious hepatitis
d. Haemolytic jaundice
*e. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas

96. A 16 y.o. female presents with abdominal pain and purpuric spots on the skin. Laboratory investigations reveals a normal platelet count, with haematuria and proteinuria.The most likely diagnosis:
*a. Schonlein-Henoch purpura
b. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Sub acute bacterial endocarditis
d. Heavy metal poisoning
e. Haemolytic uraemic syndrome

97. A 60 y.o. asthmatic man comes for a check up and complains that he is having some difficulty in "starting to urinate". Physical examination indicates that the man has blood pressure of 160/100 mm Hg, and a slight enlarged prostate. Which of the following medications would be useful in treating both of these conditions:
a. Phetolamine
b. Labetalol
*c. Doxazosin
d. Propranolol
e. Isoproterenol

98. A 36-year-old alcoholic patient has cirrhosis and pancreatic insufficiency due to recurrent pancreatitis. He complains of night blindness, decreased ability to taste food, and dry skin with hyperpigmentation. These complaints suggest deficiency of:
a. Chromium
b. Manganese
c. Copper
d. Selenium
*e. Zinc

99. A 60 year old man with unstable angina pectoris fails to respond to heparin, nitroglycerin, beta adrenegic blockers and calcium channel antagonist. The best management includes:
*a. Coronary artery bypass grafting
b. Excercise testing
c. Antihypertensive therapy
d. Oral aspirin
e. Intravenous streptokinase

100. A 60-year-old woman, mother of 6 children, developed a sudden onset of upper abdominal pain radiating to the back, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, fever and chills. Subsequently, she noticed yellow discoloration of her sclera and skin. On physical examination the patient was found to be febrile with temp. of 38,9oC, along with right upper quadrant tenderness. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
b. Choledochal cyst
c. Benign biliary stricture
d. Malignant biliary stricture
*e. Choledocholithiasis

