1. A 30 y.o. man presents with a history of recurrent pneumonias and a chronic cough production of foul smelling, pirulent sputum, ocassionally glood tinged, which is worse in the morning and on lying down. On physical examination, the patient appears chronically ill with clubbing of fingers, inspiratory rales at the base of lungs posteriorly. Most likely diagnosis:
*a. Bronchoectasis
b. Disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Chronic obstructive emphysema
d. Pulmonary neoplasm
e. Chronic bronchitis

2. The family doctor examined a patient and diagnosed an acute bleeding of an intestine. What is the doctors professional tactics in this situation?
a. The urgent hospitalization in to tthe herapeutic department
b. Aminocapronic acid intravenously
*c. The urgent hospitalization in to the surgical department
d. Treatment at a day time hospital
e. Treatment at home

3. A 40 y.o. woman is ill with rheumatic disease with composite mitral disease with prevalence of the stenosis of left venous foramen.Complains of palpitation, fatigability, progressing dyspnea, attacks of dyspnea and hemoptysis. Now she cannot be engaged even in the easy activities. What tactics is the most expedient?
a. Prescription of venous vasodilatators
b. -
c. Conduction of current bicilino-prophilaxis
d. Prescription of anticoagulants
*e. Mitral comissurotomia

4. A 42-year-old woman suffers from bronchial asthma, has an acute attack of bronchial asthma. What medication from the listed below is contraindicated to render a first aid?
a. Strophanthin hydrochloride
*b. Euphylinum
c. Corazolum
d. Izardin
e. Morphinum hydrochloride

5. A 50 y.o. male patient was taken to the emergency department with diffuse abdominal pain and signs of cardiovascular collapse. On arrival he had BP- 95/60 mm Hg, Ps- 120/min, diuresis - 20 ml/h, HgB- 100 g/L, RBC- 2,11012/L. The patient needs introduction of:
*a. Crystalloid and colloid
b. Crystalloid and 5% dextrose
c. 5% dextrose and colloid
d. 5% dextrose and red blood cells
e. Crystalloid and red blood cells

6. A 45-year-old male patient was admitted to the intensive care unit because of myocardial infarction. An hour later the ventricular facilitation occurred. Which of the following should be administered?
a. Cardiac pacing
*b. Defibrillation
c. Lidocaine injection
d. External chest compression
e. Adrenalin injection

7. A 58 y.o. man complaines of severe inspiratory dyspnea and expectoration of frothy and blood-tinged sputum. He has been suffering from essential hypertension and ischemic heart disease. On examination: acrocyanosis, "bubbling" breathing, Ps- 30/min, BP- 230/130 mm Hg, bilateral rales. Choose medicines for treatment
a. Strophanthine, potassium chloride, plathyphylline
b. Cordiamine, isoproterenol
c. Theophylline, prednisolon
d. Albuterol, atropine, papaverine
*e. Morphine, furosemide, nitroprusside sodium

8. A patient has got a sudden attack of severe substernal pain at night. On examination: confusion, pallor of the skin, acrocyanosis, cold sweat, BP- 80/50 mm Hg, Ps- 120/min, irregular and weak pulse. What condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Acute vascular insufficiency
*b. Cardiogenic shock
c. Acute right-side heart failure
d. Acute left-side heart failure
e. Radicular syndrome

9. A 61 y.o. man complained of sneezing and substernal pain on exertion. In the last 2 weeks such pain appeared at rest, with increased frequency, and couldnt be suppressed by 1 tablet of nitroglycerin. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Radiculitis
b. Stable angina pectoris of the III functional class
c. Angina pectoris of a new onset
d. Myocarditis
*e. Unstable angina pectoris

10. A 41 y.o. woman complains of weakness, fatigue, fever up to 38°C, rash on the face skin, pain in the wrists and the elbows. On physical examination: erythematous rash on the cheeks with "butterfly" look, the wrists and elbow joints are involved symmetrically, swollen, sensitive, friction rub over the lungs, the heart sounds are weak, regular, HR- 88/min, BP- 160/95 mm Hg. Hematology shows anemia, leucopenia, lymphopenia; on urinalysis: proteinuria, leukocyturia, casts. What is the main mechanism of disease development?
a. Production of myocytes antibodies
b. Production of myosin antibodies
c. Production of antimitochondrial antibodies
*d. Production of antibodies to double-stranded DNA
e. Production of antibodies to endothelial cells

11. A 56 year old woman has an acute onset of fever up to 39oC with chills, cough, and pain on respiration in the right side of her chest. On physical examination: HR - 90/min, BP- 95/60 mm Hg, RR- 26/min. There is dullness over the right lung on percussion. On X-ray: infiltrate in the right middle lobe of the lung. What is the diagnosis?
a. Acute lung abscess
b. Nosocomial lobar pneumonia
c. Community-acquired bronchopneumonia
d. Acute pleuritis
*e. Community-acquired lobar pneumonia of moderate severity

12. A 29 y.o. woman is critically ill. The illness is presented by high fever, chills, sweating, aching pain in lumbar area, discomfort during urination and frequent voiding. Pasternatskys sign is positive in both sides. On lab examination: WBC- 20109/L; on urine analysis: protein - 0,6 g/L, leukocyturia, bacteriuria. Your preliminary diagnosis
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pyelonephritis
*c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Acute cystitis
e. Nephrolithiasis

13. A 26 year old man was admitted to the hospital because of stabbing back pain on inspiration and dyspnea. Examination results: BT of 37oC, Ps of 24/min, HR of 92/min, vesicular breath sounds. There is a dry, grating, low-pitched sound heard on both expiration and inspiration in the left inferior lateral part of the chest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocarditis
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Pneumothorax
*d. Acute fibrinous pleuritis
e. Pneumonia

14. A 45 y.o. man has complained of having epigastric and right subcostal aching pain, pruritus, indigestion, dark color of the urine and acholic stool, fever and significant weight loss for 1 month. On examination: jaundice, presence of Curvuasiers sign. US scan did not reveal stones in the gallbladder and choledochus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic pancreatitis
b. Gallbladder stones
*c. Cancer of the pancreas head
d. Chronic cholangitis
e. Chronic hepatitis

15. A 34 year old woman fell ill 3 months ago after cold exposure. She complained of pain in her hand and knee joints, morning stiffness and fever up to 38oC. Interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal and knee joints are swollen, hot, with reduced ranges of motions; ESR of 45 mm/h, CRP (+++), Vaaler-Rouse test of 1:128. What group of medicines would you recommend the patient?
a. Sulfonamides
b. Fluorchinolones
c. Cephalosporines
d. Tetracyclines
*e. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

16. A 47-year-old obese man complained of periodic attacks of acute arthritis in the st left tarsophalangeal joint. Lab exam revealed increased serum rate of uric acid. What is the diagnosis?
a. Reiters disease
b. Rheumatic arthritis
c. Osteoarthritis
*d. Gout arthritis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

17. A 22 year old woman complained of right subcostal aching pain, nausea, and decreased appetite. She fell ill 2 months after appendectomy when jaundice appeared. She was treated in an infectious hospital. 1 year later above mentioned symptoms developed. On exam: the subicteric sclerae, enlarged firm liver. Your preliminary diagnosis:
a. Acute viral hepatitis
b. Chronic cholangitis
c. Calculous cholecystitis
d. Gilberts disease
*e. Chronic viral hepatitis

18. A 50 year old woman complained of attacks of right subcostal pain after fatty meal she has been suffering from for a year. Last week the attacks repeated every day and became more painful. What diagnostic study would you recommend?
a. Blood cell count
*b. Ultrasound examination of the gallbladder
c. X-ray examination of the gastrointestinal tract
d. Liver function tests
e. Ultrasound study of the pancreas

19. A 27 y.o. man complained of aching epigastric pain right after meal, heartburn and nausea. Stomach endoscopy revealed a large amount of mucus, hyperemia and edema of mucous membrane in gastric fundus with areas of atrophy. Make a diagnosis
*a. Chronic gastritis of type A
b. Peptic ulcer of stomach
c. Menetriers disease
d. Chronic gastritis of type C
e. Chronic gastritis of type B

20. A 25 year old woman complained of edema on her face and legs, rise of blood pressure up to 160/100 mm Hg and weakness. She fell ill 3 weeks after recovering from angina. Urinalysis data: protein of 0,5 g/l, erythrocytes of 17-20/field, leukocytes of 2-3/field, erythrocyte casts. What treatment should be initiated after specifying the diagnosis?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Heparin
*c. Penicillin OS
d. Dipyridamole
e. Ciprofloxacine

21. A 25 y.o. woman complained of fatigue, hair loss and brittle nails. The examination revealed pallor of skin, Ps- 94/min, BP- 110/70 mm Hg. On blood count: Hb- 90 g/L, RBC- 3,51012/L, C.I.- 0,7; ESR- 20 mm/h. Serum iron level was 8,7 mcmol/l. What treatment would you initiate?
a. Vitamin B12 intramuscularly
b. Iron dextrin injections
*c. Ferrous sulfate orally
d. Blood transfusion
e. Packed RBCs transfusion

22. A fitter of a metallurgic factory with occupational exposure to high concentrations of mercury fumes for 16 years presents instability of pulse and blood pressure, general hyperhydrosis, asymmetric innervations of facial muscles and tongue, positive subcortical reflexes, hand tremor on physical examination. A dentist revealed paradontosis and chronic stomatitis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Neuroinfection
b. Acute mercury intoxication
c. Mercury encephalopathy
*d. Chronic mercury intoxication
e. Parkinson syndrome

23. A 40-year-old woman who has worked in weaving branch for 10 years complains of frequent headache, sleeplessness, irritability, fatigue, tiredness. Physical examination revealed instability of blood pressure, internal organs are without changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertension
b. Asthenovegetative syndrome
c. Encephalopathy
*d. Noise-induced disease
e. Atopic bronchial asthma

24. A 45-year-old driver was admitted to the hospital with 5 hour substernal pain. Nitroglycerin is not effective. He is pale, heart sounds are regular but weak. HR - 96 per minute, BP of 100/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute left ventricular failure
*b. Acute myocardial infarction
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Stable angina
e. Acute myocarditis

25. A 38 y.o. woman is seriously ill. She complains of frequent paroxysms of expiratory dyspnea. The last paroxysm lasted over 12 hours and failed to respond to theophylline. The skin is palish gray, moist, RR of 26/min. On auscultation, breath sounds are absent over some areas. Your preliminary diagnosis?
a. Bronchiectasis, respiratory failure of the II-III degree
b. Ischemic heart disease, pulmonary edema
c. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
d. Atopic bronchial asthma, respiratory failure of the III degree
*e. Bronchial asthma, status asthmaticus

26. A 19 y.o. girl admitted to the hospital complained of pain in the knee and fever of 38,6°C. She is ill for 2 weeks after acute tonsillitis. On exam, hyperemia and swelling of both knees, temperature is 37,4°C, HR- 94/min, BP- 120/80 mm Hg, and heart border is displaced to the left; S1 is weak, systolic murmur is present. Total blood count shows the following: Hb- 120 g/L, WBC- 9,8109/L, ESR of 30 mm/L. ECG findings: the rhythm is regular, PQ = 0,24 sec. What is a causative agent of the disease?
a. Viral-bacterial association
b. Staphylococci
c. Ricchetsia
*d. Beta-hemolytic streptococci
e. Autoimmune disorder

27. A 42 year old woman complains of dyspnea, edema of the legs and tachycardia during minor physical exertion. Heart borders are displaced to the left and S1 is accentuated, there is diastolic murmur on apex. The liver is enlarged by 5 cm. What is the cause of heart failure?
a. Aortic stenosis
*b. Mitral stenosis
c. Tricuspid stenosis
d. Mitral regurgitation
e. Tricuspid regurgitation

28. A 33-year-old man with a history of rheumatic fever complains of fever up to 38-39oC, abdominal pain, dyspnea, tachycardia. Heart borders are displaced to the left by 2 cm, systolic and diastolic murmurs above aorta, BP of 160/30 mm Hg. Petechial rash occurs after measurement of blood pressure. Liver is enlarged by 3 cm, spleen is palpable. Urine is brown-yellow. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute nephritis
b. Aortic regurgitation
c. Rheumatic fever
d. Acute hepatitis
*e. Infectious endocarditis

29. A 60 year old man complains of fever, significant weight loss, bone and joint pain, bleeding gums. Examination revealed paleness, lymphadenopathy, hepato- and splenomegaly. CBC: WBC – 270109/l with 13% lymphocytes, 1% monocytes, 21% basophiles, 29% neutrophils, 9% blasts, 12% promyelocytes, 12% myelocytes, 2% metamyelocytes, 1% eosinophils. ESR - 22 mm/h. Name the drug for treatment:
a. Prednisolone
b. Vinblastine
c. Blood transfusion
*d. Myelosan
e. Cytosar

30. A 54 year old woman complains of increasing fatigue and easy bruising of 3 weeks duration. Physical findings included pale, scattered ecchymoses and petechiae and mild hepatosplenomegaly. Blood count: RBC- 2,51012/l; Hb - 73 g/l; Ht - 20%; PLT- 23109/l; and WBC- 162109/l with 82% blasts, that contained Auric rods; peroxidase stain was positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic leukemia
b. Hemolytic anemia
c. Megaloblastic anemia
*d. Acute leukemia
e. Thrombocytopenia

31. A 60 y.o. woman has had increased BP up to 210/110 mm Hg for the last 7 years. On examination: heart apex is displaced to the left. There are signs of left ventricular hypertrophy on ECG. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Ischemic heart disease
*b. Essential hypertension, 2nd stage
c. Symptomatic hypertension
d. Essential hypertension, 1st stage
e. Cardiomyopathy

32. A 39 y.o. woman complaines of squeezed epigastric pain 1 hour after meal and heartburn. She had been ill for 2 years. On palpation, there was moderate tenderness in pyloroduodenal area. Antral gastritis was revealed on gastroscopy. What study can establish genesis of the disease?
a. Examination of stomach secretion
b. Examination of stomach motor function
c. Detection of autoantibodies in the serum
d. Gastrin level in blood
*e. Revealing of Helicobacter infection in gastric mucosa

33. A 32 year old welder complains of weakness and fever. His illness started as tonsillitis a month before. On exam, BT of 38,9°C, RR of 24/min, HR of 100/min, BP of 100/70 mm Hg, hemorrhages on the legs, enlargement of the lymph nodes. CBC shows Hb of 70 g/l, RBC of 2,2*10^12/l, WBC of 3,0*10^/l with 32% of blasts, 1% of eosinophiles, 3% of bands, 36% of segments, 20% of lymphocytes, and 8% of monocytes, ESR of 47 mm/h. What is the cause of anemia?
*a. Acute leukemia
b. Aplastic anema
c. Chronic hemolytic anemia
d. Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia
e. Chronic lympholeukemia

34. A 30-year-old patient complains of breathlessness, pain in the right rib arc region, dry cough and the edema of legs. He is ill for 2 months. He had been treated for rheumatic fever without any effect. On exam: cyanosis, edema of legs, BT of 36,6oC, RR of 28/min, HR of 90/min, BP of 110/80 mm Hg, crackles above low parts of both lungs, heart borders are displaced to the left and to the right, weak sounds, systolic murmur above the apex. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Rheumatic fever, mitral stenosis
b. Acute pericarditis
c. Infectious endocarditis
d. Acute myocarditis
*e. Dilated cardiomyopathy

35. A male, 50 y.o., has a black flat mole on the skin of the leg for 10 years. Since 4 months ago the shapes of the mole become irregular. What diagnostic methods should be used?
a. Incision biopsy
b. Thermography
c. Fine needle biopsy
d. Smear for microscopic examination
*e. Excision biopsy

36. A 30 y.o. man complains of intense pain, skin reddening in the region of ankle joint, temperature rise up to 390С. He fell ill suddenly. In the past there were such onsets that lasted for 5-6 days and didnt cause any residual changes of the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic, without distinct outlines and infiltrative bank at the periphery. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Erysipelatous inflammation
b. Osteoarthrosis
c. Infectional arthritis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
*e. Gout

37. Which of the following symptoms would occur only if a total-body acute radiation exposure exceeded 5.000 rad (50 Gy)
a. Nausea and vomiting
b. Bleeding gums
c. Epilation (hair loss)
*d. Hallucinations and impairment of vision
e. Diarrhea

38. The highest risk of congenital anomalies probably occurs when human embryos or fetuses are exposed to ionizing radiation. At what stage of gestational period does it occur?
a. 90-120 days after conception
b. The third trimester
c. The first 7 days
d. 10-14 days after conception
*e. 18-45 days after conception

39. A 27 y.o. patient has been having for almost a year fatigue, hyperhidrosis, heaviness in the left hypochondrium, especially after meals. Objectively: spleen and liver enlargement. In blood: erythrocytes - 3,21012/l, Hb- 100 g/l, colour index - 0,87, leukocutes - 100109/l, basophils - 7%, eosinophils - 5%, myelocytes - 15%, juveniles - 16%, stab neutrophils - 10%, segmentonuclear leukocytes - 45%, lymphocytes - 2%, monocytes - 0%, reticulocytes - 0,3%, thrombocytes – 400109/l, ESR- 25 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic lympholeukosis
b. Erythremia
c. Hepatocirrhosis
*d. Chronic myeloleukosis
e. Acute leukosis

40. A patient with a history of coronary artery disease and atrial fibrillation has the onset of sudden pain and weakness of the left leg. Examination reveals a cool, pale extremity with absent pulses below the groin and normal contralateral leg. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Arterial thrombosis
b. Cerebrovascular accident
c. Dissecting aortic aneurysm
*d. Arterial embolism
e. Acute thrombophlebitis

41. Among the following causes of acute renal failure, the one that would be classified as "postrenal" is:
a. Septicemia
b. Cardiac failure
*c. Calculi
d. Rhabdomyolysis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

42. A 26 year old manual worker complained of 3 weeks history of fevers and fatigue, weight loss with no other symptoms. Physical findings: Temperature 37,6oC, Ps- 88 bpm, blood pressure 115/70 mm Hg, superficial lymph nodes (occipital, submental, cervical, axillary) are enlarged, neither tender nor painful. Rubella-like rash on the trunk and extremities. Herpes simplex lesions on the lips. Candidosis of oral cavity. What infectious disease would you suspect?
*a. HIV infection
b. Rubella
c. Tuberculosis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Influenza

43. A 27-year old patient with malaria caused by P. falciparum was treated with Chloroquine (600 mg base followed by 300 mg base in 6 hours, then 300 mg base a day for 2 days) without clinical and parasitologic responses to the treatment. What is the most likely reason for the failure to respond to the therapy?
*a. Chloroquine resistant strain of P. falciparum
b. Late recognition of infection due to P. falciparum
c. Hypersensitivity of the patient to Chloroquine
d. Inappropriate route of administration
e. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in patient

44. Ten hours before initial observation patient had frequent feces and vomiting. Fecal and vomiting masses looked like rice-water. Nausea and abdominal pain werent observed. Hiccup and convulsions of lower limbs, temperature 35,4oC, hoarse voice, greyish wry face, acrocyanosis were observed. Respiratory rate 40/min, threadlike pulse 120/min, blood pressure 40/0 mm/Hg, abdomen is drawn. What treatment measures should be taken first of all?
a. Antibiotic therapy
b. Disintoxicational therapy
c. Antibotulinic serum injection
*d. Intravenous rehydration
e. Cardiac glycosides

45. A nurse of the kindergarten was taken to the hospital with complaints of accute pain in parumbilical region, convulsions of lower limbs, multiple bile vomiting, frequent watery foul feces of green colour in huge amounts. At the same time all the staff in the kindergarden got ill. Two days ago all of them ate cottage cheese with sour cream. General condition of patients is of moderate severity. Temperature 38,2oC. Heart tones: rhythmic and muted. Heart rate 95/min, arterial pressure: 160 mm/Hg. Abdomen is slightly swollen, painful. Liver +2 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Salmonellosis
b. Cholera
c. Enterovirus infection
d. Food toxic infection
e. Dysentery

46. A patient complains about strong dyspnea that is getting worse during physical activity. Presentations appeared suddenly 2 hours ago at work: acute chest pain on the left, cough. The pain was abating, but dyspnea, dizziness, pallor, cold sweat and cyanosis were progressing. Vesicular respiration is absent, X-ray picture shows a shadow on the left. What pathology might be suspected?
a. Pulmonary infarction
b. Left-sided pneumonia
c. Pulmonary abscess
*d. Spontaneous left-sided pneumothorax
e. Pleuritis

47. The patients has sustained blunt trauma to the chest. Which of the following would most likely be the cause of acute cardiopulmonary collapse?
a. Acute adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
*b. Pneumothorax
c. Pulmonary contusion
d. Hemothorax
e. Rib fractures

48. A youth, aged 15, from childhood suffers from atopic dermatitis and allergy to the shellfish. In the last 3 months after acquiring aquarium fish rhinitis, conjunctivitis, itching in the nose developed. Level of what immunologic index should be defined in this case?
a. IgM
b. IgJ
*c. IgE
d. IgA
e. Circulating immunocomplexes

49. A 15 y.o. girl was examined. Her medical history registers gradual onset of fever, malaise, loss of weight. There was nothing typical about the kind of fever which has been present for more than 7-10 days and changed quickly. Physical examination didnt give evident results. What is the only most important examination for excluding miliary tuberculosis?
*a. Chest X-ray
b. Tuberculin skin testing
c. Bronchoscopy
d. Sputum smear and culture of m. tuberculosis
e. Liver or bone marrow biopsy

50. A 25-year-old man was admitted to a hospital with a 2 month history of cough and fever. A chest x-ray showed extensive left upper lobe disease with a 2 cm cavity. All three points were strongly positive on direct smear and grew M. Tuberculosis, fully sensitive to all first-line drugs. Patient must be treated with:
a. Streptomycin + isoniazid
b. Kanamycin + ethambutol + pyrazinamide
c. P-aminosalicylic acid + streptomycin
*d. Isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide
e. Isoniazid + ethambutol

51. A 50-year-old man was examined in the clinic for persistent cavitation and sputum. He was treated with rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambuthol. The most common toxic effect of ethambutol is:
a. Mental symptoms
*b. Optic neuritis
c. Hepatic enzyme elevation
d. Eighth cranial nerve damage
e. Peripheral neuropathy

52. A 38 year old man worked at roofing and drain pipes production for 15 years. He seeks medical help for expiratory breathlessness on exertion, and dry cough. On exam, wheezes above both lungs, grayish warts on fingers are seen. Factory physician has diagnosed asbestosis. What method is the most important for this diagnosis?
a. Blood gas analysis
b. Bronchoscopy
*c. Chest X-ray
d. Spirography
e. Electrocardiography

53. A patient has got pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is evident, the tongue is coated with white deposit. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodes are revealed in the axillary area. The skin over the lymph nodes is erythematous and glistering. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Bubonic plague
b. Lymphogranulomatosis
c. Tularemia
d. Anthrax
e. Acute purulent lymphadenitis

54. A 17 y.o. patient complains of acute pain in the knee joint and t°- 38°C. He was ill with angina 3 weeks ago. Objectively: deformation and swelling of the knee joints with skin hyperemia. Small movement causes an acute pain in the joints. Which diagnose is the most correct?
*a. Rheumatism, polyarthritis
b. Reactive polyarthritis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Infectious-allergic polyarthritis
e. Systemic lupus erythematous

55. A 56 year old patient has worked at the aluminium plant over 20 years. Within 3 last years he has been experiencing loosening of teeth, bone and joint pains, piercing pains in heart region, vomiting. The provisional diagnosis is:
a. Lead intoxication
b. Mercury intoxication
*c. Fluorine intoxication
d. Phosphorus intoxication
e. Manganese intoxication

56. A 38 y.o. woman complains of a purulent discharge from the left nostril. The body temperature is 37,5°C. The patient has been ill for a week and associates her illness with common cold. There are a pain and tenderness on palpation of her left cheek. The mucous membrane in the left nasal cavity is red and turgescent. The purulent exudate is seen in the middle meatus in maxillary. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent ethmoiditis
b. Acute purulent frontitis
*c. Acute purulent maxillary sinusitis
d. Acute purulent sphenoiditis
e. -

57. A 34 y.o. patient has been suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis for 7 years; he complains of muscle feebleness, weight loss, diarrheas, increased frequency of urination. Objectively: hyperpigmentation of skin, gums, internal cheek surfaces. AP is 90/58 mm Hg. Blood count: erythrocutes - 3,11012/L, Hb- 95 g/L, C.I.- 0,92; leukocytes - 9,4109/L, eosinophils - 7, segmentonuclear leukocytes - 45, stab neutrophils - 1, lymphocytes - 40, monocytes - 7, Na+- 115 mmole/L, К+- 7,3 mmole/L. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Diabetes insipidus
*b. Primary insufficiency of adrenal cortex
c. Primary hyperaldosteronism
d. Pheochromocytoma
e. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

58. A 52 y.o. hard smoker complains of persistent cough with purulent sputum discharge especially in the mornings, dyspnea provoked even by slight physical exercises, wheezing chest, tachypnoe, general weakness. He considers himself to be ill for 12 years. The foresaid presentations appear 3-4 times per year usually after a common cold and have tendency to progress. What disease do you think about first of all?
a. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Chronic obstructive lung disease
d. Bronchoectatic disease
e. Aspergillosis

59. 3 weeks ago a patient was ill with tonsillitis. Clinical examination reveals edema, arterial hypertension, hematuria, proteinuria (1,8 g/per day), granular and erythrocital casts. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Pyelonephritis
b. Cystitis
*c. Glomerulonephritis
d. Intestinal nephritis
e. Renal amyloidosis

60. 47 y.o. patient complains of intensive skin itching, jaundice, bone pain. The skin is hyperpigmentated. There are multiple xanthelasma palpebrae. The liver is +6 cm enlarged, solid with acute edge. The blood analysis revealed total bilirubin -160 mkmol/L, direct - 110 mkmol/L, AST- 2,1 mmol/L, ALT- 1,8 mmol/L, alkaline phosphotase - 4,6 mmol/L, cholesterol- 9,2 mmol/L, antimitochondrial antibodies M2 in a high titer. What is the probable diagnosis?
*a. Primary biliary liver cirrhosis
b. Chronic viral hepatitis B
c. Alcoholic liver cirrhosis
d. Acute viral hepatitis B
e. Primary liver cancer

61. The complications of acute cholecystitis which require surgical intervention are as follows EXCEPT:
*a. Jaundice
b. Emphysematous gall-bladder
c. Cholangitis conditioned by the presence of stones in the bile tract
d. Gall-bladder perforation
e. Empyema of the gall-bladder

62. A patient has undergone an operation on account of perforated ulcer of stomach, terminal phase of diffuse peritonitis and endotoxic shock. In the post-operative period he is prescribed artificial pulmonary ventilation with 60% oxygen inhalation. Blood gases: РаО2- 70-78 mm Hg, hypoxemy doesnt ecrease, CVP (central venous pressure) - 150-180 mm of water column, AP- 90/60 mm Hg (against the backgound of taking big doses of dopamine). Radiogram shows diffuse pulmonary infiltration. What cause the refractory arterial hypoxemia?
a. Mendelsons syndrome
b. Pulmonary edema
c. Bilateral pneumonia
d. Pneumothorax
*e. Respiratory distress syndrome

63. An excited patient constantly tries to look into the next room because he is sure of his friends presence. He claims to hear his friends and other people talking although no-one is there. He tries to persuade his doctor that people in the next room are disputing about "his punishment", repeats aloud phrases he has allegedly heard from the next room. What state is it?
a. Verbal illusions
b. Confabulations
c. Obsessional ideas
*d. Acute hallucinosis
e. Delusion

64. According to results of medical and pedagogical observation during the gymnastics lesson in the 9th grade there was plotted a phisiological curve characterized by gradual increasing of pulse rate during the opening part of lesson, 80% increase during the main part; the curve has 4 waves. How can the lessons structure be assessed?
a. Exercise stress is excesive
b. Exercise stress is adequate
c. The lessons structure is correct
d. Exercise stress is insufficient
*e. Long interval between exercises

65. A 22-year-old girl has been complaining of having itching rash on her face for 2 days. She associates this disease with application of cosmetic face cream. Objectively: apparent reddening and edema of skin in the region of cheeks, chin and forehead; fine papulovesicular rash. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Allergic dermatitis
b. Eczema
c. Neurodermatitis
d. Erysipelas
e. Dermatitis simplex

66. A patient is 16 y.o. In the last year his behaviour has gradually changed: he secluded himself, was not interested in communication with friends, in learning. He became indifferent towards relatives, motivelessly rude, was speaking or laughing to himself. He answers the questions formally correctly, laconically. Considers himself to be absolutely healthy but a little tired, says, hes thinking about writing a book "Projection of humanity on the plane of Universe". He always has a copy-book with which is full of a great many of the same daggers. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Autistic personality disorder
b. Picks disease
c. Depressive disorder
d. Schizoid personality disorder
*e. Schizophrenia

67. A 27-year-old patient with a history of ronchial asthma was stung by a bee. He had a sensation of chest compression, breath shortage, difficult expiration, sense of heat in the upper half of body, dizziness, apparent itch, convulsions. Objectively: noisy wheezing breath, AP - 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 110 bpm. Auscultation revealed weak rhythmic heart sounds, rough respiration above lungs, sibilant rales. What drug group should be administered in the first place?
*a. Glucocorticoids
b. Cardiac glycosides
c. Analgetics
d. Anticonvulsive
e. Methylxanthines

68. A 68 year old patient has been suffering from chronic pancreatitis for 35 years. During the last 5 years he has been observing abatement of pain syndrome, abdominal swelling, frequent defecations up to 3-4 times a day (feces are greyish, glossy, with admixtures of undigested food), progressing weight loss. Change of symptom set is caused by joining of:
a. Endocrine pancreatic insufficiency
b. Irritable bowels syndrome
c. Chronic enterocolitis
*d. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
e. Syndrome of lactase deficiency

69. A 32-year-old patient complains of cardiac irregularities, dizziness, dyspnea at physical stress. He has never suffered from this before. Objectively: Ps- 74 bpm, rhythmic. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolic murmur above aorta, the first heart sound was normal. ECG showed hypertrophy of the left ventricle, signs of repolarization disturbance in the I, V5 and V6 leads. Echocardiogram revealed that interventricular septum was 2 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocardium infarction
b. Coarctation of aorta
c. Aortic stenosis
d. Essential hypertension
*e. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

70. A patient complains of feeling heaviness behind his breast bone, periodical sensation of food stoppage, dysphagy. During the X-ray examination barium contrast revealed a single saccular outpouching of anterodextral esophagus wall with regular contours and rigidly outlined neck. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hiatal hernia
b. Cancer of esophagus
*c. Esophageal diverticulum
d. Varix dilatation of esophageal veins
e. Esophageal polyp

71. A 60 year old patient has been suffering from arterial hypertension for 15 years. After recurrent stroke she started complaining about amotivational bad mood, problems with attention concentration; she forgets to close the entrance door, cannot recall events of the last day. Computer tomography shows areas of postinfarction changes in the cortical postfrontal regions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Vascular dementia
b. Huntingtons chorea
c. Dissociative amnesia
d. Picks disease
e. Alzheimers disease

72. A painter working at a motorcar plant was diagnosed with acute intoxication with amide compounds of benzene, moderate severity grade. The in-patient treatment resulted in considerable health improvement. What expert decision should be made in this case?
a. The patient may get back to work providing he will keep to hygiene and sanitary regulations
b. The patient should be referred to the Medical and Social Expert Commission for determination of percentage of work capicty loss
c. -
*d. The patient should be issued a sick list for out-patient treatment
e. The patient should be referred to the Medical and Social Expert Commission for assigning the disability group because of an occupational disease

73. A 44-year-old patient complains about difficult urination, sensation of incomplete urinary bladder emptying. Sonographic examination of the urinary bladder near the urethra entrance revealed an oval well-defined hyperechogenic formation 2x3 cm large that was changing its position during the examination. What conclusion can be made?
*a. Concrement
b. Urinary bladder polyp
c. Primary ureter tumour
d. Prostate adenoma
e. Malignant tumour of the urinary bladder

74. A 35-year-old patient complains about pain and morning stiffness of hand joints and temporomandibular joints that lasts over 30 minutes. She has had these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: edema of proximal interphalangeal digital joints and limited motions of joints. What examination should be administered?
*a. Roentgenography of hands
b. Rose-Waaler reaction
c. Proteinogram
d. Immunogram
e. Complete blood count

75. A 25 year old patient complains about weakness, dizziness, haemorrhagic skin rash. She has been suffering from this for a month. Blood count: erythrocytes: 1,01012/l, Hb- 37 g/l, colour index - 0,9, leukocytes - 1,2109/l, thrombocytes - 42109/l. What diagnostic method will be the most effective?
a. Abdominal ultrasound
*b. Sternal puncture
c. Liver biopsy
d. Spleen biopsy
e. Coagulogram

76. A 68-year-old female patient complains about temperature rise up to 38,3oC, haematuria. ESR- 55 mm/h. Antibacterial therapy turned out to be ineffective. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Renal amyloidosis
b. Polycystic renal disease
*c. Renal cancer
d. Urolithiasis
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

77. A 34 year old female patient has been suffering from anxious depression accompanied by panic attacks for 2 years. She has been a patient of a psychotherapist. Treatment resulted in incomplete remission. The patient had to break off psychotherapy because of moving to a new place of residence. Soon after this her condition grew significantly worse, she was almost permanently anxious, panic attacks turned up 5-6 times a day and were accompanied by palpitation, dyspnea, cold sweat, thanatophobia. What drug group is the most appropriate for medicamental therapy?
a. Lithium drugs
b. Cardiotonics, respiratory analeptics
c. Sedative neuroleptics
d. Antipsychotic neuroleptics
*e. Antidepressants

78. A patient, aged 16, complains of headache, mainly in the frontal and temporal areas, superciliary arch, appearing of vomiting at the peak of headache, pain during the eyeballs movement, joints pain. On examination: excited, t°- 390С, Ps- 110/min. Tonic and clonus cramps. Uncertain meningeal signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Influenza, typical disease duration
b. Parainfluenza
c. Adenovirus infection
*d. Influenza with cerebral edema manifestations
e. Respiratory syncytial virus

79. A 64 y.o. patient has developed of squeering substernal pain which had appeared 2 hours ago and irradiated to the left shoulder, marked weakness. On examination: pale skin, cold sweat. Pulse- 108 bpm, AP- 70/50 mm Hg, heart sound are deaf, vesicular breathing, soft abdomen, painless, varicouse vein on the left shin, ECG: synus rhythm, heart rate is 100 bmp, ST-segment is sharply elevated in II, III aVF leads. What is the most likely disorder?
*a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Pulmonary artery thromboembolia
c. Cardiac tamponade
d. Disquamative aortic aneurizm
e. Cardiac asthma

80. A patient at a doctor complains of temperature rise up to 38,2°C, edema in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: upper lip is evidently edematic, in the middle of edema there is a cone-shaped swelling. Skin and mucous membrane over it are dark-red. Diagnosis: labial furuncle. A surgeon cut the furuncle, treated the wound with hydrogen peroxide solution and applied a bandage with hypertensive solution. What therapeutic regimen should be recommended?
a. First out-patient treatment, then out-patient treatment
b. In-patient treatment with bed rest
c. -
*d. In-patient treatment with common regimen
e. Out-patient treatment

81. A healthy 75 year old woman who leads a moderately active way of life went through a preventive examination that revealed serum concentration of common cholesterol at the rate of 5,1 millimole/l and HDL (high-density lipoproteins) cholesterol at the rate of 70 mg/dl. ECG reveals no pathology. What dietary recommendation is the most adequate?
a. Decrease of saturated fats consumption
b. Decrease of cholesterol consumption
*c. Any dietary changes are necessary
d. Decrease of carbohydrates consumption
e. Increase of cellulose consumption

82. A 52 year old patient was admitted to a hospital because of high hemorrhagic diathesis of mucous membranes, massive skin haemorrhages in form of ecchymoses and spots, nasal and stomachal haemorrhages. After clinical examinations her illness was diagnosed as thrombocytopenic purpura. What is the most probable cause of this disease?
a. Disturbed hemostasis
b. Inherited insufficiency of plasm factors of blood coagulation
c. Iron deficit in blood serum, bone marrow and depot
*d. Generation of antithrombocytic antibodies
e. Deficit of the VIII factor of blood coagulation

83. Heart auscultation of a 16 y.o. boy without clinical symptoms revealed accent of the S II and systolic murmur above the pulmonary artery. Heart sounds are resonant, rhythmic. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Nonclosure of Botallos duct
b. Defection of interatrial septum
c. Stenosis of pulmonary artery valve
d. Insufficiency of pulmonary artery valve
*e. Functional murmur

84. A 74 y.o. patient has been suffering from hypertension for 20 years. He complains of frequent headache, dizziness, he takes enalapril. Objectively: accent of the SII above aorta, Ps- 84 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 180/120 mm Hg. What group of hypotensive medications could be additionally prescribed under consideration of the patients age?
a. alpha-adrenoceptor blockers
b. Central sympatholytics
c. Loop diuretics
d. beta-adrenoceptor blockers
*e. Thiazide diuretics

85. A patient has complained of great weakness for 6 years. He fell seriously ill, the illness is accompanied by body temperature rise, indisposition, pain in joints and along the legs muscles. Objectively: violet-bluish erythema around eyes and over knee joints. HR- 120/min, heart sounds are weak. Blood count: leukocytes - 12109/L, ESR- 40 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Atopic dermatitis
b. Reactive polyarthritis
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Rheumathoid arthritis
*e. Dermatomyositis

86. A 54 year old male patient complains about permanent dull pain in the mesogastral region, weight loss, dark blood admixtures in the feces, constipations. He put off 10 kg within a year. In blood: erythrocytes: 3,51012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, leukocytes - 12,6109/l, stab neutrophil shift, ESR- 43 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic pancreatitis
b. Stomach cancer
c. Gastric ulcer
d. Chronic colitis
*e. Cancer of transverse colon

87. A patient, aged 40, has been ill during approximately 8 years, complains of pain in the lumbar part of the spine on physical excertion, in cervical and thoracal part (especially when coughing), pain in the hip and knee joints on the right. On examination: the body is fixed in the forward inclination with head down, gluteal muscles atrophy. Spine roentgenography: ribs osteoporosis, longitudinal ligament ossification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Spread osteochondrosis of the vertebral column
*b. Ancylosing spondyloarthritis
c. Psoriatic spondyloarthropatia
d. Tuberculous spondylitis
e. Spondyloarthropatia on the background of Reiters disease

88. A 20 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of having skin and sclera icteritiousness, dark urine, single vomiting, appetite loss, body temperature rise up to 380С for 2 days. Three weeks ago he went in for fishing and shared his dishes with friends. Objectively: the patient is flabby, t°- 36,80С, skin and scleras are icteritious, liver sticks from under the costal margin by 3 cm, it is sensitive; spleen isnt palpable. Urine is dark, stool is partly acholic. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemolytic anemia
b. Intestinal yersiniosis
c. Leptospirosis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
*e. Virus A hepatitis

89. A worker, aged 38, working in the slate production during 15 years, complains of expiratory exertional dyspnea, dry cough. On examination: deafening of the percutory sounds in interscapular region, rough breath sounds, dry disseminated rales. On fingers skin - greyish warts. Factorys sectorial doctor suspects asbestosis. Which method is the most informative for diagnosis verification?
a. Spirography
b. Bronchoscopy
*c. Thorax roentgenography
d. Bronchoalveolar lavage
e. Blood gases examination

90. A 38-year-old man is working for 15 years on the slate producing factory. He complains of expiration dyspnoe on exertion, dry cough. On physical exam: dullness of the percutory sound in the interscapular area, harsh respiration, dry diffused rales.There are warts of greyish color on hands. The doctor of the plant suspects asbestosis. What method is the most informational to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Spirography
b. Bronchoscopy
*c. Chest X-ray exam
d. Bronchoalveolar lavage
e. Blood gases analysis

91. A full-term newborn child has a diagnosis newborns Rh-factor hemolytic disease. Bilirubin rate is critical. The childs blood group is B(III), his mothers blood group - A(II). The child has indication for hemotransfusion. What donor blood must be chosen?
a. Blood group O(I) Rh-
*b. Blood group B(III) Rh-
c. Blood group B(III) Rh+
d. Blood group A(II) Rh-
e. Blood group A(II) Rh+

92. A 37 y.o. woman is suffering from squeezing substernal pain on physical exertion. On examination: AP- 130/80 mm Hg, heart rate=pulse rate 72 bpm, heart boarders are dilated to the left side, aortic systolic murmur. ECG- signs of the left venticle hypertrophy. What method of examination is the most informative in this case?
a. X-ray
*b. Echocardiography
c. Coronarography
d. Phonocardiography
e. Sphygmography

93. A 58-year-old woman complains of osteoarthrosis of knee-joint. For 2 weeks she had been receiving an in-patient medical treatment. She was discharged from the hospital in satisfactory condition with complaints of minor pain after prolonged static work. Local hyperemia and exudative effects in the area of joints are absent. What further tactics is the most expedient?
a. Conducting arthroscopy
b. Repeated in-patient treatment
*c. Outpatient treatment
d. Refferral to MSEC
e. Orthopedist consultation

94. A man in grave condition was delivered to the admission ward of a hospital on the 2nd day of illness. Examination revealed body temperature of 36,1oC, sharpened features of face, dry skin that makes a fold, aphonia, convulsive twitching of some muscle groups. Acrocyanosis is present. Heart sounds are muffled, Ps is 102 bpm, AP is 50/20 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, drawn-in, painless. Anuria is presnt. Stool is liquid in form of rice water. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Cholera
b. Salmonellosis
c. Intestinal amebiasis
d. Escherichiosis
e. Acute dysentery

95. Examination of a 22 year old man suffering from polyarthralgia and high fever revealed right-sided exudative pleuritis. X-ray picture showed a homogenous shadow below the IV rib on the right. In the II segment there were single dense focal shadows. Mantoux test with 2 TU resulted in formation of a papula 16 mm large. Pleural liquid has increased protein concentration, Rivaltas reaction is positive, there was also increased number of leukocytes with prevailing lymphocytes. What is the most probable etiology of pleuritis?
a. Viral
b. Autoimmune
c. Cancerous
d. Staphylococcal
*e. Tuberculous

96. A 42-year-old patient applied to hospital with complaints of pain behind the sternum with irradiation to the left scapula. The pain appears during significant physical work, this lasts for 5-10 minutes and is over on rest. The patient is sick for 3 weeks. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. IHD:Progressive angina pectoris
*b. IHD:First established angina pectoris
c. IHD:Stable angina pectoris of effort I FC
d. IHD:Variant angina pectoris (Prinzmetals)
e. IHD:Stable angina pectoris of effort IV FC

97. A 33 y.o. patient with first time detected diabetes mellitus keeps the diet and maintains glycemia at the level of 10,0 mmol/L after meal. He keeps himself from insulinotherapy. What examination is the most important for differentiation of the 1st (insulin-dependent) and the 2nd (insulin-independent) types of diabetes?
a. Glucose-tolerant test
b. Estimation of glucolized blood hemoglobin
c. Fructosamine estimation
*d. Determination of insular cells antibodies
e. Glycemia examination on an empty stomach

98. A 24-year-old patient felt sick in 16 hours after dried fish intake. There was nausea, vomiting, weakness, flabbiness, double vision. On physical exam, there was decrease of a muscle tone, anisocoria, flaccid swallowing and tendon reflex. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
*b. Botulism
c. Acute gastritis
d. Food toxicoinfection
e. Acute encephalitis

99. A 72-year-old patient after operation due to holecystectomia was prescribed gentamicin (80 mg every 8 hours) and cephalothin (2 g every 6 hours) due to fever. In 10 days there was an increase of creatinine up to 310mumol/L. BP - 130/80 mm Hg, daily quantity of the urine is 1200 mL. Urine tests are without pathology. Ultrasound: the size of kidneys is normal. What is the most probable reason for renal failure?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Unequal infusion of the liqiud
c. Hepatorenal syndrome
*d. Nephrotoxity of gentamicin
e. Cortical necrosis of kidneys

100. A 40 y.o. patient was admitted to the gasteroenterology with skin itching, jaundice, discomfort in the right subcostal area, generalized weakness. On examination: skin is jaundice, traces of scratches, liver is +5 cm, splin is 6x8 cm. In blood: alkaline phosphatase - 2,0 mmol/(hourL), general bilirubin - 60 mkmol/L, cholesterol - 8,0 mmol/L. What is the leading syndrome in the patient?
a. Asthenic
b. Liver-cells insufficiency
c. Сytolytic
d. Mesenchymal inflammatory
*e. Сholestatic

