1. A patient has assymetric face, it is especially noticeable during active muscle contraction. What nerve may be damaged?
a. Sublingual
b. Trigeminal, І branch
c. Trigeminal, ІІІ branch
*d. Facial (motor unit)
e. TrigeminaІ, IІ branch

2. A sportsman was recommended to take a preparation with carnitine in order to improve his achievements. What process is activated by carnitine to the most extent?
a. Synthesis of ketone bodies
b. Synthesis of steroid hormones
c. Lypide synthesis
d. Tissue respiration
*e. Transporting of fatty acids to the mitochondrions

3. A 56 year old man was taken to the hospital with complaints of general weakness, pain and burning in the region of tongue, extremity numbness. In the past he had resection of cardiac part of ventricl
a. Aplastic
*b. Blood test: Hb- 80 g/L; RBC- 2,0×012/L; colour index of blood- 1,2; leukocytes - 3,5×09/L. What type of anemy is it?
c. Iron-deficient
d. В12 folic-deficient
e. Hemolytic

4. In a specimen that was coloured by method of silver impregnation some piriform cells with 2-3 evident dendrites were found. What structure is being analysed?
a. Cerebral cortex
*b. Cerebellar cortex
c. Retina
d. Spiral organ of middle ear
e. Spinal ganglion

5. A 28 year old pregnant woman had the enzymes in the cells of amniotic fluid analyzed. The analysis revealed insufficient activity of -glucuronidase. What pathological process is it?
a. Glycogenosis
b. Collagenosis
*c. Mucopolysaccharidosis
d. Lipidosis
e. Aglycogenosis

6. Examination of a child who hasnt got fresh fruit and vegetables during winter revealed numerous subcutaneous hemorrhages, gingivitis, carious cavities in teeth. What vitamin combination should be prescribed in this case?
a. Riboflavin and nicotinamide
b. Calciferol and ascorbic acid
c. Folic acid and cobalamin
d. Thiamine and pyridoxine
*e. Ascorbic acid and rutin

7. A patient had a trauma that led to the injury of front spinal roots. Denote the damaged structures:
*a. Axons of motoneurons and lateral horn neurons
b. Axons of lateral horn neurons
c. Central processes of spinal ganglion neurons
d. Axons of motoneurons
e. Peripheral processes of spinal ganglion neurons

8. 8 Chronic rhinitis was complicated by inflammation of frontal sinus. What nasal meatus did the infection get into this sinus through?
*a. Median
b. Nasopharyngeal
c. Inferior
d. Superior
e. Common

9. A 7 year old girl was taken to an infectious diseases hospital. She had complaints of high temperature, sore throat, general weakness. A doctor assumed dyphteri A. What will be crucial proof of diagnosis after defining pure culture of pathogenic organism?
a. Hemolytic ability of pathogenic orhanism
b. Detection of volutine granules
*c. Toxigenity test
d. Phagolysability
e. Cystinase test

10. A 7 year old child had an acute onset of diseas Pediatrician stated that mucous membrane of fauces is hyperemic and covered with a lot of mucus. Mucous membrane of cheeks has whitish stains. Next day the childs skin of face, neck, body was covered with coarsely-papular rash. What disease may be presumed?
a. Diphteria
b. Allergic dermatitis
*c. Measles
d. Scarlet fever
e. Meningococcemia

11. A patient has an exudative pleurisy. At what level should the pleural puncture along the posterior axillary line be taken?
a. ХІ intercostal space
b. VІ intercostal space
c. VІІІ intercostal space
*d. ІХ intercostal space
e. VІІ intercostal space

12. A 17 year old student pressed out a pustule in the medial angle of eye. In 2 days she was taken to the institute of neurosurgery with thrombosis of cavernous sinus. Through what vein did the infection get into this sinus?
a. V.maxillarіs
b. V.diploicae frontalis
c. V.transversa faciei
*d. V.angularis
e. V.profunda faciei

13. A patient complains of aching gums and maxillary teeth. What nerve is inflamed?
a. Sublingual
*b. ІI branch of the V pair
c. I branch of the V pair
d. Accessory
e. III branch of the V pair

14. During phonocardiogram registration it was ascertained that the duration of the first heart sound twice exceeds the norm. It is most likely that patient has the following organ affected:
a. -
b. Cardiomyocytes of ventricles
c. Semilunar valves
*d. Atrioventricular valves
e. Cardiomyocytes of heart atriums

15. A patient has the inflammation of middle ear (otitis). At the same time he claims to have the disorder of gustatory sensation in the front part of tongu. What nerve is damaged?
a. N.vagus
b. N.trigeminus
c. N.glossopharyngeus
d. N.vestibulo-cochlearis
*e. N.facialis

16. A patient with insulin-dependent diabetes had an insulin injection. Some time later he felt weakness, irritability, excessive sweating. What is the main reason of these disorders?
a. Intensified ketogenesis
b. Intensified glycogenolysis
c. Reduced glyconeogenesis
*d. Carbohydrate starvation of brain
e. Intensified lypogenesis

17. During the postsynthetic period of mitotic cycle the synthesis of tubulin proteins was disturbed. These proteins take part in construction of division spindle. It can lead to the disturbance of:
a. Spiralization of chromosomes
b. Mitosis duration
*c. Chromosome disjunction
d. Despiralization of chromosomes
e. Cytokinesis

18. A wide cleft between incisors of both mother and father is the dominant feature. They are both homozygous. What genetic regularity will their children have?
a. Hybrid segregation by phenotype
b. Linked inheritance
c. Non-linked inheritance
d. Independent inheritance of feature
*e. Uniformity of first generation hybrids

19. After a surgical procedure a patient was developed an enteroparesis. What anticholinesterase medication should be prescribed in this case?
a. Carbacholine
b. Acetylcholine
c. Pilocarpine
*d. Proserin
e. Aceclidine

20. Microscopic analysis of tissue sampling from patients skin reveals granulomas that consist of epithelioid cells surrounded mostly by T-lymphocytes. Among epithelioid cells there are solitary giant multinuclear cells of Pirogov-Langhans typ. In the centre of some granulomas there are areas of caseous necrosis. Blood vessels are absent. What disease are the described granulomas typical for?
a. Leprosy
b. Syphilis
*c. Tuberculosis
d. Rhinoscleroma
e. Glanders

21. Climbing the mountains at a height of 5000 m climbers started complaining of breath shortness, palpitation, vertigo, ring in the ears. What pathogenetic factor determines the development of these occurances?
a. Lactacidemia
*b. Hypoxemia
c. Decreased oxygen capacity of blood
d. Hypokalemia
e. Hypernatremia

22. A patient consulted a doctor about the intensive skin itch, especially between fingers, in axillary creases, in the inferior part of belly. During the skin examination there were found twisting whitish tracts with speckles at the end of them. What disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
a. Miasis
*b. Scabies
c. Demodicosis
d. Dermatotropic leishmaniosis
e. Pediculosis

23. An infectious diseases hospital admitted a veterinarian with assumed brucellosis. What serologic test can confirm this diagnosis?
a. Wassermann reaction of complement binding
*b. Wrights agglutination reaction
c. Widals agglutination reaction
d. Ascolis precipitation reaction
e. Weigls agglutination reaction

24. Autopsy of an 8 year old boy who was ill with pharyngeal and tonsillar diphtheria and died one week after illness begin revealed myocardial changes in form of small-focal myocardiocyte necroses, stroma edema with slight lymphocytic infiltration. What type of myocarditis is it:
a. Granulomatous
b. Septic
*c. Alternative
d. Focal-intermediate, exudative
e. Interstitional

25. In the course of an experiment a nerve is being stimulated by electric impulses. It leads to excretion of some quantity of thick viscous saliva by sublingual and submandibular glands. What nerve is being stimulated?
a. N.glossopharyngeus
*b. N.sympathicus
c. N.vagus
d. N.trigeminus
e. N.facialis

26. In a histological specimen of adrenal cortex there are petite polygonal cells that form roundish clusters and contain some lipidic inclusions. What part of adrenal is presented in this histological specimen?
a. Intermedial zone
b. Fasciolar zone
c. -
d. Reticular zone
*e. Glomerular zone

27. Excessive hairiness of auricles (hypertrichosis) is determined by a gene which is localized in Y-chromosom. Father has this featur. What is the probability of the fact that the boy will be born with such anomaly?
a. 35%
*b. 100%
c. 75%
d. 0%
e. 25%

28. A patient complains of painful cracks in mouth angles. What sulfanilamide can be recommended for local treatment of angular stomatitis?
a. Synthomycine liniment
b. Prednisolone ointment
c. Tetracycline ointment
d. Butadione ointment
*e. Streptocide liniment

29. A patient with an acute rhinitis has hyperemia and excessive mucus formation in nasal cavity. What epithelial cells of mucous membrane have the intensified activity?
a. Basal cells
*b. Goblet cells
c. Endocrine cells
d. Ciliated cells
e. Microvillous cells

30. A patient with gingivitis was prescribed a gargle with a certain preparation. Its antiseptic properties are determined by atomic oxygene that slivers in presence of organic substances. It has also deodorant, adstringent (anti-inflammatory), and in big concentrations - cauterizing effect. Water solutions are used for bathing of wounds, mouth gargling and in higher concentrations - for burn treatment. It is also used for gastric lavage in case of poisoning. Name this preparasion:
a. Chlorhexidine bigluconate
b. Sodium bicarbonate
*c. Potassium permanganate
d. Hydrogen peroxide
e. Ethyl alcohol

31. A 5 year old child was admitted to the ENT-department with suppurative inflammation of middle ear (tympanitis). It began with the inflammation of nasopharynx. What canal of temporal bone did the infection get into tympanic cavity through?
a. Caroticotympanic foramina
b. Carotid canal
*c. Musculotubal canal
d. Small tympanic canal
e. Small canal of chorda tympani

32. After poisoning with an unknown drug a 37 year old patient has stereotypical face muscle contractions that imitate blinking and squinting. What form of motor function disorder of nervous system is it?
a. Ataxy
*b. Hyperkinesia
c. Akinesia
d. Hypokinesia
e. -

33. A 36 year old man with craniocerebral trauma has diminished breath sounds, thready pulse, reflexes are absent. What route of pyracetam introduction is the most suitable in this case?
*a. Intravenous
b. Oral
c. Subcutaneous
d. Rectal
e. Inhaling

34. A patient with chronic hypoglycemia had adrenaline introduction. After introduction blood test hasnt changed essentially. Doctor assumed liver pathology. What liver function may have been changed?
a. Function of cholesterin production
b. Excretory function
c. Ketogenic function
d. Glycolytic function
*e. Function of glycogen depositing

35. A patient with inflammation of trigeminal nerve has been having progressive paradontitis for some years. What factor is the most important for parodontitis development?
a. Low activity of leukocytic elastase
b. Poor formation of immunoglobulins
*c. Neurodistrophic disorders
d. Low activity of kallikrein-kinin system
e. Increased tone of vagus nerve

36. During the examination of a two month boy a pediatrician noticed that the childs cry sounds like cats mewing; he revealed also microcephalia and valvular defect. By means of cytogenetic method he determined the childs karyotype - 46 ХY, 5р-. At what stage of mitosis was the patients karyotype analyzed?
a. Prophase
b. Anaphase
c. Prometaphase
d. Telophase
*e. Metaphase

37. A patient has myocardial infarction with thrombosis of the left coronary artery. What pharmocological preparation group should be used to reestablish blood flow?
*a. Fibrinolysis activators
b. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
c. –adrenergic blockers
d. Glucocorticoids
e. Narcotic analgesics

38. A 7 year old child was taken to the infectious disease hospital with complaints of acute pain during swallowing, temperature rise up to 390С, neck edem. Objective signs: tonsills are enlarged, their mucous membrane is plethoric and covered with a big number of whitish-yellowish films that are closely adjacent to the mucous membran. After removal of these films the deep bleeding defect remains. What type of inflammation is it?
a. Crupous
b. Purulent
*c. Diphteritic
d. Serous
e. Hemorrhagic

39. Autopsy of a man who died from ethylene glycol poisoning revealed that his kidneys are a little bit enlarged, edematic; their capsule can be easily remove. Cortical substance is broad and light-grey. Medullary substance is dark-re. What pathology had this man?
a. Acute tubular-interstitial nephritis
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Acute pyelonephritis
*d. Necrotic nephrosis
e. Lipoid nephrosis

40. A boxer who got a punch in the region of temporomandibular joint has a traumatic dislocation of mandibl. Displacement of what articular surfaces will overstep the limits of physiological norm?
a. Neck of mandible and submandibular fossa
b. Head of mandible and submandibular fossa
c. Coronoid process and submandibular fossa
d. Coronoid process and pterygoid fossa
*e. Head of mandible and mandibular fossa

41. A patient has an acute painfullness of face skin. What nerve is damaged?
a. Oculomotor
b. Glossopharyngeal
c. Facial
*d. Trifacial
e. Vagus

42. A patient with diminished excretory function of kidneys has bad breath. What substance which is excessively excreted by salivary glands is the main cause of this occurence?
a. Phosphatase
*b. Urea
c. Lysozyme
d. Mucin
e. Alpha-amylase

43. A patient has pure culture of diphtheria corynebacteri. What immunological reaction should be used in order to determine bacteria toxigenity?
a. Agglutination
b. Complement binding
c. Indirect hemagglutination
d. Inhibition of hemagglutination
*e. Precipitation in agar

44. The deficit of vitamin A causes the disorder of twilight vision. What cells is the photoreceptor function typical for?
a. Ganglionic nerve cells
b. Horizontal neurocytes
c. Bipolar neurons
d. Conic neurosensory cells
*e. Rod neurosensory cells

45. A patient with essential hypertension takes enalapril. What mechanism of action has this hypotensive medication?
a. Antagonist of angiotensine ІІ
b. Inhibitor of phosphodiesterase
*c. Inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme
d. Inhibitor of cyclooxygenase
e. Са channel-blocking agent

46. In order to make a functional complete denture the left superior canine of a patient should be extracte. After the infraorbital anesthesia the patient got a rapidly growing hematoma in the front part of fac. It was found that the injured artery is a branch of:
*a. А.maxillaris
b. А.labialis superior
c. А.ophthalmica
d. А.temporalis superficialis
e. А.alveolaris nferior

47. In course of an experiment the blood pressure of an animal had a stable rise by means of renal artery constriction. Hyperfunctioning of what renal cells cause this effect?
a. Thick spot cells
b. Endotheliocytes
c. Podocytes
d. Interstitial cells
*e. Juxtaglomerular cells

48. In an excitable cell the ion channells were blocke. It hasnt changed essentially the value of rest potential, but the cell lost its ability to generate AP (action potential). What channels were blocked?
a. Natrium and potassium
b. Chloric
c. Potassium
*d. Natrium
e. Calcium

49. Recovery from an infectious disease is accompanied by neutralization of antigens by specific antibodies. What cells produce them?
a. Fibroblasts
b. Tissue basophils
*c. Plasmocytes
d. T-lymphocytes
e. Eosinophils

50. A patient with an acute myocarditis has the clinic presentations of cardiogenic shock. What pathogenetic mechanism plays the main part in shock development?
*a. Disorder of pumping ability of heart
b. Decrease of diastolic flow to the heart
c. Decrease of vascular tone
d. Increase of vascular tone
e. Depositing of blood in veins

51. Histologic examination revealed in all layers of appendix a big number of polymorthonuclear leukocytes; hyperemia, stases. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Simple appendicitis
*b. Phlegmonous appendicitis
c. Gangrenous appendicitis
d. Superficial appendicitis
e. Chronic appendicitis

52. A 20 year old patient complains of excessive thirst and urinary excretion up to 10 L a day. The level of glucose in blood is normal, there is no glucose in urin. What hormone deficit can cause such changes?
*a. Vasopressin
b. Cortisol
c. Triiodothyronine
d. Oxytocin
e. Insulin

53. In course of an experiment chorda tympani of an animal was being stimulated by electric current, as a result the parotid duct excreted:
a. Saliva wasnt excreted
b. A small quantity of fluid saliva
c. A small quantity of viscous saliva
*d. A lot of fluid saliva
e. A lot of viscous saliva

54. A patient with cancer of the back of tongue had an intensive bleeding as a result of tumor spread to the dorsal artery of tongu. What vessel should be ligated in order to stop bleeding?
*a. Lingual artery
b. Dorsal artery of tongue
c. Facial artery
d. Deep artery of tongue
e. Ascending pharyngal artery

55. A woman with ischemic disease has been taking an antianginal medication that has the following properties: dilates coronary arteries, peripheral vessels (arterial and venous), reduces the need of myocardium in oxygen, improves endocardial blood circulation. Name this preparation:
a. Papaverine
b. Dibasol
c. Validol
d. Aminophylline
*e. Nitroglycerin

56. Dystrophic changes of heart are accompanied by dilatation of cardiac cavities, decrease of heart beat force, increased volume of blood that remains in cardiac cavity after systole; veins are overfille. What state is this presentation typical for?
a. Cardiac tamponade
b. Cardiosclerosis stage
c. Emergency phase of myocardial hypertrophy
*d. Myogenic dilatation
e. Tonogenic dilatation

57. The symptoms of regeneration process (callus) on the place of fracture were revealed at the histologic specimen of tubular bon. What tissue forms this structure?
*a. Fibrous bone tissue
b. Reticular tissue
c. Lamellar bone tissue
d. Epithelial tissue
e. Loose connective tissue

58. In course of combined therapy a patient with chronic cardiac insufficiency was taking digitoxin and furocemi. A a result he had extreme muscular weakness. What electrolyte imbalances may be revealed in his blood?
*a. Hypokaliemia
b. Hypocalcemia
c. Hypercalcemia
d. -
e. Hyperkaliemia

59. During the experimental analysis of chondrohistogenesis a sclerotome was damage. What cells will it make impossible to differentiate?
*a. Chondroblasts
b. Fibroblasts
c. Myoblasts
d. Epidermocytes
e. Smooth myocytes

60. A 50 year old patient with ischemic disease was prescribed an antiaggregant preparation. The patient was taking overdoses of this preparation. It resulted in nausea, vomiting, stomach pain during fasting. What preparation was the patient prescribed?
*a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Ticlide
c. Dipiridamol
d. Parmidine
e. Pentoxyphilline

61. The contents of vesicles from the mucous tunic of a man who has smallpox variola was sent to the virusologic laboratory. What will be revealed during microscopy of smears?
a. Babesh-Ernst corpuscles
b. Babesh-Negri corpuscles
c. Syncytium
d. Guarnieris corpuscles
*e. Paschens corpuscles

62. A man has been holding his breath for 60 seconds. After that the respiratory minute volume has increased up to 12 L. What blood change is the main reason for the increase of respiratory minute volume?
a. Increase of pH
b. Decrease of p О2
c. Increase of p О2
d. Decrease of p СО2
*e. Increase of p СО2

63. A 25 year old patient had in the dentists room a sudden attack of bronchial asthm. The doctor gave him salbutamol in the form of inhalation. What is the mechanism of action of this preparation?
*a. Stimulates 2-adrenoreceptors
b. Blocks М-cholinergic receptors
c. Blocks phosphodiesterase
d. Blocks Н1-histamine receptors
e. Stimulates -adrenoreceptors

64. From the purulent exudate of a patient with odontogenic phlegmon a pure culture of Gram(+) microorganisms was segregate. This culture was lecithinously active, coagulated plasma of a rabbit, decomposed mannitol under anaerobe conditions. What microorganism may have contributed to the origin of suppurative complication?
a. S.pyogenes
b. S.mutans
c. S.epidermidis
*d. S.aureus
e. S.viridans

65. Decreased ratio of adenylic nucleotides ATP/ADP results in intensified glycolysis in parodentium tissues under hypoxia conditions. What reaction is activated in this case?
a. Enolase
b. Aldolase
c. Lactate dehydrogenase
*d. Phosphofructokinase
e. Triosophosphate isomerase

66. After a psychoemotional stress a 48 year old patient had a sudden attack of acute heart pain with irradiation to the left han. Nitroglycerine suppressed pain in 10 minutes. What pathogenetic mechanism is principal for the pain development?
*a. Spasm of coronary vessels
b. Dilatation of peripheral vessels
c. Coronary vessel occlusion
d. Embarrassement of coronary vessels
e. Increased need of myocardium in oxygen

67. A patient has a transverse laceration of spinal cord below the VІ thoracal segment. How will it change the character of breathing?
a. It will become more deep
b. It will stop
*c. It wont change esentially
d. It will become more frequent
e. It will become more rare

68. Skin samples of a patient with bronchial asthma revealed allergen sensitization of poplar fuzz. What factor of immune system plays the main part in development of this immunopathological state?
a. -
*b. IgE
c. IgM
d. Sensitized Т-lymphocytes
e. IgD

69. A patient has the following diagnosis: renal hypertension. What is the initial pathogenetic factor of arterial hypertension development in this case?
a. Intensified renin synthesis
b. Intensified angiotensin synthesis
c. Hyperaldosteronism
*d. Renal ischemia
e. Hypernatremia

70. Patient with pigmentary xeroderma are characterized by anamalously high sensivity to ultraviolet rays that causes skin cancer as a result of enzyme systems incapability to restore damages of hereditary apparatus of cells. What process abnormality is this pathology connected with?
a. Genetic complementation
b. DNA recombination
*c. DNA reparation
d. Genetic conversion
e. DNA reduplication

71. The activity of parotides reduces with ag. Activity of what enzyme in saliva will be reducing?
a. Maltase
b. Hexokinase
*c. Amylase
d. Phosphatase
e. Lysozime

72. A one year old child has enlarged head and belly, retarded cutting of teeth, destruction of enamel structur. What hypovitaminosis causes these changes?
*a. Hypovitaminosis D
b. Hypovitaminosis В2
c. Hypovitaminosis В1
d. Hypovitaminosis А
e. Hypovitaminosis С

73. What vitamin deficit causes the simultaneous disorder of reproductive function and dystrophy of skeletal musculature?
a. Vitamin В1
b. Vitamin К
*c. Vitamin Е
d. Vitamin D
e. Vitamin А

74. After tooth extraction the blood pressure of a patient fell dramatically, the patient lost consciousness. Collaptoid state was diagnose. What drug should be used?
*a. Cordiamin
b. Isadrin
c. Strophanthine
d. Sustac
e. Nitroglycerine

75. Pigmentation intensity of human skin is controlled by a few independent dominant genes. It is known that pigmentation is the more intensive, the bigger quantity of these genes. What is the type of interaction between these genes?
a. Epistasis
b. Codominancy
*c. Polymery
d. Pleiotropy
e. Complementarity

76. The students studied pecularities of genetic code and found out that there are amino acids corresponded by 6 codons, 5 amino acids - 4 different codons. Other amino acids are codified by three or two codons and only two amino acids are codified by one codon. What pecularity of genetic code did the students find out?
*a. Redundancy
b. Triplety
c. Unidirectionality
d. Collinearity
e. Versatility

77. A man left a conditioned premise and went outsid. The outside temperature was +400С, the air moisture - 60%.What way of heat emission will be mostly involved in this case?
a. Convection
b. -
c. Radiation
*d. Sweat evaporation
e. Conduction

78. A patient with focal tuberculosis of superior lobe of his right lung takes isoniazid as a part of combined therapy. After a time he started complaining of muscular weakness, decrease of skin sensitivity, sight and movement coordination disorder. What vitamin preparation will be right for elimination of these occurances?
a. Vitamin А
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin D
*d. Vitamin В6
e. Vitamin В12

79. Microscopic analysis of a specimen revealed an organ of nervous system that consists of pseudounipolar neurons covered with glial and connective tissue membranes. Determine this organ:
*a. Spinal ganglion
b. Spinal cord
c. Cortex of cerebrum
d. Cerebellum
e. Vegetative ganglion

80. Human body cools in water much more faster than in the air. Due to what way of heat emission does it happen?
a. Heat radiation
b. Convection
c. Sweat evaporation
d. -
*e. Thermal conduction

81. A 28 year old patient was diagnosed:an acute inflammation of mucuos membrane of nasolacrimal duct. It is known from his past history that after influenza he had been having nasal excretions for 10 days. From what part of nasal cavity could the infection get into the nasolacrimal duct?
a. Median nasal meatus
b. Vestibule of nose
*c. Inferior nasal meatus
d. Superior nasal meatus
e. Frontal sinus

82. A woman in grave condition was admitted to a hospital with the following diagnosis: hemorrhagic stroke in the region of frontal part of the right cerebral hemispher. The damage of what artery caused most likely this condition?
*a. A.cerebri media
b. A.сerebri anterior
c. A.communicans anterior
d. A.communicans posterior
e. A.cerebri posterior

83. X-ray examination revealed an accumulation of suppuration in maxillary sinus. Into what nasal meatus excretes the suppuration?
*a. Median nasal
b. Superior nasal
c. Nasopharyngeal
d. Common nasal
e. Inferior nasal

84. After honey consumption a teenager had urticaria accompanied by leukocytosis. What type of leukocytosis is it in this case?
*a. Eosinophilic leukocytosis
b. Neutrophilic leukocytosis
c. Lymphocytosis
d. Basophylic leukocytosis
e. Monocytosis

85. During the preparation of a patient for a heart operation the doctors measured blood pressure in heart chambers. In one of them the pressure was changing from 0 to 120 mm during one cardiac cycl. Name the heart chamber:
a. -
b. Right atrium
c. Left atrium
*d. Left ventricle
e. Right ventricle

86. A man had an acute onset of disease, he complained of chill, temperature rise up to 400С, headache, cough, dyspne. On the fifth day of illness he die. Autopsy revealed:his lungs were enlarged, they had a look of "coal-miners lungs". What illness is such postmortem diagnosis typical for?
*a. Influenza
b. Adenovirus infection
c. Multiple bronchiectasis
d. Croupous pneumonia
e. Respiratory syncytial infection

87. Father bought some pork at the market. What disease may the members of his family catch supposed this meat didnt stand veterenary control?
a. Beef tapeworm infection
b. Fasciola hepatica
c. Echinococcosis
d. Hymenolepiasis
*e. Teniosis

88. In course of an experiment posterior roots of spinal cord of an animal were cut. What changes will take place in the innervation zone?
a. Loss of sensation and motor functions
b. Loss of motor functions
*c. Loss of sensation
d. Raise of muscle tone
e. Decline of muscle tone

89. A patient with chronic glomerulonephritis has disorder of incretoty function of kidneys. What blood elements deficit will result from it?
a. Leukocytes
*b. Erythrocytes
c. Leukocytes and thrombocytes
d. Erythrocytes and leukocytes
e. Thrombocytes

90. The lung hypertension and cardiac insufficiency of right ventricle with ascites and edemata developed at patient with pneumosclerosis. What is the principal pathogenetic mechanism of edemata development?
a. Increase of oncotic pressure of intercellular fluid
b. Decrease of osmotic blood pressure
*c. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure in veins
d. Increase of vascular permeability
e. Decrease of oncotic blood pressure

91. A 46 year old patient was admitted to the hematological department. It was found that he had disorder of granulocytopoesis and thrombocytogenesis processes. In what organ does this pathological process take pace?
*a. Red bone marrow
b. Thymus
c. Palatine tonsil
d. Spleen
e. Lymphatic ganglion

92. Two days after myocardial infarction a patient had a sudden systolic pressure decrease up to 60 mm, tachycardia up to 140/min, dyspnea; the patient lost consciousness. What mechanism is principal for the shock pathogenesis?
a. Intoxication
*b. Decrease of cardiac volume
c. Anaphylactic reaction
d. Decrease of circulating blood volume
e. Paroxysmal tachycardia

93. The body temperature of a patient with an infectious disease rises once in two days up to 39,5-40,50С and stays so for about an hour and then drops to the initial level. What type of fever is it?
a. Hectic
b. Continued
*c. Intermittent
d. Atypical
e. Remittent

94. In compliance with the clinical presentations a man was prescribed pyridoxalphosphat. What processes are corrected by this preparation?
a. Desamination of purine nucleotides
b. Protein synthesis
*c. Transamination and decarboxylation of amino acids
d. Oxidative decarboxilation of keto acids
e. Synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases

95. A patient has the sudden decrease of Са2+ content in bloo. What hormone secretion will increase?
a. Thyrocalcitonin
b. Aldosterone
c. Somatotropin
*d. Parathormone
e. Vasopressin

96. A laboratory received a material (extract of animal matter) from the region with cases of anthrax among animals. What serological reaction should be used in order to reveal antigenes of pathogenic organism in the given material?
*a. Thermoprecipitation
b. Complement binding
c. Precipitations in agar
d. Indirect hemagglutination
e. Radio assay

97. The chemical burn of esophagus caused its local constriction as a result of scar formation. What cells of loose connective tissue take part in scar formation?
*a. Mature specialized fibroblasts
b. Myofibroblasts
c. Fibroclasts
d. Fibrocytes
e. Young fibroblasts

98. A patient was taken to the hospital with preliminary diagnosis progressive muscle distrophy. What substance will be excessively contained in urine and confirm this diagnosis?
a. Troponine
b. Carnosine
c. Hydroxiproline
*d. Creatine
e. Pyruvate

99. What substance makes saliva viscous and mucous, has protective function, protects mucous membrane of oral cavity from mechanical damage?
a. Lysozyme
*b. Mucin
c. Amylase
d. Glucose
e. Kallikrein

100. During the embryogenesis of oral cavity the development of dental enamel was disturbe. What source of dental development was damaged?
a. Dental saccule
b. Dental papilla
c. Mesoderma
*d. Epithelium
e. Mesenchyma

101. A victim of a road accident has an abruption of a part of mandibular angle, displacement of fragment backwards and upwards. What ligament is responsible for this displacement?
*a. Styloid-mandibular
b. Pterygoid-mandibular
c. Intraarticular
d. Sphenoid-mandibular
e. Lateral

102. ESR of a patient with pneumonia is 48 mm/h. What caused such changes?
*a. Hypergammaglobulinemia
b. Hyperalbuminemia
c. Hypoproteinemia
d. Erythrocytosis
e. Hypogammaglobulinemia

103. A patient with kidney disease has high blood pressure, espesially the diastolic one. Hypersecretion of what biologically active substance causes blood pressure rise?
a. Catecholamines
b. Adrenaline
c. Noradrenaline
*d. Renin
e. Vasopressin

104. In course of embryogenesis maxillary and mandibular processes grew together with a delay. What development anomalies should be expected in this case?
a. Microstomia
*b. Macrostomia
c. Gothic palate
d. Cleft of superior lip
e. Cleft palate

105. The regeneration process of damaged skeletal muscles іs very slow. What elements of musculoskeletal fiber take part in the process of regeneration?
a. Myofibroblasts
b. Myoepithelial cells
*c. Myosatellitocytes
d. Smooth myocytes
e. Myoblasts

106. There is a 9 year old boy in endocrinological department, who has already had a few fractures of extremeties caused by fragility of bones. Malfunction of what endocrinous glands (gland) takes place?
a. Thyroid gland
b. Adrenal glands
c. Epiphysis
d. Thymus
*e. Parathyroid glands

107. Leukoses are treated with antimetabolite methotrexat. What vitamin is its antagonist?
a. Piridoxine
b. Rutin
*c. Folic acid
d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Phyllochinone

108. A 22 year woman has enlarged lymphatic ganglions. Histological analysis of a ganglion revealed lymphocytes, histiocytes, reticular cells, small and great Hodgkins cells, multinuclear Reed-Sternberg cells, solitary foci of caseous necrosis. What disease are these changes typical for?
a. Lymphosarcoma
b. Cancer metastasis
*c. Lymphogranulematosis
d. Acute leukemia
e. Chronic leukemia

109. A patient started bleeding after tooth extraction. What action is necessary in this case?
a. Fibrinogen injection
b. Thrombin injection
c. Vicasol orally
*d. Adrenalin locally
e. Neodicumarine orally

110. After recovering from epidemic parotiditis a patient began to put off weight, he was permanently thirsty, drank a lot of water, had frequent urination, voracious appetit. Now he has complaints of skin itch, weakness, furunculosis. His blood contains: glucose - 16 mmole/L, ketone bodies - 100 mcmole/L; glucosuria. What disease has developed?
a. Malnutrition diabetes
b. Steroid diabetes
c. Diabetes insipidus
d. Insulin-independent diabetes
*e. Insulin-dependent diabetes

111. Before teeth come out first on their roots appears a solid tissue that looks like membrane reticulated bon. What tissue is it?
a. Enamel
b. Dentin
c. Dense fibrous connective tissue
*d. Cement
e. Loose fibrous connective tissue

112. Unskilled people usually have muscle pain after sprints as a result of lactate accumulation. What biochemical process may it be connected with?
a. Lypogenesis
b. Glycogenesis
*c. Glycolisis
d. Gluconeogenesis
e. Pentose-phosphate cycle

113. A patient with adenoma of glomeral zone of adrenal cortex (Conns disease) has arterial hypertension, convulsions, polyuri. What is the main link in pathogenesis of these disorders?
a. Glucocorticoid hypersecretion
b. Glucocorticoid hyposecretion
*c. Aldosterone hypersecretion
d. Catecholamine hypersecretion
e. Aldosterone hyposecretion

114. A patient who has been ill with tuberculosis for a long time has an intracellular mycobacteria disposition. What preparation must be included into the complex therapy of tuberculosis?
a. Rifampicin
b. Ethambutol
c. Sodium para-aminosalicylate
d. Ethionamide
*e. Isoniazid

115. A patient has been taking glucocorticoids for a long tim. Drug withdrowal caused acute attack of his disease, blood pressure reduction, weakness. What are these occurences connected with?
a. Hyperproduction of corticotroph hormone
b. Cumulation
*c. Adrenal glands insufficiency
d. Sensibilisation
e. Drug habituation

116. 15 minutes after a car accident examination of a 35 year old man revealed massive injury of lower extremities without serious external loos of bloo. The victim is in excited stat. What component of pathogenesis of traumatic shock is basic and requires urgent correction?
a. Internal loss of plasma
b. Intoxication
c. Cardiac function disorder
d. Acute renal insufficience
*e. Pain

117. Sputum smears of a patient with chronic pulmonary disease were stained by Ziehl-Neelsen method and analyzed in the bacteriological laboratory. Microscopy revealed red bacillus. What property of tuberculosis myobacteria was found?
a. Spore-formation
*b. Acid resistance
c. Encapsulation
d. Alcohol resistance
e. Alkali resistance

118. The myocytes cytoplasm contains a big number of dissolved metabolites of glucose oxidation. Name one of them that converts directly into lactate:
a. Fructose-6-phosphate
b. Glucose-6-phosphate
c. Oxaloacetate
*d. Pyruvate
e. Glycerophosphate

119. A patient has painfulness along big nerve trunks and excessive content of pyruvate in bloo. What vitamin deficit may cause such changes?
a. РР
*b. В1
c. В2
d. Pantothenic acid
e. Biotin

120. During the examination of patients oral cavity a dentist noticed a slight overbite of mandibular teeth by maxillary incisors. What occlusion belongs such position of teeth to?
a. Prognathism
b. Orthogenic occlusion
c. Closed occlusion
*d. Orthognathic occlusion
e. Biprognathic occlusion

121. A 65 year old patient suddenly die. She suffered from thrombophlebitis of deep veins of shin. Autopsy revealed: trunk and bifurcation of pulmonary artery contain red loose masses with dull corrugated surfac. What pathological process did the morbid anatomist reveal in pulmonary artery?
a. Foreign body embolism
b. Fat embolism
c. Tissue embolism
*d. Thromboembolism
e. Thrombosis

122. During the electronical microscopic analysis of salivary gland the cell fragmets were revealed which are surrounded by a membrane and contain condensed particles of nuclear substance and solitary organelles; the inflammatory reaction around these cells is absent. What process is meant?
*a. Apoptosis
b. Karyorhexis
c. Karyolysis
d. Coagulation necrosis
e. Karyopicnosis

123. A surgeon is going to take lympha from patients thoracic duct in the point of its flowing into venous channel. Where exactly should he insert a cannula?
*a. Point of formation of superior vena cava
b. Point of formation of inferior vena cava
c. Right venous angle
d. Left venous angle
e. Point of formation of portal vein

124. A patient complains of having urination disorder. He is diagnosed the hypertrophy of prostate glan. What part of gland is damaged?
a. Base
b. Left lobe
c. Right lobe
d. Apex
*e. Median lobe

125. The preparation comlex for periodontitis treatment includes the medicine from the group of water soluble vitamins, bioflavonide derivative, which is prescribed together with ascorbic aci. This preparation has anti-oxidative properties, decreases gingival hemorrhag. What preparation is meant?
a. Calcium panganate
b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Calcium pantothenate
d. Folic acid
*e. Rutin

126. For assessment of the neutralizing function of liver a patient with chronic hepatitis went through a test with natrium benzoate loa. The excretion of what acid with urine will characterize the neutrolizing function of liver?
*a. Hippuric acid
b. Citric acid
c. Phenylacetic acid
d. Oxalic acid
e. Valeric acid

127. A patient has lost ability to recognize the objects by the typical for them sounds (clock, bell, music). What part of brain is most likely damaged?
a. Lobus frontalis
b. Insula
c. Lobus parietalis
*d. Lobus temporalis
e. Lobus occipitalis

128. A man permanently lives high in the mountains. What changes of blood characteristics can be found in his organism?
a. Decrease of hemoglobin content
b. Decrease of reticulocytes number
c. Erythroblasts in blood
*d. Increase of erythrocytes number
e. Decrease of colour index of blood

129. A 16 year old girl consulted a dentist about dark colour of teeth enamel. The family tree analysis revealed that this pathology is transmitted to all girls from father and to 50% of boys from mother. What type of inheritance are these pecularities typical for?
*a. Dominant, Х-chromosome-linked
b. Recessive, Х-chromosome-linked
c. Autosomal-dominant
d. Autosomal-recessive
e. Recessive, Y-chromosome-linked

130. Microspecimen analysis of childs finger skin revealed that epidermis has signs of inadequate development. What embryonal leaf was damaged in the process of development?
a. Mezenchyma
b. Entoderma
*c. Ectoderma
d. Ectomezenchyma
e. Mesoderma

131. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemi. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
a. Glycogenesis
b. Pentose-phosphate cycle
c. Aerobic glycolisis
d. Glycogenolysis
*e. Gluconeogenesis

132. Autopsy of a woman who died of tumorous dissemination of mucinosous cystadenocarcinoma and before that had to stay in bed for a long time revealed big necrotic areas of skin and soft subjacent tissues in sacral region. What form of necrosis is the case?
*a. Pressure sore
b. Infarction
c. Caseous necrosis
d. Zenkers necrosis
e. Sequester

133. After implantation of a cardiac valve a young man constantly takes indirect anticoagulants. His state was complicated by hemorrhag. What substance content has decreased in blood?
a. Ceruloplasmin
*b. Prothrombin
c. Creatin
d. Haptoglobin
e. Heparin

134. A patient is being operated under inhalation narcosis with nitrous oxid. It is known that it has evident lipophilic properties. What mechanism is responsible for transporting this preparation through biological membranes?
a. Filtration
b. Pinocytosis
c. Active transport
d. Facilitated diffusion
*e. Passive diffusion

135. During the examination of patients oral cavity a dentist found a carious cavity on the crown surface of the second premolar tooth that was turned to the first molar tooth. Name the damaged crown surface:
a. Facies distalis
b. Facies lingualis
c. Facies vestibularis
d. Facies occlusalis
*e. Facies mesialis

136. A man who took part in disaster-management at a nuclear power plant had hemorrhagic syndrome at the same time with acute radiation sickness. What is the most important thing for the pathogenesis of this syndrome?
a. High activity of anticoagulative blood system
b. Low activity of anticoagulative blood system
*c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Destructed structure of vessel walls
e. High activity of fibrinolysis factors

137. A lot of pyoinflammatory processes in oral cavity are caused by anaerobes. What nutrient medium can be used for conrol of wound textile contamination by anaerobes?
a. Ploskirevs
b. Sabourauds
c. Roux
d. Endo
*e. Kitt-Tarozzi

138. A patient has disorder of airways patency at the level of small and middle bronchs. What changes of acid-base balance may take place?
a. Metabolic alkalosis
b. Respiratory akcalosis
c. Metabolic acidosis
*d. Respiratory acidosis
e. Acid-base balance wont change

139. A woman after labor lost 20 kg of body weight, her hair and teeth fall out, she has muscle atrophy (hypophysial cachexia). Synthesis of what hypophysis hormone is disturbed?
a. Thyreotropic
*b. Somatotropic
c. Corticotrophic
d. Gonadotropic
e. Prolactin

140. A patient who suffered form syphilis took a course of antibiotic therapy and fully recovere. Some time later he was infected again with Treponema pallidum. What form of infection is it?
a. Secondary infection
b. Complication
c. Superinfection
d. Recurrence
*e. Reinfection

141. A patient arrived to the oral surgery department with dislocation of temporomandibular joint and injury of its main ligament. Name this ligament:
*a. Lateral
b. Mandibular
c. Styloid-mandibular
d. Pterygoid-mandibular
e. Medial

142. A patient with chronic alcoholism has symptoms of polyneuritis and cardiac insufficiensy. What vitamin preparation should be prescribed to this patient?
*a. Thiamine
b. Retinol
c. Rutin
d. Phylloquinone
e. Ergocalciferol

143. A patient with disorder of cerebral circulation has problems with deglutition. What part of cerebrum was damaged?
a. Forebrain
b. Servical part of spinal cord
c. Midbrain
d. Interbrain
*e. Brainstem

144. During ablation of the nose wing lypoma a dentist injured a vessel, that caused a saphenous hematom. What vessel was damaged?
*a. А.facialis
b. А.supraorbitalis
c. А.infraorbitalis
d. А.angularis
e. А.maxillaris

145. In the vermiform appendix there was found a white helminth, 40 mm long with thin filiform forward en. Ecscrements contained oval eggs with plugs at the poles. Determine the kind of helminth:
a. Seatworm
b. Ascarid
c. Hookworm
*d. Whipworm
e. Threadworm

146. Examination of a patient with hepatolenticular degeneration revealed that synthesis of ceruloplasmin protein has a defect. What organelles is this defect connected with?
a. Golgi complex
b. Lysosomes
*c. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
d. Agranular endoplasmic reticulum
e. Mitochondrions

147. During the histologic lung analysis of a man who died from cardiac insufficiency the inflammation focuses were reveale. Alveoles were full of light-pink fluid, here and there with pinkish fibers that formed a close-meshed reticulum with a small number of lymphocytes. What type of exudate is present in lungs?
a. Hemorrhagic
b. Fibrinous
*c. Serofibrinous
d. Serous
e. Purulent

148. A 53 year old patient consulted a doctor about white patch on the mucous membrane of tongu. This patch sticks out from the mucous membrane, its surface is cracke. Microscopic analysis reveals thickening of multilayer epithelium, parakeratosis and acanthosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Papilloma
b. Geographic tongue
*c. Leukoplakia
d. Median rhomboid glossitis
e. Epidermoid cancer

149. A patient with complaints of dizziness, worsening of vision acuity, sickness, salivation and spasmodic stomachaches was taken to the admission department. The diagnosis was poisoning with organophosphorous compounds. What preparations should be included into complex therapy?
*a. Atropine sulfate and dipiroxim
b. Tetacin-calcium and unitiol
c. Glucose and bemegride
d. Sodium thiosulfate and bemegride
e. Nalorphine hydrochloride and bemegide

150. Bacteriological laboratory has the task to sterilize nutrient mediums containing substances that convert under the temperature over 1000С (urea, carbohydrates). What method of sterilization should be used?
a. Pasteurization
b. Boiling
c. Tindalization
*d. Fluid steam sterilization
e. Autoclaving

151. After consumption some tinned meat a patient had diplopia, acute headache, deglutition disorder, hard breathing, muscle weakness. The diagnosis was botulism. What factor of pathogenicity are the clinic presentations of this disease connected with?
a. Plasmocoagulase
b. Fibrinolysin
*c. Exotoxin
d. Endotoxin
e. Hemolysin

152. A man has a diosorder of absorption of fat hydrolysates. What components deficit in the cavity of small intestine may cause this effect?
a. Sodium ions
b. Bile pigments
*c. Bile acids
d. Liposoluble vitamins
e. Lipolytic enzymes

153. A newborn child has microcephali. Doctors believe that it is the result of mothers taking actinomycin D during pregnancy. What embryonal leaf was influenced by this teratogen?
a. Mesoderma
*b. Ectoderma
c. Entoderma and mesoderma
d. All leaves
e. Entoderma

154. A man consumes dry foo. What salivary glands secret most of all?
a. Submandibular
b. Sublingual
*c. Parotides
d. Palatine
e. Buccal

155. In a histological specimen the gland adenomeres should be determine. They are formed by the cells with central round nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm. Determine the type of adenomeres:
a. Sebaceous
b. Combined
c. Mucous
*d. Serous
e. Seromucous

156. A 23 year patient was admitted to the hospital in grave condition with craniocerebral traum. His respiration is characterized by a spasmodic long inspiration interrupted by a short expiration. What respiration type is it typical for?
a. Kussmauls respiration
*b. Apneustic
c. Gasping
d. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
e. Biots respiration

157. A purulent wound was treated with a solution that had antiseptic effect and contributed to the mechanical wound cleansing. What solution was used?
a. Alcoholic iodine
b. Brilliant green
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Ethacrydine lactate
*e. Hydrogen peroxide

158. A patients preliminary diagnosis is toxoplasmosis. What material was used for diagnostics of this disease?
a. Urine
b. Duodenal contents
c. Sputum
d. Feces
*e. Blood

159. A child complains of having an itch in occipital and temporal region of hea. After examination his mother found superficial ulcers as a result of scratching and white nits in the hair. Name the pathogenic organism:
*a. Head louse
b. Body louse
c. Pubic louse
d. Human flea
e. Screwworm fly

160. A 30 year old patient who was taken to the hospital with diagnosis acute glomerulonephritis has proteinuri. What disorder caused this occurance?
a. Delayed excretion of nitrogen metabolism products
b. Decreased number of functioning nephrons
*c. Increased permeability of renal filter
d. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure in capillaries
e. Decreased oncotic pressure of blood plasma

161. A 40 year old man who took part in disaster-management at a nuclear power plant fell sick with paradontitis. What etiological agent is the most important for the development of this pathology?
a. Iron deficit
b. Increased load of dentoalveolar apparatus
c. Streptococcus
d. Malnutrition
*e. Emotional stress

162. A three year old child was admitted to the hospital with a foreign body in bronches. What bronchus contains most likely a foreign body?
*a. Right primary
b. Right segmental
c. Lobular
d. Left primary
e. Left segmental

163. During morphologic analysis of pulp floor three zones can be distinctly differentiated: the one of softened dentin, transparent dentin and replacing dentin. What stage of caries are these changes typical for?
a. Stain stage
b. Superficial caries
c. Chronic caries
d. Deep caries
*e. Median caries

164. The impact of oxitocine on uterus wall helps to stop uterine bleeding after labor. What membrane of this oragan reacts on the effect of this hormone?
a. Submucous membrane
*b. Myometrium
c. Endometrium
d. Perimetrium
e. Parametrium

165. Damage of one of the reactors at a nuclear power plant resulted in runout of radioactive products. People who were present in the high-radiation area got approximately 250-300 R. They were urgently taken to the hospital. What blood changes will be typical for this period?
*a. Lymphopenia
b. Thrombocytopenia
c. Neutropenia
d. Leukopenia
e. Anemia

166. A 57 year old patient with diabetes mellitus was developed ketoacedosis. Biochemical base of this condition is smaller extent of acetyl-CoA utilization. What cell compound deficit causes this effect?
*a. Oxaloacetate
b. Succinate
c. 2-oxoglutarate
d. Aspartate
e. Glutamate

167. A 4 year old child had Mantoux test. 60 hours after tuberculin introduction a focal skin hardening and redness 15 mm in diameter appeare. It was regarded as positive test. What type of hypersensitivity reaction is this test based upon?
a. -
*b. Delayed-type hypersensitivity
c. Immediate hypersensitivity
d. Immune complex-mediated hypersensitivity
e. Complement-mediated cytotoxic hypersensitivity

168. After an operation a patients sensitivity of front and lateral surface of neck has reduce. What nerve is damaged?
a. N.auricularis magnus
b. Nn.supraclaviculares
c. N.occipitalis mino
d. N.phrenicus
*e. N.transversus colli

169. A 1,5 year old child was taken to the hospital. The examination revealed dementia, disorder of motor functions regulation, hypopigmentation of skin, high rate of phenylalanine in bloo. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Phenylketonuria
b. Downs syndrome
c. Mucoviscidosis
d. Galactosemia
e. Tyrosinosis

170. Microscopic analysis of tissue sampling from affected area of mucous membrane of oral cavity revealed bacillus in form of accumulations that looked like a pack of cigarettes. Ziehl-Neelsen staining gives them red colour. What kind of pathogenic organism was most likely revealed in tissue sampling?
a. M.avium
b. A.bovis
*c. M.leprae
d. M.tuberculosis
e. A.israilii

171. A patient with systemic scleroderma has an intensified collagen destruction. What amino acid will be intensively excreted with urine and reflect processes of collagen destruction?
a. Phenylalanine
b. Serine
c. Alanine
d. Tryptophan
*e. Oxyproline

172. During the histologic examination of thyroid gland of a man who died of cardiac insufficiency together with hypothyroidism there was found the diffusive infiltration of gland by lymphocytes and plasmocytes, parenchyma atrophy and growth of connective tissu. Formulate a diagnosis:
a. Thyroid gland adenoma
b. -
c. Purulent thyroiditis
*d. Hashimotos thyroiditis
e. Thyrotoxic goiter

173. In a cell the mutation of the first exon of structural gene took plac. The number of nucleotide pairs has decreased - 250 pairs instead of 290. Determine the type of mutation:
*a. Deletion
b. Translocation
c. Inversion
d. Nonsense-mutation
e. Duplication

174. During the tooth development the enamel organ has prismatic cells with hexagonal intersection; the nucleus is situated in the central part of the cell. What cells are meant?
*a. Preenameloblasts
b. Cambial cells
c. Exterior enameloblasts
d. Enamel pulp cells
e. Preodontoblasts

175. Microscopic analysis of brain base vessels of a patient who died of ischemic stroke revealed that intima of cerebral vessels is irregular, with moderate quantity of yellow stains and yellowish-whitish patches that narrow lumen. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Atherosclerosis
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Primary hypertension
d. Rheumatism
e. Nodular periarteritis

176. While the examination of patients oral cavity the dentist found xerostomia, numerous erosions. What vitamin deficit caused this effect?
*a. Vitamin А
b. Vitamin К
c. Vitamin РР
d. Vitamin Н
e. Vitamin Р

177. A patient who takes tetracyclin was recommended not to consume dairy products. Why did the doctor give him such recommendation?
a. Dairy products dont assimilate
b. Gastrointestinal digestion may be disturbed
c. They increase risk of dysbacteriosis
d. Antibiotic toxicity increases
*e. They inhibit antibiotic absorption

178. A patient has a slowly healing fractur. What medcine can be used to accelerate formation of connective tissue matrix?
a. Prednisolone
*b. Methyluracil
c. Cyclosporine
d. Cyclophosphan
e. Methotrexate

179. A 10 year old child lives in the region where fluorine content in water is above the mark. A dentist examined the child and found teeth damage in form of chalky and also pigmentary stains and stripes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Median caries
b. Wedge defects
*c. Fluorosis
d. Tooth erosion
e. Acidic necrosis of hard tooth tissues

180. A patient was taken to the hospital with complaints of headache, high temperature, frequent stool, stomach pain with tenesmus. Doctor made a clinical diagnosis dysentery and sent the material (excrements) to the bacteriological laboratory for analysis. What diagnostic method should the laboratory doctor use to confirm or to disprove the clinical diagnosis?
a. Serological
b. Biological
*c. Bacteriological
d. Allergic
e. Bacterioscopic

181. A patient was attacked by bees. He was taken to the hospital with Quinckes edem. What antihistaminic medication without sedative effect sholuld be prescribed the patient?
*a. Diasoline
b. Phencarol
c. Tavegil
d. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
e. Suprastine

182. A patient has liver cirrhosis. Analysis of what substance excreted with urine may characterize the state of antitoxic liver function?
a. Uric acid
b. Amino acids
*c. Creatinine
d. Ammonian salts
e. Hippuric acid

183. Histologic analysis of uterus mucous membrane revealed twisting glands, serrated and spinned, they were extended by stroma growth with proliferation of its cells. Formulate a diagnosis:
a. Leiomyoma
b. Acute endometritis
c. Cystic mole
d. Placental polyp
*e. Glandular hyperplasia of endometrium

184. The microscopic analysis of bronch biopsy revealed a tumor that consisted of circumscribed accumulations of atypical cells of multylayer plane epithelium, here and there with typical "pearls". What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidermoid cancer without keratinization
b. Solid carcinoma
*c. Epidermoid cancer with keratinization
d. Scirrhus
e. Mucous carcinoma

185. Autopsy of a man who died of typhoid fever revealed ulcers along the ileum. These ulcers have even sides, clean fundus formed by muscle layer or even by serous tunic of an intestin. What stage of disease does the described presentation correspond with?
a. Stage of medullary swelling
b. Stage of "dirty" ulcers
c. Stage of ulcer healing
*d. Stage of "clean" ulcers
e. Stage of necrosis

186. After a hemorrhage into the brainstem a patient has lost reflex of myosis as a reaction to increase of illumination. What structure was damaged?
a. Lateral reticular nuclei
b. Red nuclei
c. Black substance
d. Medial reticular nuclei
*e. Vegetative nuclei of oculomotor nerve

187. While of oral cavity examination the dentist revealed the formation of the first big cheekteeth on the lower jaw of a chil. How old is this child?
a. 10-11 years old
b. 12-13 years old
c. 8-9 years old
*d. 6-7 years old
e. 4-5 years old

188. A patient has an injury in right lateral area of belly. What part of large intestine is most likely injured?
a. Rectum
b. Transverse colon
c. Sigmoid colon
d. Descending colon
*e. Ascending colon

189. A patient consulted dental surgeon about an injury of submandibular triangl. During the wound cleansing the surgeon found that the artery leading to the soft palate is damaged. What artery is damaged?
a. A.palatina descendens
b. A.sphenopalatina
*c. A.palatina ascendens
d. A.pharingea ascendens
e. A.facialis

190. To what total ATP quantity is the full glucose oxidation and its linking with phosphorylation equivalent?
a. 12
*b. 38
c. 52
d. 58
e. 8

191. A sportsman was examined after an intensive physical activity. The examination revealed disorder of movement coordination but the force of muscle contractions remained the sam. It can be explained by retarded speed of excitement conduction through:
a. Conduction tracts
b. Neuromuscular synapses
c. Efferent nerves
d. Afferent nerves
*e. Central synapses

192. A patient has urolithiasis that was complicated by a renal calculus passag. At what level of ureter is it most likely to stop?
*a. Between abdominal and pelvic part
b. In pelvis
c. 5 cm above pelvic part
d. In the middle abdominal part
e. 2 cm above flowing into urinary bladder

193. Tissue sample of soft palate arches that was taken because a tumor was suspected (microscopic analysis revealed an ulcer with dense fundus) revealed mucous membrane necrosis, submucous layer was infiltrated by lymphocytes, epithelioid cells, plasmocytes, solitary neutrophils. There was also evident endovasculitis and perivasculitis. What desease are these changes typical for?
a. ulcerative stomatitis
*b. Primary syphilis
c. Aphthous stomatitis
d. Vensans ulcerative-necrotic stomatitis
e. Faucial diphteria

194. A mother consulted a doctor about her one year old child, who has got six teeth come out. How many teeth should the child of such age have?
a. 7
b. 12
c. 10
d. 6
*e. 8

195. Autopsy of a 5 year old child revealed that pia maters of brain are extremely plethoric, nebulous, have a look of yellowish-green "bonnet". Microscopic analysis: pia mater of brain is very thickened, plethoric, impregnated with purulent exudate containing fibrin. What disease is meant?
a. Measles
b. Anthrax
*c. Meningococcosis
d. Influenza
e. Tuberculosis

196. After a long-lasting and grave illness the blood pressure of a patient fell up to 60/40 mm; he has tachicardia, dyspnea, black-out. How can this state be defined?
a. Agony
*b. Preagony
c. Apparent death
d. -
e. Shock

197. Mother of a two year old child consulted a dentist. In the period of pregnancy she was non-systematically taking antibiotics to treat an infectious diseas. The childs examination revealed incisor destruction, yellow enamel, brown limbus of dental cervix. What preparation was mother taking during her pregnancy?
*a. Doxycycline
b. Furosemide
c. Xanthinol nicotinate
d. Octadine
e. Ampiox

198. A woman has ovary hyperemia, increase of hematofollicular barrier permeability with edema development, infiltration of follicle wall by segmentonuclear leukocytes. The volume of follicle is big, its wall is thinne. What period of sex cycle does the described picture correspond with?
a. Menstrual period
b. Postmenstrual period
c. Ovulation
d. Relative rest period
*e. Preovulatory stage

199. In course of an experiment the peripheral fragment of a cut vagus nerve on the dogs neck was being stimulate. There was the following change of cardiac activity:
a. Increase of myocardium excitability
b. Increase of beat frequency and force
*c. Decrease of beat frequency
d. Increased speed of excitement conduction through myocardium
e. Increase of beat force

200. A 50 year old woman had her tooth extracte. The tissue regenerate. Which of the following organella are the most active during tissue regeneration?
a. Centrosomes
*b. Ribosomes
c. Agranular endoplasmic reticulum
d. Lysosomes
e. Postlysosomes

