1. A surgeon should reach the omental bursa to perform an operation on abdominal cavity. How can he reach this part of peritoneal cavity without affecting the integrity of lesser omentum?
a. Through the left mesenteric sinus
b. Through the right paracolic sulcus
c. Through the right mesenteric sinus
d. Through the left paracolic sulcus
*e. Through the epiploic foramen

2. A patient has hypocalcemia. What hormone deficiency may be its cause?
a. Corticotropin
*b. Parathormone
c. Corticoliberin
d. Aldosterone
e. Thyrocalcitonin

3. A patients middle ear inflammation was complicated by mastoiditis. There was a threat of purulent thrombosis of the nearest venous sinus. What sinus was under the threat?
a. Inferior petrosal
b. Transverse
c. Rectus
*d. Sigmoid
e. Superior saggital

4. A 30 year old patient who was taken to the hospital with diagnosis acute glomerulonephritis has proteinuria. What disorder caused this occurance?
a. Increase of hydrostatic blood pressure in capillaries
b. Decreased number of functioning nephrons
c. Delayed excretion of nitrogen metabolism products
d. Decreased oncotic pressure of blood plasma
*e. Increased permeability of renal filter

5. Rate of excitement conduction was studied on different sites of an isolated heart. Where was the lowest rate registered?
*a. In atrioventricular node
b. In ventricles myocardium
c. In atrias myocardium
d. In Purkinjes fibers
e. In His bundle

6. A woman with ischemic heard disease has been taking an antianginal medication that has the following properties: dilates coronary arteries, peripheral vessels (arterial and venous), reduces the need of myocardium in oxygen, improves endocardial blood circulation. Name this preparation:
*a. Nitroglycerin
b. Dibasol
c. Aminophylline
d. Validol
e. Papaverine

7. On the territory of a certain region the mass death of rodents was observed. It was assumed that it may be caused by plague agent. What serological reaction should be applied for quick determination of antigene of this epizootic agent?
a. Agglutination reaction
b. Bordet-Gengou test
*c. Precipitation reaction
d. Reaction of passive hemagglutination
e. Neutralization reaction

8. Formaldehyde solution was applied for desinfection of nonmetallic instruments of surgical department. What chemical series does this antiseptic preparation belong to?
a. Detergents
*b. Aliphatic series
c. Aromatic series
d. Halogenated compaunds
e. Alcochols

9. Examination of a pregnant woman who has been taking alcohol revealed diturbed anlage of ectoderma during the fetal life. What derivatives of this leaf have defects?
a. Bowels epithelium
b. Liver
*c. Neural tube
d. Kidneys
e. Sexual glands

10. A child has disturbed enamel and dentine formation as a result of decreased content of calcium ions in his blood. What hormone deficiency may cause such changes?
*a. Thyreocalcitonin
b. Somatotropin
c. Parathormone
d. Triiodothyronine
e. Thyroxin

11. A mans energy consumption is measured on an empty stomach, in lying position, under conditions of physical psychical rest, at comfortable temperature. At what time will the energy consuption be the lowest?
*a. At 3-4 oclock a.m
b. At 10-12 oclock a.m
c. At 2-4 oclock p.m
d. At 5-6 oclock p.m
e. At 7-8 oclock a.m

12. In the vermiform appendix there was found a white helminth, 40 mm long with thin filiform forward end. Ecscrements contained oval eggs with plugs at the poles. Determine the kind of helminth:
a. Hookworm
b. Seatworm
c. Threadworm
d. Ascarid
*e. Whipworm

13. A 24 year old patient consulted a doctor about pain below the lower jaw to the right of it. Dental surgeon found a stone in the submandibular gland. While removing it he prevented bleeding from the following artery:
a. a.submentalis
*b. a.facialis
c. a.labialis inferior
d. a.lingualis
e. a.alveolaris inferior

14. There are trisome, translocational and mosaic forms of Downs Syndrome. What method of human genetics can be applied to differentiate the said forms of Downs syndrome?
a. Gemellary
*b. Cytogenetical
c. Population-statistical
d. Biochemical
e. Genealogical

15. In a genetical laboratory in course of work with DNA molecules of white rats of Wistars line a nucleotide was substituted for another one. At that only one amino acid was substituded in the peptide. This result is caused by the following mutation:
*a. Transversion
b. Displacement of reading frame
c. Duplication
d. Deletion
e. Translocation

16. As a result of head trauma a 32 year old man has damaged ampullas of semicircular ducts. What stimuli perception will be disturbed?
*a. Angular acceleration
b. Gravitation
c. Vibration and gravitation
d. Linear acceleration
e. Vibration

17. The symptoms of regeneration process (callus) on the place of fracture were revealed in the histologic specimen of tubular bone. What tissue forms this structure?
a. Reticular tissue
b. Loose connective tissue
*c. Fibrous bone tissue
d. Epithelial tissue
e. Lamellar bone tissue

18. A patient with an acute rhinitis has hyperemia and excessive mucus formation in nasal cavity. What epithelial cells of mucous membrane have the intensified activity?
a. Microvillous cells
b. Endocrine cells
*c. Goblet cells
d. Basal cells
e. Ciliated cells

19. Bacteriological examination of purulent discharges from urethra revealed some bacteries that had negative Grams stain, resembled of coffee corns, decomposed glucose and maltose up to acid. They were located in leukocutes. What disease do they cause?
a. Soft chancre
*b. Gonorrhea
c. Syphilis
d. Pseudocholera
e. Venereal lymphogranulomatosis

20. Autopsy of a man who died from ethylene glycol poisoning revealed that his kidneys are a little bit enlarged, edematic; their capsule can be easily removed. Cortical substance is broad and light-grey. Medullary substance is dark-red. What pathology had this man?
a. Lipoid nephrosis
b. Acute tubular-interstitial nephritis
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
*d. Necrotic nephrosis
e. Acute pyelonephritis

21. A patient ill with jaundice has increased content of conjugated bilirubin and bile acids in blood, no stercobilinogen in urine. What jaundice are these symptomps typical for?
a. Hepatic
b. Cythemolytic
*c. Obstructive
d. Hemolytic
e. Hepatocellular

22. A 45 year old patient was taken to the hospital by an emergency team with serious cranial trauma in shock condition. Objectively: unconscious, skin is pale, body t°- 35,00С, low muscular tonus, reflexes are absent, pulse is rapid and weak, AP- 50/30 mm Hg. What clinical shock stage is it?
a. Excitement stage
b. Inhibition stage
c. Erectile stage
d. Torpid stage
*e. Terminal stage

23. A man has considerable disorder of protein, fat and carbohydrate digestion. Reduced secretion of what digestive juice is the most probable cause of this phenomenon?
a. Intestinal juice
b. Bile
*c. Pancreatic juice
d. Gastric juice
e. Saliva

24. A patient who is ill with scurvy displays disturbed processes of connective tissue formation that leads to loosening and falling of teeth. Disturbed activity of what enzyme causes these symptomps?
*a. Elastase
b. Glycosiltransferase
c. Procollagenpeptidase of N-terminal peptide
d. Procollagenpeptidase of C-terminal peptide
e. Lisilhydroxylase

25. Father bought some pork at the market. What disease may catch members of his family provided that this meat didnt pass the veterinary control?
*a. Pork tapeworm infection
b. Liver fluke infection
c. Hymenolepiasis
d. Beef tapeworm infection
e. Echinococcosis

26. Examination of a child who hasnt got fresh fruit and vegetables during winter revealed numerous subcutaneous hemorrhages, gingivitis, carious cavities in teeth. What vitamin combination should be prescribed in this case?
a. Calciferol and ascorbic acid
b. Riboflavin and nicotinamide
*c. Ascorbic acid and rutin
d. Thiamine and pyridoxine
e. Folic acid and cobalamin

27. A non trained man has usually muscular hypoxy after a sprint. What metabolite accumulates in the muscles as a result of it?
a. Oxaloacetate
*b. Lactate
c. -
d. Ketone bodies
e. Glucose 6-phosphate

28. An 8 month old child has non-closed palate, a number of eye defects, microcephaly, disorder of cardiovascular system. Cytogenetic analysis revealed 47 chromosomes with an additional 13th chromosome. What diagnosis can be made on the basis of clinical observations and cytogenetic examinations?
a. Downs syndrome
b. Cat cry syndrome
c. Klinefelters syndrome
*d. Pataus syndrome
e. Edwards syndrome

29. Macroscopic examination of lung tissue revealed some areas of excessive airiness with small bubbles, histological examination registered thinning and rupture of alveolar septa and formation of big multiform cavities. What disease was revealed in the lung?
a. Fibrosing alveolitis
b. Multiple bronchiectasis
c. Cavernous tuberculosis
*d. Pulmonary emphysema
e. Chronic bronchitis

30. Implantation process has two stages: adhesion and invasion. Morphological manifestation of blastocyte adhesion is:
a. Destruction of connective tissue of endometrium
*b. Attachment of blastocyte to the endometrium
c. Formation of lacunes
d. Destruction of endometrium vessels
e. Destruction of endometrium epithelium

31. A 57 year old patient has periodic uterine bleedings. Diagnostic endometrectomy was performed. Biopsy material contains among the blood elements some glandular complexes of different sizes and forms that consist of atypic cells with hyperchromic nuclei and multiple mitoses (including pathological ones). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Endometritis
*b. Adenocarcinoma
c. Chorioepithelioma
d. Fibromyoma of uterus
e. Glandular hyperplasia of endometrium

32. A patient with pneumosclerosis has pulmonary hypertension and cardiac insuffisiency of right ventricle with ascites and edemata. What is the main pathogenetic mechanism of edemata development?
a. Rise of oncotic pressure of intracellular fluid
b. Reduction of oncotic blood pressure
c. -
d. Increased permeability of vessel walls
*e. Rise of hydrostatic blood pressure in veins

33. Histologic examination revealed a big number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in all layers of appendix; hyperemia, stases. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Superficial appendicitis
b. Gangrenous appendicitis
c. Chronic appendicitis
d. Simple appendicitis
*e. Phlegmonous appendicitis

34. Removal of a foreign body from patients eye involves local anesthesia with lidocaine. What is the action mechanism of this medication?
a. It reduces dehydrogenase activity
*b. It disturbs passing of Na+ through the membrane
c. It inhibits cytochrome oxidase activity
d. It reduces passage of neuromediators
e. It blocks passing of nitric oxide

35. A 25 year old patient had in the dentists room a sudden attack of bronchial asthma. The doctor gave him salbutamol in the form of inhalation. What is the mechanism of action of this preparation?
a. Blocks phosphodiesterase
b. Blocks М-cholinergic receptors
*c. Stimulates 2-adrenoreceptors
d. Blocks Н1-histamine receptors
e. Stimulates -adrenoreceptors

36. A 28 year old patient was diagnosed with acute inflammation of mucous membrane of nasolacrimal duct. It is known from the anamnesis that he had been having nasal discharges for 10 days after recovering from influenza. From what part of nasal cavity could the infection penetrate into nasolacrimal duct?
a. Middle nasal meatus
b. Superior nasal meatus
c. Frontal sinus
d. Vestibule of nose
*e. Inferior nasal meatus

37. A 30 year old man was exposed to irradiation with about 3 Gy. What blood change will be evident in 8 hours after irradiation?
a. Thrombocytopenia
*b. Lymphopenia
c. Granulocytopenia
d. Leukopenia
e. Anemy

38. Rabbits lived on food with addition of cholesterol. Five months later the atherosclerotic aorta changes were revealed. Name the main cause of atherogenesis in this case:
a. Hypodynamia
*b. Exogenous hypercholesterolemia
c. Endogenous hypercholesterolemia
d. Overeating
e. -

39. During the postsynthetic period of mitotic cycle the synthesis of tubulin proteins was disturbed. These proteins take part in construction of division spindle. It can lead to the disturbance of:
*a. Chromosomes disjunction
b. Cytokinesis
c. Despiralization of chromosomes
d. Spiralization of chromosomes
e. Mitosis duration

40. A 58 year old patient was being prepared to cholecystectomy operation. Drug complex of narcosis premedication included benzohexamethonium. What part does this medication play in the narcosis?
*a. Functional blockade of visceral reflexes
b. Increase of retrograde amnesia
c. Relaxation of skeletal muscles
d. Relaxation of smooth muscles
e. Reduction of excitement stage

41. After traumatic tooth extraction a patient complains of a severe dull pain without accurate localization in his gum, body temperature rise up to 37,50С. He was diagnosed with alveolitis. What type of pain does the patient have?
*a. Protopathic
b. Phantom
c. Referred
d. Epicritic
e. Visceral

42. Name the drug group that can reduce need of myocardium for oxygene, decrease force of heartbeat and inhibit lipolysis:
*a. beta-adrenoreceptor blockers
b. Sympatholytics
c. alpha-adrenoreceptor blockers
d. alpha-adrenoreceptor agonists
e. Selective beta-adrenoreceptor agonists

43. To approach the thyroid gland from the transverse (collar) approach the suprasternal fascial space must be opened. What anatomical formation located in this space is dangerous to damage?
a. Subclavian artery
b. Internal jugular vein
c. Carotid artery
d. Lymph nodes
*e. Venous jugular arch

44. A patient complains of painful cracks in mouth angles. What sulfanilamide can be recommended for local treatment of angular stomatitis?
a. Synthomycine liniment
*b. Streptocide liniment
c. Butadione ointment
d. Tetracycline ointment
e. Prednisolone ointment

45. Histological specimen of an oral cavity organ shows that anterior surface is lined with multilayer flat non-keratinizing epithelium and posterior surface - with multirow ciliated epithelium. What organ is it?
a. Lip
b. Hard palate
c. Cheek
d. Gum
*e. Soft palate

46. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
*a. Gluconeogenesis
b. Aerobic glycolisis
c. Pentose-phosphate cycle
d. Glycogenesis
e. Glycogenolysis

47. A patient in the oral surgery department has got purulent complication. Bacteriological analysis of the wound material found a culture that produces cyan pigment. What microorganism is the most probable causative agent?
a. Klebsiella pneumoniae
b. Bacillus subtilis
*c. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
d. Proteus vulgaris
e. Staphylococcus epidermidis

48. Electron micrograph of a kidney fragment presents an afferent arteriole with big cells under endothelium. These cells contain secretory granules. Name this type of cells:
a. Smooth muscular
b. Juxtavascular
*c. Juxtaglomerular
d. Interstitial
e. Mesangial

49. In compliance with the clinical presentations a man was prescribed pyridoxalphosphate. What processes are corrected by this preparation?
*a. Transamination and decarboxylation of amino acids
b. Oxidative decarboxilation of keto acids
c. Desamination of purine nucleotides
d. Protein synthesis
e. Synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases

50. In course of gastric endoscopy the biopsy material of mucous membrane was taken. Its histological examination revealed the following: mucous membrane is intact, thickened, edematic, hyperemic, with small droplike hemorrhages, coated with thick mucus. Name the form of acute gastritis:
a. Necrotic
b. Purulent
c. Erosive
d. Fibrinous
*e. Catarrhal

51. Microspecimen of a childs finger skin reveals subnormal development of epidermis. What embryonic leaf was damaged in course of development?
a. Mesenchyma
b. Ectomesenchyma
c. Mesoderm
*d. Ectoderm
e. Entoderm

52. A patient suffers from middle ear inflammation (otitis). He complains also of disordered test sensation in the anterior tongue part. What nerve is damaged?
*a. N.facialis
b. N.glossopharyngeus
c. N.vagus
d. N.vestibulo-cochlearis
e. N.trigeminus

53. A woman after labor lost 20 kg of body weight, her hair and teeth fall out, she has muscle atrophy (hypophysial cachexia). Synthesis of what hypophysis hormone is disturbed?
a. Corticotropic
*b. Somatotropic
c. Prolactin
d. Thyreotropic
e. Gonadotropic

54. On examination of a road accident victim a doctor revealed left clavicle fracture and disturbed blood circulation in an extremity (no pulsing of radial artery). What cause of blood circulation disturbance is the most probable?
*a. Compression of subclavian artery
b. Compression of subclavian vein
c. Compression of axillary artery
d. Compression of axillary vein
e. Compression of vertebral artery

55. A 19 year old patient was diagnosed with chronic acquired hemolytic anemia. What is the leading pathogenetic mechanism of this pathologys development?
a. Toxic hemolysis
b. Hyposmolarity of plasm
*c. Autoimmune hemolysis
d. Intracellular hemolysis
e. Osmotic hemolysis

56. During many infectious diseases patients blood may contain antigenes of pathogens. What reaction should be applied provided that antigenemia is at a low level?
a. Reaction of indirect hemagglutination
b. Reaction of latex-agglutination
c. Agglutination reaction
*d. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
e. Immunoelectrophoresis

57. Laboratory rats that have been fed only with carbohydrate food for a long time display water accumulation in the tissues. What pathogenetic mechanism is the main cause of edema in this case?
*a. Hypooncotic
b. Hyperosmolar
c. Membranogenic
d. Lymphogenic
e. Disregulatory

58. Cerebral hemorrhage caused serious disturbance of taste sensibility. What brain structure is most likely to be damged?
a. Substantia nigra
b. Hypothalamus
*c. Postcentral gyrus
d. Amygdaloid body
e. Hippocampus

59. There is a 9 year old boy in endocrinological department, who has already had a few fractures of extremeties caused by fragility of bones. Malfunction of what endocrinous glands (gland) takes place?
a. Thymus
b. Epiphysis
*c. Parathyroid glands
d. Adrenal glands
e. Thyroid gland

60. In course of an experiment the peripheral segment of vagus nerve of an animal was stimulated. The following changes of heart activity were obseerved:
a. Icreased force of heartbeat
b. Increased conduction of excitement through myocardium
*c. Reduced heart rate
d. Increase of frequency and force of heartbeat
e. Increased excitability of myocardium

61. During the histologic lung analysis of a man who died from cardiac insufficiency the inflammation focuses were revealed. Alveoles were full of light-pink fluid, here and there with pinkish fibers that formed a close-meshed reticulum with a small number of lymphocytes. What type of exudate is present in lungs?
a. Fibrinous
*b. Serofibrinous
c. Serous
d. Purulent
e. Hemorrhagic

62. By producing a number of hormones placenta plays a part of temporary endocrine gland. What hormone may be detected in womans blood on the third or the forth day after begin of implantation, that is used in medicine for early pregnancy detection?
*a. Chorionic gonadotropin
b. Oxytocin
c. Vasopressin
d. Progesterone
e. Somatostatin

63. Sputum smears of a patient with chronic pulmonary disease were stained by Ziehl-Neelsen method and analyzed in the bacteriological laboratory. Microscopy revealed red bacillus. What property of tuberculosis myobacteria was found?
*a. Acid resistance
b. Alcohol resistance
c. Alkali resistance
d. Spore-formation
e. Encapsulation

64. Autopsy of a man who suffered from essential hypertension revealed a cavity with rust-coloured walls in the cerebral substunce. What preceded the appearance of these changes?
*a. Hematoma
b. Ischemic infarction
c. Diapedetic hemorrhages
d. Abscess
e. Plasmorrhagias

65. A patient with thyreotoxicosis was prescribed a medication that inhibits enzyme systems taking part in synthesis of thyroid gland hormones. What medication is it?
a. Diiodotyrosine
b. Thyreoidine
c. Radioactive iodine
d. Potassium iodide
*e. Mercazolile

66. A newborn child has microcephalia. Doctors consider that this is the result of mothers taking actinomycin D during the pregnancy. What embryonal leaf was influenced by this teratogen?
a. Entoderma
b. Entoderma and mesoderma
*c. Ectoderma
d. All leaves
e. Mesoderma

67. A patient has increased content of uric acid in his blood that is clinically presented by pain syndrome as a result of urate deposition in the joints. What process does this acid result from?
*a. Lysis of purine nucleotides
b. Heme catabolism
c. Lysis of pyrimidine nucleotides
d. Proteolysis
e. Reutilization of purine bases

68. A 30 year old patient consulted a doctor about having diarrhea and stomach aches for 5 days, temperature rise up to 37,50С with chills. The day before the patient was in a forest and drank some water from an open pond. He was diagnosed with amebic dysentery that was bacteriologically confirmed. Name the medication for treatment of this disease:
a. Phthalazole
*b. Metronidazole
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Furasolidone
e. Emethine hydrochloride

69. A patient with chronic glomerulonephritis has disorder of incretoty function of kidneys. What blood elements deficit will result from it?
a. Leukocytes and thrombocytes
b. Erythrocytes and leukocytes
c. Leukocytes
d. Thrombocytes
*e. Erythrocytes

70. Immune-enzyme reaction revealed in blood serum HBs-antigene. What disease is this antigene associated with?
a. AIDS
b. Viral hepatitis type A
*c. Viral hepatitis type B
d. Tuberculosis
e. Syphilis

71. A stomatologists examined first-grade pupils and revealed that one of children had yellowish brown teeth, two of them were split. Heretofore the pupil was treated with "some pills" on account of pneumonia. What medication could have had such a negative effect upon teeth?
a. Ampicillin
b. Erythromycin
c. Oxacillin
d. Biseptol
*e. Doxycycline

72. Examination of a 42 year old patient who suffers from parodontosis revealed roundish calcified formations 2-3 mm in diameter in coronal pulp. Name these formatioms:
a. Interglobular spaces
b. Intertubular dentin
c. Dead dentin
d. Sclerosed (transparent) dentin
*e. Denticles

73. A patient with streptococcal gingival infection was prescribed a medication that contains beta lactam ring in its structure. What preparation belongs to this group?
a. Chloramphenicol
b. Erythromycin
*c. Benzylpenicillin
d. Rifampicin
e. Streptomicin sulfate

74. Myocyte cytoplasm contains a big number of dissolved metabolites of glucose oxidation. Name one of them that turns directly into lactate:
a. Fructose 6-phosphate
*b. Pyruvate
c. Glycerophosphate
d. Glucose 6-phosphate
e. Oxaloacetate

75. An experimentator wants a dog to develop conditioned salivary reflex. What conditioned stimulus will be appropriate to use?
a. Meat
*b. Moderately loud sound
c. Zwieback
d. Very loud sound
e. Electric current

76. A patient had his tooth extracted. The lingual surface of this tooth was smaller than the buccal one. Masticatoty surface has oval form. Deep transverse sulcus separates buccal and lingual tubercles. The root is strongly compressed in mesio-distal direction and has longitudinal sulci on its aproximal surfaces, it is bifurcated. What tooth was extracted?
a. First lower premolar
b. Lower canine
*c. First upper premolar
d. Second upper premolar
e. Upper canine

77. A patient complains of rapid fatigability. Objectively: he staggers and overbalances in the upright position with closed eyes. Skeleton muscular tonus is decreased. What brain structure is most likely to be damaged?
a. Thalamus
*b. Cerebellum
c. Hypothalamus
d. Precentral gyrus of cerebrum cortex
e. Basal ganglions

78. A doctor examined a patient with recurrent aphthous stomatitis with concominant candidosis and decided to eliminate a possibility of HIV-infection. What examination can help to clear the situation up and make a provisional diagnosis?
a. Gel precipitation reaction
b. Reaction of hemagglutination
c. Phase-contrasr microscopy
*d. Immune-enzyme analysis
e. Reaction of hemagglutination inhibition

79. What antihelmintic medication is used for stimulation of immune system in case of chronic generalized periodontitis?
a. Piperidine adipinate
b. Chloxil
c. Pumpkin seeds
d. Pyranthel
*e. Levamisole

80. A patient has hyperkaliemia and hyponatremia. Reduced secretion of what hormone may cause such changes?
*a. Aldosterone
b. Parathormone
c. Vasopressin
d. Cortisol
e. Natriuretic hormone

81. Morphological examination of carious cavity floor differenciated distinctly three zones: the one of softened dentin, transparent dentin and replacing dentin. What stage of caries are these changes typical for?
a. Chronic caries
b. Superficial caries
*c. Median caries
d. Deep caries
e. Spot stage

82. In course of an experiment the peripheral fragment of a cut vagus nerve on the dogs neck was being stimulated. There was the following change of cardiac activity:
*a. Decrease of beat frequency
b. Increase of beat frequency and force
c. Increased speed of excitement conduction through myocardium
d. Increase of beat force
e. Increase of myocardium excitability

83. Examination of a 7 year old child revealed the following symptoms: small height, broad roundish face, closely placed eyes with narrow palpebral fissures, half-open mouth. Valvular defect has been also diagnosed. These clinical presentations are most likely typical for Downs syndrome. Name the cause of such pathology:
*a. Trisomy of the 21 chromosome
b. Partial monosomy
c. X-chromosome trisonomy
d. Trisomy of the 13 chromosome
e. Nondisjunction of sexual chromosomes

84. A 7 year old girl was taken to an infectious diseases hospital. She had complaints of high temperature, sore throat, general weakness. A doctor assumed dyphteria. What will be crucial proof of diagnosis after defining pure culture of pathogenic organism?
*a. Toxigenity test
b. Cystinase test
c. Phagolysability
d. Hemolytic ability of pathogenic orhanism
e. Detection of volutine granules

85. Tissue sample of soft palate arches that was taken because a tumor was suspected (microscopic analysis revealed an ulcer with dense fundus) revealed mucous membrane necrosis, submucous layer was infiltrated by lymphocytes, epithelioid cells, plasmocytes, solitary neutrophils. There was also evident endovasculitis and perivasculitis. What desease are these changes typical for?
*a. Primary syphilis
b. Aphthous stomatitis
c. Vensans ulcerative-necrotic stomatitis
d. Faucial diphteria
e. Ulcerative stomatitis

86. A patient is diagnosed with alkaptonuria. Name a defect enzyme that causes this pathology:
a. Glutamate dehydrogenase
b. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
c. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
d. Dioxyphenylalanine decarboxylase
*e. Oxydase of homogentisine acid

87. A 5 year old child suffers from the neck deformity. Clinical examination revealed such symptoms: apparent flexion of head to the left, his face is turned right, passive movements of the head to the right are restricted. What muscles development was disturbed in this case?
*a. Sternocleidomastoid
b. Splenius muscle of head
c. Long muscle of head
d. Trapezius
e. Sternosublingual

88. Microscopic analysis of tissue sampling from affected area of mucous membrane of oral cavity revealed bacillus in form of accumulations that looked like a pack of cigarettes. Ziehl-Neelsen staining gives them red colour. What kind of pathogenic organism was most likely revealed in tissue sampling?
a. M.tuberculosis
b. M.avium
c. A.bovis
d. A.israilii
*e. M.leprae

89. A woman in grave condition was admitted to a hospital with the diagnosis of the hemorrhagic stroke in the region of frontal part of the right cerebral hemisphere. The damage of what artery most likely caused this condition?
a. A.communicans anterior
b. A.cerebri media
c. A.communicans posterior
d. A.cerebri posterior
*e. A.сerebri anterior

90. A patient with clinical presentations of primary immunodeficiency displays disturbance of antigen-presenting function by immunocompetent cells. What cells may have structure defect?
a. T-lymphocytes
*b. Macrophages, monocytes
c. B-lymphocytes
d. 0-lymphocytes
e. Fibroblasts

91. Very big teeth is an Y-linked sign. Mothers teeth are of normal size, and her sons teeth are very big. Probability of fathers having very large teeth is:
a. 12,5%
*b. 100%
c. 50%
d. 75%
e. 25%

92. Mucous membrane of the right palatine tonsil has a painless ulcer with smooth lacquer fundus and accurate edges of cartlaginous consistency. Microscopically: inflammatory infiltrate that consists of lymphocytes, plasmocytes, a small number of neutrophils and epithelioid cells; endovasculistis and perivasculitis. What disease is in question?
a. Pharyngeal diphtheria
b. Necrotic (Vincents) tonsillitis
*c. Syphilis
d. Tuberculosis
e. Actinomycosis

93. A boxer who got a punch in the region of temporomandibular joint has a traumatic dislocation of mandible. Displacement of what articular surfaces will overstep the limits of physiological norm?
a. Neck of mandible and submandibular fossa
b. Head of mandible and submandibular fossa
c. Coronoid process and submandibular fossa
d. Coronoid process and pterygoid fossa
*e. Head of mandible and mandibular fossa

94. In course of embryogenesis maxillary and mandibular processes grew together with a delay. What development anomalies should be expected in this case?
*a. Macrostomia
b. Gothic palate
c. Cleft of superior lip
d. Microstomia
e. Cleft palate

95. A patient who suffers from chronic renal insufficiency fell ill with osteoporosis. Disturbed synthesis of what mineral metabolisms regulator is the cause of osteoporosis?
a. Proline hydroxylation
b. Lysine hydroxylation
c. Glutamate carboxylation
d. Cortisol hydroxylation
*e. Formation of 1,25(ОН)2 D3

96. A 17 year old student pressed out a pustule in the medial angle of eye. In 2 days she was taken to the institute of neurosurgery with thrombosis of cavernous sinus. Through what vein did the infection get into this sinus?
a. V.maxillarіs
b. V.diploicae frontalis
c. V.transversa faciei
d. V.profunda faciei
*e. V.angularis

97. A patient with chronic myeloleukemia has presentations of anemy - decrease of erythrocyte number and hemoglobin content, oxyphil and polychromatophil normocytes, microcytes. What pathogenetic mechanism is the main for the development of this anemy?
a. Intravascular erythrocyte hemolysis
b. Chronic hemorrhage
c. Vitamin В12 deficiency
d. Reduction of erythropoietin synthesis
*e. Replacement of erythrocytic shoot

98. Cyanide poisoning causes immediate death. What is the mechanism of cyanide effect at the molecular level?
a. They inactivate oxygene
b. They bind substrates of tricarboxylic acid cycle
c. They inhibit cytochrome B
*d. They inhibit cytochromoxidase
e. They block succinate dehydrogenase

99. A patient with tuberculosis was prescribed a certain medication as a part of complex therapy - derivative of isonicotinic acid hydrazide. Name this preparation:
a. Cephaloridine
*b. Isoniazide
c. Rifampicin
d. Streptomycin sulfate
e. Kanamycin

100. What substance makes saliva viscous and mucous, has protective function, protects mucous membrane of oral cavity from mechanical damage?
a. Kallikrein
b. Glucose
c. Amylase
*d. Mucin
e. Lysozyme

101. Medical examination of some youths revealed in their axillary regions grey insects 1,0-1,5 mm large, with short broad body covered with hair. What insects were revealed?
a. Itch mite
*b. Pubic louse
c. Bed bug
d. Head louse
e. Flea

102. A 60 year old patient has problems with formation and moving of food mass, it disturbs eating process. His tongue is stiff, speaking is impossible. What nerve is damaged?
a. IX
*b. XII
c. XI
d. V
e. VII

103. In a histological specimen of adrenal cortex there are petite polygonal cells that form roundish clusters and contain some lipidic inclusions. What part of adrenal is presented in this histological specimen?
*a. Glomerular zone
b. Fasciolar zone
c. Intermedial zone
d. -
e. Reticular zone

104. A patient with myocardium infarction was prescribed an analgetic in order to stop pain syndrome. The patient felt better but overdose caused weakness, myosis, respiratory depression. What medication was prescribed?
a. Ibuprofen
b. Sedalgine
*c. Morphine
d. Paracetamol
e. Baralgine

105. A patient has been taking glucocorticoids for a long time. Drug withdrowal caused acute attack of his disease, blood pressure reduction, weakness. What are these occurences connected with?
*a. Adrenal glands insufficiency
b. Hyperproduction of corticotroph hormone
c. Drug habituation
d. Cumulation
e. Sensibilisation

106. A patient with diabetes mellitus had an insuline injection. It caused loss of consciousness and convulsions. What was the result of biochemic blood analysis on glucose content?
a. 10 mmоle/l
b. 8,0 mmоle/l
*c. 2,5 mmоle/l
d. 5,5 mmоle/l
e. 3,3 mmоle/l

107. Premature infants have syndrom of respiratory failure. Failure of what aerohematic barriere component underlies this pathology?
a. Basal membrane of alveolocytes
b. Alveolocytes
*c. Surfactant
d. Basal membrane of endothelium
e. Capillary endothelium

108. A 69 year old patient has got an abscess of frontal lobe as a result of purulent infection in nasal cavity. What anatomical formation did the infection penetrate through?
a. Foramen ethmoidalae posterior
b. Foramen rotundum
*c. Foraminae cribrosae
d. Foramen ovale
e. Foramen sphenopalatinum

109. A patient with acute condition of duodenal ulcer was admitted to the hospital. Gastric juice analysis has shown increase of secretory and acid-producing function of stomach. Choose a medication that will reduce secretory function due to blockade of H2-receptors:
a. Atropine
b. Methacin
c. Beladonna bell extraction
*d. Ranitidine
e. Platyphyllin

110. A 28 year old man with cut wound of frontal skin was admitted to the hospital. A vessel that supplies blood to the frontal part of head was ligated in order to stop bleeding. What vessel was ligated?
a. A.temporalis superficialis
*b. A.supraorbitalis
c. A.angularis
d. A.dorsalis nasi
e. A.infraorbitalis

111. An unconscious patient was admitted to the hospital. Objectively: cold skin, miotic pupils, heavy breathing, Chaine-Stokes periodicity, low arterial pressure, overfull urinary bladder. What caused the poisoning?
*a. Narcotic analgetics
b. Muscarinic receptor blockers
c. Nonnarcotic analgetics
d. -
e. Tranquilizers

112. A sportsman was examined after an intensive physical activity. The examination revealed disorder of movement coordination but the force of muscle contractions remained the same. It can be explained by retarded speed of excitement conduction through:
a. Efferent nerves
b. Conduction tracts
c. Afferent nerves
*d. Central synapses
e. Neuromuscular synapses

113. A diver who has been staying at the depth of 40 m for a long time fell ill with caisson disease as a result of decompression. The main pathogenetic factor is the following embolism:
a. Tissue
b. Paradoxical
*c. Gaseous
d. Air
e. Fat

114. Examination of a 16 year old boy revealed enlarged submandibular and cervical lymph nodes. The boy was subjected to biopsy. Microscopic examination of lymph nodes revealed: typical structure is obliterated, cell population is heterogenous, there are big cells with multilobe nuclei, multiple big mononuclear cells, eosinophilic and neutrophilic leukocytes, lymphocytes, besides that, there are necrotic areas and foci of sclerosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymph node hyperplasia
b. Non-Hodgkins lymphoma
c. Granulomatous lymphadenitis
d. Suppurative lymphadenitis
*e. lymphogranulomatosis

115. If a mountain-climber stays in the mountains for a long time, quantity of erythrocytes increases from 5,0*10^12/l to 6,0*10^12/l. What causes stimulation of erythropoesis?
a. Increase of р О2 in venous blood
b. Increase of р О2 in cells
*c. Decrease of р О2 in arterial blood
d. Decrease of р О2 in venous blood
e. Increase of р О2 in arterial blood

116. Microscopic analysis of human heart cells revealed some oval organellas, their tunic being formed by two membranes: the external one is smooth, and the internal one forms crista. Biochemical analysis determined the presence of ATP-synthetase enzyme. What organellas were analysed?
a. Ribosomes
b. Centrosomes
*c. Mitochondrions
d. Lysosomes
e. Endoplasmic reticulum

117. Poisoning with mercuric dichloride caused acute renal insufficiency that included 4 stages: 1) the initial one, 2) the stage of oligoanuria, 4) the stage of recovery. What is the third stage of acute renal insufficiency?
a. Hemodynamic
*b. Polyuretic
c. Metabolic
d. Pathochemic
e. Ischemic

118. After recovering from epidemic parotiditis a patient began to lose weight, he was permanently thirsty, drank a lot of water, had frequent urination, voracious appetite. Now he has complaints of skin itch, weakness, furunculosis. His blood contains: glucose - 16 mmole/L, ketone bodies - 100 mcmole/L; glucosuria. What disease has developed?
a. Diabetes insipidus
b. Malnutrition diabetes
*c. Insulin-dependent diabetes
d. Insulin-independent diabetes
e. Steroid diabetes

119. A chiled was diagnosed with acute renal failure. What biochemic saliva indices can confirm this diagnosis?
a. Increase of immunoglobuline A
b. Increase of alpha amylase
c. Reduction of alkaline phosphatase
d. Decreased level of phosphate
*e. Increased level of rest nitrogen

120. A patient with adenoma of glomeral zone of adrenal cortex (Conns disease) has arterial hypertension, convulsions, polyuria. What is the main link in pathogenesis of these disorders?
a. Glucocorticoid hyposecretion
b. Aldosterone hyposecretion
*c. Aldosterone hypersecretion
d. Glucocorticoid hypersecretion
e. Catecholamine hypersecretion

121. The body temperature of a patient with an infectious disease rises once in two days up to 39,5-40,50С and stays so for about an hour and then drops to the initial level. What type of fever is it?
a. Continued
b. Atypical
c. Hectic
d. Remittent
*e. Intermittent

122. ESR of a patient with pneumonia is 48 mm/h. What caused such changes?
a. Erythrocytosis
*b. Hypergammaglobulinemia
c. Hyperalbuminemia
d. Hypogammaglobulinemia
e. Hypoproteinemia

123. Retrospective diagnostics of old bacillary dysentery required serologic examination of blood serum in order to determine blood titer to the shigells. What reaction should be applied for this purpose?
a. Bacteriolysis reaction
b. Hemolysis reaction
c. Precipitation reaction
*d. Reaction of passive hemagglutination
e. Bordet-Gengou test

124. An eye trauma caused soft tissues infection of eye-socket. Through what anatomical formation can the infection penetrate into the middle cranial fossa?
*a. Through the superior orbital fissure
b. Through the zygomatic orbital foramen
c. Through the anterior ethmoidal foramen
d. Through the inferior orbital fissure
e. Through the posterior ethmoidal foramen

125. A patient has the folowing changes: disorder of twilight vision, drying out of conjunctiva and cornea. Such disorders may be caused by deficiency of vitamin:
a. Vitamin B12
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin D
*d. Vitamin A
e. Vitamin B

126. A patient has an acute painfullness of face skin. What nerve is damaged?
a. Oculomotor
b. Glossopharyngeal
*c. Trifacial
d. Vagus
e. Facial

127. A patient has disorder of tear flow after a cold. What autonomic ganglion had been most damaged?
a. Submandibular
*b. Pterygopalatine
c. Aural
d. Ciliated
e. Sublingual

128. During phonocardiogram registration it was ascertained that the duration of the first heart sound twice exceeds the norm. It is most likely that patient has the following organ affected:
a. Semilunar valves
*b. Atrioventricular valves
c. Cardiomyocytes of ventricles
d. Cardiomyocytes of heart atriums
e. Cardiomyocytes of atriums

129. Examination of an ill childs blood revealed inherited hyperlipoproteinemia. Genetic defect of what enzyme synthesis causes this phenomenon?
*a. Lipoprotein lipase
b. Hemsynthetase
c. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
d. Proteinase
e. Glycosidase

130. When a patient puts his tongue out the tip of it deflects to the left. Motor innervation of what cranial nerve is disturbed in this case?
*a. N.hypoglossus dexter
b. N.glossopharyngeus dexter
c. N.trigeminus sinister
d. N.facialis sinister
e. N.vagus dexter

131. A 62 year old patient in grave condition was admitted to the nerological department on account of cerebral hemorrhage. Objectively: hyperpnoe and rising of respiratory rate, then it falls to apnea, after that the cycle of respiratory movements restores. What respiratory type is it?
a. Gasping respiration
*b. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
c. Apneustic
d. Kussmauls respiration
e. Biots respiration

132. While a 24 year old woman was waiting for tooth extraction, tonus of sympathetic part of autonomic nervous system rose. What reaction will the patient display?
a. Hyperperistalsis
*b. Increased frequency of heartbeat
c. Bronchus constriction
d. Hypersecretion of digestive juices
e. Miotic pupils

133. A 2 year old child suffers from intestinal dysbacteriosis that lead to the development hemorrhagic syndrome. The most probable cause of hemorrhage is:
*a. Vitamin K deficiency
b. Hypovitaminosis PP
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Fibrinogen deficiency
e. Activation of tissue thromboplastin

134. In an excitable cell the ion channells were blocked. It hasnt changed essentially the value of rest potential, but the cell lost its ability to generate AP (action potential). What channels were blocked?
a. Potassium
b. Natrium and potassium
c. Calcium
*d. Natrium
e. Chloric

135. A patient has the sudden decrease of Са2+ content in blood. What hormone secretion will increase?
a. Vasopressin
*b. Parathormone
c. Somatotropin
d. Aldosterone
e. Thyrocalcitonin

136. While the examination of patients oral cavity the dentist found xerostomia, numerous erosions. What vitamin deficit caused this effect?
a. Vitamin PP
b. Vitamin P
*c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin K
e. Vitamin H

137. Parodontitis is accompanied by activation of proteolysis in parodentium tissues. Increase of what oral fluids component is the evidence of proteolysis activation?
a. Biogenic amines
b. Glucose
*c. Aminoacids
d. Cholesterol
e. Organic acids

138. A month after surgical constriction of rabbits renal artery the considerable increase of systematic arterial pressure was observed. What of the following regulation mechanisms caused the animals pressure change?
a. Noradrenaline
*b. Angiotensin-II
c. Vasopressin
d. Adrenaline
e. Serotonin

139. A patient was operated on account of abdominal injury with application of tubocurarin. At the end of operation, after the respiration had been restored, the patient got injection of gentamicin. It caused a sudden respiratory standstill and relaxation of skeletal muscles. What effect underlies this phenomenon?
*a. Potentiation
b. Sensitization
c. Antagonism
d. Habituation
e. Cumulation

140. A 22 year woman has enlarged lymphatic ganglions. Histological analysis of a ganglion revealed lymphocytes, histiocytes, reticular cells, small and great Hodgkins cells, multinuclear Reed-Sternberg cells, solitary foci of caseous necrosis. What disease are these changes typical for?
a. Chronic leukemia
b. Cancer metastasis
c. Lymphosarcoma
d. Acute leukemia
*e. Lymphogranulematosis

141. Four months ago a 43 year old patient had a traumatic amputation of his lower extrimity. Now he complains of sensing the amputated extremity and having constantly grave, sometimes unbearable pain in it. What type of pain does he have?
a. Neuralgia
b. Thalamic
c. Causalgia
*d. Phantom
e. Reflex

142. Examination of a 6 days old infant revealed phenyl pyruvate and phenyl acetate excess in his urine. What aminoacid metabolism is disturbed in the childs organism?
a. Histidine
*b. Phenylalanine
c. Methionine
d. Arginine
e. Tryptophan

143. A 3 year old child was admitted to the hospital with otitis. Pus is probable to spread from the tympanic cavity. Where can the pus get into?
a. Into auditory tube
b. Into posterior cranial fossa
c. Into external acoustic duct
d. Into internal ear
*e. Into mastoid antrum

144. On the 5th day of illness a 12 year old child who was treated in the infectious department on account of influenza felt severe headache, sickness, dizziness, got meningeal signs. The child died 24 hours later from increasing brain edema. Dissection of cranial cavity revealed that pia maters of brain are edematic, plethoric, saturated diffusively with bright red liquid. Convolutions and sulci of brain are flattened. What influenza complication is in question?
a. Serous meningitis
*b. Hemorrhagic meningitis
c. Cerebral hemorrhage
d. Venous hyperemia of brain membranes
e. Suppurative leptomeningitis

145. Trauma of occipital region of head resulted in crack fracture in the region of transverse sinus. What part of occipital bone is damaged?
a. Condyle
b. Left lateral
c. Right lateral
*d. Squama
e. Proximal

146. Histological examination in the area of neck of fundus gland reveals small cells that have high nuclear-cytoplasmatic ratio and basophilic cytoplasm. Name the function of these cells:
a. Protective
*b. Regeneration of glandular epithelium
c. Endocrine
d. Secretion of chlorine ions
e. Pepsinogen secretion

147. Histological examination of thyroid gland of a man who died from cardiac insufficiency accompanied by hypothyroidism revealed diffuse infiltration of the gland by lymphocytes and plasmocytes with formation of lymphoid follicles, as well as atrophy of parenchyma and growth of connective tissue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Adenoma of thyroid gland
b. Purulent thyroiditis
c. Thyrotoxic goiter
*d. Autoimmune Hashimotos thyroiditis
e. -

148. A surgeon cleansed his hands with 70% solution of ethyl alcochol before an operation. What is the main mechanism of preparations antiseptic effect upon microorganisms?
a. Blockade of sulfhydric groups of enzyme systems
b. Interaction with aminogroups of protoplasm proteins
*c. Dehydratation of protoplasm proteins
d. Oxidation of organic protoplasm components
e. Interaction with hydroxyl enzyme groups

149. What vitamin deficiency leads to both disorder of reproductive function and distrophy of skeletal muscles?
a. Vitamin K
b. Vitamin B1
c. Vitamin A
d. Vitamin D
*e. Vitamin E

150. After a surgical procedure a patient has got an enteroparesis. What anticholinesterase medication should be prescribed in this case?
a. Acetylcholine
b. Pilocarpine
c. Carbacholine
d. Aceclidine
*e. Proserin

151. A 12 year old boy came home from school and started complaining of headache, sickness, chill, periodical muscle pain, appetite loss, flabbiness. What period of illness are these symptoms typical for?
a. Incubative
b. High point of illness
*c. Prodromal
d. End of illness
e. Latent

152. A year after subtotal stomach resection on account of ulcer of lesser curvature the following blood changes were revealed: anemia, leukocytopenia and thrombocytopenia, color index - 1,3, megaloblasts and megalocytes. What factor deficiency caused the development of thos pathology?
a. Gastrin
b. Pepsin
c. Hydrochloride acid
d. Mucin
*e. Castles factor

153. In crisis period a 14 year old child ill with diphtheria has AP- 70/50 mm Hg accompanied by abrupt fall in temperature and tachycardia. What form of vascular tone disturbance is it?
a. Vegetovascular dystonia
b. Chronic hypotension
c. -
d. Essential arterial hypotension
*e. Acute hypotension

154. A patient complains of headache, heavy breathing. X-ray examination confirmed the diagnosis - frontitis. What nasal meatus may contain purulent discharge?
a. Above the superior nasal concha
b. Inferior
c. Superior
d. Common
*e. Middle

155. Examination of a child who has recently recovered from measles revealed in the soft tissues of cheeks and perineum some inaccurate, edematic, red-and-black, slightly fluctuating areas. What complication is it?
a. Pressure sore
b. Dry gangrene
c. Trophic ulcer
d. Gas gangrene
*e. Humid gangrene

156. Microscopic analysis of tissue sampling from patients skin reveals granulomas that consist of epithelioid cells surrounded mostly by T-lymphocytes. Among epithelioid cells there are solitary giant multinuclear cells of Pirogov-Langhans type. In the centre of some granulomas there are areas of caseous necrosis. Blood vessels are absent. What disease are the described granulomas typical for?
a. Rhinoscleroma
b. Glanders
c. Syphilis
d. Leprosy
*e. Tuberculosis

157. A patient with suspected liver abscess was admitted to the surgical department. The patient had been staying for a long time on business in one of african countries and fell repeatedly ill with acute gastrointestinal disorders. What protozoal disease may the patient be now ill with?
a. Leishmaniasis
*b. Amebiasis
c. Toxoplasmosis
d. Malaria
e. Trypanosomosis

158. A child damaged the lateral surface of his tongue. What lingual papillas are most likely to be damged?
a. Vallate
b. Filiform
c. Conic
d. Fungiform
*e. Foliate

159. Examination of a patient who had been suffering from rheumatism for a long time revealed stenosis of mitral orifice, death was caused by cardiac and pulmonary insufficiency. Autopsy has shown brown induration of lungs. What type of circulation disturbance provokes such changes in lungs?
a. Portal hypertension
b. Acute left ventricular insufficiency
c. Chronic right ventricular insufficiency
d. Acute right ventricular insufficiency
*e. Chronic left ventricular insufficiency

160. In the course of an experiment a nerve is being stimulated by electric impulses. It leads to excretion of some quantity of thick viscous saliva by sublingual and submandibular glands. What nerve is being stimulated?
a. N.trigeminus
b. N.facialis
c. N.glossopharyngeus
*d. N.sympathicus
e. N.vagus

161. A patient had a trauma that led to the injury of front spinal roots. Denote the damaged structures:
*a. Axons of motoneurons and lateral horn neurons
b. Central processes of spinal ganglion neurons
c. Peripheral processes of spinal ganglion neurons
d. Axons of motoneurons
e. Axons of lateral horn neurons

162. While passing an exam a student gets dry mouth. It is caused by realization of such reflexes:
a. Unconditioned parasympathetic
b. Conditioned and unconditioned sympathetic
*c. Conditioned sympathetic
d. Unconditioned sympathetic and parasympathetic
e. Conditioned parasympathetic

163. A patient was taken to the hospital with complaints of headache, high temperature, frequent stool, stomach pain with tenesmus. Doctor made a clinical diagnosis dysentery and sent the material (excrements) to the bacteriological laboratory for analysis. What diagnostic method should the laboratory doctor use to confirm or to disprove the clinical diagnosis?
a. Serological
b. Allergic
c. Bacterioscopic
*d. Bacteriological
e. Biological

164. Examination of a 32 year old patient revealed disproportional skeleton size, enlargement of superciliary arches, nose, lips, tongue, jaw bones, feet. What glands function was disturbed?
a. Pancreas
b. Suprarenal
c. Epiphysis
d. Thyroid
*e. Hypophysis

165. A man lost consciousness in a car with running engine where he had been waiting for a friend for a long time. What hemoglobin compaund can be found in the blood of the patient?
a. Methemoglobin
b. Carbhemoglobin
c. Deoxyhemoglobin
*d. Carboxyhemoglobin
e. Oxyhemoglobin

166. Autopsy of a woman with cerebral atherosclerosis revealed in the left cerebral hemisphere a certain focus that is presented by flabby, anhistic, greyish and yellowish tissue with indistinct edges. What pathological process is the case?
a. Multiple foci of fresh and old cerebral hemorrhage
b. Focal encephalitis
*c. Ischemic stroke
d. Senile encephalopathy
e. Multifocal tumor growth with cystic degeneration

167. Examination of coronary arteries revealed atherosclerotic plaques with calcification that close tle lumen by 1/3. The muscle contains multiple small whitish layers of connective tissue. What process was revealed in myocardium?
a. Postinfarction cardiosclerosis
b. Tiger heart
*c. Diffuse cardiosclerosis
d. Myocarditis
e. Myocardium infarction

168. Professional dentists belong to the risk group concerning professional infection with viral hepatitis typeb. Name an effective method for active prevention of this disease among the dentists:
a. Working with gum gloves on
b. Secure sterilization of medical instruments
c. Introduction of specific immunoglobuline
*d. Vaccination with recombinant vaccine
e. Introduction of interferonogenes

169. An electronic micrograph presents a cell that has no nucleole and nuclear membrane. Chromosomes has free position, centrioles migrate to the poles. What phase of cell cycle is it typical for?
a. Interphase
b. Anaphase
c. Telophase
d. Metaphase
*e. Prophase

170. The influence of negative factors upon an organism results in the thymus change that is accompanied by mass loss of thymocytes, their drive out to the peripheral organs, proliferation of epithelioreticulocytes. How is this phenomemon called?
a. Age thymus involition
b. Thymus hypotrophy
*c. Accidental thymus involution
d. Thymus atrophy
e. Thymus distrophy

171. A surgeon is going to take lympha from patients thoracic duct in the point of its flowing into venous channel. Where exactly a cannula should be inserted?
a. Point of formation of inferior vena cava
*b. Left venous angle
c. Point of formation of superior vena cava
d. Point of formation of portal vein
e. Right venous angle

172. Toxic pulmonary edema was reproduced on a laboratory rat by means of ammonium chloride solution. What is the leading pathogenetic factor of this edema?
a. Decrease of colloid osmotic pressure
b. Disorder of neural and humoral regulation
c. Increase of venous outflow
*d. Increased permeability of capillars
e. Increase of lymph outflow

173. A newborn child ill with pylorostenosis has frequent vomiting accompanied by apathy, weakness, muscular hypertonia, sometimes convulsions. What form of acid-base balance disorder has developed?
a. Excretory acidosis
*b. Nongaseous alkalosis
c. Metabolic acidosis
d. Gaseous alkalosis
e. Gaseous acidosis

174. It is known that the information about amino acids sequence in a protein molecule is coded in form of a sequence of four nucleotide types in a DNA molecule, different aminoacids being coded with different quantity of triplets - from one to six. How is such peculiarity of genetic code called?
*a. Degeneracy
b. Nonoverlayability
c. Specificity
d. Versatility
e. Triplety

175. A patient has increased permeability of blood-vessel walls, increased gingival hemorrhage, small punctate hematomas on his skin, falling of teeth. What disturbance of vitamun metabolism can account for these symptoms?
a. Hypovitaminosis D
b. Hypervitaminosis D
c. Hypovitaminosis A
d. Hypervitaminosis C
*e. Hypovitaminosis C

176. A 58 year old woman had her uterus and all appendages completely removed. It resulted in stoppage of urine excretion. Cystoscopy results: bladder doesnt contain any urine, urine doesnt come also from ureteric orifices. What part of urinary excretion system was damaged during the operation?
a. Vesica urinaria
b. Ren
*c. Ureter
d. Uretra
e. Pelvis renalis

177. A patient has a slowly healing fracture. What medcine can be used to accelerate formation of connective tissue matrix?
a. Prednisolone
*b. Methyluracil
c. Cyclosporine
d. Methotrexate
e. Cyclophosphan

178. A patient displays abnormal retrodeviation of his lower jaw as a result of trauma in the region of mandibular coronal process. What muscle is most likely to be damaged?
*a. M.temporalis
b. M.pterygoideus lateralis
c. M.masseter
d. M.levator anguli oris
e. M.pterygoideus medialis

179. A patient has acute cardiac insufficiency resulting from essential hypertension. What medication will be the most appropriate in this case?
*a. Corglycone
b. Digoxin
c. Cordiamin
d. Caffeine
e. Cardiovalen

180. A 42 year old woman diagnosed with diabetes mellitus was admitted th the endocrinological department with complaints of thirst, excessive appetite. What pathological components are revealed in course of laboratory examination of the patients urine?
a. Protein, creatine
b. Bilirubin, urobilin
c. Protein, aminoacids
*d. Glucose, ketone bodies
e. Blood

181. A woman has hyperemic ovary, increased permeability of hematofollicular barrier with the following development of edema, infiltration of follicle wall by segmentonuclear leukocytes. The follicle volume is large, its wall is thinned. What period of sexual cycle do these presentations correspond with?
a. Ovulation
*b. Preovulatory stage
c. Postmenstrual period
d. Period of relative rest
e. Menstrual period

182. Post-mortem examination of a 5 year old boy who died from acute pulmonary and cardiac insufficiency revealed the following: serohemorrhagic tracheobronchitis with some necrotic areas of mucous membrane, multiple foci of hemorrhagic pneumonia in lungs. What disease is in question?
a. Croupous pneumonia
b. Diphtheria
*c. Influenza
d. Scarlet fever
e. Measles

183. During the ether narcosis a patient had evident bradycardia with threat of cardiac arrest. What medication should be used to accelerate heartbeat under condition of narcosis that shouldnt be interrupted?
a. Isadrine
b. Adrenaline
*c. Atropine
d. Camphor
e. Caffeine

184. Opening of a patients abdominal cavity revealed for about 2,0 L of purulent fluid. Peritoneum is dull, greyish, serous tunic of intestines has grayish layers that can be easily removed. It is most likely to be:
a. -
*b. Fibrinopurulent peritonitis
c. Hemorrhagic peritonitis
d. Serous peritonitis
e. Tuberculous peritonitis

185. A patient with primary nephrotic syndrome has the following content of whole protein: 40 g/l. What factor caused hypoproteinemia?
a. Disturbance of intestinal protein absorption
*b. Proteinuria
c. Increased proteolysis
d. Reduced protein synthesis in liver
e. Transition of protein from vessels to tissues

186. A patient fell into the ice hole, was chilled in the wind and taken ill. Body temperature rised up to 39,70С and fluctuated from 39,00С to 39,80С. Name the type of patients temperature profile:
a. Febris intermittens
b. Febris remittens
*c. Febris continua
d. Febris hectica
e. Febris recurrens

187. Morphological examination revealed in histological specimen of biopsy material an irregular-shaped vessel. Its middle membrane is formed by bundles of smooth myocytes and layers of connective tissue. What type of vessel is it?
a. Venule
*b. Vein of muscular type
c. Artery uf muscular type
d. Arteriole
e. Lymphatic vessel

188. A 38 year old patient died during intractable attack of bronchial asthma. Histological examination revealed mucus accumulations in bronchis lumen, a lot of mast cells (labrocytes) in bronchis wall, some of these cells are degranulated, there are also many eosinophils. Name pathogenesis of these changes in bronchi:
a. Granulematosis
b. Immune complex mechanism
c. Cell-mediated cytolysis
*d. Atopy, anaphylaxis
e. Cytotoxic, cytolytic effect of antibodies

189. A patient with stomatitis was prescribed a medication of sulfanamide group. What is the mechanism of its antibacterial effect?
a. Decrease of membrane permeability
b. Synthesis disturbance of cell membrane proteins
c. Protein coagulation
d. Inhibition of sulfhydric groups of thiol enzymes
*e. Competitive antagonism with para-aminobenzoic acid

190. A mother consulted the doctor about her one year old child, who has got six teeth come out. How many teeth should the child of such age have?
a. 7
b. 6
c. 10
*d. 8
e. 12

191. A 35 year old patient came to the admission department with complaints of pain and edema in the region of floor of oral cavity. After examination he was diagnosed with inflammation in the region of excretory duct of submandibular gland. Where does this duct open into?
a. Vestibulum oris
b. Plica fimbriata
*c. Caruncula sublingualis
d. Recesus gingivalis
e. Foramen caecum linguae

192. Examination of a patient who was exposed to the ionizing radiation revealed damage of wight pulp. What cells of white pulp undergo pathological changes?
a. Basophilic leukocytes
*b. Lymphocytes
c. Tissue basophils
d. Monocytes
e. Neutrophilic leukocytes

193. A 10 year old child was subjected to Mantoux test (with tuberculine). 48 hours later a papule up to 8 mm in diameter appeared on the site of tuberculine injection. What type of hyperesponsiveness reaction has developed after tuberculine injection?
*a. Hyperresponsiveness reaction type IV
b. Hyperresponsiveness reaction type II
c. Reaction of Arthus phenomenon type
d. Reaction of serum sickness type
e. Atopic reaction

194. A patient has difficulties with jaw joining when he is chewing. There is partial atrophy of masticatory muscles situated below the zygomatic arch. What nerve branches do these muscles innervate?
a. Nn.alveolares superiores
*b. N.mandibularis
c. N.infraorbitalis
d. N.alveolaris inferior
e. N.maxillaris

195. A chemical burn of esophagus caused its local constriction as a result of scar formation. What cells of loose connective tissue take part in scar formation?
a. Miofibroblasts
*b. Mature specialized fibroblasts
c. Fibroclasts
d. Immature nonspecialized fibroblasts
e. Fibrocytes

196. A man has trauma of greater pectoral muscle. What index decrease will it cause?
a. Functional residual lung capacity
b. Residual volume
c. Respiratory volume
*d. Inspiratory reserve volume
e. Expiratory reserve volume

197. A child has disturbed processes of ossification and "punctate" enamel. What microelement metabolism is disturbed?
a. Iron
b. Copper
*c. Fluorine
d. Chromium
e. Zinc

198. It is required to set an experiment on an isolated excitable cell and to achieve increase of membrane rest potential (hyperpolarization). What ion channels should be activated to achieve such a result?
a. Sodium
*b. Potassium
c. Potassium and sodium
d. Calcium
e. Sodium and calcium

199. A group of students has representatives of different races. One of the students has straight black hair and overhanging skin fold of superior eyelid - epicanthus. What race does this student most probably represent?
a. Negroid
*b. Mongoloid
c. Ethiopian
d. Australoid
e. Europeoid

200. Histological examination of trasverse enamel slice revealed linear banding in form of concentric circles that is pointing at an angle to the dentinoenamel junction. Name these structures:
a. Enamel spindles
b. Enamel fascicles
*c. Retsius lines
d. Enamel plates
e. Hunter-Schregers lines

