1. During starvation normal rate of glucose is maintained by means of activation of gluconeogenesis. What substance can be used as a substrate for this process?
a. Adenine
b. Urea
*c. Alanine
d. Ammonia
e. Guanine

2. A patient complained about ear noise and pain sensations. Objectively: the patient has acute respiratory disease, rhinitis. The infection penetrated into the tympanic cavity through the following opening of the pharynx:
a. Aperture of larynx
b. Tympanic opening of auditory tube
c. Fauces
*d. Pharyngeal opening of auditory tube
e. Choanae

3. A 5 year old child has the following symptoms: body temperature up to 40oC, acute headache, vomiting, anxiety, shiver. 4 days later there appeared hemorrhagic skin rash, oliguria and adrenal insufficiency that caused death. Bacteriological examination of pharyngeal smears revealed meningococcus. What form of meningococcal infection was it?
a. Meningoencephalitis
b. Meningococcal nasopharyngitis
*c. Meningococcemia
d. Meningococcal meningitis
e. -

4. Among public catering workers examined by doctors of sanitary-and-epidemiologic station often occur asymptomatic parasite carriers. This means that a healthy person carries cysts that infect other people. Such parasitizing is impossible for the following causative agent:
a. Malarial plasmodium
b. Intestinal trichomonad
*c. Dysenteric amoeba
d. Viscerotropic leishmania
e. Dermatotropic leishmania

5. A specimen of connective tissue of derma was stained with Sudan III and hematoxylin. There are clusters of big polygonal cells that turned orange. Their nuclei are flattened and located on periphery. What tissue is it?
a. Brown adipose
b. Hyaline cartilaginous
c. Reticular connective
d. Lamellar osseous
*e. White adipose

6. Poisoning with corrosive sublimate caused acute renal insufficiency. Its progress included four stages: 1) initial, 2) oligoanuria, 4) recovery. Name the third stage of acute renal insufficiency:
*a. Polyuric
b. Ischemic
c. Hemodynamic
d. Metabolic
e. Pathochemical

7. A blood sample of a pregnant woman was typed. Erythrocyte-agglutination reaction was present with standard sera 0, (I), B(III), reaction was absent with the serum A(II). The blood under examination relates to the following group:
a. AB(IV)
b. -
c. 0, (I)
d. B(III)
*e. A(II)

8. Influence of unfavourable factors upon the organism causes change of thymus accompanied by mass loss of thymocytes, their displacement to the peripheral organs, proliferation of epithelioreticulocytes. What phenomenon is it?
a. Age thymus involution
b. Thymus hypotrophy
c. Thymus atrophy
d. Thymus dystrophy
*e. Accidental thymus involution

9. A patient with Itsenko-Cushing syndrome has persistent hyperglycemia and glycosuria, hypertension, osteoporosis, obesity. Increased synthesis and hypersecretion of the following hormone will be observed in this case:
a. Thyroxin
b. Adrenaline
c. Aldosterone
*d. Cortisol
e. Glucagon

10. A newborn has signs of dyspepsia after milk feeding. Symptoms of dyspepsia disappear when milk is substituted for glucose solution. The newborn has low activity of the following enzyme:
a. Invertase
b. Maltase
c. Amylase
*d. Lactase
e. Isomaltase

11. An experimental rat got intra-abdominal injection of 10 ml of 40% glucose solution. 60 minutes later the rat passed into a comatose state as a result of dehydratation. What is the mechanism of development of this state?
*a. Rise of osmotic pressure of extracellular fluid
b. Reduction of vasopressin secretion
c. Acid-base disbalance
d. Rise of oncotic pressure of extracellular fluid
e. Loss of salts and water

12. Medical examination of the first-year pupils included Mantoux test. 15 pupils out of 35 had negative reaction. What actions should be taken against children with negative reaction?
a. Rabies vaccination
b. Repeat Mantoux test
c. Antitoxin vaccination
*d. BCG vaccination
e. Examination of blood serum

13. A patient has hyperkaliemia and hyponatremia. Such changes might be caused by hyposecretion of the following hormone:
a. Parathormone
b. Natriuretic
*c. Aldosterone
d. Vasopressin
e. Cortisol

14. A 22 year old woman has been taking sulfanilamides for a long time that led to symptoms of hemolytic anaemia caused by hereditary disturbance of synthesis of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. This enzyme of pentose-phosphate cycle is responsible for generation of:
*a. NADP-H2
b. FAD
c. NAD
d. ATP
e. FMN

15. On a certain territory mass death of rodents was registered. It was suspected that their death might have been caused by plague. What serological reaction should be applied for quick identification of antigen of the causative agent of this epizooty?
a. Neutralization
b. Complement binding
*c. Precipitation
d. Agglutination
e. Passive hemagglutination

16. After extraction of the II maxillary molar tooth the patient has got haemorrhage from the alveolar socket. The observed haemorrhage is from the system of the following artery:
a. Mylohyoid
b. Ascending pharyngeal
*c. Maxillary
d. Facial
e. Inferior alveolar

17. In process of the secretory cycle secretion granules come and go in the apical part of cytoplasm of pancreas cells. These granules relate to the following structure elements:
a. Microfilaments
b. Lysosomes
c. Granular endoplasmic reticulum
d. Exocytic vacuoles
*e. Inclusions

18. Examination of experimental rats that have been getting only carbohydrate feed for a long time revealed accumulation of water in tissues. What is the leading pathogenetic mechanism of edema development?
a. Hyperosmolar
*b. Hypooncotic
c. Membranogenic
d. Dysregulatory
e. Lymphogenous

19. A 30 year old woman has been continuously using lipstick with a fluorescent substance that led to development of a limited erythema on the prolabium, slight peeling, and later small transversal sulci and fissures. Microscopical examination of the affected zone revealed in the connective tissue sensibilized lymphocytes and macrophages, effects of cytolysis. What type of immunological hypersensitivity has developed on the lip?
a. I type (reagin type)
b. II type (antibody cytotoxicity)
c. III type (immune complex cytotoxicity)
d. Granulomatosis
*e. IV type (cellular cytotoxicity)

20. A histological specimen presents an organ that has both cortical and medullary substance. Cortical substance consists of an external zone that contains lymph nodules as well as of a paracortical zone. Medullary substance contains medullary cords, sinuses and trabecules. What organ possesses these morphological signs?
a. Kidney
b. Adrenal glands
*c. Lymph node
d. Thymus
e. Spleen

21. As a result of a trauma a patient has got disfunction of lachrymal gland. What nerve is responsible for its secretion?
a. N. occipitalis minor
b. N. auricularis magnus
c. N. petrosus minor
*d. N. petrosus major
e. Chorda tympany

22. A 38 year old patient complained that after acute respiratory viral disease she had lost sensation of food contact with the front ⅔ of her tongue as well as pain and temperature sensation (burned her tongue with hot tea). Which nerve and which branch of it was damaged?
a. Superior laryngeal nerve of vagus
*b. Lingual nerve of mandibular branch of trigeminus
c. Tympanichord of facial nerve
d. Lingual branches of glossopharyngeal nerve
e. Lingual nerves of sublingual nerve

23. Examination of nasal cavity revealed deviation of the posterior part of nasal septum. What bone is affected?
a. Medial plate of pterygoid process
b. Perpendicular plate of ethmoid bone
*c. Vomer
d. Vertical plate of palatine bone
e. Lateral plate of pterygoid process

24. A 62 year old patient with cerebral haemorrhage was admitted to the neurological department in grave condition. Objectively: increase of respiration depth and rate with its following reduction to apnoea, thereafter respiration cycle restores. What respiration type is it?
a. Biots
b. Apneustic
*c. Cheyne-Stokes
d. Kussmauls
e. Gasping

25. Examination of puncture biopsy material of liver revealed dystrophy of hepatocytes, their necrosis and sclerosis along with disturbance of beam and lobulous structure and formation of pseudolobules of regeneration nodes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Progressing massive liver necrosis
b. Chronic hepatitis
*c. Liver cirrhosis
d. Acute hepatitis
e. Chronic hepatosis

26. A 23 year old man got perforation of hard palate. There was also a solid well-defined formation. Post-operative microscopical examination of this formation revealed a large focus of caseous necrosis surrounded by granulation tissue with endovasculitis and cellular infiltrate consisting mainly of plasmocytes but also of lymphocytes and epithelioid cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lepra
*b. Syphilis
c. Sarcoma
d. Tuberculosis
e. Scleroma

27. Analysis of a dentists urine obtained at the end of his working day revealed protein concentration at the rate of 0,7 g/l. His morning urine hadnt such changes. What is this phenomenon called?
a. Organic proteinuria
*b. Functional proteinuria
c. Extrarenal proteinuria
d. Hematuria
e. Nonselective proteinuria

28. Examination of a tissue sample of enlarged cervical lymph nodes taken from a young woman revealed proliferation of lymphocytes, reticular cells, macrophages, big and small Hodgkins cells, multinuclear Sternberg-Reed cells. There were also multiple eosinophils, single foci of caseous necrosis of the node tissue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute leukosis
*b. Lymphogranulomatosis
c. Lymphosarcoma
d. Tuberculosis
e. Metastasis of lung cancer

29. A patient suffering from chronic bronchitis takes a synthetic mucolytic drug that stimulates sputum liquefaction. What drug is it?
*a. Acetylcysteine
b. Heparin
c. Diazepam
d. Furosemide
e. Enalapril

30. Examination of a man revealed a protozoan disease that affected brain and caused vision loss. Blood analysis revealed unicellular half-moon-shaped organisms with pointed end. The causative agent of this disease is:
a. Leishmania
b. Lamblia
c. Trichmonad
*d. Toxoplasma
e. Amoeba

31. Examination of a tubular organ revealed that its middle membrane consisted of solid hyaline rings. What epithelium lines mucous membrane of this organ?
a. Monolayer prismatic glanduous
b. Monolayer cubic
c. Monolayer prismatic with a limbus
d. Multilayer squamous nonkeratinous
*e. Multinuclear prismatic ciliated

32. A 75 year old male patient consulted a surgeon about a brown nonhealing ulcer of shin. Examination of biopsy material revealed diffuse growth of polymorphic atypic cells with brown pigment in their cytoplasm. Pearls reaction was negative. There were also a lot of pathological mitoses and foci of tissue necrosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Local hemosiderosis
b. Skin cancer
*c. Melanoma
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Intradermal nevus

33. During approach to the thyroid gland by means of transverse section suprasternal cellular tissue space should be opened. It will be dangerous to damage the following anatomic formation located within this space:
a. Internal jugular vein
b. Carotid artery
c. Lymph nodes
d. Subclavicular artery
*e. Venous jugular arch

34. As a result of improper feeding an infant got full-blown diarrhe A. One of its main consequences is excretion of large amount of sodium bicarbonate. What form of acid-base balance disturbance is it?
a. Metabolic alkalosis
b. Acid-base balance wont be disturbed
c. Respiratory acidosis
d. Respiratory alkalosis
*e. Excretory acidosis

35. A 42 year old patient who had been suffering from chronic granulomatous periodontitis and chronic purulent osteomyelitis of his lower jaw for 8 years died from chronic renal insufficiency. What complication of purulent osteomyelitis has developed in kidneys?
a. Atrophy
b. Hyalinosis
c. Necrosis of epithelium of convoluted tubules
*d. Amyloidosis
e. Adipose degeneration

36. Examination of a patient 24 hours after appendectomy revealed neutrophilic leukocytosis with regenerative shift. What is the most probable mechanism of development of absolute leukocytosis in peripheral blood?
a. Redistribution of leukocytes in the organism
b. Reduction of leukolysis
c. Immunity activation
*d. Intensification of leukopoiesis
e. Slower emigration of leukocytes to the tissues

37. A patient with neck injury was admitted to the hospital. Examination revealed a damaged nerve located anteriad to the frontal scalene. What nerve is damaged?
*a. Phrenic
b. Cervical part of sympathetic trunk
c. Vagus
d. Sublingual
e. Glossopharyngeal

38. A patient was delivered to the admission ward with poisoning with an insecticide of anticholinesterase action. What drug able to block muscarinic cholinoreceptors should be prescribed?
a. Benzohexonium
b. Dithylinum
c. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
d. Mesatonum
*e. Atropine sulfate

39. A patient has allergic rhinitis with profuse mucous discharges, itching, frequent sneezing. What drug should be chosen if you know that it selectively blocks histamine receptors?
a. Mesatonum
*b. Loratadine
c. Prednisolone
d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
e. Naphthizin

40. What preventive medications should be injected to a patient with open maxillofacial trauma provided that he has never got prophylactic vaccination before?
*a. Antitetanus immunoglobulin and anatoxin
b. Diphtheria, tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine and antibiotics
c. Anticonvulsive drugs and anatoxin
d. Tetanus anatoxin and antibiotics
e. Antitetanus serum and antibiotics

41. Active physical work induces rise of concentration of carbonic acid in blood. This causes deepening and acceleration of respiration thus reducing concentration of carbonic acid and hydrogen ions in blood. This maintains the following process:
a. Immunity
*b. Homeostasis
c. Ontogenesis
d. Orthobiosis
e. Anabiosis

42. A patient has dislocation of his mandible that caused impairment of salivation and gustatory sensitivity of anterior ⅔ of his tongue. What nerve was damaged?
a. Sublingual nerve
*b. Tympanichord
c. Greater petrosal nerve
d. Deep petrosal nerve
e. Lesser petrosal nerve

43. A histological specimen presents a developed tooth that has a coating resistant to acids, but it can be found only on the lateral surfaces of the tooth. What coating is meant?
a. Enamel
b. Dentine
c. Enamel pellicle
d. Cement
*e. Cuticle

44. Electron-microscope investigation of cortical substance of a kidney reveals some structures lined with prismatic epithelium that normally has brush border and deep plicae of plasmolemma in its basal part. There is a big number of mitochondrions between these plicae. These structures belong to the following part of a nephron:
a. Distal straight tubule
b. Distal convoluted tubule
c. Henles loop
*d. Proximal tubule
e. Renal corpuscle

45. Analysis of an electron diffraction pattern of a cell revealed mitochondrion destruction. This might result in abnormal course of the following cell process:
a. Cleavage
b. Crossingover
*c. Oxidation of organic substances
d. Nuclear division
e. -

46. A 15 year old girl was delivered to the hospital with inflammation of vermiform appendix. Blood analysis revealed signs of anaemia. Her feces contained lemon-shaped helminthic eggs (50x30 micrometer) with "plugs" on the poles. What type of helminth is it?
a. Pinworm
b. Echinococcus
*c. Trichuris
d. Hymenolepis nana
e. Hookworm

47. A young woman has entered a production unit where strongly smelled of paints and varnishes and had bronchospasm. This reflex was provoked by irritation of the following receptors:
a. Pleural receptors
b. Juxtaglomerular
c. Central chemoreceptors
d. Peripheral chemoreceptors
*e. Irritant

48. Specific prophylaxis involved application of a vaccine containing microorganisms and exotoxin detoxicated by formalin. It relates to the following type of vaccine:
a. Live
b. Anatoxin
c. Genetically engineered
d. Chemical
*e. Combined

49. A 40 year old female patient has enlarged thyroid gland. On palpation the gland is dense, its surface is slightly tuberous. Histological examination of gland sample revealed diffuse infiltration of tissue by the cells, formation of lymphoid follicles. What disease is it?
a. Endemic goiter
b. Riedels disease
c. Sporadic goiter
d. Diffuse toxic goiter
*e. Autoimmune thyroiditis

50. A basketball player complains of pain over his heel that is getting stronger during walking. It might be caused by damage of tendon of the following muscle:
a. m. fibularis brevis
b. m. fibularis longus
*c. m. triceps surae
d. m. flexor digitorum longus
e. m. tibialis posterior

51. Parodontosis is treated by means of antioxidants. Which of the following natural compounds is used as an antioxidant:
*a. Tocopherol
b. Pyridoxine
c. Thiamine
d. Choline
e. Gluconate

52. Prophylactic medical examination of a 7 year old boy revealed that the boy had Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (only boys can be affected). His parents are healthy but his grandfather by his mothers side has the same diagnosis. What is the type of disease inheritance?
a. Autosomally dominant
b. Semidominance
*c. Recessive, sex-linked
d. Dominant, sex-linked
e. Autosomally recessive

53. A patient has mental retardation, small height, brachydactyly, mongoloid slant. Analysys of his karyotype revealed trisomy 21. What chromosomal anomaly is it?
a. Trisomy X
b. Turners syndrome
c. Specific fetopathy
d. Klinefelters syndrome
*e. Downs disease

54. A 7 year old child has angin. A smear from the tonsil surface was inoculated on blood agar. 24 hours later there had grown colonies of streptococci. Nutrient medium turned transparent around them. This study revealed presence of the following pathogenous factor:
a. Beta-lactamase
*b. Hemolysin
c. Leukocidin
d. Neuraminidase
e. Endotoxin

55. A patient with fracture of the greater wing of sphenoid bone was admitted to the craniocerebral department. The fracture line went through the spinous foramen. What vessel was damaged?
a. Anterior deep temporal artery
*b. Middle meningeal artery
c. Lateral pterygoid artery
d. Superficial artery
e. Posterior deep temporal artery

56. Autopsy revealed that the upper lobe of the right lung was enlarged, grey, airless; surface of incision was dripping with turbid liquid; pleura had a lot of fibrinous plicae. Microscopical examination of alveoles revealed exudate containing neutrophils, desquamated alveolocytes and fibrin fibres. Bronchus wall was intact. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Croupous pneumonia
b. Focal pneumonia
c. Pulmonary abscess
d. Interstitial pneumonia
e. Influenzal pneumonia

57. A 10 year old child underwent Mantoux test (with tuberculin). 48 hours later there apperaed a papule up to 8 mm in diameter on the site of tuberculin injection. Tuberculin injection caused the following hypersensitivity reaction:
a. Arthus reaction
b. II type hypersensitivity reaction
c. Seroreaction
*d. IV type hypersensitivity reaction
e. Atopic reaction

58. A female patient has symptoms of inflammation of urogenital tracts. A smear from the vaginal mucous membrane contained big unicellular pyriform organisms with a sharp spike on the back end of their bodies; big nucleus and undulating membrane. What protozoa were revealed in the smear?
*a. Trichomonas vaginalis
b. Trichomonas hominis
c. Lamblia intestinalis
d. Trypanosoma gambiense
e. Trichomonas buccalis

59. Microscopic study of an endocrine gland revealed that its parenchyma consisted of follicular structures. Their wall was formed by monolayer cubic epithelium, and their cavity was filled up with oxyphilic substance. What hormon is secreted by this gland?
a. Oxytocin
b. Cortisol
c. Aldosterone
d. Parathyrin
*e. Thyroxin

60. A patient who takes blocker of membrane cytoreceptors of efferent conductor synapses of autonomic nervous system complains about dry mouth. What receptors are blocked?
*a. Muscarinic cholinoreceptors
b. -adrenoreceptors
c. -adrenoreceptors
d. Nicotinic cholinoreceptors
e. H2-receptors

61. A mountain climber spent a long time in the mountains. Erythrocyte number has risen from 5,0×1012/l up to 6,0×1012/l. What factor stimulated erythropoiesis?
*a. Decrease of O2 in the arterial blood
b. Increase of O2 in the venous blood
c. Increase of O2 in the arterial blood
d. Increase of O2 in the cells
e. Decrease of O2 in the venous blood

62. A patient with streptococcal infection of gums was prescribed a drug that contained beta-lactam ring in its structure. Which drug relates to this group?
a. Rifampicin
b. Streptomycin sulfate
c. Chloramphenicol
*d. Benzylpenicillin
e. Erythromycin

63. A typical symptom of cholera is great loss of water and sodium ions. What mechanism underlies development of diarrhea in this case?
a. Increased secretion of renin by the cells of renal arterioles
b. Inhibition of vasopressin synthesis in hypothalamus
c. Aldosterone oxidation in adrenal cortex
d. Increased corticotropin synthesis
*e. Activation of adenylate cyclase of enterocytes

64. A 28 year old woman consulted a doctor about sterility. Examination revealed underdeveloped ovaries and uterus, irregular menstrual cycle. Study of sex chromatin revealed 2 Barrs bodies in most somatic cells. What chromosome disease is the most probable in this case?
a. Edwards syndrome
b. Klinefelters syndrome
c. Turners syndrome
d. Pataus syndrome
*e. Triplo-X syndrome

65. A new-born child has hyperemia, edema of the oral mucous membrane, small erosions with viscous mucopus. Smears from the mucopus contain a lot of leukocytes with Gram-negative diplococci. The same microorganisms can be found also beyond the leukocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Blennorrhea
b. Staphylococcal stomatitis
c. Congenital syphilis
*d. Gonococcal stomatitis
e. Toxoplasmosis

66. Treatment of many diseases involves use of cocarboxylase (thiamine pyrophosphate) for supplying cells with energy. What metabolic process is activated in this case?
a. Amino acids decarboxylation
b. Decarboxylation of biogenic amines
c. Glutamate deamination
d. Detoxication of harmful substances in liver
*e. Oxidizing decarboxylation of pyruvate

67. A patient with myocardium infarction was delivered to the resuscitation department. What drug should be injected to the patient for prophylaxis of pain shock?
a. Celecoxib
b. Naloxone
c. Analgin
d. Paracetamol
*e. Promedol

68. A 43 year old female patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of pain in the right subcostal area, skin itch. Examination revealed hypalgesia and hematolysis, skin icteritiousness, bradycardia, hypotoni A. What is the most probable cause of these symptoms?
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Parenchymatous jaundice
c. Hepatocellular jaundice
*d. Cholemia
e. Intensification of erythrocyte haemolysis

69. A student has accidentally hit his elbow against the edge of the table and sensed burning and tingling on the interior surface of his forearm. What nerve was damaged in this case?
a. N. medianus
b. N. axillaris
*c. N. ulnaris
d. N. radialis
e. N. musculocutaneus

70. Vagosympathetic Vishnevskys block involves introduction of novocaine along the posterior edge of sternocleidomastoid muscle above its intersection with exterior jugular vein. The block is performed within the following triangle of neck:
a. Submandibular
b. Omoclavicular
c. Carotid
*d. Omotrapezoid
e. Pirogoffs

71. Researchers studied speed of excitement conduction in different areas of an isolated heart. Which area demonstrated the lowest speed?
*a. Atrioventricular node
b. Atrial myocardium
c. His bundle
d. Purkinjes fibers
e. Ventricular myocardium

72. A patient consulted a dentist about itching and burning in the oral cavity; high temperature. The patient was diagnosed with trichomonal gingivostomatitis. What drug should be chosen for his treatment?
*a. Metronidazole
b. Nystatin
c. Gentamicin sulfate
d. Doxycycline hydrochloride
e. Ampicillin

73. Clinical examination of a female patient revealed reduction of basal metabolism by 40%, gain in body mass, drop of body temperature, face puffiness, sexual disfunctions, inertness and apathy, lowered intelligence. These symptoms are caused by disfunction of the following endocrine gland:
a. Hypofunction of parathyroid glands
b. Hyperfunction of thyroid gland
c. Epiphysis hypofunction
*d. Hypofunction of thyroid gland
e. Hypophysis hyperfunction

74. A patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 5 years. As a result of not keeping to a diet the patient passed into a comatose state. Emergency doctor injected him glucose. The patients state got better. What is the most probable type of coma in this case?
a. Acidotic
b. Hypothyreoid
c. Hepatic
d. Hyperglycemic
*e. Hypoglycemic

75. A patient suffering from caries of the left inferior premolar has got a swelling on his neck above the hyoid bone. There appeared fever, salivary discharge, contraction of masticatory muscles, difficult mouth opening. The patient was diagnosed with phlegmon of mouth floor. What muscles will be involved in the process?
a. Hyoglossal and styloglossal
*b. Mylohyoid and geniohyoid
c. Platysma and stylohyoid
d. Thyrohyoid and sternohyoid
e. Digastric and stylohyoid

76. A doctor examined a victim of a road accident and revealed damage of the exterior wall of eye socket. The patient has lost ability to abduct the eyeball on the affected side. What nerve might be damaged in this case?
a. N. infraorbitalis
*b. N. abducens
c. N. oculomotorius
d. N. ophthalmicus
e. N. trochlearis

77. A 55 year old man had been suffering from chronic glomerulonephritis. He died from chronic renal failure. Macroscopical examination revealed on the surface of epicardium and pericardium some greyish-white villous depositions. After their removal dilated and plethoric vessels were uncovered. What process took place in the pericardium?
a. Organization
b. Arterial hyperemia
c. Haemorrhagic inflammation
d. Proliferative inflammation
*e. Fibrinous inflammation

78. A 35 year old female patient diagnosed with infertility underwent diagnostic biopsy of endometrium. Microscopical examination revealed that its mucous membrane was edematic, uterine glands were convoluted and filled with thick secretion. Such changes of endometrium are caused by excess of the following hormone:
a. Testosterone
b. ACTH
*c. Progesterone
d. Somatotropin
e. Estrogen

79. A male patient underwent an operation on account of inguinal herni A. During the operation a surgeon damaged content of the inguinal canal. What structure was damaged?
a. Lig. teres uteri
b. Lig. inguinalе
c. Urarchus
d. -
*e. Funiculus spermaticus

80. What chnges will be observed in an isolated heart after introduction of adrenaline into the perfusion solution?
a. Increase of heart rate
*b. Increase of heart rate and force
c. Diastolic arrest
d. Increase of heart force
e. Decrease of heart force

81. After mouth closing and teeth clenching the mouth opens reflectory. What receptots initiate this reflex?
a. Proprioceptors of elevator muscles of lower jaw
b. Proprioceptors of depressor muscles of lower jaw
c. Gustatory receptors
d. Mechanoreceptors of oral mucous membrane
*e. Receptors of periodontium

82. A 58 year old female patient had to be prepared to cholecystectomy. Complex of premedication drugs included benzohexonium. What is the function of this drug in anaesthesia?
a. Reduction of excitement phase
b. Relaxation of skeletal muscles
c. Relaxation of smooth muscles
d. Intensification of retrograde amnesia
*e. Functional block of visceral reflexes

83. Tissue is being stimulated by electric cathodic impulse with amplitude of 70% of threshold. What changes of membrane potential will be observed?
*a. Partial depolarization
b. No changes
c. -
d. Hyperpolarization
e. Action potential

84. A child has abnormal formation of tooth enamel and dentin as a result of low concentration of calcium ions in blood. Such abnormalities might be caused by deficiency of the following hormone:
a. Thyroxin
b. Thyrocalcitonin
*c. Parathormone
d. Somatotropic hormone
e. Triiodothyronine

85. A patient with disfunction of external respiration has to undergo tracheotomy. The isthmus of thyroid gland is commonly situated on a level with the following tracheal rings:
a. V-VI
b. IV-V
c. I-II
*d. II- ІV
e. III-IV

86. A patient consulted a doctor about acute pain in the right subcostal are A. During examination the doctor noticed yellowed sclera of the patient. Laboratory analyses revealed high activity of alanine-aminotransferase and negative reaction to stercobilin in feces. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Haemolytic jaundice
b. Hepatitis
c. Chronic colitis
*d. Cholelithiasis
e. Chronic gastritis

87. A patient was prescribed a drug with apparent lipophilic properties. What is the main mechanism of its absorption?
a. Binding with transport proteins
b. Active transport
c. Pinocytosis
d. Filtration
*e. Passive diffusion

88. A 70 year old patient suffering from cardiac insufficiency has been uncontrolledly taking digoxin that resulted in extrasystole, vomiting, vision impairment, anxiety, sleep disturbance, reduction of diuresis. Application of drugs relating to the following group will be pathogenetically reasonable in this case:
a. Donators of nitrogen oxide
b. Potassium channel blockers
*c. Donators of sulfhydric groups
d. Angiotensin II receptor blockers
e. Stimulants of 1-adrenoreceptors

89. During the preventive examination of a miner a doctor revealed changes in cardiovascular fitness being evidence of cardiac insuffisiency at a stage of compensation. What is the main evidence of compensation of cardiac activity?
a. Tachycardia
b. Dyspnea
*c. Myocardium hypertrophy
d. Cyanosis
e. Rise of arterial pressure

90. It is known that information about sequence of amino acids in a protein molecule is encoded as a sequence of four types of nucleotides in a DNA molecule, and different amino acids are encoded by different number of triplets - from one to six. Such peculiarity of the genetic code is called:
a. Specificity
b. Triplety
c. Universality
*d. Degeneracy
e. Nonoverlapping

91. A child has physical and mental retardation, serious abnormalities in connective tissue of internal organs; urine contains keratan sulfates. This is caused by metabolic disorder of the following substance:
a. Elastin
b. Collagen
c. Fibronectin
d. Hyaluronic acid
*e. Glycosaminoglycan

92. During a neuro-surgical operation the occipital areas of cerebral cortex are stimulated. What sensations will the patient have?
a. Auditory
*b. Visual
c. Olfactory
d. Tactile
e. Gustatory

93. A patient suffering from chronic renal insufficiency has got osteoporosis. Osteoporosis was caused by abnormal synthesis of the following regulator of mineral metabolism in kidneys:
a. Lysine hydroxylation
b. Glutamate carboxylation
*c. 1,25(OH)2D3 formation
d. Proline hydroxylation
e. Cortisol hydroxylation

94. A female patient suffering from acute bronchitis complains about respiratory obstruction and cough with thick viscous sputum. She was prescribed a mucolytic agent that stimulates surfactant synthesis. What mucolytic agent was prescribed?
a. Theophylline
b. Glaucin
*c. Ambroxolum
d. Morphine hydrochloride
e. Sodium hydrocarbonate

95. Coprological examination of a patients feces revealed small operculate eggs. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient often consumes fish. What fluke parasitizes in the patients organism?
*a. Cat liver fluke
b. Lung fluke
c. Liver fluke
d. Lancet fluke
e. Blood fluke

96. On the 2nd day after myocardium infarction the patients systolic arterial pressure abruptly dropped down to 60 mm Hg. This was accompanied by tachycardia up to 140 bpm, dyspnea, loss of consciousness. What is the leading mechanism in the pathogenesis of this shock?
a. Intoxication by the products of necrotic degeneration
*b. Decrease of stroke volume
c. Decrease of circulating blood volume
d. Anaphylactic reaction to myocardial proteins
e. Paroxysmal tachycardia

97. A patient with fracture of femoral bone in the area of surgical neck got symptoms of acute dextroventricular insufficiency as a result of pulmonary embolism. What type of embolism is it?
a. Metastatic
b. Gas
c. Tissue
*d. Fat
e. Air

98. A sportsman needs to improve his sporting results. He was recommended a drug containing carnitine. What process is activated by this compound in the first place?
a. Transport of calcium ions
b. Transport of amino acids
c. Transport of glucose
d. Transport of vitamin K
*e. Transport of fatty acids

99. A histological specimen presents the tissue that contains cells having no processes and a few tens of nuclei each. One of cell surfaces has a corrugated zone that provides secretion of hydrolytic elements. What tissue is it?
a. Muscular tissue
b. Epithelial tissue
c. Nerve tissue
d. Cartilaginous tissue
*e. Osseous tissue

100. Examination of a female patient revealed low activity of lipoprotein lipase which hydrolyzes chylomicron triglycerides on the surface of endothelium of adipose tissue capillaries. What biochemical disorders should be expected?
a. Type II A hyperlipoproteinemia
b. Type II B hyperlipoproteinemia
*c. Type I hyperlipoproteinemia
d. Type III hyperlipoproteinemia
e. Type IV hyperlipoproteinemia

101. A patient has high sunlight sensitivity of skin. During standing his urine turns dark-brown. What is the most probable cause of this condition?
a. Pellagra
b. Haemolytic jaundice
c. Alkaptonuria
*d. Porphyria
e. Albinism

102. After restoration of blood circulation in damaged tissue accumulation of lactate comes to a stop and speed of glucose consumption slows down. These metabolic changes are caused by activation of the following process:
a. Lipolysis
b. Gluconeogenesis
*c. Aerobic glycolysis
d. Glycogen biosynthesis
e. Anaerobic glycolysis

103. A patient diagnosed with malignant carcinoid has extremely high concentration of serotonin in blood. This biogenic amine can be formed from the following amino acid:
a. Alanine
b. Threonine
*c. Tryptophan
d. Methionine
e. Leucine

104. A student has dry mouth during an exam. This is caused by realization of the following reflexes:
a. Unconditioned parasympathetic
b. Conditioned and unconditioned sympathetic
c. Unconditioned sympathetic and parasympathetic
d. Conditioned parasympathetic
*e. Conditioned sympathetic

105. A patient with apparent icteritiousness of skin, sclera and mucous membranes was admitted to the hospital. The patients urine was of brown ale colour, analysis revealed presence of direct bilirubin. Feces had low concentration of bile pigments. What type of jaundice is it?
a. Parenchymatous
b. Conjugated
c. Absorbtion
*d. Obturative
e. Haemolytic

106. In order to speed up healing of the thermal injury it is required to prescribe a drug that facilitates epithelization of skin and mucous membranes. What drug is it?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Nicotinic acid
c. Ergocalciferol
d. Tocopherol acetate
*e. Retinol acetate

107. A patient underwent extraction of a tooth with oval crown and two tubercles on its masticatory surface. Its root is strongly flattened in mesiodistal direction, its apex is bifurcated. What tooth was extracted?
a. Canine
b. Second superior premolar
c. First inferior premolar
d. Second inferior premolar
*e. First superior premolar

108. A sensory nerve ganglion consists of roundish neurocytes with one process that divides into axon and dendrite at a certain distance from perikaryon. What are such cells called?
*a. Pseudounipolar
b. Apolar
c. Bipolar
d. Multipolar
e. Unipolar

109. It was necessary to determine absolute gustation thresholds of a healthy man for different substances. The lowest threshold will be observed for the following substance:
a. Sodium chloride
b. Saccharose
c. Citric acid
d. Glucose
*e. Quinine

110. A patient with a tumour in the area of superior tubercles of quadrigeminal plate has lost pupillary reflex. This is most probably caused by dysfunction of the following nucleus of cranial nerves:
*a. Accessory nucleus of oculomotor nerve
b. Motor nucleus of abducent nerve
c. Motor nucleus of accessory nerve
d. Motor nucleus of oculomotor nerve
e. Motor nucleus of trochlear nerve

111. A married couple applied to the genetic consultation in order to consult about their child with multiple abnormalities (microcephaly, idiocy etc). The woman has had an illnesses during her pregnancy but she didnt take any teratogens or mutagens. The parents and the childs karyotype is normal. Anamnesis study revealed that the family kept a cat. What gravidic disease caused the childs abnormalities?
*a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Dysentery
c. Trichomoniasis
d. Leishmaniasis
e. Balantidiasis

112. Autopsy of a 68 year old man who died from chronic cardiac insufficiency revealed deformed, thickened, conjoined cusps of mitral valve. Along the edge of joining there were small (1-2 mm) thrombs. What form of endocarditis caused development of chronic cardiac insufficiency?
a. Polypoulcerous
*b. Recurrent verrucous
c. Fibroplastic
d. Acute verrucous
e. Diffuse

113. Rheography of an 18 year old student during exercise showed redistribution of blood flow between organs. The peak blood flow will be observed in the following vessels:
a. Cerebrum
b. Gastrointestinal tract
*c. Skeletal muscles
d. Kidneys
e. Liver

114. Pathological material taken from a patient suffering from pulpitis was inoculated onto Kitt-Tarozzi cultural medium. It is planned to find the following microorganisms:
a. Acid-resistant
b. Acidophilic
c. Aerobic
d. Haemolytic
*e. Anaerobic

115. During examination of a childs oral cavity a pediatrician established presence of inferior medial incisors. The childs development is normal. How old is the child?
a. 8-9 months
b. -
*c. 6-7 months
d. 10-12 months
e. 13-14 months

116. After continuous treatment with antibiotics a patient got symptoms of stomatitis. Examination of specimens of oral mucous membrane revealed some oval polymorphous Gram-positive microorganisms arranged in clusters. What microorganism may be the cause of such manifestations?
a. C.perfringens
b. C.pylori
*c. С.albicans
d. S.aureus
e. S.pyogenes

117. A patient suffering from chronic myeloleukemia has got the following symptoms of anemia: decreased number of erythrocytes and low haemoglobin concentration, oxyphilic and polychromatophilic normocytes, microcytes. What is the leading pathogenetic mechanism of anemia development?
*a. Substitution of haemoblast
b. Deficiency of vitamin B12
c. Chronic haemorrhage
d. Reduced synthesis of erythropoietin
e. Intravascular hemolysis of erythrocytes

118. A 35 year old man got a trauma that resulted in complete rupture of spinal cord at a level of the first cervical segment. What changes of respiration will be observed?
a. Respiration will become infrequent and deep
b. Respiration will become frequent and shallow
*c. Respiration will come to a standstill
d. Respiration wont change
e. Respiration will become diaphragmatic

119. A man got poisoned with mushrooms. They contain muscarine that stimulates muscarinic cholinoreceptors. What symptom is typical for poisoning with inedible mushrooms?
*a. Miosis
b. Heart rate rise
c. Mydriasis
d. Bronchi dilation
e. Arterial pressure rise

120. A 10 month old child has high excitability, sleep disturbance, amyotonia, retarded dentition, teeth erupt with inadequate enamel calcification. These changes are caused by deficiency of the following vitamin:
*a. Cholecalciferol
b. Thiamine
c. Retinol
d. Riboflavin
e. Nicotinamide

121. A patient has deformation of jaw bones. Histological examination revealed there growth of fibrocellular tumour-like ill-defined tissue with primitive osteogenesis. What disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Osteosarcoma
b. Parathyroid osteodystrophy
c. Ameloblastoma
*d. Fibrous dysplasia
e. Eosinophilic granuloma

122. A patient suffering from hepatocerebral degeneration has low cncentration of ceruloplasmin in blood serum. What element accumulation will be observed in liver, cerebrum and kidneys of the patient?
a. Calcium
b. Potassium
*c. Cuprum
d. Sodium
e. Ferrum

123. Microscopical study of discharges from urethra of a patient suffering from acute urethritis revealed bean-shaped microorganisms up to 1 micrometer in diameter arranged in pairs and placed inside the leukocytes. What microorganisms are these?
a. Streptococci
*b. Gonococci
c. Tetracocci
d. Staphylococci
e. Meningococci

124. A patient with myocardium infarction was admitted to the resuscitation department. What drug should be injected to the patient in order to prevent thrombosis?
*a. Heparin
b. Dimedrol
c. Biseptol-480
d. Chingamin
e. Thyroxine

125. A 40 year old European works in a Southeast Asian country. He complains that it is hard to bear high temperature under conditions of high relative humidity. The reason for it is difficult heat emission by way of:
a. Convection and heat conduction
b. Heat conduction
c. Radiation
*d. Evaporation
e. Convection

126. Roentgenological examination of a patient revealed a deformity of the inferior wall of the right eye socket. What paranasal sinus was most probably damaged?
a. Sphenoidal sinus
b. Frontal sinus
*c. Right maxillary sinus
d. Right ethmoidal labyrinth
e. Left ethmoidal labyrinth

127. A patient has been diagnosed with alkaptonuria. This pathology is caused by deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Glutamate dehydrogenase
b. DOPA decarboxylase
*c. Oxidase of homogentisic acid
d. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
e. Pyruvate dehydrogenase

128. Pathological process of purulent barotitis involves an artery on the anterior wall of tympanic cavity. What artery is it?
a. A. temporalis superficialis
*b. A. carotis interna
c. A. auricularis posterior
d. A. carotis externa
e. A. meningea media

129. A patient noticed symptoms of approaching attack of bronchial asthma and took several tablets one by one at short intervals out of the doctors control. Short-term improvement of his condition came only after taking the first two tablets. Next intakes of a drug didnt improve his condition. Reduction of the drug effectiveness was caused by:
*a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Dependence
c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Cumulation
e. Addiction

130. Histological study of an extirpated pulp revealed some cylindrical cells in its peripheral layer. What are these cells called?
*a. Odontoblasts
b. Monocytes
c. Myofibroblasts
d. Ameloblasts
e. Fibroblasts

131. What contraction of upper extremity muscles will be observed during holding (but not moving) a load in a certain position?
a. Isotonic
*b. Isometric
c. Auxotonic
d. Excentric
e. Concentric

132. During embryogenesis the epithelial band also known as vestibular plate gives rise to development of vestibule of mouth. What biological mechanism of the programmed death of cells provides growth of buccolabial sulcus from epithelial plate?
a. Paranecrosis
*b. Apoptosis
c. Amitosis
d. Necrosis
e. Meiosis

133. A patient suffers from chronic left-ventricular insufficiency. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Vinpocetine
b. Bemegride
c. Etimizol
*d. Digoxin
e. Pyracetam

134. Microscopical examination of exudate obtained from a rat with aseptic peritonitis and mixed with birds erythrocytes revealed macrophages surrounded by foreign erythrocytes. What stage of phagocytosis is it?
a. Approaching
b. Uncomplete phagocytosis
c. Intracellular digestion
*d. Adherence
e. Immersion

135. During examination a dentist revealed cervical caries of right inferior incisors as well as enlargement of a certain group of lymph nodes. What lymph nodes are enlarged?
a. Superficial cervical
b. Deep cervical
c. Occipital
*d. Submental
e. Facial

136. A patient suffering from essential arterial hypertension got hypertensic crisis that caused an attack of cardiac asthma. What is the leading mechanism of cardiac insufficiency in this case?
a. Myocardium damage
b. Absolute coronary insufficiency
c. Cardiac overload due to increased blood volume
*d. Cardiac overload due to increased resistance
e. Disturbed blood inflow to the heart

137. A 3 month old infant has got a white deposition on the mucous membrane of his mouth, tongue and lips. The doctor suspected candidosis. What nutrient medium should be used for inoculation of the material under examination in order to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Endo
b. Loewenstein-Jensen
c. Clauberg
d. Roux
*e. Sabouraud

138. Examination of mountain climbers who have spent a long time in a high-altitude region revealed increase of erythrocyte number (over 6×1012/l) and haemoglobin concentration (over 170 g/l). What mechanism caused this phenomenon?
a. Weakening of intracellular erythrocyte haemolysis
b. Intensified processes of anoxic energy production
c. Improved ability of tissue for oxygen utilization
d. Weakening of erythrocyte haemolysis in bloodstream
*e. Intensified production of erythropoietin by the kidneys

139. What factor may cause increase of power inputs of human organism by 100%?
a. Consumption of carbohydrate food
b. Consumption of fatty food
c. Consumption of protein food
d. Rise of external temperature
*e. Drop of external temperature

140. A patient underwent partial removal of a structure of central nervous system by medical indications. This resulted in development of atony, astasia, intention tremor, ataxia, adiadochokinesis. What structure of CNS was partially removed?
a. Amygdaloid complex
*b. Cerebellum
c. Hippocampus
d. Motor cortex
e. Basal ganglions

141. Roentgenological examination of a patient revealed a cyst enclosing a tooth in its cavity in the area of the premolar. Microscopical examination revealed that the cyst wall consisted of connective tissue and was lined with multilayer squamous epithelium. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Follicular cyst
b. Eosinophilic granuloma
c. Primordial cyst
d. Radicular cyst
e. Epulis

142. The 16th tooth of a patient is missing. X-ray picture shows in the depth of alveolar process rarefaction of bone and a well-defined cavity that contained the underdeveloped tooth crown. Microscopical examination revealed that the cavity wall was lined with stratified squamous epithelium and enclosed within a fibrous capsule. Make a diagnosis:
a. Cystic ameloblastoma of jaw
*b. Follicular gnathic cyst
c. Radicular gnathic cyst
d. Cyst of the incisive canal
e. Primordial gnathic cyst

143. A patient had an attack of bronchial asthma in the dentists office. The attack was arrested by salbutamol. This drug relates to the following group of therapeutic agents:
*a. beta2-adrenomimetics
b. alpha1--adrenomimetics
c. alpha1-alpha2-adrenomimetics
d. Sympatholytics
e. alpha-beta-adrenomimetics

144. Blood analysis of a patient suffering from jaundice revealed increase of total bilirubin by its indirect fraction. Urine and feces have intense colouring. What is the most probable mechanism of these abnormalities?
a. Impaired transformation of urobilinogen in the liver
b. Obstruction of bile outflow from the liver
*c. Increased haemolysis of erythrocytes
d. Damage of liver parenchyma
e. Impaired generation of direct bilirubin

145. Periodontitis is accompanied by activation of proteolysis in the periodontium tissues. The evidence of proteolysis activation is increase of the following component of oral liquid:
a. Glucose
b. Organic acids
*c. Amino acids
d. Biogenic amines
e. Cholesterol

146. A 48 year old male patient was admitted to the hospital with acute attack of chronic glomerulonephritis. Examination revealed chronic renal failure. What is the cause of hyperazotemia by chronic renal failure?
a. Reduction of tubular excreation
b. Reduction of tubular reabsorption
c. Disorder of protein metabolism
*d. Reduction of glomerular filtration
e. Disorder of water-electrolytic metabolism

147. Examination of a patient who has recently had a hepatic disease revealed low concentration of prothrombin in blood. First of all this will cause disturbance of:
a. Anticoagulative blood properties
*b. Second phase of coagulation haemostasis
c. First phase of coagulation haemostasis
d. Vasculothrombocytic haemostasis
e. Fibrinolysis

148. A patient with acute duodenal ulcer was admitted to the hospital. Analysis of gastric juice revealed hyperfunction of secretion and acid-forming in stomach. Choose a drug that can reduce secretory function of stomach due to inhibition of H2-receptors:
a. Extract of dry belladonna
*b. Ranitidine
c. Atropine
d. Methacin
e. Platyphyllin

149. A patient with ventricular arrhythmia was admitted to the cardiological department. What drug should be administered?
a. Aminazine
*b. Amiodarone
c. Drotaverine
d. Amlodipine
e. Proserin

150. A microspecimen of parotid gland presents secretory acines with serous cells that synthesize mostly enzymes. According to the chemical composition classification, the parotid gland relates to the following glands:
a. -
b. Mucous
c. Seromucous
d. Enzymatic
*e. Serous

151. Study of a patients facial gesture revealed that he couldnt whistle, round his lips; mouth corners didnt rise during laughing, oral fissure stretched sidewards (transversal smile). These symptoms indicate the atrophy of the following muscle:
*a. Orbicular muscle of mouth
b. Greater zygomatic muscle
c. Risorius muscle
d. Cervical muscle
e. Masticatory muscle

152. A 60 year old patient complains of tongue burning, excessive salivation and glossalgia effects that came 5 days after he started using a metal dental bridge. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is edematic and hyperemic. What form of stomatitis is it?
*a. Catarrhal
b. Purulent
c. Ulcerous
d. Fibrinous
e. Gangrenous

153. Autopsy of a man who had been suffering from hypertension revealed in his brain a cavity with rubiginous walls. What event preceded development of these changes?
a. Ischemic infarction
b. Plasmorrhagias
*c. Haematoma
d. Abscess
e. Diapedetic haemorrhages

154. A 40 year old male patient died from cerebral edem A. In anamnesis the face carbuncle was registered. Autopsy revealed hyperemia and edema of cerebral tissue. White matter of the left hemisphere had two cavities 6х5,5 and 5х4,5 cm large filled with yellowish-green cream-like fluid. Walls of the cavities were built up by nerve tissue with irregular rands. What complication of carbuncle was it?
*a. Acute abscesses
b. Cysts
c. Colliquative necroses
d. Empyema
e. Chronic abscesses

155. Examination of uterine cavity revealed an embryonated ovum that wasnt attached to the endometrium. The embryo is at the following stage of development:
*a. Blastocyst
b. Gastrula
c. Zygote
d. Neurula
e. Morula

156. Medical ambulance delivered a 2 year old girl to the childrens department. Objectively: the child is inert, apathetic. Liver is enlarged, study of biopsy material revealed glycogen excess. Blood glucose rate is below normal. The most probable cause of hypoglycemia is:
a. Low activity of glucose 6-phosphatase
b. Low activity of glycogen synthase
c. Low activity of glucose 1-phosphate uridine transferase
d. High activity of glucokinase
*e. Low activity of glycogen phosphorylase

157. A ventral root of spinal cord was damaged as a result of a traum A. The following processes of the following neurons were damaged:
a. Axons of sensory neurons
b. Dendrites of motor neurons
c. Dendrites of internuncial neurons
d. Dendrites of sensory neurons
*e. Axons of motor neurons

158. A patient underwent Caesarean section. During the operation a long incision was made in the uterus wall and the fetus was extracted from uterus. Healing of the sutured myometrium will proceed in the following way:
*a. Formation of a fibrous cicatrix
b. Proliferation of myosatellitocytes
c. Formation of cross-striated muscle fibers
d. Formation of smooth muscular tissue
e. Hypertrophy of smooth myocytes

159. A patient was admitted to the infectious diseases department. His skin was dry, with low turgor; he had rice-water stool. The patient was diagnosed with choler A. This disease is ordinarily accompanied by the folowing disorder of water-electrolytic balance:
a. Hyperosmotic hyperhydration
*b. Isoosmotic hypohydration
c. Hyposmotic hyperhydration
d. Hyperosmotic hypohydration
e. Hypoosmotic hypohydration

160. A patient suffering from non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus was prescribed glibenclamid internally. What is the mechanism of its hypoglycemic action?
*a. It stimulates generation of endogenous insulin by beta cells
b. It inhibits alpha glucosidase and polysaccharide breakdown
c. It intensifies utilization of glucose by peripheral tissues
d. It inhibits gluconeogenesis in liver
e. It inhibits glucose absorption in the bowels

161. A patient suffering from syphilis was prescribed a drug the action of which based upon disturbed generation of murein leading to death of the causative agent. What drug is it?
a. Ciprofloxacin
*b. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
c. Azithromycin
d. Bijochinol
e. Doxycycline hydrochloride

162. A patient was admitted to a hospital with poisoning with unsound food. His stomach was lavaged with solution of potassium permanganate. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Destruction of bacteria membranes
b. Disturbance of synthesis of respiratory chain enzymes
c. Release of chlorine
d. Release of iodine
*e. Release of atomic oxygen

163. A dentist was examining oral cavity of a 9 year old child in the buccal surface of gingiva in the area of the lower canine he revealed a red, soft, node-like formation 1 cm in diameter that started immediately bleeding when touched. Microscopical examination revealed that this formation consisted of many small vessels like venules and capillaries separated by thin layers of connective tissue, with focal infiltration by lymphoid and plasmatic cells. Such changes are typical for:
a. Papilloma
b. Capillary hemangioma
*c. Angiomatous epulis
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Radicular granuloma

164. A 6 year old child was delivered to the hospital because of measles pneumonia. On the mucous membrane of a cheek a dentist revealed an ill-defined greish area 2х2,5 cm large. Soft tissues are edematic and foul-smelling. The most probable diagnosis of the dentist should be:
a. Gangrenous stomatitis
*b. Noma
c. Pustular stomatitis
d. Ulcerous stomatitis
e. Phlegmonous stomatitis

165. Patients suffering from relapsing typhus have fever that can be characterized by several days of high temperature alternating with periods of normal temperature. Such temperature curve is called:
a. Febris continua
*b. Febris recurrens
c. Febris hectica
d. Febris atypica
e. Febris intermittens

166. A patient with myocardium infarction was admitted to the cardiological department. In order to relieve his pain it was decided to potentiate action of fentanyl by a certain neuroleptic. What is the most suitable neuroleptic for neuroleptanalgesia?
a. Aminazine
b. Haloperidol
c. Triftazine
d. Sulpiride
*e. Droperidol

167. A female patient was admitted to the hospital with pleuritis. Which area of pleural cavity contains most exudate?
a. Costomediastinal recess
b. Under the pulmonary radix
c. Phrenicomediastinal recess
d. Under the pleural cupula
*e. Costodiaphragmatic recess

168. After mouth opening the mouth closed reflectory. What receptors initiate this reflex?
a. Mechanoreceptors of oral mucous membrane
b. Gustatory receptors
*c. Proprioceptors of elevator muscles of mandible
d. Periodontium receptors
e. Proprioceptors of depressor muscles of mandible

169. A female patient with pyelonephritis was admitted to the urological department. Examination revealed an associated infection accompanied by pyelovenous reflux. This complication was induced by affection of the following structure:
a. Fornical renal apparatus
b. Renal tubules
*c. Renal corpuscle
d. Excretory renal tracts
e. Straight tubules

170. Analysis of a patients saliva revealed high concentration of lactate. This is most probably caused by activation of the following process:
a. Carbohydrate hydrolysis
b. Glucose-lactate cycle
c. Glycogen breakdown
d. Aerobic glucose breakdown
*e. Anaerobic glucose breakdown

171. A 34 year old male patient cosulted a doctor about face carbuncle. Objectively: a loose, painless edema of hypodermic tissue; black crust in the centre of carbuncle, vesicular rash around it. Microbiological examination revealed static streptobacilli capable of capsule building. What microorganisms are the causative agents of this disease?
a. Bacillus megaterium
b. Bacillus subtilis
*c. Bacillus antracis
d. Bacillus anthracoides
e. Staptylococcus aureus

172. A histological specimen of an oral cavity organ demonstrates that the organs anterior surface is lined with multilayer squamous nonkeratinous epithelium, and its posterior surface - with multiserial ciliated epithelium. What organ is it?
a. Cheek
b. Gingiva
c. Hard palate
*d. Soft palate
e. Lip

173. A 27 year old patient consulted a doctor about a solid tumour in front of the antilobium. During removal of this tumour a dental surgeon revealed a vein. What vein is localized in this area?
a. V. facialis
b. V. jugularis externa
c. V. auricularis posterior
d. V. jugularis interna
*e. V. retromandibularis

174. What method should be applied for sterilization of heatproof and moistureproof stomatological instruments in order to ensure total destruction of viruses, vegetative and spore forms of microorganisms?
a. Tyndallization
b. Pasteurization
c. Burning in the flame of gas burner
d. Boiling
*e. Autoclaving

175. Microscopic examination of periodontium revealed plethoric vessels, edema of connective tissue along with infiltration by single neutrophils. What type of exudative inflammation in the periodontium is it?
a. Fibrinous
*b. Serous
c. Purulent
d. Putrid
e. Catarrhal

176. Autopsy of a dead patient revealed that pia mater was dull, there were greenish-yellow overlays covering almost all convexital surface of cerebral hemispheres. Histological examination revealed extreme hyperemia of maters along with diffuse leukocytic infiltration. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Measles
c. Anthrax
d. Influenza
*e. Meningococcal infection

177. A 52 year old patient suffering from cancer of the lower jaw underwent a course of radiation therapy. The tumour has remitted. Which mechanism of cell destruction ensures efficiency of radiation therapy most of all?
a. Lysis by natural killer cells
b. Vessel thrombosis
c. Mutagenesis
d. Hyperthermia
*e. Generation of free radicals

178. Examination of a patient revealed abnormal development of enamel. This is caused by damage of the following structural elements of dental germ:
a. Pulp of enamel organ
b. Intermediate layer of enamel organ
*c. Internal enamel epithelium of enamel organ
d. Cervix of enamel organ
e. External enamel epithelium of enamel organ

179. Researches of the latest decades established that immediate "executors" of cell apoptosis are special enzymes called caspases. Generation of one of them proceeds with participation of cytochromec. What is its function in a normal cell?
a. Component of H+ ATP system
b. Component of pyruvate-dehydrogenase system
*c. Enzyme of respiratory chain of electron transport
d. Enzyme of tricarboxylic acid cycle
e. Enzyme of beta-oxidation of fatty acids

180. ECG of a patient showed that RR interval equaled 1,5 s, heart rate equaled 40 bpm. What is cardiac pacemaker?
*a. Atrioventricular node
b. Left branch of His bundle
c. Right branch of His bundle
d. His bundle
e. Sinus node

181. For the purpose of anaesthetization a patient got injection of local anesthetic. A few minutes later the patient got dyspnea and tachycardia; he lost consciousness. What type of shock is it?
a. Traumatic
*b. Anaphylactic
c. Burn
d. Cardiogenic
e. Haemorrhagic

182. A patient who has been taking a certain drug for a long time cannot discontinue the use of it because this causes psychic and somatic disfunctions. The syndrome occuring at refraining from the use of a drug is called:
a. Idiosyncrasy
*b. Abstinence
c. Tachyphylaxis
d. Sensitization
e. Cumulation

183. After a road accident a driver has got deformity in the midle third of his left shin and intense pain, especially when he tries to move his left shin. The ends of a trihedral bone stick out of a wound, there is great blood loss. What bone might be damaged?
*a. Tibia
b. Femur
c. Astragalus
d. Fibula
e. Patella

184. A patient with essential hypertension was admitted to the cardiological department. In order to lower arterial pressure a doctor prescribed a drug that blocks 1 and 2-adrenoreceptors. What drug is it?
*a. Propranolol
b. Proserin
c. Indometacin
d. Celecoxib
e. Prednisolone

185. During examination of a patient a dentist revealed carious cavities on the front teeth that dont have accessory antagonists. What teeth are meant?
a. Superior canines
b. Superior medial incisors
c. Inferior lateral incisors
*d. Inferior medial incisors
e. Superior lateral incisors

186. Endoscopic examination of duodenum revealed a tumour of the major papilla. This pathological formation is localized in the following part of duodenum:
a. Superior part
b. Superior flexure
c. Ascending part
*d. Descending part
e. Horizontal part

187. Intralobular capillaries of a liver specimen have wide irregular lumen. Basal membrane is absent in the major part of the capillary. What type of capillaries is it?
*a. Sinusoid
b. Postcapillaries
c. Visceral
d. Precapillaries
e. Somatic

188. Hurtnups disease is caused by point mutation of only one gene. This results in abnormal absorption of tryptophane in the intestine as well as its abnormal reabsorption in renal tubules. This causes synchronous disorders in digestive and urinary excretion systems. What genetic phenomenon is observed in this case?
a. Codominance
*b. Pleiotropy
c. Polymery
d. Complementary interaction
e. Semidominance

189. A patient was administered clonidine to be taken parenterally in case of abrupt rise of arterial pressure. What is its mechanism of action?
*a. Stimulation of central beta2-adrenoreceptors
b. Block of alpha1- and alpha2-adrenoreceptors
c. Stimulation of central imidazole1-receptors
d. Block of nicotinic cholinoreceptors of ganglia
e. Block of alpha1-adrenoreceptors

190. A 24 year old patient consulted a doctor about pain below his lower jaw on the right. Dental surgeon revealed a concrement in the submandibular gland. During its removal he had to prevent bleeding out of the following artery:
a. A. alveolaris inferior
*b. A. facialis
c. A. lingualis
d. A. submentalis
e. A. labialis inferior

191. A patient has roundish ulcers on his face, inflammation and enlargement of lymph nodes. These symptoms turned up as a result of mosquito bites. Laboratory examination of discharge from the ulcers revealed unicellular aflagellar organisms. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Myasis
c. Trypanosomiasis
*d. Dermatotropic leishmaniasis
e. Scabies

192. A 35 year old patient complains about permanent thirst, poor appetite. He drinks 9 l water per day. Daily diuresis is increased, urine is colourless, its relative density is 1,005. The most probable cause of this pathology development is damege of:
*a. Hypothalamic nuclei
b. Basal membrane of glomerular capillaries
c. Epithelium of renal tubuli
d. Adenohypophysis
e. Epiphysis

193. Potassium cyanide that is a poison came into a patients organism and caused death a few minutes after it. The most probable cause of its toxic effect was abnormal activity of:
a. Catalase
b. ATP-synthetase
c. NADP-H-dehydrogenase
d. Haemoglobin synthesis
*e. Cytochrome oxidase

194. During an experiment the median part of an animals cochlea was damaged. This resulted in impaired perception of acoustic vibrations of the following frequency:
a. High
b. Low
c. High and medium
*d. Medium
e. Low and medium

195. Formation of ribosome subunits in a cell was disturbed in course of an experiment (by means of activated mutagenic factors). This will have an effect on the following metabolic process:
a. Biological oxidation
b. ATP synthesis
c. Carbohydrate biosynthesis
d. Photosynthesis
*e. Protein biosynthesis

196. Roentgenological examination of mandible of a 27 year old man revealed a focus of osseous tissue destruction. Histological examination revealed a tumour consisting of odontogenous epithelium cords, immature connective tissue and dysplastic dentin rests. What tumour is it?
a. Ameloblastic fibro-odontoma
b. Odontoameloblastoma
c. Complex odontoma
d. Odontogenous fibroma
*e. Dentinoma

197. Abnormal chromosome disjunction during meiosis resulted in formation of: an ovum with 22 autosomes and polar body with 24 chromosomes. If such an ovum would be fertilized with a normal spermatozoon (22+X) the child might have the following syndrome:
a. Downs syndrome
b. Edwards syndrome
c. Klinefelters syndrome
d. Trisomy X
*e. Turners syndrome

198. Microscopical examination of coronary artery of a 53 year old dead man revealed luminal narrowing of the vessel because of fibrous plaque mixed with lipides. The most probable form of atherosclerosis is:
a. Lipoidosis
b. Ulceration
c. Atheromatosis
*d. Liposclerosis
e. -

199. In the surgical department of a dental clinic cases of hospital-acquired staphylococcal infection were registered which was caused by strains with multiple drug resistance. Such feature can be identified by presence of:
*a. R-plasmids
b. Virulent bacteriophages
c. Exotoxins
d. Temperate bacteriophages
e. F-plasmids

200. A 38 year old patient takes aspirin and sulfanilamides. After their intake intensified erythrocyte haemolysis is observed which is caused by deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. This pathology is caused by failure of the following coenzyme:
*a. NADP-H
b. FAD-H2
c. Ubiquinone
d. Pyridoxal phosphate
e. FMN-H2

