1. In hemotransfusions it is recommended to transfuse only phenotype-matched bloo D. According to the AB0 system, blood group is determined by:
*a. Carbohydrate determinants of erythrocyte membranes
b. Carbohydrate determinants of leukocyte membranes
c. Protein determinants of erythrocyte membranes
d. Protein-polysaccharide components of leukocytes
e. Proteins of blood serum

2. A patient consulted a dentist about the temporomandibular joint arthritis. The dentist administered an ointment containing diclofenac sodium. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Cyclooxigenase activation
b. Opiate receptor block
c. Opiate receptor activation
d. Phospholipase inhibition
*e. Cyclooxigenase inhibition

3. Examination of a patient with an interbrain injury revealed the hearing impairment. What structures must be damaged?
a. Lateral geniculate bodies of thalamus
b. Medial nuclei of hypothalamus
c. Frontal nuclei of hypothalamus
*d. Medial geniculate bodies of thalamus
e. Intralaminar nuclei of hypothalamus

4. A patient who has been treated for viral hepatitis B developed symptoms of hepatic insufficiency. What changes indicating disorder in protein metabolism are likely to be observed in this case?
*a. Absolute hypoalbuminemia
b. Absolute hyperglobulinemia
c. Absolute hyperalbuminemia
d. Absolute hyperfibrinogenemia
e. Protein rate in blood will stay unchanged

5. As a result of a trauma a patient has damaged frontal spinal roots. What structures are likely to be affected?
a. Axons of the lateral horn neurons
b. Central processes of the sensory neurons of the spinal ganglions
c. Dendrites of the spinal ganglion neurons
*d. Axons of the motoneurons and axons of the lateral horn neurons
e. Peripheral processes of the sensory neurons of the spinal ganglions

6. A patient complains about retrosternal pain, dyspnea and palpitation. After examination he was diagnosed with coronary heart disease and prescribed verapamil. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. It blocks beta-adrenoreceptors
b. It blocks sodium channels
c. It blocks potassium channels
*d. It blocks calcium channels
e. It blocks alpha-adrenoreceptors

7. Heterozygous parents with А(II) and В(III) blood group according to the AB0 system have got a chil D. What is the probability that the child has 0(I) blood group?
a. 0%
b. 50%
c. 100%
d. 75%
*e. 25%

8. It was revealed that a patient with coagulation failure has thrombosis of a branch of inferior mesenteric artery. What bowel segment is affected?
a. Colon transversum
b. Colon ascendens
*c. Colon sigmoideum
d. Caecum
e. Ileum

9. A patient with gastric ulcer underwent a course of treatment, which led to digestion normalization, pain relief, better moo D. However in a few weeks the epigastric pain as well as heartburn and sour eructation recurre D. Such course of the disease can be characterized as:
a. Complication
b. Prodromal period
*c. Relapse
d. Remission period
e. Latent period

10. Heart auscultation revealed diastolic murmur in the II intercostal space along the right parasternal lin E. This is the evidence of the following valve pathology:
a. Valve of pulmonary trunk
b. -
c. Tricuspid
d. Bicuspid
*e. Aortic valve

11. A 40-year-old male patient had a tumour-like formation 8x7 cm large on his neck. A surgeon removed it only partially because of close connection with large vessels. Microscopical examination revealed marked cellular and tissue atypism, lipoblast-type cells in different stages of maturity, with polymorphism and nuclear hyperchromia, pathological mitoses, necrosis foci. Specify the histological form of the tumour:
a. Fibrosarcoma
b. Fibroma
*c. Liposarcoma
d. Lipoma
e. Hibernoma

12. A 38 year old patient takes aspirin and sulfanilamides. After their intake intensified erythrocyte haemolysis is observed which is caused by deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenas E. This pathology is caused by failure of the following coenzyme:
a. Ubiquinone
b. FMN-H2
c. Pyridoxal phosphate
d. FAD-H2
*e. NADP-H

13. Examination of uterine cavity revealed an embryonated ovum that wasnt attached to the endometrium. The embryo is in the following stage of development:
*a. Blastocyst
b. Gastrula
c. Zygote
d. Neurula
e. Morula

14. A child suspected for tuberculosis underwent Mantoux test. 24 hours after allergen injection there appeared a swelling, hyperaemia and tenderness. What are the main components in the development of this reaction?
a. Macrophages, B-lymphocytes and monocytes
b. B-lymphocytes, IgM
c. Granulocytes, T-lymphocytes and IgG
*d. Mononuclears, T-lymphocytes and lymphokines
e. Plasmatic cells, T-lymphocytes and lymphokines

15. A female patient suffering from chronic hepatitis complains about an increased susceptibility to barbiturates, which previously induced no syptoms of intoxication. This may be explained through the folllowing liver dysfunction:
a. Cholepoietic
*b. Metabolic
c. Hemopoietic
d. Phagocytal
e. Hemodynamic

16. According to the law of constant chromosome number, each species of most animals has a definite and constant number of chromosomes. The mechanismus providing this constancy in sexual reproduction of the organisms is called:
*a. Meiosis
b. Gemmation
c. Regeneration
d. Shizogony
e. Amitosis

17. While examining a blood smear taken form a patient and stained by Romanovskys method a doctor revealed some protozoa and diagnozed the patient with Chagas diseas E. What protozoan is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Trypanosoma brucei
b. Toxoplasma gondii
c. Leishmania tropica
d. Leishmania donovani
*e. Trypanosoma cruzi

18. A patient is found to have increased permeability of blood vessel walls accompanied by increased gingival haemorrhage, petechial skin haemorrhages, dedentition. What pathology is observed in this patient?
a. Hypovitaminosis A
b. Hypervitaminosis C
c. Hypervitaminosis D
d. Hypovitaminosis D
*e. Hypovitaminosis C

19. A sensory nerve ganglion consists of roundish neurocytes with one process that divides into axon and dendrite at a certain distance from perikaryon. What are such cells called?
*a. Pseudounipolar
b. Bipolar
c. Multipolar
d. Apolar
e. Unipolar

20. A patient was diagnosed with seborrheic dermatitis associated with vitamin H (biotin) deficiency. The patient has disturbed activity of the following enzyme:
a. Carbomoyl phosphate synthetase
b. Pyruvate decarboxylase
c. Alcohol dehydrogenase
d. Amino transferase
*e. Acetyl-CoA-carboxylase

21. In order to anaesthetize superior incisors an anaesthetic should be injected in the region of the incisive foramen. What nerve is located in this place?
*a. N.nasopalatinus
b. Rr.nasales posteriores inferiores
c. N.palatinus major
d. N.pharyngeus
e. Nn.palatini minores

22. A patient consulted a dentis about a lesion of his oral mucos A. He was diagnosed with herpetic stomatitis. Which of the following drugs will have an effect on etiotropic factor?
a. Dimedrol
b. Levamisole
c. Furacilinum
*d. Acyclovir
e. Paracetamol

23. During an operation on a woman it became necessary to ligate her uterine artery. What formation can be accidentally ligated together with this artery?
a. Uterine tube
b. Urethra
c. Round ligament of uterus
*d. Ureter
e. Internal iliac vein

24. Examination of a patient, suffering from atrophic gastritis, revealed megaloblastic anemia. The anemia is likely to be caused by the deficiency of the following substance:
a. Vitamin B1
*b. Gastromucoproteid
c. Erythropoietins
d. Vitamin B6
e. Iron

25. Two weeks after hemotransfusion a patient developed fever. What protozoal disease can be suspected?
a. Amebiasis
*b. Malaria
c. Toxoplasmosis
d. Leishmaniasis
e. Trypanosomiasis

26. As a result of a trauma apatient has developed traumatic shock. The patient is fussy, talkative, pal E. AP- 140/90 mm Hg, Ps- 120 bpm. This condition is consistent with the following shock phase:
*a. Erectile
b. -
c. Torpid
d. Latent
e. Terminal

27. What artery may be damaged during the conduction anesthetization in the region of the mandibular foramen?
a. Buccal artery
*b. Inferior alveolar artery
c. Lingual artery
d. Median meningeal artery
e. Pterygoid branches

28. A child with renal insufficiency exhibits delayed teeth eruption. This is most likely caused by the abnormal formation of the following substance:
a. Hydroxylysine
*b. 1,25 (OH)2D3
c. ?-ketoglutarate
d. Glycocyamine
e. Glutamate

29. A patient complains about attacks of laboured breathing, dizziness. He works at a chemical plant producing hydrocyanic aci D. The described symptoms might be associated with dysfunction of the following enzyme:
a. Lactate dehydrogenase
b. Succinate dehydrogenase
*c. Cytochrome oxidase
d. Catalase
e. Pyruvate dehydrogenase

30. Autopsy of an aged man who had been suffering from acute intestinal upset for the last 2 weeks revealed the following changes in the rectum and sigmoid colon: mucous membrane surface was coated with brown-green film. The intestine wall was thickened, and its cavity was extremely constricte D. Microscopical examination revealed variously deep penetrating necrosis of mucous membrane; necrotic masses contained fibrin fibers and bore signs of leukocytic infiltration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Follicular collitis
b. -
c. Catarrhal colitis
*d. Fibrinous colitis
e. Ulcerative colitis

31. Examination of urine in a newborn revealed presence of citrulline and high ammonia concentration. This baby is most likely to have the disorder of the following substance production:
a. Creatinine
b. Uric acid
c. Ammonia
*d. Urea
e. Creatine

32. A patient with convulsive contractions of facial muscles was admitted to the infectious disease war D. From a scratch on his lower right extremity analysts isolated bacteria with terminal endospores that gave them drumstick appearanc E. What bacteria are compliant with given description?
a. Bacillus anthracis
b. Clostridium perfringens
*c. Clostridium tetani
d. Bacillus cereus
e. Clostridium botulinum

33. Pellagra may be caused by maize domination and low quantity of animal foodstuffs in the dietary intake. This pathology results from lack of the following amino acid:
a. Methionine
b. Isoleucine
c. Histidine
*d. Tryptophane
e. Phenylalanine

34. Osteolathyrism is characterized by a loss of tensile strength of collagen, which is induced by a significant decrease in the formation of cross-links in collagen fibrils. The cause for it is the reduced activity of:
a. Collagenase
b. Monoamine oxidase
c. Prolyl hydroxylase
d. Lysyl hydroxylase
*e. Lysyl oxidase

35. Autopsy of a man, who died from acute posthaemorrhagic anaemia resulting from pulmonary haemorrhage, revealed the following: macroscopically - lung apexes were deformed, their section showed multiple whitish-grey foci 10-15 mm in diameter and multiple pathological cavities up to 15 mm in diameter with dense walls. Microscopically: the cavity walls presented proliferation of the connective tissue infiltrated by epithelioid cells, multicellular giant cells and lymphocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Secondary fibrocavernous tuberculosis
b. Primary tuberculosis without signs of progress
c. Hematogenic disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis
d. Hematogenic miliary pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Progressing tuberculosis complex

36. A patient diagnosed with acute pancreatitis was admitted to the surgical department. Which drug administration would be pathogenetically grounded?
a. Tripsin
b. Chymotripsin
c. Pancreatin
*d. Contrical
e. Fibrinolysin

37. A patient suffering from non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus was prescribed glibenclamid internally. What is the mechanism of its hypoglycemic action?
a. It inhibits gluconeogenesis in liver
b. It inhibits alpha glucosidase and polysaccharide breakdown
*c. It stimulates generation of endogenous insulin by beta cells
d. It inhibits glucose absorption in the bowels
e. It intensifies utilization of glucose by peripheral tissues

38. A patient has dislocation of his mandible that caused impairment of salivation and gustatory sensitivity of anterior ⅔ of his tongu E. What nerve was damaged?
a. Deep petrosal nerve
b. Sublingual nerve
c. Lesser petrosal nerve
*d. Tympanichord
e. Greater petrosal nerve

39. A child has abnormal formation of tooth enamel and dentin as a result of low concentration of calcium ions in bloo D. Such abnormalities might be caused by deficiency of the following hormone:
a. Triiodothyronine
b. Thyrocalcitonin
c. Thyroxin
*d. Parathormone
e. Somatotropic hormone

40. A girl who was provisionally diagnosed with Turners syndrome came to a genetic consultation. The diagnosis can be specified by means of the following genetic method:
a. Biochemical
b. Dermatoglyphics
c. Genealogical
d. Hybridological
*e. Sex chromatin test

41. A patient with toxic paralysis of respiratory centre was given several cordiamin injections intended to stimulate the respiratory centr E. What side effect may arise?
a. Tonic convulsions
b. Collapse
*c. Clonic convulsions
d. Bronchiospasm
e. Arrhythmia

42. Various cells of the oral mucous membrane and antimicrobial substances synthesized by these cells play an important part in the local immunity of the oral cavity. Specify the key factors for the local immunity:
*a. Secretory IgA
b. IgG
c. Macrophages
d. Eosinophils
e. B-lymphocytes

43. A 65-year-old male patient complains about being unable to move his lower jaw in backward direction. It was revealed that after a fall the following muscle was damaged:
a. Lateral pterygopalatine
b. Medial pterygopalatine
c. Masticatory
d. Digastric
*e. Temporal

44. A histological specimen of a mandibular gland shows an exctretory duct. Mucous membrane of the duct is lined with cubic epithelium whose cells have weakly developed organellas. What excretory duct is it?
a. Striated
b. Interlobular
*c. Intercalated
d. -
e. Common excretory

45. A patient suffering from syphilis was prescribed a drug the action of which based upon disturbed generation of murein leading to death of the causative agent. What drug is it?
a. Doxycycline hydrochloride
b. Azithromycin
c. Bijochinol
d. Ciprofloxacin
*e. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt

46. A 14-year-old patient was diagnosed with Hutchinsons triad: barrel-shaped incisors, parenchymatous keratitis and deafness. The revealed presentations are consistent with the following disease:
a. Lepra
b. Tuberculosis
*c. Syphilis
d. Toxoplasmosis
e. Opisthorchiasis

47. A 35-year-old patient with chronic periodontitis underwent excision of a cyst 3 cm in diameter found at a root of the 15th tooth. Histological examination revealed that it had thin wall formed by mature connective tissue infiltrated by lymphocytes and plasmatic cells. Its internal surface was lined with multilayer pavement epithelium with no signs of keratinization; the cavity contained serous exudat E. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Radicular cyst
b. Follicular ameloblastoma
c. Primordial cyst
d. Follicular cyst
e. Cherubism

48. Children often have laboured nasal breathing which is caused by overdevelopment of lymphoid tissue of the pharyngeal mucous membran E. This phenomenon may cause enlargement of the following tonsils:
a. Tonsilla tubaria
b. Tonsilla palatina
*c. Tonsilla pharyngea
d. All above-mentioned
e. Tonsilla lingualis

49. A 50-year-old male patient suffers from chronic bronchitis, complains about dyspnea during physical activity, sustained cough with sputum. After examination he was diagnosed with pulmonary emphysem A. This complication is caused by:
*a. Decrease in lung elasticity
b. Ventilation-perfusion disbalance
c. Decrease in lung compliance
d. Decrease in alveolar ventilation
e. Decrease in lung perfusion

50. Introduction of a local anesthetic to a patient resulted in the development of anaphylactic shock. What is the leading mechanism of blood circulation disturbance?
a. Activation of sympathoadrenal system
b. Reduction of contractile myocardium function
*c. Decrease of vascular tone
d. Hypervolemia
e. Pain

51. In the process of tooth tissue histogenesis dentin wasnt formed in time for some reasons. What process of further histogenesis will be delayed or will not take place at all?
a. Cellular cement formation
b. Pulp formation
*c. Enamel formation
d. Acellular cement formation
e. Predentinal space formation

52. A 5 y.o. child had a temperature rise up to 40oC, acute headache, vomiting, anxiety, chill. 4 days later there appeared hemorrhagic skin eruption, oliguria and adrenal insufficiency that caused death. Bacteriological examination of smears from the childs pharynx revealed meningococcus. What disease form was revealed?
a. Meningoencephalitis
b. Meningicoccal nasopharyngitis
c. -
d. Meningococcal meningitis
*e. Meningococcemia

53. A patient in a cardiological department has arrhythmi A. A doctor administered him amyodaron. What is the main mechanism of amyodarons antiarrhythmic action?
a. It activates serotonin receptors
b. It stimulates histamine receptors
c. It inhibits cholinoreceptors
*d. It blocks mostly potassium channels
e. It alters myocardium susceptibility to the acetylcholine

54. Examination of a 30-year-old mans mandible revealed in the region of his molar a dense tumour-like formation that significantly deformed the mandibl E. Here and there the formation wasnt fully detached from the bone tissu E. Microscopical examination of a tissue sampling revealed that stroma had some cords and follicles with odontogenous cylindric epithelial cells in peripheria and stellate cells resembling of the enamel oragan pulp in the centr E. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteoclastoma
*b. Ameloblastoma
c. Adenomatoid tumour
d. Primary intraosteal cancer
e. Adenocarcinoma

55. A patient complains about pain in his upper jaw and toothach E. Objectively: the patient feels pain when pressed in the region of the supraorbital foramen. What nerve is affected?
a. The third branch of trigeminus
b. Facial nerve
*c. The second branch of trigeminus
d. Trochlear nerve
e. The first branch of trigeminus

56. Blood of a child and putative father was referred to forensic medical examination for affiliation. What chemical components should be identified in the blood under study?
a. Messenger RNA
b. Transfer RNA
c. Ribosomal RNA
*d. DNA
e. SnRNA

57. An electrical cardiostimulator was implanted to a 75 y.o. man with heart rate of 40 bpm. After that heart rate rose up to 70 bpm. Cardiostumulator assumed the function of the following heart part:
a. His bundle branches
b. His bundle fibers
c. Purkinjes fibers
d. Atrioventricular node
*e. Sinoatrial node

58. Autopsy of a 70-year-old man who died from cardiac insufficiency revealed deformed and constricted coronary arteries. The artery section shows that the intimal surface is stony hard and fragil E. It is also whitish, with nodular appearanc E. What stage of atherosclerosis is it?
a. Ulceration
b. Liposclerosis
*c. Atherocalcinosis
d. Atheromatosis
e. Lipoidosis

59. A 5-month-old boy was hospitalized for tonic convulsions. He has a life-time history of this diseas E. Examination revealed coarse hair, thinned and fragile nails, pale and dry skin. In blood: calcium - 1,5 millimole/l, phosphor - 1,9 millimole/l. These changes are associated with:
*a. Hypoparathyroidism
b. Hyperaldosteronism
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Hyperparathyroidism
e. Hypoaldosteronism

60. A female patient with a tumour of pancreas has developed mechanic jaundice resulting from compression of a bile-excreting duct. Which duct is compressed?
a. Ductus hepaticus sinister
*b. Ductus choledochus
c. Ductus cysticus
d. Ductus hepaticus dexter
e. Ductus hepaticus communis

61. A 60-year-old female patient presents with hypoactivity of the principal digestive enzyme of saliv A. This is usually accompanied by disturbed primary hydrolysis of:
a. Proteins
b. Lactose
c. Cellulose
d. Fats
*e. Carbohydrates

62. A 35 y.o. patient diagnosed with sterility came to gynaecological department for diagnostic biopsy of endometrium. Microscopic examination revealed that mucous membrane is edematous, uterine glands are convoluted and filled with thick secret A. Such changes in the endometrium are caused by excess of the following hormon:
a. Somatotropin
b. Estrogen
*c. Progesterone
d. Testosterone
e. ACTH

63. In a surgical department of a stomatological polyclinic a patient is being prepared for tooth extraction. What drug should be added to the solution of a local anaesthetic in order to prolong its action?
a. Isadrine
b. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
c. Octadine
d. Salbutamol
*e. Adrenalin hydrochloride

64. Analysis of urine from a 24-year-old man revealed the following changes: daily diuresis - 10 l, relative density - 1,001, qualitative alterations are absent. A patient complains of excessive thirst, frequent urination. What is the most likely cause of this disease?
a. Aldosteron hypersecretion
*b. Vasopressin hyposecretion
c. Vasopressin hypersecretion
d. Glucocorticoid hypersecretion
e. Relative insulin insufficiency

65. Examination of a bronchial tissue sample revealed atrophy of mucous membrane, cystic degeneration of glands, focal metaplastic changes of lining prismatic epithelial cells into multilayer squamous cells; increase in goblet cell number; in some parts of bronchial wall and especially in the mucous membrane there was marked cellular inflammatory infiltration and growth of granulation tissue bulging into the bronchial lumen in form of a polyp. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic bronchitis
b. Interstitial pneumonia
c. Bronchopneumonia
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Lobar pneumonia

66. A patient has secretory dysfunction of the submandibular salivary gland. Which nerve is responsible for its vegetative innervation?
a. N.mandibularis
b. N.petrosus minor
c. N.petrosus major
d. N.auriculotemporalis
*e. Сhorda tympani

67. A patient has roundish ulcers on his face, inflammation and enlargement of lymph nodes. These symptoms turned up as a result of mosquito bites. Laboratory examination of discharge from the ulcers revealed unicellular aflagellar organisms. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Toxoplasmosis
b. Trypanosomiasis
c. Myasis
*d. Dermatotropic leishmaniasis
e. Scabies

68. A lightly dressed man is standing in a room; air temperature is +14oC. Windows and doors are close D. In what way does he loose heat most of all?
a. Convection
b. Heat conduction
c. Evaporation
*d. Heat radiation
e. Perspiration

69. Prophylactic examination of a patient revealed hyperglycemia, ketonuria, polyuria, glycosuri A. What form of acid-base balance disorder is the case?
*a. Metabolic acidosis
b. Gaseous acidosis
c. Nongaseous acidosis
d. Metabolic alkalosis
e. Gaseous alkalosis

70. A chemical industry worker complains about enamel wear. Objectively: generalized destruction of dental crowns along with replacing dentin formation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Necrosis of hard tooth tissues
b. Wedge-shaped defects
c. Dental erosion
d. Median caries
e. Fluorosis

71. ECG of a patient shows that T-waves in the second standard extremity lead are positive, their amplitude and duration are normal. It would be true that the following pocess is taking its normal course in the cardiac ventricles:
a. Excitement
*b. Repolarization
c. Depolarization
d. Contraction
e. Relaxation

72. Examination of a kidney tissue sampling revealed leukocyte infiltration of interstitial tissue; miliary abscesses; dystrophic tubules filled with desquamated epithelium and leukocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Glomerulonephritis
b. Nephrolithiasis
c. Necrotic nephrosis
*d. Pyelonephritis
e. Pyelitis

73. A patient complains about shin pain which is getting worse during walking. Objectively: there is an edema and reddening along the vein. A doctor administered a direct coagulant to be applied topically. What drug can be applied for this purpose?
*a. Heparin ointment
b. Thrombin
c. Salicylic ointment
d. Troxevasin ointment
e. Butadion ointment

74. A patient underwent gastroscopy that revealed insufficient amount of mucus covering the mucous membran E. This phenomenon is caused by the dysfunction of the following cells of stomach wall:
a. Endocrinocytes
*b. Cells of prysmatic glandular epithelium
c. Cervical cells of gastric glands
d. Parietal cells of gastric glands
e. Principal exocrinocytes of gastric glands

75. A man is in the state of rest. He has been forcing himself to breath deeply and frequently for 3-4 minutes. What effect will it have upon acid-bace balance of the organism?
a. Metabolic acidosis
b. Respiratory acidosis
*c. Respiratory alkalosis
d. There will be no change in acid-base balance
e. Metabolic alkalosis

76. Examination of a patient revealed that he had a strong, balanced, inert type of higher nervous activity according to Pavlovs classification. What temperament has this patient according to Hippocrate?
a. Choleric
b. -
c. Melancholic
*d. Phlegmatic
e. Sanguine

77. A patient was admitted to a hospital because of a penetrating wound of mouth floor. Which muscle is injured?
a. Stylohyoid
*b. Mylohyoid
c. Omohyoid
d. Thyrohyoid
e. Sternohyoid

78. As a result of a cold a patient has the abnormal pain and temperature sensitivity of the frontal ⅔ of his tongu E. Which nerve must be damaged?
a. Glossopharyngeal
b. Accessory
*c. Trigeminus
d. Vagus
e. Sublingual

79. A patient has increased pyruvate concentration in bloo D. Large amount of it is excreted with urin E. What vitamin deficiency is observed?
a. B6
b. E
*c. B1
d. B3
e. B2

80. A patient with high obesity was recommended to take carnitine as a food additive for better fat burning. What function is fulfilled by carnitine in the process of fat oxidation?
*a. Transport of fatty acids from the cytosol to the mitochondria
b. Intracellular lipolysis activation
c. Fatty acid activation
d. Transport of fatty acids from the fat depots to the tissues
e. Participation in one of the reactions of beta-oxidation of fatty acids

81. Parodontitis is treated with calcium preparations and a hormone that stimulates tooth mineralization and inhibits tissue resorption. What hormone is it?
a. Parathormone
*b. Calcitonin
c. Adrenalin
d. Aldosterone
e. Thyroxine

82. In course of an experiment thalamocortical tracts of an experimental animal were cut through. The animal didnt lose the following sensations:
*a. Olfactory
b. Visual
c. Nociceptive
d. Exteroceptive
e. Auditory

83. Injection of an anaesthetic before the tooth extraction resulted in development of anaphylactic shock accompanied by oliguri A. What pathogenetic mechanism caused a decrease in diuresis in this case?
a. Increase in oncotic pressure of blood plasma
*b. Decrease in hydrostatic pressure in the renal corpuscle capillaries
c. Increase in hydrostatic pressure in the Bowmans capsule
d. Increase in vasopressin secretion
e. Damage of glomerular filter

84. A 70-year-old man has developed prosphetic stomatitis. Apart of this he was found to have an evident lesion of mouth corners. Microscopical examination revealed large ovoid gram-positive cells. What microorganisms are most likely to be the leading etiological agent of such a lesion?
a. Neisseria
b. Staphylococci
*c. Candida fungi
d. Streptococci
e. Corynebacteria

85. Glucose concentration in a patients blood is 15 millimole/l (reabsorption threshold is 10 millimole/l). What effect can be expected?
a. Diuresis reduction
b. Reduced vasopressin secretion
c. Reduced glucose reabsorption
d. Reduced aldosterone secretion
*e. Glucosuria

86. A scheme shows an exocrinous gland with an unbranched excretory duct into which only one terminal part in form of a saccule opens. In compliance with the morphological classification of exocrinous glands, such gland is called as follows:
a. Complex unbranched alveolar
b. Complex unbranched alveolar-tubular
c. Simple branched tubular
d. Complex branched alveolar
*e. Simple unbranched alveolar

87. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about low density of dental tissues, increased fragility of teeth on eating solid foo D. In order to determine Ca/P relation a scrape of enamel was sent to the laboratory. What value of this index is suggestive of intensified demineralization?
a. 2,5
*b. 0,9
c. 1,5
d. 1,85
e. 1,67

88. A boy has fallen down from the tre E. Now he finds it difficult to abduct his arm till it takes horizontal position. Which muscle is most probably injured?
a. M.anconeus
b. M.triceps brachii
c. M.supinator
d. M.coracobrachialis
*e. M.deltoideus

89. A 40 year old female patient has enlarged thyroid glan D. On palpation the gland is dense, its surface is slightly tuberous. Histological examination of gland sample revealed diffuse infiltration of tissue by the cells, formation of lymphoid follicles. What disease is it?
a. Sporadic goiter
*b. Autoimmune thyroiditis
c. Riedels disease
d. Diffuse toxic goiter
e. Endemic goiter

90. Cytogenetic examination of a patient with dysfunction of the reproductive system revealed normal karyotype 46,ХУ in some cells, but most cells have Klinefelters syndrome karyotype - 47,ХХУ. Such phenomenon of cell inhomogeneity is called:
*a. Mosaicism
b. Transposition
c. Duplication
d. Heterogeneity
e. Inversion

91. Clinical examination of a female patient revealed reduction of basal metabolism by 40%, gain in body mass, drop of body temperature, face puffiness, sexual disfunctions, inertness and apathy, lowered intelligence. These symptoms are caused by dysfunction of the following endocrine gland:
a. Hypofunction of parathyroid glands
b. Hyperfunction of thyroid gland
c. Epiphysis hypofunction
*d. Hypofunction of thyroid gland
e. Hypophysis hyperfunction

92. A sample taken from the pharynx of a patient with angina was inoculated on the blood-tellurite agar. This resulted in growth of grey, radially striated (in form of rosettes) colonies up to 4-5 mm in diameter. Microscopically there can be seen gram-positive rods with club-shaped ends arranged in form of spread fingers. What microorganisms are these?
a. Clostridium botulinum
b. Streptococci
*c. Corynebacteria diphtheriae
d. Diphtheroids
e. Streptobacilli

93. A male patient has stenosis of the mitral orific E. What is the leading mechanism of cardiac failure?
a. Myocardial damage
b. Tension-induced overload
*c. Resistance-induced overload
d. -
e. Volume overload

94. A 70-year-old patient is diagnosed with brainstem haemorrhag E. Examination revealed increased tonus of flexor muscles accompanied by decreased tonus of extensor muscles. Such changes in muscle tonus can be explained by the irritation of the following brain structures:
a. Vestibular nuclei
b. Quadrigeminal plate
*c. Red nuclei
d. Reticular formation
e. Black substance

95. Obliterating atherosclerosis causes changes in the vessels of the lower extermities. A histological specimen of such a vessel evidently presents both internal and external elastic membranes, middle membrane contains a lot of myocytes. What vessel is affected in case of this disease?
*a. Artery of muscular type
b. Vein with strongly developed muscles
c. Artery of mixed type
d. Artery of elastic type
e. Lymph node

96. Liver puncture biopsy in a patient with hepatocellular insufficiency revealed vacuolar, balooning degeneration of hepatocytes, necrosis of single cells, Councilmans bodies, infiltartion of portal and lobular stroma mainly by lymphocytes and macrophages with a small number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute viral hepatitis
b. Chronic persisting hepatitis
c. Autoimmune hepatitis
d. Chronic active hepatitis
e. Alcoholic hepatitis

97. Examination of a patient revealed that dental hypoplasia was caused by hypovitaminosis of vitamins A and D. These vitamins were administered perorally but they didnt have any medicinal effect. What is the probable cause of disturbed vitamin assimilation?
a. Hypochlorhydria
b. Achylia
c. Hyperchlorhydria
*d. Bile acid deficiency
e. Achlorhydria

98. A patient suffering form stomatitis was prescribed oral rinsing. Which antiseptic from the oxidant group is the most suitable for this purpose?
a. Boric acid
b. Ethyl alcohol
c. Chloramine
d. Alcoholic iodine solution
*e. Potassium permanganate

99. During an experiment it is required to estimate the rate of cell excitability. For this purpose it would be rational to determine:
a. Duration of action potential
*b. Depolarization threshold
c. Critical level of depolarization
d. Amplitude of action potential
e. Rest potential

100. During physical exercise people are less sensitive to pain. The reason for it is the activation of:
a. Adrenal gland functions
*b. Antinociceptive system
c. Sympathoadrenal system
d. Thyroid gland functions
e. Nociceptive system

101. While exercising on a bicycle ergometer a sportsman was trying to choose such a load that would allow him to achieve the maximal performance of his muscles. What load intensity is required in this case?
a. Maximal
b. Continuous minimal
c. Alternating minimal and maximal
*d. Middle
e. Minimal

102. A patient complains of headache, difficult respiration. Rhoentgenological examination allowed to confirm the following diagnosis: frontitis (frontal sinus inflammation). Which nasal meatus may contain purulent discharges?
a. Common
b. Superior
c. Inferior
*d. Median
e. Above the superior nasal turbinate

103. A newborn didnt take his first breath. Autopsy revealed that in spite of unobstructed respiratory tracts the babys lungs didnt expan D. What might be the cause of it?
*a. Surfactant absence
b. Bronchi rupture
c. Apical cap of lung
d. Bronchostenosis
e. Alveole enlargement

104. A female patient suffering from secondary syphilis got foci of skin depigmentation in the upper parts of her back. What pathological process is it?
a. Dysplasia
b. Metaplasia
c. Parakeratosis
*d. Leukoderma
e. Leukoplasia

105. During anaesthetization of the oral cavity mucous tunic a patient developed anaphylactic shock (generalized vasodilatation, increase in vascular permeability along with escape of liquid to the tissues). What type of hypersensitivity has the patient developed?
a. IV type (cellular cytotoxicity)
b. V type (granulomatosis)
c. III type (immune complex)
d. II type (antibody-dependent)
*e. I type (anaphylactic)

106. A 30-year-old woman has subnormal concentration of enzymes in the pancreatic juic E. This might be caused by the hyposecretion of the following gastrointestinal hormone:
a. Somatostatin
b. Vaso-intestinal peptide
c. Secretin
d. Gastro-inhibiting peptide
*e. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin

107. A male patient underwent an operation on account of inguinal herni A. During the operation a surgeon damaged content of the inguinal canal. What structure was damaged?
*a. Funiculus spermaticus
b. -
c. Lig. inguinalе
d. Lig. teres uteri
e. Urarchus

108. A 40 year old male patient died from cerebral edem A. In anamnesis the face carbuncle was registere D. Autopsy revealed hyperemia and edema of cerebral tissu E. White matter of the left hemisphere had two cavities 6х5,5 and 5х4,5 cm large filled with yellowish-green cream-like flui D. Walls of the cavities were built up by nerve tissue with irregular rands. What complication of carbuncle was it?
a. Colliquative necroses
b. Chronic abscesses
*c. Acute abscesses
d. Cysts
e. Empyema

109. Inside a human cell the informational RNA containing both exons and introns was delivered to the granular endoplasmic reticulum to the ribosomes. What process does NOT take place?
a. Translation
*b. Processing
c. Prolongation
d. Transcription
e. Replication

110. A specimen of connective tissue of derma was stained with Sudan III and hematoxylin. There are clusters of big polygonal cells that turned orang E. Their nuclei are flattened and located on periphery. What tissue is it?
a. Reticular connective
*b. White adipose
c. Brown adipose
d. Lamellar osseous
e. Hyaline cartilaginous

111. A patient has coronary heart disease. For its treatment he was prescribed an antianginal drug that activates guanylate cyclase and accumulates cyclic guanosine monophosphate in the miocardium cells. What drug is it?
a. Verapamil
b. Panangine
c. Validol
d. Dipiridamol
*e. Isosorbide mononitrate

112. It was determined that basal metabolic rate of a patient under study increased due value by 8%. This means that the intensity of energetic metabolism processes in this patient is:
a. Moderately inhibited
*b. Normal
c. Moderately increased
d. Essentially increased
e. Essentially inhibited

113. A patient who takes a blocker of membrane cytoreceptors of efferent conductor synapses of autonomic nervous system complains about dry mouth. What receptors are blocked?
a. ?-adrenoreceptors
b. H2-receptors
c. ?-adrenoreceptors
d. Nicotinic cholinoreceptors
*e. Muscarinic cholinoreceptors

114. Laboratory of extremely dangerous infections received a sample taken from a patient with assumed choler A. What express-diagnostics method can confirm this diagnosis?
*a. Immunofluorescence test
b. Hemagglutination reaction
c. Complement binding reaction
d. Precipitation reaction
e. Agglutination test

115. A 60-year-old patient presents with intestinal hypoperistalsis. Which of the following foodstuffs will stimulate peristalsis most of all?
a. Lard
*b. Brown bred
c. White bread
d. Meat
e. Tea

116. A patient being treated in the burns department has suppurative complication. The pus is of bluish-green colour that is indicative of infection caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. What factor is typical for this causative agent?
a. Presense of spores
b. Coccal form
c. Cell pairing
d. Mycelium formation
*e. Gram-negative stain

117. Examination of a patient with chronic renal insufficiency revealed an increase in residual nitrogen concentration in blood up to 35 millimole/l, more than half of which is urea. What type of hyperazotemia is it?
a. Hepatic
b. Combined
c. Productional
*d. Retentional
e. Residual

118. During examination of a childs oral cavity a pediatrician found 8 incisors. The childs development corresponds to his ag E. How old is the child?
a. 7-8 months
b. 12-15 months
c. 16-20 months
*d. 10-12 months
e. 6-7 months

119. Histological examination of a microspecimen presenting a malignant lung tumour revealed that the tumor consisted of lymphocyte-like cells forming any structures. Stroma is mildely marked, there are a lot of mitoses and necroses. What tumour is it?
a. Squamous cell keratinous carcinoma
*b. Small cell carcinoma
c. Squamous cell nonkeratinous carcinoma
d. Fibroma
e. Adenocarcinoma

120. A patient suffering form tuberculosis was treated with rifampicin, which caused drug resistance of tuberculosis mycobacteri A. In order to reduce mycobacteria resistance, rifampicin should be combined with the following drug:
a. Amoxicillin
b. Metronidazole
*c. Isoniazid
d. Intraconazole
e. Acyclovir

121. A patient has myocardial infarction in the region of the frontal wall of the left ventricl E. Circulatory dysfunction occurred in the following vascular basin:
*a. Frontal interventricular branch of the left coronary artery
b. Circumflex branch of the left coronary artery
c. Marginal branch of the left coronary artery
d. Frontal ventricular branch of the right coronary artery
e. Atrioventricular branch of the left coronary artery

122. Dehelmintization of a patient revealed some long fragments of a helminth with segmented structur E. Mature segments were rectangular, 30x12 mm large, closed-type matrix was in form of a stem with 17-35 lateral branches. Specify this helminth:
*a. Hookless tapeworm
b. Armed tapeworm
c. Echinococcus
d. Dwarf tapeworm
e. Alveococcus

123. Bacteriological analysis of purulent discharges from urethra revealed presence of gram-negative bacteria resembling of coffee beans, which were able to decompose glucose and maltose into aci D. They were found in the leukocytes. These bacteria are causative agents of the following disease:
a. Ulcul molle
b. Syphilis
c. Melioidosis
*d. Gonorrhoea
e. Venereal lymphogranulomatosis

124. In spring a patient experiences petechial haemorrhages, loosening of teeth, high liability to colds. A doctor supposes hypobitaminosis C. In this respect loosening of teeth can be explained by:
*a. Structural failure of collagen in the periodontal ligaments
b. Structural change of glycosaminoglycan
c. Mechanical damage of teeth
d. Disturbed oxidation-reduction process in the periodont
e. Increased permeability of periodont membranes

125. Patients with erythropoietic porphyria (Gunthers disease) are known to have photoesthetic skin, red urin E. In the ultraviolet light their teeth exhibit bright red fluorescenc E. This disease is associated with deficiency of the following enzyme:
a. Ferrochelatase
b. Uroporphyrinogen-I-synthase
c. Delta-aminolevulinate synthase
d. Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase
*e. Uroporphyrinogen-III-cosynthase

126. At an altitude of 14000 m an aircraft experienced a sudden loss of cabin pressur E. The pilot must have developed the following type of embolism:
a. Fat embolism
*b. Gaseous
c. Foreign body embolism
d. Thromboembolism
e. Air embolism

127. It is known that people who permanently live in highland have an increased concentration of erythrocytes per each blood volume unit. Owing to this fact blood can optimally fulfil the following function:
a. Maintenance of acid-base balance
b. Amino acid transport
c. Maintenance of ionic equilibrium
*d. Gas transport
e. Haemostasis participation

128. A 65-year-old patient with chronic heart failure has been taking digitoxin in self-administered dosages for a long tim E. She was admitted to the hospital for general health aggravation, arrhythmia, nausea, reduced diuresis, insomni A. What is the primary action to be taken?
a. To give an intravenous injection of calcium gluconate solution
b. To reduce digitoxin dosage
*c. To withhold digitoxin
d. To administer digoxin
e. To administer strophanthine intravenously

129. A scientific expedition in India was guided by a native who had never parted with his dog. What invasion diseases can be transmitted to the participants of the expedition as a result of contacts with this dog if it is known to be the source of invasion?
a. Fascioliasis
*b. Echinococcosis
c. Paragonimiasis
d. Teniasis
e. Dicroceliasis

130. During postembryonal haemopoiesis in the red bone marrow the cells of one of the cellular differons demonstrate a gradual decrease in cytoplasmic basophilia as well as an increase in oxyphilia, the nucleus is being forced out. Such morphological changes are typical for the following haemopoiesis type:
a. Eosinophil cytopoiesis
b. Basophil cytopoiesis
c. Lymphopoiesis
d. Neutrophil cytopoiesis
*e. Erythropoiesis

131. While being at the dentists a patient had an attack of bronchial asthm A. The dentist applied a ?-adrenomimetic drug in form of inhalations. What drug was applied?
a. Aminophylline
b. Adrenaline hydrochloride
c. Atropine sulfate
*d. Salbutamol
e. Ephedrine hydrochloride

132. Vaccination is done by means of a toxin that has been neutralized by a formaldehyde (0,4%) at a temperature 37-40oC for four weeks. Ramond was the first to apply this preparation for diphtheria prophylaxis. What preparation is it?
a. Inactivated vaccine
*b. Anatoxin
c. Immunoglobulin
d. Antitoxic serum
e. Adjuvant

133. 30 minutes after a road accident a 35-year-old man was found to have a massive trauma of his lower extremities without significant external haemorrhag E. The injured is in excited stat E. What is the leading component of traumatic shock pathogenesis that requires immediate correction?
a. Internal organs dysfunction
b. Internal plasm loss
*c. Pain
d. Internal haemorrhage
e. Intoxication

134. A female patient was admitted to the hospital with pleuritis. Which area of pleural cavity contains most exudate?
*a. Costodiaphragmatic recess
b. Phrenicomediastinal recess
c. Costomediastinal recess
d. Under the pleural cupula
e. Under the pulmonary radix

135. Treatment of many diseases involves use of cocarboxylase (thiamine pyrophosphate) for supplying cells with energy. What metabolic process is activated in this case?
a. Glutamate deamination
*b. Oxidizing decarboxylation of pyruvate
c. Amino acids decarboxylation
d. Decarboxylation of biogenic amines
e. Detoxication of harmful substances in liver

136. Examination of a patients oral cavity revealed contacting cutting edges of his superior and inferior incisors. Such tooth position is typical for the following occlusion:
a. Prognathism
*b. Direct occlusion
c. Biprognathic occlusion
d. Closed occlusion
e. Orthognathia

137. A teenger had his tooth extracted under novocain anaesthesi A. 10 minutes later he presented with skin pallor, dyspnea, hypotension. When this reaction is developed and the allergen achieves tissue basophils, it reacts with:
a. IgА
b. IgD
*c. IgE
d. T-lymphocytes
e. ІgМ

138. After destruction of CNS structure an animal lost its orientative reflexes. What exactly was destroyed?
a. Medial reticular nuclei
*b. Quadrigeminal plate
c. Lateral vestibular nuclei
d. Black substance
e. Red nuclei

139. It is known that patients with diabetes mellitus are more subject to inflammative processes, they have low regeneration and slower wound healing. What is the reason for this?
a. Decrease in lipolysis
*b. Decrease in protheosynthesis
c. Accelerated gluconeogenesis
d. Increase in lipolysis
e. Intensification of catabolism

140. A patient consulted a dentist about pains, reddening and swelling of gums. The dentist assumed herpetic gingivostomatitis. What virus might have caused this disease?
a. Cytomegalic virus
*b. Herpes simplex virus type 1
c. Epstein-Barr virus
d. Herpes simplex virus type 2
e. Herpes zoster

141. Autopsy of a 35 y.o. woman revealed not only enlargement of many lymph nodes but also enlarged spleen weighting 600,0. Its incision showed that it was heterogeneous, dark red, dense with greyish-yellow necrotic areas up to 1 cm in diameter (porphyritic spleen). What disease can be assumed?
*a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Cancer metastases
c. Chronic lymphoid leukosis
d. Chronic myeloid leukosis
e. Lymphosarcoma

142. A pregnant woman lost for about 800 ml of blood during labour. There is also tachycardia, arterial pressure is 100/70 mm Hg, tachypnea up to 28/min. What hypoxia type is primary in such clinical situation?
*a. Blood
b. Respiratory
c. Cardiovascular
d. Mixed
e. Tissue

143. Study of a tubular organ revealed that its median membrane consists of solid hyaline rings. What epithelium lines mucous membrane of this organ?
*a. Multinuclear prismatic ciliated
b. Multistratal squamous nonkeratinizing
c. Monostratal cubical
d. Monostratal prismatic with a border
e. Monostratal prismatic glandular

144. As a result of a chest trauma the costal cartilage was damage D. The cartilage regenerates due to the following layer of perichondrium:
a. Fibrous
b. Elastic
c. Collagen
d. Sharpeys fibers
*e. Chondrogenic

145. Underdevelopment of which parts of facial skeleton in the embryonal period is the reason for such a malformation as cleft palate?
a. Mandibular and palatine processes
b. Mandibular processes
c. Frontal processes
*d. Palatine processes
e. Frontal and maxillary processes

146. Examination of a 60 y.o. mans oral cavity revealed the following changes: the 26th and 27th tooth are covered with metallic crowns that plunge deep into the gums. There is a parodontal pouch 0,7 cm deep between them containing some pus. Gingival papillae of these teeth are hyperemic, edematic, cyanotic, bleed as a reaction to touching by a dental explorer. X-ray picture shows resorption of interdental septa of ½ of tooth root. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Local parodontitis
b. Generalized parodontitis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. -
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

147. As a result of a road accident a 26-year-old man is in the torpid phase of shock. Blood count: leukocytes - 3,2×09/l. What is the leading mechanism of leukopenia development?
a. Leukopoiesis inhibition
b. Leukocyte destruction in the hematopietic organs
c. Faulty release of mature leukocytes from the bone marrow into the blood
*d. Leukocyte redistribution in the bloodstream
e. Increased excretion of the leukocytes from the organism

148. A patient who has been taking a certain drug for a long time cannot discontinue the use of it because this causes psychic and somatic disfunctions. The syndrome occuring at refraining from the use of a drug is called:
a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Sensitization
c. Idiosyncrasy
d. Cumulation
*e. Abstinence

149. Epithelium regeneration of mucous membrane of oral cavity (cell reproduction) was accompanied by semiconservative DNA replication (selfreproduction). Nucleotides of a new DNA chain are complementary to:
a. DNA-polymerase enzyme
b. Sense codons
c. Introns
*d. Maternal chain
e. RNA-polymerase enzyme

150. As a result of iodine deficiency in foodstuffs Transcarpathian people often have endemic goiter. This disease is caused by the following type of variability:
a. Correlative
*b. Modification
c. Ontogenetic
d. Mutational
e. Combinatorial

151. The total number of leukocytes in patients blood is 90×09/l. Leukogram: eosinophils - 0%, basophils - 0%, juvenile - 0%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmentonuclear cells - 20%, lymphoblasts - 1%, prolymphocytes - 2%, lymphocytes - 70%, monocytes - 5%, Botkin-Gumprecht cells. Clinical examination revealed enlarged cervical and submandibular lymph nodes. Such clinical presentations are typical for the following pathology:
*a. Chronic lympholeukosis
b. Acute lympholeukosis
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Chronic myeloleukosis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

152. A histological specimen presenting a tooth slice shows that the intercellular dentin substance contains collagen fibers being tangential to the dentinoenamel junction and perpendicular to the dentinal tubules (Ebners fibers). This dentin layer is called:
a. Mantle dentin
b. Granular layer
*c. Parapulpar dentin
d. Secondary dentin
e. Interglobular dentin

153. A patient was delivered to a hospital after having been exposed to ionizing radiation. He presents with vomiting, anorexia, pain in different region of abdomen, bloody feces, elevation of body temperature, inertness. Such clinical presentations are typical for the following form of acute radiation disease:
a. Bone-marrow
b. Toxemic
c. Cerebral
*d. Intestinal
e. Combined

154. After prophylactic medical examination a 7 y.o. boy was diagnosed with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (only boys fall ill). His parents are healthy, but his grandfather by his mothers side has the same diseas E. What type of inheritance is it?
a. Dominant, sex-linked
b. Autosomal and recessive
c. Autosomal and dominant
*d. Recessive, sex-linked
e. Semidominance

155. A patient complains about having pain during mastication, especially when he moves his jaw forward or sidewar D. What muscles are damaged?
*a. Lateral pterygoid
b. Temporal
c. Masticatory
d. Medial pterygoid
e. Mylohyoid

156. On examination a male patient was diagnosed with acute radiation dseas E. Laboratory examination revealed abrupt decrease in serotonin found in blood platelets. A likely cause of decrease in serotonin concentration would be metabolic imbalance of the following substance:
a. Phenyl alanine
b. Histidine
c. Serine
d. Tyrosine
*e. 5-oxytryptophane

157. A 49-year-old woman spent a lot of time standing. As a result of it she got leg edem A. What is the most likely cause of the edema?
*a. Increase in hydrostatic pressure of blood in veins
b. Increase in oncotic pressure of blood plasma
c. Decrease in hydrostatic pressure of blood in veins
d. Increase in systemic arterial pressure
e. Decrease in hydrostatic pressure of blood in arteries

158. A patient with fracture of femoral bone in the area of surgical neck got symptoms of acute dextroventricular insufficiency as a result of pulmonary embolism. What type of embolism is it?
a. Air
*b. Fat
c. Metastatic
d. Gas
e. Tissue

159. A patient with edemata was prescribed a K+-retaining diuretic - aldosterone antagonist. What drug is it?
a. Digoxin
b. Clonidine
c. Procainamide hydrochloride
d. Alopurinole
*e. Spironolactone

160. Autopsy of a 68 year old man who died from chronic cardiac insufficiency revealed deformed, thickened, conjoined cusps of mitral valv E. Along the edge of joining there were small (1-2 mm) thrombs. What form of endocarditis caused development of chronic cardiac insufficiency?
a. Acute verrucous
*b. Recurrent verrucous
c. Fibroplastic
d. Diffuse
e. Polypoulcerous

161. Blood analysis of a patient suffering from jaundice revealed increase of total bilirubin by its indirect fraction. Urine and feces have intense colouring. What is the most probable mechanism of these abnormalities?
*a. Increased haemolysis of erythrocytes
b. Impaired generation of direct bilirubin
c. Damage of liver parenchyma
d. Obstruction of bile outflow from the liver
e. Impaired transformation of urobilinogen in the liver

162. To prevent possible negative effect upon the gastric mucsa a patient with rheumatoid arthritis was administered a nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drug - a COX-2 selective inhibitor. Specify this drug:
a. Analgine
*b. Celecoxib
c. Butadion
d. Ibuprofen
e. Acetylsalicinic acid

163. As a result of a trauma a patient is unable to extend his cubital articulation. This may be caused by dysfunction of the following muscle:
a. Musculus infraspinatus
*b. Musculus triceps brachii
c. Musculus teres major
d. Musculus subscapularis
e. Musculus levator scapule

164. Examination of a 42-year-old patient suffering from paradontosis revealed some roundish calcified formations 2-3 mm in diameter in the coronal pulp. Name these structures:
a. Dead dentin
b. Sclerotic dentin
c. Interglobular spaces
*d. Denticles
e. Interglobular dentin

165. Blood analysis of a 16-year-old girl suffering from the autoimmune inflammation of thyroid gland revealed multiple plasmatic cells. Such increase in plasmocyte number is caused by proliferation and differentiation of the following blood cells:
a. Tissue basophils
b. T-killers
c. T-helpers
d. T-supressors
*e. B-lymphocytes

166. A patient complained about a carbuncle on his face. Examination results: neither dense nor painful edema of subcutaneous cellular tissue, there is black crust in the middle of the carbuncle and peripheral vesicular rash around it. Bacteriological examination revealed presence of immobile streptobacilli able of capsulation. What microorganisms are causative agents of this disease?
a. Staptylococcus aureus
b. Bacillus megaterium
c. Bacillus anthracoides
*d. Bacillus antracis
e. Bacillus subtilis

167. A patient has applied eye drops containing atropine which resulted in persistent mydriasis. Which muscle was blocked?
a. Rectus
b. Pupil-dilating
*c. Pupil-contracting
d. Oblique
e. Ciliate

168. A histological specimen of an eyeball shows a structure in form of a convexoconvex formation connected with the ciliary body by the fibers of ciliary zonule and covered with a transparent capsule. Specify this structure:
a. Sclera
b. Vitreous body
*c. Crystalline lens
d. Ciliary body
e. Cornea

169. A man who has been staying in a stuffy room for a long time lost consciousness. He regained consciousnes after inhalation of ammonia spirit vapour. This substances effect is connected with direct influence upon the following structures:
*a. Receptors of upper airways
b. Resistive vessels
c. Capacitive vessels
d. Respiratory centre
e. Vasculomotor centre

170. In the mountains some clinically healthy people present with anaemia symptoms. Blood test can reveal sickle cells. What is the genotype of such people?
a. ХсХс
b. АА
c. ХСХс
d. аа
*e. Аа

171. Histological examination of myocardium of a 47-year-old patient with rheumatic heart disease (section material) revealed some big visually empty vacuoles within the cardiomyocytes. They turn black when stained with osmic acid, and yellow-red when stained with sudan III. What pathological process is it?
a. Carbohydrate degeneration
*b. Adipose degeneration
c. Dysproteinosis
d. Hyaline drop degeneration
e. Hydropic degeneration

172. During starvation normal rate of glucose is maintained by means of gluconeogenesis activation. What substance can be used as a substrate for this process?
a. Ammonia
b. Adenine
c. Guanine
d. Urea
*e. Alanine

173. A patient underwent the extraction of his isuperior medial incisor. It is supplied with blood by the branches of the following artery:
a. A.alveolaris inferior
*b. A.infraorbitalis
c. A.sphenopalatina
d. A.palatina descendens
e. A.buccalis

174. Coprological examination of a patients feces revealed small operculate eggs. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient often consumes fish. What fluke parasitizes in the patients organism?
a. Blood fluke
*b. Cat liver fluke
c. Lung fluke
d. Liver fluke
e. Lancet fluke

175. Specimen of a patients sputum was stained with the following dyes and reagents: Ziehls solution, methylene blue solution, 5% solutoin of sulfuric aci D. What staining method was applied?
a. Neissers
b. Grams
c. Burris
d. Peshkovs
*e. Ziehl-Neelsen

176. A 35 year old man got a trauma that resulted in complete rupture of spinal cord at a level of the first cervical segment. What changes of respiration will be observed?
a. Respiration wont change
b. Respiration will become diaphragmatic
*c. Respiration will come to a standstill
d. Respiration will become infrequent and deep
e. Respiration will become frequent and shallow

177. A 60-year-old patient consulted a doctor about retrosternal pain arising immediately after physical exercis E. He was prescribed nitroglycerin. The medication relieved retrosternal pain but the patient got acute headach E. What is the likely mechanism of this side effect?
a. Phosphodiesterase block
*b. Intracranial pressure rise
c. Inhibited formation of mediators in brain
d. ?-adrenoreceptor block
e. Reduced accumulation of calcium ions

178. Microscopic examination of a parenchymatous organ revealed that its epithelial cords formed glomerular, fascicular and reticular zones. The central part of the organ was presented by accumulations of chromaffin cells. Specify this organ:
*a. Adrenal gland
b. Thyroid gland
c. Hypophysis
d. Epiphysis
e. Liver

179. Autopsy of a man, who died from typhoid fever on the 5th day of disease, revealed the following changes: aggregated follicles of ileum were enlarged and plethoric; they protruded over the mucous membrane, and multiple sulci and convolutions could be seen on their surfac E. Histological examinatio revealed plethority and edema of tissues, presense of granulomas composed of big cells with light cytoplasm and containing typhoid bacilli. These local changes are compliant with the following period of typhoid fever:
a. Stage of ulcer healing
b. Stage of necrosis
*c. Stage of medullary swelling
d. Stage of ulceration
e. Stage of clean ulcers

180. A 25-year-old patient with clinical presentations of nephrotic syndrome underwent puncture biopsy of a kidney. Microscopical examination revealed expansion of the epithelium cells of proximal nephron tubules, vacuoles containing transparent liquid in the cytoplasm, peripheral deviation of the nucleus. What degeneration was revealed in the tubule epithelium?
a. Adipose
b. Granular
c. Keratinization
d. Hyaline drop
*e. Hydropic

181. During examination of a 36-year-old woman a dentist revealed a formation in form of a nodule up to 0,8 cm in diameter, of dark brown-red colour, soft, on a wide bas E. The formation was found on the buccal surface of gum in the region of the 2nd molar. Histological examination revealed that the formation had plenty of sinusoid vessels and a lot of roundish mononuclear and big multinuclear cells; in some parts accumulations of hemosiderin granules could be foun D. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mandibular osteoclastoma
b. Ameloblastoma
c. Root granuloma
d. Angiomatous epulis
*e. Giant-cell epulis

182. Researches of the latest decades established that immediate "executors" of cell apoptosis are special enzymes called caspases. Generation of one of them proceeds with participation of cytochrome C. What is its function in a normal cell?
a. Component of H+ATP system
b. Component of pyruvate-dehydrogenase system
c. Enzyme of tricarboxylic acid cycle
*d. Enzyme of respiratory chain of electron transport
e. Enzyme of beta-oxidation of fatty acids

183. A 45-year-old patient was admitted to the resuscitation department with a laryngeal edema. During tracheotomy a surgeon accidentally cut across the jugular venous arch that lies within:
a. Spatium interscalenum
*b. Spatium interaponeuroticum suprasternale
c. Spatium retropharyngeale
d. Spatium antescalenum
e. Spatium pretracheale

184. The air in a room has increased concentration of carbonic aci D. What respiratory changes (depth and rate) will be observed in a person after entering this room?
a. Decrease in depth
b. Increase in depth
c. Decrease in rate
d. Increase in rate
*e. Increase in depth and rate

185. Examination of nasal cavity revealed deviation of the posterior part of nasal septum. What bone is affected?
a. Perpendicular plate of ethmoid bone
b. Medial plate of pterygoid process
*c. Vomer
d. Lateral plate of pterygoid process
e. Vertical plate of palatine bone

186. A woman with intractable vomiting was admitted to the infectious disease ward. What changes of water-salt metabolism are likely to be observed?
a. Iso-osmolar dehydration
b. Hypo-osmolar hyperdehydration
c. Hyper-osmolar hyperdehydration
*d. Hypo-osmolar dehydration
e. Hyperosmolar dehydration

187. Examination of a 35-year-old patient included histological analysis of the red bone marrow punctate that revealed a significant increase in the megakaryocyte number. This will cause the following alterations in the peripheral blood:
a. Leukopenia
*b. Thrombocytopenia
c. Leukocytosis
d. Thrombocytosis
e. Agranulocytosis

188. Cystinuria in humans shows itself in form of cystine stones in kidneys (homozygotes) or else an increased rate of cystine in urine (heterozygotes). Cystinuria is a monogenic diseas E. Specify the type of interaction between cystinuria genes and normal rate of cystine in urine:
a. Codomination
b. Epistasis
c. Complementarity
*d. Semidominance
e. Complete dominance

189. Before an operation a 30-year-old male patient had his blood type D. It turned out to be Rh-positiv E. Erythrocytes were not agglutinated by standard sera of 0(I), А(II), В(III) groups. According to the AB0 blood group system this blood is of the following type:
a. А(II)
b. АВ(IV)
*c. 0(I)
d. -
e. В(III)

190. A patient was admitted to a surgical department for an operation. He has to undergo neuroleptanalgesi A. To achieve neuroleptanalgesia it would be rational to combine fentanyl with the following medicine:
a. Pilocarpine
b. Salbutamol
c. Cholosasum
d. Fraxiparine
*e. Droperidol

191. Examination of a patient who complains of deglutitive problem revealed a tumour-like eminence 1-2 cm in diameter on the tongue root in the region of the cecal foramen. These are overgrown remnants of the following gland:
a. Parathyroid
*b. Thyroid
c. Sublingual
d. Adenohypophysis
e. Thymus

192. A patient has torticollis. Which neck muscle is damaged?
a. M.platisma
b. M.mylohyoideus
c. M.omohyoideus
d. M.sternohyoideus
*e. M.sternocleidomastoideus

193. While under barbituric anaesthesia a 65-year-old male patient developed respiratory inhibition. Anesthesiologist made him a 10 ml intravenous injection of 0,5% bemegride solution. The patients condition got better, the pulmonary ventilation volume increase D. What phenomenon underlies the interaction of these medivcations?
a. Indirect synergism
b. Direct synergism
c. Unilateral antagonism
*d. Direct antagonism
e. Indirect antagonism

194. After parenteral introduction of a medication a patient fell into a com A. He had Cheyne-Stokes respiration, apparently miotic pupils. The patellar reflex was preserve D. What medication might have caused the intoxication?
a. Aminazine
b. Diazepam
*c. Morphine hydrochloride
d. Analgine
e. Phenobarbital

195. A 13-year-old patient complains of general weakness, dizziness, fatiguability. Mental retardation is also observed . Examination revealed high concentration of valine, isoleucine and leucine in blood and urine. The patients urine has a specific smell. What is the likely cause of such condition?
*a. Maple syrup urine disease
b. Histidinemia
c. Basedows disease
d. Tyrosinosi
e. Addisons disease

196. For infection prevention a patient who underwent appendectomy was prescribed a cephalosporin antibioti C. Antimicrobial activity of these antibiotics is called forth by the disturbance of the following process:
*a. Microbial wall formation
b. Ribosomal protein synthesis
c. Nucleic acid synthesis
d. Energy metabolism
e. Cholinesterase block

197. ECG of a patient showed that RR interval equaled 1,5 s, heart rate equaled 40 bpm. What is the cardiac pacemaker?
*a. Atrioventricular node
b. Sinus node
c. Right branch of His bundle
d. His bundle
e. Left branch of His bundle

198. A 7 year old child has angina. A smear from the tonsil surface was inoculated on blood agar. 24 hours later there had grown colonies of streptococci. Nutrient medium turned transparent around them. This study revealed presence of the following pathogenous factor:
a. Neuraminidase
b. Endotoxin
*c. Hemolysin
d. Leukocidin
e. Beta-lactamase

199. While on holiday in the countryside a boy found a spider with the following morphological peculiarities: body length at the rate of 2 cm, round black abdomen with two rows of red dots on its dorsal surface, four pairs of segmented extremities covered with tiny black hairs. Identify this arthropod:
a. Tarantula
b. Solifugae
c. Mite
d. Scorpion
*e. Steppe spider (Latrodectus tredecimguttatus)

200. While operating on a tumour of abdominal part of ureter a doctor should be aware of an important arterial vessel located in front of it. Which vessel is it?
a. A.ileocolica
b. A.iliaca interna
c. A.renalis
*d. A.testicularis
e. A.iliaca communis

