1. A 50-year-old man sustained a great stress. This caused a dramatic increase in adrenalin and noradrenaline concentration. What enzymes catalyze the inactivation of the latter?
a. Peptidases
b. Carboxylase
*c. Monoamine oxidases
d. Glycosidases
e. Tyrosinase

2. In course of parallel experiments some rats were being subjected to continuous direct solar irradiation and some were being irradiated while placed into a glass box. The animals that received a doze of direct irradiation got tumours on parts of their skin not coated with hair. This phenomenon is associated with the influence of the following factor:
a. Exogenous chemical carcinogens
*b. Ultraviolet radiation
c. Endogenous chemical carcinogens
d. Infrared radiation
e. Biological carcinogens

3. A patient with essential hypertension has been prescribed captopril. What is its mechanism of action?
*a. Inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme activity
b. α-adrenoreceptor block
c. Peripheral vasodilatating effect
d. Angiotensin II receptor block
e. β-adrenoreceptor block

4. Inside a human cell the informational RNA containing both exons and introns was delivered to the granular endoplasmic reticulum to the ribosomes. What process does NOT take place?
a. Prolongation
b. Transcription
*c. Processing
d. Translation
e. Replication

5. A patient has a first-degree atrioventricular block accompanied by the prolongation of P-Q interval up to 0,25 s. Under such conditions the following myocardial function will be disturbed:
*a. Conduction
b. Automatism
c. Contractibility
d. Excitability
e. -

6. Blood test of a patient suffering from atrophic gastritis gave the following results: RBCs - 2,0×1012/l, Hb - 87 g/l, colour index - 1,3, WBCs - 4,0×109/l, thrombocytes – 180×109/l. Anaemia migh have been caused by the following substance deficiency:
a. Vitamin A
b. Iron
c. Vitamin K
*d. VitaminB12
e. Zinc

7. An electronic microphotography of a sense organ shows some hair cells with short microvilli - stereocilia - located on their apical surface and a polar kinocilium. What sense organ are these cells typical for?
a. Olfactory organ
b. Gustatory organ
c. Acoustic organ
d. Organ of vision
*e. Organ of equilibrium

8. Examination of a 45-year-old man who had kept to a vegeterian diet for a long time revealed negative nitrogen balanc e. Which peculiarity of his diet is the cause of this phenomenon?
a. Lack of fats
b. Lack of vitamins
c. Excess of carbohydrates
*d. Lack of proteins
e. Excess of water

9. A sample taken from the pharynx of a patient with angina was inoculated on the blood-tellurite agar. This resulted in growth of grey, radially striated (in form of rosettes) colonies up to 4-5 mm in diameter. Microscopically there can be seen gram-positive rods with club-shaped ends arranged in form of spread fingers. What microorganisms are these?
*a. Corynebacteria diphtheriae
b. Diphtheroids
c. Streptobacilli
d. Clostridium botulinum
e. Streptococci

10. Curarelike substances (dithylinum) make it impossible for skeletal muscles to contract because they block:
a. Membrane conduction of excitement
b. Central synapses
c. Ganglionic synapses
d. Proprioceptors
*e. Neuromuscular synapses

11. A 30-year-old woman has subnormal concentration of enzymes in the pancreatic juic e. This might be caused by the hyposecretion of the following gastrointestinal hormone:
a. Secretin
b. Somatostatin
c. Vaso-intestinal peptide
*d. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin
e. Gastro-inhibiting peptide

12. A patient has been delivered to a hospital with a provisional diagnosis of progressing muscle dystrophy. This diagnosis can be confirmed by the increased concentration of the following substance found in urine:
a. Hydroxyproline
b. Pyruvate
c. Troponin
*d. Kreatine
e. Carnosine

13. A 42-year-old patient came to a first-aid post because of a cut wound in the lower part of the anterior shoulder surfac e. Objectively: the patient has difficulties with forearm flexion. What muscles are most likely to be damaged?
a. M.deltoideus, m.biceps brachii
b. M.biceps brachii, m.anconeus
c. M.coracobrachialis, m.supraspinatus
d. M.deltoideus, m.infraspinatus
*e. M.brachialis, m.biceps brachii

14. Dentists commonly practice local anaesthetization by applying novocain solution with 0,1% adrenalin solution. The added adrenalin induces:
a. Decrease in vascular resistance
b. Arterial pressure rise
c. Arterial pressure drop
d. Local vasodilatation
*e. Local vasoconstriction

15. A 26-year-old patient was found to have a big furuncle of soft tissues of face by the root of nose and inferior eyeli d. This disease can be seriously complicated by the infection spreading along veins of this region to the sinuses of dura brain mater. What sinus is most likely to be affected?
a. Sigmoid
b. Superior sagittal
c. Petrosal
*d. Cavernous
e. Occipital

16. A child suspected for tuberculosis underwent Mantoux test. 24 hours after allergen injection there appeared a swelling, hyperaemia and tenderness. What are the main components in the development of this reaction?
a. Macrophages, B-lymphocytes and monocytes
b. B-lymphocytes, IgM
c. Granulocytes, T-lymphocytes and IgG
*d. Mononuclears, T-lymphocytes and lymphokines
e. Plasmatic cells, T-lymphocytes and lymphokines

17. A 5-month-old boy was hospitalized for tonic convulsions. He has a life-time history of this diseas e. Examination revealed coarse hair, thinned and fragile nails, pale and dry skin. In blood: calcium - 1,5 millimole/l, phosphor - 1,9 millimole/l. These changes are associated with:
*a. Hypoparathyroidism
b. Hypothyroidism
c. Hyperaldosteronism
d. Hyperparathyroidism
e. Hypoaldosteronism

18. A teenger had his tooth extracted under novocain anaesthesi a. 10 minutes later he presented with skin pallor, dyspnea, hypotension. When this reaction is developed and the allergen achieves tissue basophils, it reacts with:
*a. IgE
b. T-lymphocytes
c. IgD
d. IgА
e. ІgМ

19. A 58-year-old female patient complains of rapid fatigability, performance decrement, sleepiness, dyspnea during fast walking. In blood: RBCs - 4,0×1012/l, Hb - 80 g/l, CI - 0,6; alurge number of annulocytes and microcytes. What anaemia are these presentations typical for?
a. Posthemorrhagic
b. Pernicious
*c. Iron-deficient
d. Haemolytic
e. Sickle-cell

20. A patient with bronchial asthma has been administered inhalations of 0,5% isadrin solution. This helped to relieve bronchiospasms but the patient started complaining of heart pain and palpitation. What is the cause of these presentations?
a. Inhibition of acetylcholine synthesis
b. alpha-adrenoreceptor stimulation
*c. beta1-adrenoreceptor stimulation
d. M-cholinoreceptor activation
e. beta2-adrenoreceptor stimulation

21. In order to establish the level of antidiphtheritic immunity in a child it was decided to use a passive hemagglutination test. This task can be completed by the sensibilization of erythrocytes by:
a. Diphtheria bacillus antigens
b. Haemolytic serum
c. Diphtheria antitoxin
d. Antidiphtheric serum
*e. Diphtheria anatoxin

22. An embryo has a disturbed development of blood-vascular system caused by a teratogenic factor. This disturbance occurred in the following germ layer:
a. Ento- and mesoderm
b. Entoderm
c. Ento- and ectoderm
d. Exoderm
*e. Mesoderm

23. Sdudying the mitotic cycle phases of an onion root the researchers revealed a cell with chromosomes lying in equatorial plane in form of a star. What phase of mitosis is it?
a. Anaphase
b. Prophase
c. Interphase
*d. Metaphase
e. Telophase

24. In the third period of fever a patient had a critical body temperature drop accompanied by tachycardia and arterial pressure drop down to 80/60 mm Hg. Specify a type of collapse developed as a result od these changes:
a. Haemorrhagic
*b. Infectious-and-toxical collapse
c. Cardiogenic
d. Pancreatic
e. Orthostatic

25. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about low density of dental tissues, increased fragility of teeth on eating solid foo d. In order to determine Ca/P relation a scrape of enamel was sent to the laboratory. What value of this index is suggestive of intensified demineralization?
a. 2,5
b. 1,85
*c. 0,9
d. 1,5
e. 1,67

26. A patient lost consciousness as a result of a cerebral traum a. This might be caused by damaging the following zones of cerebral cortex:
*a. Occipital
b. Temporal
c. Frontal
d. Parietal
e. Temporal and parietal

27. A patient diagnosed with acute pancreatitis was admitted to the surgical department. Which drug administration would be pathogenetically grounded?
a. Chymotripsin
b. Tripsin
*c. Contrical
d. Pancreatin
e. Fibrinolysin

28. A patient with a trigeminus inflammation has been suffering from progressing parodontitis for the last few years. What is the leading factor in the parodontitis development in this case?
a. Low immunoglobulin production
b. Hypoactivity of leukocytic elastase
c. Increase of vagus tonus
*d. Neurodystrophical changes in parodentium
e. Hypoactivity of kallicrein-kinin system

29. A man has a considerable decrease in diuresis as a result of 1,5 l blood loss. The primary cause of such diuresis disorder is the hypersecretion of the following hormone:
a. Parathormone
*b. Vasopressin
c. Cortisol
d. Natriuretic
e. Corticotropin

30. After a trauma of soft tissues in the region of the posterior sorface of medial condyle of humerus a patient has got a skin prickle of medial forearm surfac e. Which of the listed nerves is located in the affected region?
a. N.radialis
*b. N.ulnaris
c. N.dorsalis scapularis
d. N.musculocutaneu
e. N.subscapularis

31. As a result of a chest trauma the costal cartilage was damage d. The cartilage regenerates due to the following layer of perichondrium:
a. Elastic
b. Sharpeys fibers
c. Collagen
d. Fibrous
*e. Chondrogenic

32. A patient has a right-sided fracture in the region of the frontal third of mandible accompanied by a haematoma in the region of chin. It is caused by the injury of the following artery:
a. Palatine
b. Lingual
c. Inferior labial
d. Facial
*e. Mental

33. A 70-year-old man has developed prosphetic stomatitis. Apart of this he was found to have an evident lesion of mouth corners. Microscopical examination revealed large ovoid gram-positive cells. What microorganisms are most likely to be the leading etiological agent of such a lesion?
a. Staphylococci
*b. Candida fungi
c. Neisseria
d. Streptococci
e. Corynebacteria

34. A histological specimen of an oral cavity organ represents three zones: adipose, glandular and fibrous. Specify this organ:
a. Lip
b. Gum
*c. Hard palate
d. Cheek
e. Soft palate

35. Parodontitis is treated with calcium preparations and a hormone that stimulates tooth mineralization and inhibits tissue resorption. What hormone is it?
a. Thyroxine
b. Aldosterone
*c. Calcitonin
d. Adrenalin
e. Parathormone

36. After prolonged exercising people usually experience intense muscle pain. What is its most likely cause?
a. Intensified disintegration of muscle proteins
*b. Accumulation of lactic acid in muscles
c. Increased muscle excitability
d. Accumulation of creatinine in muscles
e. Increased concentratioon of ADP in muscles

37. A couple has a son with haemophili a. The parents are healthy but the maternal grandfather also has haemophili a. Specify the type of inheritance:
a. Dominant sex-linked
*b. Recessive sex-linked
c. Semidominance
d. Autosomal dominant
e. Recessive autosomal

38. A 46-year-old inveterate smoker has a white crateriform ulcer with dense edges in the right corner of mouth. Eosine staining and microscopical examination revealed cords of atypical multilayer epithelium ingrowing into the adjacent tissues and making clusters. In the centre of these clusters some roundish pink concentric formations can be seen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma
b. Basal cell carcinoma
c. Leukoplakia
d. Adenocarcinoma
e. Squamous cell nonkeratinous carcinoma

39. A 46-year-old female patient complaining of having alveolar haemorrhage for 6 hours after a tooth extraction, general weakness and dizziness was delivered to a hospital. The patient has a history of essential hypertension. Objectively: pale skin and mucous membranes. In blood: Hb - 80 g/l, Ht - 30%, bleeding and coagullation time is normal. What complication had been provoked by the haemorrhage?
a. Chronic posthaemorrhagic anaemia
*b. Acute posthaemorrhagic anaemia
c. Folic acid deficiency anaemia
d. Haemolytic anaemia
e. Iron deficiency anaemia

40. While playing a child got a punch in the presternum region. As a result of this trauma an organ located behind the presternum was damage d. Name this organ:
a. Thyroid gland
b. Larynx
c. Pericardium
*d. Thymus
e. Heart

41. A specimen of cerebral cortex impregnated with silver nitrate shows some gigantic neurons of pyramidal form. These cells make the following layer of cortex:
*a. Ganglionic
b. Interior granular
c. Molecular
d. Exterior granular
e. Pyramidal

42. A patient has a spasm of smooth muscles of bronchi. As the first aid it would be physiologically appropriate to inject the patient the antagonists of the following receptors:
a. β-adrenoreceptors
*b. M-cholinoreceptors
c. N-cholinoreceptors
d. Adenosine receptors
e. α-adrenoreceptors

43. A patient suffering from stenocardia takes 100 mg of acetylsalicilic acid daily. What is the effect of acetylsalicilic acid in this patient?
*a. Inhibition of thrombocyte aggregation
b. Dilatation of coronary vessels
c. Cholesterol rate reduction
d. Inhibition of blood coagulation
e. Prothrombin rate reduction

44. A patient complains of frequent gingival haemorrhages he has been experiencing since his childhood. Blood test revealed a deficiency in blood-coagulation factor VIII. This means that the patient has an impairment of:
a. Thrombin generation
*b. Prothrombinase generation
c. Fibrin generation
d. Thrombocyte aggregation
e. Thrombocyte adhesion

45. Examination of newborns in one of the Ukrainian cities revealed a baby with phenylketonuri a. The babys parents dont suffer from this disease and have two other healthy children. Specify the most likely parents genotype with phenylketonuria gene:
a. Аа х АА
*b. Аа х Аа
c. Аа х аа
d. аа х аа
e. АА х аа

46. A patient with herpetic stomatitis was prescribed acyclovir for topical application. What is its mechanism of action?
a. It inhibits virus penetration into cells
*b. It inhibits synthesis of nucleic acids of viruses
c. It inhibits virus maturation
d. It inhibits virion assembly
e. It increases the resistance of macroorganism cells to the viruses

47. A patient has a craniocerebral traum a. X-ray examination revealed a fracture of skull bas e. The fracture line passes through the spinous and round foramens. What bone is damaged?
a. Ethmoid
b. Occipital
c. Temporal
d. Frontal
*e. Sphenoid

48. A 60-year-old male patient is unable to urinate after a surgery and needs a catheter installation. When a manipulator is not skilled enough, he can pierce the ureter in its following part (normally its the most narrow part):
a. Fossa navicularis
b. Ostium uretrae externum
c. Pars spongiosa
*d. Pars membranacea
e. Pars prostatica

49. Autopsy of a 75-year-old patient who had been suffering from disseminated atherosclerosis and died under chronic cardiac failure revealed constriction and deformation of coronary arteries, tuberous intima whose section appeared to be white and petrosal. Specify the stage of atherosclerosis morphogenesis:
a. Lipoidosis
b. Bilipid
c. Liposclerosis
d. Atheromatosis
*e. Atherocalcinosis

50. Examination of a 30-year-old mans mandible revealed in the region of his molar a dense tumour-like formation that significantly deformed the mandibl e. Here and there the formation wasnt fully detached from the bone tissu e. Microscopical examination of a tissue sampling revealed that stroma had some cords and follicles with odontogenous cylindric epithelial cells in peripheria and stellate cells resembling of the enamel oragan pulp in the centr e. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenocarcinoma
*b. Ameloblastoma
c. Adenomatoid tumour
d. Primary intraosteal cancer
e. Osteoclastoma

51. After inoculation of feces sample into the 1% alkaline peptonic water and 8-hour incubation in the thermostat at a temperature of 37°C a culture in form of a tender bluish film has grown. Such cultural properties are typical for the causative agent of the following disease:
a. Paratyphoid fever A
*b. Cholera
c. Dysentery
d. Plague
e. Typhoid fever

52. A 29-year-old female patient has moon face, upper body obesity, striae on her anterior abdominal wall, hirsutism; urine shows an increased rate of 17-oxy ketosteroids. What disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Primary aldosteronism
b. Secondary aldosteronism
*c. Itsenko-Cushing syndrome
d. Conns syndrome
e. Pheochromocytoma

53. An electronic microphotography shows epidermis with some dendritic cells among common cubic cells. These cells have a well-developed Golgi complex, a lot of ribosomes and melanosomes. These cells are called:
*a. Melanocytes
b. Tissue basophils
c. Keratinocytes
d. Langerhans cells
e. Merkels cells

54. Dehelmintization of a patient revealed some long fragments of a helminth with segmented structur e. Mature segments were rectangular, 30x12 mm large, closed-type matrix was in form of a stem with 17-35 lateral branches. Specify this helminth:
a. Alveococcus
b. Echinococcus
c. Dwarf tapeworm
*d. Hookless tapeworm
e. Armed tapeworm

55. A patient has some vesicles on the mucous membrane of the oral cavity, lips and nose. A dentist suspected vesicular stomatitis. What analysis will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Contamination of animals with the vesicular fluid
b. Microscopy of the vesicular fluid
c. Recovery of bacteria from the vesicular fluid
d. Allergy test
*e. Recovery of virus from the vesicular fluid

56. A patient has myocardial infarction in the region of the anterior wall of the left ventricle. Circulatory dysfunction occurred in the following vascular basin:
a. Marginal branch of the left coronary artery
b. Anterior ventricular branch of the right coronary artery
c. Circumflex branch of the left coronary artery
*d. Anterior interventricular branch of the left coronary artery
e. Atrioventricular branch of the left coronary artery

57. Inflammation of tympanic cavity got complicated by the mastoid bone inflammation. Which wall of the tympanic cavity did the pus penetrate through?
a. Superior
b. Anterior
c. Medial
*d. Posterior
e. Lateral

58. A child presents with symptoms of psychic and physical retardation (cretinism). It is usually associated with the following hormone deficiency:
a. Somatotropic
b. Insulin
c. Calcitonin
*d. Thyroxin
e. Testosterone

59. A victim has been delivered to a hospital with an open fracture of mandible ramus and profuse bleeding in the region of fractur e. What artery is most likely to be damaged?
*a. Inferior alveolar
b. Median temporal
c. Lingual
d. Ascending palatine
e. Facial

60. A male patient waiting for tooth extraction has developed a strong sense of anxiety. Which drug should be given to him in order to relieve him of this discomfort?
a. Aminazine
*b. Diazepam
c. Aethimizolum
d. Analgin
e. Carbamazepine

61. Depressions and emotional disorders result from noradrenaline, serotonin and other biogenic amines deficiency in brain. Concentration of these compounds in synapses can be increased by means of antidepressants that inhibit the activity of the following enzyme:
a. Diamine oxidase
b. Phenylalanine-4-monooxigenase
c. L-amino acid oxidase
*d. Monoamine oxidase
e. D-amino acid oxidase

62. A 23-year-old patient complains of increased salivation. Production of large amount of serous saliva is caused by the stimulation of the following vegatative ganglion:
a. Ganglion pterygopalatinum
b. Ganglion submandibulare
c. Ganglion sublinguale
d. Ganglion ciliare
*e. Ganglion oticum

63. Children often have laboured nasal breathing which is caused by overdevelopment of lymphoid tissue of the pharyngeal mucous membran e. This phenomenon may cause enlargement of the following tonsils:
a. Tonsilla lingualis
b. All above-mentioned
c. Tonsilla palatina
*d. Tonsilla pharyngea
e. Tonsilla tubaria

64. After the traumatic tooth extraction a patient is complaining of acute, dull, poorly-localized pain in gingiva, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. The patient has been diagnosed with alveolitis. Specify the kind of pain in this patient:
*a. Protopathic
b. Phantom
c. Heterotopic
d. Visceral
e. Epicritic

65. In order to administer general health-improving therapy a parodontist intends to study factors of nonspecific resistance of saliva and mucous secretion. Which of the following factors of nonspecific resistance should be studied in the first line?
a. Interferon
*b. Lysozyme
c. Secretory IgA
d. Complement
e. Properdin

66. A 57-year-old patient experiences periodical uterine haemorrhages. Diagnostic biopsy of lining of uterus has revealed among the blood elements some glandular complexes of different forms and sizes made by atypic cells having hyperchromic nuclei with multiple mitoses (including pathological ones ). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Glandular endometrium hyperplasia
*b. Adenocarcinoma
c. Chorioepithelioma
d. Endometritis
e. Uterus fibromyoma

67. A histologic specimen of the sagittal section of mandible primordium of a 3,5-month-old human embryo shows an epithelial organ surrounded by compactly arranged mesenchymal cells. This mesenchymal formation is called:
a. Internal enamel organs
*b. Dental saccule
c. Dental bulb
d. External enamel organs
e. Pulp of an enamel organ

68. Autopsy of a 67-year-old man who died after presenting with hypoglycemic coma revealed some areas of connective tissue growth and necrosis foci, atrophy of Langerhans islets in pancreas. What disease might have induced such changes in pancreas?
*a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Pancreas hypoplasia
c. Mucoviscidosis
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Cancer of the head of pancreas

69. A patient who has been taking tetracycline for a long time has developed candidosis of mucous membranes. What drug shoul administered for its treatment?
a. Nitrofurantoin
b. Nitrofungin
c. Amphotericin
d. Griseofulvin
*e. Itraconazole

70. One of the protein synthesis stages is recognition. The first iRNA triplet starts with UAU triplet. What complementary triplet is found in tRNA?
a. GUG
b. CUC
*c. AUA
d. AAA
e. UGU

71. A removed vermiform appendix was sent for a histological analysis. The appendix was enlarged, with thickened walls and dull plethoric serous membrane covered by coagulated fibrin. After dissection some pus could be seen. Microscopical examination revealed vascular congestion, edema of all the layers and their diffuse infiltration with leukocytes. Specify the form of acute appendicitis:
a. Gangrenous
b. Simple
c. Apostematous
*d. Flegmonous
e. Superficial

72. Shortly before death a patient got an electrocardiographically based diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction. Autopsy revealed that the myocardial cavity contained 200 ml of liquid blood and 400 g of clots; the posterior wall of the left ventricle had a perforation up to 2 cm long. What complication of myocardial infraction is it?
a. Idiopathic myocarditis
b. Exudative pericarditis
c. Haemorrhagic pericarditis
d. Stone heart
*e. Myocardial rupture with cardiac tamponade

73. During examination of first-grade pupils a dentist revealed that one child had brown-yellow teeth and two split teeth. According to the child, previously he had been treated for pneumonia with "some" pills. What drug might have had such a negative impact on teeth?
a. Biseptol
b. Erythromycin
c. Oxacillin
*d. Doxycycline
e. Ampicillin

74. A 35-year-old female patient with a chronic renal disease has developed osteoporosis. The cause of this complication is the deficiency of the following substance:
a. D3
b. D2
c. Cholesterol
*d. 1,25-dihydroxy-D3
e. 25-hydroxy-D3

75. In spring a patient experiences petechial haemorrhages, loosening of teeth, high liability to colds. A doctor suspects hypovitaminosis c. In this respect loosening of teeth can be explained by:
a. Increased permeability of periodont membranes
b. Disturbed oxidation-reduction process in the periodont
c. Structural change of glycosaminoglycans
*d. Structural failure of collagen in the periodontal ligaments
e. Mechanical damage of teeth

76. A 71-year-old man had been presenting with diarrhea for 10 days. The feces had admixtures of blood and mucus. He was delivered to a hospital in grave condition and died 2 days later. Autopsy of the body revealed the following: diphtheritic colitis with multiple irregularly-shaped ulcers of different depth in both sigmoid colon and rectus. Bacteriological analysis revealed Shigell a. What was the main disease?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Nonspecific ulcerous colitis
d. Typhoid fever
*e. Dysentery

77. A patients blood shows an increased concentration of pyruvate which is excreted with urine for the most part. This is typical for the following vitamin deficiency:
a. B3
b. B6
*c. B1
d. E
e. B2

78. A 25-year-old patient has been diagnosed with chronic hepatitis. The patient complains of 10 kg weight loss within 2 months. Objectively: the patient has dry peeling skin, pale with yellow shade, petechial haemorrhages, stomatorrhagia. Petechial haemorrhages and stomatorrhagia are caused by the disturbance of the following hepatic function:
a. Depositing
b. Glycogen synthesizing
c. Chromogenic
d. Detoxication
*e. Protein synthesizing

79. The immunoblot detected gp120 protein in the blood serum. This protein is typical for the following disease:
a. Tuberculosis
b. Virus B hepatitis
*c. HIV-infection
d. Poliomyelitis
e. Syphilis

80. Heart rate of an adult man is 40/min. This rate is possible due to the following element of the cardiac conduction system:
a. His bundle
b. Purkinjes fibers
c. Sinoatrial node
d. His bundle branches
*e. Atrioventricular node

81. A patient with a history of chronic glomerulonephritis presents with azotemia, oliguria, hypo- and isosthenuria, proteinuri a. What is the leading factor in the pathogenesis of these symptoms development under chronic renal failure?
a. Intensification of glomerular filtration
b. Disturbed permeability of glomerular membranes
c. Intensification of sodium reabsorption
*d. Mass decrease of active nephrons
e. Tubular hyposecretion

82. Such presentations as catarrhal conjunctivitis, pharyngitis, laryngotracheobronchitis, white spots on the buccal mucosa in the region of lower premolar teeth, maculopapular rash on face, body and extremities are typical for the following disease:
*a. Measles
b. Spotted fever
c. Influenza
d. Meningococcal infection
e. Scarlet fever

83. Dwellers of a village noticed mass mortality of rats in some farms. It was suspected that the animals might have died from plague. What postmortal analyses should be conduced in order to establish the causative agent of the infection as soon as possible?
*a. Ring precipitation reaction
b. Passive agglutination reaction
c. Complement-binding reaction
d. Neutralization reaction
e. Agglutination reaction

84. A 50-year-old patient suffers from essential hypertension. After a physical stress he experienced muscle weakness, breathlessness, cyanosis of lips, skin and face. Respiration was accompanied by distinctly heard bubbling rales. What mechanism underlies the development of this syndrome?
a. Cardiac tamponade
b. Chronic left-ventricular failure
c. Chronic right-ventricular failure
*d. Acute left-ventricular failure
e. Collapse

85. A patient was delivered to a hospital after having been exposed to ionizing radiation. He presents with vomiting, anorexia, pain in different region of abdomen, bloody feces, elevation of body temperature, inertness. Such clinical presentations are typical for the following form of acute radiation disease:
a. Combined
b. Cerebral
c. Bone-marrow
*d. Intestinal
e. Toxemic

86. While examining an extracted stomach a researcher revealed that its antral part along the lesser curvature had a deep, roundish, even-edged defect up to 1,5 cm in diameter reaching the myenteron. In the defect floor one could see a dense semitransparent area resembling of a hyaline cartilage. Specify the process observed in the floor of the mucosa defect?
a. General hyalinosis
*b. Local hyalinosis
c. Fibrinoid changes
d. Mucoid swelling
e. Amyloidosis

87. After a fall a patient got unable to extend his knee joint. What muscle is likely to be damaged?
a. Semitendinous
*b. Quadriceps
c. Semimembranous
d. Triceps muscle of calf
e. Biceps muscle of thigh

88. In order to reduce salivation before a stomatological procedure a dentist gave his patient 10 drops of 0,1% solution of atropine sulfate perorally. 30 minutes later the patient started complaining of acute pain in the eyeballs, misty vision, headache, palpitation. These symptoms were eliminated by means of the following drug:
a. Carbacholine
b. Aceclidine
*c. Physostigmine
d. Cytiton
e. Phosphacol

89. An infectious patient manifests sensibilization to penicillin. Which of the following antibiotics is the safest to be applied in this case?
*a. Erythromycin
b. Oxacillin
c. Ampicillin
d. Amoxicillin
e. Bicillin

90. A victim has a trauma resulting from the direct blow to the internal surface of the middle third of shin. What anatomic formation is most likely to be broken?
a. Proximal epiphysis of tibial bone
b. Distal epiphysis of tibial bone
c. Distal epiphysis of fibular bone
*d. Tibial shaft
e. Proximal epiphysis of fibular bone

91. Before the cells can utilize the glucoze, it is first transported from the extracellular space through the plasmatic membrane inside theml. This process is stimulated by the following hormone:
a. Glucagon
*b. Insulin
c. Thyroxin
d. Aldosterone
e. Adrenalin

92. A patient presents with the following motor activity disturbances: tremor, ataxia and asynergia f movements, dysarthri a. The disturbances are most likely to be localized in:
a. Basal ganglions
*b. Cerebellum
c. Medulla oblongata
d. Brainstem
e. Limbic system

93. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a mastication disorder and pain provoked by pulling the jaw backwards. The dentist diagnosed the patient with an inflammation of one of the masticatory muscles. Which muscle is inflamed?
a. Temporal (anterior fibers)
b. Lateral pterygopalatine
c. Masticatory
d. Medial pterygopalatine
*e. Temporal (posterior fibers)

94. A surgeon concluded that the biggest space for examination and surgical procedures on pancreas can be created by dissection of lig. gastrocolicum. It allows to penetrate into the following space of abdominal cavity:
*a. Omental bursa
b. Right lateral canal
c. Pregastric bursa
d. Left lateral canal
e. Hepatic bursa

95. A 35-year-old patient with chronic periodontitis underwent excision of a cyst 3 cm in diameter found at a root of the 15th tooth. Histological examination revealed that it had thin wall formed by mature connective tissue infiltrated by lymphocytes and plasmatic cells. Its internal surface was lined with multilayer pavement epithelium with no signs of keratinization; the cavity contained serous exudat e. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Follicular ameloblastoma
*b. Radicular cyst
c. Primordial cyst
d. Cherubism
e. Follicular cyst

96. As a result of a cold a patient has the abnormal pain and temperature sensitivity of the frontal ⅔ of his tongu e. Which nerve must have been damaged?
*a. Trigeminus
b. Accessory
c. Vagus
d. Glossopharyngeal
e. Sublingual

97. During a brain surgery it was noticed that stimulation of certain zones of cerebral cortex caused tactile and thermal sensations in patient. Which zone was being stimulated?
a. Precentral gyrus
b. Parahippocampal gyrus
c. Cingulate gyrus
d. Superior lateral gyrus
*e. Postcentral gyrus

98. In the process of tooth tissue histogenesis dentin wasnt formed in time for some reasons. What process of further histogenesis will be delayed or will not take place at all?
a. Predentinal space formation
b. Cellular cement formation
c. Acellular cement formation
*d. Enamel formation
e. Pulp formation

99. On examination a male patient was diagnosed with acute radiation dseas e. Laboratory examination revealed abrupt decrease in serotonin found in blood platelets. A likely cause of decrease in serotonin concentration would be metabolic imbalance of the following substance:
a. Tyrosine
*b. 5-oxytryptophane
c. Histidine
d. Phenyl alanine
e. Serine

100. A 45-year-old female patient underwent an excision of 2,5x2 cm large tumour located in the region of submandibular salivary gland. Microscopic examination revealed that it consisted of glandular structures and contained solid epithelial complexes as well as mucoid, chondroid and myxoid foci. Specify this tumour:
a. Salivary gland carcinoma
b. Ameloblastoma
*c. Polymorphous adenoma
d. Osteoclastoma
e. Cementoma

101. It is known that patients with diabetes mellitus are more subject to inflammative processes, they have low regeneration and slower wound healing. What is the reason for this?
a. Intensification of catabolism
b. Accelerated gluconeogenesis
c. Decrease in lipolysis
*d. Decrease in protheosynthesis
e. Increase in lipolysis

102. A 29-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital because of intoxication with carbon monoxid e. Objectively: the patient presents with symptoms of severe hypoxia - evident dyspnea, cyanosis, tachycardi a. What compound is produced as a result of intoxication with carbon monooxide?
a. Methemoglobin
b. Oxyhemoglobin
c. Carbhemoglobin
*d. Carboxyhemoglobin
e. Sulfhemoglobin

103. A patient with obliterating endarteritis underwent ganglionic sympathectomy. What type of arterial hyperaemia should have developed as a result of the surgery?
a. Reactive
*b. Neuroparalytic
c. Functional
d. Metabolic
e. Neurotonic

104. In the second week of being ill wit viral hepatitis a patient presented with sleep disorder, headache, aggressiveness, unbearable skin itch. Objectively: AP drop, decrease in blood coagulation and reflectory activity, bradycardi a. What is the cause of these changes?
a. Hypercholesterolemia
b. Stercobilinemia
c. Urobilinemia
d. Hyperlipemia
*e. Cholemia

105. While examining a blood smear taken form a patient and stained by Romanovskys method a doctor revealed some protozoa and diagnozed the patient with Chagas diseas e. What protozoan is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Toxoplasma gondii
b. Leishmania tropica
c. Trypanosoma brucei
d. Leishmania donovani
*e. Trypanosoma cruzi

106. A patient with diabetes mellitus lapsed into diabetic coma as a result of acid-base disbalanc e. Specify the type of disbalance:
a. Gaseous alkalosis
b. Metabolic alkalosis
c. Non-gaseous alkalosis
*d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Respiratory acidosis

107. Before a tooth extraction a 48-year-old female patient received an injection of diazepam. Anxiolytic effect of this drug can be explained by:
a. M-cholinoreceptor activation
b. beta-adrenoreceptor block
*c. Interaction with benzodiazepine receptors
d. Dopamine receptor block
e. alpha-adrenoreceptor block

108. A victim has a left-sided comminuted fracture of cheekbone accompanied by loss of skin sensitivity above it. What nerve is damaged?
a. Infraorbital
*b. Zygomaticofacial
c. Facial
d. Pes anserinus minor
e. Buccal

109. A patient diagnosed with morphinism has been admitted to the narcological department. A doctor noted a decrease in pharmacological activity of morphine. Repetitive use of a drug may result in tolerance to its effect, and this phenomenon is called:
a. Allergy
b. Antagonism
c. Cumulation
d. Tachyphylaxis
*e. Addiction

110. A 2-day-old baby has yellowish skin and mucous membranes. This might be caused by the temporary lack of the following enzyme:
a. Haem synthetase
b. Sulfotransferase
*c. UDP-glucuronil transferase
d. Hemoxygenase
e. Biliverdine reductase

111. A 60-year-old patient consulted a doctor about retrosternal pain arising immediately after physical exercis e. He was prescribed nitroglycerin. The medication relieved retrosternal pain but the patient got acute headach e. What is the likely mechanism of this side effect?
a. α-adrenoreceptor block
*b. Intracranial pressure rise
c. Inhibited formation of mediators in brain
d. Phosphodiesterase block
e. Reduced accumulation of calcium ions

112. A victim who had been rescued from under the ruins was found to have confused mental state, multiple subcutaneous haemorrhages on his head and neck, small wound on the face. There was a scalping in the posterosuperior parts of head and a significant deformation of head contours. What bones might have been damaged?
*a. Parietal and occipital bone
b. Malar and lacrimal bones
c. Sphenoid bone and mandible
d. Temporal bone and maxilla
e. Frontal and nasal bones

113. In the focus of inflammation the vessels of microvasculature exhibit an increased permeability and hydrodynamic pressure rise. Inter-tissue fluid has an increase in osmotic concentration and dispersity of protein structures. What type of edema will develop in this case?
a. Lymphogenous
b. Hydrodynamic
c. Membranogenic
d. Colloid osmotic
*e. Combined

114. A child has abnormal formation of tooth enamel and dentin as a result of low concentration of calcium ions in bloo d. Such abnormalities might be caused by deficiency of the following hormone:
a. Somatotropic hormone
b. Thyroxin
c. Triiodothyronine
d. Thyrocalcitonin
*e. Parathormone

115. A 49-year-old woman spent a lot of time standing. As a result of it she got leg edem a. What is the most likely cause of the edema?
*a. Increase in hydrostatic pressure of blood in veins
b. Decrease in hydrostatic pressure of blood in veins
c. Increase in systemic arterial pressure
d. Increase in oncotic pressure of blood plasma
e. Decrease in hydrostatic pressure of blood in arteries

116. A 47-year-old female patient was diagnosed with a tumour of the tongue apex. Metastases are likely to spread into the following regional lymph nodes:
a. Occipital
*b. Submandibular
c. Mastoid
d. Parotid
e. Retropharyngeal

117. Purulent discharges of a patient with a mandibulofacial phlegmon contain spheroid microorganisms making S-shaped colonies with golden pigment that produce lecithinase, plasmocoagulase, hemolysin and decompose mannitol under anaerobic conditions. Specify the kind of microorganisms that had caused the suppuration:
*a. S. aureus
b. Str. pyogenes
c. Str. sanguis
d. Str. mutans
e. S. epidermidis

118. A patient was delivered to a hospital with the fracture of mandible and considerable bleeding in the region of fractur e. What artery is likely to be dameged?
a. Superior alveolar artery
*b. Inferior alveolar artery
c. Ascending pharyngeal artery
d. Ascending palatine artery
e. Lingual artery

119. A patient consulted a dentist about the temporomandibular joint arthritis. The dentist administered an ointment containing diclofenac sodium. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Opiate receptor block
*b. Cyclooxigenase inhibition
c. Cyclooxigenase activation
d. Phospholipase inhibition
e. Opiate receptor activation

120. A patient who has been treated for viral hepatitis B developed symptoms of hepatic insufficiency. What changes indicating disorder in protein metabolism are likely to be observed in this case?
a. Absolute hyperalbuminemia
b. Absolute hyperfibrinogenemia
c. Protein rate in blood will stay unchanged
d. Absolute hyperglobulinemia
*e. Absolute hypoalbuminemia

121. After a severe trauma of visceral cranium a patient has a deglutition disorder with food getting to the nasopharynx. This is the result of the following muscles disfunction:
*a. M.levator veli palatini
b. M.stylopharyngeus
c. M.palatoglossus
d. M.genioglossus
e. M.palatopharyngeus

122. After an attack of bronchial asthma a patient had his peripheral blood teste d. What changes can be expected?
a. Lymphocytosis
b. Thrombocytopenia
c. Leukopenia
*d. Eosinophilia
e. Erythrocytosis

123. Among the specific hypocholesterolemic drugs the most effective are those blocking the synthesis of endogenic cholesterol in liver. Which of the below listed drugs has such mechanism of hypocholesterolemic action?
a. Linaethol
*b. Lovastatin
c. Clofibrate
d. Probucol
e. Allilcepum

124. A patient of oral surgery department has developed a purulent complication. Bacteriological analysis of the wound discharge allowed to isolate a culture producing a blue-and-green pigment. Which of the listed microorganisms may be a causative agent of the infection?
*a. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
b. Klebsiella pneumoniae
c. Proteus vulgaris
d. Bacillus subtilis
e. Staphylococcus epidermidis

125. A 32-year-old female patient suffers from gingivitis accompanied by gum hypoxia. What metabolite of carbohydrate metabolism is produced in the periodontium tissues more actively in this case?
a. NADPH-H
*b. Lactate
c. Glycogen
d. Glucose 6-phosphate
e. Ribose 5-phosphate

126. Analysis of a newborns urine revealed phenylpyruvic aci d. Its presence in urine is associated with the following pathology:
a. Tyrosinosis
*b. Phenylketonuria
c. Alkaptonuria
d. Gout
e. Albinism

127. HIV has gp41 and gp120 on its surface interacts with target cells of an organism. Which of the following human lymphocyte antigens is gp120 complementary bound with?
a. CD 8
b. CD 3
c. CD 19
d. CD 28
*e. CD 4

128. A 50-year-old male patient suffers from chronic bronchitis, complains about dyspnea during physical activity, sustained cough with sputum. After examination he was diagnosed with pulmonary emphysem a. This complication is caused by:
a. Decrease in lung perfusion
b. Decrease in alveolar ventilation
c. Ventilation-perfusion disbalance
d. Decrease in lung compliance
*e. Decrease in lung elasticity

129. A man is eating dry foo d. Which salivary glands secrete the largest amount of saliva in this case?
a. Submandibular
b. Palatine
c. Buccal
d. Sublingual
*e. Parotid

130. For infection prevention a patient who underwent appendectomy was prescribed a cephalosporin antibioti c. Antimicrobial activity of these antibiotics is called forth by the disturbance of the following process:
a. Energy metabolism
b. Cholinesterase block
*c. Microbial wall formation
d. Ribosomal protein synthesis
e. Nucleic acid synthesis

131. A 20-year-old patient complains of morbid thirst and huperdiuresis (up to 10 l daily). Glucose concentration in blood is normal but it is absent in urin e. The patient has been diagnosed with diabetes insipidus. What hormonal drug is the most appropriate for management of this disorder?
a. Cortisol
b. Oxytocin
c. Thyroxin
d. Insulin
*e. Vasopressin

132. A shepherd who has tended sheep together with dogs presents with chest pain and blood spitting. X-ray examination revealed a roundish neoplasm in his lungs. Immunological reactions confirmed the provisional diagnosis. Specify the helminth that might have caused this disease:
*a. Echinococcus
b. Broad tapeworm
c. Dwarf tapeworm
d. Armed tapeworm
e. Common liver fluke

133. According to the phenotypic diagnosis a female patient has been provisionally diagnosed with X-chromosome polysomi a. This diagnosis can be confirmed by a cytogenetic metho d. What karyotype will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. 47(ХХХ)
b. 46(XX)
c. 47(XXY)
d. 48(XXYY)
e. 48(XXXY)

134. In course of an experiment a white rat was being stimulated with a stress factor (electric current). The researchers could observe muscle hypononia, arterial hypotension, hypothermi a. What period of general adaptation syndrome is it?
a. -
*b. Shock phase
c. Antishock phase
d. Exhaustion stage
e. Resistance stage

135. A female patient with a tumour of pancreas has developed mechanic jaundice resulting from compression of a bile-excreting duct. Which duct is compressed?
a. Ductus cysticus
b. Ductus hepaticus dexter
c. Ductus hepaticus communis
*d. Ductus choledochus
e. Ductus hepaticus sinister

136. A patient has been admitted to the oral surgery department with a fracture of malar arch. The patient presents with difficult mouth opening. This state is caused by the dysfunction of the following muscle:
a. Digastric
*b. Masticatory
c. Lateral pterygoid
d. Zygomatic
e. Medial pterygoid

137. A male patient consulted a dentist about an acute toothach e. Examination revealed a carious cavity in the upper premolar on the right. The carious cavity reaches the pulp. What is the most likely caries complication causing the toothache?
a. Periodontitis
b. Parodontitis
c. -
d. Tooth erosion
*e. Pulpitis

138. Before the infiltration anaesthesia a patient had been tested for sensitivity to novocain e. The reaction turned out to be positiv e. Which of the below listed drugs can be used for anaesthetization in this case?
a. Procainamide hydrochloride
b. Tetracaine
*c. Lidocaine
d. Trimecaine
e. Anesthezin

139. As a result of a road accident a 26-year-old man is in the torpid phase of shock. Blood count: leukocytes - 3,2×109/l. What is the leading mechanism of leukopenia development?
*a. Leukocyte redistribution in the bloodstream
b. Increased excretion of the leukocytes from the organism
c. Leukocyte destruction in the hematopietic organs
d. Leukopoiesis inhibition
e. Faulty release of mature leukocytes from the bone marrow into the blood

140. In order to anaesthetize superior incisors an anaesthetic should be injected in the region of the incisive foramen. What nerve is located in this place?
a. Rr.nasales posteriores inferiores
b. N.pharyngeus
c. Nn.palatini minores
d. N.palatinus major
*e. N.nasopalatinus

141. A histological specimen shows an extraembryonic organ in form of a vesicle linked to the entodermal canal. Its wall is lined with epithelium, exteriorly it is made up by connective tissue. In the early stages of embryogenesis this organ has hematopoietic function. Name this organ:
a. Amnion
b. Placenta
*c. Vitelline sac
d. Umbillical cord
e. Allantois

142. Histological study of two different tooth specimens revealed acellular and cellular cement, respectively. The second specimen comes from the following tooth part:
a. The border between root and crown
*b. Root apex
c. Superior subgingival part
d. Dental cervix
e. Tooth crown

143. Power inputs of a man are being measured on an empty stomach, in the lying position, at physical and psychic rest, under comfortable temperature. The highest power inputs will be ovserved in the following daypart:
a. 7-8 a.m
b. 10-12 a.m
c. 8-12 p.m
*d. 5-6 p.m
e. 3-4 a.m

144. After a long training session a sportsman has developed fatigue accompanied by abrupt performance decrement. What link of the reflex arch was the fatigue initiated in?
a. Efferent conductor
b. Muscles
*c. Nerve centres
d. Afferent conductor
e. Receptors

145. A patient suffers from hypertension and atherosclerosis. He should reduce the consumption of the folowing lipide:
a. Phosphatidyl serine
b. Lecithin
c. Oleic acid
d. Monooleate glyceride
*e. Cholesterol

146. A 29-year-old female patient complains of gingival haemorrhage and lower front teeth mobility she has been experiencing for the last 6 months. Objectively: the mucous membrane in the region of the front lower teeth is hyperemized, edematic, bleeds when touched. From under the gingival mucosa foul-smelling pus is discharged, tooth roots are exposed. The patient has been diagnosed with the III stage of parodontitis. What factor allowed to establish the stage of disease progress?
a. Mucosa inflammation
b. Disease duration
*c. Tooth root exposure
d. Nature of purulent discharge
e. Teeth mobility

147. Indirect calorimetry allowed to establish that a 30-year-old male patient had a 30% decrease in basal metabolic rat e. This might be caused by the reduced concentration of the following hormones in blood plasma:
a. Somatoliberin, somatostatin
b. Catecholamines
*c. Triiodothyronine, tetraiodothyronine
d. Glucocorticoids
e. Thyrocalcitonin, parathormone

148. It is known that people who permanently live in highland have an increased concentration of erythrocytes per each blood volume unit. Owing to this fact blood can optimally fulfil the following function:
a. Maintenance of acid-base balance
b. Amino acid transport
c. Maintenance of ionic equilibrium
d. Haemostasis participation
*e. Gas transport

149. In course of an experiment thalamocortical tracts of an experimental animal were cut through. The animal didnt lose the following sensations:
a. Exteroceptive
b. Nociceptive
*c. Olfactory
d. Visual
e. Auditory

150. A man is in the state of rest. He has been forcing himself to breath deeply and frequently for 3-4 minutes. What effect will it have upon acid-bace balance of the organism?
a. Respiratory acidosis
b. There will be no change in acid-base balance
*c. Respiratory alkalosis
d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Metabolic alkalosis

151. During postembryonal haemopoiesis in the red bone marrow the cells of one of the cellular differons demonstrate a gradual decrease in cytoplasmic basophilia as well as an increase in oxyphilia, the nucleus is being forced out. Such morphological changes are typical for the following haemopoiesis type:
*a. Erythropoiesis
b. Basophil cytopoiesis
c. Neutrophil cytopoiesis
d. Lymphopoiesis
e. Eosinophil cytopoiesis

152. Autopsy of a man, who died from typhoid fever on the 5th day of disease, revealed the following changes: aggregated follicles of ileum were enlarged and plethoric; they protruded over the mucous membrane, and multiple sulci and convolutions could be seen on their surfac e. Histological examinatio revealed plethority and edema of tissues, presense of granulomas composed of big cells with light cytoplasm and containing typhoid bacilli. These local changes are compliant with the following period of typhoid fever:
a. Stage of ulcer healing
b. Stage of ulceration
c. Stage of necrosis
d. Stage of clean ulcers
*e. Stage of medullary swelling

153. During manipulations aimed at treatment of mandible dislocation a physician should pay particular attention to a muscle that pulls a capsule and interarticular disc of temporomandibular articulation exteriorly. What muscle is it?
a. M. pterygoideus medialis
*b. M. pterygoideus lateralis
c. M. masseter
d. M. mylohyoideus
e. M. temporalis

154. A 25-year-old man has a saucer-shaped ulcer 0,8 cm in diameter on the upper left surface of tongu e. The ulcers floor and edges are dense with smooth and glistening surface, painless on palpation. Microscopical examination of the ulcer floor revealed an infiltration consisting of lymphoid, plasmatic and epithelioid cells with a lot of vessels affected by endovasculitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis
*b. Primary syphilis
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Decubital ulcer
e. Settons aphtha

155. A 70-year-old patient is diagnosed with brainstem haemorrhag e. Examination revealed increased tonus of flexor muscles accompanied by decreased tonus of extensor muscles. Such changes in muscle tonus can be explained by the irritation of the following brain structures:
a. Vestibular nuclei
*b. Red nuclei
c. Black substance
d. Reticular formation
e. Quadrigeminal plate

156. Autopsy of a 42-year-old man revealed a distinctly dilated lumen of small intestine filled with rice-water-like liqui d. The intestine wall was edematic with lots of petechial haemorrhages on the mucos a. What infectious disease is the described enteritis typical for?
a. Typhoid fever
*b. Cholera
c. Dysentery
d. Amebiasis
e. Salmonellosis

157. While under barbituric anaesthesia a 65-year-old male patient developed respiratory inhibition. Anesthesiologist made him a 10 ml intravenous injection of 0,5% bemegride solution. The patients condition got better, the pulmonary ventilation volume increase d. What phenomenon underlies the interaction of these medivcations?
a. Indirect synergism
b. Indirect antagonism
*c. Direct antagonism
d. Direct synergism
e. Unilateral antagonism

158. A patient complains of skin itch, especially between fingers, in the inguinal creases, on the lower abdomen. Examination of these regions revealed there some small vesicles. Laboratory diagnostics allowed to establish that this condition had been caused by a representative of Arthropoda. Specify the disease caused by this arthropod:
a. Demodicosis
*b. Scabies
c. Pediculosis
d. Dermatotropic leishmaniasis
e. Myiasis

159. Premolar teeth absence is inherited as an autosomal dominant factor. Parents with normal dental system gave birh to a child with lacking premolar teeth. What is the probability of giving birth to children without this pathology (%) in this family?
*a. 75%
b. 50%
c. 25%
d. 0%
e. 12,5%

160. A patient with a tumour of thymus presents with cyanosis, expansion of subcutaneous venous network and soft tissue edema of face, neck, upper trunk and upper extremities. What vein is compressed by the tumour?
a. Subclavicular vein
b. Exterior jugular vein
c. Anterior jugular vein
*d. Precava
e. Interior jugular vein

161. A patient has a lacrimal gland secretory dysfunction induced by a disorder of its vegetative innervation. Which of the ganglia of vegetative nervous system gives it postganglionic parasympathetic fibers?
a. Ganglion ciliare
b. Ganglion submandibulare
c. Ganglion oticum
d. -
*e. Ganglion pterygopalatinum

162. An emotional stress induces activation of hormone-sensitive triglyceride lipase in the adipocytes. What secondary mediator takes part in this process?
a. cGMP
b. AMP
c. Ca2+ ions
*d. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
e. Diacylglycerol

163. A child has an acute renal failur e. What biochemical factor found in saliva can confirm this diagnosis?
*a. Increase in urea concentration
b. Increase in concentration of higher fatty acids
c. Increase in glucose concentration
d. Decrease in nucleic acid concentration
e. Decrease in glucose concentration

164. A patient with a serious trauma of his upper extremity has an impaired regeneration of cartilaginous tissue as a result of a damage done to poorly differentiated cells of cartilage lineage. What cells has been damaged?
*a. The cells of the internal perichondrium
b. The cells of the young cartilage
c. The cells coming from the blood vessels
d. The cells of the external perichondrium
e. The cells constituting isogenic groups

165. A patient sufferinf from glomerulonephritis was found to have anasarca, AP of 185/105 mm Hg, anaemia, leukocytosis, hyperazotemia, hypoproteinemi a. What factor indicates that glomerulonephritis has been complicated by the nephrotic syndrome?
a. Leukocytosis
b. Anaemia
*c. Hypoproteinemia
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Hyperazotemia

166. Examination of a bronchial tissue sample revealed atrophy of mucous membrane, cystic degeneration of glands, focal metaplastic changes of lining prismatic epithelial cells into multilayer squamous cells; increase in goblet cell number; in some parts of bronchial wall and especially in the mucous membrane there was marked cellular inflammatory infiltration and growth of granulation tissue bulging into the bronchial lumen in form of a polyp. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Interstitial pneumonia
b. Acute bronchitis
*c. Chronic bronchitis
d. Bronchopneumonia
e. Lobar pneumonia

167. A married couple complains of inability to have children. Examination revealed that the husband had his spermatogenetic epithelium of a testicle damaged, which caused absence of spermatozoons in his sperm and infertility as a result. Which part of testicle was damaged?
a. Efferent ducts
b. Network of testis
c. Straight seminiferois tubules
d. Epididymis ducts
*e. Convoluted seminiferois tubules

168. A patient underwent the extraction of his isuperior medial incisor. It is supplied with blood by the branches of the following artery:
a. A.palatina descendens
b. A.alveolaris inferior
c. A.sphenopalatina
d. A.buccalis
*e. A.infraorbitalis

169. A cell with vitamin E deficit had been affected by ionizing radiation. This induced an intensified release of hydrolytic enzymes into the cytoplasm and thus a complete destruction of intracellular structures - autolysis. What organellas caused this phenomenon?
*a. Lysosomes
b. Golgi complex
c. Endoplasmic reticulum
d. Mitochondrions
e. Microbodies

170. Cystinuria in humans shows itself in form of cystine stones in kidneys (homozygotes) or else an increased rate of cystine in urine (heterozygotes). Cystinuria is a monogenic disease. Specify the type of interaction between cystinuria genes and normal rate of cystine in urine:
a. Epistasis
*b. Semidominance
c. Complete dominance
d. Complementarity
e. Codomination

171. A 40-year-old male patient had a tumour-like formation 8x7 cm large on his neck. A surgeon removed it only partially because of close connection with large vessels. Microscopical examination revealed marked cellular and tissue atypism, lipoblast-type cells in different stages of maturity, with polymorphism and nuclear hyperchromia, pathological mitoses, necrosis foci. Specify the histological form of the tumour:
a. Lipoma
*b. Liposarcoma
c. Hibernoma
d. Fibroma
e. Fibrosarcoma

172. 10 years ago a patient underwent extraction of his right kidney on account of a tumour. After that the volume of his left tumour grew by 50%. What process was developed in the kidney?
a. Pseudohypertrophy
b. Functional hypertrophy
c. Hypertrophic enlargement
*d. Vicarious hypertrophy
e. Neurohumoral hypertrophy

173. A cell has been treated with a substance that blocks nucleotide phosphorilation in the mitochondrions. What process of cell activity will be disturbed in the first place?
a. Integration of functional protein molecules
b. Synthesis of mitochondrial proteins
c. Fragmentation of big mitochondrions into lesser ones
d. Oxidative phosphorilation
*e. ATP resynthesis

174. A viral process caused a considerable sclerosis of parenchyma of submandibular salivary glands as well as reduced production of biologically active hormonal substances. This resulted in the impairment of oral mucosa regeneration. The reason for it is an insufficient concentration of the following saliva component:
a. Lysozyme
*b. Epithelial growth factor
c. Parotin
d. Thymocyte-transforming factor
e. Insulin-like growth factor

175. Obliterating atherosclerosis causes changes in the vessels of the lower extermities. A histological specimen of such a vessel evidently presents both internal and external elastic membranes, middle membrane contains a lot of myocytes. What vessel is affected in case of this disease?
*a. Artery of muscular type
b. Lymph node
c. Artery of elastic type
d. Artery of mixed type
e. Vein with strongly developed muscles

176. A nurse accidentally injected a nearly double dose of insulin to a patient with diabetes mellitus. The patient lapsed into a hypoglycemic com a. What drug should be injected in order to help him out of coma?
a. Noradrenaline
*b. Glucose
c. Lidase
d. Insulin
e. Somatotropin

177. A boy has fallen down from a tre e. Now he finds it difficult to abduct his arm into horizontal position. Which muscle is most likely to be injured?
a. M.supinator
*b. M.deltoideus
c. M.anconeus
d. M.triceps brachii
e. M.coracobrachialis

178. An electronic microphotography shows a renal corpuscle with dendritic cells between the capillaries of choroid glomus. Their cytoplasm contains a large number of filaments. Specify these cells:
a. Adventitional
b. Juxtaglomerular
*c. Mesangial
d. Fibroblasts
e. Juxtavascular

179. A 12-year-old child presents with intolerance to some foodstuffs. Their consumption causes an allergic reaction in form of itching skin eruption. What antihistaminic drug should be administered that wont have any negative impact on the childs school studies (with no sleepiness effect)?
*a. Loratadine
b. Aminophylline
c. Mesatonum
d. Sodium diclofenac
e. Dimedrol

180. A man with a long-term history of bronchial asthma died from asphyxi a. Histological examination of his lungs revealed that the lumens of bronchioles and minor bronchi contained a lot of mucus with some eosinophils. There was also sclerosis of interalveolar septa, dilatation of alveole lumens. What mechanism accounts for the development of hypersensitivity reaction?
a. Cytotoxic reaction
b. Lymphocyte-mediated cytolysis
c. Granulomatosis
*d. Reagine reaction
e. Immune complex reaction

181. A mother consulted a pediatrician about small white filiform worms about 1 cm long with pointed ends that she found on her childs underwear. According to the mother, the child sleeps badly, grits his teeth, scrathes the area of anus. Specify the helminth type:
a. Trichuris
b. Armed tapeworm
*c. Pinworm
d. Hookworm
e. Ascarid

182. A patient under test was subjected to a moderate physical stress. His minute blood volume amounted 10 l/min. What blood volume was pumped through his lung vessels every minute?
a. 5 l/min
b. 4 l/min
*c. 10 l/min
d. 6 l/min
e. 7 l/min

183. After severe viral hepatitis a 4-year-old boy presents with vommiting, occasional loss of consciousness, convulsions. Blood test revealed hyperammoniemia. Such condition is caused by a disorder of the following biochemical hepatic process:
*a. Disorder of ammonia neutralization
b. Inhibition of transamination enzymes
c. Activation of amino acid decarboxylation
d. Disorder of biogenic amines neutralization
e. Protein synthesis inhibition

184. An embryo had its external layer of dental saccule experimentally destroyed. What dental structure wont have any further development?
*a. Periodontium
b. Dentin
c. Pulp
d. Enamel
e. Cement

185. An inflammation is characterized by the dilatation of blood capillaries in the region of injury, reduced circulation, increased permeability of vessel walls. What cells play the main part in the development of these changes?
a. Plasmocytes
b. Eosinophils
c. Fibroblasts
*d. Tissue basophils
e. Macrophages

186. On the 2-3 day after stomach resection a patient is still experiencing a failure of intestinal peristalsis. In order to stimulate the motility of gastrointestinal tract the following drug should be administered:
*a. Proserin
b. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
c. Atropine sulphate
d. Prazosin
e. Cyclodolum

187. A 65-year-old patient with chronic heart failure has been taking digitoxin in self-administered dosages for a long tim e. She was admitted to the hospital for general health aggravation, arrhythmia, nausea, reduced diuresis, insomni a. What is the primary action to be taken?
a. To reduce digitoxin dosage
b. To administer strophanthine intravenously
c. To administer digoxin
*d. To withhold digitoxin
e. To give an intravenous injection of calcium gluconate solution

188. Elderly people often complain of joint pain that can be associated with age-related changes of tissue covering the joint surface. What tissue is it?
a. Connective tissue proper
*b. Hyaline cartilage
c. Epithelial
d. Bone tissue
e. Elastic cartilage

189. There is a strict time limit for people to stay at a height of 8000 m above sea level without oxigen cyllinders. Specify the life-limiting factor in this case:
a. Humidity rate
b. Rate of ultraviolet radiation
c. Temperature
d. Earth gravity
*e. Partial pressure of oxygen in air

190. During an acute experiment some of diluted solution of hydrochloric acid was injected into the duodenal cavity of an experimental animal. This will result in hypersecretion of the following hormone:
a. Histamine
*b. Secretin
c. Motilin
d. Neurotensin
e. Gastrin

191. Microscopic examination of a parenchymatous organ revealed that its epithelial cords formed glomerular, fascicular and reticular zones. The central part of the organ was presented by accumulations of chromaffin cells. Specify this organ:
a. Hypophysis
b. Thyroid gland
c. Liver
d. Epiphysis
*e. Adrenal gland

192. A section of pulmonary tissue has a large-meshed look due to the sacciform and cylindric dilatation of the bronchi; microscopical examination of the bronchial wall reveals a leucocytal infiltration with neutrophil prevalence; elastic, muscle fibers as well as cartilage plates are partly destroyed and replaced by the connective tissue. The adjacent pulmonary tissue has inflammation foci, fibrosis areas, vascular sclerosis and signs of emphysema. The right ventricle hypertrophy is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Multiple bronchiectasis
b. Pneumofibrosis
c. Interstitial pneumonia
d. Pulmonary emphysema
e. Chronic bronchitis

193. A 1,7-year-old child with a developmental delay and manifestations of self-agression has the concentration of uric acid in blood at the rate of 1,96 millimole/l. What metabolic disoder is this typical for?
a. Podagra
b. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
c. Cushings basophilism
d. Gierkes disease
*e. Lesch-Nyhan syndrome

194. Two weeks after haemotransfusion a patient has developed fever. What protozoal disease can be suspected?
a. Trypanosomiasis
b. Toxoplasmosis
c. Amebiasis
d. Leishmaniasis
*e. Malaria

195. Examination of a kidney tissue sampling revealed leukocyte infiltration of interstitial tissue; miliary abscesses; dystrophic tubules filled with desquamated epithelium and leukocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nephrolithiasis
b. Necrotic nephrosis
*c. Pyelonephritis
d. Pyelitis
e. Glomerulonephritis

196. A veterenary attendant working at a cattle farm complains of joint pain, fever, indisposition and sweating at nighttime that he has been experiencing for a month. Giving the regard to such presentations and occupational history the doctor suspected brucellosis. What material taken from this patient is to be analyzed in a common microbiological laboratory?
a. Feces
b. Urine
c. Vomit mass
*d. Blood serum
e. Spinal fluid

197. After a tourniquet application a patient was found to have petechial haemorrhages. The reason for it is the dysfunction of the following cells:
*a. Platelets
b. Neutrophils
c. Eosinophils
d. Monocytes
e. Lymphocytes

198. A patient has a trauma of sternocleidomastoid muscle. This caused a decrease in value of the following indicator of external respiration:
a. Expiratory reserve volume
b. Residual volume
*c. Inspiratory reserve volume
d. Functional residual lung capacity
e. Respiratory capacity

199. A month after a serious operation a 38-year-old patient has recovered and has now positive nitrogen balanc e. Urine of this patient may be found to have low concentration of the following nitrogen-containing substance:
a. Galactose
b. Lactate
*c. Urea
d. 17-ketosteroids
e. Stercobilinogen

200. During a visit to a dentist a patient has developed collapse. What drug can be applied to manage this situation?
a. Strophanthine
b. Seduxen
*c. Mesaton
d. Propranolol
e. Nitroglycerine

