1. A child has abnormal formation of tooth enamel and dentin as a result of low concentration of calcium ions in blood. Such abnormalities might be caused by deficiency of the following hormone:
a. Somatotropic hormone
b. Triiodothyronine
c. Thyroxin
d. Thyrocalcitonin
*e. Parathormone

2. A patient at the early stage of diabetes mellitus was found to have polyuria. What is its cause?
a. Ketonemia
b. Hypercholesterolemia
c. Hypocholesterolemia
d. Hyperkaliemia
*e. Hyperglycemia

3. A 39-year-old man who had been operated for the stomach ulcer died 7 days after the surgery. Autopsy revealed that peritoneal leaves were dull, plethoric, covered with massive yellow-greenish films, the peritoneal cavity contained for about 300 ml of thick yellow-greenish liquid. What pathologic process was revealed in the peritoneal cavity?
a. Fibrinous serous peritonitis
b. Serous peritonitis
*c. Fibrinous suppurative peritonitis
d. Peritoneal commissures
e. Fibrinous haemorrhagic peritonitis

4. Autopsy of a 75-year-old patient who had been suffering from disseminated atherosclerosis and died under chronic cardiac failure revealed constriction and deformation of coronary arteries, tuberous intima whose section appeared to be white and petrosal. Specify the stage of atherosclerosis morphogenesis:
a. Lipoidosis
b. Liposclerosis
c. Bilipid
d. Atheromatosis
*e. Atherocalcinosis

5. Examination of duodenal contents revealed some pyriform protozoa with twin nuclei and four pairs of flagella. There were two supporting filaments between the nuclei and a suctorial disc on the ventral side. What representative of protozoa was revealed in this patient?
a. Trypanosome
b. Leishmania
*c. Lamblia
d. Toxoplasma
e. Intestinal trichomonad

6. Trauma of occipital region of head resulted in crack fracture in the region of transverse sinus. What part of occipital bone is damaged?
a. Condyle
b. Right lateral
c. Left lateral
d. Proximal
*e. Squama

7. A 12-year-old child presents with intolerance to some foodstuffs. Their consumption causes an allergic reaction in form of itching skin eruption. What antihistaminic drug should be administered that wont have any negative impact on the childs school studies (with no sleepiness effect)?
*a. Loratadine
b. Dimedrol
c. Aminophylline
d. Mesatonum
e. Sodium diclofenac

8. In order to fix dislocated mandible it is necessary to pull it down. What anatomic structure requires this action?
*a. Articulate tubercule of temporal bone
b. Mandibular incisure
c. Condylar process of mandible
d. Coronal process of mandible
e. Mandibular fossa of temporal bone

9. A patient with epilepsy and depressive reaction has been administered a drug that reduced epilepsy manifestations and improved the patients psychic condition
a. Phenobarbital
b. Ethosuxemide
c. Phenytoin
*d. Sodium valproate
e. Amitriptyline

10. Macroscopic examination of lung tissue revealed areas of high airiness with small bubbles, histological examination revealed thinning and rupture of alveolar septa accompanied by formation of large diversiform cavities. What disease was revealed in a lung?
*a. Pulmonary emphysema
b. Cavernous tuberculosis
c. Chronic bronchitis
d. Fibrosing alveolitis
e. Multiple bronchiectasis

11. Harmful stimulations of tooth tissues resulted in formation of denticle structures along the peripheral zone of pulp. This phenomenon induces the following risk for the tooth:
a. Loss of enamel regenerability
b. Loss of pulp regenerability
c. Loss of tooth innervation
d. Loss of cement regenerability
*e. Loss of dentine regenerability

12. Before the cells can utilize the glucoze, it is first transported from the extracellular space through the plasmatic membrane inside theml. This process is stimulated by the following hormone:
*a. Insulin
b. Thyroxin
c. Adrenalin
d. Glucagon
e. Aldosterone

13. On examination a male patient was diagnosed with acute radiation dsease. Laboratory examination revealed abrupt decrease in serotonin found in blood platelets. A likely cause of decrease in serotonin concentration would be metabolic imbalance of the following substance:
a. Tyrosine
b. Serine
c. Histidine
d. Phenyl alanine
*e. 5-oxytryptophane

14. Sdudying the mitotic cycle phases of an onion root the researchers revealed a cell with chromosomes lying in equatorial plane in form of a star. What phase of mitosis is it?
*a. Metaphase
b. Interphase
c. Anaphase
d. Prophase
e. Telophase

15. A 65-year-old patient with chronic heart failure has been taking digitoxin in self-administered dosages for a long time. She was admitted to the hospital for general health aggravation, arrhythmia, nausea, reduced diuresis, insomnia. What is the primary action to be taken?
*a. To withhold digitoxin
b. To administer strophanthine intravenously
c. To give an intravenous injection of calcium gluconate solution
d. To reduce digitoxin dosage
e. To administer digoxin

16. It is required to anaesthetize the right lower molars. The proper injection site for the conduction anaesthesia is:
a. The region of the right mental foramen
b. The gums to the right of mandible
c. The region of suborbital foramen
d. The region of the oval foramen
*e. The region of the right mandibular foramen

17. Deficiency of linoleic and linolenic acids in an organism induces skin damages, hair loss, slow wound healing, thrombocytopenia, low resistance to infectious diseases. These symptoms are most likely to be caused by the disturbed synthesis of the following substances:
a. Catecholamines
b. Corticosteroids
c. Interleukins
*d. Eicosanoids
e. Interferons

18. A patient presents with dysfunction of cerebral cortex accompanied by epileptic seizures. He has been administered a biogenic amine synthetized from glutamate and responsible for central inhibition. What substance is it?
*a. Gamma-amino butyric acid
b. Serotonin
c. Histamine
d. Acetylcholine
e. Dopamine

19. After the traumatic tooth extraction a patient is complaining of acute, dull, poorly-localized pain in gingiva, body temperature rise up to 37,5oC. The patient has been diagnosed with alveolitis. Specify the kind of pain in this patient:
*a. Protopathic
b. Heterotopic
c. Visceral
d. Epicritic
e. Phantom

20. The immunoblot detected gp120 protein in the blood serum. This protein is typical for the following disease:
a. Poliomyelitis
*b. HIV-infection
c. Virus B hepatitis
d. Syphilis
e. Tuberculosis

21. A child presents with body shortness, mental deficiency, mongoloid palpebral fissures, epicanthal fold, enlarged grooved tongue protruding from the mouth, high palate, maldentition, diastema, cross striation of lips. What hereditary disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Edwards syndrome
*b. Down syndrome
c. Pataus syndrome
d. Klinefelters syndrome
e. Turners syndrome

22. Microelectrode technique allowed to register a potential following "all-or-none" law and being able of undecremental spreading. Specify this potential:
a. Receptor potential
*b. Action potential
c. Inhibitory postsynaptic potential
d. Excitatory postsynaptic potential
e. Rest potential

23. A patient has myocardial infarction with thrombosis of the left coronary artery. What pharmocological preparation group should be used to reestablish blood flow?
a. Narcotic analgesics
b. beta-adrenergic blockers
c. Glucocorticoids
d. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
*e. Fibrinolysis activators

24. Microspecimen of a childs finger skin reveals subnormal development of epidermis. What embryonic leaf was damaged in course of development?
a. Mesoderm
b. Entoderm
*c. Ectoderm
d. Ectomesenchyma
e. Mesenchyma

25. A woman who had taken alcohols during her pregnancy had a child with cleft palate and upper lip. These presentations are indicative of some chromosomal anomalies. What process do they result from?
a. Carcinogenesis
b. Mutagenesis
c. Phylogenesis
d. Ontogenesis
*e. Teratogenesis

26. A 55-year-old man had been suffering from chronic glomerulonephritis. He died from chronic renal failure. Macroscopical examination revealed on the surface of epicardium and pericardium some greyish-white villous depositions. After their removal dilated and plethoric vessels were uncovered. What process took place in the pericardium?
a. Haemorrhagic inflammation
b. Arterial hyperemia
*c. Fibrinous inflammation
d. Organization
e. Proliferative inflammation

27. A 60-year-old patient was found to have a dysfunction of main digestive enzyme of saliva. This causes the disturbance of primary hydrolysis of:
*a. Carbohydrates
b. Cellulose
c. Proteins
d. Lactose
e. Fats

28. A patient with a trigeminus inflammation has been suffering from progressing parodontitis for the last few years. What is the leading factor in the parodontitis development in this case?
a. Hypoactivity of leukocytic elastase
b. Low immunoglobulin production
*c. Neurodystrophical changes in parodentium
d. Hypoactivity of kallicrein-kinin system
e. Increase of vagus tonus

29. A patient has roundish ulcers on his face, inflammation and enlargement of lymph nodes. These symptoms turned up as a result of mosquito bites. Laboratory examination of discharge from the ulcers revealed unicellular aflagellar organisms. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Dermatotropic leishmaniasis
b. Scabies
c. Myasis
d. Toxoplasmosis
e. Trypanosomiasis

30. The value of basal metabolism of a man under examination exceeds the due value by 8%. This means that the man has the following intensity of energy metabolism processes:
*a. Normal
b. Considerably decreased
c. Moderately decreased
d. Considerably increased
e. Moderately increased

31. In course of an experiment researchers stimulate a branch of a sympathetic nerve that innervates heart. What changes in cardiac activity should be registered?
a. Increase in arterial pressure
b. Increase in heart force
c. Increase in heart rate
d. Decrease in heart force
*e. Increase in heart rate and heart force

32. A 60-year-old patient has problems with formation and moving of food mass, it disturbs eating process. His tongue is stiff, speaking is impossible. What nerve is damaged?
*a. XII
b. VII
c. XI
d. IX
e. V

33. For the purpose of disinfection of nonmetallic surgical instruments the formaldehyde solution was used. What group does this anticeptic preparation belong to according to its chemical structure?
a. Halogenated compounds
b. Alcohols
c. Detergents
*d. Aliphatics
e. Aromatics

34. A child with renal insufficiency exhibits delayed teeth eruption. This is most likely caused by the abnormal formation of the following substance:
a. Glycocyamine
b. Hydroxylysine
*c. 1,25 (OH)2D3
d. Glutamate
e. ?-ketoglutarate

35. A 67-year-old patient complains of periodic heart ache, dyspnea during light physical activities. ECG reveals extraordinary contractions of heart ventricles. Such arrhythmia is called:
a. Bradycardia
b. Flutter
*c. Extrasystole
d. Tachycardia
e. Fibrillation

36. Autopsy of a man who had tuberculosis revealed a 3x2 cm large cavity in the superior lobe of the right lung. The cavity was interconnected with a bronchus, its wall was dense and consisted of three layers: the internal layer was pyogenic, the middle layer was made by tuberculous granulation tissue and the external one was made by connective tissue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal tuberculosis
b. Fibrous focal tuberculosis
c. Tuberculoma
*d. Fibrous cavernous tuberculosis
e. Acute cavernous tuberculosis

37. Preventive examination of a 55-year-old patient revealed type II diabetes mellitus. An endocrinologist revealed an increase in body weight and liver enlargement. The man is non-smoker and doesnt abuse alcohol but likes to have a good meal. Histological examination by means of diagnostic liver puncture revealed that the hepatocytes were enlarged mostly on the lobule periphery, their cytoplasm had transparent vacuoles showing positive reaction with sudan III. What liver pathology was revealed?
a. Alcohol hepatitis
b. Chronic viral hepatitis
c. Acute viral hepatitis
d. Portal liver cirrhosis
*e. Fatty hepatosis

38. A patient presents with the following motor activity disturbances: tremor, ataxia and asynergia movements, dysarthria. The disturbances are most likely to be localized in:
a. Brainstem
b. Limbic system
c. Basal ganglions
*d. Cerebellum
e. Medulla oblongata

39. Examination of a patient revealed that dental hypoplasia was caused by hypovitaminosis of vitamins A and D. These vitamins were administered perorally but they didnt have any medicinal effect. What is the probable cause of disturbed vitamin assimilation?
a. Hyperchlorhydria
b. Achlorhydria
c. Achylia
d. Hypochlorhydria
*e. Bile acid deficiency

40. A 30-year-old comatous patient with type I diabetes mellitus had been admitted to a hospital. Laboratory tests revealed hyperglycemia, ketonemia. Which of the following metabolic disorders might be found in this patient?
*a. Metabolic acidosis
b. Normal acid-base state
c. Respiratory alkalosis
d. Respiratory acidosis
e. Metabolic alkalosis

41. A patient consulted a dentist about the temporomandibular joint arthritis. The dentist administered an ointment containing diclofenac sodium. What is its mechanism of action?
a. Opiate receptor block
b. Opiate receptor activation
*c. Cyclooxigenase inhibition
d. Phospholipase inhibition
e. Cyclooxigenase activation

42. Morphological examination of an amputated gangrenous extremity revealed that the lumen of femoral artery was constricted due to stony, partly ulcerated plaques with obturating thrombi. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atherosclerosis
b. Non-specific aortoartheriitis
c. Nodular periarthritis
d. Obliterating thromboangiitis
e. Obliterating endartheriitis

43. Wound healing is accompanied by the development of a connective tissue cicatrice which is formed on the site of the tissue defect. What cells are responsible for this process?
*a. Fibroblasts
b. Fibrocytes
c. Macrophages
d. Mastocytes
e. Melanocytes

44. After a tourniquet application a patient was found to have petechial haemorrhages. The reason for it is the dysfunction of the following cells:
a. Eosinophils
*b. Platelets
c. Monocytes
d. Neutrophils
e. Lymphocytes

45. After a trauma of soft tissues in the region of the posterior sorface of medial condyle of humerus a patient has got a skin prickle of medial forearm surface. Which of the listed nerves is located in the affected region?
a. N.musculocutaneu
b. N.radialis
c. N.subscapularis
*d. N.ulnaris
e. N.dorsalis scapularis

46. As a result of a development anomaly a newborn has malformation of major salivary glands. This anomaly is caused by the damage of the following embryonal structure:
a. Splanchnotom
b. Mesenchyme
c. Somites
*d. Ectoderm
e. Entoderm

47. A 5-month-old boy was hospitalized for tonic convulsions. He has a life-time history of this disease. Examination revealed coarse hair, thinned and fragile nails, pale and dry skin. In blood: calcium - 1,5 millimole/l, phosphor - 1,9 millimole/l. These changes are associated with:
a. Hypothyroidism
b. Hyperparathyroidism
c. Hyperaldosteronism
d. Hypoaldosteronism
*e. Hypoparathyroidism

48. A 32-year-old patient who lives in the countryside consulted a doctor about a painful swelling and a fistula in the submandibular region. Examination revealed an infiltration with a fistula discharging thick pus and containing white granules. On dissection the infiltration tissues turned out to be dense, yellow-green and had honeycomb structure because of multiple abscesses. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Submandibular abscess
b. Tuberculosis
*c. Actinomycosis
d. Syphilis
e. Lepra

49. A patient suffering from non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus was prescribed glibenclamid internally. What is the mechanism of its hypoglycemic action?
a. It inhibits gluconeogenesis in liver
b. It intensifies utilization of glucose by peripheral tissues
c. It inhibits alpha glucosidase and polysaccharide breakdown
d. It inhibits glucose absorption in the bowels
*e. It stimulates generation of endogenous insulin by beta cells

50. A worker of a cattle farm consulted a surgeon about fever up to 40oC, headache, weakness. Objective examination of his back revealed hyperaemia and a dark red infiltration up to 5 cm in diameter with black bottom in the centre and some pustules. What disease are these presentations typical for?
a. Plaque
b. Abscess
c. Tularemia
*d. Anthrax
e. Furuncle

51. A patient was delivered to a hospital after having been exposed to ionizing radiation. He presents with vomiting, anorexia, pain in different region of abdomen, bloody feces, elevation of body temperature, inertness. Such clinical presentations are typical for the following form of acute radiation disease:
a. Toxemic
b. Bone-marrow
*c. Intestinal
d. Combined
e. Cerebral

52. A histological specimen of ovary cortex shows a follicle with a large cavity. The first-order ovocyte is located in the region of cumulus oophorus, it is surrounded by transparent zone and radiate crown. Specify the type of follicle:
a. Primary
b. Atertiary
c. Primordial
d. Secondary
*e. Tertiary

53. Examination of a 30-year-old mans mandible revealed in the region of his molar a dense tumour-like formation that significantly deformed the mandible. Here and there the formation wasnt fully detached from the bone tissue. Microscopical examination of a tissue sampling revealed that stroma had some cords and follicles with odontogenous cylindric epithelial cells in peripheria and stellate cells resembling of the enamel oragan pulp in the centre. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenocarcinoma
*b. Ameloblastoma
c. Osteoclastoma
d. Primary intraosteal cancer
e. Adenomatoid tumour

54. A 30-year-old woman has subnormal concentration of enzymes in the pancreatic juice. This might be caused by the hyposecretion of the following gastrointestinal hormone:
a. Secretin
b. Gastro-inhibiting peptide
c. Somatostatin
d. Vaso-intestinal peptide
*e. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin

55. A patient of oral surgery department has developed a purulent complication. Bacteriological analysis of the wound discharge allowed to isolate a culture producing a blue-and-green pigment. Which of the listed microorganisms may be a causative agent of the infection?
a. Proteus vulgaris
b. Bacillus subtilis
c. Staphylococcus epidermidis
d. Klebsiella pneumoniae
*e. Pseudomonas aeruginosa

56. A man has a considerable decrease in diuresis as a result of 1,5 l blood loss. The primary cause of such diuresis disorder is the hypersecretion of the following hormone:
*a. Vasopressin
b. Natriuretic
c. Corticotropin
d. Cortisol
e. Parathormone

57. A 34-year-old patient has low endurance of physical loads. At the same time skeletal muscles have increased concentration of glycogen. This is caused by the reduced activity of the following enzyme:
a. Glycogen synthase
b. Glucose-6-phosphatase
c. Phosphofructokinase
*d. Glycogen phosphorylase
e. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase

58. A patient with ischemic heart disease has been administered an anti-anginal drug that reduces the myocardial oxygen consumption and improves blood supply of myocardium. What drug is it?
a. Retabolil
*b. Nitroglycerine
c. Validol
d. Propranolol
e. Promedol

59. A 42-year-old woman has been administered propranolol for the ischemic heart disease. Yet she has been found to have a disease in case of which the use of propranolol is contra-indicated. What disease is it?
a. Duodenal ulcer
b. Arterial hypertension
c. Myasthenia
*d. Bronchial asthma
e. Cholecystitis

60. A woman consulted an otolaryngologist about an olfactory disorder. Examination revealed atrophic alterations of regio olfactoria of the nasal cavity mucosa. Where is it located?
a. -
b. In the region of common nasal meatus
c. In the region of inferior nasal meatus
d. In the region of median nasal meatus
*e. In the region of superior nasal meatus

61. A 30-year-old driver complains of allergic rhinitis that usually excerbates in spring. He has been administered an antihistamine drug with a slight sedative effect and 24-hour period of action. Which of the listed drugs has been administered?
*a. Loratadine
b. Heparin
c. Dimedrol
d. Vicasol
e. Oxytocin

62. Autopsy of a man who died from ethylene glycol poisoning revealed that his kidneys are a little bit enlarged, edematic; their capsule can be easily removed. Cortical substance is broad and light-grey. Medullary substance is dark-red. What pathology had this man?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Lipoid nephrosis
*c. Necrotic nephrosis
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Acute tubular-interstitial nephritis

63. Dentists are at increased risk of being infected with the type B hepatitis. What preparation should be used for reliable active prevention of this disease?
*a. Recombinant vaccine of HBsAg proteins
b. Monoclonal HBsAg antibodies
c. Antihepatitis serum
d. Live type B hepatitis vaccine
e. Specific immunoglobulin

64. A 38-year-old man died all of a sudden. Autopsy revealed myocardial infarction in the posterior wall of the left ventricle. What are the most likely alterations in myocardiocyte structure that can be revealed microscopically in the infarction focus?
*a. Karyolysis
b. Adipose degeneration
c. Calcification
d. Protein degeneration
e. Carbohydrate degeneration

65. A patient who abuses smoking has chronic bronchitis. Biopsy of his primary bronchus revealed multilayer pavement epithelium. What pathological process was revealed in the bronchus?
a. Hyperplasia
b. Dysplasia
c. Physiological regeneration
*d. Metaplasia
e. Reparative regeneration

66. Toxic affection of liver results in dysfunction of protein synthesis. It is usually accompanied by the following kind of dysproteinemia:
a. Absolute hyperproteinemia
*b. Absolute hypoproteinemia
c. Relative hyperproteinemia
d. Paraproteinemia
e. Relative hypoproteinemia

67. A cell of granular endoplasmatic reticulum is at the stage of translation, when mRNA advances to the ribosomes. Amino acids get bound by peptide bonds in a certain sequence thus causing polypeptide biosynthesis. The sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide corresponds with the sequence of:
*a. mRNA codons
b. rRNA nucleotides
c. tRNA anticodons
d. tRNA nucleotides
e. rRNA anticodons

68. As a result of a road accident a 26-year-old man is in the torpid phase of shock. Blood count: leukocytes - 3,2109/l. What is the leading mechanism of leukopenia development?
a. Leukopoiesis inhibition
*b. Leukocyte redistribution in the bloodstream
c. Increased excretion of the leukocytes from the organism
d. Faulty release of mature leukocytes from the bone marrow into the blood
e. Leukocyte destruction in the hematopietic organs

69. A 62-year-old patient with cerebral haemorrhage was admitted to the neurological department in grave condition. Objectively: increase of respiration depth and rate with its following reduction to apnoea, thereafter respiration cycle restores. What respiration type is it?
a. Biots
b. Gasping
c. Kussmauls
d. Apneustic
*e. Cheyne-Stokes

70. Parodontitis is treated with calcium preparations and a hormone that stimulates tooth mineralization and inhibits tissue resorption. What hormone is it?
a. Aldosterone
b. Thyroxine
c. Adrenalin
*d. Calcitonin
e. Parathormone

71. A 67-year-old patient ordered a full functional denture. It was necessary to extract his left upper canine. After infraorbital anaesthesia a patient presented with a progressing haematoma in the frontal part of his face. The patient was found to have an injury of an artery which is the branch of:
a. A. labialis superior
*b. A. maxillaris
c. A. ophthalmica
d. A. temporalis superficialis
e. A. facialis

72. A patient consulted a dentist about itching and burning in the oral cavity; high temperature. The patient was diagnosed with trichomonal gingivostomatitis. What drug should be chosen for his treatment?
a. Gentamicin sulfate
b. Ampicillin
c. Nystatin
*d. Metronidazole
e. Doxycycline hydrochloride

73. A patient with anacydic gastritis has the following blood formula: erythrocytes - 2,51012/l; Hb - 50 g/l; colour index - 0,6; reticulocytes - 0,02%; microcytosis. What type of anaemia is it?
a. Protein-deficient
b. Aplastic
c. Folic acid-deficient
*d. Iron-deficient
e. Hypoplastic

74. A group of students who were climbing up a mountain presented with euphoria, tachypnea, tachycardia. Specify the immediate reason for hypocapnia accompanying mountain sickness:
a. Decrease in respiration depth
b. Anaemia
*c. Increase in respiration rate and depth
d. Increase in heart rate
e. Erythrocytosis

75. During cytoscopy mucous membrane of urinary bladder normally makes folds except for a single triangular area with smooth mucosa. This triangle is located in the following part of urinary bladder:
a. Bladder isthmus
b. Bladder apex
c. Bladder cervix
d. Bladder body
*e. Bladder floor

76. A 28-year-old woman has been diagnosed with extrauterine pregnancy complicated by tha fallopian tube rupture. The blood is most likely to penetrate the following peritoneal space:
a. Right mesenteric sinus
*b. Rectouterine
c. Left mesenteric sinus
d. Vesicouterine
e. Intersigmoid sinus

77. An embryon has signs of disturbed process of dorsal mesoderm segmentation and somite generation. What part of skin is most likely to have developmental abnormalities?
a. Sudoriferous glands
b. Hair
c. Sebaceous glands
d. Epidermis
*e. Derma

78. HIV has gp41 and gp120 on its surface interacts with target cells of an organism. Which of the following human lymphocyte antigens is gp120 complementary bound with?
a. CD 19
b. CD 8
*c. CD 4
d. CD 3
e. CD 28

79. In the course of evolution there appeared molecular mechanisms for correction of damaged DNA molecules. This process is called:
a. Replication
b. Transcription
c. Processing
d. Translation
*e. Reparation

80. Autopsy revealed that the upper lobe of the right lung was enlarged, grey, airless; surface of incision was dripping with turbid liquid; pleura had a lot of fibrinous plicae. Microscopical examination of alveoles revealed exudate containing neutrophils, desquamated alveolocytes and fibrin fibres. Bronchus wall was intact. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Influenzal pneumonia
b. Focal pneumonia
c. Pulmonary abscess
d. Interstitial pneumonia
*e. Croupous pneumonia

81. Examination of a patient revealed II grade obesity. It is known that he consumes a lot of sweets and rich food, has sedentary way of life. Thats why anabolic metabolism has the priority in his organism. Which of the following pathways is amphibolic?
*a. Cycle of tricarboxylic acids
b. Glyconeogenesis
c. Fatty acids oxidation
d. Lipolysis
e. Glycolysis

82. A histological specimen of kidney shows a structure consisting of a glomerulus of fenestrated capillaries and a bilayer epithelial capsule. Specify this structure:
*a. Renal corpuscle
b. Receiving tube
c. Distal tubule
d. Henles loop
e. Proximal tubule

83. A 45-year-old woman has been diagnosed with endemic goiter. What mechanism has caused hyperplasia of thyroid gland in this patient?
a. Increased catecholamine production
b. Increased hydration of derma and hypodermic cellulose
c. Increased iodine absorption
d. Increased thyroxine production
*e. Increased thyrotropin production

84. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the epigastral area, vomiting; vomit masses have the colour of "coffee-grounds", the patient has also melena. Anamnesis records gastric ulcer. Blood formula: erythrocytes - 2,81012/l, leukocytes – 8109/l, Hb- 90 g/l. What complication is it?
a. Perforation
b. Pyloric stenosis
c. Penetration
*d. Haemorrhage
e. Canceration

85. A patient with chronic bronchitis has been administered an expectorant that disintegrates disulphide bonds of sputum glycosaminoglycan thus reducing its viscosity. The patient has been also warned about possible bronchospasm. What drug has been administered?
a. Bromhexine
b. Thermopsis herb
c. Sodium hydrocarbonate
*d. Acetylcysteine
e. Libexine

86. Examination of a child who hasnt got fresh fruit and vegetables during winter revealed numerous subcutaneous hemorrhages, gingivitis, carious cavities in teeth. What vitamin combination should be prescribed in this case?
a. Folic acid and cobalamin
b. Calciferol and ascorbic acid
c. Riboflavin and nicotinamide
*d. Ascorbic acid and rutin
e. Thiamine and pyridoxine

87. An oral surgery unit admitted a woman with a phlegmon on the anterior surface of neck in the region of carotid triangle. What muscle demarcates the posterior wall of this triangle?
*a. Sternocleidomastoid
b. Thyrohyoid
c. Omohyoid
d. Sternothyroid
e. Sternohyoid

88. A patient in grave condition has been deliveredf to the admission ward. Examination revealed pupil mydriasis, no reaction to the light, considerable reddening and dryness of skin and mucous membranes. What drug might have caused the intoxication symptoms?
*a. Atropine sulphate
b. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
c. Adrenalin hydrochloride
d. Dithylinum
e. Proserin

89. A patient with diabetes mellitus lapsed into diabetic coma as a result of acid-base disbalance. Specify the type of disbalance:
a. Respiratory acidosis
b. Metabolic alkalosis
c. Non-gaseous alkalosis
*d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Gaseous alkalosis

90. A patient with a fracture of mandibular angle has been admitted to a hospital. A haematoma in the region of the fracture usually results from the injury of the following artery:
a. Facial
b. Lingual
*c. Inferior alveolar
d. Maxillary
e. Internal carotid

91. A woman with A (II), Rh-negative blood had a child with B (III), Rh-positive blood. The child was diagnosed with congenital anaemia of newborns. What is the most likely cause of its development?
a. AB0-incompatibility
b. Intrauterine intoxication
c. Intrauterine infection
d. Hereditary chromosomal pathology
*e. Rhesus incompatibility

92. After the second abortion a 23-year-old woman has been diagnosed with toxoplasmosis. Which drug should be used for toxoplasmosis treatment?
a. Azidothimidine
b. Mebendazole
*c. Co-trimoxazole
d. Itraconazole
e. Acyclovir

93. Examination of a 32-year-old patient revealed disproportional skeleton size, enlargement of superciliary arches, nose, lips, tongue, jaw bones, feet. What glands function was disturbed?
a. Pancreas
b. Thyroid
*c. Hypophysis
d. Epiphysis
e. Suprarenal

94. A patient has been diagnosed with acute glomerulonephritis that developed after he had had streptococcal infection. It is most likely that the affection of basal glomerular membrane is caused by an allergic reaction of the following type:
*a. Immune complex
b. Delayed
c. Anaphylactic
d. Stimulating
e. Cytotoxic

95. A shepherd who has tended sheep together with dogs consulted a doctor about pain in his right subcostal area, nausea, vomiting. Roentgenoscopy revealed a tumour-like formation. What kind of helminthiasis might be suspected?
a. Taeniarhynchosis
b. Taeniasis
*c. Echinococcosis
d. Enterobiasis
e. Ascaridiasis

96. A month after surgical constriction of rabbits renal artery the considerable increase of systematic arterial pressure was observed. What of the following regulation mechanisms caused the animals pressure change?
a. Serotonin
b. Noradrenaline
c. Vasopressin
d. Adrenaline
*e. Angiotensin-II

97. To prevent possible negative effect upon the gastric mucsa a patient with rheumatoid arthritis was administered a nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drug - a COX-2 selective inhibitor. Specify this drug:
a. Ibuprofen
b. Acetylsalicinic acid
*c. Celecoxib
d. Analgine
e. Butadion

98. A patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy. Analysis of the biopsy material enabled doctors to diagnose him with helicobacteriosis. What property of the bacteria found in this patient had to be obligatory taken into account during their cultivation?
*a. Microaerophilic ability
b. Presence of six polar flagella
c. Colonisation of gastral cells
d. Absence of spores and capsules
e. Presence of urease

99. A woman had taken synthetic hormones during her pregnancy. Her newborn girl presents with excessive hairiness which has formal resemblance to adrenogenital syndrome. This sign of variability is called:
a. Recombination
b. Mutation
c. Replication
d. Heterosis
*e. Phenocopy

100. For infection prevention a patient who underwent appendectomy was prescribed a cephalosporin antibiotic. Antimicrobial activity of these antibiotics is called forth by the disturbance of the following process:
a. Ribosomal protein synthesis
*b. Microbial wall formation
c. Nucleic acid synthesis
d. Cholinesterase block
e. Energy metabolism

101. A stomatologists examined first-grade pupils and revealed that one of children had yellowish brown teeth, two of them were split. Heretofore the pupil was treated with "some pills" on account of pneumonia. What medication could have had such a negative effect upon teeth?
a. Biseptol
*b. Doxycycline
c. Oxacillin
d. Ampicillin
e. Erythromycin

102. A patient suffering from chronic myeloleukemia has got the following symptoms of anemia: decreased number of erythrocytes and low haemoglobin concentration, oxyphilic and polychromatophilic normocytes, microcytes. What is the leading pathogenetic mechanism of anemia development?
a. Chronic haemorrhage
b. Deficiency of vitamin B12
*c. Substitution of haemoblast
d. Reduced synthesis of erythropoietin
e. Intravascular hemolysis of erythrocytes

103. Autopsy of a 68-year-old man who died from chronic cardiac insufficiency revealed deformed, thickened, conjoined cusps of mitral valve. Along the edge of joining there were small (1-2 mm) thrombs. What form of endocarditis caused development of chronic cardiac insufficiency?
*a. Recurrent verrucous
b. Diffuse
c. Polypoulcerous
d. Acute verrucous
e. Fibroplastic

104. A patient has been delivered to a hospital with a provisional diagnosis of progressing muscle dystrophy. This diagnosis can be confirmed by the increased concentration of the following substance found in urine:
a. Carnosine
*b. Kreatine
c. Hydroxyproline
d. Troponin
e. Pyruvate

105. After a serious psychoemotional stress a 48-year-old patient suddenly developed acute heart ache irradiating to the left arm. Nitroglycerine relieved pain after 10 minutes. What is the leading pathogenetic mechanism of this process development?
a. Increase in myocardial oxygen consumption
b. Compression of coronary vessels
c. Dilatation of peripheral vessels
*d. Spasm of coronary arteries
e. Obstruction of coronary vessels

106. A 35-year-old patient with chronic periodontitis underwent excision of a cyst 3 cm in diameter found at a root of the 15th tooth. Histological examination revealed that it had thin wall formed by mature connective tissue infiltrated by lymphocytes and plasmatic cells. Its internal surface was lined with multilayer pavement epithelium with no signs of keratinization; the cavity contained serous exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Primordial cyst
*b. Radicular cyst
c. Follicular ameloblastoma
d. Cherubism
e. Follicular cyst

107. Leukoses are treated with antimetabolite methotrexate. What vitamin is its antagonist?
a. Piridoxine
b. Rutin
c. Cyanocobalamin
*d. Folic acid
e. Phyllochinone

108. Histological examination of a lymph node removed from the posterior triangle of neck of an 18-year-old patient revealed some cell agglomerations that included single multinuclear Reed-Sternberg cells, major Hodgkins cells, minor Hodgkins cells and many lymphocytes, single plasmatic cells, eosinophils. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Burkitts tumour
b. Nodular lymphoma
*c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Chronic lymphoid leukosis
e. Lymphocytic lymphoma

109. Autopsy of a woman with cerebral atherosclerosis revealed in the left cerebral hemisphere a certain focus that is presented by flabby, anhistic, greyish and yellowish tissue with indistinct edges. What pathological process is the case?
a. Multifocal tumor growth with cystic degeneration
b. Focal encephalitis
c. Multiple foci of fresh and old cerebral hemorrhage
d. Senile encephalopathy
*e. Ischemic stroke

110. After 4 months of treatment for tuberculosis the patient began complaining of toes and fingers numbness, sensation of creeps. He was diagnosed with polyneuritis. What antituberculous drug might have caused these complications?
a. Sodium salt of benzylpenicillin
b. Alcohol iodine solution
c. Ciprofloxacin
*d. Isoniazid
e. Rifampicin

111. Bacterioscopy of nasopharyngeal mucus taken from a 2,5-year-old child with nasopharyngitis revealed gram-positive diplococci looking like coffee grains. What organs of the child are most likely to be affected if these microorganisms penetrate the blood?
a. Urogenital tracts
b. Lymph nodes
c. Renal glomeruli
d. Cardiac valves
*e. Brain tunics

112. In the process of tooth tissue histogenesis dentin wasnt formed in time for some reasons. What process of further histogenesis will be delayed or will not take place at all?
a. Pulp formation
b. Acellular cement formation
c. Predentinal space formation
*d. Enamel formation
e. Cellular cement formation

113. A 20-year-old patient has multiple yellow-brown and black erosions of tooth enamel. The teeth crumble and break, some of them are decayed. Make a diagnosis:
a. Teeth erosion
b. Deep caries
*c. Fluorosis
d. Acidic necrosis of teeth
e. -

114. After prolonged exercising people usually experience intense muscle pain. What is its most likely cause?
a. Increased concentratioon of ADP in muscles
b. Increased muscle excitability
*c. Accumulation of lactic acid in muscles
d. Intensified disintegration of muscle proteins
e. Accumulation of creatinine in muscles

115. A patient underwent the extraction of his isuperior medial incisor. It is supplied with blood by the branches of the following artery:
a. A.buccalis
*b. A.infraorbitalis
c. A.sphenopalatina
d. A.palatina descendens
e. A.alveolaris inferior

116. Obliterating atherosclerosis causes changes in the vessels of the lower extermities. A histological specimen of such a vessel evidently presents both internal and external elastic membranes, middle membrane contains a lot of myocytes. What vessel is affected in case of this disease?
*a. Artery of muscular type
b. Artery of elastic type
c. Lymph node
d. Artery of mixed type
e. Vein with strongly developed muscles

117. When water affects mucous membrane of the inferior nasal meatuses, this causes "diver reflex" that provokes:
a. Bronchospasm
*b. Reflectory apnea
c. Reflectrory dyspnea
d. Cough
e. Reflectory hyperpnea

118. For relief of hypertensive crisis a doctor administered a patient a drug that apart from antihypertensive effect has also sedative, spasmolytic and anticonvulsive effect. The drug was taken parenterally. When it is taken enterally it acts as a laxative and cholagogue. What drug was administered?
a. No-spa
b. Dibasolum
c. Reserpine
*d. Magnesium sulfate
e. Apressin

119. Cytogenetic examination of a patient with dysfunction of the reproductive system revealed normal karyotype 46,?? in some cells, but most cells have Klinefelters syndrome karyotype - 47,???. Such phenomenon of cell inhomogeneity is called:
a. Transposition
b. Inversion
c. Duplication
d. Heterogeneity
*e. Mosaicism

120. An 18-year-old boy applied to a geneticist. The boy has asthenic constitution: narrow shoulders, broad pelvis, nearly hairless face. Evident mental deficiency. The provisional diagnosis was Klinefelters syndrome. What method of clinical genetics will enable the doctor to confirm this diagnosis?
a. Genealogical
b. Dermatoglyphics
*c. Cytogenetic
d. Twin study
e. Population-and-statistical

121. A man permanently lives high in the mountains. What changes of blood characteristics can be found in his organism?
*a. Increase of erythrocytes number
b. Decrease of reticulocytes number
c. Decrease of hemoglobin content
d. Erythroblasts in blood
e. Decrease of colour index of blood

122. A female patient suffering from secondary syphilis got foci of skin depigmentation in the upper parts of her back. What pathological process is it?
a. Parakeratosis
*b. Leukoderma
c. Leukoplasia
d. Metaplasia
e. Dysplasia

123. A patient has been diagnosed with transmural myocardial infarction. What drug should be given in order to prevent cardiogenic shock?
a. Reserpin
b. Analgin
c. Octadine
*d. Promedol
e. Phentolamine

124. A boy has fallen down from a tree. Now he finds it difficult to abduct his arm into horizontal position. Which muscle is most likely to be injured?
a. M.anconeus
b. M.coracobrachialis
*c. M.deltoideus
d. M.triceps brachii
e. M.supinator

125. There was a record of some anthrax cases among animals in a countryside. The spread of disease can be prevented by means of immunization. What kind of vaccine should be used?
*a. STI live vaccine
b. Sabins vaccine
c. Diphteria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine
d. BCG vaccine
e. Salk vaccine

126. In order to prevent massive haemorrhage in the region of oral cavity floor it is required to ligate an artery which is located within Pirogovs triangle. What artery is it?
a. Maxillary artery
b. Facial artery
c. Ascending pharyngeal artery
*d. Lingual artery
e. Superior thyroid artery

127. An electron microphotograph of duodenal epithelium clearly shows a cell with electron-dense granules in the basal pole. What cell is it?
*a. Endocrine
b. Parietal
c. Prismatic with a limbus
d. Goblet
e. Poorly differentiated

128. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
a. Glycogenolysis
b. Pentose-phosphate cycle
*c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Aerobic glycolisis
e. Glycogenesis

129. Examination of patients with periodontitis revealed the interdependence between the rate of affection of periodontal tissues and the amount of lysozymes in saliva and gingival liquid. These results can be obtained during studying the following protection system of an organism:
*a. Non-specific resistance
b. Tolerance
c. Humoral immunity
d. Autoresponsiveness
e. Cellular immunity

130. A 45-year-old male died from disseminated tuberculosis. On autopsy the symptoms of tuberculosis were confirmed by both microscopical and histological analyses. All the affected organs had epithelioid cell granulomas with caseous necrosis in the centre. What kind of hypersensitivity reaction underlies the process of granuloma development?
a. Complement-dependent cytotoxicity
b. Antibody-dependent cytotoxicity
c. Anaphylactic
d. Immune complex
*e. Delayed

131. After a surgery on thyroid gland a patient complains of hoarse voice. What nerve has been damaged during the surgery?
a. N. accessorius
b. N. glossopharyngeus
c. N. laryngeus superior
d. N. hypoglossus
*e. N. laryngeus reccurens

132. While under barbituric anaesthesia a 65-year-old male patient developed respiratory inhibition. Anesthesiologist made him a 10 ml intravenous injection of 0,5% bemegride solution. The patients condition got better, the pulmonary ventilation volume increased. What phenomenon underlies the interaction of these medivcations?
a. Indirect synergism
*b. Direct antagonism
c. Indirect antagonism
d. Direct synergism
e. Unilateral antagonism

133. As a result of a trauma apatient has developed traumatic shock. The patient is fussy, talkative, pale. AP- 140/90 mm Hg, Ps- 120 bpm. This condition is consistent with the following shock phase:
a. Latent
b. Terminal
c. Torpid
*d. Erectile
e. -

134. A 26-year-old pregnant woman is under treatment at an in-patient hospital. After a continuous attack of vomiting she was found to have reduced volume of circulating blood. What kind of change in general blood volume is the case?
a. Polycythemic hypervolemia
b. Oligocythemic hypovolemia
*c. Polycythemic hypovolemia
d. Oligocythemic hypervolemia
e. Simple hypovolemia

135. After a hemorrhage into the brainstem a patient has lost reflex of myosis as a reaction to increase of illumination. What structure was damaged?
a. Medial reticular nuclei
b. Black substance
c. Lateral reticular nuclei
*d. Vegetative nuclei of oculomotor nerve
e. Red nuclei

136. A female patient with a tumour of pancreas has developed mechanic jaundice resulting from compression of a bile-excreting duct. Which duct is compressed?
a. Ductus hepaticus sinister
*b. Ductus choledochus
c. Ductus hepaticus dexter
d. Ductus cysticus
e. Ductus hepaticus communis

137. An electron microphotograph of an enamel organ shows a prismatic cell with developed granular endoplasmatic reticulum and Golgi complex. The apical part of the cell has Tomes process containing secretory granules and small vesicles. Specify the cell:
a. Cell of intermediate layer of enamel organ
b. Cell of enamel organ pulp
*c. Secretory active enameloblast
d. Pre-enameloblast
e. External cell of an enamel organ

138. A patient complains of difficulty in closing of jaws during chewing. He has been found to have atrophy of masticatory muscles. This indicates the dysfunction of the following nerve:
a. N. vagus
b. N. glossopharyngeus
*c. N. trigeminus
d. N. facialis
e. N. ophthalmicus

139. In the second week of being ill wit viral hepatitis a patient presented with sleep disorder, headache, aggressiveness, unbearable skin itch. Objectively: AP drop, decrease in blood coagulation and reflectory activity, bradycardia. What is the cause of these changes?
a. Urobilinemia
b. Stercobilinemia
c. Hypercholesterolemia
d. Hyperlipemia
*e. Cholemia

140. Analysis of sputum taken from a patient with suspected pneumonia revealed rather elongated gram-positive diplococci with somewhat pointed opposite ends. What microorganisms were revealed in the sputum?
a. Klebsiella pneumoniae
b. Neisseria meningitidis
*c. Streptococcus pneumoniae
d. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
e. Staphylococcus aureus

141. According to the phenotypic diagnosis a female patient has been provisionally diagnosed with X-chromosome polysomia. This diagnosis can be confirmed by a cytogenetic method. What karyotype will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
a. 48(XXXY)
b. 47(XXY)
c. 48(XXYY)
*d. 47(???)
e. 46(XX)

142. A man got into ice-cold water and died soon as a result of abrupt exposure to cold. In such cases an organism loses heat most intensively by the way of:
a. Heat conduction and radiation
*b. Heat conduction
c. -
d. Convection
e. Radiation

143. While examining a blood smear taken form a patient and stained by Romanovskys method a doctor revealed some protozoa and diagnozed the patient with Chagas disease. What protozoan is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Leishmania tropica
b. Trypanosoma brucei
*c. Trypanosoma cruzi
d. Leishmania donovani
e. Toxoplasma gondii

144. A 67-year-old patient has atherosclerosis of cardiac and cerebral vessels. Examination revealed hyperlipidemia. What class of blood plasma lipoproteids is most important in atherosclerosis pathogenesis?
a. Chylomicrons
*b. Low-density lipoproteids
c. -
d. High-density lipoproteids
e. ?-lipoproteids

145. After restoration of blood circulation in damaged tissue accumulation of lactate comes to a stop and speed of glucose consumption slows down. These metabolic changes are caused by activation of the following process:
a. Glycogen biosynthesis
b. Anaerobic glycolysis
c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Lipolysis
*e. Aerobic glycolysis

146. As a result of dysfunction of protein synthesis in liver a patient with hepatic insufficiency has disturbed synthesis of procoagulants, prothrombin, fibrinogen. Which of the listed syndromes can be expected in this patient?
a. Portal haemorrhagic syndrome
b. Acholia syndrome
*c. Haemorrhagic
d. Hepatolienal syndrome
e. Cholaemia syndrome

147. An elderly patient has chronic constipations induced by large intestine hypotonia. What drug should be administered?
a. Castor oil
*b. Bisacodyl
c. Sodium sulphate
d. Novocaine amide
e. Atropine

148. The contents of vesicles that appeared on the mucous membrane of a patient with variola was sent to a virological laboratory. Which of the listed changes were revealed during the smear microscopy?
*a. Paschen bodies
b. Syncytium
c. Babes-Ernst bodies
d. Guarnieri bodies
e. Babes-Negri bodies

149. A blood sample of a pregnant woman was typed. Erythrocyte-agglutination reaction was present with standard sera 0?, ?(I), B?(III), reaction was absent with the serum A?(II). The blood under examination relates to the following group:
*a. A?(II)
b. 0?, ?(I)
c. -
d. AB(IV)
e. B?(III)

150. As a result of a trauma a patient has damaged anterior roots of spinal cord. What structures have been affected?
a. Central processes of sensitive neurons of spinal ganglions
b. Axons of neurons of lateral horns
*c. Axons of motoneurons and axons of neurons of lateral horns
d. Peripheral processes of sensitive spinal ganglions
e. Dendrites of neurons of spinal ganglions

151. Specific prophylaxis involved application of a vaccine containing microorganisms and exotoxin detoxicated by formalin. It relates to the following type of vaccine:
a. Anatoxin
b. Chemical
*c. Combined
d. Live
e. Genetically engineered

152. Before the infiltration anaesthesia a patient had been tested for sensitivity to novocaine. The reaction turned out to be positive. Which of the below listed drugs can be used for anaesthetization in this case?
a. Tetracaine
*b. Lidocaine
c. Trimecaine
d. Anesthezin
e. Procainamide hydrochloride

153. A sample taken from the pharynx of a patient with angina was inoculated on the blood-tellurite agar. This resulted in growth of grey, radially striated (in form of rosettes) colonies up to 4-5 mm in diameter. Microscopically there can be seen gram-positive rods with club-shaped ends arranged in form of spread fingers. What microorganisms are these?
*a. Corynebacteria diphtheriae
b. Streptobacilli
c. Diphtheroids
d. Clostridium botulinum
e. Streptococci

154. A patient under test was subjected to a moderate physical stress. His minute blood volume amounted 10 l/min. What blood volume was pumped through his lung vessels every minute?
a. 4 l/min
b. 6 l/min
c. 7 l/min
*d. 10 l/min
e. 5 l/min

155. A comatose patient has been delivered to a hospital. He has a 5-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Objectively: breathing is deep and noisy, there is a smell if acetone around the patient. The concentration of glucose in blood is 15,2 millimole/l, of ketone bodies - 100 micromole/l. These disorders are typical for the following complication of this disease:
a. Hypoglycemic coma
*b. Ketoacidotic coma
c. Hyperosmolar coma
d. Hyperglycemic coma
e. Hepatic coma

156. A patient with diabetes mellitus complicated by angiopathy has been recommended a drug which is a sulphonyl urease derivate of the second generation. It improves microcirculation and is known for its relatively good tolerance. What drug is it?
a. Adrenalin
*b. Glibenclamide
c. Insulin
d. Acarbose
e. Glibutidum

157. There is a strict time limit for people to stay at a height of 8000 m above sea level without oxigen cyllinders. Specify the life-limiting factor in this case:
a. Humidity rate
b. Rate of ultraviolet radiation
c. Earth gravity
d. Temperature
*e. Partial pressure of oxygen in air

158. A 67-year-old patient underwent extraction of a tumour of the right parotid region. Macroscopical examination revealed a soft encapsulated node up to 35 cm in diameter, the tissue was whitish-grey and included many small cysts. Microscopical examination revealed that the duct structures of large diameter were lined with bilayer prismatic epithelium, they had eosinophilic cytoplasm, the duct lumens contained papillary structures, the stroma was infiltrated with lymphocytes, there were some solitary lymphoid follicles. Specify the kind of tumour:
a. Pleomorphic adenoma
b. Adenocystic carcinoma
*c. Adenolymphoma
d. Mucoepidermal tumour
e. Monomorphic carcinoma

159. Histological examination of myocardium of a 47-year-old patient with rheumatic heart disease (section material) revealed some big visually empty vacuoles within the cardiomyocytes. They turn black when stained with osmic acid, and yellow-red when stained with sudan III. What pathological process is it?
*a. Adipose degeneration
b. Hydropic degeneration
c. Hyaline drop degeneration
d. Dysproteinosis
e. Carbohydrate degeneration

160. Examination of a 40-year-old man ill with stenosing (without metastases) esophageal carcinoma revealed the folowing changes: atrophy of skeletal muscles and fatty tissue. His skin is sallow, epidermis is attenuated, heart has grown smaller. Myocardium and liver are brown. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Myasthenia
b. Brown atrophy
c. Cancerous cachexia
*d. Alimentary cachexia
e. Addisons disease

161. A 35-year-old patient diagnosed with sterility came to gynaecological department for diagnostic biopsy of endometrium. Microscopic examination revealed that mucous membrane is edematous, uterine glands are convoluted and filled with thick secreta. Such changes in the endometrium are caused by excess of the following hormon:
a. Estrogen
b. Somatotropin
c. ACTH
d. Testosterone
*e. Progesterone

162. A patient was delivered to a hospital with the fracture of mandible and considerable bleeding in the region of fracture. What artery is likely to be dameged?
a. Superior alveolar artery
*b. Inferior alveolar artery
c. Lingual artery
d. Ascending palatine artery
e. Ascending pharyngeal artery

163. A man got poisoned with mushrooms. They contain muscarine that stimulates muscarinic cholinoreceptors. What symptom is typical for poisoning with inedible mushrooms?
*a. Miosis
b. Bronchi dilation
c. Mydriasis
d. Arterial pressure rise
e. Heart rate rise

164. Osteolaterism is charcterized by a decrease in collagen strength caused by much less intensive formation of cross-links in collagen fibrils. This phenomenon is caused by the low activity of the following enzyme:
a. Collagenase
b. Monoamino-oxidase
*c. Lysyl oxidase
d. Lysyl hydroxylase
e. Prolyl hydroxylase

165. Skin of patients with pigment xeroderma is very sensitive to the sun radiation, there is a risk of skin cancer development. The reason for this is hereditary deficiency of UF-endonuclease. As a result of this defect the following process is disturbed:
*a. DNA reparation
b. Initiation
c. Transcription
d. DNA replication
e. Translation

166. A patient has a slowly healing fracture. What medicine can be used to accelerate formation of connective tissue matrix?
*a. Methyluracil
b. Cyclophosphan
c. Prednisolone
d. Methotrexate
e. Cyclosporine

167. A patient has a right-sided fracture in the region of the frontal third of mandible accompanied by a haematoma in the region of chin. It is caused by the injury of the following artery:
*a. Mental
b. Inferior labial
c. Lingual
d. Facial
e. Palatine

168. An employee was working with radioactive substances and as a result of an incident he was irradiated with 4 Gy. He complains about headache, nausea, dizzyness. What changes of blood formula can be expected 10 hours after irradiation?
a. Neutropenia
b. Leukopenia
c. Lymphocytosis
d. Agranulocytosis
*e. Neutrophilic leukocytosis

169. Gastroscopy of a patient revealed lack of mucus coating the mucous membrane. This may be caused by the dysfunction of the following cells of gastric wall:
a. Cervical cells
b. Main exocrinocytes
*c. Cells of prismatic glandular epithelium
d. Endocrinocytes
e. Parietal cells of gastric glands

170. While a 24-year-old woman was waiting for tooth extraction, tonus of sympathetic part of autonomic nervous system rose. What reaction will the patient display?
a. Hyperperistalsis
b. Miotic pupils
c. Bronchus constriction
d. Hypersecretion of digestive juices
*e. Increased frequency of heartbeat

171. A sportsman needs to improve his sporting results. He was recommended a drug containing carnitine. What process is activated by this compound in the first place?
a. Transport of vitamin K
b. Transport of calcium ions
*c. Transport of fatty acids
d. Transport of amino acids
e. Transport of glucose

172. During postembryonal haemopoiesis in the red bone marrow the cells of one of the cellular differons demonstrate a gradual decrease in cytoplasmic basophilia as well as an increase in oxyphilia, the nucleus is being forced out. Such morphological changes are typical for the following haemopoiesis type:
*a. Erythropoiesis
b. Neutrophil cytopoiesis
c. Eosinophil cytopoiesis
d. Lymphopoiesis
e. Basophil cytopoiesis

173. A 46-year-old female patient needs a surgery in the maxillofacial region. It is known that the patient is disposed to increased hemocoagulation. What natural anticoagulant can be used in order to prevent thrombosis?
a. Hirudin
*b. Heparin
c. None of the listed drugs
d. Fibrinolysin
e. Sodium citrate

174. In order to prevent wound infection associated with surgical procedures a patient was given a synthetic antiprotozoan drug with a high activity against Helicobacter pylori. Specify this drug:
*a. Metronidazole
b. Acyclovir
c. Isoniazid
d. Doxycycline hydrochloride
e. Chingamin

175. Roentgenologically confirmed obstruction of common bile duct resulted in preventing bile from inflowing to the duodenum. What process is likely to be disturbed?
*a. Fat emulgation
b. Salivation inhibition
c. Carbohydrate hydrolysis
d. Protein absorption
e. Hydrochloric acid secretion in stomach

176. A patient with evident pneumosclerosis that developed after infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis presents with respiratory failure. What is its pathogenetic type?
a. Reflectory
b. Obstructive
c. Apneustic
*d. Restrictive
e. Disregulative

177. An infectious disease unit admitted a patient with signs of jaundice caused by hepatitis virus. Select an indicator that is specific only for parenchymatous jaundice:
a. Cholaemia
*b. Increase in ALT and AST rate
c. Hyperbilirubinemia
d. Bilirubinuria
e. Urobilinuria

178. A 50-year-old male patient suffers from chronic bronchitis, complains about dyspnea during physical activity, sustained cough with sputum. After examination he was diagnosed with pulmonary emphysema. This complication is caused by:
a. Decrease in alveolar ventilation
b. Decrease in lung compliance
c. Decrease in lung perfusion
*d. Decrease in lung elasticity
e. Ventilation-perfusion disbalance

179. Microscopic examination of a parenchymatous organ revealed that its epithelial cords formed glomerular, fascicular and reticular zones. The central part of the organ was presented by accumulations of chromaffin cells. Specify this organ:
a. Hypophysis
b. Liver
c. Epiphysis
d. Thyroid gland
*e. Adrenal gland

180. Histologic analysis of uterus mucous membrane revealed twisting glands, serrated and spinned, they were extended by stroma growth with proliferation of its cells. Formulate a diagnosis:
a. Acute endometritis
b. Placental polyp
c. Leiomyoma
d. Cystic mole
*e. Glandular hyperplasia of endometrium

181. Microscopic study of an endocrine gland revealed that its parenchyma consisted of follicular structures. Their wall was formed by monolayer cubic epithelium, and their cavity was filled up with oxyphilic substance. What hormon is secreted by this gland?
a. Aldosterone
*b. Thyroxin
c. Oxytocin
d. Cortisol
e. Parathyrin

182. A 57-year-old patient experiences periodical uterine haemorrhages. Diagnostic biopsy of lining of uterus has revealed among the blood elements some glandular complexes of different forms and sizes made by atypic cells having hyperchromic nuclei with multiple mitoses (including pathological ones). What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Adenocarcinoma
b. Uterus fibromyoma
c. Endometritis
d. Glandular endometrium hyperplasia
e. Chorioepithelioma

183. After a car accident a patient has been diagnosed with a fracture of spine. He is unable to move his lower extremities. This form of motor disorder is called:
a. Quadriplegia
*b. Paraplegia
c. Paresis
d. Hemiplegia
e. Paralysis

184. A sportsman was examined after an intensive physical activity. The examination revealed disorder of movement coordination but the force of muscle contractions remained the samee. It can be explained by retarded speed of excitement conduction through:
a. Conduction tracts
b. Neuromuscular synapses
c. Efferent nerves
d. Afferent nerves
*e. Central synapses

185. An oncological patient had been administered methotrexate. With time target cells of the tumour lost sensitivity to this drug. At the same time the change in gene expression of the following enzyme is observed:
*a. Dehydropholate reductase
b. Pholate decarboxylase
c. Pholate oxidase
d. Deaminase
e. Thiaminase

186. A 14-year-old patient has been diagnosed with Hutchinsons triad: screwdriver-shaped teeth, parenchymatous keratitis and deafness. What disease are these signs typical for?
a. Lepra
b. Opisthorchiasis
*c. Syphilis
d. Tuberculosis
e. Toxoplasmosis

187. A microspecimen of heart shows rectangular cells from 50 to 120 mcm large with central position of nucleus, developed myofibrils. The cells are connected by intercalated discs. These cells are responsible for the following function:
a. Endocrine
b. Protective
c. Regeneratory
d. Function of impulse conduction
*e. Function of heart contractions

188. As a result of a cold a patient has the abnormal pain and temperature sensitivity of the frontal 2/3 of his tongue. Which nerve must have been damaged?
a. Accessory
*b. Trigeminus
c. Glossopharyngeal
d. Sublingual
e. Vagus

189. A patient consulted an otolaryngologist about voice changes. Examination revealed a tumour within the posterior part of rima vocalis. This part is located between the following cartilages of larynx:
a. Cartilago corniculata
*b. Cartilago arytenoidea
c. Cartilago thyroidea
d. Cartilago cricoidea
e. Cartilago cuneiformis

190. A man is in the state of rest. He has been forcing himself to breath deeply and frequently for 3-4 minutes. What effect will it have upon acid-bace balance of the organism?
a. There will be no change in acid-base balance
*b. Respiratory alkalosis
c. Metabolic acidosis
d. Respiratory acidosis
e. Metabolic alkalosis

191. A histological specimen shows terminal secretory parts of glands made by conic cells with basophilic cytoplasm and a roundish nucleus in the centre. Specify the type of terminal secretory parts by the type of secretion:
a. Sebaceous
*b. Serous
c. Combined
d. Seromucous
e. Mucous

192. A patient suffering form stomatitis was prescribed oral rinsing. Which antiseptic from the oxidant group is the most suitable for this purpose?
*a. Potassium permanganate
b. Alcoholic iodine solution
c. Ethyl alcohol
d. Chloramine
e. Boric acid

193. A few days before an operation a patient should be administered vitamin K or its synthetic analogue Vicasol. Vitamin K takes part in the following post-translational modification of the II, VII, IX, X blood clotting factors:
a. Transamination
b. Glycosylation
c. Deamination
d. Decarboxylation
*e. Carboxylation

194. After implantation of a cardiac valve a young man constantly takes indirect anticoagulants. His state was complicated by hemorrhage. What substance content has decreased in blood?
a. Ceruloplasmin
*b. Prothrombin
c. Heparin
d. Haptoglobin
e. Creatin

195. Serological diagnostics of infectious diseases is based upon specific interaction with antigenes. Specify the serological reaction that underlies adhesion of microorganisms when they are affected by specific antibodies in presence of an electrolyte:
a. Hemadsorption reaction
*b. Agglutination reaction
c. Complement-binding reaction
d. Neutralization reaction
e. Precipitation reaction

196. Examination of a bronchial tissue sample revealed atrophy of mucous membrane, cystic degeneration of glands, focal metaplastic changes of lining prismatic epithelial cells into multilayer squamous cells; increase in goblet cell number; in some parts of bronchial wall and especially in the mucous membrane there was marked cellular inflammatory infiltration and growth of granulation tissue bulging into the bronchial lumen in form of a polyp. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Interstitial pneumonia
b. Bronchopneumonia
*c. Chronic bronchitis
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Lobar pneumonia

197. As a result of a chest trauma the costal cartilage was damaged. The cartilage regenerates due to the following layer of perichondrium:
a. Collagen
b. Elastic
c. Sharpeys fibers
*d. Chondrogenic
e. Fibrous

198. Autopsy of a man, who died from typhoid fever on the 5th day of disease, revealed the following changes: aggregated follicles of ileum were enlarged and plethoric; they protruded over the mucous membrane, and multiple sulci and convolutions could be seen on their surface. Histological examinatio revealed plethority and edema of tissues, presense of granulomas composed of big cells with light cytoplasm and containing typhoid bacilli. These local changes are compliant with the following period of typhoid fever:
*a. Stage of medullary swelling
b. Stage of clean ulcers
c. Stage of ulceration
d. Stage of necrosis
e. Stage of ulcer healing

199. A shepherd who has tended sheep together with dogs presents with chest pain and blood spitting. X-ray examination revealed a roundish neoplasm in his lungs. Immunological reactions confirmed the provisional diagnosis. Specify the helminth that might have caused this disease:
a. Broad tapeworm
b. Armed tapeworm
c. Common liver fluke
*d. Echinococcus
e. Dwarf tapeworm

200. A patient presented to a hospital with complaints about quick fatigability and significant muscle weakness. Examination revealed an autoimmune disease that causes functional disorder of receptors in the neuromuscular synapses. This will result in the disturbed activity of the following mediator:
a. Glycine
b. Serotonin
*c. Acetylcholine
d. Noradrenaline
e. Dopamine

