1. In the framework of complex treatment of gingivitis a patient has been administered a drug that stimulates leucopoiesis, accelerates wound healing, enhances the growth and proliferation of cells, has the anti-inflammatory effect. It is applied for treatment of leukopenias of different genesis, in the dental practice it is used for treatment of inflammatory diseases of the oral mucosa. Identify the drug:
a. Methotrexate
b. Coamide
*c. Pentoxylum
d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Mercaptopurine

2. A 69-year-old patient got a small plaque with subsequent ulceration on the skin of the lower eyelid. The formation was removed. Microscopic examination of dermis revealed complexes of atypical epitelial cells arranged perpendicularly to the basal membrane on the periphery. The cells were dark, of polygonal prismatic shape with hyperchromic nuclei with frequent mitoses. What is the histological form of carcinoma in this patient?
a. Undifferentiated
b. Adenocarcinoma
*c. Basal cell carcinoma
d. Nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma
e. Keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma

3. After a severe stress a patient was found to have eosinopenia. A decrease in the eosinophil number can be explained by the changed concentration of the following hormones:
*a. Glucocorticoids
b. Insulin
c. Vasopressin
d. Adrenaline
e. Mineralocorticoids

4. A patient has wound abscess. Bacteriological examination of the wound content revealed a gram-negative bacillus which forms semi-transparent mucous colonies of blue-green colour with a pearlescent appearance on the beef-extract agar. Culture has a specific odour of violets or jasmine. What type of pathogen was isolated from the patients wound?
*a. P. aeruginosa
b. P. vulgaris
c. S. pyogenes
d. S. faecalis
e. S. aureus

5. A patient has been prescribed the salt-free diet. What changes to the salt taste sensitivity threshold should be expected?
a. No changes
b. Increase
c. Little change
d. Increase followed by a decrease
*e. Decrease

6. A patient has enamel erosion. What vitamin should be administered for its treatment?
*a. D3
b. K
c. B1
d. PP
e. C

7. Nucleolus organizers of human chromosomes 13-15, 21, 22 include about 200 gene clusters that synthesize RNA. These chromosomal regions contain the information on the following type of RNA:
a. tRNA + rRNA
b. tRNA
*c. rRNA
d. mRNA
e. snRNA

8. For an unknown reason the fertilization membrane of an embryo dissolved in the fallopian tube in the first critical period. What complication of pregnancy is possible in this case?
*a. Embryo implantation into the Fallopian tube
b. Invagination of the blastocyst wall
c. Formation of two blastocysts
d. Return of blastocyst back to the ampullary portion of the tube
e. Embryonic death

9. A patient is 59 years old and works as director of a private enterprise. After the inspection by tax authorities he developed intense burning retrosternal pain radiating to the left arm. After 15 minutes the patient returned to normal. What is the leading mechanism for the development of stenocardia in this patient?
a. Coronary thrombosis
*b. Increased level of blood catecholamines
c. Functional overload of heart
d. Coronary atherosclerosis
e. Intravascular aggregation of blood corpuscles

10. A patient of neurological department has a sensitivity loss caused by the damage to pseudounipolar neurocytes. Pseudounipolar neurons are a kind of bipolar neurons and the only place of their localization in the human body is:
*a. Spinal ganglions
b. Thalamic tubercle
c. Retina
d. Intramural vegetative ganglia
e. Spiral ganglion

11. Periodontitis induces the development of lipid peroxidation in the periodontal tissues, as well as an increase in malondialdehyde and hydrogen peroxide concentration in the oral cavity. Which of the following enzymes provides antioxidant protection?
*a. Catalase
b. Amylase
c. Invertase
d. Maltase
e. Lactase

12. Continuous treatment of cancer patients with methotrexate over time reduces the target cells sensitivity to the drug. In this case gene amplification of the following enzyme is observed:
a. Thioredoxin reductase
*b. Dihydrofolate reductase
c. Deaminase
d. -
e. Thiaminase

13. An attack of tachycardia was stopped by pressing on the eyeballs. Which of the following reflexes underlies this phenomenon?
a. Bainbridge reflex
b. Hering reflex
*c. Aschner reflex
d. Holtz reflex
e. Bernard reflex

14. A child is 6 years old. The permanent teeth have started to take the place of the primary teeth. What teeth are the first to emerge?
a. Lower first premolars
b. Upper medial incisors
*c. Lower first molars
d. Lower canines
e. Upper first premolars

15. A patient complains of frequent bowel movements and stool with blood admixtures ("raspberry jelly" stool). Microscopic examination revealed large mononuclear cells with absorbed red blood cells. What protozoon is this morphological structure typical for?
a. Campylobacter jejuni
b. Toxoplasma gondii
c. Giardia lamblia
d. Balantidium coli
*e. Entamoeba histolytica

16. Histological examination of the grayish-pink elastic nodule of 0,3 cm in diameter found by a surgeon at the root of the extracted tooth shows granulation tissue with cords of stratified squamous epithelium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute apical periodontitis
b. Granulating pulpitis
*c. Granulomatous periodontitis
d. Granulating periodontitis
e. Eosinophilic granuloma

17. Examples of human-specific parasites are malaria plasmodium, enterobius vermicularis and some other. The source of invasion of such parasites is always a human. Such human-specific parasites cause diseases that are called:
a. Zoonotic
b. Anthropozoonotic
*c. Anthroponotic
d. Infectious
e. Multifactorial

18. A woman consulted a doctor about swelling and tenderness of the lower extremity, swollen veins and nodes on the medial surface of thigh. Which vein was affected?
a. Small saphenous
*b. Great saphenous
c. Popliteal
d. Tibial
e. Femoral

19. Microscopy of a smear obtained from a patient with acute purulent periostitis revealed gram-positive bacteria arranged in clusters resembling bunch of grapes. What microorganisms is this morphology typical for?
a. Tetracocci
b. Candida fungi
*c. Staphylococci
d. Sarcina
e. Streptococci

20. At the recruiting office US examination of a 19-year-old man revealed nephroptosis. Normally the kidneys should be located at the following vertebral level:
a. IX-X thoracic
b. XII thoracic and I lumbar
c. IV-V lumbar
d. IX-XII thoracic
*e. XI thoracic and III lumbar

21. A histological specimen represents an organ made up of skeletal cross-striated muscle tissue. The organ has cutaneous, intermediate, and mucosal sections. The skin of the organ is stratified squamous keratinizing epithelium passing into nonkeratinizing epithelium in the mucosal section. Specify this organ:
a. Hard palate
b. Gum
c. Cheek
*d. Lip
e. Tongue

22. A 40-year-old male has hearing impairment and paresis of facial muscles resulting from a blow to his head. He was diagnosed with a hematoma of cerebellopontine angle. What nerves had been damaged?
*a. VII, VIII pair of cranial nerves
b. V, VI pairs of cranial nerves
c. VIII, IX pairs of cranial nerves
d. IX, X pair of cranial nerves
e. -

23. Following the tooth extraction for acute pulpitis complicated by purulent periodontitis a patient developed osteomyelitis of mandible. 10 days later the patient died with symptoms of severe intoxication. Autopsy revealed a 2x2 cm large abscess of the right frontal lobe of brain, bilateral abscessed pneumonia, myeloid hyperplasia of spleen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chroniosepsis
b. Septicemia
c. Secondary septic endocarditis
d. -
*e. Pyosepticemia

24. It has been revealed that intense physical exercise causes activation of gluconeogenesis in liver of experimantal rats. Which substance is glucose precursor in this case?
a. Palmitate
b. Stearate
c. Urea
d. Glycogen
*e. Pyruvate

25. Autopsy of a young man revealed some lung cavities with inner walls made up of granulation tissue with varying degrees of maturity; pronounced pneumosclerosis and bronchiectasis. Some cavities had caseation areas. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Bronchiectasis
b. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
c. Infiltrative tuberculosis
d. Caseous pneumonia
*e. Fibrous cavernous tuberculosis

26. A 50-year-old woman with myocardial infarction has been delivered to the intensive care unit. Which enzymes activity will be most increased during the first two days?
a. Alanine aminopeptidase
*b. Aspartate aminotransferase
c. LDH5
d. LDH4
e. Alanine aminotransferase

27. Wilsons disease is a disorder of copper transport which leads to the accumulation of this metal in brain and liver cells. It is associated with a disturbance in the synthesis of the following protein:
a. Transcobalamin
b. Siderophilin
*c. Ceruloplasmin
d. Metallothionein
e. Haptoglobin

28. A 60-year-old man with a history of chronic intestinal obstruction has excessive protein putrefaction in the colon. What is the indicator of this process?
a. Glycosuria
*b. Indicanuria
c. Hyperuricuria
d. Bilirubinuria
e. Creatinuria

29. Depressions and emotional disorders result from noradrenaline, serotonin and other biogenic amines deficiency in brain. Concentration of these compounds in synapses can be increased by means of antidepressants that inhibit the activity of the following enzyme:
a. Phenylalanine-4-monooxigenase
b. Diamine oxidase
c. D-amino acid oxidase
*d. Monoamine oxidase
e. L-amino acid oxidase

30. A 70-year-old man has developed prosphetic stomatitis. Apart of this he was found to have an evident lesion of mouth corners. Microscopical examination revealed large ovoid gram-positive cells. What microorganisms are most likely to be the leading etiological agent of such a lesion?
a. Neisseria
*b. Candida fungi
c. Staphylococci
d. Streptococci
e. Corynebacteria

31. Microscopy of a smear taken from the film that appeared on the peptone water 6 hours after seeding and culturing of a fecal sample in a thermostat revealed mobile gram-negative bacteria curved in form of a comma that didnt make spores or capsules. What microorganisms were revealed?
a. Spirochetes
b. Clostridia
c. Spirilla
*d. Vibrios
e. Corynebacteria

32. Vestibular surface of the left lower incisor has a pink fungoid formation up to 2 cm large which is fixed to the supra-alveolar tissue by a wide pedicle. Histological examination revealed branched capillary vessels with multiple hemorrhages and foci of hemosiderosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Giant cell epulis
b. Cavernous hemangioma
*c. Angiomatous epulis
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Gingival fibromatosis

33. Oral mucosa of a patient was treated with hydrogen peroxide. Instead of foaming, the blood turned brown. That is possible in case of reduced concentration of the following enzyme:
a. Acetyltransferase
*b. Catalase
c. Pseudocholinesterase
d. Methemoglobin reductase
e. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase

34. During a surgery, the anesthesiologist used a ganglionic blocker for controlled hypotension. What drug was given the patient in this case?
a. Pirilenum
b. Pachycarpinum
c. Benzohexonium
*d. Hygronium
e. Pentaminum

35. During ventricular systole the muscle does not respond to additional stimulation because it is in the phase of:
a. -
*b. Absolute adiaphoria
c. Subnormal excitability
d. Increased excitability
e. Relative adiaphoria

36. A patient has herpetic conjunctivitis. What etiotropic drug should be administered?
*a. Acyclovir
b. Tetracycline
c. Furagin
d. Ampicillin
e. Methisazonum

37. A patient with a long history of chronic periodontitis underwent removal of a maxillary cyst located at the root of the affected tooth. Microscopy shows that the bone wall is made up of fibrous tissue infiltrated by lymphocytes and plasma cells. The inner surface of the cyst is covered with stratified squamous epithelium with no signs of keratinization. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Radicular cyst
b. Primordial cyst
c. Follicular cyst
d. Gingival fibromatosis
e. Eosinophilic granuloma

38. Anatomical dead space is the part of air that remains in the airways after the expiration. Anatomical dead space will be reduced in the following situation:
a. Lying patient is turned to his right side
*b. Tracheostomy
c. Patients head is flexed forward
d. Breathing through the mouth
e. Lying patient is turned to his left side

39. Functioning of certain structures of the isolated heart was stopped by means of cooling. What structure was cooled providing that the heart first stopped contractions and then resumed them with a frequency twice lower than the initial one?
a. Atrioventricular node
b. His bundle branches
c. Purkinjes fibers
*d. Sinoatrial node
e. His bundle

40. Histological examination of a tissue sample revealed that the tissue had no blood vessels, and the cells were packed tightly together making layers. Specify this tissue:
*a. Epithelial
b. Cartilaginous
c. Muscular
d. Osseous
e. Nervous

41. A patient has petechial hemorrhages on the gums, hard and soft palate, buccal mucosa. This is caused by the dysfunction of the following blood corpuscles:
a. Lymphocytes
b. Monocytes
*c. Platelets
d. Erythrocytes
e. Eosinophils

42. Survey radiograph of facial skull of a 16-year-old girl shows some hole-like foci of cranial bone destruction. Histological examination of biopsy material revealed zones of destruction of bone trabeculae, proliferation of connective tissue with diffuse histiocytic infiltrate and a large number of eosinophilic leukocytes. Diagnose the disease:
*a. Eosinophilic granuloma
b. Cherubism
c. Histiocytosis X
d. Fibrous dysplasia
e. Osteoclastoma

43. A 77-year-old patient with atherosclerosis got pain in his right foot. The foot is enlarged, the skin is black and macerated, the demarcation zone is not defined clearly. What pathological process arose in the foot?
a. Dry gangrene
b. Noma
c. Coagulation necrosis
*d. Wet gangrene
e. Sequestrum

44. Certain infections caused by bacteria are treated with sulphanilamides that block the synthesis of bacterial growth factor. What is the mechanism of these drugs action?
a. They are allosteric enzymes
b. They inhibit the folic acid absorption
*c. They are antivitamins of p-aminobenzoic acid
d. They are involved in redox processes
e. They are allosteric enzyme inhibitors

45. A 26-year-old patient was found to have a big furuncle of soft tissues of face by the root of nose and inferior eyelid. This disease can be seriously complicated by the infection spreading along veins of this region to the sinuses of dura brain mater. What sinus is most likely to be affected?
*a. Cavernous
b. Occipital
c. Sigmoid
d. Superior sagittal
e. Petrosal

46. A 12-year-old male patient has tetanic convulsions. Which gland function may be impaired in this case?
a. Hypophisis
b. Glandula pinealis
*c. Glandulae parathyroidae
d. Glandula thyroidea
e. Thymus

47. The total number of leukocytes in patients blood is 90*10^9/l. Leukogram: eosinophils - 0%, basophils - 0%, juvenile - 0%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmentonuclear cells - 20%, lymphoblasts - 1%, prolymphocytes - 2%, lymphocytes - 70%, monocytes - 5%, Botkin-Gumprecht cells. Clinical examination revealed enlarged cervical and submandibular lymph nodes. Such clinical presentations are typical for the following pathology:
a. Chronic myeloleukosis
b. Lymphogranulomatosis
c. Acute lympholeukosis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
*e. Chronic lympholeukosis

48. A patient with chronic heart failure has been taking digoxin for several months on an outpatient basis. At a certain stage of treatment, he got symptoms of drug overdose. What effect underlies the development of this complication?
a. Adaptation
b. Functional cumulation
c. Sensibilization
d. Tachyphylaxis
*e. Material accumulation

49. A 60-year-old man consulted a doctor about an onset of chest pain. In blood serum analysis showed a significant increase in the activity of the following enzymes: creatine kinase and its MB-isoform, aspartate aminotransferase. These changes indicate the development of the pathological process in the following tissues:
a. Skeletal muscles
b. Lungs
c. Liver
*d. Cardiac muscle
e. Smooth muscles

50. Following treatment with a highly-efficient anti-tuberculosis drug a 48-year-old female developed optic nerve neuritis, memory impairment, cramps. Which of these anti-TB drugs had the patient taken?
a. Rifampicin
b. Kanamycin sulfate
*c. Isoniazid
d. PASA
e. Ethambutol

51. Following the estimation of a persons energy expenditures it was established that the respiratory quotient was equal to 1,0. This means that the compound that is mainly oxidized in the cells is:
a. Proteins and carbohydrates
b. Proteins
c. Carbohydrates and fats
*d. Carbohydrates
e. Fats

52. A patient from Prykarpattia (at the foot of the Carpathian mountains) with endemic goiter consulted a doctor about suppuration of gingival angles and loosening of teeth. What is a major factor of periodontitis development in this case?
a. Malnutrition
b. Violation of swallowing
c. Stress effects
*d. Endocrine disorders
e. Hypersalivation

53. A patient has the pronounced pain syndrome induced by neuralgia. What drug from the group of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs will reduce pain sensitivity?
a. Lidocaine hydrochloride
b. Ketamine hydrochloride
c. Codeine phosphate
*d. Diclofenac sodium
e. Droperidol

54. After examining the patient the doctor recommended him to eliminate rich meat and vegetable broth, spices, smoked products from the diet, since the patient was found to have:
a. Reduced salivation
b. Reduced motility of the gastrointestinal tract
c. Reduced secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach glands
d. Biliary dyskinesia
*e. Increased secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach glands

55. Microscopy of dental plaque revealed unicellular organisms. Their cytoplasm had two distinct layers, barely visible core, wide pseudopodia. The patient is most likely to have:
a. Lamblia
b. Trichomonas tenax
*c. Entamoeba gingivalis
d. Entamoeba histolytica
e. Entamoeba coli

56. Platelet adhesion at the site of vascular injury is of great importance for the mechanisms of primary hemostasis. Which factor plays a major part in this process?
a. Fitzgeralds
b. Rosenthals
c. Hagemans
*d. Willebrands
e. Fletchers

57. Enamel hypoplasia is caused by a dominant gene localized in the X chromosome. Mother has a normal enamel, and father has enamel hypoplasia. Which of children will have this anomaly?
a. Only the sons
b. Half of the daughters
c. Half of the sons
*d. Only the daughters
e. All the children

58. A patient consulted a doctor about an increased pain sensitivity of the ear skin and ear canal. Palpation behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle was painful. Such clinical presentations are typical for the irritation of the following nerve:
a. N.occipitalis minor
*b. N.auricularis magnus
c. N.vagus
d. Nn.supraclaviculares
e. N.transversus colli

59. Electrophoretic study of blood serum of a patient with pneumonia revealed an increase in one of the protein fractions. What fraction is it?
*a. γ-globulins
b. β-globulins
c. Albumins
d. α2-globulins
e. α1-globulins

60. After the transfusion of the concentrated red blood cells the patient developed posttransfusion shock. What is the leading mechanism of acute renal failure in this case?
a. Impairment of the renal incretory function
*b. Glomerular filtration disorder
c. Tubular secretion disorder
d. Urinary excretion disorder
e. Tubular reabsorption disorder

61. Histological specimen of mandible shows 10 tooth buds connected to the dental plate. Which element of tooth germ will develop out of them?
*a. Enamel organ
b. Enamel spindles
c. Dental bulb
d. Enamel pearls
e. Dental sac

62. A patient with diabetes mellitus developed ketoacidotic coma due to the acid-base disturbance. What type of disorder had arisen in this case?
*a. Metabolic acidosis
b. Nongaseous alkalosis
c. Gaseous alkalosis
d. Exogenous acidosis
e. Respiratory acidosis

63. Throughout a year a 37-year-old woman periodically got infectious diseases of bacterial origin, their course was extremely lingering, remissions were short. Examination revealed low level of major classes of immunoglobulins. The direct cause of this phenomenon may be the following cell dysfunction:
a. Lymphocytes
*b. Plasmocytes
c. Phagocytes
d. Macrophages
e. Neutrophils

64. A hospital in Donetsk region admitted the patients - members of the same family - with eyelid and face edemata, fever, eosinophilia, headache, muscle pain. The disease developed on the 7-10 day after eating pork sausage sent by the patients relatives from Khmelnitsky region. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Teniasis
b. Taeniarhynchosis
c. Echinococcosis
*d. Trichinosis
e. Cysticercosis

65. After the extraction of the lower first premolar the patient had dentoalveolar haemorrhage. What artery did the bleeding occur from?
a. Lingual
b. Transverse facial artery
c. Mental
d. Buccal
*e. Inferior alveolar

66. As a result of an injury a child developed an abscess of adipose tissue of cheek. With time the process spread to the lateral surface of pharynx. The pus spread along the following fascia:
a. Temporal
b. -
*c. Bucco-pharyngeal
d. Parotid
e. Masticatory

67. A female patient presents with the ovarian hyperaemia, increased permeability of the blood-follicle barrier with the development of edema, infiltration of the follicle wall with segmental leukocytes. The follicle is large in volume. Its wall is thickened. What period of the sex cycle is the described situation typical for?
a. Period of relative rest
*b. Preovulatory stage
c. Menstrual period
d. Postmenstrual period
e. Ovulation

68. A 4-year-old girl died suddenly with symptoms of asphyxia. Autopsy revealed white spots on the buccal mucosa; large blotches of rash on the skin of face, trunk and extremities; conjunctivitis, edema with foci of necrosis on the laryngeal mucosa; giant-cell pneumonia on microscopy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Influenza
b. Scarlet fever
c. Meningococcal infection
d. Typhus
*e. Measles

69. Inhibitory effect of GABA is due to the increased permeability of the postsynaptic membrane for chloride ions. This mediator is produced as a result of decarboxylation of the following amino acid:
a. Arginine
b. Glutamine
*c. Glutamate
d. Aspartate
e. Asparagine

70. A patient has an inflammation in the pterygopalatine fossa. The infection has spread into the nasal cavity. Which anatomical structure has the infection spread through?
a. Canalis ptherygoideus
b. Foramen rotundum
*c. Foramen sphenopalatinum
d. Canalis palatinus major
e. Canalis palatinus minor

71. Degeneration of glycogen in liver is stimulated by glucagon. What secondary messenger (mediator) is thus formed in the cell?
*a. c-AMP
b. NO
c. Triacylglycerol
d. c-GMP
e. CO

72. Postmortem examination of a patient with a long history of rheumatism revealed thickening and shortening of the mitral valve leaflets with abundant thrombotic deposits. Histological examination of the valve leaflets confirmed sclerosis and revealed multiple foci of connective tissue disorganization in form of mucoid and fibrinoid swelling, as well as deendothelization foci. Endothelium defects were covered with thrombotic deposits of 1-2 mm. What type of valvular endocarditis is the case?
*a. Recurrent verrucous endocarditis
b. Polypous-ulcerative endocarditis
c. Fibroplastic endocarditis
d. Diffuse valvulitis
e. Acute verrucous endocarditis

73. A 10-year-old child cut his leg with a piece of glass and was sent to a clinic for an anti-tetanus serum injection. In order to prevent the development of anaphylactic shock the Besredka desensitisation method was applied. What mechanism underlies this method?
a. Stimulation of the immunological antigen tolerance
b. Stimulation of antigen-specific IgG2 synthesis
*c. Binding to IgE fixed to mast cells
d. Inhibited synthesis of mast cells mediators
e. Binding of IgE receptors on mast cells

74. A patient consulted a doctor about the inflammation of the ethmoid bone cells (ethmoiditis). Examination revealed the disorder of blood supply to the bone. The ethmoidal cells are normally supplied with blood by the branches of the following artery:
a. A. transversa faciei
b. A. cerebri anterior
*c. A. ophthalmica
d. A. infraorbitalis
e. A. facialis

75. An 18-year-old patient complains of general weakness, fatigue, low spirits. The patient is of the asthenic constitution type. Ps- 68/min., AP- 90/60 mm Hg. She has been found to have primary neurocirculatory hypotension. What is the leading factor of the arterial pressure drop in this patient?
a. Hypovolemia
b. Decreased minute blood volume
*c. Decreased tonus of resistive vessels
d. Decreased cardiac output
e. Deposition of blood in the veins of the systemic circulation

76. A histological specimen of mandible of an embryo shows a tooth germ with the dental papilla made up of small stellate basophilic cells. What tissue forms this part of the tooth germ?
a. Reticular
b. Cartilaginous
*c. Mesenchyme
d. Epithelial
e. Osseous

77. A patient underwent lobectomy of the right middle lobe of a lung. What segments of the lung were affected?
a. Apical, anterior
*b. Lateral and medial
c. Apical posterior and anterior
d. Basal posterior and lateral
e. Basal medial and anterior

78. A patient with symptoms of acute heart failure, namely pallor, acrocyanosis and rapid shallow breathing, has been delivered to the emergency department. Which of these drugs is indicated in this case?
a. Cordiamine
b. Nitroglycerine
*c. Corglycon
d. Digitoxin
e. Adrenalin hydrochloride

79. During gastrulation the Hensens node remained underdeveloped in the embryo. Which axial organ will slow down its development?
a. Neural groove
b. Neural crests
*c. Chord
d. Mantle layer of the neural tube
e. Neural tube

80. Ionizing radiation or vitamin E deficiency may increase the permeability of lysosome membranes. What consequences may arise from this pathology?
a. Intensive protein synthesis
*b. Partial or complete cell disintegration
c. Formation of cleavage spindle
d. Restoration of the cytoplasmic membrane
e. Intense energy synthesis

81. Mother of a 10-year-old boy with purulent gingivitis consulted a dentist about the possibility of gingivitis treatment with fluoroquinolone drugs. The doctor gave a negative answer explaining it by the fact that fluoroquinolones:
a. Damage dentin
b. Have cauterizing effect on the mucous membranes
*c. Damage the cartilage tissue in children
d. Provoke gingival haemorrhage
e. Provoke loss of calcium from bones and teeth

82. A patient with arthritis and varicose veins has been taking a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug for a long time, which caused the thrombosis of cutaneous veins. Which of the listed drugs might have caused this complication?
a. Aspirin
b. Ibuprofen
*c. Celecoxib
d. Indomethacin
e. Phenylbutazone

83. A 42-year-old man died with symptoms of severe intoxication and respiratory failure. A slide of lung tissue was heterogenous, with multiple microfocal hemorrhages and foci of emphysema. Histological examination of lungs revealed hemorrhagic abscessing bronchopneumonia; eosinophilic and basophilic granules in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells of bronchi. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Parainfluenza
b. Adenovirus infection
*c. Influenza
d. Respiratory syncytial virus infection
e. Staphylococcal bronchopneumonia

84. A 45-year-old female patient has neurosis with irritability, insomnia, amotivational anxiety. What tranquilizer will be able to eliminate all symptoms of the disease?
a. Paracetamol
*b. Diazepam
c. Levodopa
d. Piracetam
e. Caffeine-sodium benzoate

85. On the base of the clinical data a child was diagnosed with atypical pneumonia resistant to the effects of beta-lactam antibiotics. The patients sputum was cultured and incubated in a special medium, which resulted in growth of microorganisms forming microscopic colonies with a dense center (looking like fried eggs). What microorganism caused the disease?
a. Chlamidia pneumoniae
b. Klebsiella pneumoniae
*c. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
d. Streptococcus pneumoniae
e. Legionella pneumophila

86. A patient was taken to a hospital with dizziness, dry mouth, mydriatic pupils, accommodation disorder, tachycardia, difficult urination, intestinal atony. These symptoms might have been caused by overdose of the following drug:
a. Captopril
b. Prazosin
*c. Atropine sulfate
d. Furosemide
e. Clonidine

87. A 71-year-old man had been presenting with diarrhea for 10 days. The feces had admixtures of blood and mucus. He was delivered to a hospital in grave condition and died 2 days later. Autopsy of the body revealed the following: diphtheritic colitis with multiple irregularly-shaped ulcers of different depth in both sigmoid colon and rectus. Bacteriological analysis revealed Shigella. What was the main disease?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Nonspecific ulcerous colitis
*d. Dysentery
e. Typhoid fever

88. Before an exam a student complained of acute dental pain which grew less during the exam. What inhibition caused the pain abatement?
*a. External
b. Differentiating
c. Declining
d. Protective
e. Delayed

89. A patient with chronic heart failure had been taking digitoxin for several months, during digitalization the following symptoms developed: headache, nausea, diarrhea, loss of appetite, impaired color vision, bradycardia. What antidote should be administered to reduce the intoxication symptoms?
a. Prednisolone
*b. Unithiol
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Naloxone
e. Adrenalin hydrochloride

90. A woman got infected with rubella during pregnancy. The child was born with malformations, namely cleft lip and palate. The childs genotype is normal. These malformations are a manifestation of:
a. Chromosomal mutations
b. Combinatory variability
*c. Modification variability
d. Polyploidies
e. Aneuploidies

91. A patient has been diagnosed with a haemorrhage in the region of the lateral sulcus of the brain. As a result, the blood flow is disturbed in the following artery:
a. A. communicans posterior
b. A. cerebri posterior
*c. A. cerebri media
d. A. cerebri anterior
e. A. communicans anterior

92. Cationic glycoproteins are the major components of parotid saliva. What amino acids are responsible for their positive charge?
a. Aspartate, arginine, glutamate
b. Glutamate, valine, leucine
c. Aspartate, glutamate, glycine
d. Cysteine, glycine, proline
*e. Lysine, arginine, histidine

93. A patient with mandibular osteomyelitis has been administered an antibiotic from the tetracycline group. Specify this drug:
a. Oxacillin
b. Amikacin
c. Streptomycin
*d. Doxycycline hydrochloride
e. Rifampicin

94. In course of a surgery the surgeon needs to expose spatium antescalenum. What structure forms the posterior border of this space?
a. M. longus colli
*b. M. scalenus anterior
c. M. scalenus posterior
d. M. longus capitis
e. M. scalenus medius

95. When processing a molar tooth with a dental cutter the dentist has by accident deeply wounded the patients cheek and damaged not only the mucosa but also a muscle. Which muscle was hurt?
a. Greater zygomatic muscle
b. Orbicular muscle of the mouth
*c. Buccal muscle
d. Masticatory muscle
e. Mylohyoid muscle

96. A patient complains of an increased sensitivity of the posterior third of his tongue as well as of a gustatory disturbance in this region. What nerve is damaged?
a. Accessory
b. Facial
*c. Glossopharyngeal
d. Trigeminal
e. Hypoglossal

97. Tooth extraction in a patient with chronic persistent hepatitis was complicated by a prolonged bleeding. What is the cause of hemorrhagic syndrome?
a. Increased fibrinolysis
*b. Decreased production of thrombin
c. Increased production of thromboplastin
d. Decreased production of fibrin
e. Increased synthesis of fibrinogen

98. A physician is planning to diagnose an infectious disease by means of agglutination test. What is required for this reaction apart from the serum of a patient?
a. Hemolytic serum
b. Complement
c. Diagnostic serum
d. Anatoxin
*e. Diagnosticum

99. From the fecal sample of a patient Shigella sonnei were isolated. What additional studies are required to identify the source of infection?
a. Neutralization reaction
b. Precipitation reaction
c. Complement-fixation reaction
d. Antibiogram
*e. Phage-typing of the isolated pure culture

100. Preventive examination of 1-1.5-year-old children living in an orphanage revealed focal thickening of ribs and wrists, bowed legs. The dentist pointed out delayed teething, wrong eruption order, irregular mineralization of the enamel and dentin, high-arched palate. What disease has developed in children?
a. Osteomalacia
b. Metastatic calcification
*c. Rickets
d. Metabolic calcification
e. Dystrophic calcification

101. A patient with a severe maxillofacial trauma has been delivered to the emergency department. What drug should be given this patient to relieve pain shock?
*a. Promedol
b. Mydocalm
c. Sydnocarb
d. Ibuprofen
e. Pantogam

102. A patient with acute heart failure refractory to cardiac glycosides was given an injection of dobutamine. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Increase of n.vagus tonus
b. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase activity
c. Inhibition of K+, Na+- ATPase
d. Complexation with membrane phospholipids
*e. Stimulation of ?-1-adrenergic receptors

103. An examination of a 26-year-old patient involved histological analysis of bone marrow punctate which revealed a significant decrease in the number of megakaryocytes. At the same time the following blood corpuscles should be decreased in number:
a. Eosinophils
b. B-lymphocytes
c. Neutrophils
*d. Platelets
e. Erythrocytes

104. A patient has been diagnosed with sepsis. It was decided to treat him with a drug from the fluoroquinolone group. Specify this drug:
a. Metronidazole
*b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Cefpirome
d. Cephalexin
e. Ampicillin

105. When a wound heals, a scar takes its place. What substance is the main component of its connective tissue?
a. Elastin
b. Hyaluronic acid
c. Chondroitin sulfate
*d. Collagen
e. Keratan sulfate

106. After a person had drunk 1,5 liters of water, the amount of urine increased significantly, and its relative density decreased to 1,001. These changes are a result of decreased water reabsorption in the distal nephron portion due to reduced secretion of:
*a. Vasopressin
b. Renin
c. Prostaglandins
d. Angiotensin II
e. Aldosterone

107. During allergic rhinitis (inflammation of the nasal mucosa) the number of basophils in the connective tissue of the mucosa increases, which is accompanied by a tissue edema. This phenomenon is associated with the following function of tissue basophils:
a. Heat production
b. Phagocytosis
*c. Histamine synthesis
d. Production of intercellular substance
e. Antibody formation

108. A patient with a craniocerebral injury presents with respiration characterized by progressively deeper respiratory movements followed by a gradual decrease that results in a temporary stop in breathing. What pattern of abnormal respiration are these features typical for?
*a. Cheyne-Stokes
b. Biots
c. Kussmauls
d. Apneustic
e. Gasping

109. Calcification of the intercellular substance of bone tissue is accompanied by the deposition of hydroxyapatite crystals along the collagen fibers. This process requires the presence of alkaline phosphatase in the intercellular substance. What cell produces this enzyme?
a. Osteocyte
*b. Osteoblast
c. Chondroblast
d. Chondrocyte
e. Osteoclast

110. A patient complains of toothache. On examination he has been diagnosed with pulpitis. Which factor played a main pathogenic role in the development of pain syndrome in this case?
a. Vasospasm
b. Inadequate stimulation of a mandibular nerve branch
*c. Increased intratissular pressure in the dental pulp
d. Activation of one of the components of the complement system
e. Interleukin action

111. Having recovered from angina a 23-year-old patient developed urinary syndrome (hematuria, proteinuria, leukocyturia). Study of the puncture biopsy of a kidney revealed manifestations of intracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis, and electron microscopy revealed large subepithelial deposits. What is the pathogenesis of this disease?
a. Atopy, anaphylaxis with production of IgE and their fixation to the mast cells
b. Granulomatosis
c. Cytotoxic, cytolytic action of antibodies
d. Cell-mediated cytolysis
*e. Immunocomplex mechanism

112. Following a cold, a patient developed numbness on the right side of his face. Examination revealed a disturbance of pain and temperature sensitivity on the right side of the face. What nerve is damaged?
*a. Trigeminal
b. Glossopharyngeal
c. Hypoglossal
d. Vagus
e. Facial

113. Children often have laboured nasal breathing which is caused by overdevelopment of lymphoid tissue of the pharyngeal mucous membrane. This phenomenon may cause enlargement of the following tonsils:
a. Tonsilla lingualis
b. All above-mentioned
*c. Tonsilla pharyngea
d. Tonsilla palatina
e. Tonsilla tubaria

114. A patient has sustained a traumatic injury of the greater pectoral muscle. This resulted in a decrease of:
*a. Inspiratory reserve volume
b. Functional residual lung capacity
c. Residual volume
d. Tidal volume
e. Expiratory reserve volume

115. Examination of the oral mucosa revaled a small nodule with papillary surface. Histological examination revealed conjugate papillary proliferations of stratified squamous epithelium without cellular atypism and underlying stroma represented by thin-walled vessels and loose connective tissue. What formation has developed in a patient?
a. Basal cell carcinoma
b. Epithelium hyperplasia
*c. Papilloma
d. Fibrolipoma
e. Fibroma

116. Injection of an anaesthetic before the tooth extraction resulted in development of anaphylactic shock accompanied by oliguria. What pathogenetic mechanism caused a decrease in diuresis in this case?
a. Damage of glomerular filter
b. Increase in hydrostatic pressure in the Bowmans capsule
c. Increase in oncotic pressure of blood plasma
d. Increase in vasopressin secretion
*e. Decrease in hydrostatic pressure in the renal corpuscle capillaries

117. The patients mobile phone rang during EEG recording. What changes will be observed on the EEG?
*a. Alpha rhythm will change into beta rhythm
b. Beta rhythm will increase
c. Alpha rhythm will change into delta rhythm
d. Alpha rhythm will increase
e. Beta rhythm will change into alpha rhythm

118. Blood serum of a newborn contains antibodies to measles virus. What kind of immunity is this indicative of?
a. Artificial active
b. Heredoimmunity
*c. Natural passive
d. Natural active
e. Artificial passive

119. It is known that the gene responsible for the development of the MN blood groups has two allelic states. If the gene M is considered as the initial gene, the allelic gene N appeared due to:
a. DNA repair
b. Gene combinations
c. DNA replication
d. Crossing over
*e. Mutations

120. A patient with a pronounced icteritiousness of skin, sclera and mucous membranes has urine of dark beer colour and colourless feces. Direct bilirubin in blood is elevated, urine contains bilirubin. What type of jaundice is it?
a. Excretory
b. Parenchymatous
*c. Obstructive
d. Hemolytic
e. Conjugation

121. A 37-year-old patient has has lost 5 kg in weight over the past three months, he complains of hand tremor, excessive sweating, exophthalmos, tachycardia. These changes might have been caused by the increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Thyrocalcitonin
b. Cortisol
c. Glucagon
*d. Thyroxine
e. Insulin

122. Histological study of a microslide of human skin found only dense irregular connective tissue. Which layer of this organ was analysed?
*a. Reticular dermis
b. Epidermis
c. Subcutaneous adipose tissue
d. Basal layer of epidermis
e. Papillary dermis

123. A patient consulted an immunologist about diarrhea, weight loss within several months, low-grade fever, enlarged lymph nodes. The doctor suspected HIV infection. What immunocompetent cells must be studied in the first place?
*a. Helper T-lymphocytes
b. Plasma cells
c. Monocytes
d. B-lymphocytes
e. Suppressor T-lymphocytes

124. The operative dentistry department admitted a newborn girl who choked during sucking. Examination revealed cleft palate arising from non-union of the middle frontal process and maxillary process of the I-st branchial arch. The cleft was located in the palate between:
*a. Os incisivum et processus palatinus maxillae
b. Processus palatinus maxillae et lamina horizontalis os palatinum
c. In the region of canalis incisivus
d. Processus palatinus maxillae dextrae et sinistrae
e. Lamina horizontalis os palatinum dextrum et sinistrum

125. Analysis of biopsy material of urinary bladder mucosa revealed a tumour of epithelial origin. What kind of epithelium was the source of this tumour?
a. Simple squamous
b. Multinucleated ciliated
*c. Stratified transitional
d. Simple cubical
e. Stratified squamous nonkeratinizing

126. A 30-year-old patient with pneumonia has been administered a 3-day course of an antibiotic from the group of azalides that has bactericidal effect, prolonged action, the ability to bind to phagocytic cells and accumulate in the infection foci. What drug has been administered?
a. Ciprofloxacin
b. Isoniazid
*c. Azithromycin
d. Erythromycin
e. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt

127. Histological specimen of a decalcified tooth represents richly vascularized loose fibrous connective tissue containing a variety of cells. Pyriform odontoblasts of this region are arranged in several rows. What kind of dental structure is it?
a. Root pulp
b. Periodontium
c. Vasodentin
*d. Coronal pulp
e. Mantle dentin

128. A patient has air embolism as a result of a skin injury in the middle portion of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Which cervical vein was injured?
a. Posterior auricular vein
*b. External jugular vein
c. Transverse cervical vein
d. Anterior jugular vein
e. Internal jugular vein

129. At a certain stage of development of a human embryo one can observe formation of a cavity in its structure, small light blastomeres on the periphery and large dark blastomeres at one of the poles. The embryo at this stage of development is called:
a. Morula
*b. Blastocyst
c. Blastodisk
d. Zygote
e. Gastrula

130. A patient has a history of chronic obstructive bronchitis. Blood gas analysis revealed the development of hypoxemia and hypercapnia on the background of dyspnea, tachycardia and cyanosis. What disorder of external respiration is observed in the patient?
a. Hyperperfusion
b. Hypoperfusion
c. Hyperventilation
*d. Hypoventilation
e. Hyperdiffusion

131. A patient has secretory dysfunction of the submandibular salivary galnd. Which nerve is responsible for its vegetative innervation?
*a. Сhorda tympani
b. N.petrosus major
c. N.auriculotemporalis
d. N.petrosus minor
e. N.mandibularis

132. It was established that the conduction velocity in the nerve fibers was equal to 120 m/sec. Specify these fibers:
a. Preganglionic parasympathetic
b. Postganglionic sympathetic
c. Preganglionic sympathetic
d. Postganglionic parasympathetic
*e. Motoneuron axons

133. After a diver had dived to a depth of 60 meters he got the following symptoms of CNS dysfunction: anxiety, euphoria, lack of attention, professional errors. These symptoms are associated with neurons being under a toxic effect of:
a. Oxygen
*b. Nitrogen
c. Ammonia
d. Carbon dioxide
e. Lactate

134. A patient with marked manifestations of exsicosis died in the infectious disease hospital. Postmortem examination results: the corpse with contracted muscles, dry skin and mucous membranes, thick and dark blood in veins, edematous plethoric mucosa, distended bowel loops, the lumen contains about 4 liters of rice-water fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enteric fever
b. Anthrax, intestinal form
c. Yersiniosis
*d. Cholera
e. Dysentery

135. A patient consulted a doctor about loss of taste at the root of tongue. The doctor established that this was due to a nerve damage. What nerve was damaged?
a. Trigeminal
b. Superlaryngeal
*c. Glossopharyngeal
d. Vagus
e. Facial

136. Autopsy of a 52-year-old woman with a long history of chronic glomerulonephritis revealed significantly reduced in size, dense kidneys with a surface of fine granularity; fibrinous inflammation of serous and mucous membranes; dystrophic changes in parenchymatous organs; cerebral edema. The described changes of serous membranes and internal organs are caused by the following complication:
a. Anaemia
b. Thrombocytopenia
*c. Uraemia
d. DIC syndrome
e. Sepsis

137. The surgically excised connective tissue of the deformed mitral valve gives a basophilic reaction when stained with hematoxylin and eosin. When stained with toluidine blue it turns purple (metachromasia). What changes of the connective tissue can be detected by such reactions?
a. Petrification
b. Connective tissue edema
c. Fibrinoid necrosis of connective tissue
d. Hyalinosis
*e. Mucoid edema

138. In a bacteriological laboratory some bacterial smears had to be stained by Grams method. For this purpose the following reagents were prepared: gentian violet, Lugols solution, aqueous fuchsin solution. What other reagent is required?
a. Methylene blue solution
*b. 96% ethanol
c. 5% sulfuric acid
d. 3% hydrogen peroxide
e. Carbolic fuchsin

139. In the perianal folds of a 5-year-old girl mother found white worms causing itch and anxiety, and took them to the laboratory. The study revealed white filament-like helminths 0,5-1 cm long, with pointed, sometimes twisted, ends. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Ascariasis
*b. Diphyllobothriasis
c. Difilobotrioz
d. Opisthorchiasis
e. Teniasis

140. A pregnant women developed severe toxemia with exhausting recurrent vomiting throughout a day. By the end of the day she developed tetanic convulsions and bodily dehydration. The described changes were caused by the following type of acid-base disbalance:
*a. Nongaseous excretory alkalosis
b. Nongaseous metabolic acidosis
c. Nongaseous excretory acidosis
d. Gaseous acidosis
e. Gaseous alkalosis

141. During the formation of mantle dentin the synthetic activity of odontoblasts was disturbed, which will have an effect on the formation of the following fibers:
*a. Radial collagen Korffs fibers
b. Nerve
c. Elastic
d. Reticular
e. Tangential collagen Ebners fibers

142. A patient visited a dentist for acute dental pain in the lower left canine. He was diagnosed with pulpitis. What nerve innervates this tooth?
*a. Inferior alveolar
b. Zygomatic
c. Palatal
d. Superior alveolar
e. Facial

143. Phenylketonuria is a disease caused by a recessive gene that is localized in the autosome. The parents are heterozygous for this gene. They already have two sons with phenylketonuria and one healthy daughter. What is the probability that their fourth child will have the disease too?
a. 100%
b. 0%
*c. 25%
d. 75%
e. 50%

144. An unconscious patient had been delivered to a hospital by the ambulance. Objectively: absent reflexes, occasional convulsions, irregular breathing. After a laboratory examination he was diagnosed with hepatic coma. What metabolite accumulation is essential for the development of the central nervous system disorders?
a. Glutamine
b. Bilirubin
*c. Ammonia
d. Urea
e. Histamine

145. As a result of an injury the patient is unable to move his tongue forward and downward. Which of the following muscles is damaged?
a. Stylohyoid
b. Hyoglossal
c. Superior longitudinal
*d. Genioglossal
e. Inferior longitudinal

146. When examining a child the dentist found the deposit on both tonsils and suspected atypical form of diphtheria. A smear was taken, and after the nutrient media inoculation the toxicity of the isolated pure culture was determined. What reaction was used to determine the toxigenicity of the isolated strain of diphtheria bacillus?
a. Agglutination reaction on a glass slide
*b. Gel precipitation reaction
c. Hemolysis reaction
d. Ring precipitation reaction
e. Complement binding reaction

147. A patient with inflammation of tongue mucosa (glossitis) complains of taste sensitivity disorder in the two anterior thirds of the tongue. This is caused by the lesion of the following nerve:
a. Lesser petrosal
b. Glossopharyngeal
*c. Tympanichord
d. Lingual
e. Tympanic

148. A patient with periodontitis has developed gingival edema. The gums are of dark red colour. What local circulation disorder prevails in the gums of the patient?
a. Thrombosis
*b. Venous hyperemia
c. Ischemia
d. Arterial hyperemia
e. Embolism

149. It is known that the pentose phosphate pathway occuring in the adipocytes of adipose tissue acts as a cycle. What is the main function of this cycle in the adipose tissue?
*a. NADPH2 generation
b. Ribose-phosphate production
c. Energy generation
d. Glucose oxidation to end products
e. Xenobiotic detoxification

150. A 50-year-old patient has been examined by a dentist and found to have crimson smooth tongue. Blood analysis revealed a decrease in RBC level and hemoglobin concentration, colour index of 1,3, symptoms of megaloblastic hematopoiesis, degenerative changes in WBCs. What blood disorder was found in this patient?
a. Hemolytic anemia
*b. B12-folic-acid-deficiency anemia
c. Aplastic anemia
d. Myeloid leukemia
e. Iron deficiency anemia

151. In order to eliminate occupational risks dental workers underwent vaccination. The vaccine should protect them from a viral infection, whose pathogen may be found in blood of dental patients who had had this infection or who are its chronic carriers. What vaccine was used?
a. Anti-rabies vaccine
b. Inactivated hepatitis A vaccine
c. Live measles vaccine
d. Subunit influenza vaccine
*e. Genetically engineered HBs antigen

152. A patient with a malignant neoplasm on the upper jaw had been administered morphine hydrochloride for analgesia. The injection induced respiratory depression, pupil constriction, cyanosis, hypothermia, loss of consciousness. What antidote must be used?
a. Droperidol
b. Atropine sulfate
*c. Naloxone
d. Promedol
e. Adrenalin hydrochloride

153. A patient with rheumatoid arthritis has been given hydrocortisone for a long time. He has developed hyperglycemia, polyuria, glycosuria, thirst. These complications of treatment result from the activation of the following process:
a. Glycolysis
b. Glycogenesis
c. Glycogenolysis
d. Lipolysis
*e. Gluconeogenesis

154. Steatosis is caused by accumulation of triacylglycerols in hepatocytes. One of the mechanisms of this disease is to reduce the utilization of neutral fat VLDL. What lipotropic substances prevent the steatosis development?
*a. Methionine, B6, B12
b. Alanine, B1, PP
c. Valine, B3, B2
d. Isoleucine, B1, B2
e. Arginine, B2, B3

155. Histological study of the bronchial wall and adjacent lung segments revealed sheets and strands of squamous epithelium. The cells have moderately expressed symptoms of atypia: polymorphism, nuclear hyperchromatism, mitoses. In the center of the complex there are concentric pink formations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Undifferentiated carcinoma
b. Adenocarcinoma
c. Scirrhus
d. Non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma
*e. Keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma

156. Autopsy of a man who died from intraintestinal hemorrhage revealed necrosis of grouped and solitary follicles, dead tissues imbibed with bile and blood in the ileum; sequestration and rejection of necrotic masses with defect formation in the lower segment of the intestine. Which of the following diagnoses is most likely?
a. Typhoid fever, necrosis stage
*b. Typhoid fever, ulcerative stage
c. Typhoid fever, clean ulcer stage
d. Crohns disease
e. Abdominal typhoid salmonellosis

157. A patient has acute laryngotracheitis with nonproductive cough that is very exhaustive. Prescribe an antitussive drug:
a. Ambroxol
b. Неrbа Тhermopsidis
c. Acetylcystein
d. Mucaltin
*e. Glaucine

158. After the traumatic tooth extraction a patient is complaining of acute, dull, poorly-localized pain in gingiva, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. The patient has been diagnosed with alveolitis. Specify the kind of pain in this patient:
a. Visceral
b. Heterotopic
c. Phantom
d. Epicritic
*e. Protopathic

159. Histologically, the internal wall of a cyst localized on the upper jaw is lined with stratified squamous epithelium with underlying granulation tissue infiltrated by lymphocytes. The external layer is represented by loose fibrous connective tissue surrounded by cicatrical fibrous tissue. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Simple granuloma
b. Ameloblastoma
c. Epithelial granuloma
*d. Cystic granuloma
e. Keratocyst

160. A patient presents with dysfunction of shin muscles. He cannot raise his body by standing on tiptoe. Which muscle is affected?
a. M. extensor digitorum longus
b. M. tibialis posterior
*c. M. triceps surae
d. M. tibialis anterior
e. M. flexor digitorum longus

161. Microscopy of colonic biopsy material revealed a tumour made up of prismatic epithelium and forming atypical glandular structures of various shapes and sizes. The basal membrane of glands was destroyed. Tumour cells were polymorphic, with hyperchromatic nuclei and a large number of pathological mitoses. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mucosal carcinoma
b. Undifferentiated carcinoma
c. Basal cell carcinoma
*d. Adenocarcinoma
e. Solid carcinoma

162. Curarelike substances (dithylinum) make it impossible for skeletal muscles to contract because they block:
a. Ganglionic synapses
b. Proprioceptors
c. Central synapses
*d. Neuromuscular synapses
e. Membrane conduction of excitement

163. A student who unexpectedly met his girlfriend developed an increase in systemic arterial pressure. This pressure change was caused by the intensified realization of the following reflexes:
*a. Conditional sympathetic
b. Conditional sympathetic and parasympathetic
c. Unconditional sympathetic
d. Conditional parasympathetic
e. Unconditional parasympathetic

164. Cytogenetic analysis established that the patient had the 47, XYY karyotype. The extra chromosome in the karyotype has a centromere located very close to one of the chromosome ends so that one chromosomal arm is much shorter than the other one. Such a chromosome is called:
a. Telocentric
b. Submetacentric
*c. Acrocentric
d. Submetacentric with a satellite
e. Metacentric

165. A female woman has been clinically diagnosed with gonorrhea. Which of the following studies can be used to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Bacteriophage test
b. Hemagglutination reaction
*c. Microscopy of the pathological material
d. Immobilization reaction
e. Disinfection of laboratory animals

166. In the experiment, an animal had its brain stem cut, which caused a rapid increase of extensor muscle tone (decerebrate rigidity). This condition arose because the muscles were no more under the control of the following brain structure:
*a. Red nucleus
b. Striatum
c. Black substance
d. Blue spot
e. Gray tuber

167. An animal had been intensively fed with carbohydrates. Histologic examination of its liver revealed a significant number of glycogen granules. Glycogen relates to the following group of cell structures:
a. Special organelles
b. Secretory granules
*c. Trophic granules
d. Pigment granules
e. Excretory granules

168. X-ray of a patient in the upright position revealed the presence of air in the stomach. What part of stomach is it located?
*a. Fundus
b. Body
c. Lesser curvature region
d. Cardia
e. Pylorus

169. Treatment of a patient with hereditary form of immunodeficiency involved gene therapy: the enzyme gene was introduced into the cells of the patient by means of a retrovirus. What property of the genetic code allows to use retroviruses as vectors of functional genes?
*a. Universality
b. Collinearity
c. Redundancy
d. Specificity
e. Continuity

170. A patient complains about retrosternal pain, dyspnea and palpitation. After examination he was diagnosed with coronary heart disease and prescribed verapamil. What is the mechanism of its action?
a. It blocks sodium channels
b. It blocks potassium channels
*c. It blocks calcium channels
d. It blocks ?-adrenoreceptors
e. It blocks ?-adrenoreceptors

171. After a thorough examination the patient who had returned from Central Asia to Ukraine was diagnosed with spring-summer encephalitis. Its pathogen might have entered the body through the bite of the following arthropod:
a. Taiga tick
*b. Dog-louse
c. Argasid tick (ornithodorus papillipes)
d. Itch mite
e. Mosquito

172. A patient has been preliminarily diagnosed withf paragonimiasis. This disease is caused by lung flukes. The causative agent entered into the patients body through:
a. Eating half-cooked or dried fish
b. Contact with an infected cat
c. Drinking raw water from open reservoirs
*d. Eating half-cooked lobsters and crabs
e. Eating unwashed vegetables

173. A patient with periodontitis has been administered a glucocorticoid drug in form of an ointment. Specify this ointment:
a. Erythromycin
b. Ampicillin
c. Decamine
*d. Prednisolone
e. Tetracycline

174. Examination of a chemical plant worker who had had a poisoning revealed an increase in total bilirubin concentration at the expense of indirect fraction. Feces and urine are characterized by high stercobilin concentration. The level of direct bilirubin in blood plasma is normal. What type of jaundice is the case?
a. Parenchymatous
*b. Hemolytic
c. Hepatic
d. Obstructive
e. Mechanical

175. It is known that many hormones act through the adenylate cyclase system causing the enzyme activation by phosphorylation. What enzyme is activated by hormonal signals and catalyzes glycogen breakdown?
a. Tyrosinase
b. Phosphotransferase
c. Phosphatase
d. Glucomutase
*e. Phosphorylase

176. After the exposure to ionizing radiation a person was found to have a decrease in blood granulocyte level. What mechanism underlies these changes?
*a. Leikopoiesis inhibition
b. Increased passage of granulocytes into the tissues
c. Autoimmune process development
d. Increased disintegration of leucocytes
e. Disturbed release of mature leukocytes from the bone marrow

177. In a hot weather, the microclimate in hot rooms is often normalized by fans. At the same time heat radiation from the human body increases through:
a. Conduction
b. Radiation
c. Evaporation
*d. Convection
e. Heat conduction

178. In the dental practice, the vitality of tooth tissues is estimated by electric pulp test. What parameter is assessed?
a. Accommodation
b. Lability
c. Chronaxie
d. Productive time
*e. Threshold stimulus intensity

179. Reduced activity of antioxidant enzymes enhances peroxidation of cell membrane lipids. The reduction of glutathione peroxidase activity is caused by the following microelement deficiency:
*a. Selenium
b. Manganese
c. Copper
d. Cobalt
e. Molybdenum

180. A tumour pressing upon the vegetative nucleus of a cranial nerve causes saliva secretion by the parotid gland. What nucleus does the tumor press upon?
a. N.dorsalis nervi vagi
b. N.intermediolateralis
*c. N.salivatorius inferior
d. N.accessorius
e. N.salivatorius superior

181. A patient has a history of chronic heart failure. Which of the following hemodynamic parameters is a major symptom of cardiac decompensation development?
a. Increased central venous pressure
b. Increased peripheral vascular resistance
*c. Decreased stroke volume
d. Tachycardia development
e. Tonogenic dilatation

182. A patient has symptoms of atherosclerosis. What plasma lipid transport forms should have an increased concentration?
a. IDL
b. Chylomicrons
c. HDL
d. VLDL
*e. LDL

183. A specimen of the pia mater shows a vessel with no middle membrane in its wall, its outer membrane adheres to the surrounding tissues, the inner membrane is made up of the basal membrane and endothelium. Specify this vessel:
a. Mixed artery
b. Muscular artery
c. Muscular vein with weakly developed muscular elements
*d. Fibrous vein
e. Arteriola

184. In the armpits of a patient the small (1-1,5 mm), dorsoventrally flattened, wingless, blood-sucking insects. Their larvae developed in the armpits too. What disease is caused by these insects?
*a. Phthiriasis
b. Plague
c. Chagas disease
d. Relapsing fever
e. Sleeping sickness

185. Examination of a teenager revealed a congenital heart disease, namely the functioning of Botallos duct. In the prenatal period of development this duct connects the following organs:
a. Pulmonary trunk and superior vena cava
*b. Pulmonary trunk and aorta
c. Right and left atrium
d. Right and left ventricle
e. Aorta and inferior vena cava

186. During manipulations aimed at treatment of mandible dislocation a physician should pay particular attention to a muscle that pulls a capsule and interarticular disc of temporomandibular articulation exteriorly. What muscle is it?
a. M. temporalis
b. M. masseter
c. M. mylohyoideus
d. M. pterygoideus medialis
*e. M. pterygoideus lateralis

187. Some proteins of saliva have a protective function. Which of them protects the oral mucosa from the mechanical damage?
a. Peroxidase
b. Catalase
*c. Mucin
d. Lysozyme
e. Renin

188. Examination of a patient revealed glycosuria and hyperglycemia. He complains of dry mouth, itchy skin, frequent urination, thirst. He has been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. What is the cause of polyuria in this patient?
a. Decreased cardiac output
*b. Increased urine osmotic pressure
c. Decreased plasma oncotic pressure
d. Increased plasma oncotic pressure
e. Increased filtration pressure

189. Experimenters irritate the peripheral segment of the intersected sympathetic nerve of an experimental dog. Which of the following changes will be observed?
a. Increased gastric and intestinal motility
*b. Bronchiectasis
c. Heart force decrease
d. Heart rate decrease
e. Pupil constriction

190. In course of an experiment an animal had its cornea injured. What cells will provide the regeneration of stratified epithelium?
a. Basal membrane cells
b. Cells of the prickle-cell layer of corneal epithelium
*c. Basal epithelium cells
d. Squamous cells
e. Cells of proper substance of cornea

191. A 26-year-old woman at 40 weeks gestation was admitted to the maternity ward. Examination revealed that the cervix was open, but uterine contractions were absent. The doctor gave her a hormonal drug to induce labor. Specify this drug:
a. Hydrocortisone
b. Testosterone
c. Estrone
d. ACTH
*e. Oxytocin

192. A 65-year-old patient had been treated for 3 days in the resuscitation unit for a cardiac pathology. Suddenly he developed ventricular fibrillation which turned out to be the immediate cause of death. Microscopy of the left ventricular myocard revealed a large focus of cardiomyocyte karyolysis demarcated by the zone of hyperaemia. What cardiac pathology was the cause of death?
a. Acute myocarditis
*b. Acute myocardial infarction
c. Postinfarction cardiosclerosis
d. Ischemic myocardial degeneration
e. Diffuse cardiosclerosis

193. As a result of a rapid change from horizontal to vertical body position a 16-year-old girl lost consciousness. What is the reason for it?
a. Heart rate decrease
b. Arterial pressure rise
c. Increased venous return
d. -
*e. Decreased venous return

194. After severe viral hepatitis a 4-year-old boy presents with vomiting, occasional loss of consciousness, convulsions. Blood test revealed hyperammoniemia. Such condition is caused by a disorder of the following biochemical hepatic process:
a. Disorder of biogenic amines neutralization
b. Protein synthesis inhibition
c. Inhibition of transamination enzymes
d. Activation of amino acid decarboxylation
*e. Disorder of ammonia neutralization

195. A patient has a systemic inflammatory lesion of connective tissue. Which anti-inflammatory drug will reduce all the inflammatory phases?
*a. Prednisolone
b. Phenylbutazone
c. Indomethacin
d. Contrycal
e. Diclofenac sodium

196. The aim of the morphological study was to investigate an endocrine gland with parenchyma consisting of epithelium and neural tissue. In the epithelial trabeculae the study revealed two types of cells: chromophile and chromophobe. Identify this organ:
a. Adrenal gland
b. Hypothalamus
c. Parathyroid gland
d. Thyroid gland
*e. Pituitary gland

197. A 20-year-old male got his tongue pierced. 5 months later a dense pale pink formation appeared in the zone of puncture. Biopsy revealed growing connective tissue with focal clusters of single polymorphonuclear neutrophils, fibroblasts, foreign body cells, lymphocytes and plasmocytes. What kind of pathological process developed in the tongue tissues?
a. Tumour
*b. Nonspecific productive inflammation
c. Circulatory disturbance
d. Fibrinous exudative inflammation
e. Purulent exudative inflammation

198. Detection of X-chromatin in somatic cells is used for the quick diagnosis of hereditary diseases associated with a change in the sex chromosome number. Vast majority of a mans cells have three X-chromatin bodies. What is the mans karyotype?
a. 47, XXY
b. 48, XXXY
c. 45, X
*d. 49, XXXXY
e. 46, XY

199. DNA replication occurs during the cell division when a signal is received from the cytoplasm, and a certain portion of the DNA helix is unwound and divided into two chains. The helix is unwound by the following enzyme:
a. DNA polymerase
*b. Helicase
c. Ligase
d. RNA polymerase
e. Restrictase

200. After starting treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis a patient complained about red tears and urine. What drug could cause such changes?
a. Benzylpenicillin potassium salt
b. Biseptol-480
c. Cefazolin
d. Benzylpenicillin sodium salt
*e. Rifampicin

