1. Heterozygous parents with А (II) and В (III) blood groups according to AB0 system gave birth to a child. What is the probability of the child having 0 (I) blood group?
a. 100%
b. 50%
c. 0%
*d. 25%
e. 75%

2. During dehelmintization a patient expelled long fragments of a segmented helminth. In some segments their width exceeds their length; there is a rosettelike uterus in the segment center. Name the helminth:
a. Echinococcus
b. Hymenolepis nana
c. Taenia solium
d. Taeniarhynchus saginatus
*e. Diphylobotrium latum

3. Carious cavities of a 29-year-old patient contain parasitic protozoa. It is established that they belong to the Sarcodina class. Specify these protozoa:
a. Amoeba proteus
b. Lamblia intestinalis
c. Entamoeba coli
d. Entamoeba histolutica
*e. Entamoeba gingivalis

4. According to the law of constancy of chromosome numbers, most animal species have definite and constant chromosome number. The mechanism that maintains this constancy during sexual reproduction of organisms is called:
*a. Meiosis
b. Amitosis
c. -
d. Regeneration
e. Schizogony

5. At a certain stage of human ontogenesis, physiological bond occurs between circulatory systems of the mother and the fetus. This function is being carried out by the following provisory organ:
a. Yolk sac
b. Serous tunic
c. Allantois
*d. Placenta
e. Amnion

6. It is necessary to perform urinary bladder catheterization of an adult man. Resistance to the catheter can occur in the following structure or part of the urethra:
a. Spongiose part
b. Prostatic part
*c. Membranous part
d. External urethral orifice
e. Internal urethral orifice

7. A woman has come to a dentist with complaints of bruising and swelling around her eye. Anamnesis is as follows: several days prior her 1st premolar tooth had been extracted, with infraorbital anaesthesia administered; several days later hematoma appeared in the area of foramen intraorbitale. The branch of the following artery was damaged:
a. Masseteric artery
*b. Maxillary artery
c. Superficial temporal artery
d. Facial artery
e. Superior labial artery

8. A patient consulted a doctor about an increased pain sensitivity of the ear skin and ear canal. Palpation behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle was painful. Such clinical presentations are typical of the irritation of the following nerve:
a. N. occipitalis minor
b. N. vagus
c. N. transversus colli
*d. N. auricularis magnus
e. Nn. supraclaviculares

9. In a 12-year-old patient an inflammatory process in the internal ear spread to the meninges, diffusely affecting them. A doctor suspects the process to have spread through the connection between the subarachnoid space of the brain and perilymphatic space of the internal ear. What anatomic structure became the pathway for the spreading inflammation?
a. Fossa subarcuata
b. Hiatus canalis n. petrosi minoris
c. Fissura petrosquamosa
*d. Аqueductus vestibuli
e. Hiatus canalis n. petrosi majoris

10. A woman with essential hypertension has been hospitalized. The patient presents with aneurysm of a. communicans posterior of the cerebrum arterial circle. What vessels of arterial circle are normally joined with this artery?
a. A. carotis externa et a. cerebri anterior
b. A. carotis interna et a. cerebri media
*c. A. carotis interna et a. cerebri posterior
d. A. cerebri anterior et a. cerebri media
e. A. cerebri media et a. cerebri posterior

11. In the skin biopsy material in the epidermis there are cells with processes and cytoplasm that contains dark brown granules. Name these cells:
a. Keratinocytes
b. Intraepidermal macrophages
*c. Melanocytes
d. Merkel’s cells
e. Lymphocytes

12. Gastroscopy of a patient revealed the lack of mucus in the coating of the mucous membrane. This can be caused by the dysfunction of the following cells of gastric wall:
a. Main exocrinocytes
b. Parietal cells of gastric glands
*c. Cells of prismatic glandular epithelium
d. Cervical cells
e. Endocrinocytes

13. Alcoholic intoxication is accompanied by disturbed motor coordination and equilibrium due to the damage caused to structural elements of the cerebellum. Functional disturbance of the following cells occurs in the first place:
a. Granule cells
b. Basket cells
*c. Pyriform cells
d. Stellate cells
e. Fusiform cells

14. Histologic specimen demonstrates an oral cavity organ with mucosa covered with keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Specify this organ or its part:
a. Uvula
b. Soft palate
c. Inferior surface of tongue
d. Labial mucosa
*e. Gum

15. During gastrulation an embryo proceeds from histiotrophic to hematotrophic nutrition. What provisory organ makes it possible at first?
a. Amnion
b. Allantois
c. Trophoblast
d. Yolk sac
*e. Chorion

16. One of the coats of a hollow organ has anastomotic fibers with nuclei. The fibers consist of cells that form intercalated disks at the places of contact. What tissue forms this coat?
a. Cross-striated skeletal muscle
b. Loose fibrous connective tissue
c. Dense irregular connective tissue
*d. Cross-striated cardiac muscle
e. Unstriped muscle

17. A 30-year-old woman has decreased enzyme content in the pancreatic juice. This condition can be caused by insufficient secretion of the following hormone:
a. Secretin
b. Somatostatin
*c. Cholecystokinin-pancreozymin
d. Gastric inhibitory polypeptide
e. Vasoactive intestinal peptide

18. Electric current has affected skeletal muscle fiber resulting in depolarisation of the membrane. Depolarisation develops due to the following ions penetrating the membrane:
a. Ca2+
b. HCO3–
*c. Na+
d. Cl–
e. K+

19. Psychological evaluation determined that a person is able to quickly adapt to changing situation, has good memory, is emotionally stable, possesses of high working ability. This person is the most likely to be:
a. Phlegmatic with melancholic traits
*b. Sanguine
c. Melancholic
d. Choleric
e. Phlegmatic

20. An oculist has detected increased time of darkness adaptation of a patient’s eye. What vitamin deficiency can cause such symptom?
a. Е
b. К
c. D
*d. А
e. С

21. A patient suffers from diabetes mellitus with fasting hyperglycemia over 7,2 mmol/l. What blood plasma protein would allow to assess the patient’s glycemia level retrospectively (4-8 weeks prior to examination)?
a. Ceruloplasmin
*b. Glycated hemoglobin
c. Fibrinogen
d. Albumin
e. C-reactive protein

22. A patient is in the state of hypoglycemic coma. What hormone can cause this condition if overdosed?
a. Cortisol
b. Progesterone
*c. Insulin
d. Somatotropin
e. Corticotropin

23. A 24-year-old patient has been administered glutamic acid to treat epilepsy. Medicinal effect in this case occurs not due to glutamate itself, but due to the product of its decarboxylation:
a. Dopamine
b. Taurine
c. Histamine 4-monooxygenase
d. Serotonin
*e. γ-aminobutyric acid

24. Mucin aggregates retain water, which results in their viscosity and protective action. It is possible because mucin structure contains:
a. Glucose
*b. Glycosaminoglycans
c. Disaccharides
d. Homopolysaccharides
e. Oligosaccharides

25. Along with normal hemoglobin types there can be pathological ones in the body of an adult. Specify one of them:
a. HbA1
b. HbF
*c. HbS
d. HbA2
e. HbO2

26. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
a. Aerobic glycolisis
b. Glycogenolysis
*c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Pentose-phosphate cycle
e. Glycogenesis

27. After anaesthetic application during tooth extraction the patient developed marked soft tissue edema of the upper and lower jaw, skin rash on the face, reddening, and itching. What pathological process results in such reaction to the anaesthetic?
a. Circulatory deficiency
b. Disturbed lymph drainage
c. Toxic action of a drug
d. Inflammation
*e. Allergy

28. Due to morbid affection of the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus a 40-year-old patient has developed polyuria (10-12 liters per day) and polydipsia. The following hormone is deficient, thus leading to this disturbance:
a. Oxytocin
b. Somatotropin
c. Thyrotropin
*d. Vasopressin
e. Corticotropin

29. A patient with glossitis presents with disappearance of lingual papillae, reddening and burning pain in the tongue. Blood test: erythrocytes 2, 2×1012/l, hemoglobin — 103 g/l, color index — 1,4. What type of anemia is it?
a. α–thalassemia
b. Iron deficiency
*c. B12 folate-deficient
d. β-thalassemia
e. Iron refractory

30. A patient with chronic renal failure presents with reduced inulin clearance of 60 ml/min. The following renal function is disturbed:
a. Reabsorption in the proximal tubular segment of the nephron
b. Tubular secretion
*c. Glomerular filtration
d. Reabsorption in the distal tubular segment of the nephron
e. Reabsorption in the tubules of collecting duct

31. Histological investigation of an extracted tooth revealed presence of necrotic detritus with fatty acid crystals and numerous microbe colonies in the pulp chamber. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Complicated chronic pulpitis
b. Chronic pulpitis
*c. Pulp gangrene
d. Serous pulpitis
e. Purulent pulpitis

32. Autopsy of a man with tuberculosis has revealed a 3x2 cm large cavity in the superior lobe of the right lung. The cavity was interconnected with a bronchus, its wall was dense and consisted of three layers: the internal layer was pyogenic, the middle layer wasmade of tuberculous granulation tissue and the external one was made of connective tissue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal tuberculosis
b. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
c. Fibrous focal tuberculosis
d. Tuberculoma
*e. Fibrous cavernous tuberculosis

33. Histological investigation of renal biopsy material taken from a patient with tuberculosis has revealed chaotically located chromatin granules in the focus of caseous necrosis. These changes are the result of:
a. Apoptosis
*b. Karyorrhexis
c. Karyopyknosis
d. Karyolysis
e. Mitotic activity of nuclei

34. During inspection of dental tools for sterility in one case gram-positive cocci were detected. They were situated in clusters and yielded positive plasma coagulation reaction; the cocci were fermenting mannitol in anaerobic conditions and exhibiting lecithinase activity. What microorganism was detected?
a. Corinebacterium xerosis
*b. Staph. aureus
c. St. saprophiticus
d. St. epidermidis
e. Str. pyogenes

35. Analysis of sputum taken froma patient with suspected pneumonia revealed slightly elongated gram-positive diplococci with tapered opposite ends. What microorganisms were revealed in the sputum?
a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Neisseria meningitidis
c. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
*d. Streptococcus pneumoniae
e. Klebsiella pneumoniae

36. Microscopic examination of pus sample taken from mandibular fistula canal and stained by Gram’s method has revealed druses with gram-positive coloring in the center and cone-shaped structures with gram-negative coloring. Such morphology is characteristic of the agent of:
a. Staphylococcal osteomyelitis
b. Fusobacteriosis
c. Candidiasis
d. Anaerobic infection
*e. Actinomycosis

37. A puncture sample has been taken from the inguinal lymph nodes of a patient provisionally diagnosed with plague. The sample was inoculated into hard nutrient medium. What shape will the colonies have, if the diagnosis is confirmed?
a. ”Dewdrops”
b. ”Mercury drops”
*c. ”Lace handkerchief”
d. ”Shagreen leather”
e. ”Lion’s mane”

38. To perform conduction anesthesia a patient had been administered a drug used in dental surgery. The patient developed the symptoms of poisoning: central nervous system excitation followed by paralysis and acute cardiovascular insufficiency (collapse). Additionally there were allergic reactions (itching, swelling, erythema). Name this drug:
a. Tubocurarin chloride
b. Pipecuronium bromide
c. Suxamethonium chloride
d. Thiopental sodium
*e. Lidocaine

39. Enzymes and other active substances regulating connective tissue density and permeability are being produced in connective tissue cells. What enzyme drug is used to make the connective tissue growths looser and more permeable?
a. Amylase
b. Cocarboxylase
c. Cholinesterase
*d. Lydase
e. Lipase

40. A schizophrenic patient has been prescribed aminazine. What pharmacodynamic action of this drug justifies its prescription in this case?
a. Muscle relaxant
b. Hypotensive
c. Antiemetic
d. Hypothermic
*e. Antipsychotic

41. A patient with maxillofacial joint arthritis has come to a dentist. The dentist prescribed an ointment with an antiinflammatory agent that is a pyrazolone derivative. Name this agent:
a. Mefenamic acid
b. Indometacin
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)
e. Ibuprofen

42. A 55-year-old man with acute heart failure has been administered a quickrelief cardiac glycoside. Which of the following drugs has been given to the patient?
a. Celanid
b. Milrinone
c. Adonisidum
d. Digitoxin
*e. Strophanthin

43. A patient suffering from ciliary arrhythmia with anamnesis of bronchial asthma should be prescribed an antiarrhythmic drug. What antiarrhythmic drug is CONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Nifedipine
b. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
c. Ajmaline
d. Verapamil
*e. Anaprilin (Propranolol)

44. A 35-year-old woman is diagnosed with faucial diphtheria. The patient died with signs of acute heart failure. On autopsy: heart cavities are enlarged in the diameter, heartmuscle is dull, flaccid, striped on section, with yellowish areas under the endocardium. What type of degeneration was detected in cardiac hystiocytes?
a. Carbohydrate
b. Hyaline droplet
c. Hydropic
*d. Fatty
e. Ballooning

45. A 67-year-old patient has ordered a full functional denture. It was necessary to extract his left upper canine. After infraorbital anaesthesia the patient presented with progressing hematoma in the frontal part of his face. The patient was found to have an injury of the artery that is the branch of:
a. A. ophthalmica
b. A. labialis superior
c. A. facialis
d. A. temporalis superficialis
*e. A. maxillaris

46. A woman, who had undergone mastectomy due to breast cancer, was prescribed a course of radiation therapy. What vitamin preparation has marked antiradiation effect due to its antioxidant activity?
*a. Tocopherol acetate
b. Riboflavin
c. Folic acid
d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Ergocalciferol

47. Often the cause of secondary immunodeficiency is an infectious affection of an organism, when agents reproduce directly in the cells of immune system and destroy them. Specify the diseases, during which the described above occurs:
a. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis
b. Dysentery, cholera
c. Q fever, typhus
*d. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS
e. Poliomyelitis, viral hepatitis type A

48. Premature babies often develop respiratory distress syndrome. This pathology is caused by the deficiency of a certain component of the blood–air barrier. Name this component:
a. Alveolar basement membrane
b. Alveolocytes
c. Capillary endothelium
d. Endothelial basement membrane
*e. Surfactant

49. A forensic laboratory received clothes of a citizen, who a day before was reported missing. The clothes were found in a shed, there are red stains identified as blood by an expert. What reaction should be performed to determine whether these red stains are dried human blood?
*a. Circular precipitation
b. Flocculation
c. Agglutination
d. Enzyme immunoassay
e. Complement binding

50. A patient has a history of chronic heart failure. Which of the following hemodynamic parameters is a major symptom of cardiac decompensation development?
a. Increased central venous pressure
*b. Decreased stroke volume
c. Tonogenic dilatation
d. Tachycardia development
e. Increased peripheral vascular resistance

51. A 45-year-old patient with essential hypertension, who has been taking an antihypertensive drug for 4 days, notes that his blood pressure is normalized; however the patient complains of sleepiness and sluggishness. What drug is the patient taking?
*a. Clophelin (Clonidine)
b. Captopril
c. Apressin (Hydralazine)
d. Enalapril
e. Prazosin

52. Due to trauma the patient’s parathyroid glands have been removed, which resulted in inertness, thirst, sharp increase of neuromuscular excitability. Metabolism of the following substance is disturbed:
a. Manganese
b. Molybdenum
c. Zinc
*d. Calcium
e. Chlorine

53. A doctor has established significant growth retardation, disproportional body build, and mental deficiency of a child. What is the most likely cause of this pathology?
a. Genetic defects
b. Hypopituitarism
c. Insufficient nutrition
d. Hyperthyroidism
*e. Hypothyroidism

54. To terminate hypertensive crisis the patient was administered solution of magnesium sulfate. What route of drug administration should be chosen?
a. Intra-arterial
*b. Intravenous
c. Rectal
d. Duodenal
e. Oral

55. A specimen presents an endocrine system organ covered with capsule made of connective tissue. Septa branch off from the capsule inwards and divide the organ into lobules. Each lobule consists of two cell types: neurosecretory pinealocytes (polygonal cells with processes) located in the center and gliacytes (astrocytes) located at the periphery. What organ is represented in this specimen?
a. Thyroid gland
b. Adrenal medulla
c. Pituitary gland
d. Hypothalamus
*e. Epiphysis

56. After introdiction of adrenaline the patient’s blood glucose level increased. It is caused by intensified:
*a. Glycogenolysis in the liver
b. Glycolysis in the skeletal muscles
c. Glycogenolysis in the muscles
d. Glycogen synthesis
e. Glycolysis in the liver

57. A 20-year-old young man, who started to train systematically in athletics, has the following resting-state blood values: erythrocytes — 5,5×1012/l, reticulocytes — 12%, hemoglobin — 160 g/l, color index — 1,03. Such blood values indicate erythropoiesis stimulation due to the following occurring in the process of his training:
a. Hypercapnia
b. Hyperventilation
c. Hyperglycemia
*d. Hypoxemia
e. Physical activity

58. In the armpits of a patient there are small (1-1,5 mm), dorsoventrally flattened, wingless, blood-sucking insects. Their larvae have been developing in the armpits as well.What disease is caused by these insects?
a. Sleeping sickness
b. Plague
c. Relapsing fever
*d. Phthiriasis
e. Chagas’ disease

59. To treat peptic ulcer disease of the stomach a patient has been prescribed famotidine. Specify the mechanism of action of this drug:
a. Effect on cell membrane transport system
*b. H2 histamine receptors block
c. Antienzyme action
d. Effect on ion channels of cell membranes
e. Physicochemical interaction

60. A student, who unexpectedly met his girlfriend, developed an increase in systemic arterial pressure. This pressure change was caused by the intensified realization of the following reflexes:
a. Unconditioned parasympathetic
b. Unconditioned sympathetic
c. Conditioned parasympathetic
d. Conditioned sympathetic and parasympathetic
*e. Conditioned sympathetic

61. A connective tissue specimen stained with hematoxylin-eosin shows isogenous cell groups surrounded with basophilic intercellular substance. No fibrous structures are detected. What type of connective tissue is it?
a. Loose fibrous tissue
b. Splenial bone tissue
c. Elastic cartilage tissue
d. Dense fibrous tissue
*e. Hyaline cartilage tissue

62. A 46-year-old patient consulted an oculist about drooping of the upper eyelid. On examination he was diagnosed with a brain tumor. The pathological process must have affected the nuclei of the following pair of cranial nerves:
a. VI
b. VII
c. II
d. IV
*e. III

63. A 36-year-old patient consulted an ophthalmologist about eye ache. The examination revealed erosion of the cornea, that is the lack of superficial and spinous layers of the epithelium. What cells will provide regeneration of the damaged epithelium?
*a. Cells of stratum basale
b. Cells of stratum granulosum
c. Cells of stratum superficiale
d. Cells of stratum lucidum
e. Cells of stratum corneum

64. A patient undergoing treatment with nitrofurans has imbibed a small amount of alcohol, which resulted in severe poisoning. The poisoning developed due to:
*a. Accumulation of acetic aldehyde
b. Neural disorder
c. Disturbed renal function
d. Cardiovascular collapse
e. Allergic reaction

65. During development of a frostbite the exposed skin becomes pale and its temperature drops. What mechanism is the basis of these developments?
a. Decreased heart rate
b. Closure of arteriovenous anastomoses
c. Dermal and subcutaneous vasodilatation
d. Visceral vasoconstriction
*e. Reflex vasoconstriction

66. A patient during fasting developed ketoacidosis as a result of increased fatty acids decomposition. This decomposition can be inhibited with:
a. Glucagon
b. Thyroxin
c. Cortisol
*d. Insulin
e. Adrenaline

67. Examination of a patient revealed glycosuria and hyperglycemia. He complains of dry mouth, itchy skin, frequent urination, thirst. He has been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. What is the cause of polyuria in this patient?
a. Decreased cardiac output
b. Increased plasma oncotic pressure
c. Decreased plasma oncotic pressure
d. Increased filtration pressure
*e. Increased urine osmotic pressure

68. Due to overdosage of a vasodilator a 58-year-old patient has developed acute vascular insufficiency. What drug would be advisable for termination of this pathological condition?
a. Aethimizolum (Methylamide)
*b. Mesaton (Phenylephrine)
c. Dopamine
d. Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
e. Cordiamin

69. To treat chronic heart failure a patient takes digoxin. What diuretic can increase digoxin toxicity due to increased excretion of K+ ions?
a. Silibor
b. Lisinopril
c. Spironolactone
d. Panangin
*e. Hydrochlorothiazide

70. A patient, who had been eating only polished rice, developed polyneuritis caused by thiamine deficiency. What compound can be indicative of this kind of avitaminosis when excreted with urine?
a. Methylmalonic acid
b. Malate
*c. Pyruvic acid
d. Uric acid
e. Phenylpyruvate

71. A doctor examined a patient, studied the patient’s blood analyses and concluded that the peripheral organs of immunogenesis are damaged. What organs are the most likely to be affected?
a. Kidneys
b. Thymus
*c. Tonsils
d. Red bone marrow
e. Yellow bone marrow

72. In what organ biotransformation (metabolic transformation) of most medicinal agents occurs upon their introduction into an organism?
a. Kidneys
b. Skin
c. Lungs
*d. Liver
e. Intestine

73. A patient with diabetes mellitus has been delivered to a hospital unconscious. BP is low, Kussmaul’s respiration is observed, the smell of acetone can be detected from the patient’s mouth. What mechanism is leading in the coma development in this case?
a. Accumulation of urea
*b. Accumulation of ketone bodies in blood
c. Accumulation of sodium ions
d. Accumulation of potassium ions
e. Accumulation of chlorine ions

74. A patient has been diagnosed with bicuspid valve insufficiency. Where is this valve located?
*a. Between the left atrium and left ventricle
b. Between the left and right atria
c. At the aortic orifice
d. Between the left and right ventricles
e. Between the right atrium and right ventricle

75. In the epicenter of the registered rabies cases among wild animals a 43year-old man came to a clinic and claimed to have been bitten by a stray dog. He was given a course of anti-rabies vaccine. This preparation belongs to the following type of vaccines:
a. Toxoids
b. Synthetic
c. Inactivated
d. Molecular
*e. Attenuated

76. In Western Europe nearly half of all congenital malformations occur in the children conceived in the period when pesticides were used extensively in the region. These congenital conditions are the result of the following factor:
*a. Teratogenic
b. Malignization
c. Mechanical
d. Mutagenic
e. Carcinogenic

77. Gastrulation is the period of embryogenesis, when germinal layers are formed, resulting in three-layered structure of an embryo. What gastrulation mechanism is characteristic of a human embryo?
a. Delamination and epiboly
*b. Delamination and immigration
c. Epiboly
d. Invagination
e. Immigration and invagination

78. A 19-year-old young man has been examined in a nephrological hospital. Increased potassium content was detected in secondary urine of the patient. Such alterations are the most likely to be caused by the increased secretion of the following hormone:
a. Glucagon
b. Testosterone
c. Oxytocin
d. Adrenaline
*e. Aldosterone

79. A 12-year-old boy has tetanic convulsions. What gland can be functionally impaired in this case?
a. Glandula thyroidea
b. Hypophisis
*c. Glandulae parathyroidae
d. Thymus
e. Glandula pinealis

80. A man came to a surgeon with complains of pain in his lower right abdomen. On deep palpation the doctor detected a painful area in the right inguinal region. What part of the intestine is the most likely to be affected with pathological process?
a. Rectum
*b. Cecum
c. Descending colon
d. Transverse colon
e. Sigmoid colon

81. During investigation of skin epithelium it was determed, that it consists of several cellular layers. Epithelial cells of the external layer have no nuclei. What type of epithelium is it?
a. Multirow columnar epithelium
*b. Keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
c. Transitional epithelium
d. Non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
e. Multirow ciliary epithelium

82. A histological specimen shows terminal secretory parts of glands made of conic cells with basophilic cytoplasm and a roundish nucleus in the centre. Specify the type of terminal secretory parts by the type of secretion:
a. Seromucous
*b. Serous
c. Combined
d. Sebaceous
e. Mucous

83. Electron diffraction pattern of a spermatozoon clearly presents a sheathlike structure localized in the spermiocalyptrotheca and participating in dissolution of ovular membranes. Name this structure:
*a. Acrosome
b. Microtubules
c. Segmented columns
d. Axoneme
e. Centriole

84. A patient complains of toothache. On examination he has been diagnosed with pulpitis. Which factor played the main pathogenic role in the development of pain syndrome in this case?
*a. Increased intratissular pressure in the dental pulp
b. Inadequate stimulation of the mandibular nerve branch
c. Interleukin action
d. Activation of one of the complement system components
e. Vasospasm

85. The patient’s saliva has been tested for antibacterial activity. What saliva component has antibacterial properties?
a. Ceruloplasmin
b. Amylase
*c. Lysozyme
d. Parotin
e. Cholesterol

86. A patient with a bleeding knife wound in the area of carotid triangle has been delivered to a hospital. Blood flowing from the wound is dark. What vessel is injured?
a. Facial artery
b. Facial vein
c. External jugular vein
d. Internal carotid artery
*e. Internal jugular vein

87. A patient with symptoms of acute heart failure, namely pallor, acrocyanosis, and rapid shallow breathing, has been delivered to an emergency department.Which of these drugs is indicated in this case?
*a. Corglycon
b. Cordiamine
c. Adrenalin hydrochloride
d. Nitroglycerine
e. Digitoxin

88. A victim of an earthquake has been remaining under debris for 7 days without food or water. What type of starvation is it?
a. Quantitative
b. Complete with continued hydration
*c. Complete
d. Qualitative
e. Incomplete

89. Micromanipulator was used to extract one of the two centrioles of centrosome (cell center) from hepatocyte (liver cell).What process will STOP OCCURRING in this cell?
a. Lipid synthesis
*b. Division
c. Glycogen synthesis
d. Energy exchange
e. Protein biosynthesis

90. During an experiment aimed as study of respiration regulation processes the peripheral chemoreceptors of test animals were stimulated, which resulted in changed respiratory rate and depth. Where are these receptors localized?
a. Capillary bed, aortic arch, carotid sinus
b. Capillary bed, carotid sinus
c. Atria, carotid sinus
*d. Aortic arch, carotid sinus
e. Capillary bed, aortic arch

91. After an abortion a 25-year-old woman developed oliguria, anuria, and increasing azotemia. The patient died of acute renal failure. Autopsy revealed degeneration and necrosis of the convoluted renal tubules epithelium. What disease was the cause of death in this case?
*a. Acute necrotizing nephrosis
b. Chronic glomerulonephritis
c. Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
d. Renal amyloidosis
e. Acute pyelonephritis

92. A child with a foreign body in the lungs has been hospitalized. What bronchus is the most likely to contain this foreign body, if its diameter approximates to 1,5 cm?
*a. Right primary bronchus
b. Left primary bronchus
c. Right segmental bronchus
d. Left segmental bronchus
e. Lobar bronchus

93. During examination of the oral cavity at the vestibular surface of the lower right incisor there was detected a rounded growth on the thin pedicle. Histologically: in the connective tissue there are numerous thin-walled sinusoids, hemorrhage areas, hemosiderin foci, and giant cells resembling osteoclasts. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cavernous hemangioma
*b. Giant cell epulis
c. Angiomatous epulis
d. Granular cell ameloblastoma
e. Gingival fibromatosis

94. A 35-year-old man has come to a dentist with complaints of decreased density of the dental tissue and increased brittleness of his teeth during consumption of hard food. Laboratory analysis measured Ca/P correlation in the enamel sample. What value of Ca/P indicates increased demineralization?
a. 1,5
*b. 0,9
c. 1,85
d. 1,67
e. 2,5

95. During examination a dentist noticed bowl-shaped defects on the frontal surface of the patient’s canines in the cervical area. Microscopically the pulp is covered with compacted dentin, slightly atrophied and sclerosed. What pathological process occurs in the patient?
*a. Cuneiform defects
b. Median caries
c. Deep caries
d. Stage of chalky white spots
e. Superficial caries

96. A patient complains of frequent bowel movements and stool with blood admixtures (”raspberry jelly” stool). Microscopic examination revealed large mononuclear cells with absorbed red blood cells. What protozoon is this morphological structure typical of?
*a. Entamoeba histolytica
b. Campylobacter jejuni
c. Balantidium coli
d. Toxoplasma gondii
e. Giardia lamblia

97. During teeth examination on the lateral surface of the first upper molar there was detected a cone-shaped carious cavity with base oriented towards the tooth surface and apex — towards the tooth center. Softened dentin is visible at the floor of the carious cavity. Make the diagnosis:
a. -
*b. Dentin caries
c. Cement caries
d. Enamel caries
e. Tooth erosion

98. After restoration of maxllary incisors with artificial crowns a 44-year-old woman was found to have a brownish growth in the form of a node 15mmin diameter. Histological study revealed that under the stratified squamous epithelium of the gingiva there was a connective tissue mass with numerous sinusoidal vessels, oval-shaped mononuclear cells forming osteoid substance, and polynuclear giant cells that destroyed the alveolar ridge of the upper jaw. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Giant cell epulis
b. Angiomatous epulis
c. Eosinophilic granuloma
d. Gingival fibromatosis
e. Fibromatous epulis

99. A woman is diagnosed with fatty tissue inflammation located between the leaves of broad ligament of the uterus. Name this anatomical structure:
a. Myometrium
b. Perimetrium
*c. Parametrium
d. Endometrium
e. Mesometrium

100. Normal metabolic rate and energy expenditure should be taken into account when actual basal metabolic rate of a patient is being determied by means of indirect calorimetry. Normal metabolic rate can be determined most accurately based on the patient’s:
a. Respiratory coefficient and body surface area
b. Body surface area and weight
*c. Sex, age, height and weight
d. Height and respiratory coefficient
e. Respiratory coefficient and caloric coefficient of oxygen

101. On microscopic examination of leftovers of the canned meat eaten by a patient with severe food toxicoinfection the following was detected: grampositive bacilli with subterminal staining defect and configuration alteration of bacilli generally resembling a tennis racket. What agent was detected?
a. S. aureus
b. S. enteritidis
c. P. vulgaris
*d. C. botulinum
e. E. coli

102. The patient’s examination in a hospital specialised in diseases of nervous system has revealed absence of light-induced miosis. It is caused by the damage of the following brain structures:
a. Hypothalamus nuclei
b. Reticular nuclei of medulla oblongata
c. Red nuclei of mesencephalon
d. Reticular nuclei of mesencephalon
*e. Vegetative nuclei of the 3rd pair of cranial nerves

103. A newborn boy has been diagnosed with hydrocephalus. Doctors consider it to be caused by teratogenic factors. What germ layers are affected by the teratogen?
a. Endoderm
b. Mesoderm
c. All embryo germ layers
d. Endoderm and mesoderm
*e. Ectoderm

104. A patient on the 2nd day after cardiac infarction presents with acute decrease of systolic blood pressure down to 60 mm Hg with tachycardia 140/min., dyspnea, loss of consciousness. What mechanism is essential in the pathogenesis of shock developed in this case?
a. Development of paroxysmal tachycardia
b. Development of anaphylactic reaction to myocardial proteins
c. Increased myocardial excitability caused by products of necrotic disintegration
d. Decreased circulating blood volume
*e. Decreased cardiac output

105. For biochemical diagnostics of cardiac infarction it is necessary to determine activity of a number of enzymes and their izoenzymes in the blood. What enzyme assay is considered to be optimal for confirming or ruling out cardiac infarction at the early stage, after the patient develops thoracic pain?
a. LDH1 isoenzyme
b. Creatine kinase MM isoenzyme
*c. Creatine kinase MB isoenzyme
d. LDH5 isoenzyme
e. Cytoplasmic isoenzyme of aspartate aminotransferase

106. A 56-year-old man presents with parathyroid tumor. The following is observed: muscle weakness, osteoporosis, bone deformation, nephroliths consisting of oxalates and phosphates. The patient’s condition is caused by:
a. Increased secretion of thyroxin
*b. Increased secretion of parathyroid hormone
c. Increased secretion of calcitonin
d. Decreased secretion of parathyroid hormone
e. Decreased secretion of calcitriol

107. There is increased activity of AST, LDH1, LDH2, and CPK in the patient’s blood. Pathological process most likely occurs in the:
a. Adrenal glands
*b. Heart
c. Kidneys
d. Skeletal muscles
e. Liver

108. A patient suffering from acute vascular purpura is prescribed a firstgeneration antihistamine with local anaesthetic, antispasmodic, and sedative action. Specify this drug:
a. Dibazol (Bendazol)
*b. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
c. Dithylin
d. Diazolin (Mebhydrolin)
e. Droperidol

109. A patient with autoimmune thyroiditis has been prescribed a peptide hormonal agent. Specify this agent:
a. Triquilar
b. Tamoxifen
c. Trimethoprim
d. Triamcinolone
*e. L-thyroxin

110. A 42-year-old woman, who has been keeping to a vegetarian diet for a long period of time, consulted a doctor. Examination revealed negative nitrogen balance in the patient. What factor is the most likely cause of such a condition?
a. Excessive amount of fats in the diet
b. Insufficient amount of dietary fiber
*c. Insufficient amount of proteins in the diet
d. Insufficient amount of fats in the diet
e. Decreased rate of metabolic processses

111. Cytogenetic analysis allowed to determine the patient’s karyotype — 47, XY, +21/46, XY. Name this condition:
a. Genocopy
b. Phenocopy
c. Deletion
d. Translocation
*e. Mosaicism

112. A patient, who after a trauma suffers from impeded active flexion of elbow, consulted a traumatologist. What muscle is the most likely to be damaged?
a. M. pectoralis major
b. M. coracobrachialis
c. M. latissimus dorsi
*d. M. biceps brachii
e. M. deltoideus

113. In the patient’s feces there were eggs of Fasciola hepatica. The doctor, however, refrained from making diagnosis and insisted on a repeat of analysis, with beef liver excluded from the patient’s diet.What led the doctor to make such decision?
a. Absent symptoms of invasion
b. Insufficient qualification of a laboratory assistant
c. Lack of trust towards the investigation method
*d. Possible phenomenon of transient eggs
e. Uncertainty regarding the analysis precision

114. A patient presents with dysfunction of the cerebral cortex accompanied by epileptic seizures. He has been administered a biogenic amine synthetized from glutamate and responsible for central inhibition.What substance is it?
*a. γ-aminobutyric acid
b. Dopamine
c. Histamine
d. Acetylcholine
e. Serotonin

115. Red bone marrow has been damaged under radioactive emission of 5 Gy. What determines the red bone marrow sensitivity towards ionizing radiation?
a. High content of free radicals in the cells
b. Radiosensitizers in the cells
c. Destructive effect of radiotoxins on DNA synthesis
*d. Intensive cell division
e. High content of peroxides in the cells

116. A 40-year-old patient suffers from intolerance of dairy products. This condition has likely developed due to insufficiency of the following digestive enzyme:
a. Invertase
b. Amylase
c. Lipase
d. Maltase
*e. Lactase

117. A patient has been diagnosed with severe B12-deficient anemia with hemopoiesis disturbance. Anamnesis states total gastrectomy.What cells allow to confirm this diagnosis, if they are absent in the peripheral blood?
a. Ovalocytes
b. Microcytes
*c. Megalocytes
d. Normocytes
e. Anulocytes

118. To prevent wound infection associated with surgical procedures a patient was given a synthetic antiprotozoan drug demonstrating high activity against Helicobacter pylori. Specify this drug:
a. Acyclovir
b. Isoniazid
c. Doxycycline hydrochloride
d. Chingamin
*e. Metronidazole

119. A specimen of intestine demonstrates complex branching tubuloalveolar glands with their ends embedded in the submucous layer.What organ is it?
a. Jejunum
b. Colon
c. Cecum
*d. Duodenum
e. Ileum

120. After examining a patient a doctor recommended him to exclude rich meat and vegetable broths, spices, and smoked products from the diet, since the patient was found to have:
a. Reduced motility of the gastrointestinal tract
b. Reduced secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach glands
*c. Increased secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach glands
d. Reduced salivation
e. Biliary dyskinesia

121. Roentgenologically confirmed obstruction of common bile duct resulted in preventing bile from inflowing to the duodenum. What process is likely to be disturbed?
a. Hydrochloric acid secretion in stomach
b. Salivation inhibition
c. Protein absorption
d. Carbohydrate hydrolysis
*e. Fat emulgation

122. Typical signs of food poisoning caused by C. botulinum include diplopia, swallowing and respiration disorders. These signs develop due to:
a. Adenylate cyclase activation
b. Adhesion of the agent to enterocyte receptors
c. Enterotoxin action
d. Enterotoxic shock development
*e. Exotoxin action

123. A patient in a grave condition has been delivered to an admission ward. Examination revealed pupil mydriasis, no reaction to the light, considerable reddening and dryness of skin and mucous membranes. What drug could have caused the intoxication symptoms?
*a. Atropine sulphate
b. Adrenalin hydrochloride
c. Dithylinum
d. Pilocarpine hydrochloride
e. Proserin

124. A patient consulted a therapeutist with complaints of pain in the chest, cough, fever. X-ray revealed eosinophilic infiltrates in the lungs, further investigation of which allowed to detect presence of larvae. What helminthiasis is it characteristic of?
a. Fascioliasis
b. Echinococcosis
*c. Ascariasis
d. Cysticercosis
e. Trichiniasis

125. As a result of an injury a child developed an abscess of adipose tissue of the cheek. With time the process spread to the lateral surface of the pharynx. Pus had spread along the following fascia:
a. -
*b. Bucco-pharyngeal
c. Masticatory
d. Temporal
e. Parotid

126. Brain investigation by means of nuclear magnetic resonance revealed the patient to have a hematoma in the genu of the internal capsule. What pathway is damaged in this case?
a. Тr. cortico-thalamicus
b. Tr. thalamo-corticalis
c. Tr. cortico-spinalis
d. Tr. cortico-fronto-pontinus
*e. Tr. cortico-nuclearis

127. Cytochemical investigation revealed high content of hydrolytic enzymes in the cytoplasm. This phenomenon indicates the activity of the following organelles:
a. Mitochondria
b. Endoplasmic reticulum
*c. Lysosomes
d. Polysomes
e. Cell center

128. A victim of a traffic accident has lost thoracic respiration but retaines diaphragmal. The spinal cord is most likely to be damaged at:
*a. VI-VII cervical segments
b. XI-XII cervical segments
c. I-II sacral segments
d. I-II lumbar segments
e. I-II cervical segments

129. Preventative examination of a 55year-old patient revealed type II diabetes mellitus. An endocrinologist detected an increase in body weight and liver enlargement. The man is a non-smoker and does not abuse alcohol but likes to have a ”hearty meal”. Histological examination by means of diagnostic liver puncture revealed that the hepatocytes were enlarged mostly on the lobule periphery, their cytoplasm had transparent vacuoles that reacted positively with sudan III.What liver pathology was revealed?
a. Acute viral hepatitis
b. Alcohol hepatitis
c. Portal liver cirrhosis
*d. Fatty hepatosis
e. Chronic viral hepatitis

130. On microscopic examination of a surgical biopsy material (part of the lip with an ulcer) near the ulcer margins and under the ulcer floor in the connective tissue of mucosa there are epithelial complexes composed of atypical stratified epithelium with pathological mitotic figures.Within these complexes there are accumulations of bright pink concentric formations. What pathology is it?
a. Papilloma
b. Squamous cell nonkeratinous carcinoma
*c. Squamous cell keratinous carcinoma
d. Transitional cell carcinoma
e. Basal cell carcinoma

131. During examination of a patient with a periodontal disease it would be advisable to investigate functional state of blood vessels of the dentomaxillary area.What method can be applied in this case?
*a. Rheography
b. Sphygmography
c. Electroodontodiagnostics
d. Chronaximetry
e. Gnathodynamometry

132. A patient with displaced fracture of the right coronoid process of mandible has been delivered to a first-aid center. What muscle had displaced the coronoid process?
a. Left masticatory muscle
*b. Right temporal muscle
c. Right lateral pterygoid muscle
d. Right masticatory muscle
e. Right medial pterygoid muscle

133. A patient with bronchial asthma has developed a bronchial spasm during the visit to a dentist. Name the drug necessary to arrest the spasm:
a. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
b. Bisoprolol
c. Naphthizin
d. Mesaton (Phenylephrine)
*e. Salbutamol

134. Microscopy of an oval cell, 150 micron in size, revealed the following: cytoplasm has yolk inclusions but no centrioles. Name this cell:
a. Fibroblast
b. Macrophage
c. Leucocyte
d. Myocyte
*e. Oocyte

135. A worker of a cattle farm consulted a surgeon about fever up to 40°C, headache, weakness. Objective examination of his back revealed hyperemia and a dark red infiltration up to 5 cm in diameter with black bottom in its center, which was surrounded with pustules. What disease are these presentations typical of?
a. Furuncle
b. Abscess
c. Plague
d. Tularemia
*e. Anthrax

136. The autopsy of a 37-year-old man has revealed the following: in the aorta on the smooth glossy ivory-colored intima there are yellowish-gray spots blending with each other, which form stripes that do not protrude from the intima surface. Microscopy reveals swelling and destruction of elastic membranes, diffuse impregnation of aortic wall with orange granules (if stained with Sudan III), orange coloring of macrophage cytoplasm and nonstriated muscle elements. Specify this process:
a. Liposclerosis of the aorta
b. Atherocalcinosis of the aorta
c. Imbibition of the aorta with cadmium salts
*d. Lipoidosis of the aorta
e. Atheromatosis of the aorta

137. A patient with acute bronchitis has been prescribed sulfanilamide drugs for treatment. In an hour after administration the patient developed itching and vesicles filled with light transparent liquid on the face, palms and soles. Name the mechanism of immune response:
a. Immune complex-mediated hypersensitivity
b. -
c. Antibody-mediated cytolysis
d. Cell cytotoxicity
*e. Reaginic reaction

138. A 47-year-old man consulted a dentist about difficult mouth opening (trismus). The patient has a history of a stab wound of the lower extremity. What infection can be manifested by these symptoms?
a. Brucellosis
b. Anaerobic wound infection
c. Tularemia
*d. Tetanus
e. Whooping cough

139. A 69-year-old patient developed a small plaque with subsequent ulceration on the skin of the lower eyelid. The formation was removed. Microscopic examination of dermis revealed complexes of atypical epithelial cells arranged perpendicularly to the basal membrane on the periphery. The cells were dark, of polygonal prismatic shape, and had hyperchromic nuclei with frequent mitoses. What is the histological form of carcinoma in this patient?
a. Undifferentiated carcinoma
*b. Basal cell carcinoma
c. Nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma
d. Keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma
e. Adenocarcinoma

140. A 68-year-old man, who had been suffering from essential hypertension for a long time, was delivered to a resuscitation unit with hemiplegia. The patient died after 7 hours. On autopsy: in the right cerebral hemisphere there is a cavity 5x5 cm in size with uneven margins, filled with dark red blood clots. What cerebral circulation disorder developed in the patient?
a. Hemorrhagic infiltration
b. Petechial hemorrhage
c. Local venous hyperemia
*d. Hematoma
e. Thrombosis

141. What factor results in the highest energy expenditure under the normal vital activity conditions?
a. Decrease of environment temperature
b. Increase of environment temperature
*c. Action of skeletal muscles
d. Mental work
e. Food rich in calories

142. To drain the oral cavity a dentist places a tampon between the cheek and the 2nd upper molar. This way secretion of the following salivary gland WILL NOT be able to accumulate in the oral cavity:
a. Lingual gland
b. Labial glands
c. Submandibular gland
d. Sublingual gland
*e. Parotid gland

143. During thermal stimulation it is characteristic of oral cavity blood vessels to:
*a. Dilate in response to both cold and hot stimuli
b. Respond with constriction to cold stimuli
c. Respond depending on the vessel functional condition
d. Respond with constriction to hot stimuli
e. Present no response towards thermal stimuli

144. After the cerebral hemorrhage a patient developed aphasia — lost the ability to articulate words. The hemorrhage is localized in the:
*a. Inferior frontal gyrus
b. Middle frontal gyrus
c. Second temporal convolution
d. First temporal convolution
e. Superior frontal gyrus

145. To assess the rate of collagen diKrok sintegration during certain connective tissue disturbances, it is necessary to measure the urine content of the following:
*a. Oxyproline
b. Proline
c. Urea
d. Lysine
e. Ornithine

146. Deaf parents with genotypes DDee and ddEE gave birth to a girl with normal hearing. Specify the form of D and E genes interaction:
*a. Complementary interaction
b. Epistasis
c. Overdominance
d. Polymery
e. Complete dominance

147. A 33-year-old man has a cystic growth connected to the 2nd molar of the lower jaw. Within the cystic cavity there is a rudimentary tooth. On microscopy: inner cystic surface is covered with stratified squamous epithelium, there are groups of mucin-producing cells.What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Follicular ameloblastoma
*b. Follicular cyst
c. Primordial cyst
d. Periodontitis
e. Radicular cyst

148. In the course of an experiment researchers stimulate a branch of the sympathetic nerve that innervates heart. What alterations of cardiac activity should be registered?
a. Decrease in heart force
b. Increase in heart force
c. Increase in arterial pressure
*d. Increase in heart rate and heart force
e. Increase in heart rate

149. A patient with a nasal trauma presents with skull fracture that circles the piriform opening. What bone is damaged?
*a. Nasal
b. Maxillary
c. Ethmoid
d. Frontal
e. Lacrimal

150. During tooth brushing it is not uncommon for oral mucosa to be injured. However, bleeding quickly stops on its own.What substances in saliva quickly staunch the flow of blood during minor oral injuries?
a. Lysozyme and mucin
*b. Procoagulants
c. Amylolytic enzymes
d. Lipolytic enzymes
e. Mineral substances

151. The autopsy of a 45-year-old man, who worked in organic acids production and died from uremia, has revealed reduced and completely destroyed crowns of the upper and lower incisors. Microscopy detects destruction of dentin and enamel, the pulp is covered with dense replacing dentin. What pathological process occurred in the teeth in this case?
a. Cuneiform defects
b. Hypercementosis
c. Fluorosis
d. Teeth erosion
*e. Necrosis of the hard tooth tissues

152. During postmortem examination of a 9-month-old infant it was determined that the cause of death was cerebral edema. What water-electrolyte imbalance is the most likely cause of the edema development?
*a. Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
b. Isoosmolar dehydration
c. Hyperosmolar dehydration
d. Isoosmolar hyperhydration
e. Hyperosmolar hyperhydration

153. An accident had resulted in a 65-year-old man drowning in a lake. Resuscitation measures allowed to restore his respiration and cardiac function. What factor prolongs the period of apparent death?
a. Hyperthermia
b. Elderly age
c. -
*d. Hypothermia
e. Prolonged preagony and agony

154. An athlete (a long-distance runner) during competition has developed acute heart failure. This pathology developed due to:
a. Coronary blood flow disturbance
b. Pericardial pathology
c. Pressure overload
*d. Volume overload
e. Direct damage to myocardium

155. In postabsorptive state glycogen synthesis is increased in liver and muscles. The syntesis involves the following substance:
a. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
*b. Uridine triphosphate (UTP)
c. Cytidine triphosphate (CTP)
d. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP)
e. Thymidine triphosphate (TTP)

156. A 50-year-old man, who has been suffering for a long time from viral hepatitis, developed mental impairments, impairments of consciousness, and motor disturbances (tremor, ataxia, etc.). What is the mechanism of such condition?
a. Disturbed lipid exchange in the liver
b. Alterations in the lipid composition of blood
c. Insufficient phagocytic function of stellate macrophages
d. Decreased synthesis of albumins and globulins in the liver
*e. Decreased detoxification function of the liver

157. A 30-year-old man had suffered a thoracic trauma in a traffic accident, which resulted in disturbance of external respiration. What ventilatory failure can be observed in this case?
a. Mixed type
*b. Extrapulmonary restrictive
c. Obstructive
d. Pulmonary restrictive
e. Dysregulatory

158. A girl is diagnosed with primary microcephaly that is a monogenic autosomal recessive disease. Her natural brother develops normally. What genotypes do the parents of these children have?
a. АА х АА
b. АА х аа
c. ААВВ х ААВВ
*d. Аа х Аа
e. аа х аа

159. A patient diagnosed with botulism has been prescribed antibotulinic serum for treatment. What immunity will be formed in the given patient?
a. Antimicrobic active immunity
b. Antitoxic active immunity
*c. Antitoxic passive immunity
d. Antimicrobic passive immunity
e. Infection immunity

160. An 84-year-old patient suffers from parkinsonism. One of the pathogenetic development elements of this disease is deficiency of a certain mediator in some of the brain structures. Name this mediator:
a. Adrenaline
b. Histamine
c. Acetylcholine
*d. Dopamine
e. Noradrenaline

161. High-altitude dwellers typically demonstrate chronically intensified respiration and decreased pCO2 value of blood. What mechanism is leading in the compensation of their asid-base imbalance?
*a. Desreased renal reabsorption of bicarbonate
b. Decreased pulmonary ventilation
c. -
d. Increased pulmonary ventilation
e. Increased ammonia excretion with urine

162. A patient has suffered a head injury. On examination there is a subcutaneous hematoma in the temporal area. What vessel was damaged, thus resulting in hematoma development?
a. А. maxillaris
b. А. buccalis
c. А. occipitalis
*d. А. temporalis superficialis
e. А. auricularis posterior

163. Due to severe pain syndrome a patient has been prescribed a narcotic analgesic. Specify the prescribed drug:
a. Analgin (Metamizole)
b. Dimexid
c. Indometacin
*d. Morphine
e. Nimesulid

164. A 50-year-old man came to a hospital with complaints of memory disorders, painful sensations along the nerve trunks, decreased mental ability, circulatory disorders and dyspepsia. Anamnesis states excessive alcohol consumption. What vitamin deficiency can result in such symptoms?
*a. Thiamine
b. Retinol
c. Riboflavin
d. Calciferol
e. Niacin

165. A young man has been performing physical exercises, holding a weight for a long time. What kind of muscle contraction is the most characteristic of these exercises?
a. Isotonic
b. Asynchronous
c. Isovolumetric
*d. Isometric
e. Single

166. A patient presents with lymphocytic-monocytic leukogram pattern. It is characteristic of:
a. -
*b. Chronic inflammatory process
c. Allergies
d. Acute inflammatory process
e. Chronic radiation sickness

167. A patient has been hospitalised with provisional diagnosis of diphyllobothriasis. What food products can be the cause of this condition?
a. Fruit and vegetables
*b. Fish
c. Beef
d. Pork
e. Milk and eggs

168. During examination of a woman she was found to have a luminal narrowing of the right jugular foramen (foramen jugulare). What cranial bones form this foramen?
a. Temporal and cuneiform
b. Occipital and frontal
*c. Temporal and occipital
d. Occipital and cuneiform
e. Cuneiform and palatine

169. What coenzyme of flavin-dependent dehydrogenases participates in the reactions of tricarboxylic acid cycle?
a. Flavin mononucleotide (FMN)
b. Thymidine diphosphate (TDP)
c. Heme
*d. Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
e. Nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD+)

170. A patient is diagnosed with inflammatory process in the area of the excretory duct of submandibular gland. This duct opens to:
a. Linea terminalis
b. Recesus gingivalis
c. Vestibulum oris
d. Foramen caecum linguae
*e. Caruncula sublingualis

171. A patient suffering from arthritis is prescribed a COX2 selective inhibitor with anti-inflammatory action. Specify this drug:
*a. Celecoxib
b. Dimexid
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
d. Indometacin
e. Butadion (Phenylbutazone)

172. A patient has undergone recurring blood tests that revealed sharp fluctuations of glucose content: significant increase in absorptive state and significant decrease in postabsorptive state. What pathology can be the cause of it?
a. Endemic goiter
*b. Aglycogenosis (glycogenosis type 0)
c. Diabetes mellitus type II
d. Diabetes mellitus type I
e. Acromegaly

173. A person found oneself in an emotionally straining situation. As the result the blood adrenaline level has risen, therefore increasing the strength of cardiac contractions. In what way does adrenaline increase the strength of cardiac contractions?
*a. Activates cardiac β-adrenergic receptors
b. Decreases tone of vagus nerves
c. Decreases excitability of pacemaker cells
d. Activates peripheral chemoreceptors
e. Activates vascular baroreceptors

174. During a brain surgery stimulation of the cerebral cortex resulted in tactile and thermal sensations in the patient. What gyrus was stimulated?
*a. Postcentral gyrus
b. Parahippocampal gyrus
c. Precentral gyrus
d. Superior temporal gyrus
e. Cingulate convolution

175. A patient suffering from malaria has developed hemolytic anemia after taking primaquine antimalarial drug. Hereditary insufficiency of the following enzyme in erythrocytes will be observed in this case:
*a. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
b. Lipase
c. Phosphofructokinase
d. Fructose 1-phosphate aldolase
e. Triosephosphate isomerase

176. Bacilli were extracted from the investigated sample. The bacilli are curved, extremely mobile, gramnegative, form no spores or capsules, have anaerobic form of respiration. They form transparent smooth colonies in alkaline agar, ferment saccharose and mannose into acid, produce exotoxin, fibrinolysin, collagenase, and hyaluronidase. What agent was extracted?
a. Blue pus bacillus
b. Colibacillus
c. Dysentery bacillus
*d. Comma bacillus
e. Proteus

177. A 30-year-old man with glomerulonephritis has developed nephrotic syndrome. What symptom invariably accompanies nephrotic syndrome?
a. Low urine specific gravity
b. Glucosuria
*c. Proteinuria
d. Anemia
e. Azotemia

178. Ulcer disease of the duodenum has been detected in a 38-year-old man. A treatment was prescribed after which the patient considered himself to be healthy. However, half a year later the patient developed pain in the epigastrium, heartburn, and insomnia. The patient’s condition can be estimated as a:
a. Latent period
b. Pathological state
c. Remission
d. Development of chronic disease
*e. Relapse

179. Autosomal nondisjunction had occurred in a woman during meiosis. An ovum with the third copy of the 18th chromosome was formed. The ovum was impregnated by normal spermatozoon. The resulting child will suffer from:
a. Patau’s syndrome
b. Klinefelter’s syndrome
*c. Edwards’ syndrome
d. Turner’s syndrome
e. Down’s syndrome

180. Amino acids join to each other in ribosomes of granular endoplasmic reticulum. Knowing the sequence of amino acids and applying genetic code, it is possible to determine the sequence of nucleoids in:
a. Carbohydrates
b. rRNA
c. Introns
d. Proteins
*e. mRNA

181. A patient suffers from an inflammatory process in the area of the lower wall of orbital cavity. What anatomical structure makes it possible for the inflammatory process to spread to the pterygopalatine fossa?
*a. Inferior orbital fissure
b. Supraorbital incisure
c. Optic canal
d. Posterior ethmoidal foramen
e. Superior orbital fissure

182. In 8 days after a surgery the patient developed tetanus. The surgeon suspects this condition to be caused by suture material contaminated by tetanus agent. The material is delivered to a bacteriological laboratory. What nutrient medium is required for primary inoculation of the suture material?
a. Egg-yolk salt agar
b. Hiss medium
c. Endo agar
d. Sabouraud agar
*e. Kitt-Tarozzi medium

183. A patient is diagnosed with deformed posterior portion of the nasal septum. What bone is deformed?
a. Vertical plate of palatine bone
*b. Vomer
c. Lateral pterygoid plate
d. Medial pterygoid plate
e. Perpendicular plate of ethmoid bone

184. A patient suffers from disturbed blood supply of superior lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres. What blood vessel is damaged?
*a. Medial cerebral artery
b. Posterior cerebral artery
c. Posterior communicating artery
d. Anterior communicating artery
e. Anterior cerebral artery

185. A victim of an accident has hemorrhage in the area of lateral surface of the mastoid process. What branch of the external carotid artery supplies this area with blood?
a. A. facialis
b. А. temporalis superficialis
*c. A. auricularis posterior
d. A. maxillaris
e. A. pharyngea ascendens

186. A 33-year-old man presents with disturbed pain and thermal sensitivity after a spinal cord trauma. The following ascending tract is injured:
a. Dorsal spinocerebellar
*b. Spinothalamic
c. Anterior corticospinal
d. Lateral corticospinal
e. Ventral spinocerebellar

187. A patient is diagnosed with pancreatitis. Starch decomposition disturbance occurs in the patient’s intestine due to deficiency of the following pancreatic enzyme:
a. Tripsin
b. Lipase
c. Carboxypeptidase
*d. Amylase
e. Chymotrypsin

188. Histologic specimen of a tooth slice shows a tissue consisting of intercellular substance permeated with tubules, in which cellular processes of odontoblasts are situated. What tissue is presented in this histologic specimen?
a. Periodontium
*b. Dentin
c. Pulp
d. Enamel
e. Cement

189. To test teeth sensitivity they are sprayed with cold or hot water. What structure of cerebral cortex provides subjective estimation of this thermal test?
a. First temporal convolution
b. Middle frontal gyrus
c. Central fissure
*d. Posterior central gyrus
e. Precentral gyrus

190. During oral cavity examination a dentist noticed eruption of the permanent canines in a child. The child grows and develops normally. Determine the child’s age:
a. 9-10 years
*b. 11-13 years
c. 6-7 years
d. 13-16 years
e. 8-9 years

191. Autopsy of a 58-year-old man, who had been suffering from rheumatic heart disease and died of cardiopulmonary decompensation, revealed gray diffuse film- and fiber-shaped coating in his pericardium. What type of inflammation is characteristic of this pericarditis?
a. Serous
b. Diphtheritic fibrinous
c. Suppurative
*d. Croupous fibrinous
e. Hemorrhagic

192. During examination of the patient’s oral cavity a dentist noticed deformation of the teeth and a crescent indentation on the upper right inscisor. The teeth are undersized, barrel-shaped — tooth cervix is wider than its edge. The patient uses a hearing aid, suffers from visual impairment. What type of syphilis affects teeth in such a way?
a. Secondary
b. Neurosyphilis
c. Primary
d. Early congenital
*e. Late congenital

193. Autopsy of a 45-year-old man revealed the following: wrinkled shagreen-resembling intima in the ascending aorta; elastic staining is negative. Wall of the left ventricle is up to 1,5 cm in width; no myocardial alterations. Specify the most probable disease of the aorta:
a. Aortic failure
b. -
c. Atherosclerosis of the aorta
d. Rheumatic vasculitis
*e. Syphilitic mesaortitis

194. A patient has developed a painful sore with soft ragged edges in the oral cavity. Microscopically there is lymphocytic infiltration with epithelioid and giant multinucleate Langhans cells in the sore floor. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Ulcerative stomatitis (Vincent’s stomatitis)
b. Syphilis
*c. Tuberculosis
d. Ulcer-cancer
e. Gangrenous stomatitis

195. Lateral X-ray of the occipital bone area demonstrates fracture of the occipital condyle. Integrity of the following anatomical structure is disturbed:
a. Canalis caroticus
b. Foramen stylomastoideum
c. Foramen mastoideum
*d. Canalis nervi hypoglossi
e. Foramen ovale

196. In the process of embryogenesis of dentomaxillary system there was an enamel disturbance detected. What source of tooth development is damaged in this case?
*a. Oral cavity epithelium
b. Dental bulb
c. Mesoderm
d. Mesenchyme
e. Dental saccule

197. The autopsy of the body of a man, who suffered from toxic diphtheria and died on the 9th day from the onset of disease with signs of cardiac decompensation, has revealed the following: dilated cardiac cavities, dull flaccid myocardium, myocardial section is variegated. Microscopy revealed fatty degeneration of cardiac hystiocytes, large foci of myocytolysis, stromal edema with scant lymphocytic and macrophageal infiltration. Specify the type of myocarditis in this case:
a. Septic
b. Interstitial
c. Granulomatous
d. Focal intermediate exudative
*e. Alterative

198. A doctor has made a diagnosis of gingivitis and recommended the patient to rinse the oral cavity with an oxidizing agent. Specify this agent:
a. Boric acid
b. Phenol
c. Brilliant green
*d. Hydrogen peroxide
e. Salicylic acid

199. In dental practice atropine sulfate is used to decrease salivation. This drug belongs to the following group:
a. Muscle relaxants
*b. Muscarinic antagonists
c. β-adrenoceptor antagonists
d. α–adrenergic agonists
e. Ganglionic blockers

200. A patient has developed a grayish-white dense protruding focus on the oral mucosa. Histologycally there are hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, and acanthosis of epithelium with lymphocytic and plasmocytic infiltration of underlaying connective tissue in this area. What pathology has developed in the oral mucosa?
a. -
*b. Leukoplakia
c. Leukoderma
d. Hyalinosis
e. Local tumor-like amyloidosis

