1. ?1. Several patients with similar complaints came to the doctor. They all present with weakness, pain in the intestines, indigestion. Feces analysis revealed the need for urgent hospitalization of the patient, who had microbial cysts with four nuclei detected in his samples. Such cysts are characteristic of the following protozoon:
a. Lamblia
*b. Entamoeba histolytica
c. Entamoeba coli
d. Balantidium
e. Trichomonad

2. A patient was diagnosed with a monogenic hereditary disease. Name this disease:
a. Hypertension
b. Poliomyelitis
c. Hymenolepiasis
*d. Hemophilia
e. Peptic ulcer disease of the stomach

3. According to the law of constancy of chromosome numbers, most animal species have de?nite and constant chromosome number. The mechanism that maintains this constancy during sexual reproduction of organisms is called:
a. Schizogony
b. Regeneration
c. —
*d. Meiosis
e. Amitosis

4. At a certain stage of human ontogenesis, physiological bond occurs between circulatory systems of the mother and the fetus. This function is being carried out by the following provisory organ:
*a. Placenta
b. Amnion
c. Allantois
d. Serous tunic
e. Yolk sac

5. According to the data collected by WHO researchers, every year there are approximately 250 millon malaria cases occur in the world. This disease can be encountered predominantly in tropical and subtropical areas. The spread of this disease matches the natural habitat of the following genus of mosquitoes:
a. Mansonia
b. Culiseta
c. Culex
d. Aedes
*e. Anopheles

6. A hunter was drinking raw water from a pond. He risks infection with the following type of trematodiasis:
a. Paragonimiasis
b. Opisthorchiasis
*c. Fascioliasis
d. Clonorchiasis
e. Dicroceliasis

7. A patient complains of urine excretion that occurs during sexual intercourse. What organ is affected?
a. Epididymis
b. Urinary bladder
c. Testicle
d. Seminal vesicles
*e. Prostate

8. After facial trauma the patient developed a buccal hematoma. What salivatory gland has its out?ow blocked by the hematoma?
a. Lingual
b. Buccal
c. Sublingual
d. Submandibular
*e. Parotid

9. A woman complains of painful chewing, especilly when she moves her lower jaw backwards. What muscles are affected?
a. Anterior bundles of the temporal muscles
b. Lateral pterygoid muscles
c. Masseter muscles
*d. Posterior bundles of the temporal muscles
e. Medial pterygoid muscles

10. A patient complains of painful chewing, especially when his lower jaw moves forward and to the side. It indicates functional disorder of the following muscles:
a. Mylohyoid muscles
b. Temporal muscles
c. Medial pterygoid muscles
d. Masseter muscles
*e. Lateral pterygoid muscles

11. A patient consulted a doctor about an increased pain sensitivity of the ear skin and ear canal. Palpation behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle was painful. Such clinical presentations are typical of the irritation of the following nerve:
a. Nn. supraclaviculares
b. N. occipitalis minor
*c. N. auricularis magnus
d. N. vagus
e. N. transversus colli

12. Due to sustained trauma the patient presents with unevenly dilated pupils (anisocoria). What muscle is blocked?
a. Musculus rectus superior
b. Musculus rectus inferior
c. Musculus ciliaris
d. Musculus rectus lateralis
*e. Musculus sphincter pupillae

13. Microphotogram made with electron microscope shows alveolar cells that compose blood-air barrier. Name this cells:
a. Alveolar macrophages
b. Alveolar secretory epithelial cells
*c. Alveolar respiratory epithelial cells
d. Clara cells (club cells)
e. Villous epithelial cells

14. During experiment, the myotome was destroyed in the rabbit fetus. This manipulation will result in malformation of the following structure:
a. Axial skeleton
b. Smooth muscles
c. Serous membranes
*d. Skeletal muscles
e. Dermal connective tissue

15. Electronic microscopy of a kidney shows tubules paved with cuboidal epithelium. In the epithelium there are light and dark cells. The light cells contain few organelles; their cytoplasm forms folds. These cells provide reabsorption of water from primary urine into blood. The dark cells structurally and functionally resemble gastric parietal cells. What tubules are shown on the microslide?
*a. Collecting tubules
b. Distal tubules
c. Descending limb of loop of Henle
d. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
e. Proximal tubules

16. Gastroscopy of a patient revealed the lack of mucus in the coating of the mucous membrane. This can be caused by the dysfunction of the following cells of the gastric wall:
a. Parietal cells of gastric glands
b. Cervical cells
c. Endocrinocytes
*d. Cells of prismatic glandular epithelium
e. Main exocrinocytes

17. At the cementoenamel junction there are non-calci?ed areas, through which infection often penetrates into the tooth. Name these structures:
a. Odontoblasts
b. Tomes’ dentinal ?ber
c. Enamel prisms
d. Ameloblasts
*e. Enamel tufts

18. A slide mount of an ovary presents a rounded structure with glandular cells that contain lipid droplets. Name this structure:
a. Primordial ovarian follicle
b. Mature ovarian follicle
c. Corpus albicans
*d. Corpus luteum
e. Primary ovarian follicle

19. A microspecimen of heart shows rectangular cells from 50 to 120 micrometer in size with central position of nucleus and developed myo?brils. The cells are connected by intercalated discs. These cells are responsible for the following function:
a. Function of impulse conduction
b. Protective
c. Regeneratory
*d. Function of heart contractions
e. Endocrine

20. After inhalation of dust a person develops cough, which results from stimulation of:
a. Pulmonary chemoreceptors
b. Juxtacapillary receptors
*c. Irritant receptors
d. Pulmonary thermoreceptors
e. Nociceptors

21. Electric current has affected skeletal muscle ?ber resulting in depolarization of the membrane. Depolarization develops due to the following ions penetrating the membrane:
a. HCO3?
b. Cl?
c. K+
*d. Na+
e. Ca2+

22. An experimental animal, a dog, received a weak solution of hydrochloric acid through a tube inserted into the duodenum. Primarily it will result in increased secretion of the following hormone:
*a. Secretin
b. Histamine
c. Neurotensin
d. Cholecystokinin
e. Gastrin

23. A woman presents with edemas. In her urine there is a large amount of protein excreted. What nephron segment is functionally disturbed in this case?
a. Distal convoluted tubule
b. Proximal convoluted tubule
*c. Renal corpuscle
d. Descending limb of loop of Henle
e. Ascending limb of loop of Henle

24. A patient suffers from diabetes mellitus with fasting hyperglycemia over 7.2 mmol/L. What blood plasma protein would allow to assess the patient’s glycemia level retrospectively (4-8 weeks prior to examination)?
*a. Glycated hemoglobin
b. Fibrinogen
c. Ceruloplasmin
d. C-reactive protein
e. Albumin

25. The patient exhausted by starvation presents with intensi?cation of the following process in the liver and kidneys:
a. Bilirubin synthesis
b. Urea synthesis
*c. Gluconeogenesis
d. Hippuric acid synthesis
e. Uric acid synthesis

26. Mucin aggregates retain water, which results in their viscosity and protective action. It is possible because mucin structure contains:
a. Oligosaccharides
b. Glucose
c. Homopolysaccharides
d. Disaccharides
*e. Glycosaminoglycans

27. A diabetus mellitus patient developed unconsciousness and convulsions after administration of insulin. What result of blood glucose analysis is the most likely in this case?
a. 10 mmol/L
b. 5.5 mmol/L
c. 3.3 mmol/L
d. 8 mmol/L
*e. 1.5 mmol/L

28. Chronic overdosage of glucocorticoids leads to the development of hyperglycemia. What process of carbohydrate metabolism is responsible for this effect?
a. Glycogenesis
*b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Aerobic glycolisis
d. Glycogenolysis
e. Pentose-phosphate cycle

29. A patient with glossitis presents with disappearance of lingual papillae, reddening and burning pain in the tongue. Blood test: erythrocytes - 2.2 · 1012/l, hemoglobin - 103 g/l, color index - 1.4. What type of anemia is it?
a. Iron refractory
*b. B12 folate-de?ciency
c. α-thalassemia
d. Iron de?ciency
e. β-thalassemia

30. A pregnant woman developed severe toxemia with exhausting recurrent vomiting throughout a day. By the end of the day she developed tetanic convulsions and dehydration. The described changes were caused by the following type of acid-base imbalance:
a. Nongaseous metabolic acidosis
b. Nongaseous excretory acidosis
c. Gaseous alkalosis
d. Gaseous acidosis
*e. Nongaseous excretory alkalosis

31. A 13-year-old girl is an in-patient at the hematology department of the regional children’s hospital. She was diagnosed with iron-de?ciency anemia. What type of hypoxia does this patient have?
a. Circulatory
b. Respiratory
c. Mixed
*d. Hemic
e. Tissue

32. A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with acute glomerulonephritis. Name the main mechanism of anemia development in this case:
a. Decreased tubular reabsorption
*b. Decreased erythropoietin synthesis
c. Decreased synthesis of renal prostaglandins
d. Decreased glomerular ?ltration
e. Renal azotemia

33. A man, who for a long time has been suffering from chronic mandibular osteomyelitis, died of chronic kidney disease. Autopsy revealed large lardaceous kidneys. What process had occurred in the kidneys?
a. Glomerulonephritis
b. Arterial nephrosclerosis
*c. Renal amyloidosis
d. Necrotic nephrosis
e. Contracted kidney

34. Macroscopic examination of lung tissue revealed areas of high airiness with small bubbles. Histological examination revealed thinning and rupture of alveolar septa accompanied by formation of large diversiform cavities. What disease was revealed in the lung?
a. Multiple bronchiectasis
b. Chronic bronchitis
c. Fibrosing alveolitis
*d. Pulmonary emphysema
e. Cavernous tuberculosis

35. On autopsy of a 69-year-old woman, who for a long time had been suffering from hypertension, the pathologist determined that both of her kidneys are dense, markedly diminished, with ?negrained surface. These changes are indicative of:
a. Hypoplasia
*b. Atrophy due to inadequate blood supply
c. Senile renal atrophy
d. Compression atrophy
e. Dysfunctional atrophy

36. Autopsy of a man who died of ethylene glycol poisoning revealed that his kidneys are slightly enlarged, edematic; their capsule can be easily removed. Cortical substance is broad and light gray. Medullary substance is dark red. What pathology did this man develop?
a. Lipoid nephrosis
*b. Necrotic nephrosis
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Acute tubular-interstitial nephritis

37. Signi?cant shortcoming of microscopy in infection diagnostics is its insuf?cient information value due to morphological similarity between many species of microorganisms. What immunoassay can signi?cantly increase informativity of this method?
a. Immune-enzyme assay
b. Coombs’ test
*c. Fluorescence immunoassay
d. Opsonization
e. Radioimmunoassay

38. What drugs are used for speci?c treatment of diphtheria?
a. Native plasma
b. Placental gamma globulin
*c. Antitoxic serum
d. Antibiotics
e. Anatoxin

39. An ophthalmologist suspects blennorrhea (gonococcal conjunctivitis) in a child with signs of suppurative keratoconjunctivitis. What laboratory diagnostics should be conducted to con?rm the diagnosis?
a. Biological analysis and allergy test
b. Microscopy and serum diagnostics
c. Serum diagnostics and allergy test
d. Biological analysis and phagodiagnostics
*e. Microscopy and bacteriological analysis

40. Analysis of sputum taken from a patient with suspected pneumonia revealed slightly elongated gram-positive diplococci with tapered opposite ends. What microorganisms were revealed in the sputum?
*a. Streptococcus pneumoniae
b. Klebsiella pneumoniae
c. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
d. Neisseria meningitidis
e. Staphylococcus aureus

41. In a closed community it is necessary to determine community members immunity to diphtheria and verify the need for their vaccination. What investigation is necessary in this case?
*a. Determine antitoxin titer by means of indirect hemagglutination assay
b. Determine diphtheria antibody titer
c. Determine community members immunity to diphtheria bacillus
d. Check medical records for vaccination
e. Test community members for diphtheria bacillus carriage

42. For two weeks a woman has been taking the mixture for neurasthenia, which was prescribed by a neurologist. Her general state slightly improved but shortly she started complaining of rhinitis, conjunctivitis, skin rashes, fatigue, and memory impairment. What group of drugs can have such asideeffect?
*a. Bromine salts
b. Motherwort preparations
c. Hop preparations
d. Adaptogens
e. Valerian preparations

43. A patient developed burning sensation in the oral cavity and white fuzzy coating on the tongue. Oral thrush is diagnosed. What drug of those listed below should be used?
a. Gentamicin
*b. Nystatin
c. Griseofulvin
d. Amphotericin
e. Tetracycline

44. A dental patient was prescribed a psychosedative for his fear of pain. What drug would be the most effective in this case?
a. Lithium carbonate
b. Aminazine
*c. Diazepam
d. Valerian tincture
e. Sodium bromide

45. A patient with skin burns was delivered to a hospital. To clean the wound from necrotic tissues and mucus the doctor prescribed an enzymatic drug for topical treatment. Name this drug:
a. Asparaginase
b. Pancreatin
*c. Tripsin
d. Pepsin
e. Streptokinase

46. A patient suffering from ciliary arrhythmia with anamnesis of bronchial asthma should be prescribed an antiarrhythmic drug. What antiarrhythmic drug is CONTRAINDICATED in this case?
a. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
*b. Anaprilin (Propranolol)
c. Ve ra pa mil
d. Ajmaline
e. Nifedipine

47. Anewbornfailedtotakehis?rst breath. Autopsy revealed that despite unobstructed airways the lungs of the newborn were unable to stretch. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Alveolar enlargement
*b. Absence of surfactant
c. Bronchial rupture
d. Bronchial narrowing
e. Pleural thickening

48. A 35-year-old woman is diagnosed with faucial diphtheria. The patient died with signs of acute heart failure. On autopsy: heart cavities are enlarged in the diameter, heart muscle is dull, ?accid, striped on section, with yellowish areas under the endocardium. What type of degeneration was detected in cardiac hystiocytes?
a. Ballooning
b. Carbohydrate
*c. Fatty
d. Hyaline droplet
e. Hydropic

49. During acute in?ammation of parotid gland, there is damage to the cells of secretory segments observed. What cells are damaged in this case?
a. Serous cells, cells with basal striation, stellate cells
b. Albuminous cells, serous cells, mucous cells
*c. Serous cells, myoepithelial cells
d. Seromucous cells
e. Brush-bordered epithelial cells, cells with basal striation

50. A child with signs of rickets has been prescribed a certain liposoluble vitamin drug by the pediatrician and dentist. This drug affects the metabolism of phosphorus and calcium in the body and facilitates calcium accumulation in bone tissue and dentine. If its content in the body is insuf?cient, there develop disorders of ossi?cation process, dental structure, and occlusion. Name this drug:
*a. Ergocalciferol
b. Tocopherol acetate
c. Thyroidin
d. Menadione (Vicasolum)
e. Retinol acetate

51. A patient with parodontosis was prescribed a fat-soluble vitamin that actively participates in redox processes in the organism. This antioxidant is a growth factor, has antixerophthalmic action, and contributes to maintenance of normal vision. In dental practice it is used to accelerate mucosal re-epithelization during parodontosis. Name this substance:
a. Cyanocobalamin
*b. Retinol acetate
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Ergocalciferol
e. Menadione (Vicasolum)

52. A patient has deep lacerated wound with uneven edges. The wound is suppurating; its edges present with moist granulation tissue that does not protrude above the wound level. Name the type of wound healing:
a. Direct closure of the epithelial defect
b. Wound organization
c. Healing by primary intention
d. Healing under the scab
*e. Healing by secondary intention

53. Often the cause of secondary immunode?ciency is an infectious affection of an organism, when agents reproduce directly in the cells of immune system and destroy them. Specify the diseases, during which the described above occurs:
a. Dysentery, cholera
b. Q fever, typhus
c. Tuberculosis, mycobacteriosis
d. Poliomyelitis, viral hepatitis type A
*e. Infectious mononucleosis, AIDS

54. A 30-year-old woman complains of intense thirst and dryness of the mouth that developed after a severe emotional shock. Laboratory analysis revealed increase of the patient’s blood sugar level up to 10 mmol/L. What endocrine gland is affected in the patient?
*a. Pancreas
b. Gonads
c. Pineal gland
d. Adrenal glands
e. Thyroid gland

55. A 45-year-old man came to the hospital complaining of sensory loss in the posterior 1/3 of his tongue. Which pair of the cranial nerves is functionally disturbed?
a. VIII
b. X
*c. IX
d. V
e. XII

56. A patient presents with disturbed patency of the airways at the level of small and medium bronchial tubes. What acidbase imbalance can the patient develop?
*a. Respiratory acidosis
b. Metabolic acidosis
c. Acid-base balance remains unchanged
d. Metabolic alkalosis
e. Respiratory alkalosis

57. Due to trauma the patient’s parathyroid glands have been removed, which resulted in inertness, thirst, sharp increase of neuromuscular excitability. Metabolism of the following substance is disturbed:
a. Zinc
*b. Calcium
c. Chlorine
d. Manganese
e. Molybdenum

58. A patient presents with high content of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) in the blood. What changes in the patient’s diuresis will occur?
a. Natriuria
*b. Oliguria
c. Anuria
d. Polyuria
e. Glycosuria

59. To terminate hypertensive crisis the patient was administered solution of magnesium sulfate. What route of drug administration should be chosen?
*a. Intravenous
b. Rectal
c. Intra-arterial
d. Oral
e. Duodenal

60. A patient presents with osteoporosis; hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are observed in the patient’s blood. What is the cause of this condition?
a. Increased thyroxin secretion
b. Increased corticosteroid secretion
c. Inhibited corticosteroid secretion
*d. Increased parathormone secretion
e. Inhibited parathormone secretion

61. During their expedition to the Middle East, the students found a 7-centimeterlong arthropod. Its body consists of cephalothorax with 4 pairs of ambulatory legs and segmented abdomen with two venom glands in its last segment. The gland openings are located on the tip of the hookshaped sting. The animal was identi?ed as a nocturnal predator, its venom is dangerous for humans. It belongs to the following order:
a. Aranei
b. Solpugae
c. Aphaniptera
*d. Scorpiones
e. Acarina

62. The patient, who for a long time has been keeping to an unbalanced lowprotein diet, developed fatty liver in?ltration. Name the substance, absence of which in the diet can lead to this condition:
a. Arachidonic acid
b. Biotin
c. Alanine
d. Cholesterol
*e. Methionine

63. After introdiction of adrenaline the patient’s blood glucose level increased. It is caused by intensi?ed:
a. Glycolysis in the skeletal muscles
b. Glycolysis in the liver
*c. Glycogenolysis in the liver
d. Glycogen synthesis
e. Glycogenolysis in the muscles

64. A student, who unexpectedly met his girlfriend, developed an increase in systemic arterial pressure. This pressure change was caused by the intensi?ed realization of the following re?exes:
*a. Conditional sympathetic
b. Conditional sympathetic and parasympathetic
c. Unconditional sympathetic
d. Unconditional parasympathetic
e. Conditional parasympathetic

65. It is necessary to decrease pumping ability of the patient’s heart. What membrane cytoreceptors must be blocked to achieve this effect?
a. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
*b. β-adrenergic receptors
c. α-and β-adrenergic receptors
d. α-adrenergic receptors
e. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors

66. Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvic acid is catalyzed by a multienzyme complex with several functionally linked coenzymes. Name this complex:
*a. Thymidine diphosphate (TDP), ?avin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), coenzyme A (CoASH), nicotine amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), lipoic acid
b. Nicotine amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), pyridoxal-5-phosphate, thymidine diphosphate (TDP), methylcobalamin, biotin
c. Lipoic acid, tetrahydrofolic acid, pyridoxal-5-phosphate, methylcobalamin
d. Coenzyme A (CoASH), ?avin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), pyridoxal-5phosphate, tetrahydrofolic acid, carnitine
e. Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), tetrahydrofolic acid, pyridoxal-5-phosphate, thymidine diphosphate (TDP), choline

67. To take a sample of cerebrospinal ?uid for analysis, a doctor makes a puncture into subarachnoid space. To prevent damage to the spinal cord, the needle must be inserted between the two following vertebrae:
*a. III and IV lumbar
b. XII thoracic and I lumbar
c. IV and V thoracic
d. IandIIlumbar
e. XI and XII thoracic

68. Resuscitation unit received a patient with acute poisoning caused by unidenti?ed medicine. To quickly excrete the poison from the patient’s body, forced diuresis was induced. What substance was used to perform this procedure?
a. Hydrochlorothiazide
b. Spironolactone
c. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
*d. Furosemide
e. Omeprazole

69. It is known that in metabolism of catecholamine mediators the special role belongs to monoamine oxidase (MAO). How does this enzyme activate these mediators (noradrenaline, adrenaline, dopamine)?
a. Methyl group removal
b. Amino group attachment
*c. Oxidative deaminization
d. Carboxylation
e. Hydrolysis

70. A patient with acute pancreatitis presents with signi?cantly increased urine diastase content. What proteolysis inhibitor must be included into complex therapy of this patient?
a. Pancreatine
b. Festal
*c. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
d. Digestal
e. Mezym forte

71. A bacteriological laboratory received asampleofdried?sh from an outbreak of food poisoning. Inoculation of the sample on Kitt-Tarozzi medium revealed microorganisms resembling tennis racket. These microorganisms are causative agents of the following disease:
a. Typhoid fever
*b. Botulism
c. Dysentery
d. Salmonellosis
e. Diphtheria

72. A man with signs of intestinal obstruction was delivered to a hospital. In the process of treatment, roundworms 25-40 cm in size were extracted from the patent’s intestine. Determine the species of this helminth:
a. Trichocephalus trichiurus
b. Ancylostoma duodenale
*c. Ascaris lumbricoides
d. Strongyloides stercoralis
e. Enterobius vermicularis

73. A patient suffering from acute bronchitis with dif?cult expectoration was prescribed acetylcysteine. What drug action will provide curative effect?
a. Activation of bronchial ciliated epithelium
b. Alkalinization of sputum
c. Stimulation of the bronchial glands
*d. Mucoproteins depolymerization
e. Re?ex stimulation of bronchiolar peristalsis

74. A patient with ischemic heart disease presents with increased blood plasma content of triglycerides and very lowdensity lipoproteins. What drug should be prescribed?
a. Amiodarone
b. Famotidine
*c. Feno?brate
d. Lisinopril
e. Dobutamine

75. In what organ biotransformation (metabolic transformation) of most medicinal agents occurs upon their introduction into an organism?
a. Lungs
*b. Liver
c. Intestine
d. Kidneys
e. Skin

76. Among organic substances of a cell there is a polymer composed of dozens, hundreds, and thousands of monomers. This molecule is capable of self-reproduction and can be an information carrier. X-ray structure analysis shows this molecule to consist of two complementary spiral threads. Name this compound:
a. Carbohydrate
b. Hormone
c. RNA
d. Cellulose
*e. DNA

77. In Western Europe nearly half of all congenital malformations occur in the children conceived in the period, when pesticides were used extensively in the region. Those congenital conditions result from the following in?uence:
a. Mechanical
*b. Teratogenic
c. Malignization
d. Carcinogenic
e. Mutagenic

78. A 30-year-old breastfeeding woman keeps to the diet that daily provides her with 1000 mg of calcium, 1300 mg of phosphorus, and 20 mg of iron. How should the daily dosages of minerals in this diet be adjusted?
a. Decrease iron intake
*b. Increase phosphorus intake
c. Decrease ?uorine intake
d. Increase calcium intake
e. Increase iron intake

79. A patient presents with damaged ?bers of the ninth pair of cranial nerves (glossopharyngeal nerve). What gustatory sensation will be disturbed in this case?
a. Sourness
b. All gustatory sensations
c. Sweetness
d. Saltiness
*e. Bitterness

80. A 49-year-old man presents with facial edema, signi?cant proteinuria, hypoproteinemia, dysproteinemia, and hyperlipidemia. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
*a. Nephrotic syndrome
b. Prostatitis
c. Cystitis
d. Pyelonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

81. A dentist prescribed the patient with maxillofacial arthritis diclofenac sodium. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Catalase inhibition
b. Opiate receptors block
c. Phosphodiesterase activation
*d. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
e. Opiate receptors activation

82. A surgeon must amputate the damaged part of the patient’s foot along the line of Lisfranc joint. What ligament must be cut in this case?
a. Calcaneonavicular ligament
b. Talonavicular ligament
c. Talocalcaneal ligament
*d. Medial interosseous tarsometatarsal ligament
e. Bifurcated ligament

83. A histological specimen shows terminal secretory parts of glands made of conic cells with basophilic cytoplasm and a roundish nucleus in the centre. Specify the type of terminal secretory parts by the type of secretion:
a. Combined
b. Sebaceous
*c. Serous
d. Mucous
e. Seromucous

84. Microscopy of a plaque-like structure extracted from the lateral surface of the tongue of a man with dentures revealed signi?cant thickening of the epithelial layer along with processes of parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, and acanthosis; in the connective tissue there are small round cell in?ltrations. Make the diagnosis of the given pathological state:
a. Chronic glossitis
b. Atrophic (Hunter’s) glossitis
c. Ichthyosis
d. Chronic stomatitis
*e. Leukoplakia

85. A patient is registered for regular check-ups. Laboratory analyses for viral hepatitis diagnostics are made. In the blood serum only antibodies to HbsAg are detected. Such result is indicative of:
a. Acute viral hepatitis type B
b. Viral hepatitis type A
c. Chronic viral hepatitis type C
*d. Past case of viral hepatitis type B
e. Acute viral hepatitis type C

86. To treat tuberculosis, an antibiotic that colors urine red is prescribed. Name this antibiotic:
a. Erythromycin
b. Nitroxoline
c. Cefotaxime
*d. Rifampicin
e. Amoxicillin

87. Holocrine secretion is characteristic of sebaceous glands. What structural components ensure renewal of the cells of these glands?
a. Strati?ed squamous epithelium of the excretory duct
b. Nonstrati?ed cuboidal epithelium of the excretory duct
c. Sebocytes
d. Myoepithelial cells
*e. Germinative layer cells

88. During experiment the processes of food and water hydrolysis products absorption were studied. It was determined that these processes mainly occur in the following gastrointestinal segment:
*a. Small intestine
b. Large intestine
c. Oral cavity
d. Rectum
e. Stomach

89. Detoxi?cation of bilirubin occurs in the membranes of endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes. Bilirubin is secreted by hepatocytes into bile for the most part as:
a. Bilirubin monoglucuronide
b. Unconjugated bilirubin
*c. Bilirubin diglucuronide
d. Indirect reacting bilirubin
e. —

90. A patient developed a tender red nodule in the lower jaw area. Histologically there is accumulation of purulent exudate in several hair follicles. What clinicopathological type of in?ammation is observed?
*a. Carbuncle
b. Furuncle
c. Hypostatic abscess
d. Abscess
e. Phlegmon

91. Autopsy of a man, who died suddenly with signs of acutely disturbed cerebral circulation, revealed aneurysm rupture of the medial cerebral artery and a round cavity4cmindiameter?lled with blood in his frontal lobe. Name this type of hemorrhage:
a. —
*b. Hematoma
c. Hemorrhagic in?ltration
d. Petechiae
e. Contusion

92. During examination of a child’s oral cavity a dentist noted the appearance of the ?rst permanent molars on the child’s lower jaw. How old is the child?
a. 12-13
*b. 6-7
c. 8-9
d. 4-5
e. 10-11

93. During examination of the oral cavity at the vestibular surface of the lower right incisor there was detected a rounded growth on the thin pedicle. Histologically: in the connective tissue there are numerous thin-walled sinusoids, hemorrhage areas, hemosiderin foci, and giant cells resembling osteoclasts. Make the diagnosis:
a. Granular cell ameloblastoma
b. Gingival ?bromatosis
c. Cavernous hemangioma
*d. Giant cell epulis
e. Angiomatous epulis

94. During teeth examination on the lateral surface of the ?rst upper molar there was detected a cone-shaped carious cavity with base oriented towards the tooth surface and apex - towards the tooth center. Softened dentin is visible at the ?oor of the carious cavity. Make the diagnosis:
a. Tooth erosion
b. —
c. Enamel caries
d. Cement caries
*e. Dentin caries

95. A patient on the 2nd day after cardiac infarction presents with acute decrease of systolic blood pressure down to 60 mm Hg with tachycardia 140/min., dyspnea, loss of consciousness. What mechanism is essential in the pathogenesis of shock developed in this case?
a. Development of anaphylactic reaction to myocardial proteins
*b. Decreased cardiac output
c. Decreased circulating blood volume
d. Increased myocardial excitability caused by products of necrotic disintegration
e. Development of paroxysmal tachycardia

96. After the water supply system had been put into operation in a new residential area, the medical of?cers of sanitary and epidemiological station measured total microbial number in the water. Name the maximum permissible value of this indicator for potable water:
a. 500
b. 1000
c. 10
d. 400
*e. 100

97. A woman had been taking synthetic hormones during her pregnancy. Her newborn girl presents with excessive hairiness which has formal resemblance to adrenogenital syndrome. This sign of variability is called:
a. Replication
*b. Phenocopy
c. Recombination
d. Mutation
e. Heterosis

98. Breakdown of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) into simple, non-cyclic nucleoside monophosphates is catalyzed by the following enzyme:
a. Glucose 6-phosphatase
b. Glycogen phosphorylase
*c. Phosphodiesterase
d. Protein kinase
e. Adenylate cyclase

99. In the course of experiment the vagus nerve of the test animal was severed, which resulted in the animal developing constant tachycardia. What effect of parasympathetic nervous system on cardiac performance is demonstrated by this experiment?
*a. Inhibition
b. Stimulus summation
c. Mixed effect
d. Paradoxical response
e. Stimulation

100. A 42-year-old woman, who has been keeping to a vegetarian diet for a long period of time, consulted a doctor. Examination revealed negative nitrogen balance in the patient. What factor is the most likely cause of such a condition?
a. Insuf?cient amount of fats in the diet
b. Decreased rate of metabolic processses
c. Insuf?cientamountofdietary?ber
d. Excessive amount of fats in the diet
*e. Insuf?cientamountofproteinsinthe diet

101. A patient came to the traumatologist with complaints of developing dif?culties during active extension of elbow. What muscle is the most likely to be damaged?
a. M. deltoideus
b. M. pectoralis minor
*c. M. triceps brachii
d. M. coracobrachialis
e. M. latissimus dorsi

102. A patient complains of acute spastic abdominal pain, frequent urge to defecate, liquid bloody feces with mucus. Laboratory analysis of fecal smear revealed inconstant in shape organisms with erythrocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Amebiasis
b. Intestinal trichomoniasis
c. Lambliasis
d. Balantidiasis
e. Schistosomiasis

103. A patient presents with dysfunction of the cerebral cortex accompanied by epileptic seizures. He has been administered a biogenic amine synthetized from glutamate and responsible for central inhibition. What substance is it?
a. Serotonin
b. Acetylcholine
c. Histamine
*d. ?-aminobutyric acid
e. Dopamine

104. In hot weather the bus passengers asked to open the roof hatches. What way of heat transfer is activated in this situation?
a. Conduction
b. Conduction and radiation
c. Sweat evaporation
*d. Convection
e. Radiation

105. At the end of winter a student, who had been lately in the state of nervous tension, developed a case of URTI after overexposure to cold. What is the case of this disease?
a. Nervous stress
b. Improper diet
c. Hypovitaminosis
*d. Pathogenic agent
e. Overexposure to cold

106. A 38-year-old woman developed an attack of bronchial asthma. What bronchial spasmolytic for emergency medical aid is a beta-2-adrenergic agonist?
*a. Salbutamol
b. Ipratropium bromide
c. Atropine
d. Platyphyllin
e. Adrenaline

107. During examination the doctor performs auscultation to assess the functioning of the patient’s mitral valve. Where can the sound of this valve be auscultated?
a. At the edge of the sternum over the 5th costal cartilage on the left
*b. At the apex of the heart
c. At the edge of the sternum in the 2nd intercostal space on the right
d. At the edge of the sternum over the 5th costal cartilage on the right
e. At the edge of the sternum in the 2nd intercostal space on the left

108. A patient was diagnosed with Klinefelter’s syndrome. The patient with this disease will have the karyotype (47, ХXY). How many sex chromosomes are in this complement?
a. One
b. Zero
*c. Three
d. Two
e. Forty four

109. Oral examination reveals marked reddening of mucosa at the root of the tongue. What structure is involved in the in?ammatory process?
a. Veil of palate
b. Pharyngeal tonsil
c. Palatine tonsil
d. Tonsil of torus tubaris
*e. Lingual tonsil

110. A trauma patient has wound in the temporal region, with trickle of bright-red blood streaming from it. What blood vessel is damaged?
a. A. facialis
b. A. auricularis posterior
c. A. maxillaris
*d. A. temporalis super?cialis
e. A. occipitalis

111. On histological examination of biopsy material taken from the liver of a woman, who for a long time had been suffering from viral hepatitis type B, the pathologist detected diffuse hepatic ?brosis with formation of porto-portal and portocentral ?brotic septa and disturbance of the liver lobular structure (development of pseudolobules). What process can be characterized by the given morphological changes?
a. Chronic hepatitis
b. Acute hepatitis
c. Cholestasis
*d. Hepatic cirrhosis
e. Hepatocellular carcinoma

112. Examination of histological specimen of oral mucosa reveals non-keratinized strati?ed squamous epithelium with lymphocyte in?ltrations. What structure of oral cavity is the most likely to be represented by this mucosa specimen?
*a. To n s i l
b. Cheek
c. Gums
d. Hard palate
e. Lip

113. A victim of a traf?c accident has lost thoracic respiration but retaines diaphragmal. The spinal cord is most likely to be damaged at:
a. XI-XII cervical segments
b. I-II cervical segments
*c. VI-VII cervical segments
d. I-II lumbar segments
e. I-II sacral segments

114. During examination a neurologist taps the tendon under the patient’s kneecap with a re?ex hammer to evaluate re?ex extension of the knee. This response is provoked by stimulation of the following receptors:
a. Articular receptors
b. Golgi tendon organ
*c. Muscle spindles
d. Tactile receptors
e. Nociceptors

115. An experimet was conducted to study major indicators of hemodynamics. What hemodynamics indicator would be the same for both systemic and pulmonary circulation?
a. Mean arterial pressure
b. Linear blood ?ow velocity
c. Dyastolic blood pressure
*d. Volumetric blood ?ow rate
e. Vascular resistance

116. A 50-year-old man declined anaesthesia during dental manipulations. Due to severe pain he developed anuria caused by acute increase in production of:
*a. Adrenaline
b. Thymosin
c. Glucagon
d. Thyroxin
e. Renin

117. 30 minutes after dental treatment the patient developed red itching spots on the face and oral mucosa. The patient was diagnosed with urticaria. What bioactive substance with vasodilating and pruriginous effect is produced during this type of allergic reaction?
*a. Histamine
b. Leukotriene B4
c. Bradykinin
d. Interleukin-1
e. Prostaglandin E2

118. A patient has been administered conduction anesthesia with novocaine in preparation for tooth extraction. After the anesthesia administration the patient developed swelling and hyperemy around the injection site, skin itch, general fatigue, motor agitation. Name the developed complication:
a. Idiosyncrasy
b. Drug dependence
c. In?ammation
*d. Allergy
e. Tachyphylaxis

119. A 26-year-old woman presents with skin rashes and itching after eating citrus fruits. Prescribe her a drug that is an H1histamine receptor antagonist:
a. Menadione (Vicasolum)
b. Acetylsalicylic acid
*c. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
d. Analgin (Metamizole)
e. Paracetamol

120. A patient with acne is prescribed doxycycline hydrochloride. What should the patient be warned against, regarding administration of this drug?
a. Take with large amount of liquid, preferably milk
b. Course of treatment should not exceed 1 day
c. Do not take with vitamin preparations
*d. Avoid prolonged exposure to the sun
e. Take before eating

121. A patient with megaloblastic anemia was taking a water-soluble vitamin. Name this substance:
a. Pyridoxine
*b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Tocopherol acetate
d. Thiamine chloride
e. Ascorbic acid

122. Biological material taken from a patient contains several species of microorganisms (staphylococci and streptococci) that are causative agents of the patient’s disease. Name this type of infection:
a. Consecutive infection
b. Coinfection
c. Superinfection
d. Reinfection
*e. Mixed infection

123. After spinal trauma the patient presents with absence of voluntary movements and tendon re?exes; sensitivity is retained only in the lower extremities. What is the mechanism of these disturbances and what part of the spine was injured?
a. Peripheral paralysis, cervical spine
b. Spinal shock, cervical spine
*c. Spinal shock, thoracic spine
d. Central paralysis, coccyx
e. —

124. A man has developed downturning mouth and smoothed out nasolabial fold due to in?uenza complication. What nerve is damaged?
a. Maxillary nerve
b. Trochlear nerve
c. Oculomotor nerve
*d. Facial nerve
e. Mandibular nerve

125. A patient with electrical injury to the neck area developed pathologic ?xed sideways ?exion of the head towards the injured area, while the face is ?xed away from the injury. What neck muscle sustained scarring?
a. Anterior scalene muscle
b. Omohyoid muscle
c. Digastric muscle
*d. Sternocleidomastoid muscle
e. Trapezius muscle

126. Chronic in?ammation of gingiva resulted in excessive growth of connective tissue ?bers. What cell elements are leading in the development of this condition?
a. Osteoblasts
b. Macrophages
c. Osteoclasts
*d. Fibroblasts
e. Fibrocytes

127. A worker of a cattle farm consulted a surgeon about fever up to 40oC, headache, weakness. Objective examination of his back revealed hyperemia and a dark red in?ltration up to 5 cm in diameter with black bottom in its center, which was surrounded with pustules. What disease are these presentations typical of?
a. Furuncle
b. Abscess
c. Plague
d. Tularemia
*e. Anthrax

128. A 20-year-old woman came to the doctor with complaints of general weight loss, loss of appetite, weakness, skin discoloration resembling bronze tan. In addtition to hyperpigmentation, examination in the hospital revealed bilateral adrenal tuberculosis. What substance leads to skin hyperpigmentation, when accumulated excessively?
a. Bilirubin
b. Lipofuscin
c. Adrenochrome
*d. Melanin
e. Hemozoin

129. During cell analysis, their cytoplasm was determined to have high content of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase. This enzyme ensures the following process:
a. Elongation
b. Repair
*c. Amino acid activation
d. Transcription
e. Replication

130. What enzyme has demineralization effect,i.e.intensi?es decomposition of mineral components of the tooth tissues?
*a. Acid phosphatase
b. Glucose 6-phosphatase
c. Phosphotransferase
d. Glycogen phosphorylase
e. Alkaline phosphatase

131. Histologic specimen of renal cortex shows renal corpuscle and renal tubules. It is known that reabsorption of substances occurs in the renal tubules. What nephron tissue takes part in this process?
a. Cartilaginous tissue
*b. Epithelial tissue
c. Reticular tissue
d. Connective tissue proper
e. Mucous tissue

132. A 45-year-old man with a history of left-sided croupous pneumonia died of multiple traumas received as the result of a car accident. On autopsy in the lower lobe of his left lung its posterolateral wall is attached to the chest wall with ?brous adhesions. The lobe is diminished, dense, ?eshy on section, grayish-pink in color; its pieces sink, when placed in water. Histological analysis reveals diffuse excessive growth of ?brous connective tissue in these areas. Name this complication of croupous pneumonia:
*a. Carneous degeneration
b. Gangrene
c. Abscess
d. Atelectasis
e. Emphysema

133. A 16-year-old girl, who has been starving herself for a long time to lose weight, developed an edema. This phenomenon is mainly caused by:
a. Deceleration of glomerular ?ltration rate
b. Decreased production of vasopressin in the hypothalamus
c. Hypoglycemia due to glycogen synthesis disturbance
d. Venous congestion and increased venous pressure
*e. Hypoproteinemia due to protein synthesis disturbance

134. A patient with knife wound of the neck presents with hemorrhage. Initial wound management revealed damage to the vessel that is located along the lateral edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Name this vessel:
a. V. jugularis anterior
b. A. carotis interna
c. V. jugularis interna
*d. V. jugularis externa
e. A. carotis externa

135. Erythrocytes of the patient with hemolytic anemia present with signi?cant decrease of pyruvate kinase activity. What methabolic process is disturbed in this case?
*a. Glycolysis
b. Gluconeogenesis
c. Glycogen synthesis
d. Pentose-phosphate pathway of glucose oxidation
e. Glycogenolysis

136. To determine functional state of the patient’s liver, the analysis of animal indican excreted with urine was conducted. This substance is produced in the process of detoxi?cation of putrefaction products of a certain amino acid, which takes place in the large intestine. Name this amino acid:
a. Serine
b. Cysteine
c. Valine
d. Glycine
*e. Tryptophan

137. When determining comparative tissue radiosensitivity, it was revealed that different tissues have different level of sensitivity toward ionizing radiation. What tissue of those listed below is the most radiosensitive?
a. Muscular
b. Nerve
c. Cartilaginous
d. Bone
*e. Hematopoietic

138. Oral examination revealed dark yellow and brown spots and stripes on the labial and lingual surfaces of the patent’s teeth; more than the half of the dental surface is affected; enamel and dentin are destroyed. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Dystrophic calci?cation
c. Metastatic calci?cation
d. Dental calculus
*e. Fluorosis

139. A 28-year-old patient complains of frequent gingival hemorrhages. Blood test revealed the clotting factor II (prothrombin) de?ciency. What phase of blood coagulation is impaired in this patient?
a. Clot retraction
b. Vascular-platelet haemostasis
*c. Thrombin generation
d. Fibrinolysis
e. —

140. Longitudinal tooth section shoes a tissue that makes up the tooth basis and consists of collagen ?bers, mineralized matrix, and tubules that hold dentinal ?bers. This tissue develops from:
*a. Peripheral part of dental papilla
b. Internal cells of enamel organ
c. Intermediate cells of enamel organ
d. Dental saccule
e. External cells of enamel organ

141. In the course of experiment it is necessary to detect muscle excitation. For this purpose the following measurement should be made:
a. Mechanomyogram
b. Contraction duration
c. Ion concentration
*d. Electromyogram
e. Contraction strength

142. Increased stumulation rate of isolated heart of a rabbit leads to incomplete relaxation of the heart ventricles due to:
a. Increased potassium content in cardiomyocytes
b. Increased potassium content in the interstitial tissue
c. Increased sodium content in cardiomyocytes
d. Inhibition of K ? Napump
*e. Calcium accumulation in cardiomyocytes

143. Several hours after the dental trauma the tooth pulp presents with hyperemic vessels, marked tissue edema with isolated neutrophils, lymphocytes, and minor dystrophic changes of nerve ?bers. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Serous pulpitis
b. Gangrenous pulpitis
c. Fibrous pulpitis
d. Granulating pulpitis
e. Suppurative pulpitis

144. Fetal malformations can be caused by such maternal diseases as rubella, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegaly, herpes, and chlamydiosis. These malformations belong to the following type of variability:
a. Epimutational
*b. Modi?cation
c. Combinative
d. Mutational
e. Genomic imprinting

145. Beriberi is a classical example of thiamine de?ciency. Active form of this vitamin is synthesized by an enzyme belonging to the following group:
*a. Transferases
b. Hydrolases
c. Isomerase
d. Lyases
e. Oxidoreductases

146. A 25-year-old man has lost all sensitivity due to damage of his peripheral nerves. Name this disorder:
a. —
*b. Anesthesia
c. Hypoesthesia
d. Ataxia
e. Hyperesthesia

147. A 60-year-old woman with hepatocirrhosis developed hemorrhagic syndrome. What mechanism leads to the development of this condition?
a. Increased portal venous pressure
b. Reduction of hepatic glycogen stores
c. Emergence of neurotoxins in the blood
*d. Decreased synthesis of prothrombin and ?brinogen
e. Deceased blood oncotic pressure

148. A woman is diagnosed with Turner’s syndrome (karyotype 45, X0). How many autosomal pairs would her somatic cells contain?
a. 44
b. 45
c. 24
d. 23
*e. 22

149. Blood serum of the patient has milky appearance. Biochemical analysis revealed high content of triacylglycerols and chylomicrons. This condition is caused by hereditary defect of the following enzyme:
a. Adipose tissue hormone-sensitive lipase
b. Phosphodiesterase
c. Phospholipase
d. Pancreatic lipase
*e. Lipoprotein lipase

150. Dopamine precursor - dioxyphenylalanine (DOPA) - is used in treatment of Parkinson’s disease. This active substance is produced from the following amino acid:
a. Alanine
b. Histidine
c. Tryptophan
*d. Tyrosine
e. Cysteine

151. An 84-year-old patient suffers from parkinsonism. One of the pathogenetic development elements of this disease is de?ciency of a certain mediator in some of the brain structures. Name this mediator:
a. Acetylcholine
*b. Dopamine
c. Noradrenaline
d. Adrenaline
e. Histamine

152. A patient has suffered a head injury. On examination there is a subcutaneous hematoma in the temporal area. What vessel was damaged, thus resulting in the hematoma development?
a. А. buccalis
b. А. occipitalis
c. А. maxillaris
d. А. auricularis posterior
*e. А. temporalis super?cialis

153. Due to severe pain syndrome a patient has been prescribed a narcotic analgesic. Specify the prescribed drug:
a. Dimexid
b. Indometacin
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
d. Nimesulid
*e. Morphine

154. A tumor is detected in one of the regions of the patient’s brain, resulting in the patient’s inability to maintain normal body temperature. What brain structure is damaged?
a. Thalamus
b. Striatum
c. Substantia nigra
*d. Hypothalamus
e. Cerebellum

155. An experiment was conducted to measure the threshold of tactile receptors stimulation with various stimuli. What stimulus will have the lowest threshold?
a. Photic stimulus
b. Chemical stimulus
*c. Mechanical stimulus
d. Cold stimulus
e. Heat stimulus

156. A 50-year-old man came to a hospital with complaints of memory disorders, painful sensations along the nerve trunks, decreased mental ability, circulatory disorders and dyspepsia. Anamnesis states excessive alcohol consumption. What vitamin de?ciency can result in such symptoms?
*a. Thiamine
b. Retinol
c. Ribo?avin
d. Calciferol
e. Niacin

157. Auscultation reveals that in the patient’s II intercostal space along the parasternal line on the right the II heart sound is better heard than the I heart sound. What valve produces this sound when closing?
a. Tricuspid valve
b. Bicuspid and tricuspid valves
c. Semilunar pulmonary valve
d. Bicuspid valve
*e. Semilunar aortic valve

158. Miners’ work at the coal-face often leads to development of anthracosis. What type of respiratory failure arises along with this disease?
a. Obstructive
b. Thoracic
c. Diaphragmatic
*d. Restrictive
e. Dysregulatory

159. Alanceletembryoisatthe developmental stage during which its cells multiply, while its general volume remains practically unchanged. What developmental stage is it?
*a. Cleavage
b. Organogenesis
c. Gastrulation
d. Histogenesis
e. Neurulation

160. Histologic specimen of endometrium demonstrates isolated epithelial cells with chromosomes that form a ”plate” located in the equatorial plane of the cell. What stage of the cell cycle is it?
a. Prophase
b. Interphase
*c. Metaphase
d. Anaphase
e. Telophase

161. During ultrasound a patient with atherosclerosis was diagnosed with bilateral stenosis of the renal arteries. Specify the bioactive substance that is the key pathogenetic link in the development of arterial hypertension in this case:
*a. Renin
b. Vasopressin
c. Thyroxin
d. Cortisol
e. Adrenaline

162. A 72-year-old man with hepatocirrhosis developed hepatic coma. Its development is caused by the substances, that are being neutralized in the liver, entering into general circulation through portacaval shunts (portal hypertension syndrome) and necrosis of hepatic cells. What type of hepatic coma is characterized by these presentations?
*a. Mixed
b. Shunt
c. Ketoacidotic
d. Hepatocellular
e. Parenchymatous

163. After a traf?c accident a man presents with severe blood loss, consciousness disturbance, low blood pressure, as well as compensatory activation of the reninangiotensin system, which results in:
*a. Hyperproduction of aldosterone
b. Intensi?cation of erythropoiesis
c. Intensi?cation of heart contractions
d. Hyperproduction of vasopressin
e. Increased blood coagulation

164. Laboratory analysis revealed UDPglucuronyl transferase de?ciency in the patient. What blood values can con?rm this enzymopathy?
*a. Hyperbilirubinemia
b. Phenylketonuria
c. Uremia
d. Ketoacidosis
e. Indicanuria

165. Examination revealed the patient to have decreased secretory function of the nasal cavity glands.What nerve provides parasympathetic innervation of these glands?
*a. N. petrosus major
b. N. petrosus minor
c. N. chorda tympani
d. N. maxillaris
e. N. petrosus profundus

166. A 67-year-old man was delivered to a cardiology department with complaints of periodical pains in his heart, dyspnea caused by even slight exertion, cyanosis and edemas. ECG shows additional excitations of heart ventricles. Name this type of rhythm disturbance:
*a. Extrasystole
b. Tachycardia
c. Fibrillation
d. Flutter
e. Bradycardia

167. A 40-year-old woman is being treated at the therapeutics department. Her temperature chart shows cyclic fevers alternating with periods of temperature normalization that last for several days. What type of temperature pro?le is it?
a. Febris remittens
b. Febris intermittent
*c. Febris recurrens
d. Febris continua
e. —

168. A patient with heatstroke was delivered to the admission room. What compensatory reactions develop in the patient’s body in such case?
a. Increased heart rate
b. Peripheral vasoconstriction
*c. Peripherial vasodilatation
d. Coronary vasospasm
e. Persistent hyperglycemia

169. During a brain surgery stimulation of the cerebral cortex resulted in tactile and thermal sensations in the patient. What gyrus was stimulated?
a. Precentral gyrus
*b. Postcentral gyrus
c. Parahippocampal gyrus
d. Cingulate convolution
e. Superior temporal gyrus

170. Cells of sensory spinal ganglions are a part of re?ex arches. What type of neurons are these cells?
a. Multipolar
b. Unipolar
c. —
*d. Pseudounipolar
e. Bipolar

171. A patient with damaged muscles of the lower limbs has been delivered to a ?rstaid center. What cells enable reparative regeneration of muscle ?bers and restoration of muscle function?
a. Adipocytes
b. Endotheliocytes
c. Plasmocytes
*d. Myosatellitocytes
e. Fibroblasts

172. 2daysafterahuntercutaground squirrel’s body, he developed fever up to 39oC, his lymph nodes enlarged. Later he developed pneumonia with serohemorrhagic exudate that contained egg-shaped microorganisms with bipolar staining. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Anthrax
*b. Plague
c. Pseudotuberculosis
d. Tetanus
e. Brucellosis

173. Various types of muscle contractions occurring in the alimentary canal of a test animal were studied and their different functional purposes were determined. It was noted that only one type of motor activity occurred in the circular and longitudinal muscles. Name this motor activity:
*a. Peristalsis
b. Nonpropulsive segmental activity
c. Tonic contraction of sphincters
d. Pendular movements of intestine
e. Mastication

174. A child presents with a wound behind the mastoid bone. Bright red blood streams from the wound. Damage was sustained to the branches of the following artery:
a. A. maxillaris
b. A. temporalis superior
*c. A. occipitalis
d. A. carotis externa
e. A. carotis interna

175. A man presents with suppurative wound in the area of mastoid bone, which resulted in development of cerebral meningitis in the patient. Specify the way of infection penetration into the patient’s cranial cavity:
a. V.v. labirinthi
*b. V. emissariae mastoidea
c. V.v. tympanicae
d. V. auricularis
e. V. facialis

176. Rotenone is known to inhibit respiratory chain. What complex of mitochondrial respiratory chain is inhibited by this substance?
*a. NADH-coenzyme Q reductase
b. Coenzyme Q - cytochrome c reductase
c. Adenosine triphosphate synthetase
d. Succinate-coenzyme Q reductase
e. Cytochrome oxidase

177. In 8 days after a surgery the patient developed tetanus. The surgeon suspects this condition to be caused by suture material contaminated by tetanus agent. The material is delivered to a bacteriological laboratory. What nutrient medium is required for primary inoculation of the suture material?
a. Endo agar
b. Egg-yolk salt agar
c. Hiss medium
*d. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
e. Sabouraud agar

178. A patient is diagnosed with deformed posterior portion of the nasal septum. What bone is deformed?
a. Lateral pterygoid plate
b. Medial pterygoid plate
*c. Vomer
d. Perpendicular plate of ethmoid bone
e. Vertical plate of palatine bone

179. A patient suffers from disturbed blood supply of superior lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres. What blood vessel is damaged?
a. Posterior communicating artery
*b. Medial cerebral artery
c. Posterior cerebral artery
d. Anterior cerebral artery
e. Anterior communicating artery

180. X-ray detected pus accumulation in the sphenoidal sinus. The pus is being excreted into the following nasal meatus:
a. Left middle nasal meatus
b. Left inferior nasal meatus
c. Right middle nasal meatus
*d. Right and left superior nasal meatus
e. Right inferior nasal meatus

181. Dentists have high risk of contracting viral hepatitis type B in the course of their duties and therefore are subject to mandatory vaccination. What vaccine is used in such cases?
a. Live vaccine
*b. Recombinant vaccine
c. Inactivated vaccine
d. Chemical vaccine
e. Anatoxin

182. Differentiation of B-lymphocytes into plasma cells leads to synthesis of immunoglobulins that ensure speci?c immune response of the body. Differentiation of B-lymphocytes takes place in the following organ of immune system:
*a. Tonsils
b. Liver
c. Thyroid gland
d. Thymus
e. Red bone marrow

183. On tooth section in the area of the root apex there is a tissue consisting of cells with processes surrounded by mineralized intercellular substance. Name this tissue:
a. Enamel
b. Periodontium
c. Reticulo?brous bone tissue
d. Mantle dentin
*e. Cellular cement

184. During oral cavity examination a dentist noticed eruption of the permanent canines in a child. The child grows and develops normally. Determine the child’s age:
a. 13-16 years
b. 8-9 years
c. 9-10 years
*d. 11-13 years
e. 6-7 years

185. A surgeon accidentally damaged a nerve that innervates mylohyoid muscle. Name this nerve:
a. N. glossopharyngeus
b. N. facialis
*c. N. trigeminus
d. N. hypoglossus
e. N. accessorius

186. At the crown apex of the second molar, on the surface that comes into contacts with the cheek, the doctor detected a carious cavity. Name the affected crown surface:
a. Facies mesialis
b. Facies lingualis
*c. Facies vestibularis
d. Facies distalis
e. Facies occlusalis

187. Autopsy of a 46-year-old man, who had untreated enteric infection and died of sepsis, revealed the following: perirectal phlegmon, multiple ulcers of the rectum and sigmoid colon, some of which are perforated; mucosa of these intestinal segments is thickened and covered with ?rmly attached grayish ?lms. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Amebiasis
b. Typhoid fever
*c. Dysentery
d. Cholera
e. Tuberculosis

188. Autopsy of a 52-year-old man revealed changes in his lungs: there is a segmented area of caseous necrosis in the upper right lung; the segments merge with each other. The lung is enlarged, dense, yellowishcoloredonsection;thereare?brinous ?lms on the pleura. Name the type of tuberculosis:
a. Acute cavernous tuberculosis
*b. Caseous pneumonia
c. In?ltrative tuberculosis
d. Tuberculoma
e. Cirrhotic tuberculosis

189. A 3-year-old child presents with facial deformation that was gradually developing over the course of 6 months and manifests as symmetrical enlargement of both mandibular angles. Microscopy shows the space between the bone trabeculae to be ?lled with connective tissue that contains numerous blood vessels and smaller primitive bone trabeculae. What disease is the most likely in this case?
a. Fibroma
b. Giant-cell tumor of the bone
*c. Cherubism
d. Eosinophilic granuloma
e. Osteosarcoma

190. Autopsy of a 72-year-old man with recurrent transmural myocardial infarction revealed his epicardium and pericardium membranes to be swollen, thickened, coarce, as if covered in hair. Name the type of in?ammation that occurred in the cardiac membranes:
a. Serous
b. Diphtheritic
*c. Croupous
d. Suppurative
e. Catarrhal

191. During autopsy of the patient, who died of cardiovascular insuf?ciency, the patient’s right foot is darkly colored. The vessels of the patient’s thigh are partially obstructed by grayish-red clots. On the vessel walls there are yellowish-gray spots and ?brous plaques, some of which are of stony density. What clinicopathological type of atherosclerosis was complicated in the patient?
a. Cerebral atherosclerosis
b. Vascular intestinal atherosclerosis
c. Renal atherosclerosis
*d. Atherosclerosis of lower extremities
e. Atherosclerosis of aorta

192. During examination of the patient’s oral cavity a dentist noticed deformation of the teeth and a crescent indentation on the upper right inscisor. The teeth are undersized, barrel-shaped - tooth cervix is wider than its edge. The patient uses a hearing aid, suffers from visual impairment. What type of syphilis affects teeth in such a way?
a. Primary
b. Secondary
c. Neurosyphilis
*d. Late congenital
e. Early congenital

193. Autopsy of a 7-year-old child, who died of uncompensated congenital heart disease, revealed increase in mass and volume of the thymus. On microscopy thymus structure is normal. What pathologic process had occurred in the thymus?
a. Accidental involution
b. Thymic dysplasia
c. Thymoma
d. Thymic agenesis
*e. Congenital thymomegaly

194. A patient came to the doctor with complaints of general weakness and sleep disturbances. Objectively the patient’s skin is yellow. In blood there is increased concentration of direct bilirubin and bile acids. Acholic stool is observed. What condition can be characterized by these changes?
a. Hemolytic jaundice
b. Familial nonhemolytic (Gilbert’s) syndrome
c. Chronic cholecystitis
*d. Mechanical jaundice
e. Parenchymatous jaundice

195. A diver that submerged to the depth of 75 meters detected signs of CNS functional disturbance: excitation, lapse of concentration, euphoria leading to professional errors. What substance has toxic effect on the neurons, thus leading to the development of these signs?
a. Oxygen
b. Lactate
c. Ammonia
d. Carbon dioxide
*e. Nitrogen

196. A patient with dislocated jaw was given a short-acting muscle relaxant by a doctor. Name this drug:
a. Cytitonum (Cytisine)
b. Procaine
*c. Dithylinum (Suxamethonium chloride)
d. Papaverine hydrochloride
e. Pyridostigmine hydrobromide

197. A doctor has made a diagnosis of gingivitis and recommended the patient to rinse the oral cavity with an oxidizing agent. Specify this agent:
*a. Hydrogen peroxide
b. Salicylic acid
c. Brilliant green
d. Phenol
e. Boric acid

198. To treat osteomyelitis, a patient was prescribed an antibiotic that easily penetrates into bone tissue. Name this drug:
a. Cefazolin
b. Streptomycin sulfate
*c. Lincomycin hydrochloride
d. Polymyxin B
e. Amphotericin B

199. A person in the state of nervous tension develops transverse wrinkles on the forehead. What muscle contracts to produce this result?
a. M. procerus
b. M. temporoparietalis
c. M. auricularis anterior
*d. M. occipitofrontalis
e. M. corrugator supercilii

200. A girl presents with high fever and sore throat. Objectively the soft palate is swollen, the tonsils are covered with gray ?lms that are ?rmly attached and leave deep bleeding lesions when removed. What is the most likely disease in this case?
a. Pseudomembranous (Vincent’s) tonsillitis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Necrotic tonsillitis
*d. Pharyngeal diphtheria
e. Lacunar tonsillitis

