1. During or immediately after an injection, certain local complications can develop. What is textbf{NOT one of those complications?
*a. Mucosal necrosis
b. Functional paralysis or paresis of facial muscles
c. Diplopia
d. Damage to a blood vessel by the needle
e. Dermal ischemia

2. A 20-year-old pregnant woman with the term of 22 weeks complains of thermal sensitivity of her upper front teeth. The sensitivity developed one month ago. She was diagnosed with acute initial caries of teeth 12, 11, 21, 22, Black class V. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.8. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Remineralization therapy and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
b. Professional teeth cleaning, remineralization therapy, and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
c. Professional teeth cleaning and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
*d. Professional teeth cleaning and remineralization therapy
e. Postpone the treatment until 30 weeks of gestation

3. A 53-year-old man complains of increased teeth sensitivity to chemical stimuli. Objectively, the gums are pale pink, the roots are exposed by 1/3 of their length. A small amount of dental deposit is observed. Teeth 15, 14, 24, 41, 31, 42, and 32 have cuneiform defects. Probing of the defects and exposed cervices is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Generalized periodontitis, I degree
*b. Periodontosis, I degree
c. Catarrhal gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis, II degree

4. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontics clinic to have dental prosthesis made for him. Objectively teeth 34, 35, 36, 43, and 16 are absent in this patient. During examination alginate impressions for diagnostic models were obtained. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
*a. 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution
b. Sterillium
c. 3% sodium hypochlorite solution
d. 10% hydrogen peroxide solution
e. 3% hydrogen peroxide solution

5. Teeth 71 and 81 erupted in a 6-year-old child, the lower jaw is retrogenic, the palate is flat with pronounced cross-folds. Determine the condition of the oral cavity:
a. Subcompensated
b. Pathologic
c. Abnormal
d. Decompensated
*e. Physiologic

6. A 16-year-old girl came to an orthodontist with complaints about aesthetical defects. Objectively, there is a vestibular inclination of her upper and lower incisors and canines with a slight overlap of the lower teeth by the upper teeth; in the lateral regions the teeth ratio is neutral. What type of bite is it characteristic of?
a. Opistognathic
b. Deep
c. Orthognathic
d. Direct
*e. Biprognathic

7. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist with complaints of brief attacks of toothache caused by eating sweets. Objectively there is a shallow carious cavity within enamel. On probing cavity walls and bottom are coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Endemic fluorosis
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Enamel hypoplasia

8. A patient needs a clasp (bugel) denture for the upper jaw. The working impression was obtained using a silicone material, while the auxiliary impression was obtained using an alginate material. How many casts need to be produced to make one clasp (bugel) denture?
a. One working cast and two auxiliary casts
b. Two working casts and two auxiliary casts
*c. Two working casts and one auxiliary cast
d. One working cast and one auxiliary cast
e. One working cast

9. On the second day after the fixation of partial laminar dentures, the patient complained of a burning sensation in the oral cavity and an unpleasant taste when using the dentures. Examination detects hyperemic mucosa and hypersalivation. According to the patient's history, before the new dentures were made, the patient had been using removable dentures for 5 years and had no such complaints back then. What is the most likely cause of the patient's complaints?
a. Mechanical injury of the mucosa by the denture base
b. Allergic reaction to the components of the base plastic
c. Bacterial stomatitis
d. Poor oral hygiene
*e. Residual monomer remaining in the denture base

10. A 44-year-old man came to the dental polyclinic to have a denture made for him. He complains of problematic chewing and aesthetical defects. Objectively teeth 14, 15, and 22 are missing. According to Agapov, the loss of masticatory efficiency in this case is:
a. 20%
b. 9%
c. 12%
d. 16%
*e. 18%

11. During dental procedures, a mbox{50-year-old man developed burning retrosternal pain, dyspnea, and acute general weakness. Three doses of nitroglycerin had no positive effect. Objectively, his skin is pale, his blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg, the pulse is thready, the heart sounds are weakened and rhythmic. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Angina pectoris attack
*c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Acute cerebrovascular accident
e. Fainting

12. A 15-year-old patient has been diagnosed with pulpal hyperemia of tooth 27. The treatment was carried out using the vital amputation method. What must be done in this method of pulpitis treatment?
a. Removal of the crown pulp and root pulp under anesthesia
b. Pulp extirpation in the accessible canals and its mummification in the canals that are difficult to access
*c. Removal of the crown pulp and preservation of the root pulp vitality
d. Removal of the crown pulp followed by the application of a mummifying paste to the root canal openings
e. Preserving the vitality of the crown pulp and root pulp

13. A removable complete denture is being made for the lower jaw of a 50-year-old man. During the fitting of an individual impression tray, the border in the area of the mylohyoid line needs to be determined. What Herbst test should be performed for this purpose?
a. Alternately touching the right and left cheeks with the tongue
*b. Licking the upper lip
c. Swallowing saliva
d. Stretching the tongue towards the tip of the nose
e. Wide mouth opening

14. A 35-year-old patient undergoes treatment of chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 25. The canal is to be filled using the warm gutta-percha vertical condensation technique. What instrument is needed for gutta-percha condensation?
a. Spreader
b. K-file
c. Root needle
d. Endodontic probe
*e. Plugger

15. A 12-year-old boy complains of a pain and trauma of the buccal tissues on the right. The trauma was received in a car accident. 27 hours after the trauma, he went to a doctor and requested help. Objectively, his general condition is moderately severe, the face is asymmetrical due to a swelling and a skin injury of the cheek. The wound is 2.5х1.5х1 cm, with smooth gaping margins that are covered in a gray-white coating. The patient was diagnosed with an incised wound of the right cheek. What type of surgical debridement should be performed in this case?
a. Early primary
b. Late primary
c. Primary
*d. Delayed primary
e. Secondary

16. A 25-year-old man complains of pain in the area of tooth 16, heavy bursting sensation in the right upper jaw, headache, and body temperature of 38^oC) Objectively, the right cheek is swollen, palpation of the maxillary alveolar process is painful, percussion of tooth 16 is painful. Anterior rhinoscopy shows hyperemia and edema of the mucosa in the right nasal passage. The middle nasal passage contains mucopurulent discharge. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute rhinogenous maxillary sinusitis
*b. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Acute maxillary periostitis

17. A 66-year-old woman complains of dull pain in her left parotid-masseteric region and increasing facial assymetry that she first noticed 2-3 months ago. Objectively the patient is undernourished, pale, and suffers from the left-sided paresis of the mimic muscles. In front of her earlobe, there is a lumpy infiltration without clear margins. The infiltration is 4x5 cm in size. It is fused to the surrounding tissues and moderately painful. No saliva could be produced from the duct of the left parotid gland. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes on the left are enlarged. Survey X-ray of the mandible shows no changes in the structure of the bone tissue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbated chronic parotitis
b. Actinomycosis of the left parotid-masseteric region
c. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
*d. Adenocarcinoma
e. Mixed tumor of the left parotid gland

18. A 12-year-old boy complains to a dentist of a swelling on his chin. The edema appeared 3 weeks ago after he fell from a bicycle. No treatment was provided. After the injury, the edema slightly decreased, but did not disappear completely. The edema in the left mental region causes facial asymmetry. The skin is not discolored. Palpation detects there a slightly painful dense thickening of the mental region 1.5x2 cm in size. The oral mucosa is without changes. The teeth are intact and immobile. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Chronic hyperplastic periostitis
b. Chronic non-odontogenic lymphadenitis
c. Non-odontogenic abscess of the mental region
d. Chronic post-traumatic osteomyelitis
e. Purulent hematoma of the mental region

19. A patient has been diagnosed with acute purulent pulpitis of tooth 48. What type of anesthesia must be used in the treatment of this tooth?
a. General anesthesia
b. Intrapulpal anesthesia
*c. Conduction anesthesia
d. Infiltration anesthesia
e. Topical anesthesia

20. A 30-year-old patient is diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic periostitis of the upper left jaw originating from tooth 23. The crown of 23 on the left is destroyed with caries by 1/3. Teeth 22 and 24 are intact. Spot-film X-ray shows widening of the periodontal fissure of 23. What treatment would be the most advisable in this case?
a. -
b. Extraction of the causative tooth, physiotherapy
c. Extraction of the causative tooth, pharmacotherapy
d. Extraction of the causative tooth, periosteotomy
*e. Periosteotomy and pharmacotherapy followed by treatment of the causative tooth

21. A 28-year-old man was diagnosed with a non-displaced median mandibular fracture. The continuity of the dentition is preserved. What splint should be used in this case for permanent immobilization?
*a. Smooth splint-brace
b. Ivy splint
c. Two-jaw splint with a spreader arch
d. Splint with an inclined plane
e. Two-jaw splint with anchoring loops

22. A 40-year-old man has a fresh mental mandibular fracture without visible displacement of the fragments. What dental orthopedic appliance is recommended in this case?
a. Replacing
b. Forming
c. Directing
*d. Fixing
e. Reponating

23. A 20-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of severe pain in her left upper jaw. The pain intensifies when she eats hot food, while cold liquids bring pain relief. Objectively, tooth 24 has a carious cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is sharply painful. Percussion is positive. Electric pulp testing - 50 microamperes. What treatment method must be used in this case?
a. Devital extirpation
b. Vital amputation
c. Biological method
*d. Vital extirpation
e. Tooth extraction

24. A 52-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a bright red spot that appeared on his buccal mucosa several months ago. Objectively, there is a lesion focus with small papillary growths up to 1 cm in size. The lesion is slightly sunken compared to the surrounding tissues, soft, with uneven clear contours. During palpation, it is painless and does not change in color. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. Make the provisional diagnosis.
*a. Bowen's disease
b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Trophic ulcer
d. Hemangioma
e. Leukoplakia

25. The dental therapist accidentally exposed the pulp horn, when treating deep caries of tooth 26. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Non-vital amputation
b. Non-vital extirpation
*c. Biological method
d. Vital amputation
e. Vital extirpation

26. Partial removable laminar dentures are being made for the upper and lower jaws of a 59-year-old man. The stage of determining the central occlusion was completed. What laboratory stage will be next?
a. Making wax bite rims
b. Making final casts
c. Teeth placement
*d. Making plaster impressions in an occluder
e. Making plaster impressions in a cuvette

27. A clasp (bugel) denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 59-year-old man. At the stage of denture design, the parallelometry must be performed using any suitable method. What is determined at this stage?
a. Equator
b. Line A
*c. Border line
d. Smile line
e. Midline

28. A 63-year-old woman has an oval neoplasm on the lateral surface of her neck. The neoplasm has a smooth surface and is approximately 3 cm in size. On palpation it is soft and dough-like, mobile, and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Lymphoma
*b. Lipoma
c. Adenoma
d. Lateral cyst of the neck
e. Fibroma

29. Preventive examination of a 15-year-old girl by a dentist revealed a carious cavity in the vestibular paracervical region of her tooth 36. The cavity has a wide opening and is located within dense, pigmented enamel. Probing of the defect is painless. Thermal stimulation results are negative. Make the diagnosis.
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Acute initial caries
*d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Chronic initial caries

30. The parents of a 10-year-old girl came to a dental orthodontist complaining that their child has an aesthetic defect. The girl has a history of formula feeding and had been using a pacifier for a long time. Objectively, her face is symmetrical, but disproportionate due to the shortening of its lower third, the chin is slanted back. The bite is transitional, there is a contact between the cusps of the corresponding first permanent molars and canines, the sagittal fissure is 7 mm, the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by more than 1/2 of the crown height. During the Eschler-Bittner test, the child's appearance improves. What orthodontic appliance should be used to treat this occlusal pathology?
a. Frankel functional regulator, type III
b. Bracket system
c. Kraus plate
d. Bruckl appliance
*e. Schwartz appliance

31. A 7-year-old child needs mandibular vestibuloplasty. What pathology is most often caused by a shallow vestibule of the mouth?
a. Mandibular growth retardation
*b. Diseases of periodontal tissues
c. Parafunction of the facial muscles
d. Deep bite
e. Crowded front teeth

32. Objective examination of a 10-year-old child revealed slight hyperemia, infiltration, and dryness of the whole surface of the vermillion border. Architectonics of the lips is disturbed. Dryness and contracted sensation are observed in the lips, especially during cold seasons. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
b. Cheilitis of microbial origin
c. Atopic cheilitis
*d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

33. A patient came to a dentist for extraction of tooth 24 due to orthodontic indication. Select the forceps necessary to perform this manipulation.
a. S-shaped right-sided forceps
b. Bayonet forceps
c. Straight forceps
*d. S-shaped crown forceps
e. S-shaped left-sided forceps

34. The medical station of a regiment received a patient with signs of bilateral mandibular fracture. What is the main task of first aid in this case?
a. To clean oral cavity from blood clots, tooth shards, and bone fragments
b. To administer analgesics and cardiac medications
*c. To control shock, bleeding, and asphyxia and to provide transport immobilization
d. To provide symptomatic therapy and care
e. To check and correct previously applied bandages

35. The parents of a 4-year-old girl complain of defects on the upper teeth of their child. Objectively, her upper incisors have defects in the cervical region of their vestibular surface. The defects do not cross the dentinoenamel junction and look like patches of chalky enamel with visible destruction of its structure. Probing detects a rough softened surface. There is no response to cold stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic initial caries
*b. Acute superficial caries
c. Acute initial caries
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

36. A 65-year-old man was diagnosed with a bilateral uncomplicated mandibular fracture in the mental region. The patient uses removable complete dentures. Choose the long-term splint for this patient:
a. Vankevich splint
b. The patient's own dentures
c. Vasiliev splint
d. Weber splint
*e. Port splint

37. The parents of a 6-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of eruption of a permanent tooth on the lower jaw behind the deciduous one and lack of mobility in the deciduous tooth. Objectively, tooth 71 has the first degree of mobility, tooth 31 has erupted with its cutting edge on the lingual side behind tooth 71. The diagnosis of a physiological replacement of tooth 71 was made. What is the optimal method of anesthesia in this case?
a. Anesthesia through a mask
b. Topical anesthesia
c. Intravenous anesthesia
*d. Infiltration anesthesia
e. Conduction anesthesia

38. A 59-year-old woman needs splinting of her lower teeth. Objectively, the dentition integrity is preserved, the crowns of the lower teeth are tall, the teeth are intact, with exposed cervices and mobility of the II degree. What dental splint would be optimal in this case?
*a. Solid-cast removable splint
b. Splint made of equatorial crowns
c. Cap splint
d. Splint made of soldered crowns
e. Semi-crown splint

39. How to separate teeth for orthodontic crowns?
a. With separating discs
*b. With elastics
c. With volcanic discs
d. With a diamond-tipped bore
e. No separation is needed

40. An 8-year-old girl has been complaining of pain in her lower right tooth for the second day already. The tooth was treated 6 months ago. Objectively, her general condition is satisfactory, the body temperature has increased to 37.4°С, the face is asymmetric due to edema of the soft tissues of the right cheek, the skin is of a physiological color, the mouth fully opens. The crown of tooth 84 is discolored (grayish-pink), its masticatory surface has a filling, the tooth is painful to percussion. Teeth 83 and 85 are intact. The mucogingival junction in the projection of teeth 83, 84, 85 is smoothed-out, the mucosa in this area is edematous and mildly hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Physiological replacement of tooth 84
*b. Acute serous odontogenic periostitis of the mandible
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the mandible
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis of the mandible

41. A 23-year-old man with an asthenic built came to a dental surgeon for the planned extraction of tooth 18. During the objective examination, the patient complained of general weakness, nausea, and darkened vision and lost his consciousness for several seconds. The skin of his face is pale and covered in sweat, the pulse is thready, the blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Syncope
b. Quincke's edema
c. Epilepsy attack
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Collapse

42. The parents of a 2-month-old boy brought him to a dentist with complaints of a congenital defect of the upper lip in the child. Objectively, there is a fissure-like defect in the tissues of the upper lip on the left, which passes through all the tissues of the lip and does not reach the nasal passage by 4 mm. The integrity of the alveolar process and hard palate is preserved. Make the diagnosis.
a. Congenital complete left-sided non-union of the upper lip
b. Oblique non-union of the face
c. Congenital incomplete bilateral non-union of the upper lip
d. Congenital hidden left-sided non-union of the upper lip
*e. Congenital incomplete left-sided non-union of the upper lip

43. A 42-year-old woman after examination was diagnosed with closed medial mandibular fracture in the area of 31, 41, non-displaced. Crown portions of her other teeth are intact. Additionally she was diagnosed with chronic generalized parodontitis of moderate severity. What type of splint would be the most advisable for fracture treatment in this patient?
a. Tigerstedt splint
b. Port gingival splint
c. Vankevych dentogingival splint
*d. Weber dentogingival splint
e. Tigerstedt splint with anchor hooks

44. A 29-year-old woman complains of short-term pain in her front teeth, provoked by thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli. She has a thyroid disease. Objectively, on the vestibular surface of teeth 11, 12, 13, 21, 22, 23, 31, 32, 33, 41, 42, and 43 there are defects of hard tissues, with softened dark pigmented dentin. The enamel at the edges is chalk-colored, rough, brittle, can be chipped off with an excavator. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute median caries
b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
c. Cuneiform defect
d. Erosion of hard dental tissues
*e. Necrosis of hard dental tissues

45. A hit to the face has forced the upper central incisors of a 15-year-old boy to sink into the jaw to the half of their crown height. What treatment tactics should the dentist choose?
*a. Surgical repositioning of 11 and 21, teeth immobilization, endodontic treatment if necessary
b. Transplantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, endodontic treatment
c. Dynamic observation, endodontic treatment of 11 and 21 if necessary
d. Extraction of 11 and 21, their replacement with dentures
e. Replantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, ligation

46. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his left lower jaw and limited mouth opening. Objectively, his mouth opens by 2 cm, the retromolar mucosa on the left is slightly edematous, hyperemic, and painful on palpation. An orthopantomogram shows the dystopia of tooth 38 in the mesiodistal position. What surgery is indicated in this case?
a. Operculectomy
b. Hemisection
c. Bicuspidization
d. Resection of the dental root apex
*e. Atypical tooth extraction

47. A 66-year-old woman while waiting for her appointment with a dentist complained of feeling unwell and developed asphyxia and acute constricting pain behind the sternum. Objectively, the following is observed: hyperemia of the skin of the face, sonorous heart sounds, systolic murmur over the aorta. Heart rate - 94/min., blood pressure - 230/120 mm Hg. What emergency condition has developed in the patient?
a. Myocardial infarction
b. Quincke's edema
*c. Hypertensive crisis
d. Angina pectoris attack
e. Anaphylactic shock

48. A 48-year-old man complains of a dull pain in the area of his tooth 48 that intensifies when biting, worsening of his general condition, and high body temperature of 38^oC) Objectively, the retromolar mucosa is edematous and hyperemic. The distal surface of tooth 48 is covered with a mucosal flap, palpation of which provokes a sharp pain and discharge of purulent exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. -
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent periostitis
d. Phlegmon of the submandibular region
*e. Acute purulent pericoronitis

49. A 42-year-old man was delivered to the hospital in the severe condition: inert, body temperature is 39.1^oC, there is acutely painful infiltration of the mouth floor and submandibular area on the right. The skin over the infiltration is turgid and cyanotic. Palpation detects crepitus under the skin. What diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Odontogenic phlegmon of the mouth floor
*b. Ludwig's angina (suppurative-necrotic phlegmon of the mouth floor)
c. Actinomycosis of the mouth floor
d. Adenophlegmon of the mouth floor
e. Malignant tumor of the mouth floor

50. A 2-year-old child is being treated for severe acute herpetic stomatitis. Currently, it is the period of disease decline. What medicines for topical application to the oral mucosa should be added specifically at this stage to the complex of medicines being taken?
a. Antiviral agents
b. Proteolytic enzymes
c. Antiseptics
*d. Keratoplastics
e. Anesthetics

51. A 38-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a burning sensation, pain, and bleeding gums. Objectively, her gums are edematous, hyperemic, doughy, and bleed when lightly touched. The gingival attachment is not destroyed. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage
*b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
e. -

52. During dental procedures, a 29-year-old man after receiving anesthesia suddenly developed a dense non-itching skin edema in the area of his face and neck. The edema was accompanied by cough and wheezing. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Urticaria
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Bronchial asthma attack
*d. Quincke's edema
e. Contact dermatitis

53. A 48-year-old woman complains of itching gums and increased teeth sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively, the dental cervices are exposed. The gums are firm and pale. There is a small amount of supragingival dental plaque. In the area of teeth 13, 14, 24, and 25 there are cuneiform defects, probing of which is painful. The patient was provisionally diagnosed with periodontosis. What X-ray presentation is characteristic of this disease?
a. Vertical resorption
b. Diffuse osteoporosis
c. Uneven resorption of the alveolar bone
d. Bone pocket formation
*e. Horizontal resorption

54. A 12-year-old girl has been hospitalized because of injuries sustained during a fall from a height. After examination, the following diagnosis was made: contused-lacerated cheek wound, closed craniocerebral injury, concussion. What type of injury is it?
a. Single trauma
b. Isolated trauma
c. Combined trauma
*d. Joined trauma
e. Multiple trauma

55. When analyzing the composition of potable water in a region, it was revealed that its fluorine levels are 0.5 mg/L. What disease of the dental hard tissues can be expected in this environment?
a. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
*c. Caries
d. Erosion of dental hard tissues
e. Fluorosis

56. A 56-year-old man has an oval erosion with a deep red smooth surface on the vermillion border of the lower lip between the angle of the mouth and the midline. The surface of the erosion has bloody scabs that are difficult to remove. Their removal causes a slight bleeding. Slight trauma of the erosion in a place without scabs causes no bleeding. What type of lower lip precancer is it?
a. Actinic cheilitis
b. Circumscribed precancerous  hyperkeratosis of the vermillion border
c. Lupus erythematosus
*d. Manganotti's abrasive precancerous  cheilitis
e. Bowen's disease

57. A 16-year-old boy complains of general indisposition, fever, and pain during swallowing. Objectively, the oral mucosa of the pharynx, palatine arches, uvula, and palatine tonsils is hyperemic and edematous; it has clearly demarcated patches of fibrinous and membranous plaque, tightly attached to the adjacent tissues. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
c. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative tonsillitis
*d. Diphtheria
e. Measles

58. A new dental polyclinic is being opened in the city. There are to be 38 doctors in the dental surgery department. How many department heads should supervise this number of personnel according to the normatives?
a. 5
b. 2
*c. 3
d. 1
e. 4

59. A 29-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. He complains of frequent destruction of dental restorations in his upper front tooth. Objectively, his tooth 11 is restored with a filling material to 2/3 of its coronal portion; thermal stimulation and percussion are painless. What type of orthopedic installation is indicated in this case?
a. Plastic crown
b. Crown made using the Belkin technique
c. Telescopic crown
d. Swaged metal crown
*e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown

60. A 58-year-old man complains of painless gum enlargement. He has a history of epilepsy and for a long time has been taking hydantoin derivatives. Objectively, the gingival margin of the both jaws is dense, painless on palpation, and covers the crowns to the half of their height. Gingival pockets are 5 mm deep. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Viral warts
*b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form
c. Hyperplastic syndrome in leukemia
d. Gingival fibromatosis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, granulating form

61. A man with an occupational face trauma on the right has been brought into the first-aid center. The trauma was received approximately 3 hours ago, the man is conscious. Objectively, on his right cheek there is an irregularly-shaped wound 5x3 cm in size with uneven edges. Parting of the wound edges exposes immobile teeth. In the oral cavity, there is a breach in the buccal mucosa. The bite is not affected. What type of surgical debridement is necessary for this patient?
a. Late primary surgical debridement
b. Secondary surgical debridement
c. -
d. Delayed primary surgical debridement
*e. Early primary surgical debridement

62. A 13-year-old boy complains of his gums bleeding when he brushes his teeth and constant aching pain during eating, especially solid foods. Objectively, hyperemia and edema of the gingival margin is observed in the upper and lower front teeth, there are no periodontal pockets. X-ray detects no pathological changes in the bone tissue of the alveolar process of the jaws. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Generalized parodontitis, initial stage, chronic course
*c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Localized parodontitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis

63. The mother of a 4-year-old girl complains that her child has fever of 39^oC, cough, and runny nose. Examination of the oral cavity detects punctate whitish spots that resemble splashes of lime on the hyperemic buccal mucosa in the area of the molars. Palpation of the affected areas detects a mucosal unevenness. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Varicella
*c. Measles
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

64. A patient was diagnosed with cancer of the right parotid gland, T2N2M0. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Radiation therapy
b. Surgical removal of the neoplasm
c. Chemotherapy
d. Surgical removal of the lymph node
*e. Combined therapy

65. An HIV-infected patients needs a dental prosthesis. The dentist plans to make dental bridges for this patient. How should the instruments be processed after the appointment?
a. In a hot air sterilizer
b. According to the usual scheme
c. With 3% chloramine solution
*d. According to the special scheme
e. With lysoformin

66. A 75-year-old man was diagnosed with a right-sided mandibular fracture in the area of the mental foramen. Objectively, all his upper and lower teeth are missing. The fragments are not displaced. The mouth opening is free up to 3.5 cm. What splint should be used in this case?
a. Rudko appliance
b. Vasiliev splint
*c. Port splint
d. Zbarzh appliance
e. Vankevich splint

67. A person has a unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was performed by applying a two-jaw dental ligature splint with anchoring loops and intermaxillary traction. Healing progresses without complications. When is it the time to remove the splint?
a. In 10 days
b. In 2 weeks
c. In 7 days
d. In 5 weeks
*e. In 3 weeks

68. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain and bleeding in the area of his upper right teeth. Objectively, on the contact surfaces of teeth 16 and 17 there are dental restorations of unsatisfactory quality, the contact point of the teeth is not restored, the gingival papilla between teeth 16 and 17 is edematous, hyperemic, and bleeds when probed. X-ray shows resorption of the interalveolar septum in the area of teeth 16 and 17 by 1/3 of their root length. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Localized periodontitis
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Generalized periodontitis, degree I
d. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis, degree I
e. Acute catarrhal gingivitis

69. A 33-year-old man has been hospitalized after a car accident with an injury to the soft tissues of his right parotid-masseteric region. The patient's right eye does not close, the right corner of his mouth is lowered. What has been injured in this case, causing these symptoms?
a. Parenchyma of the parotid salivary gland
b. Capsule of the parotid salivary gland
*c. Facial nerve
d. Mimic muscles
e. Excretory duct of the parotid salivary gland

70. A 31-year-old man complains of pain in the upper jaw and mobility of the upper teeth. He has a history of bloody discharge periodically appearing from the right half of his nose. Objectively, his right upper teeth are mobile. X-ray shows homogeneous darkening of the right maxillary sinus and destruction of the medial wall bone that resembles "melted sugar". What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Specific maxillary sinusitis
b. Maxillary ameloblastoma
c. Maxillary osteosarcoma
d. Chronic maxillary osteomyelitis
*e. Maxillary cancer

71. A man complains of gingival pain in his upper left jaw and bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively on the upper jaw he wears a swaged-soldered metal bridge with 14 and 16 as abutment teeth. The crown edge is pushed under the gingival margin by 0.3 mm. Intermediate part is closely fitted to the gums. The mucosa is hyperemic, swollen, interdental papillae are smoothed out; touching mucosa with a dental instrument provokes bleeding. What medical tactics should the dentist choose in the first place?
*a. Remove the dental bridge
b. Refer the patient for cosultation with the dental therapist
c. Make metal-fused-to-porcelain dental bridge
d. Refer the patient for clinical blood test
e. Refer the patient for X-ray

72. A 7-year-old practically healthy child was undergoing the carious cavity preparation of tooth 46 due to acute median caries. During this procedure the mesio-buccal pulp horn was accidentally exposed. What treatment would be optimal in this case?
*a. Biological approach
b. Vital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

73. A 7-year-old boy was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of teeth 64 and 85. The child has hemophilia A) Determine the treatment tactics for this case:
a. Teeth extraction is possible in the  maxillofacial department
b. Teeth extraction is possible in an  outpatient setting; after the teeth extraction, the alveoli must be packed with a hemostatic sponge
*c. Teeth extraction is possible in the  hematology department after all the  necessary preparations
d. Teeth extraction is contraindicated due to the high risk of bleeding
e. Teeth extraction is possible both in the maxillofacial inpatient department and in the outpatient department after all the   necessary preparations

74. A 47-year-old woman complains of dry mouth, taste disturbance, and a burning sensation in the tip of her tongue that disappears during eating, but intensifies in the evening. These complaints first appeared after a psychic trauma. The patient suffers from carcinophobia and disturbed sleep. What disease can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Desquamative glossitis
*b. Glossodynia
c. Neuritis of the lingual nerve
d. Chronic candidiasis
e. Median rhomboid glossitis

75. A 21-year-old man 3 hours ago received a knife wound to the right cheek; the wound was initially bleeding, but by the time of examination the bleeding has already stopped. Objectively in the area of the right cheek there was a wound 4x1 cm with even margins that does not penetrate into the oral cavity and is filled with clotted blood. What sutures should be applied to the wound in this case?
a. Late secondary suture
b. Early secondary suture
c. Primary approximation suture
*d. Primary blind suture
e. Primary apposition suture

76. In the course of treatment for exacerbated chronic pulpitis of tooth 16, the system of root canals was obturated by means of lateral condensation of gutta-percha. What instruments should be used in this treatment method?
a. Plugger
*b. Spreader
c. Stopfer
d. Root filler
e. Probe

77. The jaws of a newborn are in direct relation to each other. The baby is full term, healthy, and breastfed. What bite can be prognosed in this case?
a. Deep bite
*b. Mesial bite
c. Open bite
d. Distal bite
e. Direct bite

78. A partial removable laminar denture is being made for a 57-year-old patient with missing upper lateral teeth. The patient has the orthognathic type of occlusion. To what height should the denture base overlap the crowns of the front teeth on the palatal side?
*a. 1/3 of the height of the crown
b. 1/2 the height of the crown
c. Reaching the level of the necks of the teeth
d. 2/3 of the height of the crown
e. The entire height of the crown

79. After a fall, a woman complains of pain and swelling in the middle part of her face on the right and difficulty opening her mouth. Objectively, her face is asymmetrical due to edema and hematomas of the right infraorbital region. The patient presents with right-sided paresthesia of the upper lip, a hemorrhage into the lower eyelid and conjunctiva of the right eye, her mouth opening is reduced to 2.5 cm. There is a bony step-off in the area of the right zygomaxillary suture, on the outer edge of the eye socket, and on the temporozygomatic suture on the right. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Soft tissue contusion in the right infraorbital region
*b. Displaced fracture of the right zygomatic bone and zygomatic arch
c. Le Fort type II maxillary fracture
d. Non-displaced fracture of the right zygomatic bone
e. Displaced fracture of the right zygomatic arch

80. Parents of a 5-year-old child came to the dentist for sanation of the child's oral cavity. Objectively on the masticatory surfaces of teeth 54, 64, 74, 75, and 85 there are carious cavities within the softened mantle dentin. The child is anxious and misbehaves. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Invasive sealing
b. Preventive filling
*c. ART technique
d. Impregnation treatment
e. Deep fluoridation

81. An 11-year-old boy complains of his gums bleeding when he brushes his teeth. Examination by a dentist detected significant deposits of soft dental plaque. The Greene-Vermillion index is 1.8. What teeth must be examined when determining this hygienic index?
*a. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 11, 31, 16, 26 and lingual surfaces of teeth 36, 46
b. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 11, 31, 24, 14 and lingual surfaces of teeth 36, 46
c. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 23, 22, 21, 11, 12, 13
d. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 11, 21, 16, 26 and lingual surfaces of teeth 31, 41, 34, 44
e. Vestibular surfaces of teeth 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33

82. A 35-year-old man complains of sour sensation in his mouth and front teeth sensitivity to thermal and mechanical stimuli. Objective examination revealed visible changes in the enamel of 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23. The enamel is dull, rough, missing on the cutting edge. Probing of the vestibular surface of these teeth is painful, response to thermal stimuli is positive. The patient's medical record states his occupation in industrial production of inorganic acids. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
b. Pathologic teeth grinding
c. Enamel erosion
d. Enamel hypoplasia
e. Fluorosis

83. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 27. Vital extirpation is chosen as the treatment method. Amide anesthetic is to be used for tuberal and palatal anesthesia. What anesthetic solution needs to be administered in this case?
a. 2% dicain (tetracaine)
b. 2% novocaine (procaine)
*c. 3% mepivastesin (mepivacaine)
d. 10% lidocaine
e. 5% anaesthesin (benzocaine)

84. A man came to a dentist with complaints of pain and edema in the area of his upper lip and in the lower parts of the infraorbital region on the left, as well as periodical pain in destroyed tooth 22. After examination, he was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 22 and an abscess of the canine socket. The extraction of tooth 22 and lancing of the abscess via an intraoral access are indicated in this case. What would be the optimal method of anesthesia for this purpose?
a. Infraorbital (intraoral) and palatal  anesthesia
*b. Infraorbital (extraoral) and incisor  anesthesia
c. Narcosis
d. Tuberal and palatal anesthesia
e. Infiltration anesthesia

85. A 25-year-old man complains of genelal malaise, high body temperature, acute gingival bleeding, and gingival enlargement. He has a history of nosebleeds. Objectively the patient presents with systemic lymphoid hyperplasia, pallor of skin and mucosa, II-III degree hyperplasia of the gingival mucosa, hemorrhages into the buccal mucosa, and ulcers covered with gray deposit. What examination method would be optimal for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Yasynsky test
*b. Complete blood test panel
c. Immunoassay
d. Bacterioscopy
e. Blood glucose test

86. A 62-year-old woman complains of intense pain attacks in the area of her left lower jaw that last 1-3 minutes. The pain occurs during talking, washing her face, and touching the skin. Mandibular X-ray shows no destruction of bone tissue. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Neuralgia of the 2nd branch of the  trigeminal nerve
b. Facial nerve neuritis
c. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
d. Neuritis of the 3rd branch of the  trigeminal nerve
*e. Neuralgia of the 3rd branch of the  trigeminal nerve

87. The parents of a 3-year-old girl complain of the destruction of the child's upper teeth. Objectively, there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the masticatory surfaces of teeth 54 and 55. Enamel and dentin in the affected area are softened and can be easily removed with an excavator. The child refuses to undergo teeth prteparation and is in a psychoemotionallly unstable condition. What method of treatment should be used in this case?
a. Remineralization therapy
b. ICON treatment
*c. Atraumatic restorative treatment
d. Non-invasive sealing
e. Invasive sealing

88. A 48-year-old woman complains of low-grade fever and a gradually enlarging ulcer on her gingival mucosa near the molars; the teeth in the affected area are mobile. Objectively on the gingival mucosa between the lower left molars there are two superficial sharply painful ulcers with undermining margins. Floor of the ulcers is granulated and covered in yellow-gray coating. Small tubercles surround the ulcers. Tooth cervices are exposed, pathologic tooth mobility is observed. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and matted together into dense clusters. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Tuberculosis
b. Cancerous ulcer
c. Syphilis
d. Acute aphthous stomatitis
e. Trophic ulcer

89. A woman came to a dentist with complaints of a formation on her face. Objectively, on the cheek there is a painless hemispherical tumor-like formation up to 1 cm in size. On palpation, the formation is dense-elastic, mobile, has a smooth surface, and is fused to the skin surface in one point at its center. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Atheroma
b. Lymphangioma
c. Lipoma
d. Papilloma
e. Fibroma

90. At the dentist's office, a patient diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 14 undergoes a typical tooth extraction. What stage precedes the application of forceps?
a. Fixation
b. Traction
c. Advancement of forceps
*d. Syndesmotomy
e. Luxation

91. A child is 5 years old. There are complaints of an aesthetical defect. An extraoral examination shows that the face is symmetrical, but disproportionate because of reduced lower third of the face. In the oral cavity, teeth 55, 54, 64, and 65 are lost. What dental device is necessary for this patient?
a. Frankel appliance
b. Dental bridge
c. Andresen-Haupl appliance
d. Clasp-retained (bugel) denture
*e. Removable partial denture for the upper jaw

92. A 38-year-old man complains of aching pain in the area of his right lower tooth, observed for the past two days. Objectively, the distal surface of tooth 46 has a carious cavity within the peripulpal dentin, probing of ist bottom is painless, vertical percussion is positive, thermal testing results are negative. The mucosa in the area of the projection of tooth 46 root apices is hyperemic. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of localized parodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
*e. Acute serous periodontitis

93. An 18-year-old young man complains of tooth sensitivity in his lower left jaw when eating sweet food. Examination shows enamel defects in the fissures on the masticatory surface of tooth 37. The enamel there is dull white and fragile when (chips off) probed. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute superficial caries of tooth 37
b. Chronic median caries of tooth 37
c. Acute initial caries of tooth 37
d. Chronic initial caries of tooth 37
e. Chronic superficial caries of tooth 37

94. A 43-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgeon with complaints of aesthetic defect. Examination revealed excessive accumulation of adipose tissue in the patient's neck and upper torso, which resembles collar with unclear magins; neck mobility is reduced. Family history shows the same symptoms to be present in the patient's father. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Lymphangioma
b. Neurofibromatosis
*c. Madelung's deformity
d. Lipoma
e. Fibroma

95. A 45-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of bad breath and gums that bleed when she brushes her teeth. Objectively, she has a significant amount of hard and soft dental plaque; her gums are dough-like, they have a cyanotic tinge and bleed when probed. X-ray shows resorption of the cortical plate at the apices of the interalveolar septa. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage,  acute progression
b. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  chronic progression
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  exacerbated progression
*e. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage,  chronic progression

96. A 44-year-old man after an injury complains of pain in his lower jaw. The pain intensifies during lower jaw movements, especially when the man opens his mouth. Objectively, the facial configuration is disturbed, there is an extensive hematoma in the area of the left mandibular angle. Palpation of this area is painful. The lower lip frenulum is displaced to the left of the midline. When the chin is pressed, pain appears in the left mandibular angle. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Left-sided fracture of the mandibular  angle
b. Anterior bilateral mandibular dislocation
c. Posterior mandibular dislocation on the  left
d. -
e. Bilateral fracture of the mandibular  ramus

97. A 35-year-old man suffered a facial injury 3 days ago. Objectively, his face is asymmetrical due to a soft tissue edema in the left parotid masticatory region and in the submandibular region. Palpation detects a <<step sign>> in the left gonial angle. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Bilateral mandibular fracture
b. Anterior unilateral dislocation of the  mandible
*c. Fracture of the left gonial angle
d. Fracture of the mandibular body
e. Hematoma in the left parotid masticatory region

98. A 24-year-old patient came to the dentist complaining of chalky lesions on the front teeth. Objectively teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 present with chalky lesions separated by areas of healthy unchanged enamel. Lesion surface is coarse;  there is no response to thermal stimuli. Childhood years of the patient were spent in the area with fluorine level of 1.8 mg/L in drinking water. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Enamel hypoplasia
*c. Endemic fluorosis
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Enamel hyperplasia

99. A 24-year-old man has a painless oval neoplasm with a smooth surface on his upper neck, on the anterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The neoplasm is 2x3.5 cm in size, dense-elastic, with limited mobility, not fused to the skin. Puncture has yielded a yellow liquid with cholesterol crystals. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Cyst of the submandibular salivary gland
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
c. Median cervical cyst
d. Dermoid cervical cyst
*e. Lateral cervical cyst

100. A 34-year-old man underwent a surgical lancing of an odontogenic phlegmon in the left pterygomandibular space. He presents with further deterioration of his general condition, his body temperature increased to mbox{39-40^oC) Objectively, there are edema and crepitation in the jugular fossa and retrosternal pain that intensifies when the patient's chest is being percussed, during passive movements of the trachea, or when the patient's heels are percussed while the patient is in a horizontal position. What complication has most likely occurred in this case?
a. Thrombosis of the cavernous sinus
*b. Anterior mediastinitis
c. Phlegmon of the parapharyngeal space
d. Phlegmon of the mouth floor
e. Posterior mediastinitis

101. A 47-year-old woman has been diagnosed with chronic generalized parodontitis, II degree of severity, chronic course. Complex therapy included splinting her front lower teeth using a fiber adhesive splint. What was the first stage of the local treatment in this case?
a. Pharmacotherapy
b. Orthopedic dental treatment
c. Physiotherapy
*d. Professional oral hygiene
e. Closed curettage

102. A 42-year-old man complains of difficult chewing. Objectively, teeth 26 and 25 are lost. On the medial surface of tooth 27 and distal surface of tooth 24 there are class II carious cavities according to Black's classification. It is recommended to make a full-cast dental bridge with 27 and 25 as the abutment teeth. What material is used to assess whether dental bridge framework tightly adheres to the abutment teeth?
*a. Corrective silicone mass
b. -
c. Articulating paper
d. Model wax
e. Basic silicone mass

103. Preventive examination of a 7-year-old child revealed a carious cavity with overhanging enamel within the limited area of a fissure in tooth 36. The probe catches in the softened dentin. In the other areas, the enamel on the edges of the fissures is glossy and dense. A dentist plans to fill the carious lesion of tooth 36. What tactics should be chosen regarding the intact areas of the fissure?
a. Application of calcium-containing gels
b. Invasive sealing
c. Processing the tooth with an antiseptic solution
*d. Non-invasive sealing
e. Application of fluoride varnishes

104. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist to have her 25 tooth extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Unilateral tuberal and palatal anesthesia
b. Unilateral infraorbital and palatal anesthesia
*c. Unilateral tuberal, infraorbital, and palatal anesthesia
d. Unilateral infraorbital and incisor anesthesia
e. Unilateral central anesthesia

105. What causes formation of Hunter-Schreger bands on longitudinal sections of enamel?
a. Non-homogeneous mineralization of enamel prisms
*b. Alternation of longitudinal and transverse sections of enamel prisms
c. Mineralization of interprismatic spaces
d. Non-homogeneous arrangement of enamel bundles
e. Cyclic disturbances in the formation of enamel prisms

106. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of tooth mobility, pain and gingival bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth. Objectively, the roots of teeth 13, 12, 11, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36 and 37 are exposed by over 2/3; they have the mobility of the III-IV degree. It is planned to extract the mobile teeth in the front area. What are the terms for making an immediate denture?
a. Make the dentures in a month after the teeth extraction
*b. Make the dentures before the teeth extraction and fix the dentures immediately after the extraction
c. Make the dentures in ten days after the teeth extraction
d. Make the dentures in three months after the teeth extraction
e. Make the dentures on the day after the teeth extraction

107. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a filling fallen out of the lower right tooth that had been previously treated for caries. Objectively, tooth 45 is slightly discolored and has a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber on its masticatory surface. Probing and percussion are painless. Thermodiagnostics results are negative. X-ray shows uniform widening of the periodontal fissure in the area of the root apex of tooth 45. Electric pulp testing - 100 microamperes. Make the diagnosis.
*a. Chronic fibrotic periodontitis
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic deep caries

108. During carious cavity preparation in a 20-year-old man, the pulp-chamber floor was accidentally perforated and horn of the pulp was exposed. On the carious cavity floor there is a point-like puncture surrounded with white predentin. Pink pulp can be seen through the perforation, pulp probing is acutely painful. What treatment should be given to the patient?
*a. Biological approach
b. Devital extirpation
c. Devital amputation
d. Vital extirpation
e. Vital amputation

109. A patient complains of constant aching pain in a left upper tooth during the last 24 hours. Objectively, the mesial surface of tooth 25 has a carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity. The response to a cold stimulus is negative. Percussion of tooth 25 is painful. X-ray shows no pathological changes in the periapical bone tissue of tooth 25. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

110. The parents of a 10-year-old boy complain of a slight deformity in the area of the child's gonial angles and nocturnal pain attacks observed for the last several months. Examination reveals facial asymmetry caused by increased volume of the bone in the area of the gonial angles. The formations are dense, tubercular, and painless to paplation. X-ray shows uneven thinning of the cortical layer with spherical and oval areas of lucency, resembling a honeycomb and separated by dense bony septa. There is no clear border between the lesion and the healthy bone. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Odontoma
b. Osteoid osteoma
*c. Fibrous dysplasia
d. Osteosarcoma
e. Ameloblastoma

111. A 30-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his lower front teeth, which he associates with a chin injury. Objectively, the dentition ratio is orthognathic. X-ray shows a non-displaced midline mandibular fracture. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Limberg splint
b. Vasiliev splint
c. Weber splint
d. Port splint
*e. Smooth splint-brace

112. During planned sanation of a 3-year-old child, a deep carious cavity filled with food debris and softened dentin is detected in tooth 54. After tooth preparation the pulp of 54 is bleeding, probing is sharply painful. To treat pulpitis by means of devital amputation, during the first visit it is necessary to use:
a. Calcium-containing paste
b. Dentin paste
*c. Paraformaldehyde paste
d. Zinc-eugenol paste
e. Iodoform paste

113. A 36-year-old man complains of itching, redness, and a rash on his lips and skin. Objectively, the vermilion border of his lips, its adjacent skin, and mouth angles are hyperemic and edematous. Against their background, there are small vesicles with serous exudate, some of which merge together, while others are erupted and scabbed over. The affected area weeps. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Acute eczematous cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form
c. Chronic recurrent herpes
d. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
e. Glandular cheilitis

114. The parents of a 5-month-old child complain of white plaque in the child's mouth and child's refusal to feed. Objectively, the child's general condition is satisfactory, the body temperature is 37.1^oC) White caseous deposits are detected on the mucosa of the cheeks, lips, and hard palate. The deposits can be easily removed, the underlying mucosa is hyperemic. What additional examination method can confirm the diagnosis in this case?
a. Virology
b. Cytology
c. Immunology
*d. Microbiology
e. Immunofluorescence

115. A 34-year-old woman complains of dark brown spots on her upper front teeth. The spots formed approximately 18 months ago. Objectively, the contact surfaces of teeth 22 and 23 have pigmented areas of brown enamel with clear margins. Probing is painless. The surface of the spots is rough, the probe does not catch on it. After drying with a chip-blower, the surface of the spots has lost its luster and become matte. Percussion and thermodiagnostics are painless. Electric pulp testing - 4 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Chronic superficial caries
*c. Chronic initial caries
d. Fluorosis
e. Tetracycline teeth

116. During the treatment of chronic pulpitis in tooth 32 of a 45-year-old patient, a dentist completes the expansion of the root canal using the step-back technique. The apical part of the canal is expanded to file size 30. To smooth the walls of the root canal, the doctor was using rotational movements of a size 25 H-file. In the process, the instrument broke off. What mistake did the doctor make during the procedure?
a. H-file should not be used in this method
*b. Violation of the instrument operation  technique
c. Incorrect file size
d. Incorrectly selected method of  instrumental canal treatment
e. H-file should not be used at this stage

117. During a preventive examination of a 19-year-old girl after the removal of dental plaque, chalk-like spots were detected in the cervical region of her teeth 11 and 42 on their vestibular surface. The spots are painless when probed. Enamel resistance test - 7 points. What morphological changes are characteristic of this condition?
a. Changes in the mantle dentin
b. Degenerative changes in odontoblasts
c. Superficial enamel demineralization
*d. Subsurface enamel demineralization
e. Damaged dentinoenamel junction

118. The parents of a 10-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling on the right side of the child's neck. The swelling appeared 4 days ago. During examination, a round, dense and elastic, mildly painful formation is palpable in the right upper neck region. The formation is not fused with the adjacent tissues, 3 cm in diameter, without skin discoloration above it. Intraorally, destroyed tooth 85 was detected. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Acute purulent odontogenic lymphadenitis
b. Lateral cyst of the neck
c. Atheroma of the right upper neck region
d. Migratory granuloma
*e. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis

119. A 54-year-old man with completely edentulous jaws was diagnosed with a non-displaced midline mandibular fracture. A few days after applying a Port splint, the patient developed complaints of intense pain in the area of the mandibular condyles of his temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely cause of these complaints?
a. Deepened bite
b. Incorrect splint design was chosen
c. Displaced mandible
*d. Raised bite
e. -

120. A 7-year-old boy is diagnosed with epidemic parotitis (mumps). Name the most likely complication of this disease:
a. Dermatitis
b. Colitis
c. Cholecystitis
d. Pneumonia
*e. Orchitis

121. A regular preventive examination of a 5-year-old girl detected that she has problems with nasal breathing. Instead, the child breathes through her constantly open mouth. This pathology can result in:
a. Expansion of the upper dentition
b. Teeth rotation around their axis
c. Partial adentia
d. Incomplete eruption of front teeth
*e. Narrowing of the upper dentition in the  lateral areas

122. When a dentist was administering tuberal anesthesia to an 11-year-old girl, the patient developed a buccal hematoma. What should be done first in this case?
a. Apply a warm compress to the the injection site
b. Prescribe Troxevasin (Troxerutin) to be applied locally
c. Apply cold to the the injection site
*d. Press with the hand the injection site
e. Prescribe physiotherapy

123. A 47-year-old man has lost his lower left premolars. After that the teeth at the edges of the defect have been gradually sliding inside the defect. At the same time the antagonist teeth started to protrude toward the edentulous segment of the alveolar bone. In the medical literature, such clinical presentation is called:
a. Phenomenon of relative tooth-alveolar lengthening
b. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
*c. Popov-Godon phenomenon
d. Castaigne syndrome
e. Kourliandski phenomenon

124. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 14, 15, 16, 17 are missing. It is planned to restore the defect of his upper dentition using a porcelain-fused-to-metal denture with implant supports. During the treatment, occlusion-surgical templates are being made. At what stage of treatment are they used?
a. Occlusion correction
b. Selective polishing
c. Fixation of the superstructure
*d. Installation of the implants
e. Installation of the abutments

125. An 18-year-old young man complains of a painful submandibular edema on the left that developed after shaving and has been troubling him for the last 4 days. Objectively, there is an inflammatory infiltrate 1.5-1.0 cm in size in the left submandibular area with a purulonecrotic rod in its center. The skin around the infiltrate is hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Furuncle
b. Carbuncle
c. Lymphadenitis
d. Actinomycosis
e. Pyoderma

126. A 43-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of defects on her upper front teeth and their sensitivity to sour and cold stimuli. The defects began to appear about 5 years ago, while the pain provoked by stimuli has been observed for a year. The woman suffers from thyrotoxicosis. On the vestibular surface of her teeth 12, 11, 21 and 22, in the area of their equator, examination revealed concave oval defects of the enamel up to 0.3 cm in size with a smooth, dense floor. What will be the diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Cuneiform defects
*e. Erosion of hard dental tissues

127. A 28-year-old woman complains of a cavity in her lower left lateral tooth. Objective examination detects a mesio-occlusal-distal (MOD) defect of hard tissues of tooth 36. X-ray shows that tooth 36 is vital, no changes were detected in the periapical tissues. The anatomical and functional integrity of the tooth is being restored by making an inlay using an indirect method. During the first visit, the doctor prepared the dental cavity. What stage of denture-making is next?
a. Inlay casting
b. Model casting
*c. Obtaining an impression
d. Inlay modeling
e. Inlay fixation

128. A regular check-up has detected crowded teeth on the front lower jaw of a 15-year-old boy. The gums in this area are slightly edematous and hyperemic with a cyanotic tint. The gingival margin has a torusal thickening. Dental calculus is observed on the teeth. The Schiller-Pisarev test is positive. X-ray shows that in the front lower jaw the contours of the cortical plate are fuzzy on the apices of the interdental septa, though the cortical plate itself is intact. Make the diagnosis:
a. Desquamative gingivitis
*b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Acute ulcerative gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis

129. An adolescent complains of reduced and painful mouth opening, difficulties when eating, and swelling in the left mandibular angle that developed after tooth 37 was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue swelling in the area of the left mandibular angle. Mouth opening is painful and reduced to 2.0 cm. Disturbed occlusion is observed. Palpation of the left mandibular angle is painful, the tissues are soft, bone crepitus is detected. ''Indirect load to the chin'' symptom is positive in the area of the left mandibular angle. The socket of the extracted tooth is packed with iodoform gauze. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mandibular periostitis on the left
b. Anterior mandibular fracture
c. Mandibular alveolar fracture
*d. Left mandibular angle fracture
e. Odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis

130. A 26-year-old man came to a dental clinic. He was diagnosed with a non-displaced fracture of the maxillary alveolar process in the area of teeth 14 and 15. The dentition remains uninterrupted. All the teeth are stable. What splint must be applied in this case?
a. Tigerstedt splint with a spreader bar
b. Vasiliev splint
*c. Smooth splint-bracket
d. Tigerstedt splint with an inclined plane
e. Tigerstedt splint with wire loops

131. A 9-year-old boy complains of pain in his upper right tooth that intensifies during biting. The pain appeared 2 days ago. The tooth was previously treated. Objectively, the crown of tooth 65 is discolored and destroyed by 2/3, its percussion is sharply painful. The mucosa in the projection area of the root apices of tooth 65 is hyperemic, its palpation is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute purulent periodontitis
d. Acute purulent maxillary periostitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

132. A 14-year-old patient has an anomaly of teeth positioning, detected by a dentist during an examination. Tooth 23 occupies the place of tooth 24, while tooth 24 takes the place of tooth 23. What is the correct diagnosis in this case?
a. Mesial position of tooth 24 and distal  position of tooth 23
b. Distal position of tooth 23
*c. Transposition of teeth 23 and 24
d. Mesial position of tooth 24
e. Semi-retention of teeth 23 and 24

133. After examination, a 6-month-old infant was diagnosed with a complete labial cleft. What surgical operation should be performed in this case to remove this defect?
a. Frenulotomy
b. Frenulectomy
c. Uranoplasty
d. Uranostaphyloplasty
*e. Cheiloplasty

134. A non-removable dental bridge screw-retained on two implants was made for a 45-year-old patient to restore the missing lower premolars and molars on the right. Preventive examination one year after installing the denture detects its mobility. X-ray shows signs of peri-implantitis. What is the management tactics for this patient?
a. Tighten the screws
b. Perform professional hygiene
c. Prescribe anti-inflammatory treatment
*d. Remove the denture
e. Prescribe antimicrobial treatment

135. A 55-year-old man periodically, once every few months, develops 1-2 sharply painful round erosions 5-8 mm in size in his oral cavity without any prodromal phenomena. The erosions are surrounded by a hyperemic border and covered with a yellow-gray coating. According to the patient's medical history, he has chronic colitis. Make the diagnosis.
a. Chronic candidal stomatitis
*b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Papular syphilis
e. Herpetic recurrent stomatitis

136. A 16-year-old boy complaints of generally feeling unwell, a fever of 37.8°С, and pain during swallowing. Objectively, the following is observed: catarrhal gingivitis; inflammatory changes in the pharyngeal region, palatine arches, and uvula; edema of the tonsils that have massive fibrinous coating, tightly fused with the underlying tissues and spreading to the soft and hard palate. Removal of the fibrinous coating exposes an erosive surface. What is the causative agent of this disease?
*a. Loffler bacillus
b. Coxsackievirus
c. Epstein-Barr virus
d. Hemolytic streptococcus
e. Herpes simplex virus

137. A group of experts conducts epidemiologic investigation of certain age groups by severity of signs of periodontal damage and their need for treatment. What index allows to study these criteria?
*a. CPITN (WHO)
b. PІ (Russel)
c. PMA (Parma)
d. PDІ (Ramfjord)
e. OHІ-S (Green-Vermillion)

138. A 14-year-old boy complains of a rash in his oral cavity and on the lips. The rash appeared after a long-term antibiotic therapy. Objectively, there are painful erosions with a gray coating on the hyperemic mucosa of the oral cavity and hemorrhagic scabs on the lips. Maculo-papular rash is observed on the skin of the flexor surfaces of the forearms. What group of drugs should be chosen for etiotropic treatment of this disease?
a. Keratoplastics
b. Anti-inflammatory drugs
c. Antifungal drugs
*d. Antihistamines
e. Antiviral drugs

139. A maxillofacial surgery department has received a 34-year-old man with a frostbite on his face. Examination shows that the skin in the affected area is edematous, hyperemic, and cyanotic. No tissue necrosis. What degree of the frostbite is it?
a. ІІІ degree
b. ІІ degree
c. ІV degree
d. -
*e. I degree

140. A 12-year-old boy develops a long-term aching pain in the area of his tooth 46 after eating hot food. Objectively, the crown of tooth 46 is dirty gray and has a deep carious cavity. The cavity is filled with softened dentin and communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing of the carious cavity is painful. Heat stimuli provoke a pain that slowly subsides. Tooth 46 is moderately tender to percussion. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

141. A 25-year-old correspondent complains of involuntary paroxysmal pain in his left temple. The pain occurs spontaneously in the evening. Sometimes the pain occurs, when he tilts his head or during the takeoff of an aircraft. Objectively, all his teeth are intact; the necks of teeth 24 and 36 are exposed. Percussion of tooth 24 is mildly painful. X-ray of tooth 24 detects an induration of dentin-like density in the central part of the coronary cavity. This formation is 0.5x0.5 mm in size. What method of treatment would you suggest?
a. Reminalization therapy of the cervical  areas of teeth 24 and 36
b. Electrophoresis with potassium iodide in the projection of the apex of tooth 24
c. Vital amputation of tooth 24
*d. Vital extirpation of the pulp of tooth 24
e. A course of novocaine (procaine)  blockade with vitamin B_1

142. The parents of a 4-year-old boy came to a dentist complaining that their child suffers from pain in an area of his right upper jaw and a fever of 37.5°С. Objectively, there is edema of soft facial tissues in the right buccal and suborbital regions, the crown of tooth 54 is destroyed, the tooth was previously treated and is mobile. The mucogingival junction is hyperemic on the vestibular side in the area of tooth 54, palpation detects there a painful infiltrate with a focus of fluctuation. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Acute odontogenic purulent lymphadenitis
*c. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis
d. Giant-cell tumor of bone in the right upper jaw
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 54

143. A 45-year-old man came to the prosthodontic department to have a denture made for him. Before the preparation of the hard tissues of the intact teeth, the patient was given an infiltration anesthesia with 0.5% lidocaine solution. Several minutes later he developed depressed level of consciousness, his blood pressure dropped, convulsions started, and involuntary urination occurred. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
a. Heart failure
b. Collapse
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Syncope
e. Pain shock

144. A 58-year-old man complains of a neoplasm on his lower lip that appeared 6 months ago. Throughout the last 20 days, it has been rapidly growing. Objectively, on the vermilion border of the lower lip there is a hemispherical gray-red node, raised above the underlying tissues by 0.5 cm. The node is demarcated and has a funnel-shaped indentation in its center, filled with keratinous masses. On palpation, the node is dense, mobile, and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Verrucous leukoplakia
*b. Keratoacanthoma
c. Manganotti's abrasive precancerous  cheilitis
d. Verrucous precancer
e. Papilloma

145. A 40-year-old man complains of constant decementation of the porcelain-fused-to-metal crown on tooth 11. The crown was made for him one year ago. How must the stump of the prepared tooth look like for proper functioning of this type of dental crown?
a. Cylindrical shape, two-plane  preparation, circular ledge
*b. Conical shape, convergence angle of 5-7 degrees, two-plane preparation, circular ledge
c. Conical shape, convergence angle of 15-20 degrees, single-plane preparation, circular ledge
d. Cylindrical shape, single-plane  preparation, no ledge
e. Conical shape, convergence angle of 10-15 degrees, single-plane preparation, circular ledge

146. A 78-year-old man complains of a painful sore in his mouth that has been persisting for 2 months already. The patient is a smoker. Objectively on the buccal mucosa on the right there is a shallow ulcer up to 1.5 cm in size with lumpy floor and uneven margins. There are yellowish granules on its periphery. Palpation is painful, the lesion is soft. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and matted together. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Decubitus ulcer
b. Cancerous ulcer
c. Hard chancre
d. Trophic ulcer
*e. Tuberculous ulcer

147. A 9-year-old boy complains of a spontaneous pulsing and irradiating pain in his lower right teeth that slightly abates when cold is applied. Objectively, tooth 46 has a deep carious cavity with soft floor, located within the parapulpar dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is acutely painful. Percussion of the tooth is painful. The boy was diagnosed with acute purulent pulpitis of tooth 46. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Devital pulp extirpation
b. Vital pulp amputation
*c. Vital pulp extirpation
d. Biological treatment
e. Devital pulp amputation

148. After examination, a 34-year-old patient was diagnosed with Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome. What complex of symptoms is characteristic of this syndrome?
a. Lichen ruber planus, essential hypertension, diabetes mellitus
b. Hutchinson's teeth, congenital deafness, congenital blindness
c. Fissured tongue, atopic cheilitis, trigeminal neuritis
*d. Macrocheilitis, fissured tongue, paresis of the facial nerve
e. Median rhomboid glossitis, eczematous cheilitis, paresis of the facial nerve

149. A 28-year-old woman complains of persisting pain in tooth 34, which intensifies on biting. Four days ago arsenic paste was left in the 34. The patient missed her appointment with the dentist. Objective examination detected occlusive dressing on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 34, percussion is acutely painful. What treatment tactics would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Dentin dressing is removed, electrophoresis with antidote along the mucogingival fold is prescribed
*b. Arsenic antidote is placed into the root canal under occlusive dressing
c. The root canal is lavaged with antidote, the tooth remains uncovered
d. -
e. The root canal is lavaged with antidote and filled

150. A 45-year-old man came to an orthopedic dentistry clinic complaining of inability to close his mouth. Computed tomography detects no contact between the articular surfaces of the temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ankylosis
b. Deforming arthrosis
c. Subluxation of the articular head
*d. Complete dislocation of the articular head
e. Chronic arthritis

151. A 16-year-old girl was referred for X-ray scan before therapeutic treatment of her tooth 46. X-ray detects no periapical changes in the area of the roots of tooth 46. In the area of the root apex of tooth 45, a homogeneous round dense shadow with clear margins was detected. The shadow is 5 mm in diameter. The neoplasm is similar in its structure to the tooth root tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Cementoma
b. Odontoma
c. Ameloblastoma
d. Osteoma
e. Giant-cell epulis

152. A 22-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of increased salivation and a sharp pain in the oral cavity during eating and talking. He notes the acute onset of the disease that occurred after an overexposure to cold, high body temperature (39,5^oC), general weakness, and headache. He has a history of chronic tonsillitis and is allergic to certain medicines. On examination his skin is pale. On the dorsal surface of his hands there are bluish-pink rashes with a hemorrhagic crust in the center. Vermilion border of the lips is swollen and covered in hemorrhagic crusts. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and mobile. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Drug-induced stomatitis
c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
*d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Acantholytic pemphigus

153. A 50-year-old man complains of bleeding gums and mobility of his teeth. After a clinical examination, he was provisionally diagnosed with generalized parodontitis of the II degree. To clarify the diagnosis, the dentist used orthopantomography. What main X-ray sign of parodontitis can be detected in the image?
a. Vertical resorption
*b. Mixed resorption
c. Horizontal resorption
d. Osteosclerosis
e. Osteoporosis

154. A 20-year-old man complains of spontaneous pain attacks (5-7 minutes) in the area of 36 that occur for the last 24 hours. Objectively in 36 there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface. Probing is painful at one point, response to cold stimulus is painful, with an aftereffect that lasts for 5 minutes. Percussion is painless. X-ray shows root canals to be slightly curved, canal lumen is clearly visible. The tooth is planned to be used as an abutment for a dental bridge. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Filling of the carious cavity
*b. Vital extirpation
c. Vital amputation
d. Devital amputation
e. Biological approach

155. A 24-year-old woman is at the III trimester of her pregnancy. She complains of white spots appearing on her lower front teeth. Examination detects chalk-like lesions on the vestibular surfaces of teeth 41, 42, 31, 32 in the precervical area. The lesions can be stained with dyes. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Preparation and filling
*b. Remineralization therapy
c. Preparation without filling
d. ART-technique
e. Impregnation with silver nitrate

156. A 15-year-old girl complains of discolored upper front teeth. Examination by a dentist detected signs of acute initial caries in the pericervical areas of teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23. What treatment technique would be most effective in this case?
a. Filing down
b. Preparation and filling
c. Impregnation
d. Remineralization
*e. Infiltration

157. An 11-year-old child presents with protrusion of the upper front teeth, there are tremata and diastema between the child's teeth. What apparatus can be used for treatment of this pathology?
a. Frankel, type 3
*b. Osadchy
c. Brukle
d. Vasylenko
e. Mershon

158. A 22-year-old man is referred for extraction of tooth 36. In the office of the dental surgeon before the anestehesia was given to him he felt weakness and developed tinnitus and visual blackout. Objectively the face is pale and covered in cold sweat, blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg. For several seconds the patient was unconscious. What complication occurred during the visit to the dentist?
a. Angina pectoris
b. Epileptic seizure
c. Collapse
*d. Fainting (Syncope)
e. Anaphylactic shock

159. Due to lack of timely specialized treatment a 44-year-old man presents with incorrectly healed displaced mandibular fracture. Objectively the lower jaw narrows sharply, vestibular cusps of the lower teeth contact with oral cusps of the upper teeth. The patient declined surgical treatment. What treatment tactics should be chosen by the dentist in this case?
a. Make a dentogingival laminar denture
*b. Make a prosthesis with double dentition
c. Correct the malocclusion by filing down the patient's teeth
d. Correct the malocclusion via instrumental surgical method
e. Make a non-removable dental bridge with movable joint

160. An 18-year-old girl needs consultation of the dentist regarding a neoplasm that appeared in the frontal area of her face. On the frontal area there is a pink-red semicircular spot on her skin 3-4 cm in size, with clear margins. When pressed, the skin in the affected area discolors and becomes pale. As soon as the pressing stops, the skin again assumes its pink-red color. When the patient bows her head, the spot darkens and enlarges in volume; when the patient lifts her head, the spot gradually returns to its initial pink-red color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Birthmark (nevus)
b. Neurofibromatosis
c. Cavernous hemangioma
d. Lymphangioma
*e. Capillary hemangioma

161. A 70-year-old man complains of displacement of the lower jaw to the right when he opens his mouth, clicking in the left temporomandibular joint, and slight pain during eating. According to the patient, his mouth opening gradually becomes reduced. X-ray shows a round focus of significant darkening with clear contours in the area of the left articular process. The density of the focus matches the density of the cortical plate. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Osteoma
b. Chondroma
c. Osteoid osteoma
d. Giant-cell tumor of bone
e. Odontoma

162. A 58-year-old man came to a dentist for orthopedic treatment after the extraction of his right upper lateral incisor four weeks ago. For two years, he has been using a partial removable laminar denture for the upper jaw that replaces missing teeth 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. The patient has a history of a myocardial infarction that occurred 6 months ago. Objectively, the socket of tooth 12 has healed, there are no signs of inflammation, the relief of the alveolar process is preserved. What tactics should the doctor choose to replace missing tooth 12?
*a. Reconstruct the partial removable laminar denture by welding an artificial tooth to it
b. Make a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge
c. Make a new partial removable laminar denture
d. Perform dental implantation and make a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. Wait two months before making a denture

163. Examination of the oral cavity of a 4-year-old boy by a dentist revealed four teeth with initial caries and two teeth treated for caries. What is the level of caries intensity in the child?
a. Very low
*b. High
c. Average
d. Very high
e. Low

164. A 37-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his left lower jaw and reduced mouth opening. Objectively, edema and hyperemia of the mucosa are observed in the area of the left retromolar fossa that is painful to palpation. The mouth opening is reduced to 2 cm. X-ray shows dystopia of tooth 38 in the mesial direction. Make the diagnosis.
a. Parapharyngeal space abscess
b. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*c. Pericoronitis of tooth 38
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 38
e. Pterygomaxillary space abscess

165. A 12-year-old girl complains of a painful neoplasm under the tongue on the left. It appears during eating (especially salty or sour foods) and then slowly diminishes. Mouth opening is unrestricted; the duct orifice of the left sublingual salivary gland is dilated and hyperemic; saliva is clear with pus admixtures. Bimanual palpation detects an induration of a part of the duct. Ultrasound reveals a hyperechogenic zone with an ''absorption path''. This clinical presentation is characteristic of the following disease:
a. Sclerosing submaxillitis
b. Sialodochitis
*c. Calculous submaxillitis
d. Interstitial parotitis
e. Parenchymatous parotitis

166. A 28-year-old man complains of an ulcer on his tongue. Objectively, he has a painless red erosion with a smooth glossy floor, approximately 1 cm in diameter. The erosion has clear smooth margins and a dense infiltrate at its base. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painless on palpation. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Tuberculous ulcer
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Decubital ulcer
d. Actinomycotic ulcer
*e. Syphilitic ulcer

167. The parents of a 3-year-old child came to the orthodontist. They complain of an aesthetical defect in the teeth of their child. The child has a history of tongue sucking habit. In the front region there is a vertical fissure 5 mm. What orthodontic appliance is indicated for the treatment of this pathology?
a. Schonherr plate
b. Kerbitz plate
c. Dass activator appliance
*d. Kraus plate
e. Friel plate

168. A 55-year-old woman complains of erosions in her mouth, pain during eating, and hoarse voice. The disease onset was 3 months ago. Local treatment was uncuccessful. Objectively, on the unchanged mucosa of the gums and soft palate there are large bright red erosions. The mucosa can be easily injured and exfoliates with the development of new erosions. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*b. Pemphigus
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Chronic herpetic stomatitis
e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

169. A 6-year-old girl took paracetamol to treat a case of URTI two days ago, which resulted in the development of her present condition. The disease onset was acute with temperature increase up to 39.8^oC)  Objectively there are cockade-shaped maculopapular rashes on her face. The vermilion border is swollen, hyperemic, covered in massive brown crusts, and presents with bleeding cracks. Conjunctivitis is detected. Swollen and hyperemic oral mucosa presents with numerous erosions covered with fibrinous incrustations; the erosions are sharply painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*b. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
c. Pemphigus
d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

170. A 32-year-old man presents with fever of 38.9^oC, general weakness, impaired speech, and inability to eat. This condition has been recurring for the last 4 years in autumn and spring. There are vesicles and erosions covered in grayish fibrinous coating on the hyperemic and edematous mucosa of the lips and cheeks. The lips are covered in massive blood-brown scabs.The Nikolsky's sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Nonacantholytic pemphigus
b. Dermatitis herpetiformis  (Duhring's disease)
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

171. During the treatment of acute diffuse pulpitis of tooth 16, a few minutes after receiving conduction anesthesia, the patient became anxious, flushed hot, and developed chest pain. Objectively, the patient developed problematic breathing, profuse sweating, hyperemic skin, vomiting, loss of consciousness, and convulsions. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Syncope
b. Hypoglycemic coma
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Bronchial asthma attack
e. Collapse

172. In the epicenter of a natural disaster, a man with a lacerated wound of soft facial tissues was found. The wound cuts open the patient's lower lip and chin; external bleeding is observed. The patient is conscious. What first aid should be provided for this man?
a. Provide primary surgical processing of the wound, place the sutures
*b. Stop the external bleeding, pack the wound, apply sterile bandage, provide transport immobilization
c. Thoroughly ligate the vessel in the wound, position the flaps correctly, place the U-shaped mattress sutures, apply sterile bandage
d. Use a syrette from the personal medical kit to provide anesthesia with 2% promedol (trimeperidine) solution
e. Position the flaps correctly and place the U-shaped mattress sutures

173. A bleeding occurred in the patient, when a needle was removed from the soft tissues after palatal anesthesia administration. What should be done to stop the bleeding?
a. Administer vicasol (menadione)  intramuscularly
b. Put in the stitches
*c. Press the injection site with a swab
d. Ligate the external carotid artery
e. Administer 10% calcium chloride  solution intravenously

174. 3 days after the extraction of tooth 46, a 29-year-old man developed complaints of a dull pain in the area of the dental alveolus of extracted tooth 46. He presents with hyperemic and edematous mucosa in the area of the dental alveolus; no blood clot; food debris are detected. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Acute serous alveolitis
b. Acute necropurulent alveolitis
c. Acute suppurative alveolitis
d. Chronic local osteomyelitis
e. Neuritis of the alveolar nerve

175. A 68-year-old man has removable partial dentures made for him. At the stage of checking the denture construction, occlusal contact in the lateral areas is cusp-to-cusp and frontal area has sagittal fissure. What mistake was made by the doctor?
a. Height of centric occlusion is understated
b. Prothetic plane is designed incorrectly
c. Lateral occlusion is fixed
d. Height of centric occlusion is overstated
*e. Anterior occlusion is fixed

176. After examination, an 8-year-old child was diagnosed with torsiversion of the lateral maxillary incisors and an arch-length deficiency caused by macrodontia. To prevent the vestibular position of the canines, a Hotz serial extraction was performed. In what order were the teeth removed in this case?
a. First temporary molars, temporary  canines, second premolars
b. Second incisors, temporary canines and first temporary molar
c. First temporary molars, first premolars, temporary canines
*d. Temporary canines, first temporary  molars, first premolars
e. First temporary molars, temporary  canines, first premolars

177. A clasp (bugel) denture with clammer fixation is being made for a partially edentulous (Kennedy class I) man. Impressions were obtained, casts were made, and the centric relation of the jaws was determined and fixed. What laboratory stage of the denture-making is the next one?
*a. Studying the working cast in a  parallelometer
b. Marking the denture frame
c. Duplication of the cast
d. Installation of the gating system
e. Obtaining a refractory cast

178. After extraction of tooth 27 the dental surgeon suspected that the maxillary sinus was perforated. To clarify this provisional diagnosis the doctor desided to conduct an oronasal communication test (Valsalva maneuver). What manipulations are necessary for this test?
*a. Pinch the nostrils together to occlude the patient's nose and ask the patient to blow through the nose, while observing the socket of 27
b. Ask the patient to blow through the mouth, while observing the socket of 27
c. Ask the patient to blow through the nose, while observing the socket of 27
d. Ask the patient to inhale through the nose, pinch the nostrils together, and exhale through the mouth
e. Pinch the nostrils together to occlude the patient's nose and ask the patient to blow through the mouth, while observing the socket of 27

179. A 42-year-old man complains of painful bleeding gums that especially trouble him during eating. There are also complaints of muscle weakness, pain in the limbs, and chills. For the last 15 years, he has been living in the North and engaging in hard physical labor. Objectively, his skin is dry, brown, and peeling. His oral mucosa is edematous and hyperemic with a cyanotic tinge. His gingival papillae cover the tooth crowns to the half of their height and bleed in response to the slightest stimulus. Teeth mobility of the I degree is observed. There are numerous petechiae on the mucosa of the soft palate. These signs are likely to indicate the following type of avitaminosis:
a. Vitamin B_2
b. Vitamin B_1
c. Vitamin A
*d. Vitamin C
e. Vitamin PP

180. A 67-year-old man complains of a painless neoplasm that appeared on his lower lip several months ago and is rapidly growing. Examination detects a demarkated hemispherical neoplasm up to 1.0 cm in size on the vermilion border of the lower lip on the left. The neoplasm is covered in small scales and is darker in color than the surrounding tissues. During palpation, the base of the neoplasm is not indurated. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Verrucous leukoplakia
b. Keratoacanthoma
*c. Verrucous precancer
d. Cutaneous horns
e. Papilloma

181. To clarify the diagnosis, the orthodontist performed Eschler-Bittner clinical diagnostic test. As the result the facial signs became more marked. What jaw abnormality is the most likely in this case?
a. Mandibular macrognathia
b. Mandibular micrognathia
c. Maxillary micrognathia
d. Combined pathology of both jaws
*e. Maxillary macrognathia

182. A 29-year-old man came to the surgery department of a dental hospital. He complains of painful facial swelling on the right that appeared 1.5-2 months ago and has been gradually increasing since then. Objectively mouth opening is unrestricted, the face is asymmetrical due to a swelling in the right parotid-masseteric region. The skin over the edema is hyperemic and swollen; palpation detects a painful infiltration 3 cm in size. Massage in this region results in discharge of clear saliva from the excretory duct of the right parotid salivary gland. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Submasseteric abscess on the right
b. Acute suppurative parotitis on the right
c. Chronic interstitial parotitis on the right
*d. Chronic suppurative lymphadenitis of the right parotid-masseteric region
e. Furuncle of the right parotid-masseteric region

183. A 54-year-old man developed a pustule on the skin of his chin. The pustule rapidly progressed into a hard and sharply painful infiltration 3x3.5 cm in size. The skin over the infiltration is bluish-red. In its center there are three necrotic foci surrounding the hair follicles. Palpation detects enlarged and painful submental lymph nodes. The body temperature is 38.5^oC) Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Allergic dermatitis
*b. Carbuncle
c. Festering atheroma
d. Erysipelas
e. Furuncle

184. Complete removable dentures are being made for the upper and lower jaws of a 75-year-old man. At the stage of checking the wax cast of the denture with artificial teeth in the oral cavity, a contact between the lateral teeth is observed, while there is no contact between the front teeth. What mistake was made in this case?
a. No contact between the bite rims in the  lateral regions
b. Mistake during the teeth placement
c. No contact between the bite rims in the  frontal region
d. Deformation of the working cast
*e. Fixation of anterior occlusion

185. A 21-year-old young man came to an orthodontist complaining about his markedly visible labiomental fold. Objectively, the lower third of his face is reduced and the labiomental fold is markedly visible. Intraoral examination reveals no contact between the front teeth of both jaws when they are closed, the sagittal fissure is 4 mm, the anterior buccal cusp of the first upper molar is in contact with its counterpart of the first lower molar. What abnormal bite is it characteristic of?
a. Crossbite
b. Mesial bite
c. Open bite
*d. Distal bite
e. Deep bite

186. A 10-year-old girl complains of pain in the area of her upper front teeth, observed when she eats cold food. The pain appeared one month ago after an injury. Examination detects a missing mesial corner of the crown of tooth 21 and a broken off cutting edge of tooth 11 within the mantle dentin. Probing of teeth 11 and 21 is mildly painful, the response to a cold stimulus is painful and brief. Electric pulp testing - 7 microamperes. What filling material should be used in treatment in this case?
a. Compomer
*b. Microhybrid composite
c. Amalgam
d. Macro-filled composite
e. Glass ionomer cement

187. A 65-year-old man with fully edentulous upper jaw needs removable full laminar denture. To make the denture, anatomical impressions of the upper and lower jaws are necessary. The patient exhibits heightened gag reflex. What drug can be used to suppress the gag reflex in this patient?
a. 0.1% atropin solution
b. 0.2% noradrenaline solution
c. 10% glucose solution
*d. 10% lidocaine solution
e. 1% dimedrol (diphenhydramine) solution

188. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and creaking in the area of his temporomandibular joint during lower jaw movements. Objectively, his face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with a slight displacement to the left. The dentition is preserved. To clarify the diagnosis, it is planned to conduct an X-ray of the temporomandibular joint. What type of X-ray scan would be the most informative in this case?
*a. Computed tomography of the  temporomandibular joint
b. Orthopantomography
c. Parma X-ray projection
d. Schuller X-ray projection
e. Teleradiography

189. A 28-year-old man came to a dentist for the purpose of sanation. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 47 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity is painless, the tooth is non-responsive to thermal stimuli, its percussion is painless. Electric pulp testing - 108 microamperes. X-ray shows traces of filling material in the root canals of tooth 47, the periodontal fissure is widened and deformed in the apical region. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 47
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis of  tooth 47
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of tooth 47
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis of tooth 47
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of tooth 47

190. A 51-year-old woman came to a clinic with complaints of multiple burns caused by hot steam. Objectively, the skin of her nose, frontal, buccal, and mental regions is brightly hyperemic, edematous, and sharply painful. Her regional lymph nodes are unchanged and painless. Name the degree of burns in this case:
a. II
b. IV
c. ІІІb
d. ІІІa
*e. І

191. A 42-year-old man came to an orthopedic dentistry clinic to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 34, 35, 36, 43, and 16 are missing. Examination shows the patient's face to have a notably high and wide forehead, the face resembles a pyramid with its base facing upwards. This face shape can be classified as:
*a. Cerebral
b. Muscular
c. Digestive
d. Respiratory
e. Mixed

192. A 10-year-old child complains of persisting throbbing pain in tooth 36, which appeared one day ago. Hot stimulus aggravates the pain, while cold mitigates it slightly.  Objectively on the masticatory and medial surfaces of tooth 36 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity bottom and percussion are painful. X-ray shows no pathologic changes of the periodontium. What treatment method shold be chosen in this case?
*a. Vital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
c. Vital amputation
d. Conservative treatment
e. Devital extirpation

193. Biopsy material was obtained from the focus of a lesion in the retromolar space. Pathohistological findings: cellular polymorphism in the stratum spinosum, increased mitotic number, giant multinucleate cells, acanthosis, some cells in the stratum spinosum exhibit signs of parakeratosis, keratin pearls are detected. These pathohistological findings indicate the following disease:
a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Leukoplakia
c. Lichen ruber planus, verrucous form
*d. Bowen disease
e. Lupus erythematosus

194. A complete removable denture is being made for the lower jaw of a 67-year-old man. The individual tray is being adjusted using the Herbst technique. The location of the tray edge in the sublingual region, 1 cm away from the midline, needs to be further specified. What Herbst test must be performed for this purpose?
a. Running the tongue over the vermilion  border of the upper lip
b. Swallowing
c. Opening the mouth slowly
*d. Alternately touching the cheeks with the tongue
e. Active movements of facial muscles

195. A 48-year-old man complains of disturbed lower jaw mobility. The condition developed gradually, starting with the deterioration of lower jaw mobility and its stiffness. X-ray of the temporomandibular joint, with scans taken on the left and on the right both with the mouth open and closed, shows exophytes on the articular surfaces. What disease can be characterized by these changes?
a. Habitual mandibular dislocation
b. Acute arthritis
*c. Arthrosis
d. Fibrous ankylosis
e. Chronic arthritis

196. Vestibular surfaces of the upper and lower incisors of a 27-year-old patient are affected by destructive form of fluorosis. What construction of a denture will provide the maximum aesthetic effect with minimum invasion?
a. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns
b. Ceramic crowns
*c. Ceramic veneers
d. Plastic crowns
e. -

197. A 40-year-old woman complains of sharply painful ulcers that periodically appear in her mouth throughout the last 4 years. Exacerbations of her condition occur 2-3 times a year. Examination of unchanged buccal mucosa revealed two round defects of the epithelium 5 mm in size. The defects have a hyperemic rim and grayish coating. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic herpetic stomatitis
b. Miliary ulcerative tuberculosis
c. Primary syphilis
d. Sutton's aphthae
*e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

198. A 38-year-old man came to the dentist. After history-taking and examination  he was found to have exacerbated generalized periodontitis of the II degree with periodontal pockets 3-5 mm deep. After the local factors were removed and anti-inflammatory treatment was provided to the patient, it is necessary to remove the periodontal pockets. What method should be applied in this case?
a. Flap surgery
b. Gingivectomy
c. Vestibuloplasty
d. Gingivotomy
*e. Curettage

199. A draft-age young man undergoes an examination in the orthopedic dental clinic. Objectively, teeth 46 and 16 are missing. What would be the loss of masticatory efficiency, according to Agapov's classification?
*a. 12%
b. 10%
c. 5%
d. 24%
e. 6%

200. A 62-year-old woman complains of unpleasant sensations in her mouth during eating, general weakness, and rashes on her scalp observed for the last several months. Objectively, she has multiple irregular-shaped erosions on her cheeks, gums and palate against the background of unchanged mucosa. The Nikolsky's sign is positive. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Duhring's dermatitis herpetiformis
b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
c. Lever's bullous pemphigoid
*d. Pemphigus
e. Lupus erythematosus

201. A 21-year-old woman after a domestic accident presents with a fracture of the maxillary alveolar process in the area of teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23. What splint should be used for this fracture?
a. With supporting plane
b. With retention loops
c. With spreader arch
*d. Smooth dental brace
e. With inclined plane

202. A 25-year-old woman complains of acute and prolonged pain attacks in the area of her right lower jaw. The pain attacks can be provoked by various stimuli, pain also occurs spontaneously at night and radiates into the right ear. After a clinical examination, a diagnosis of acute diffuse pulpitis of tooth 46 was established. What is the most common route of infection spreading into the pulp?
a. Lymphogenous infection through the root apex
b. Hematogenous infection through the root apex
*c. From the carious cavity along the dentinal tubules
d. Through the branching delta of the root canal
e. In retrograde, through the apical foramen

203. A 18-year-old boy complains of bleeding and pain in her gums. The disease onset was 4 days ago. Objectively the skin is pale, body temperature is 38.5^oC) Her submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged, painful, non-fused with the surrounding tissues. The gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37 are hyperemic, ulcerated, and covered in necrotic deposit. Teeth present with soft dental plaque. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
d. -
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

204. A 63-year-old man complains of fever and multiple painful rashes in his oral cavity and on his face and torso. 3-4 days before the rashes appeared he had noticed a burning sensation followed by sharp shooting pain resembling that which occurs during lumbago. The patient takes cytotoxic drugs for leukemia treatment. On examination there are multiple aphthae located in a row on the vermillion border and labial, lingual, and buccal mucosa on the right. The aphthae have hyperemic borders, they are not fused together and are sharply painful on palpation. The right side of the face presents with erythematous spots, vesicles, and erosions. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Toxic allergic dermatostomatitis
b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*c. Herpes zoster
d. Chronic recurrent herpes
e. Secondary syphilis

205. A 54-year-old woman complains of pain and clicking in her temporomandibular joint during movements of the lower jaw. This condition has been observed for several years. Objectively, her face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with a slight mandibular displacement to the left. The dentition is intact. What type of X-ray examination would be most informative for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Teleradiography
*b. Computed tomography of the  temporomandibular joint
c. Axiography
d. Orthopantomography
e. Electromyography

206. A 46-year-old woman complains of painful reddening of the skin of her face, chills, headache, generally feeling unwell, vomiting, and a fever of 39°С. Objectively, on the skin of her cheeks and nose there is a bright glossy red spot with clear irregular borders. The affected area is edematous, infiltrated, and hot and sharply painful to the touch. During palpation, the border between the affected reddened skin and unaffected skin does not disappear. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Shingles
b. Hemangioma
c. Scarlet fever
d. Lupus erythematosus
*e. Erysipelas

207. After a fall, a 28-year-old man came to a maxillofacial surgery clinic with complaints of limited mouth opening and skin numbness in the left suborbital region, on the upper lip, and on the wing of the nose, as well as pain in the left zygomatic region that intensifies during mouth opening. Palpation detects the <<step sign>> along the zygomaticomaxillary suture. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
b. Fracture of the left zygomatic arch
*c. Displaced zygomatic fracture
d. Non-displaced zygomatic fracture
e. Le Fort II maxillary fracture

208. A 44-year-old man complains of his gums bleeding when he brushes his teeth. Objectively, the following is observed: congestively hyperemic gingival papillae on the upper and lower jaws, mild edema of the gingival margin, mineralized and non-mineralized dental deposits. What test can confirm the presence of periodontal pockets?
*a. Formalin test
b. Rotter test
c. Benzidine test
d. Vacuum test
e. Glycogen test

209. A 43-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 24. Tooth preparation, pulp extirpation, and mechanical and medical treatment of root canals were performed. How must the root canals be sealed in this case?
a. Reaching 1 mm over the apex
b. -
c. To the radiographic apex
d. To the anatomical apex
*e. To the physiological apex

210. An 8-year-old girl complains of dry lips and a painful burning sensation in them. She has a history of food allergies. Objectively, there is a slight edema and hyperemia of the skin of her lips. The vermillion border is infiltrated and has fissures, scabs, and scales. The surface of the lips is dry. In the angles of the mouth there are infiltrations, maceration, and fissures. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Glandular cheilitis
*b. Eczematous cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Actinic cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

211. A 27-year-old woman complains of an aesthetical defect in the area of her upper central incisors. She was diagnosed with chronic deep caries, Black class IV. Aesthetic restoration of teeth 11 and 21 is planned. What material has optimal combination of strength and aesthetical properties?
*a. Hybrid composites
b. Microfilled composites
c. Liquid composites
d. Compomers
e. Macrofilled composites

212. As a result of a trauma, an upper front tooth was broken in a 39-year-old patient. Objectively, the cutting edge on the mesial surface of tooth 22 is destroyed, with the area of destruction remaining within the mantle dentin. What class of cavity is it according to the Black's classification?
*a. IV
b. VI
c. III
d. II
e. V

213. A 27-year-old woman complains of general weakness and pain in her lower jaw during swallowing. Two days ago she developed pain in tooth 38. Mouth opening is impossible. What anesthesia should be given to the patient before examination of the oral cavity and extraction of 38?
a. Verlotsky
b. Tuberal
c. Mental
*d. Berchet-Dubov
e. Infiltration

214. A 40-year-old woman came to an orthopedic dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect due to missing teeth 24 and 25. Examination shows that the clinical crowns of her teeth 23 and 26 are of optimal height and stable. X-ray detects no changes in the periapical tissues. A porcelain-fused-to-mental dental bridge with abutment teeth 23 and 26 is to be made for the patient. What impressions must be obtained in this case?
*a. Two-layer working impression of the maxilla and anatomical auxiliary impression of the mandible
b. Two-layer working impression of the maxilla
c. Partial impressions of both jaws
d. Complete working impression of the maxilla, partial impression of the mandible
e. Anatomical working and auxiliary impressions of the both jaws

215. A 52-year-old man complains of pain and clicking in the area of his left temporomandibular joint. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, palpation of the medial and lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left. The mouth opening is limited to 1.5 cm between the cutting edges of the central incisors. X-ray shows smooth contours of the articular surfaces, the joint space is normal. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Neuromuscular joint syndrome
b. Fibrous ankylosis of the joint
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Deforming arthrosis
e. Acute post-traumatic arthritis

216. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of the mobility of his lower front teeth. Objectively, his dentition is preserved, the lower front teeth exhibit the II degree mobility. The loose teeth are depulped. What design of a fixed splint is necessary in this case as a part of complex treatment of periodontitis to prevent a secondary deformity?
a. -
b. Denture splint with a multilink clasp  (clammer)
c. Elbrecht splint
d. Van Thiel splint
*e. Mamlock splint

217. The parents of a 5-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of pain in the area of the child's upper front teeth due to an injury, obtained when the child fell the day before. Objectively, the upper lip is edematous, teeth 51 and 61 have mobility of the II degree. X-ray shows partial resorption of the roots of teeth 51 and 61. What is the most reasonable doctor's tactics regarding the injured teeth?
*a. Extraction of teeth 51 and 61
b. Replantation of teeth 51 and 61
c. Splinting with a smooth splint-brace
d. Ligature fixation of teeth 51 and 61
e. Splinting with a dentogingival splint

218. A 19-year-old young man complains of constant pain in tooth 22, which intensifies on biting with this tooth, sensation of ''protruding'' tooth, and upper lip edema. The patient has history of upper jaw trauma. Objectively tooth 22 is intact. Vertical percussion is acutely painful. The upper lip is swollen, mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 22 is red and painful on palpation. What examination method is necessary for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Transillumination
b. Dental pulp test
*c. X-ray
d. Rheodentography
e. Thermometry

219. A 45-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums and bad breath. After examination the patient was provisionally diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis of the II degree. To make the final diagnosis, it is necessary to:
*a. Perform an X-ray
b. Perform Kulazhenko test (capillary resistance test)
c. Perform Kotzshke test (periodontal pocket suppuration test)
d. Measure the depth of the periodontal pockets
e. Determine teeth mobility

220. A 30-year-old man complains of a carious cavity in a lower left tooth. Objectively, tooth 34 has a deep carious cavity that at one point communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the cavity floor is painless, while percussion of the tooth is slightly painful. Thermal stimuli provoke no response. On the gums, there is a fistula in the projection of the root apex of tooth 34. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
*b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

221. A 37-year-old man complains of facial asymmetry due to an edema of the right parotid-masticatory region, which developed 6 months ago. Palpation detects a painful dense formation without clear margins. The mouth and eye angles are drooping. When the patient tries to puff up his cheeks, the right cheek wavers. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Phlegmon of the parotid-masticatory  region
*b. Malignant tumor of a parotid salivary  gland
c. Trigeminal neuralgia
d. Central paresis of the facial nerve
e. Peripheral paresis of the facial nerve

222. A dental bridge is being made for a 43-year-old man. Anesthesia was provided before the preparation of the abutment teeth. Two minutes later, the patient suddenly paled, broke out in cold sweat, his limbs became cold and cyanotic, he developed rapid thready pulse and muscle weakness, his blood pressure became 80/50 mm Hg. The patient is conscious but apathetic. What emergency condition has likely developed in this case?
a. Epileptic seizure
*b. Collapse
c. Acute cerebrovascular accident
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Hypoglycemic coma

223. A 48-year-old man came to a dental surgeon for extraction of the roots of tooth 37. What instrument must be used for this procedure?
a. Beak-shaped forceps, curved in a plane
b. Bayonet forceps
*c. Beak-shaped crushing forceps
d. S-shaped forceps
e. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps

224. A 6-year-old child for a 3rd day presents with body temperature up to 38-39^oC and painful swallowing. Objectively on the mucosa of the palatine arches, tonsils and a part of the soft palate there are several erosions up to 2 mm in diameter. The erosions are situated on the hyperemic mucosa and covered in whitish plaque. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
*b. Herpetic angina
c. Diphtheria
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

225. A 47-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 43, 44, and 45 are missing. What class of mandibular dentition defect is it according to Kennedy?
a. -
*b. 3
c. 2
d. 4
e. 1

226. A 2-year-old girl has a bright red neoplasm 1x1.5 cm in size on her upper lip. The neoplasm does not protrude above the mucosa and becomes paler, when pressed. The regional lymph nodes have no pathology. The results of blood and urine analysis are normal for her age. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Cavernous hemangioma
b. Cavernous lymphangioma
*c. Capillary hemangioma
d. Capillary lymphangioma
e. Systemic hemangiomatosis

227. A 25-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for oral cavity sanation. Objectively the crown of tooth 37 is destroyed by 2/3. Gingival mucosa around tooth 37 is without changes. What anesthesia should the dental surgeon give to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Mandibular anesthesia
b. Intraoral infraorbital nerve block
c. Mental nerve block
d. Tuberal anesthesia
*e. Mandibular and buccal anesthesia

228. A 10-year-old child is referred by the orthodontist for extraction of tooth 53. Objectively the crown of 53 is retained, the tooth is immobile. X-ray of tooth 53 shows root resorption by less than 1/3. Choose the best instrument for extraction of tooth 53:
a. Root bayonet forceps
b. Crown forceps with S-shaped handles
c. Beak-shaped root forceps
*d. Straight crown forceps
e. Straight elevator

229. A 15-year-old teenager came to a dentist with complaints of swollen upper lip, pain, general weakness, and fever of 38.5^oC) The swelling appeared 3 days ago after bursting a boil. Objectively, the patient has an edema of the upper lip and hyperemic skin. There is a dense infiltrate 1.0x2.0 cm in size. The infiltrate is painful to palpation and has a purulent scab in its center. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Dermoid cyst
*b. Furuncle of the upper lip
c. Upper lip abscess
d. Atheroma of the upper lip
e. Carbuncle of the upper lip

230. A 5-year-old girl complains of a cavity in her lower tooth. Objectively, her tooth 84 has a carious cavity within its mantle dentin. The mantle dentin can be easily removed in layers. Cold stimuli, probing, and percussion are painless. Preparation of the carious cavity is sensitive along the dentinoenamel junction. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
*c. Acute median caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Acute deep caries

231. A patient with non-generalized parodontitis, first degree, chronic course, presents with a decreased titer of secretory IgA in the oral fluid. What is most likely indicated by these findings?
*a. Decreased protective functions of the oral mucosa and an unfavorable course of the disease
b. Decreased activity of the inflammatory process in the periodontal tissues
c. Decreased level of the body's sensitization
d. Stabilization of the pathological process
e. Increased level of the body's non-specific resistance

232. A 33-year-old man complains of a fever of 37.5°С and pain in the area of the socket of tooth 47 that was extracted three days ago due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively, the following is observed: mucosa of the alveolar process in the area of the extracted tooth is edematous and hyperemic, the tooth socket is partially filled with food debris and necrotic masses and covered with a dirty-gray foul-smelling coating. Palpation of the alveolar process in this area is sharply painful. Submandibular lymph nodes on the right are enlarged, mobile, and painful. Moderate edema of the adjacent soft tissues is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of the mandible
b. Acute limited osteomyelitis of the mandible
c. Neuritis of the inferior alveolar nerve
*d. Dental alveolitis
e. Acute serous lymphadenitis

233. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complains of acute paroxysmal pain in his right lower jaw. The pain radiates to the ear and intensifies when a cold stimulus is applied. Six months ago this man had a severe pain in his tooth 46, but he made no appointment with a doctor. Three days ago the pain reappeared. Examination of the mesial surface of tooth 46 revealed a deep carious cavity filled with softened pigmented dentin. Probing is sharply painful at one point. In the area of the root apices of tooth 46, X-ray shows a widening of the periodontal fissure. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute limited pulpitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

234. A patient needs a removable full laminar denture for the upper jaw. Objectively on the mucosa of the denture bed there are numerous dense papillomas of varying size. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Removable dentures are contraindicated in this case
b. Make a 3D-model of the denture base
c. Make a denture base from metal
d. Reduce the area of the denture base
*e. Remove papillomas and make a denture with a double layered base lined with elastic material

235. What period of bite formation in a child can be normally characterized by physiological tremata and diastemata?
*a. Preparation for the change of dentition (4.5-6 years)
b. Permanent occlusion
c. Formation of milk occlusion (6 months - 3 years)
d. It is always a sign of pathology
e. Changing occlusion

236. A 49-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of his gums bleeding when he eats solid foods or brushes his teeth. The complaints arose several months ago. Objectively, his maxillary and mandibular gingiva is congestively hyperemic, epithelial attachment loss is 2-3 mm. X-ray shows uneven resorption of the alveolar processes of the jaws up to 1/3 of the dental root length. Make the diagnosis.
*a. Generalized parodontitis, I degree, chronic course
b. Generalized parodontitis, II degree, exacerbation
c. Generalized parodontitis, initial stage
d. Generalized parodontitis, II degree, chronic course
e. Generalized parodontitis, I degree, exacerbation

237. An 8-year-old girl complains of bleeding gums. The child has diabetes mellitus. Objectively the interdental papillae between the teeth of the upper and lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen, and cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height. The teeth exhibit mobility of the I degree. What investigation technique is necessary for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. PMA index
b. Rheoparodontography
c. Vacuum test
d. Stomatoscopy
*e. X-ray

238. A 60-year-old man has completely edentulous jaws. He has been using dentures for 15 years. Objectively, the lower third of the face is reduced, the alveolar processes of the upper and lower jaws are sharply atrophied, the palate is flat, the torus is pronounced. The mucosa of the prosthetic bed is thin, atrophied, and without a submucosal layer. What impression should be obtained in this case and what material must be used for this purpose?
a. Functional differentiated impression  obtained with repin
b. Functional compression impression  obtained with stens
c. Complete anatomical impressions  obtained with plaster
d. Complete anatomical impressions  obtained with stomalgin
*e. Functional decompression impression  obtained with dentaflex

239. A 49-year-old man was diagnosed with recurrence of lower lip cancer two years after he had undergone radiation therapy. Objectively in the area of his lower right lip there is a neoplasm 1x2 cm in size with an ulcer in its center. In the right submandibular area there are 2 round, enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes. What approach to the treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Wedge resection of the lower lip
b. Trapezial resection of the lower lip
*c. Combined treatment
d. Vanakh's operation
e. Rectangular resection of the lower lip

240. During teeth preparation without anesthesia, a 33-year-old patient suddenly developed dizziness, weakness, and nausea. Objectively, the patient presents with sudden facial pallor, slightly cyanotic lips, cold sticky sweat, and blood pressure of 80/50 mm Hg. What emergency condition developed in this case?
a. Angina pectoris
*b. Collapse
c. Unconsciousness
d. Myocardial infarction
e. Hypertensive crisis

241. After a car accident, a 42-year-old man was hospitalized. Examination detects an edema of the tissues in the middle face region, bilateral hemorrhages into the lower eyelids, open bite, mobility of the nasal bones, and a <<step sign>> along the lower edge of the both eye sockets and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest. Palpation of the oral cavity detects mobility of the upper jaw. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
c. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
d. Zygomatic fracture
e. Nasal fracture

242. A 64-year-old man undergoes fixation of a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. The dentist examined the denture base and noticed there a clearly visible ''marble pattern''. This net of white lines runs through the whole plastic base. What is the most likely cause of this defect?
a. Disturbed process of denture base polishing
b. Fractures in the denture base caused by mechanical damage
c. Foreign admixtures in the denture base
*d. Disturbed process of acrylic resin polymerization
e. Uneven moistening of acrylic resin with a monomer

243. A ceramic dental bridge is being made for a 38-year-old man. Vital teeth 33 and 35 are used as the abutment in this case. The patient is at the stage of tooth preparation. What type of anesthesia should he be provided?
*a. Conduction anesthesia
b. Inhalation anesthesia
c. Topical anesthesia
d. Infiltration anesthesia
e. Cooling anesthesia

244. A patient is undergoing a plastic surgery to correct a soft tissues defect of the face caused by a domestic injury. What appliances must be used in this case to make the bed for the denture that will be installed in the future?
a. Reponation appliances
b. Replacement appliances
*c. Formation appliances
d. Fixation appliances
e. Combined appliances

245. A 75-year-old man complains of poor fixation of his full removable denture for the lower jaw and food particles accumulating under the denture base. The lower third of his face is shortened. The alveolar processes are markedly atrophied. What anatomical structure of the lower jaw can be used for improvement of full removable denture fixation?
a. Vestibule of the oral cavity
*b. Retroalveolar space
c. Internal oblique line
d. Mucogingival fold
e. Mylohyoid ridge

246. During examination of a 5-year-old boy, the dentist detected a deep carious cavity communicating with the pulp chamber in tooth 84. Probing of the junction, thermal stimulation, and percussion of the tooth are painless. Gingival mucosa in the area of the root apices projection of tooth 84 is doughy and has a fistula scar. X-ray shows an irregularly-shaped focus of bone tissue destruction in the apical part of the distal root. Choose the optimal material for permanent obturation of the root canals of tooth 84.
a. Phenol-based material
*b. Zinc oxide and eugenol paste
c. Mineral trioxide aggregate material
d. Epoxy resin paste
e. Calcium hydroxide paste

247. The parents of a 7-year-old child complain that their child for the last 2 days has been presenting with body temperature of 38.8^oC and a sore throat. Objectively, catarrhal stomatitis is observed on the gums, cheeks, lips, and on the floor of the oral cavity. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. Bright-red catarrhal inflammation is present on the soft palate, tonsils, and palatine arches. The tongue is edematous, red, and dry. The skin of the face is hyperemic, except for the white nasolabial triangle. Make the diagnosis:
a. Measles
b. Pertussis
c. Chickenpox
*d. Scarlet fever
e. Infectious mononucleosis

248. A 43-year-old woman was provisionally diagnosed with generalized periodontitis. What examination will be the most informative for the assessment of the severity of her condition?
a. Schiller-Pisarev test
b. Determining the periodontal index
*c. Panoramic X-ray
d. Measuring the degree of tooth mobility
e. Measuring the depth of the periodontal pockets

249. During examination of schoolchildren, the orthodontist noticed that some of them present with strained orbicularis oris muscle. What dental appliance can be used for exercising of the orbicularis oris muscle?
a. Bruckl appliance
b. Frankel functional regulator III
c. Angle appliance
d. Andresen-Haupl activator appliance
*e. Dass activator appliance

250. A 6-year-old child was referred for extraction of the temporary lower central incisors due to changes in the occlusion. The teeth exhibit the III degree of mobility. What type of anesthesia would be optimal in this case?
a. Inhalation narcosis
*b. Application anesthesia
c. Infiltration anesthesia
d. Conduction anesthesia
e. Intraosseous anesthesia

251. A 42-year-old man complains of a whitish neoplasm that appeared on his lower lip and is painful and bleeding when the patient bites on it. The patient associates it with work outdoors and increased insolation. The patient has been smoking for approximately 15 years. Objectively, on the vermilion border of the lower lip, to the left from its center, there is a clearly demarkated polygonal area 0.5x1.0 cm in size. It does not protrude above the level of the vermilion border, is covered in small, tightly attached, grayish-white scales, and has a thin whitish border on its periphery. The surrounding area of the vermilion border has no signs of inflammation, the mucosa and skin of the lips are not affected. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Manganotti's abrasive precancerous cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Leukoplakia
*d. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

252. During the treatment of acute deep caries in 16 in an 18-year-old girl, the pulp chamber was accidentally perforated. Perforation is punctate and located in the area of a pulp horn. What treatment tactics would be advisable in this case?
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Biological approach
c. Devital amputation
d. Vital extirpation
e. Insulating inlay and permanent filling

253. A 36-year-old woman complains of a constant mild aching pain in her right lower jaw, observed during biting on tooth 45, as well. The pain appeared two days ago. Objectively, the masticatory surface of tooth 45 has a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the junction is painless, vertical percussion is positive. X-ray detects no pathological changes in the area of tooth 45. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute serous periostitis
d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

254. A 26-year-old woman needs dental prosthetics. Objectively the crown of 16 is destroyed by 1/3. Its anatomical shape will be restored with a porcelain inlay. Direct method is chosen for inlay-making. What should be used to obtain the impression of the formed inlay cavity?
*a. Gold or platinum foil
b. Silicone materials
c. Solid crystal materials
d. Wax
e. Thermoplastic materials

255. The mother of a 6-year-old girl complains of the child's body temperature increasing to 37.5°С and general weakness in her child. Examination revealed multiple sharply painful erosions 1-3 mm in diameter with a whitish coating on the mucosa of the lower lip, closer to its middle, against the background of hyperemia. Such rashes occur several times a year. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Shingles (herpes zoster)
*c. Recurrent herpetic stomatitis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

256. Before the extraction of tooth 28, the patient received tuberal and palatal anesthesia for pain relief, with 0.5 mL of Ubistesin-forte administered for this purpose. A few minutes after the administration of the drug, the patient became pale, a rash appeared on the skin of the patient's face and neck, the patient's breathing became difficult and consciousness became clouded. Blood pressure - 50/0 mm Hg, pulse - 100/min. What must be administered first to provide emergency aid for this patient?
a. Euphylline (Theophylline)
b. Calcium chloride
c. Dimedrol (Diphenhydramine)
*d. Adrenaline hydrochloride
e. Prednisolone

257. A 16-year-old girl came to a dental orthodontist with complaints of a loosened bracket on tooth 12. The bracket system was installed one week ago. Intraoral examination detects residual fixation material on tooth 12, the bracket is displaced and remains attached to the arch due to the ligature. What is the main active element of the bracket system?
a. Metal ligature
b. Orthodontic ring
c. Bracket
*d. Orthodontic archwire
e. Buccal tube

258. In the maxillofacial department a 6-month-old boy was hospitalized due to bleeding from a wound in the frenulum of his tongue. He has a medical history of frenulotomy the day before. The bleeding started 6 hours after the surgery. Suturing the wound was ineffective against the bleeding. The child was brought to the hematology department, where the bleeding was stopped by intravenous administration of coagulation factor IX concentrate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Iron-deficiency anemia
b. Willebrand disease
c. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
*d. Hemophilia B
e. Suppurated tongue wound

259. A 22-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a neoplasm that appeared on the mucosa of his lower lip one week ago and is slowly growing. Examination detects a soft and elastic, demarkated, translucent, painless formation up to 1 cm in diameter, located deep within the lower lip. The formation protrudes from the surface of the thinned-out mucosa and is attached to it. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Lipoma
b. Hemangioma
c. Papilloma
*d. Retention cyst
e. Glandular cheilitis

260. A 67-year-old man complains of poor fixation of his full removable laminar denture for the upper jaw. He has been using this denture for 7 years. Objectively the denture balances and is poorly fixed. What tactics should the doctor choose in this case?
*a. Make a new denture
b. Make elastic lining
c. Change the denture base
d. File the artificial teeth in the denture for better fit
e. Correct the denture

261. A 45-year-old man complains of painful and loose front teeth on his lower jaw. Objectively, teeth 41, 42, 31, and 32 have the III degree of mobility. Plans are made to remove these teeth and make a direct denture for this man. When should a direct denture be installed after the teeth extraction?
*a. On the day of the teeth extraction
b. 14 days after the teeth extraction
c. 1-2 days after the teeth extraction
d. 7 days after the teeth extraction
e. 3-4 days after the teeth extraction

262. Removable partial dentures for upper and lower teeth are being made for a 45-year-old man. Complete anatomical impressions were made using ''Ypeen'' alginate material. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
*a. 2.5% glutaraldehyde with рH- 7.0 - 8.7
b. Phenol solution in proportion 1:20
c. 0.1% desoxone solution
d. 6% hydrogen peroxide solution
e. -

263. A 14-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of a large cavity in her upper molar. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 26 there is a carious cavity within the parapulpar dentin, filled with dense pigmented dentin. Thermal test with a cold stimulus produces brief and weakly positive response. Percussion of tooth 26 is negative, tooth preparation is sensitive along the dentinoenamel junction. Probing of the cavity floor is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute deep caries

264. A 25-year-old man complains of incorrectly positioned maxillary left central incisor due to trauma sustained 2 months ago. Objectively tooth 21 is rotated around its axis into palatal position. What would be the most advisable treatment method for correction of this defect?
a. Surgical treatment
b. -
*c. Orthodontic treatment
d. Instrumental surgical treatment
e. Splinting followed by prosthetic treatment

265. A 45-year-old man after a tooth extraction carried out by a dentist complained of sudden weakness and intense bursting retrosternal pain that radiated under the left shoulder blade. Objectively, the patient has skin pallor, cyanosis of the lips, and the blood pressure of 90/60 mm Hg. The heart sounds are rhythmic and weakened, the pulse is thready. The pain did not decrease after the patient took nitroglycerin three times. What condition is developing in the patient?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Anaphylactic cardiogenic shock
c. Angina pectoris attack
d. Collapse
*e. Myocardial infarction

266. A 43-year-old patient complains of a sharp pulsing pain in the area of the right upper jaw. The pain appeared three days ago. Objectively, an inflamed round infiltration can be palpated on the vestibular surface of gingival mucosa of tooth 26, closer to the gingival margin. The tooth is intact, with II degree mobility. Its horizontal and vertical percussion is painful. Periodontal pockets are 4-5 mm deep. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*b. Periodontal abscess
c. Maxillary periostitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

267. The lateral incisors of a child are rotated around their axis by 45^o. Name this anomaly of tooth position:
a. Supraocclusion
b. Infraocclusion
*c. Tortoanomaly
d. Transposition
e. Dystopia

268. A 50-year-old man complains of gum discoloration, pain when eating spicy food, weakness, and irritability. He notes that periodically spots and vesicles appear on his skin. For a long time he has been working in the galvanic workshop of a factory. On examination the patient is pale, he has a gray-black border on his gums, and on his oral mucosa there are single erosions that are painful on palpation. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
*a. Lead salt poisoning
b. Mercury salt poisoning
c. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis (Vincent stomatitis)
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Acute leukemia

269. A 39-year-old woman complains of teeth mobility in her lower jaw. Objectively her dental formula is as follows: 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 / 21 22 23 24 25 26 27, 47 46 45 44 43 42 41/31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The teeth are intact, crowns are tall. Gingival pockets and mobility of the I and II degrees are observed in teeth 42 41/31 32. To immobilize the mobile teeth, a cap splint with fixed crowns was made for 43/33. What type of stabilization provides this splint?
a. Circumferential
b. Frontal-sagittal
c. Parasagittal
d. Sagittal
*e. Frontal

270. A 54-year-old patient is prescribed full cast porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridges for the upper and lower jaws. What type of impression material should be chosen in this case?
a. Thermoplastic
b. Plaster
*c. Silicone
d. Alginate
e. Zinc oxide eugenol

271. Examination of a 5-year-old child by a dentist detected multiple bright-yellow chalky dots that affect the enamel of most upper and lower teeth of the child. When dried, the spots becomes matte-colored and glossy. Treatment with 2% methylene blue solution produces no staining. The child lives in an area, where water fluorine content is 2.0 mg/L. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Dental fluorosis
b. Marble disease
c. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
d. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
e. Amelogenesis imperfecta

272. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with acute odontogenic mandibular periostitis on the right originating from tooth 74. What treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. Endodontic treatment of 74, pharmacotherapy
b. -
c. Periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
*d. Extraction of 74, periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
e. Endodontic treatment of 74, periosteotomy

273. The parents of a 5-month-old boy came to a dentist complaining that their child frequently cries, refuses to eat, has an increased body temperature of 37.3°С and his gums became red. Examination detected brightly hyperemic and edematous gums in the frontal area of the lower jaw, with bluish spots. What is the likely cause of the gingival inflammation in this case?
a. Scarlet fever
b. Herpetic infection
c. Acute candidiasis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
*e. Tooth eruption

274. A patient is diagnosed with mandibular ameloblastoma. What type of surgery is recommended for this patient?
a. Only conservative treatment
b. Cystectomy
*c. Mandibular resection at the distance of 1.5 cm from the lesion focus
d. Tumor cryodestruction
e. Tumor curettage within healthy tissue

275. A 46-year-old man, a teacher, complains of lower teeth mobility that impedes the process of biting. Objectively the dentition is uninterrupted, front teeth demonstrate the II degree of mobility. X-ray shows straight and filled root canals of 32, 31, 41, and 42. What appliance will stabilize front teeth while retaining their aesthetic appearance?
*a. Mamlok's dental splint
b. Semicrown splint
c. Splint with embrasure clasps
d. Removable segmented splint for the front teeth
e. Cap splint

276. A full removable laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for a mbox{69-year-old man. After obtaining a functional impression, the denture borders are being determined on the cast. Where should the posterior border of the full removable laminar denture for the upper jaw be located?
*a. Overlapping the line A by 1-2 mm
b. Overlapping the line A by 5-6 mm
c. -
d. Leaving 5-6 mm before the line A
e. Leaving 1-2 mm before the line A

277. A 13-year-old girl complains of tooth mobility. Objectively, her tooth crowns are of normal shape, size, and color. X-ray reveals significant shortening of the roots in all her teeth and obliteration of pulp chambers and root canals. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
b. Amelogenesis imperfecta
c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Osteogenesis imperfecta
*e. Dentinogenesis imperfecta

278. A removable partial denture has been made for the upper jaw of a 58-year-old man. During the assessment of its quality, small bubble pores were detected throughout the whole denture base. What has caused the formation of pores in this case?
a. Excessice plastic thickness
b. Use of expired plastic
*c. Rapid temperature increase during the  plastic polymerization
d. Rapid cooling of the cuvette after the  plastic polymerization
e. Insufficient plastic thickness

279. The parents of a 5-year-old girl came to an orthodontist complaining that their child constantly sucks the thumb of her right hand at night. What advice should be given to the parents in this case?
*a. Use a fixing elbow splint
b. Perform myogymnastic exercises for the  mandibular extensor muscles
c. Use a mandibular plate with a reverse  curve
d. Use a palatine plate with a reverse curve
e. Use a four-tailed bandage at night

280. Parents of a 6-year-old boy complain of deterioration of the child's general condition, fever of 38.0^oC, facial edema, and dry mouth. Objectively, the child's face is pear-shaped due to a dough-like soft tissue edema in the parotid regions, more on the right. Palpation of the parotid areas is painful. The skin is not discolored. A small amount of thick transparent saliva is being secreted from the ducts of the parotid glands. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
b. Phlegmon of the right parotid region
c. Mikulicz disease
d. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
*e. Acute epidemic parotitis

281. A 35-year-old man undergoes treatment for acute odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis conducted by a dental surgeon. To control the quality of treatment and determine further tactics, a control X-ray scan is planned. When after the onset of the disease can the first signs of bone destruction be detected on an X-ray scan?
a. In a week
b. In a month
*c. By the end of the 2nd week
d. In 2-3 days
e. In 4-5 days

282. A 50-year-old man complains of a formation 4 cm in size in the submandibular region. On palpation the neoplasm has homogeneous, soft, and elastic consistency, it is not fused with the skin or surrounding tissues. Its slow growth was observed for 3 years. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following condition:
a. Fibromyoma
b. Fibroma
c. Median cyst
*d. Lipoma
e. Migrating granuloma

283. A 47-year-old man underwent an unsuccessful conservative treatment of chronic granulating periodontitis of tooth 15. After that he was referred for the tooth extraction. What forceps should be used to extract this tooth?
a. S-shaped right-sided forceps
b. Bayonet forceps
*c. S-shaped forceps
d. Straight forceps
e. S-shaped left-sided forceps

284. After the complex examination of a 44-year-old man, the dentist made a diagnosis of generalized periodontitis, II degree, exacerbated progression. Lately the patient has been noticing a deterioration of his general condition, thirst, dryness in the oral cavity, itching skin. What additional examination needs to be performed first in this case?
a. Vitamin C levels in blood
b. Immunologic blood test
*c. Blood sugar levels
d. Complete comprehensive blood count
e. Blood iron levels

285. A 25-year-old patient has been diagnosed by a dentist with acute limited pulpitis of tooth 26. The treatment was carried out using the vital amputation method. What is necessary in this method of treating pulpitis?
*a. Removal of the crown pulp and preservation of the root pulp vitality
b. Removal of the crown pulp and root pulp under anesthesia
c. Removal of the crown pulp followed by the application of a mummifying paste to the opening of the root canals
d. Pulp extirpation from the accessible root canals and its mummification in the tooth canals that are difficult to access
e. Preservation of the vitality of crown pulp and root pulp

286. A 50-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his dental formula is as follows: 13 12 11/ 21 22 23, 33 32 31/ 41 42 43. The mounting of the diagnostic casts into a universal articulator using plaster is planned. What will allow the positioning of the occlusal plane in relation to the temporomandibular joint axes in the articulator?
a. Bite rims
b. Bite registrator
*c. Facial arch
d. Parallelometer
e. Silicone key

287. A 51-year-old woman complains of dry mouth, distorted sense of taste, and burning and tingling in the back and sides of her tongue, which disappears during eating, but intensifies in the evening. Such sensations first appeared one year ago after a mental trauma. Over time the sensations intensify. The woman suffers from anacid gastritis, diabetes mellitus, and disturbed sleep. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Glossodynia
b. Ganglionitis of the sublingual ganglia
c. Desquamative glossitis
d. Moeller-Hunter glossitis
e. Candidal glossitis

288. A 62-year-old man came to a dental orthopedist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 18, 17, 16, 15, 24, 25, 26 and 28 are missing, while teeth 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 and 27 are retained and stable. It is planned to make him a partial removable laminar denture for the upper jaw. What type of fixation would be optimal in this case?
a. Linear transverse fixation
b. Point fixation
c. Linear diagonal fixation
d. Linear sagittal fixation
*e. Planar fixation

289. A 36-year-old man complains of an ulcer on his lower left lip. Three weeks ago a smal round red spot appeared on his lip. Eventually it became more dense and noticeable and 2-3 days ago developed an ulcer in its center, while under the lower jaw appeared multiple painless nodules. Objectively on the mucosa of the lower left lip there is an oval ulcer, 1.2 cm in diameter, with smooth clear margins and bright-red glossy floor. Ulcer edges form a cushion that smoothly descends to the bottom of the ulcer. In the base of the ulcer there is a dense painless infiltration. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless, the skin over them remains unchanged. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following disease:
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Ulcerative cheilitis
*c. Syphilis (initial period)
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Lip cancer

290. A 47-year-old man complains of frequent recurrent jaw dislocations. Objectively, the teeth are retained and the molars are covered with artificial crowns. What treatment tactics should be chosen in this case?
a. Immobilization of the jaw with teeth ligation
*b. Restriction of the mouth opening, using the Petrosov appliance
c. Physiotherapy
d. Myogymnastics, physiotherapy
e. Restriction of the mouth opening, using the Schroeder appliance

291. A 70-year-old man with a completely edentulous lower jaw came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Examination detected slight and uniform atrophy of the alveolar process of the lower jaw, the points of attachment of the muscles and mucosal folds are located near the base of the alveolar process. What type of atrophy of the edentulous mandible is observed in this patient?
*a. Keller's type 1
b. Keller's type 3
c. Keller's type 4
d. Oxman's type 2
e. Keller's type 2

292. A 46-year-old man came to a dental clinic for a preventive examination. Objectively, his upper front teeth overlap his lower teeth by 3 mm. In the central occlusion, the mesial buccal cusp of the upper first molars is located between the mesial and distal buccal cusps of the lower first molars. What type of bite is it?
a. Prognathic
b. Open
c. Oblique
*d. Orthognathic
e. Direct

293. A 16-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of a carious cavity in her upper right tooth that accumulates food debris. Examination revealed a carious cavity with a wide opening in tooth 14. The dentin of the cavity floor and walls is dense and pigmented. Electric pulp testing - 4 microamperes. During the treatment, a pulp horn was accidentally exposed. What doctor's tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Vital extirpation of the pulp
b. Vital amputation of the pulp
*c. Application of odontotropic paste
d. Application of mummifying paste
e. Tooth extraction

294. A 28-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a cavity in her upper right tooth. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 16 there is a carious cavity with a wide opening. The cavity is located within the parapulpar dentin and filled with dense pigmented dentin. The carious cavity does not communicate with the dental cavity. Probing of the carious cavity walls and floor, cold stimulus, and percussion cause no pain. Electric pulp testing - 12 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
*b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

295. Preventive examination of a 6.5-year-old child revealed a carious cavity with a narrow entrance in the distolingual groove on the masticatory surface of tooth 46. The cavity floor is localized within the softened mantle dentin. Other areas of the fissure are intact. The dentist has chosen the method of preventive filling. What tactics is advisable regarding the intact areas of the fissure?
a. Invasive sealing
b. Applications with antiseptic lacquers
c. Applications with calcium-containing gels
d. Applications with fluoride-containing lacquers
*e. Non-invasive sealing

296. The parents of a 3-year-old child complain that their child refuses to eat and has painful rashes on the lips and fever of 38^oС. Examination detects 10 small vesicles with clear contents on the skin around the mouth. The mucosa of the lips has several round aphthae 1-3 mm in diameter. Acute catarrhal gingivitis and submandibular lymphadenitis are observed. What medicines should be used for etiotropic treatment in this case?
a. Antifungal agents
b. Hyposensitization agents
*c. Antiviral agents
d. Antibiotics
e. Anti-inflammatory agents

297. After a trauma, a man has developed complaints of displaced tooth 32 and pain that intensifies when he bites food. Examination shows edema of the lower lip and mucosal hematoma in the area of tooth 32. Tooth 32 has the I degree of mobility and a slight sagittal displacement. X-ray shows a widening of the periodontal fissure. Make the diagnosis:
a. Root fracture of tooth 32
b. Impacted dislocation of tooth 32
c. Contusion of tooth 32
d. Complete dislocation of tooth 32
*e. Incomplete dislocation of tooth 32

298. A 6-year-old child complains of food retention in a tooth on the lower jaw. Objectively, in tooth 75 on its masticatory surface within mantle dentin there is a carious cavity with a wide opening. The dentin of the cavity walls and floor is dense and pigmented. Probing of the carious cavity and percussion of the tooth are painless. Thermal stimuli provoke no response. Mucosa in the area of tooth 75 is without pathologic changes. The child belongs to health group I. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic superficial caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Chronic median caries

299. How often should the dentures be replaced in children during the period of milk occlusion according to Ilyina-Markosian?
a. Every 16 months
b. Every 8-10 months
c. Every 10-12 months
d. Every 12-16 months
*e. Every 6-8 months

300. A patient complains of a painless neoplasm on the lower lip, which appeared 2 weeks ago after an injury. Objectively, there is a painless dense spherical translucent neoplasm approximately 5 mm in diameter, with clear margins and signs of fluctuation. The mucosa around this formation is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Retention cyst of the salivary gland
b. Decubital ulcer
c. Fibrous epulis
d. Angiomatous epulis
e. Trophic ulcer

301. When treating chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 21, a dentist performed instrumental processing of the dental root canal using the apex-to-crown step-back technique. After the processing was complete, ledges formed on the walls of the root canal. What endodontic instrument must be used to smooth-out these ledges?
a. Flexofile
b. K-reamer
c. K-file
d. Gates Glidden
*e. H-file

302. Tooth 21 of a 25-year-old woman is being restored with a zirconium dioxide-based crown fixed on an implant. After installation of the individual abutment, the distance between the abutment and its antagonist is being measured. What minimum distance must be observed in this case?
a. 3.0 mm
b. 1.0 mm
*c. 1.5 mm
d. 2.0 mm
e. 0.5 mm

303. A 50-year-old man was diagnosed with sialolithiasis with the salivary gland stone located deep within the salivary gland. Choose the optimal treatment tactics:
a. Sclerotherapy
*b. Submandibular gland excision
c. Radiation therapy
d. Removal of the sialolith while retaining the gland
e. Conservative pharmacotherapy

304. An 8-year-old boy complains of toothache during eating. Objectively, the proximal surface of tooth 55 has a deep carious cavity that communicates with the dental cavity. Probing of the communication point  is sharply painful. Moderate bleeding is observed. Tooth percussion is painless. What paste must be applied during the first visit to a dentist?
a. Arsenic
b. Thymol
c. Calcium-containing
*d. Paraformaldehyde
e. Resorcinol-formaldehyde

305. A patient complains of carious cavity in tooth 11. The filling was lost one week ago. The tooth crown is dark, there is residual filling material at the bottom of the carious cavity. Vertical percussion is painless. X-ray shows an oval area of bone tissue resorption with clear margins, 0.4х0.3 cm in size. The root canal is filled by 2/3 of its length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Radicular cyst

306. Removable partial dentures for both jaws are being made for a 70-year-old man. To make diagnostic models, alginate impressions of both jaws need to be obtained. To prepare the alginate mass, the doctor mixes the powder with water in a rubber flask. Within what interval should the doctor apply the impression mass to the tray and place the tray in the patient's oral cavity?
a. Over 10 minutes
b. Less than 1 minute
*c. 3-5 minutes
d. Less than 3 minutes
e. 5-10 minutes

307. A 60-year-old patient came to the maxillofacial inpatient department. He complains of pain, bleeding, and chewing problems. He has a history of mandibular trauma at the level of the central incisors. Objectively the traumatized place is swollen, mouth opening is unrestricted. He was diagnosed with medial mandibular fracture. Both jaws are edentulous. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Gunning gingival splint
b. Limberg gingival splint
c. Rudko appliance
*d. Port gingival splint
e. Vankevych dentogingival splint

308. A dentist uses a 4% articaine solution to administer anesthesia for the extraction of tooth 38. What maximum single dose of anesthetic can be administered to the patient?
a. 200 mg
b. 600 mg
*c. 500 mg
d. 100 mg
e. 1000 mg

309. An 11-year-old child has a thickening in the frontal region of the lower jaw that appeared after the child fell down. The trauma occurred one month ago. Objectively, on the lower jaw, in the area of the mucogingival junction, there is a circumscribed dense spot with smooth surface that is slightly painful on palpation. The teeth in the pathologic focus are intact and vital. X-ray detects an osteoporotic focus with thickened periosteum in the frontal region of the lower jaw. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Osteitis deformans
*b. Rarefying periostitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic osteomyelitis, destructive- productive form
e. Chronic osteomyelitis, destructive form

310. A 4-year-old practically healthy child came for oral cavity sanation. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 75 there is a carious cavity within mantle dentin. The cavity is filled with softened dentin. Dentinoenamel junction is painful on probing. What material would be optimal for permanent filling?
a. Phosphate cement
b. Silicate cement
c. Composite material
d. Silicophosphate cement
*e. Glass ionomer cement

311. A 63-year-old man is referred for the extraction of his tooth 36 due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively, the crown of the tooth is destroyed by 1/2. What forceps should be used in this case?
*a. Beak-shaped forceps curved along the  edge with a spike
b. Bayonet forceps
c. Beak-shaped forceps curved along the  edge without a spike
d. S-shaped left-sided forceps
e. Beak-shaped forceps curved in a plane

312. A 22-year-old woman came to a dentist for preventive examination of her oral cavity. Examination detected a defect of hard dental tissues in the cervical area of tooth 22 within its mantle dentin. The dentin is dense and pigmented. Percussion and probing provoke no response. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Enamel erosion
c. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

313. A 46-year-old woman complains of bleeding gums, suppuration, teeth mobility. She has been presenting with these signs for 10 years. On examination her upper and lower gums are hyperemic, swollen, bleed on touch. In the area of 42, 41, 31, and 32 periodontal pockets are up to 8 mm deep, contain purulent discharge; these teeth demonstrate mobility of the II degree, other teeth present with mobility of the I degree. In the area of 42, 41, 31, and 32 X-ray shows interalveolar septa resorption by 1/2 of the root length and signs of osteoporosis. What is the most advisable method of surgical treatment in this case?
a. Gingivectomy
b. Flap surgery
c. Gingivotomy
*d. Osteoplasty
e. Curettage

314. A 50-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of deteriorated fixation of her partial removable laminar denture for the upper jaw that she has been using for 3 months. Objectively, the alveolar process in the edentulous areas is atrophied, but the base of the denture corresponds with the prosthetic bed, the denture balances. What tactics should the doctor choose in this case?
a. Making a new denture
b. Reduction of the denture base
c. Changing the denture base
d. Making a denture with an elastic lining
*e. Activation of the retaining clasps  (clammers)

315. A patient has been diagnosed with a unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was carried out by applying a two-jaw dental wire splint with hook loops and an interjaw elastic band. The fracture is healing without complications. After what period of time should the splint be removed?
a. 7 days
*b. 3 weeks
c. 2 weeks
d. 1 month
e. 10 days

316. A 20-year-old woman complains of pain in the area of tooth 38. The pain increases during swallowing and opening her mouth wide. Objectively, the crown of tooth 38 is partially covered in mucosa, from under which a purulent exudate is being discharged. Palpation is painful. The mucosa over tooth 38 is hyperemic and swollen. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute serous periostitis
b. Acute ulcerative pericoronitis
c. Acute suppurative periostitis
*d. Acute suppurative pericoronitis
e. Acute catarrhal pericoronitis

317. A 14-year-old child complains of bleeding and pain in the lower right molar during eating. Objectively, on the mesial and masticatory surfaces of tooth 46 there is a carious cavity filled with red tissue. Its superficial probing resuts in pain and moderate bleeding, while deeper probing causes sharp pain. Tooth percussion is painless. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic papillitis
*c. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

318. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 46, 47, 48 are missing. The edentulous part of the alveolar process is significantly atrophied. The antagonist teeth are intact, with well-defined cusps. A decision was made to make him porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns supported by intraosseous implants. What can prevent occlusal overload of implants?
a. Removing the crowns from the occlusion
b. Reducing the height of the crowns
c. Reducing the height of the cusps of antagonist teeth
*d. Reducing the width of the crowns
e. Deepening the fissures on the crowns

319. The parents of a 3-year-old girl complain of the mobility of the child's teeth. Objectively, her teeth are mobile; the gingival papillae are edematous and cyanotic; there are pathological pockets with purulent discharge. Skin keratinization is increased, especially on the child's palms and soles of the feet. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Niemann-Pick disease
b. Gaucher disease
c. Takahara disease
*d. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
e. Taratinov disease

320. A 40-year-old serviceman came to the orthopedic dentistry department with complaints of dull intermittent aching pain in his left temporomandibular joint, its morning stiffness and creaking. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, the distance between the cutting edges of the central incisors during the maximum opening of the mouth is 2.5 cm. During movements of the lower jaw, joint noise and clicking are observed. Skin over the joint has no visible changes. X-ray shows deformation of the articular surfaces of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pain dysfunction of the left  temporomandibular joint
*b. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Acute arthritis of the left  temporomandibular joint
d. Bone ankylosis of the left  temporomandibular joint
e. Mandibular subluxation

321. A patient with ischemic heart disease and exertional angina pectoris complains of a sudden constricting retrosternal pain that lasts for over 30 minutes and irradiates to the left arm. The pain occurred during a physical exertion. The pain attack did not stop after the patient had taken 3 tablets of nitroglycerine. On examination, the skin is pale gray, moist, and cold to touch; the facial features are sharp; acrocyanosis is observed; pulse is 102/min., arrhythmic; blood pressure is 90/40 mm Hg. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Hypotension
c. Stable angina pectoris
d. Angina pectoris attack
e. Cardialgia

322. A 29-year-old man with diabetes mellitus developed a short-term agitation after injecting 30 IU of insulin, after which he lost his consciousness. What emergency condition has likely developed in this case?
a. Stroke
b. Ketoacidotic coma
c. Hyperglycemic coma
*d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Myocardial infarction

323. On the 7 day after an abdominal surgery, a 69-year-old man has developed pain and swelling in the area of his left parotid gland. His body temperature is 39^oC, his mouth is dry. Massage of the salivary gland produces purulent exudate from the excretory duct. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute mumps
b. Phlegmon of the parotid-masseteric region
c. Herzenberg parotitis
d. Phlegmon of the submassseteric region
*e. Acute non-epidemic parotitis

324. A 72-year-old patient came to a dentist complaining of insufficient fixation of a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. The denture was made one month ago. Objectively, the edge of the denture in the area of the maxillary labial frenulum is shortened, the peripheral seal is broken. What should be done in this case to improve the denture fixation?
*a. Make a new denture
b. Widen the edges of the denture base
c. Correct and polish the edges of the denture base
d. Perform three-dimensional modeling of the denture base
e. Correct the occlusal plane of the denture

325. A 38-year-old man needs to have his 12 tooth extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used in this case?
*a. Infraorbital and incisor
b. Infraorbital and palatal
c. Infraorbital, palatal and incisor
d. Incisor
e. Infraorbital

326. After the extraction of tooth 38, the patient developed bleeding from the tooth socket. The dentist performed tamponade of the socket, but 20 minutes later, the socket is still bleeding. What should the doctor do in this case?
a. Perform tamponade of the socket again
*b. Suture the socket
c. Finish the visit, give advice to the patient about properly taking care of the tooth socket
d. Refer the patient to the inpatient department
e. Refer the patient to a hematologist for a consultation

327. A porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge with teeth 21 and 13 as the abutment is being made for a 35-year-old woman. What type of intermediate part must be modeled in the denture by a dental technician in relation to the mucosa of the alveolar process?
a. Flushing
b. Saddle-shaped
c. Combined
d. Arbitrary-shaped
*e. Contact

328. A patient undergoes fitting of the frame of a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge with abutment teeth 24 and 27. What should be the minimum thickness of the cobalt-chrome alloy metal cap, if an abutment porcelain-fused-to-metal crown is being made?
*a. 0.3 mm
b. 0.4 mm
c. 0.5 mm
d. 0.8 mm
e. 0.1 mm

329. A 30-year-old man complains of aching toothache that radiates to the ear and intensifies when he eats hot or cold foods. Previously, spontaneous night pain was observed in this tooth. Objectively, tooth 37 has a deep carious cavity on its masticatory surface. The carious cavity communicates with the dental cavity at one point. The response to probing at the communication point and to cold stimuli is sharply painful, with pain not subsiding for a long time. Electric pulp testing - 55 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Chronic concrementous pulpitis

330. A regular check-up of a 7-year-old girl detected smooth chalk-like spots on the vestibular surface of her upper central incisors, closer to their cutting edge. The surface of the spots does not stain with methylene blue. At the age of 4, the child had a trauma of teeth 51 and 61. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Hyperplasia
*b. Local hypoplasia
c. Acute superficial caries
d. Systemic hypoplasia
e. Caries at the spot stage

331. A 30-year-old man complains of pain, heavy and bursting sensation in the right half of his face, nasal congestion on the right, and general weakness. One week before, he was suffering from a severe pain in his tooth 15. Objectively, his face is somewhat asymmetrical due to a swelling of the infraorbital and buccal regions on the right. The crown of tooth 15 is destroyed by 2/3, its percussion is sharply painful. Survey X-ray shows a shadow of varying intensity in the right maxillary sinus. The root apex of tooth 15 exhibits signs of chronic periodontitis. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis  originating from tooth 15
*b. Acute right-sided odontogenic maxillary sinusitis originating from tooth 15
c. Chronic right-sided odontogenic  maxillary sinusitis originating from tooth 15
d. Odontogenic right-sided phlegmon of the infraorbital region originating from tooth 15
e. Odontogenic right-sided phlegmon of the buccal region originating from tooth 15

332. A 24-year-old woman complains of a constant increasing pain in her lower right tooth that intensifies on biting. Objectively in her tooth 46 there is a carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity, percussion is mildly painful, probing of cavity walls and floor is painless. X-ray imaging shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute local pulpitis

333. To treat crowded teeth of a 9-year-old girl, the Hotz method of systemic tooth extraction was proposed. Why was this method of treatment chosen by the doctor?
*a. Size mismatch of teeth and jaws
b. Elongation of the anterior portion of the dental arch
c. Supernumerary teeth
d. Jaw size mismatch
e. Narrowing of the jaws

334. A 7-year-old girl complains of a neoplasm on her lower lip. The neoplasm appeared 3 months ago and has been slowly growing since then. Objectively on the mucosa of the lower right lip there is a round neoplasm 0.5-1 cm in diameter. It protrudes from the mucosa, has smooth surface, and its clear bluish content is visible through its walls. On palpation it is painless and elastic. Make the clinical diagnosis:
a. Fibroma of the lower lip
b. Papilloma of the lower lip
c. Lymphangioma of the lower lip
*d. Retention cyst of the lower lip
e. Hemangioma of the lower lip

335. A 71-year-old man came to a dental orthopedist to have a denture made for him. During examination, the dentist noticed that the mucosa that covers the palate and the alveolar processes was worn thin and barely pliant. What Supple class is it?
a. Fourth
b. First
c. Third
*d. Second
e. -

336. A 28-year-old patient complains of aesthetical defect. Objectively the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 are destroyed by caries by over 2/3 of their heights. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. X-ray shows the root canals of these teeth to be completely filled; no pathologic changes detected in the periapical tissues. What approach to teeth restoration would be optimal in this case?
a. Crown restoration with photopolymer fillings
b. Immediate denture with posts
c. Combined swaged crowns, made in Borodiuk technique
*d. Stump inlays and porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns
e. Plastic-faced stump inlays

337. A 42-year-old woman complains of a swelling and pus discharge from a fistula in her left parotid region and limited mouth opening, observed for three months. Six months ago, her tooth 38 was extracted due to its long-term chronic inflammation. Objectively, there is a facial asymmetry due to a cyanotic and dense (<<wooden>>) infiltration in the left parotid region. The infiltration has two fistulas: granulations protrude from one of them, while the other discharges liquid yellowish crumb-like pus. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Herzenberg parotitis
b. Chronic diffuse osteomyelitis of the  gonial angle and mandibular ramus
c. Odontogenic subcutaneous granuloma of the parotid region
d. -
*e. Actinomycosis of the parotid region,  musculocutaneous form

338. A 47-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a growth on his lower lip that appeared one month ago. Apart from its inaesthetic appearance, it causes the patient no discomfort. Objectively, against the background of visually unchanged vermilion border of the lower lip, there is a formation (diameter - 6 mm, height - 3 mm) with a bumpy bluish-red surface, covered in grayish scales. The formation is moderately dense and painless to palpation. It has no infiltrate in ist base or on the periphery. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Cancer of the lower lip
b. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis
*c. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion  border
d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Pyogenic granuloma

339. The parents of a 6-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints that their child has a swelling in the right parotid-masticatory region, dry mouth, and fever of 37.6^oC) Similar complaints took place about 6 months ago. Objectively, there is a lumpy and mildly painful infiltrate in the child's right parotid-masticatory region. The child's saliva is viscous. A small amount of secretion with whitish inclusions is being produced from the duct of the right salivary gland. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
b. Acute purulent parotitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
d. Mixed salivary gland tumor
e. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis

340. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic granulomatous periodontitis of tooth 21. The doctor decided to perform the root apex resection. What filling material is optimal for hermetic isolation of the root canal?
a. Resorcinol-formalin paste
b. Glass-ionomer cement
c. Zinc eugenol material and gutta-percha
d. Epoxy resin and gutta-percha
*e. Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA)

341. Examination by a dentist of an 8-year-old girl detected enamel defects that look like spots and grooves. The defects are located on the upper and lower incisors parallel to the cutting edge and on the masticatory surfaces of teeth 16, 26, 36, 46. The child has a history of severe toxic dyspepsia at the age of 9 months. Make the provisional diagnosis.
*a. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
b. Amelogenesis imperfecta
c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel erosion
e. Fluorosis

342. After the atypical extraction of tooth 38, the patient developed numbness in the left half of her tongue and pain attacks that resemble electrocution in the left lower jaw. The socket undergoes epithelialization after the tooth extraction. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Glossodynia
b. Trigeminal neuralgia
c. Dental plexalgia
d. Glossopharyngeal neuropathy
*e. Trigeminal neuritis

343. Missing tooth 12 of a 35-year-old man is being restored with a ceramic crown fixed on a zirconium dioxide implant. What cement should be used to fix the crown in this case?
a. Phosphate
b. Silicate
*c. Composite
d. Polycarboxylate
e. Glass ionomer

344. A child born with cleft palate needs an obturator. What is the optimal age for installing a palatal obturator in this case?
*a. The first days after birth
b. 5-6 years
c. 3-4 years
d. 1.5 years
e. 1 year

345. A 2.5-year-old child is fussy and refuses to eat because of pain in the mouth that lasts for several days already. The body temperature is 37.2^oC) The child has pneumonia and is being treated in an inpatient department. Objectively, on the hyperemic and edematous mucosa of the cheeks, palate, and tongue, there is a white film that can be easily removed, with the formation of erosions in some areas. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*b. Acute candidal stomatitis
c. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
d. Mild leukoplakia
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

346. A patient diagnosed with phlegmon of the root of the tongue has been hospitalized into the maxillofacial surgery department. What incision would be optimal for creating a surgical access during treatment of phlegmon of the root of the tongue?
a. Collar-like
b. Near the gonial angle
c. Submandibular
d. Intraoral
*e. Midline

347. A 28-year-old woman came to the dentist for oral cavity sanation. She was diagnosed with acute deep caries of tooth 24. She has a history of seasonal allergic rhinitis and drug allergy that manifests as a skin rash and Quincke edema. She does not remember whether she has been given local anesthesia at the dentist's office previously. What tactics should the dentist choose regarding the anesthesia in this case?
*a. Referral to the allergologist for consultation and anesthetic allergy testing
b. Perform an anesthetic scratch test in the dental chair immediately before giving anesthesia
c. Use amide local anesthetic
d. Use ether anesthetic
e. Perform a cutaneous anesthetic allergy test in the dental chair immediately before giving anesthesia

348. An 80-year-old man needs a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. How should the denture boder be located relative to the natural teeth?
a. Covers the crowns by 1/3 of their height
b. Located below dental cervices
c. Reaches dental cervices
*d. Covers the crowns by 2/3 of their height
e. Fully covers the crowns

349. A 30-year-old man presents with fresh median mandibular fracture without visible displacement of the fragments. What will be the function of the dental apparatus to be prescribed in this case?
a. Replacement
b. Setting
*c. Fixation
d. Directing
e. Formation

350. A 54-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of difficulty chewing food due to partial loss of teeth. After an examination, it was decided to make him a bugel (clasp) denture with mandibular fixation using clasps (clammers) with an occlusal overlay and two long T-shaped arms. What type of clasp is it according to the Ney classification?
a. Fourth
b. Third
c. First
*d. Second
e. Fifth

351. A 60-year-old man with completely edentulous upper and lower jaws complains of pain in his lower right jaw. The pain developed after an injury on the day before. Objectively, the lower jaw is slightly swollen in its right mental region, the mouth opening is not restricted. X-ray shows a right-sided non-displaced mandibular fracture in the area of the mental foramen. What splint must be used in this case?
a. Tigerstedt splint
b. Vankevych splint
*c. Port splint
d. Vasiliev splint
e. Weber splint

352. A 34-year-old woman complains of a short-lasting pain response to thermal stimuli in teeth 34 and 35. Objectively, the surfaces of teeth 34 and 35 are intact; the contat surfaces cannot be examined due to tight placement of the teeth. What examination method would be the most informative in this case, if the presence of a carious cavity is suspected?
*a. Diagnostic X-ray
b. Probing
c. Tomography
d. Electric pulp testing
e. Percussion

353. A 47-year-old woman complains of an itching sensation in her gums and increased teeth sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively, the roots of most of her teeth are exposed to 1/3 of their length, the gums are pale pink, no periodontal pockets. X-ray shows osteosclerosis of the alveolar process bone tissue, disturbed intactness of the lamina dura on the apices of the interdental septa. The patient was diagnosed with initial periodontosis. What should be prescribed in this case for local treatment of the systemic dental hyperesthesia?
*a. Desensitizers
b. Keratolytics
c. Anesthetics
d. Antiseptics
e. Keratoplastics

354. What is the angle of the transverse articular path in a fixed (average) anatomical articulator?
a. 12°
b. 110°
c. 33°
*d. 17°
e. 45°

355. The patient with shallow vestibule of mouth and edentulous mandible underwent a surgery: a mucoperiosteal flap was relocated from the alveolar ridge to the body of the mandible and fixed with denture acting as a bandage. What surgical procedure was used for vestibular deepening?
a. Trauner
b. Thiersch
c. Kazanjian
d. Rhermann
*e. Rumpel

356. A 37-year-old woman complains of a white formation on the mucosa of her upper lip. The formation was noticed accidentally. Objectively, on the teeth of her lower jaw there are 2 dental bridges, the crown of tooth 21 is half-destroyed, the tooth is untreated. In the projection of tooth 21 on the labial mucosa, there is an irregularly-shaped white plaque 4x9 mm in size with clear margins. The plaque is slightly raised above the mucosa, cannot be scraped off, painless, and without an infiltration in its base. The regional lymph nodes cannot be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Candidal cheilitis
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Secondary syphilis
*d. Leukoplakia
e. Lichen ruber planus

357. A complete removable laminar denture needs to be made for the lower jaw of an 82-year-old man. Slight atrophy of the alveolar process is observed. At the stage of fitting a custom tray using the Herbst method, it falls off when the tip of the tongue touches the left cheek with the mouth half closed. Name the area where the edge of the tray should be shortened.
*a. At the distance of 1 cm from the midline on the sublingual edge of the tray on the right
b. Near the lingual frenulum
c. Along the mylohyoid line on the left
d. At the distance of 1 cm from the midline on the sublingual edge of the tray on the left
e. From canine to canine on the vestibular side

358. A 27-year-old woman needs a denture. Objectively, her tooth 15 is missing, while teeth 14 and 16 are intact. What denture is preferable in this case?
*a. Adhesive dental bridge
b. Clasp (bugel) denture
c. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge
d. Swaged dental bridge
e. Partial removable laminar denture

359. A 24-year-old young man was very worried before an appointment with a dentist. He developed ringing in his ears, dizziness, pale skin, darkened vision, weak and rapid pulse, and blood pressure of 100/70 mm Hg. His breathing is slow and shallow. The pupils are dilated. The patient has lost his consciousness for about a minute. What condition can be suspected in this case?
a. Epileptic seizure
*b. Fainting
c. Hypertensive crisis
d. Collapse
e. Anaphylactic shock

360. While waiting in line for an appointment with a dentist, a 48-year-old woman was stung in the neck by a bee. The bee sting caused a sharp symmetrical facial edema, bronchospasm, skin redness, and urticaria in this woman. What emergency condition developed in this case?
a. Collapse
*b. Quincke edema
c. Epileptic seizure
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Aseptic shock

361. A 35-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in the body of the lower jaw on the left. Objectively, he has a facial swelling on the left, hematoma, intact dentition, and no displacement of the fragments. Palpation is painful. Bimanual examination detects pathological mobility of the mandible in the area of teeth 35 and 36. What method of treatment must be used in this case?
a. Elastic Angle arch for the lower jaw
b. Pharmacological treatment
c. Betelman appliance
*d. Aluminum splints with hooks and  maxillomandibular traction
e. Vankevich appliance

362. A patient undergoes endodontic treatment of tooth 11. The doctor has performed instrumental treatment of the root canal. The method of warm vertical condensation of gutta-percha was chosen for the canal sealing. What instrument must be used for the filler condensing in this case?
*a. Plugger
b. Spreader
c. K-file
d. Gutta-percha condenser
e. Root needle

363. A clasp (bugel) denture is being made by a dentist for a 58-year-old patient with a defect of the lower dentition. When planning the design of the clasps (clammers), their rigid elements were placed in the zone between the occlusal surface and the boundary (survey) line of the abutment tooth. In what zone should the supporting part of the supporting and retaining clasp be located?
*a. Occlusal zone
b. Gingival zone
c. Neutral zone
d. Seal zone
e. Retaining zone

364. A 43-year-old man complains of an intense unbearable pain in the area of the upper jaw; his general condition has been disturbed for 5 days. Objectively, his face is asymmetrical due to a swelling of the buccal and zygomatic regions. In the oral cavity, tooth 26 is destroyed, mucosa of the alveolar bone is hyperemic and edematous; there is a cuff-shaped thickening of the alveolar bone in the area of teeth 25, 26, 27; teeth 25, 26, and 27 exhibit I degree mobility. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Odontogenic buccal abscess
*b. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
c. Odontogenic palatal abscess
d. Odontogenic zygomatic abscess
e. Acute odontogenic maxillary periostitis

365. Removable complete dentures are being made for the both jaws of a 68-year-old woman. Objectively, the alveolar processes are slightly atrophied, the mucosa is moderately pliant. Anatomical impressions are obtained. What is the next stage of denture-making in this case?
a. Making of wax bases with bite blocks
b. Checking the denture construction
c. Measuring the centric relation between the jaws
*d. Making of individual impression trays
e. Obtaining the functional impressions

366. A 50-year-old woman with compensated insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus needs dental prosthetics. She has been in a clinic for several hours already, during which she was nervous and skipped her meals. In the process of obtaining her dental impressions, she suddenly became aggressive, paled, broke out in cold sweat, and fell unconscious. What substance is used for emergency aid in such clinical situations?
a. Nitroglycerine
b. Insulin
c. Ammonia solution
d. Valocordin
*e. Glucose solution

367. A victim of a traffic accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. What measures should be taken to prevent complications in this case?
*a. Fixation of the lower jaw and tongue with standard Entin's head-chin strap
b. Removal of foreign bodies from the oral cavity
c. Fixation of the tongue to the patient's collar
d. Tracheostomy and artificial pulmonary ventilation
e. Excision of injured mucosal flaps

368. After extraction of tooth 46, a 41-year-old man noticed a dark defect on the distal contact surface of tooth 45. The defect is limited to the enamel, has blurred margins and dark brown color. The affected tissue crumbles when probed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries, Black class IV
b. Chronic initial caries, Black class II
*c. Chronic superficial caries, Black class II
d. Chronic superficial caries, Black class IV
e. Chronic initial caries, Black class IV

369. A 24-year-old man needs to have his tooth 47 extracted due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. What is the optimal method of peripheral conduction anesthesia in this case?
*a. Torusal anesthesia
b. Infiltration anesthesia
c. Mental anesthesia
d. Plexus anesthesia
e. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia

370. A 29-year-old woman complains of itching, burning, and pain in the vermilion border of her lips. These signs appear in spring and summer, and disappear during other seasons. The onset of the disease was 5 years ago. Objectively, the vermilion border of the lower lip is hyperemic and edematous. It has isolated fissures and small vesicles and erosions up to 3 mm in diameter, covered in scabs that are painful to the touch. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form
b. Erosive lupus erythematosus of the  vermilion border
c. Acute eczematous cheilitis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
e. Meteorological cheilitis

371. A 45-year-old woman diagnosed with thrombophlebitis of the angular vein of the face developed exophthalmos. What does this symptom indicate?
a. Development of purulent meningitis as a complication of thrombophlebitis
b. Development of periphlebitis
*c. Spread of the inflammatory process into the retrobulbar fat
d. Spread of the inflammatory process into the pterygopalatine fossa
e. Suppuration of the angular vein of the face

372. A 12-year-old boy complains of constant intense throbbing toothache, aggravated by biting on the affected tooth. The pain appeared 4 days ago. Objectively, submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful to palpation; tooth 26 has a deep carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity. Thermal stimulation and probing of the cavity floor are painless, percussion is sharply painful, the tooth is mobile, the mucosa in the area of tooth 26 is hyperemic and edematous. During the necrectomy, the dental cavity was opened and a drop of exudate was obtained. X-ray shows no pathological changes in tooth 26. What is the most likely diagnosis in this   case?
a. Acute odontogenic periostitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
*e. Acute purulent periodontitis

373. A 12-year-old girl complains of pain in her lower front tooth during eating sweet foods. Objectively, her tooth 32 has a Black's class IV carious cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing of the carious cavity in the area of the dentinoenamel junction provokes pain. Choose the optimal material for the cavity filling.
a. Compomer
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Chemically-cured composite
d. Silicate cement
*e. Light-cured composite

374. A 49-year-old man complains of progressing reduction of mouth opening, pain on the left when swallowing, severe deterioration of his general well-being, temperature increase up to 39.3^oC) Destroyed tooth 38 presents with acute pain. Objectively the face is symmetrical, the submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painful on palpation. Palpation under the left mandibular angle and in the the left retromandibular area provokes sharp pain. Mouth opening and movement of the mandible to the left are significantly reduced. The left pterygomandibular fold is hyperemic and infiltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of the retromandibular area
b. Phlegmon of the parapharyngeal space
c. Abscess of the sublingual fossa
*d. Phlegmon of the pterygomandibular space
e. Phlegmon of the submandibular space

375. After a blow to the temporomandibular joint the patient developed facial hematoma, the joint is difficult to move, mandibular mobility is reduced. Attempts to open the mouth wide are painful. What examination should be performed to make the diagnosis?
a. X-ray and consultation with the neurologist
b. Rheoencephalography and consultation with the neurologist
c. Limit the joint mobility
d. Panoramic dental X-ray
*e. Bilateral X-ray of the temporomandibular joint with mouth open and closed

376. A 12-year-old child presents with temperature 38^oC, chills, nausea, vomiting, delirium, and weakness. On the middle third of the face there is hyperemia in a butterfly-shaped pattern. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and mildly painful. In blood: leukocytes - 12cdot10^9/L, lymphocytes - 8.0cdot10^9/L, ESR- 26 mm/hour. What diagnosis should be made?
a. Acute non-odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
b. Streptoderma, submandibular lymphadenopathy
*c. Erysipelatous inflammation
d. Facial vein thrombophlebitis
e. Cutaneous actinomycosis

377. During examination of an 8-year-old girl, a dentist detected a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 that communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the junction, thermal stimulation, and percussion of the tooth are painless. Gingival mucosa in the projection of the root apices of tooth 36 is doughy and has a fistula scar. X-ray shows an irregularly-shaped focus of bone tissue destruction in the area of the unformed root apices of tooth 36. Choose the optimal material for temporary obturation of the root canals of tooth 36.
a. Zinc oxide eugenol-based paste
b. Sealer with gutta-percha
*c. Calcium hydroxide-based paste
d. Phenol-based substance
e. Mineral trioxide aggregate-based substance

378. A dentist diagnosed chronic gangrenous pulpitis of tooth 36 in an 11-year-old girl. Choose the optimal drug for antiseptic treatment of root canals in this case.
a. Aethonium
b. Furacilin (Nitrofural)
*c. Sodium hypochlorite
d. Hydrogen peroxide
e. Ethyl alcohol

379. A 48-year-old man complains of gingival overgrowth (''gums cover the teeth''). The patient suffers from epilepsy and takes anticonvulsant agents. Objectively gingival papillae are of normal color, dense, with lumpy surface; they do not bleed on probing and cover the lower front teeth up to their incisal surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gingival fibromatosis
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form, degree III
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form, degree II
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form, degree II
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form, degree III

380. A clasp (bugel) denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 47-year-old woman. Objectively, the abutment teeth are intact, the crowns are tall. When checking the denture frame, the width of the arch needs to be estimated. What is the optimal width of the denture arch?
a. 4.0-5.0 mm
*b. 2.0-3.0 mm
c. 1.5-2.0 mm
d. 1.0-1.5 mm
e. 0.5-1.0 mm

381. After examination of a 27-year-old patient, a dentist diagnosed him with acute catarrhal gingivitis. A local therapy complex was carried out. For individual hygiene, the doctor prescribed the patient a dental elixir containing chlorhexidine digluconate. What negative effect can occur, if it is used incorrectly?
a. Impaired taste
b. Bad breath
c. Epithelial hypertrophy
d. Allergizing effect
*e. Microflora resistance

382. A 35-year-old patient has a fresh mental fracture of the mandible without visible displacement of the fragments. What orthopedic appliance is indicated in this case?
a. Replacement appliance
b. Forming appliance
c. Reponation appliance
d. Combined appliance
*e. Fixation appliance

383. A 34-year-old man with missing teeth that were extracted 6 years ago came to a dentist to have dentures made for him. Objectively, the configuration of his face remains unchanged, the lower jaw has a dentition defect with missing teeth 34, 35, 36, 37. Teeth 24, 25, 26 are vertically displaced by 3.5 mm in relation to the occlusal plane, the alveolar process in this area was enlarged. The necks of the teeth are not exposed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Dental transposition
b. Dental divergence
*c. Dentoalveolar elongation
d. Infraocclusion
e. Dental convergence

384. Medical committee registers the patients, who for a long time lived in an area polluted with radiation. The patients are advised on the diet that will quickly purge the body from radionuclides. The portion of products rich in pectine should be increased in their diet. Name these products:
*a. Fruits and vegetables
b. Meat products
c. Baked goods
d. Pasta
e. Dairy products

385. An 8-year-old boy complains of an acute pain in his lower left jaw, general weakness, high body temperature of 38.6^oC, and problems with opening the mouth and swallowing. Objectively, the face is asymmetrical because of edema in the submandibular region and in the lower third of the left cheek. Mucosa in the area of teeth 73, 74, and 75 is edematous on the both sides of the alveolar process. The teeth are mobile, percussion is positive, the Vincent's sign is positive. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Odontogenic phlegmon of the  submandibular region
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Non-odontogenic acute purulent  lymphadenitis
e. Inflammatory infiltration of the left  cheek

386. A 22-year-old man presents with swollen and hyperemic mucosa of the retromolar area; tooth 38 is covered with hood-shaped gingival flap that discharges pus on palpation; body temperature is 37.5^oC) What urgent aid should be given to the patient in this case?
a. Antibiotic treatment
*b. Gingival flap incision and antibacterial treatment
c. Extraction of tooth 38
d. Gingival flap excision
e. Gingival flap incision

387. A 5-year-old child presents with infantile swallow pattern. What structural element must be present in the orthodontic appliance for correction of this pathology?
a. Buccal shields
b. Labial bandages
c. Bite plane
*d. Rudolph loops
e. Inclined plane

388. Complete removable dentures have been made for a patient for the first time. After denture fixation, among the other recommendations the doctor informs, how long these dentures can be used. When should these dentures be replaced with the new ones?
a. In 2 years
b. In 7 years
*c. In 3 years
d. In 5 years
e. In one year

389. A 52-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Upon objective examination a removable partial laminar denture is determined to be optimal denture construction in her case. What material should be applied to the impression tray edges?
a. Plaster
b. Silast
c. Stens
d. Wax
*e. Orthocor

390. A 55-year-old man was delivered into the hospital with bilateral mandibular fracture within the dentition. Objectively teeth 34, 35, 36, 45, and 46 are missing. Lower incisors are mobile (I-II degree). Fragment displacement is insignificant. What splint should be made for this patient?
a. Vankevych
b. Gunning-Port
c. Flat occlusal splint
*d. Weber
e. Tigerstedt

391. A 26-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of facial asymmetry that developed because of a painful swelling in the left parotid area that appeared 3 days ago. His body temperature is 37.2^oC) Two weeks ago he had a case of acute respiratory disease. Objectively, in the left parotid area there is a dense round infiltration up to 2 cm in size that is slightly mobile and moderately painful. The excretory duct of the parotid gland produces clear transparent saliva. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Mikulicz disease
b. Acute purulent parotitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
*d. Herzenberg parotitis
e. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland

392. A 25-year-old man undergoes the stage of endodontic treatment of tooth 44 due to exacerbation of chronic pulpitis. The dentist plans to fill the root canal using the method of vertical condensation of heated gutta-percha. What instrument is necessary to perform this procedure?
a. Spreader
b. Pro-file
c. U-file
d. Canal filler
*e. Plugger

393. A 14-year-old girl, while conducting experiments during a chemistry class, received a burn on her face. Objectively, the skin at the site of the damage is dehydrated and covered with a dense dry scab with clear boundaries and a band of hyperemia on the periphery, the scab is embedded into the skin. Name the most likely type of the traumatic agent in this case.
*a. Acidic
b. Alkaline
c. Electric
d. Radiation
e. Thermal

394. Mother and her 11-year-old daughter came to the medical station. According to the mother her daughter has fallen when playing outdoors. The doctor determined the patient to have an isolated mechanical injury of soft tissues in her cheek with damaged skin. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Abrasion
b. Bruice
c. Wound
d. Contusion
e. Hematoma

395. A 43-year-old man complains of the mobility of his teeth 34, 36 and 37 and purulent discharge from the socket of extracted tooth 35. One and a half months ago, a cut was made along the mucogingival fold and tooth 35 was extracted. Objectively, there is a slight infiltration of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and mildly painful. The alveolar process in the area of teeth 34, 36 and 37 is thickened on the both sides, the mucosa is edematous and cyanotic. On the mucogingival fold a fistula with granulations was detected. The socket of extracted tooth 35 is filled with granulations with purulent exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Chronic rarefying periostitis
c. Chronic alveolitis
d. Localized periodontitis
*e. Chronic circumscribed osteomyelitis

396. During examination of a 17-year-old patient, a targeted intraoral X-ray of the frontal region of the maxilla shows a round area of homogeneous rarefaction of bone tissue with clear borders, 2 cm in size. In the projection of the rarefaction, the roots of the intact central upper incisors with preserved periodontal fissures are located. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Radicular cyst
b. Nasoalveolar cyst
c. Follicular cyst
d. Globulomaxillary cyst
*e. Nasopalatine cyst

397. A 9-year-old boy complains of a sore throat and fever. Objectively, he has catarrhal gingivitis, plaque on his tongue, hyperemia of the palatine arches, hypertrophied tonsils, bad breath, and lymphadenitis. According to the pediatrician, the boy's liver and spleen are enlarged and he has severe monocytosis. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Herpetic tonsillitis
*b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

398. An 8-year-old boy complains of a dull pain in his lower right tooth. The pain appears in response to thermal stimuli and slowly abates after the stimuli are removed. Objectively on the approximal surface of tooth 46 there is a deep carious cavity. During necrectomy with a dental excavator, communication between the carious and dental cavities is detected. Probing of the communication area results in sharp pain and bleeding. What method of pulpitis treatment is recommended in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Biological approach
c. Devital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
*e. Vital amputation

399. A 55-year-old man suffered a blow to the frontal mandibular area. He is diagnosed with mandibular fracture. Prior to trauma he was wearing removable dentures (partial laminar denture for the lower law and full denture for the upper jaw). What can be used for transport immobilization of the fracture?
a. Vasiliev splint
b. Weber splint
c. Zbarzh apparatus
d. Vankevych splint
*e. Patient's dentures

400. When receiving tuberal anesthesia intraorally, a man developed a rapidly progressing edema of the left cheek that soon spread to the temporal region. What complication has likely occurred in this case?
a. Abscess
b. Quincke's edema
*c. Hematoma
d. Emphysema
e. Ischemia

401. A 61-year-old woman came to a dentist complaining that the majority of her upper and lower teeth are mobile. The dentist needs to make diagnostic dental casts. What impression material would be optimal in this case for obtaining impressions?
*a. Alginate
b. Plaster
c. A-silicone
d. C-silicone
e. Zinc oxide eugenol

402. A 28-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling that she discovered accidentally in the area of her maxillary alveolar process on the left. Her mouth opening is unhindered. Objectively, in the area of the maxillary alveolar process on the left, in the projection of the roots of teeth 22 and 23, there is a deformity that looks like a round induration and is painless to palpation. Teeth 22, 23, 24 are intact. X-ray shows an area of bone tissue rarefaction with clear boundaries, up to 1 cm in diameter, located between teeth 22 and 23; their periodontal fissure is preserved, the roots are divergent. Electric pulp testing results are within the normal range. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Nasopalatine cyst
b. Cementoma
c. Follicular cyst
*d. Globulomaxillary cyst
e. Ameloblastoma

403. A 12-year-old girl complains of pain in her mouth that occurs during eating. According to her medical history these symptoms reemerge once or twice per year. Objectively on the mucogingival fold there are 3 aphthae 5-7 mm in size, they have yellowish coating and inflamed red border and are acutely painful on touch. Name the most likely diagnosis:
a. Toxic-allergic drug-induced stomatitis
b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
c. Chronic recurrent herpetic stomatitis
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

404. A 25-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of increased sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli in the area of her upper lateral teeth on the left. Objectively, in the pericervical area of the vestibular surface of tooth 26, there is a chalk-like spot with a shallow defect in its center. When stained with a 3% solution of methylene blue, the enamel in the area of the spot stains blue. The affected area is tender when probed. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Cuneiform defect
c. Enamel necrosis
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Enamel erosion

405. During the extraction of tooth 37, the dentist accidentally pushed the root into the perimandibular soft tissues. The root is located under the alveolar mucosa and can be clearly palpated with a finger. What are the doctor's tactics in this case?
a. Remove the root through the tooth socket
b. Refer the patient for X-ray imaging to  determine further tactics
*c. Dissect the soft tissues over the root and  remove it
d. Leave the root in the soft tissues
e. Remove the root through a  submandibular surgical access

406. A 35-year-old man complains of persisting pain in tooth 24, which intensifies on biting. Objectively on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 24 there is a deep carious cavity filled with food debris. Percussion of cavity bottom is painless, there is no pain response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of tooth 24 is acutely painful. X-ray shows no pathologic changes of periapical tissues in the area of root apices of 24. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative periodontitis

407. The parents of a 5-year-old child complain of the destruction of the child's lower lateral teeth on the left. Objectively, the contact surfaces of teeth 74 and 75 have carious cavities within the pigmented softened mantle dentin. The response to cold stimuli is painful and brief. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Pulpal hyperemia
*e. Acute median caries

408. When fitting the metallic frame of a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge, it was determined that in the central occlusion the frame is in a contact with the antagonist teeth. It reaches the ledges of the abutment teeth and is 0.3 mm thick. What tactics should a dentist choose?
a. Determine the areas that prevent  normal installation of the dental bridge
b. Send the frame to the next laboratory stage of the denture-making
*c. Complete the preparation of the  abutment teeth and make a working impression
d. Obtain an impression with the frame  fitted into the oral cavity
e. File down the metallic frame in the areas of its contact with the antagonist teeth

409. A 57-year-old man complains of pain and creaking in his right temporomandibular joint when eating. In the evening the signs diminish. The pain is observed for the last 2-3 years. Objectively the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is reduced to 2.5 cm. Molars are missing on both jaws. X-ray shows deformed articular surfaces of the right temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Contracture of the right temporomandibular joint
b. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
c. Ankylosis of the right temporomandibular joint
d. Pain dysfunction syndrome of the right temporomandibular joint
*e. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint

410. A 53-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of pain provoked by chemical, thermal, and mechanical stimuli in his upper and lower front teeth. Moreover, sometimes he develops a slight pain in his temporomandibular joints. Objectively, the bite is deep, on the lingual surface of the upper front teeth and the vestibular surface of the lower teeth the enamel is sharpened and worn-off to the dentin. The dentin is pigmented and shiny. The enamel is of normal color. The crown height of the lateral teeth is reduced by 1/3. What will be the diagnosis in this case?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
c. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
d. Enamel hypoplasia
*e. Pathological tooth wear

411. A 7-year-old child complains of pain in the upper right molar during eating. The masticatory surface of tooth 55 has a carious cavity, filled with softened dentin. The cavity is located within the parapulpar dentin and communicates with the dental cavity. Probing of the communication point provokes sharp pain and moderate bleeding. Tooth percussion is painless. X-ray shows no changes in the periodontium of tooth 55. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous pulpitis
*b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic gangrenous  pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

412. A 36-year-old woman complains of dryness and peeling of her lower lip vermillion border. Both dryness and peeling have been observed for a month. Application of indifferent ointments was ineffective. Objectively the vermillion border of the lower lip is bright red, moderately infiltrated, and densely covered in white-gray scales, that cannot be removed without pain and bleeding. The lesion focus contains concave areas, while on the periphery there are patches of dull epithelium that look like irregular white stripes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Leukoplakia
c. Candidal cheilitis
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

413. A 42-year-old man came to the dental surgeon for oral sanation. After application of anesthesia, the patient suddenly developed nausea, acute weakness, constricting sensation behind the sternum, and cardiac pain. The patient's skin is pale and covered in cold clammy sweat. The patient started vomiting, lost his consciousness, and developed seizures. The patient's pupils are unresponsive to the light. The pulse is thready, blood pressure cannot be measured. Make the diagnosis:
a. Unconsciousness
b. Collapse
c. Traumatic shock
d. Epileptic seizure
*e. Anaphylactic shock

414. A 14-year-old child has a bilateral mandibular fracture in the area of the mental foramina. Against the background of fractures, the clinic presentation of respiratory disorders intensifies. What is the cause of asphyxia in this case?
a. Hypersalivation
b. Edema of the oral mucosa
c. Foreign bodies in the oral cavity
d. Formation of a hematoma in the floor of the mouth
*e. Posterior displacement of the tongue root with a mandibular fragment

415. A 55-year-old man complains of heartburn and unpleasant sensations in his tongue. The patient has been suffering from gastritis with low acidity for approximately 5 years. What changes in the tongue are the most likely to be detected in this patient?
a. Fissured tongue
*b. Atrophied and smoothed out lingual papillae
c. Hypertrophic lingual papillae
d. Erosions on the lateral surfaces of the tongue
e. Coated tongue

416. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of aesthetic defects in his upper front teeth. The defects started manifesting approximately 10 years ago. Objectively, the pericervical regions of the vestibular surfaces of teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 have defects of dental hard tissues within the mantle dentin in the form of two planes converging at an angle. The walls and floor of the defects are dense, smooth, glossy, with even edges. Probing is painless. The defects do not stain with methylene blue. Make the diagnosis.
a. Pathological tooth wear
*b. Cuneiform defects
c. Enamel erosion
d. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
e. Chronic median caries

417. A 25-year-old man complains of brief pain attacks in response to sweet foods in one of his lower teeth and food retention in a carious cavity. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 there is a carious cavity within the parapulpar dentin. The dentin is soft. The carious cavity does not communicate with the dental cavity, probing of its floor is painful. Percussion of tooth 36 and palpation of gingival mucosa in the projection of root apex are painless. Thermal stimuli cause pain that quickly stops after the simulus is removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Acute median caries
c. Pulp hyperemia
*d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

418. A woman came to the dental surgeon with complaints of teeth mobility. After objective examination and X-ray analysis she was diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of stages I and II. Which teeth of those affected by periodontitis should be extracted?
a. Carious teeth
b. With degree 1 of tooth mobility
c. Teeth with painful percussion
d. Intact teeth
*e. With degrees 2-3 of tooth mobility

419. The vestibular surfaces of the upper incisors of a 25-year-old patient are affected by fluorosis. What dental installation will have the maximum aesthetic result in this case?
a. Plastic-fused-to-metal crown  (Mathe technique)
b. Ceramic crown
c. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
d. Plastic crown
*e. Veneer

420. A porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge is being made for a 31-year-old woman. Vital teeth 33, 36, and 37 will function as the abutment teeth. The teeth preparation is planned to be done under anesthesia. What type of anesthesia will be the most effective in this case?
a. Application
b. Intraligamentary
*c. Conduction (torusal)
d. Infiltration
e. Conduction (tuberal and palatal)

421. The parents of a 7-year-old girl brought her to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. Examination detected a small carious cavity with a narrow opening in the limited area of a fissure in her tooth 46. The probe catches in the softened mantle dentin. Choose the optimal treatment tactics in this case.
a. Impregnation method
*b. Preventive filling
c. Non-invasive sealing
d. Deep fluoridation
e. Invasive sealing

422. A 42-year-old woman complains of swelling and purulent discharge from a fistula in the left parotid region and limited mouth opening. Objectively, her face is asymmetrical due to an infiltration in the left parotid region. The infiltration is cyanotic, has ''wooden'' density, and contains fistulas that produce crumbs of yellowish pus. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Actinomycosis
b. Herzenberg's mumps
c. Odontogenic subcutaneous granuloma
d. Adenophlegmon
e. Tuberculosis

423. A 38-year-old man complains of a neoplasm 1 cm in size on the gums in the area of tooth 14. The neoplasm is bright red, soft, round, and bleeds when touched. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following disease:
*a. Angiomatous epulis
b. Fibrous epulis
c. Eosinophilic granuloma
d. Migratory granuloma
e. Fibroma

424. A 35-year-old man needs an adhesive dental bridge. Objectively tooth 15 is missing. Abutment teeth 14 and 16 are firm. Teeth crowns are of medium height. Dental equator is markedly visible. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. What will most likely be an abutment part of this adhesive denture?
*a. Whole or perforated cast overlays
b. Combined crowns
c. Full cast crowns
d. Stump inlays
e. Equator crowns

425. A 47-year-old man complains of a painless neoplasm on his lower lip. The neoplasm appeared one month ago. Objectively, there is a round neoplsm 6 mm in diameter against the background of the visually unchanged vermilion border of the lower lip. The neoplasm has a smooth bluish-red surface and protrudes 2-3 mm from the surface of the lip. During palpation, the neoplasm is moderately dense, without an infiltrate in its base or on its periphery. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Papilloma
b. Keratoacanthoma
*c. Verrucous precancer
d. Pyogenic granuloma
e. Cutaneous horn

426. Preventive examination of a 20-year-old young woman by a dentist detected multiple chalk-like spots on the approximal surfaces and in the pericervical regions of her upper and lower premolars. The lesions are somewhat symmetrical. Objectively, the size of the spots is several millimeters. When the spots are dried, enamel there has no luster. Probing is painless, the surface is smooth. The dentist used vital staining of the dental hard tissues as an additional study. What is the purpose of this method?
a. Hygiene assessment
b. Measuring the depth of the hard tissue damage
*c. Caries diagnostics
d. Assessment of the caries spread
e. Measuring the activity of the process

427. In a 56-year-old woman, a preventive examination by a dentist has detected a deep red oval erosion with a smooth surface on the vermilion border of her lower lip. On the surface of the erosion, there are bloody scabs that are difficult to remove. After their removal, a slight bleeding occurs. Mild injury to the erosion in the areas without scabs causes no bleeding. What type of precancerous lesion of the lower lip is observed in this case?
a. Bowen's disease
b. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion  border
*c. Manganotti abrasive precancerous  cheilitis
d. Erythroplasia
e. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis of  the vermilion border

428. A 48-year-old woman complains of missing teeth 38, 37, 36, 45, 46, 47, and 48. Her teeth 35 and 44 are intact, stable, and have quite tall crowns of anatomical shape. What orthopedic appliance should be proposed for this patient?
a. Removable laminar denture
b. Adhesive dental bridge
c. Dental bridge
*d. Clasp (bugel) denture
e. Microdenture

429. For 2 days a man has been suffering from spontaneous nocturnal pain attacks in his tooth 25. The pain irradiates along the branches of the trigeminal nerve and alternates with brief painless intervals. Objectively, on the medial surface of tooth 25 there is a deep carious cavity within the parapulpar dentin. Probing of the cavity floor and percussion are painful. Thermal stimulation of tooth 25 provokes a pain attack. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Trigeminal neuralgia
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

430. During the preparation of teeth for installation of an orthopedic construction, a 65-year-old woman indistinctly complained of a sharp headache, sensation of heat, nausea, and numbness of her limbs. Her face is asymmetrical due to a smoothed out nasolabial fold on one side. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Unconsciousness
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Pneumothorax
d. Angina pectoris
*e. Acute disturbance of cerebral circulation

431. A 41-year-old patient came to a dentist with complaints of loosened fixation of his porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge for the upper jaw with teeth 13 and 16 as the abutment. Objectively, the abutment teeth are stable, without defects, restored with a composite material, the size of the crown part of the tooth is average, the conicity of the approximal surfaces of the abutment teeth is approximately 30°, the relief of the masticatory surface is preserved. What is the cause of the denture fixation becoming loose in this case?
a. Secondary caries in the abutment teeth
*b. The conicity of the appproximal surfaces of the abutment teeth has significantly increased
c. Wrong denture design choice
d. No inlays in the stumps
e. Preservation of the relief of the masticatory surfaces of the abutment teeth

432. A 44-year-old man came to extract destroyed tooth 24. Objectively his face is symmetrical, the crown of 24 is destroyed by 2/3, percussion is painless. Gingival mucosa surrounding the tooth is unchanged. X-ray shows enlarged periodontal fissure in the area of the root apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of 24
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis of 24
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of 24
d. Chronic gangrenous periodontitis of 24
*e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of 24

433. A 12-year-old girl complains of spontaneous pain in tooth 16 with short periods of remission (10-20 minutes) that developed 4 days ago. The pain increases at night and irradiates to the upper right jaw. Examination revealed a deep carious cavity in 16, the dentin is soft, the probing is painful at all points of the cavity floor, vertical percussion is slightly tender, the pain increases in response to thermal stimuli. EPT is 25 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute apical periodontitis
*c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute local pulpitis
e. Chronic concrementous pulpitis

434. Epidemiological examination of certain age groups to study the prevalence of the signs that indicate periodontal diseases and to assess the need for treatment uses the following index:
a. PI (Russel)
*b. CPITN (WHO)
c. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion)
d. PMA (Parma)
e. IR (Ramfjord)

435. A 25-year-old man complains of a dull pain in the area of his lower right second molar. This tooth was treated for pulpitis one day ago. The carious cavity has a temporary filling. Objectively, X-ray of tooth 47 shows a perforation in the area of root bifurcation within the bone tissue. The root canals are filled and there are no pathologic changes in the periapical tissues. The depth of dentogingival probing in the bifurcation area is normal. What treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. Crown lengthening
*b. Perforation closure with MTA
c. Tooth replantation
d. Perforation closure with glass-ionomer cement
e. Tooth extraction

436. What are the contraindications to the use of liquid flowing composites in dental practice?
a. Filling of small pericervical cavities
b. Creating a "shock-absorbing" underlying pad, when restoring the masticatory teeth
c. Non-invasive sealing of fissures
*d. Filling of Black's class IV carious cavities
e. Invasive sealing of fissures

437. A 32-year-old woman needs a denture. On objective examination the decision was made in favor of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown. What material should be used in this case to obtain the impression?
a. Repin
b. Stomalgin
*c. Stomaflex
d. Orthocor
e. Stens

438. A 29-year-old man is diagnosed with medial maxillary fracture. The line of the fracture is symmetrical on both sides. In this case sensory perception in the teeth and mucosa is likely to be disturbed within the following interval:
a. From tooth 18 to tooth 28
*b. From tooth 15 to tooth 25
c. Sensitivity of the teeth and mucosa will remain undisturbed
d. From tooth 13 to tooth 23
e. From tooth 11 to tooth 21

439. A 27-year-old woman came to the dentist for the purpose of oral cavity sanation. After anesthesia, she started complaining of dizziness, ringing in her ears, dimming vision, and general weakness. Objectively, her skin is pale and covered in cold sweat. Her pulse is 94/min., of low volume and pressure. Her blood pressure is 96/60 mm Hg. She had a brief episode of unconsciousness that lasted 30 seconds. What urgent condition developed in this woman?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Acute heart failure
*c. Syncope
d. Collapse
e. Hypertensive crisis

440. Parents of a 9-year-old child came to the dentist complaining that their child presents with enlarged cervical lymph nodes on the right. During examination palpation revealed the lymph nodes in the right submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and infraclavicular areas to be enlarged up to 2-2.5 cm in diameter, painless, non-matted together, and non-fused to the skin (resemble ''potatoes in a sack''). The parents note rapid fatigability and night sweats in their child. What additional examinations should the child be referred for?
*a. Puncture biopsy of the lymph nodes
b. Wassermann test
c. Clinical blood and urine tests
d. CT of the cervical spine
e. Pirquet and Mantoux tests

441. A 28-year-old man complains of painless sore in his mouth that persists despite the attempts at self-treatment. Objectively the regional lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painless. Mucosa of the left cheek presents with round ulcer, 1 cm in diameter, with raised margins and cartilage-like infiltration in its basis. The surface of the ulcer is colored meat red and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Decubitus ulcer
*b. Primary syphilis
c. Secondary syphilis
d. Lupus vulgaris
e. Cancer

442. A 28-year-old man has a tumor on his face. A clinical diagnosis of chin lipoma was made. What anesthesia should be used to remove this tumor?
a. Topical anesthesia
b. Bilateral mandibular anesthesia
c. General anesthesia
*d. Infiltration anesthesia
e. Bilateral mental anesthesia

443. Examination of a 5-year-old boy by a dentist detected carious cavities within the pigmented dense mantle dentin on the contact surfaces of teeth 84 and 85. Probing of the cavity walls and floor is painless, there is no response to thermal stimuli, percussion of the teeth is painless. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic superficial caries
*c. Chronic median caries
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

444. A 46-year-old man is undergoing endodontic treatment of tooth 26 due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. X-ray shows significant obliteration of buccal root canals of tooth 26. What chemical solutions should be used during the mechanical widening of root canals in this case?
a. Chloramine and hydrogen peroxide
b. Chlorhexidine and hydrogen peroxide
c. Sodium hypochlorite and decamethoxine
*d. EDTA and sodium hypochlorite
e. Sodium hypochlorite and chlorhexidine

445. A 58-year-old woman complains of a red spot on her lower lip that first appeared 4 years ago. Objectively, on the vermillion border of the lower lip there is a red spot with velvety surface. The lesion is slightly concave, when compared to the surrounding tissues. It does not change its color when pressed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Verrucous precancer
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Hemangioma
d. Simple leukoplakia
*e. Bowen's disease

446. A 20-year-old young woman complains of pain and marked bleeding in her gums when she brushes her teeth and eats even soft food. Objectively her gingival mucosa is swollen, hyperemic and bleeds even on the slightest touch. The teeth are covered with moderate amount of soft dental plaque. What toothpaste should be recommended to this patient as a part of complex treatment of her condition?
a. Fluoride toothpaste
b. Antifungal toothpaste
*c. Herbal toothpaste
d. Mineral-rich toothpaste
e. Gel toothpaste with microelements

447. A 7-year-old boy during primary examination was found to have a habit of sleeping with his fist under the cheek. What bite anomaly can develop due to this habit?
a. Prognathism
*b. Crossbite
c. Mesial bite
d. Open bite
e. Deep bite

448. A patient is prescribed mandibular vestibuloplasty. What pathology is likely to occur if the vestibule of the mouth is too shallow?
a. Overcrowding of the front teeth
b. Parafunction of mimic muscles
c. Delayed growth of the jaw
d. Deep occlusion
*e. Diseases of periodontal tissues

449. A removable partial laminar denture was made for the upper jaw of a 55-year-old patient. During assessment of its quality, small pores were detected all throughout the denture base. What has caused the formation of pores in the denture?
a. Insufficient amount of monomer in the plastic dough
b. Using plastic with an expired expiration date
*c. Rapid temperature increase during plastic polymerization
d. Rapid cooling of the cuvette after plastic polymerization
e. Insufficient pressure applied to the plastic during its polymerization

450. During a preventive examination of an 11-year-old child, an orthodontist observes the following: the face is symmetrical and proportional; in the oral cavity, tooth 22 is located orally and blocked by the lower teeth. The distance between teeth 21 and 23 is 5 mm, while the width of tooth 22 is 7 mm. What treatment tactics should be chosen in this clinical situation?
a. Extract tooth 24, move tooth 22 to its  proper place in the dentition
b. Replant tooth 22
c. Extract tooth 22, retract the front upper  teeth
d. Expand the upper dentition and move  tooth 22 to its proper place in the dentition
*e. Expand the upper dentition, open the  bite, move tooth 22 to its proper place in the dentition

451. A 13-year-old boy complains of facial pain and edema on the left, which appeared the day before, and a fever of 37.5^oC) Examination revealed facial asymmetry due to a dense painful edema of the left lower jaw. Hyperemia and edema of the gingival mucosa are observed on the vestibular side of tooth 36, the mucogingival fold is smoothed-out, the fluctuation sign is positive. The crown of tooth 36 is destroyed, its percussion is sharply painful. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Odontogenic buccal phlegmon
*b. Acute odontogenic purulent periostitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis  of tooth 36
e. Acute odontogenic purulent  lymphadenitis

452. In the dentist's office, after a treatment of tooth 26 a 46-year-old woman suddenly developed a pulsing headache, dizziness, ringing in her ears, tachycardia, and blood pressure of 220/160 mm Hg. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute cerebrovascular accident
*b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Syncope
d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Anaphylactic shock

453. A 43-year-old woman complains of her lower teeth mobility. Objectively the teeth mobility is of the I-II degree. It is planned to make a full-cast removable occlusal splint for her. What material would be optimal for this splint?
a. Gold alloy of 900 millesimal fineness
b. ''EI-95'' alloy
*c. Cobalt nickel chromium alloy
d. Stainless steel
e. ''PD-250'' alloy  (silver palladium alloy)

454. Partial removable laminar dentures are being made for a 65-year-old man. Complete anatomical impressions of both jaws were obtained using "Kromopan" alginate material. What solution should be used for the disinfection of the obtained impressions?
*a. 0.5% sodium hypochlorite
b. 70% ethyl alcohol
c. 0.75% chloramine B
d. 0.6% hydrogen peroxide
e. 0.2% "Dezoxon-1"

455. A 40-year-old man came to a dental clinic with complaints of bleeding, edematous, and hyperemic gums and missing lateral teeth on his lower jaw. A complex treatment is planned for this man, along with making removable dentures. What method of functional diagnostics is used to assess the condition of the periodontal vessels?
a. Galvanometry
b. Masticatiography
c. X-ray
d. Myography
*e. Rheoparodontography

456. A 69-year-old woman complains of dry mouth and burning pain in her oral cavity. For the last 2 years she has been using removable laminar dentures. The mucosa of the hard palate and tongue dorsum is bright red, hyperemic, and edematous. Within the prosthetic bed there is a small amount of easily removable gray-white plaque. What medicines are used for the etiotropic treatment of this disease?
a. Anti-inflammatory agents
b. Antiprotozoal agents
*c. Antifungal agents
d. Antibiotics
e. Antiviral agents

457. After the unsuccessful treatment for chronic granulomatous periodontitis of tooth 15 by dental therapist, the 47-year-old man came to extract this tooth. What forceps should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
*a. S-shaped forceps
b. Straight forceps
c. Bayonet forceps
d. S-shaped right-sided forceps
e. S-shaped left-sided forceps

458. A 39-year-old woman complains of bad breath, bleeding and sore gums, and loose teeth. Objectively, the gums are hyperemic and edematous, the lower front teeth exhibit the I-II degree mobility. Periodontal pockets are 4-5 mm deep. X-ray shows resorption of interdental septa up to 1/2 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Generalized periodontitis, II degree,  exacerbated progression
b. Generalized periodontitis, II degree,  chronic progression
c. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  chronic progression
d. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  exacerbated progression
e. Generalized periodontitis, III degree,  chronic progression

459. A 34-year-old woman complains of a pain in her lower left jaw. Two months ago her teeth 35, 36, and 37 were extracted. Objectively, her lower left jaw has a cuff-like thickening. X-ray shows a sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute purulent periostitis
b. Acute serous alveolitis
c. Ameloblastoma
d. Mandibular sarcoma
*e. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis

460. A 30-year-old woman after an overexposure to cold complains of facial asymmetry and fever of 37.9^oC) Objectively, she can not wrinkle her forehead on the left or close her left eye. Her left nasolabial fold is smoothed out and her lips cannot close tightly. No superciliary reflex can be observed on the left. Name this pathology:
a. -
b. Facial hemispasm
c. Trigeminal neuralgia
d. Progressive facial hemiatrophy
*e. Facial nerve neuropathy

461. A 48-year-old man complains of a tumor-like formation on the hard palate. Examination detected a semi-spherical protrusion with clear margins in the anterior portion of the palate. Teeth 11 and 21 are intact. X-ray shows a homogeneous focus of bone tissue rarefaction. The focus is 3.5x2.5 cm and has clear margins. Against the background of rarefied bone tissue there are projections of intact teeth 11 and 21; periodontal fissure is visible. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Nasopalatine duct cyst
b. Maxillary ameloblastoma
c. Follicular cyst of the maxilla
d. Giant-cell tumor of the maxilla
e. Radicular cyst of the maxilla

462. A 47-year-old man complains of pain and swelling in his left submandibular region and pain during eating. Objectively, the mouth opening is unrestricted, mucosa of the left sublingual fold is hyperemic, the excretory duct of the submandibular salivary gland produces a small amount of turbid saliva. X-ray of the mouth floor shows an oval shadow 1 cm in size. Make the diagnosis:
a. Lipoma of the submandibular region
b. Mandibular osteoma
c. Ranula of the sublingual salivary gland
d. Lymphadenitis of the submandibular region
*e. Sialolithiasis

463. A 36-year-old woman with a pacemaker complains of bleeding gums when she brushes her teeth. Objectively, the gums are stagnantly hyperemic, edematous, with gingival pockets that are 4-5 mm deep; the teeth exhibit the I-II degree mobility and have large amounts of supra- and subgingival calculus. The woman was diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis of the II degree. What method of dental plaque removal is contraindicated in this clinical case?
a. -
b. Instrumental
c. Chemical
d. Air flow abrasive system
*e. Ultrasound

464. A 42-year-old woman complains of acute lip enlargement, itching, and bursting sensation. She ascribes her condition to introduction of a new lipstick. On examination the lips are significantly enlarged and turgid, on palpation they are firm, elastic, and painless. Regional lymph nodes are without changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meteorological cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis
*c. Allergic contact cheilitis
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

465. A 45-year-old woman complains of a burning sensation and dryness of her oral cavity, which intensifies during eating spicy foods. Objectively, her saliva is viscous, the tongue is edematous and has tooth imprints. The back of the tongue is covered with a white-gray coating that is difficult to remove with a spatula, filamentous papillae are hypertrophied. On the lateral surfaces and the tip of the tongue there are round patches of desquamation. The patient has diabetes mellitus. What etiological medicines must be prescribed in this case?
a. Keratolytics
b. Antibiotics
*c. Antifungal agents
d. Antihistamines
e. Antiprotozoal agents

466. A 48-year-old man came to a clinic for oral cavity sanation. He has a history of mild diabetes mellitus. Objective examination reveals whitish papulae against the background of normal buccal mucosa. The papulae are slightly raised above the mucosa. They are located symmetrically, predominantly in the retromolar space, and form a lace-like pattern. On the upper jaw there are two soldered dental bridges, tooth 37 has an amalgam filling, tooth 36 is covered with a cast metal crown. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Secondary syphilis
b. Leukoplakia
c. Chronic atrophic candidiasis
*d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Lupus erythematosus

467. A white non-glossy spot was detected on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 of an 18-year-old patient. What additional method of examination should be used to make the diagnosis?
*a. Staining tests with dyes
b. Electric pulp testing
c. Thermal stimulation
d. Measuring hygiene indices
e. X-ray

468. What can be determined by studying the jaw casts during the period of permanent bite using the Korkhaus technique?
a. Incorrect placement of the lateral teeth in the dentition in the sagittal and transversal directions
b. Dentition dimensions in the transversal plane
c. The ratio of the width of the transverse dimensions of the upper and lower incisors
*d. The length of the front segment of the upper and lower dentitions in the sagittal direction
e. Longitudinal length of the dentitions

469. A 39-year-old woman was provisionally diagnosed with generalized periodontitis, I degree, chronic progression. X-ray shows uneven resorption of the interdental septa by 1/3-1/4 of the root length. What surgical method should be used as a part of the complex treatment?
a. Flap surgery
b. Gingivosteoplasty
c. Gingivotomy
d. Open curettage
*e. Closed curettage

470. A 35-year-old man has an open unilateral non-dispalced fracture of the mandibular body on the left. The fracture line passes between the missing teeth 33 and 34. The fragments need to be immobilized. What splint would be the most advisable for this purpose?
a. Two-jaw splint with wire loops
b. Port splint
c. Smooth splint-bracket
d. Splint with an inclined plane
*e. Tigerstedt splint with a spreader bar

471. A 5-year-old child has all temporary teeth in the oral cavity with tremas between them. The incisors are in direct contact and their cutting edges are worn off. The distal surfaces of two temporary molars form a mesio-sagittal step - the Zielinsky sign. What period of bite formation is it?
a. Stabilization of the temporary bite
b. Late transitional dentition
*c. Aging of the temporary bite
d. Formation of the temporary bite
e. Early transitional dentition

472. A 27-year-old patient was provisionally diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic maxillary sinusitis. What radiology method would be the most informative in this case?
a. Spot-film radiography
b. Panoramic radiography
c. -
*d. Computed tomography
e. X-ray

473. To make the external prosthesis for a 62-year-old man it is necessary to obtain a Hippocrates facial moulage of this patient. What impression material should be used?
a. Stens
b. Stomaflex
c. Dentafol
d. Repin
*e. Plaster

474. A 34-year-old man presents with persisting dull pain in his tooth, which aggravates on biting. One week ago the tooth was treated for deep caries. Objectively on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 there is a filling, percussion is painful, there is a supracontact observed in the area of 36. X-ray shows unchanged periodontium. What mistake was made when tooth 36 was filled?
*a. High filling
b. Insulation layer exceeds borders of the dentinoenamel junction
c. Gingival attachment is disturbed
d. Filling without medicinal substance sealed inside
e. Filling without insulation layer

475. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a deteriorated fixation of his complete removable denture for the upper jaw. He has been using this denture for 5 years. Objectively, the prosthetic bed does not correspond with the denture base due to the atrophy of the jaw. How long can a complete removable denture be used before it becomes necessary to make a new one?
a. 5-6 years
b. 1-2 years
c. 7-8 years
d. 9-10 years
*e. 3-4 years

476. A 16-year-old girl complains of constant dull pain in her lower tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 46 there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Comparative percussion is sharply painful. Thermal stimuli and probing are painless. Mucosa in the area of tooth 46  is markedly hyperemic, swollen, painful on palpation. X-ray shows an irregularly shaped focus of bone tissue destruction with blurred margins. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis

477. A 46-year-old man was diagnosed with horizontal generalized form of pathological tooth wear, complicated with the occlusion height decreased by 10 mm. To restore the occlusion height, it is planned to make a plastic mouthguard for this patient. What is the maximum acceptable single separation of the upper and lower dentition?
a. 1-2 mm
b. 3-4 mm
*c. 4-6 mm
d. 0.5-1 mm
e. 9-10 mm

478. A 27-year-old man complains of a periodical pain in the frontal area of the upper jaw. Maxillary X-ray shows a round focus of bone tissue destruction 0.5 cm in diameter near the apex of tooth 12. The root canal of tooth 12 is filled to the apex. The patient is diagnosed with chronic granulomatous periodontitis of tooth 12. What method of surgical treatment should be chosen in this case?
a. Cystectomy
b. Extraction of tooth 12
c. Periostotomy
d. Replantation of tooth 12
*e. Resection of the root apex of tooth 12

479. A 42-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling on his left cheek and skin redness. Objectively, on the skin of his left cheek there is an inflammatory infiltrate 2.5x1.5 cm in size with clear margins. The skin over the infiltrate is sharply thinned-out, cyanotic, and glossy. On the oral mucosa along the mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 37, a band can be palpated. The band is connected to the lesion focus on the patient's cheek. Tooth 37 underwent a volumetric restoration. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Buccal carbuncle
*b. Subcutaneous migrating granuloma
c. Buccal furuncle
d. Buccal phlegmon
e. Buccal lymphadenitis

480. A 28-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgery department. He complains of a cutaneous neoplasm in his right submandibular region. The neoplasm appeared approximately 2 years ago. In the process of shaving, the neoplasm was frequently injured. He was diagnosed with papilloma. In the neoplastic area, examination shows an ulcer against the background of hyperemic skin. What tactics should the dental surgeon choose?
*a. Prevention of malignant transformation of the papilloma. Removal of the papilloma
b. Anti-inflammatory therapy followed by observation
c. Antibacterial and anti-inflammatory therapy, observation
d. Anti-inflammatory therapy followed by removal of the papilloma
e. Removal of the papilloma and postoperative radiation therapy

481. A man complains of destroyed crown of the 16 tooth. Objectively the crown portion of the 16 tooth is completely destroyed. The patient is diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 16 tooth and this tooth needs to be extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used for this procedure?
*a. Tuberal and palatal anesthesia
b. Infraorbital and tuberal anesthesia
c. Infraorbital anesthesia
d. Tuberal anesthesia
e. Tuberal and incisor anesthesia

482. A 19-year-old young man, who was waiting for the appointed time at the dentist's, suddenly developed an attack: his face became purple, bloody foam flowed from his mouth (bitten tongue), pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light, the patient developed first tonic then clonic convulsions that stopped spontaneously, after that he calmed down and fell asleep quickly. What happened with the patient?
a. Sympathoadrenal crisis
b. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome
*c. Epileptic seizure
d. Spasmophilia
e. Pulmonary embolism

483. A 42-year-old man was hospitalized into the maxillofacial department after a car accident. Examination detected, among other signs, the so-called <<raccoon eyes>>. When does this sign develop and where does it spread to in case of an isolated basilar skull fracture?
a. Develops immediately after an injury and does not extend beyond the orbicularis oculi muscle
*b. Develops no sooner than in 12 hours after an injury and does not extend beyond the orbicularis oculi muscle
c. Develops no sooner than in 12 hours after an injury and is diffuse in nature
d. Develops no sooner than in 24-48 hours after an injury and is diffuse in nature
e. Develops immediately after an injury and is diffuse in nature

484. A 33-year-old man undergoes treatment of tooth 15 for acute median caries. What type of anesthesia will be the most advisable in this case?
a. Inhalation anesthesia
b. Application anesthesia
c. Conduction anesthesia
d. Non-inhalation anesthesia
*e. Infiltration anesthesia

485. What medical establishment provides dental and prosthodontic (making of splints, appliances, and dentures) treatment for those who received maxillofacial injuries on the battlefield?
*a. Specialized surgical field hospital
b. Civilian medical establishment
c. Separate medical platoon
d. Evacuation hospital
e. Separate medical battalion

486. A dentist makes complete removable laminar dentures for the upper and lower jaw of a 58-year-old completely edentulous patient. Placement of the artificial teeth is carried out on glass, using the Vasiliev's technique. The greatest convexity of the transverse occlusal curve will be observed in this case at the level of the following artificial upper lateral teeth:
a. -
b. First premolars
*c. Second molars
d. First molars
e. Second premolars

487. During the treatment of tooth 11 due to exacerbation of chronic pulpitis, a dentist obstructs the root canal using the lateral condensation of cold gutta-percha technique. What instrument is needed for this sealing method?
a. Gutta-percha condenser
b. Endodontic probe
c. Root needle
d. Plugger
*e. Spreader

488. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his right temporomandibular joint when he opens his mouth. During external examination, the joint must be palpated. Where should the index fingers be placed to diagnose the distal displacement of the articular head?
a. Behind the auricle
b. In front of the tragus
c. On the posterior wall of the external acoustic meatus
d. -
*e. On the anterior wall of the external acoustic meatus

489. A 32-year-old man has metallic inlay made for him. The denture is being made for tooth 36 with Black's class I carious cavity. What surfaces of the inlay should be filed down and polished before fixing the denture?
a. Inlay bottom
b. All surfaces
*c. Occlusal surface
d. Lateral surfaces and inlay bottom
e. Lateral surfaces

490. A 32-year-old man complains of pain and heaviness in the right half of his face, stuffed nose with thick discharge on the right, pain in his right upper teeth, and a fever of 38 °C) Objectively, the front surface of the right upper jaw is edematous and painful to palpation. In the oral cavity, tooth 15 is destroyed, its percussion is painful. X-ray shows an area of bone tissue destruction with unclear contours in the projection of the root apex of tooth 15 and darkened right maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of the maxilla
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute rhinogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary sinusitis

491. A 43-year-old man complains of an intensifying painful <<redness>> of his face and increasing edema in the area of his cheekbones and eyelashes. The onset of his condition was 10 hours ago, when he received burns during firefighting. Objectively, the mouth opening is painful, the mucosa is not discolored, the skin of the face is very painful to the touch and covered in blisters with clear contents, the depth of the lesion does not reach the subcutaneous adipose tissue. Name the burn degree observed in this patient:
*a. II
b. IIIa
c. IV
d. I
e. IIIb

492. A 27-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his gums, bad breath, bleeding, and general weakness for 3 days. Prior to his visit, he requested no physician's help. Examination shows that the patient is pale, his regional lymph nodes are enlarged, their palpation is painful. The gums on the both jaws are edematous and hyperemic. The gums have several ulcers with dirty-gray coating. What group of medicines must be used for the etiotropic treatment of this condition?
a. Steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
b. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
c. Proteolytic enzymes
d. Antihistamines
*e. Antibacterial agents

493. Puncture sample taken from a 13-year-old child contains giant Reed-Sternberg cells. What diagnosis can be confirmed by the cell content of this puncture material?
*a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Lymph node actinomycosis
c. Lymphocytic leukemia
d. Tuberculous lymphadenitis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

494. An 18-year-old girl in her childhood underwent a surgery for complete bilateral cleft upper lip. Examination detects multiple scars on the markedly flat upper lip. There is no visible asymmetry, but the upper lip is slightly deformed. Wide bases of the wings of her nose are symmetrically displaced laterally and posteriorly. Her nasal septum is shortened. The tip of the nose is bifurcated and drawn to the upper lip. Her nasal dorsum is arcuate. What changes occurred in the patient's jaws?
a. The upper jaw is underdeveloped in its frontal area, while its lateral areas remain without pathologic changes
b. Both upper and lower jaws are flattened in their lateral areas due to disturbed nasal breathig
c. The lower jaw is underdeveloped due to reduced masticatory load, the upper jaw is flattened
*d. The upper jaw is underdeveloped, the intermaxilla is frontally displaced due to interrupted labial muscle layer
e. Both upper and lower jaws are underdeveloped due to reduced masticatory load and flattened in their frontal areas

495. A 62-year-old woman presents with reduced occlusal height, which makes madibular condyles press on the vault of the articular fossa, the auriculotemporal nerve, and the chorda tympani. What disease can be caused by this clinical presentation?
a. Arthrogenic mandibular contracture
b. Juvenile temporomandibular joint dysfunction
c. Intra-articular ankylosis
d. Pierre Robin syndrome
*e. Costen's syndrome

496. The parents of a 5-year-old child explain that lately their child has started chewing only on one side and refusing hard foods. Objectively, tooth 74 has a carious cavity and there are dental deposits on teeth 73, 74, and 75. Probing of the cavity floor in tooth 74 is painful and provokes a slight bleeding in the area where the cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
*c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Acute deep caries

497. What anatomical landmarks are used to locate the mandibular foramen, when administering mandibular anesthesia intraorally in a 6-year-old child?
a. 5 mm below the level of the lower alveolar ridge
b. 10 mm below the masticatory surface of the last lower molar
*c. At the level of the masticatory surface of a lower temporary molar
d. 6 mm above the masticatory surface of the last lower molar
e. 10 mm above the masticatory surface of the last lower molar

498. A 5-year-old girl was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 75. Objectively, her face is symmetrical, percussion of tooth 75 is painful. The child suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis. Determine the treatment tactics for this case:
a. Endodontic treatment of tooth 75 and  anti-inflammatory therapy
*b. Extraction of tooth 75
c. Endodontic treatment of tooth 75 and  periostotomy
d. Endodontic treatment of tooth 75
e. Extraction of tooth 75 and periostotomy

499. A 27-year-old pregnant woman came to the surgical dentistry department with complaints of acute pain in the area of her tooth 48. Her tooth 48 needs to be extracted. Her gestation period is 22 weeks, no allergies. What anesthetic is usually the drug of choice for pregnant women?
a. Procaine (Novocaine)
b. Lidocaine
*c. Articaine
d. Mepivacaine
e. Prilocaine

500. An 18-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of a sharp pain in his upper tooth. The pain appeared after an injury one week ago and sharply intensifies when he bites on this tooth. After using additional examination methods, the diagnosis was established: acute traumatic periodontitis of tooth 21. What would be the doctor's tactics in this case?
a. Conservative treatment, open method
b. Monitoring of the tooth condition for the next 6 months
*c. Conservative treatment, closed method
d. Extraction of tooth 21
e. Conservative-surgical treatment

501. A 30-year-old man came to a  dentist with complaints of short-term pain provoked by cold stimuli in a lower tooth. The pain disappears immediately after the stimulus removal. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 47 there is a carious cavity filled with light-colored softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor causes slight pain, thermal test is positive during the action of the stimulus. X-ray shows no changes in the periapical tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute limited pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

502. A 69-year-old woman came to a dentist complaining of problematic swallowing and her teeth clacking when she talks. The complaints arose after she started using her recently made complete removable dentures for the upper and lower jaws. What mistake did the doctor make when making the dentures for this patient?
*a. The bite height is too high
b. The bite height is too low
c. The denture plane is defined incorrectly
d. The Bonville three-point contact has not been formed
e. The edges of the functional impression  are designed incorrectly

503. A 63-year-old completely edentulous patient (the upper jaw - Schroeder's type II, the lower jaw - Keller's type II) has the so-called "senile progeny". What factors underlie the mechanism of its development?
a. Basal arches of the upper and lower jaw are wider than their alveolar arches
b. Basal arches of the upper and lower jaw are narrower than their alveolar arches
*c. The basal arch of the upper jaw is narrower than its alveolar arch, and the basal arch of the lower jaw is wider than its alveolar arch
d. Basal and alveolar arches of the upper and lower jaw are of the same width
e. The basal arch of the upper jaw is wider than its alveolar arch, and the basal arch of the lower jaw is narrower than its alveolar arch

504. A 30-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling of his upper lip. Objectively, he has facial asymmetry due to upper lip edema, his nasolabial fold on the left is smoothed-out. In the oral cavity on the maxillary vestibular surface, the mucogingival fold at the level of teeth 11, 21, and 22 is edematous and hyperemic. Its palpation provokes pain and fluctuation. X-ray shows signs of bone tissue destruction in the area of the root apex of tooth 21. The bone lesion is 3-4 mm in diameter. The root canal of tooth 21 is filled to 2/3 of its length. The man was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw, originating from tooth 21. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Repeat endodontic treatment of tooth 21, anti-inflammatory therapy
*b. Repeat endodontic treatment of tooth 21, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of tooth 21, periosteotomy
d. Extraction of tooth 21, periosteotomy,  anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Extraction of teeth 12, 21, and 22,  periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy

505. A 45-year-old man came to a dental clinic to have dentures made for him. Objectively, his lower teeth 36, 35, 34, 31,41, 44, 45, and 47 are missing. The abutment teeth are stable, their roots are not exposed. Teeth 46 and 37 have low clinical crowns, their cusps and equator are not well-defined. What denture design would be optimal in this case?
a. -
b. Arch denture with abutment and  retaining clasps
*c. Arch denture with telescopic crowns
d. Partial removable laminar denture
e. Swaged-soldered dental bridge

506. A 16-year-old girl came to a dentist to check the quality of fissure sealing that had been performed one year ago. Objectively, the sealant is completely retained in teeth 17 and 27, while in teeth 37 and 47 the sealant is only partially retained and the enamel in the longitudinal fissures of these teeth is softened and chalk-like, when probed. Fedorov-Volodkina Hygiene Index is 2.5. What tactics should the dentist choose regarding teeth 37 and 47 in this case?
a. Invasive sealing
b. Repeat noninvasive sealing
c. Electrophoresis with a calcium-containing solution
*d. Preventive filling
e. Applications with a fluorine-containing  gel

507. A 50-year-old patient, an employee of the print shop, complains of foul smell from his mouth and excessive salivation. Objectively against the background of hyperemic and slightly swollen gums there is a blue-black border along the gum margin of the lower jaw and upper front teeth. There is a large amount of dental deposit observed. Name the type of stomatitis in this patient:
a. Mercury
b. Catarrhal
c. Bismuth
d. Necrotizing ulcerative
*e. Lead

508. A 33-year-old man came to a dental surgeon complaining of frequent exacerbations of pain and inflammation in his lower right wisdom tooth within the last 6 months. Currently, the patient is not in pain, the mouth opens freely. Examination detects visible mesial cusps of an atypically located impacted tooth 48. Mandibular X-ray shows dystopic tooth 48 on the right, the crown of which presses into tooth 47. What should the doctor do in this case?
*a. Atypical extraction of tooth 48
b. Monitoring until complete eruption of  tooth 48
c. Extraction of tooth 47
d. Excision of the operculum over tooth 48
e. Referral for orthodontic treatment

509. A 43-year-old man complains of a periodic feeling of heaviness in his right buccal region and a salty taste in his mouth with frequent exacerbations. Objectively, his parotid salivary gland on the right is dense, elastic, springy, and painless. Thick saliva with translucent mucus inclusions is being secreted from the duct opening. The sialogram revealed numerous small cavities in the parenchyma of the gland. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic interstitial parotitis
b. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland
c. Herzenberg's parotitis
*d. Chronic parenchymal parotitis
e. Sjogren's syndrome

510. A 35-year-old woman came to a dental surgeon complaining of a slight deformity of the mandibular body on the right. Orthopantomogram shows a round homogeneous shadow with clear margins in the mandibular body. The density of the shadow is close to that of dental tissues. On its periphery, the neoplasm is surrounded by a transparent zone 1 mm wide. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ameloblastoma
b. Osteoma
*c. Odontoma
d. Mixoma
e. Odontogenic fibroma

511. A 34-year-old man came to a dental clinic to have his tooth 38 extracted. He has an inflammatory contracture of the II degree (mouth opens by 1.5 cm). What anesthesia must be provided to eliminate the contracture in this case?
*a. Berchet-Dubov anesthesia
b. Mental anesthesia
c. Mandibular anesthesia
d. Torusal anesthesia
e. Gow-Gates anesthesia

512. The anatomo-physiological method was applied to determine the interalveolar height of a 65-year-old man with completely edentulous jaws. How does the distance between the control points on the chin and at the nasal base differ in this case from the physiological resting state of the lower jaw?
*a. It is 2-3 mm shorter
b. It is 5-6 mm shorter
c. It is 5-6 mm longer
d. It is 2-3 mm longer
e. The distance is the same

513. A 24-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for extraction of tooth 38. What anesthesia should be given to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Infiltration
b. Tuberal
*c. Torusal
d. Mandibular
e. Plexus

514. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of missing upper teeth. Objectively, his teeth 24 and 25 are missing, the bite is orthognathic, the crowns of teeth 23 and 26 are tall and intact. It is planned to make a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge for this patient. What impression material must be used to obtain an impression in this case?
a. Plaster
b. Thermoplastic
c. Zinc oxide eugenol
*d. Silicone
e. Alginate

515. A 70-year-old man has edentulous maxilla. Objectively maxillary tuberosity and alveolar processes are completely atrophied; palatine vault is flat, its mucosal layer is moderately pliant. In this case the patient's atrophic edentulous maxilla can be classified as:
a. Schroeder class II
b. -
c. Keller class III
*d. Schroeder class III
e. Keller class II

516. What denture constructions should be chosen in cases of multiple adentia during the early period of changing occlusion?
a. No denture is necessary
b. Clasp-retained (bugel) dentures
c. Dental bridges
d. Removable complete dentures
*e. Removable partial dentures

517. After sustained trauma a man developed nose bleeding, reduced mouth opening, sensation of paresthesia in the right infraorbital region and lower eyelid. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to concave right temporal region; step deformity symptom is observed in the middle of the lower right eye socket and in the area of zygomaticoalveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Displaced fracture of the temporal bone
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
c. Zygomatic arch fracture
d. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
e. Nondisplaced fracture of the temporal bone

518. A 17-year-old young man came to a dentist with complaints of significant gingival bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth. The doctor noted that walking is problematic for this patient because of pain in his knees and ankle joints. The patient's medical history informs that the pain is associated with hemorrhages into the joints - hemarthroses; the bleeding when he brushes his teeth has been observed since childhood. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Post-traumatic arthritis
c. Acute leukemia
*d. Hemophilia
e. Rheumatoid polyarthritis

519. A 42-year-old man complains of periodic pain in his tooth 48. On examination tooth 48 is partially erupted with its medial cusps, its mucosa is pale pink and painless on palpation, the mouth opening is fully unhindered. X-ray shows tooth 48 to be located medially to tooth 47. Choose the surgical treatment:
a. Operculum removal
b. Typical tooth extraction of 48
c. Operculum dissection
d. Crown and root separation
*e. Atypical tooth extraction of 48

520. A 7-year-old girl received conduction anesthesia with 2% articaine solution for extraction of tooth 16. She has no history of allergies. After receiving anesthesia the patient complained of weakness, she developed skin pallor, cyanosis, and nausea. Her blood pressure dropped significantly. The patient is conscious. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pain shock
*b. Collapse
c. Vertigo
d. Allergic response to the anesthetic
e. Anaphylactic shock

521. After a clasp-retained (bugel) maxillary denture is made, it is necessary to assess the quality of the newly-made construction. Width of the denture arch should be:
*a. 5-8 mm
b. 10-12 mm
c. 3-5 mm
d. 12-15 mm
e. 1.5-2 mm

522. A clasp (bugel) denture is being made for the upper jaw of a 64-year-old man, who has a Kennedy's class II dentition defect. After parallelometry, the types of boundary lines were determined on the abutment teeth. Tooth 24 has a type 1 boundary line. What type of clasp (clammer) according to the Ney classification is indicated in this case?
*a. Type I
b. Type V
c. Type IV
d. Type III
e. Type II

523. After a thorough examination, a 32-year-old patient was diagnosed with black hairy tongue syndrome. What medicines must be prescribed to this patient?
*a. Keratolytics
b. Vitamins
c. Keratoplastics
d. Antiseptics
e. Antiviral agents

524. A 44-year-old patient underwent a surgery to close a soft tissue defect in the submental region using a Filatov stem. Will the sensitivity in the postoperative site be restored?
a. Sensitivity will not be restored
b. Tactile sensitivity and partially pain sensitivity will be restored
c. Only pain sensitivity will be restored
d. Only temperature sensitivity will be restored
*e. Pain sensitivity, tactile sensitivity, and temperature sensitivity will be restored

525. A 7-year-old boy was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic granular periodontitis of tooth 75. The crown of tooth 75 is destroyed by its 3/4. During examination, the child behaves calmly and answers the questions. The boy is somatically healthy. What anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Topical anesthesia
b. Intravenous anesthesia
c. Infiltration anesthesia
d. Facemask general anesthesia
*e. Conduction anesthesia

526. A 22-year-old man complains of tearing, throbbing, constant, intensifying pain in the tooth on the upper left jaw. The pain has been persisting for 4 days. Objectively tooth 26 has deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing is painless. Percussion is acutely painful. The tooth is mobile. Mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 26 is painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
*e. Acute suppurative periodontitis

527. A 45-year-old man came to an orthopedic dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect of the shape of his face. According to the patient, this defect was caused by a dysfunction of his maxillofacial system. Anthropometric examination shows that the upper and lower parts of his face are approximately equal in size and the straight hairline in the forehead area gives his face a square shape. What type of face is it according to Bauer?
a. Cerebral
b. Digestive
c. Progenic
*d. Muscular
e. Respiratory

528. A patient from a psychiatric clinic was referred to a dentist for treatment. After the examination she was diagnosed with acute median caries of tooth 16 (Black's class I). The patient has problems with communication and is afraid of injections. The doctor decided to use the ART technique. What filling material should be used in this case?
a. Macrofilled composite
b. Amalgam
c. Microfilled composite
d. Hybrid composite
*e. Glass ionomer cement

529. A 30-year-old woman complains of mild burning sensation in her lower lip and its dryness. She peels skin scales off with her teeth. She has been presenting with this condition for 10 years. On examination the skin scales are gray and located on the lip from the Klein's line to the center of the vermillion border from angle to angle of the mouth. The scales are firmly attached in the center and are loose on the periphery. Their forcible removal does not result in erosions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exfoliative cheilitis
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Allergic contact cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Eczematous cheilitis

530. What shape does the upper dental arch have in the permanent dentition?
a. Saddle-shaped
b. Trapezoid
c. Semicircle
*d. Semi-ellipse
e. Parabola

531. During his shift a dentist of the prosthodontics unit has consulted and examined the patient, checked the crowns, installed dental bridges, measured centric jaw relation, and made necessary corrections to the removable dentures. What is the normal workload of a dentist per shift and per month measured in arbitrary units of labor intensity (AU) in a five-day work week and according to the normatives for provision of healthcare to the adults?
a. 9 AU - 189 AU
b. 7 AU - 147 AU
c. 8 AU - 168 AU
d. 5 AU - 105 AU
*e. 6 AU - 126 AU

532. During administration of infraorbital anesthesia, a patient developed a focus of skin pallor in the infraorbital region. The general condition of the patient did not deteriorate. The doctor diagnosed skin ischemia in the patient. What aid must be provided in this case?
*a. This condition needs no treatment, the  ischemia will pass on its own
b. Give liquid ammonia to smell
c. Administer tavegyl (clemastine) or  suprastin (chloropyramine) solution  intramuscularly
d. Administer 1 mL of cordiamine  intramuscularly
e. Administer 1 mL of 10% caffeine solution subcutaneously

533. Examination of the oral cavity of a 12-year-old child revealed a carious cavity on the medial contact surface of tooth 46. The cavity is located within the mantle dentin, its walls and floor are pigmented and dense. Thermal stimuli provoke no response. Preparation of tooth 46 is painful in the area of dentinoenamel junction. The decay-missing-filled index is DMF+df=2. What filling material will be optimal in this case?
a. Glass-ionomer cement
b. Zinc phosphate cement
c. Amalgam
*d. Photopolymer composite
e. Silicophosphate cement

534. A 42-year-old woman complains of sharp pain in her right temporomandibular joint. The pain intensifies during lower jaw movements. Three days ago, she was injured (fell and hit her chin on a hard object). Objectively, her face is symmetrical, the bite is orthognathic, the mouth opening is limited to 2 cm. X-ray shows smooth and straight contours of the bone tissues of the articular surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Right-sided anterior dislocation of the  mandible
b. Pain dysfunction of the right  temporomandibular joint
c. Ankylosis of the right  temporomandibular joint
*d. Acute post-traumatic arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
e. Rheumatic arthritis of the  temporomandibular joint

535. A patient with a defect in the crown portion of tooth 26 came to a dentist with complaints of frequent loss of photopolymer fillings. Examination of tooth 26 revealed a carious cavity, Black's class I. Occlusal surface destruction index is 0.6. What would be the optimal treatment in this case?
a. Tooth extraction and making a dental  bridge
*b. Inlay
c. Pivot crown
d. Artificial crown
e. Cement filling

536. Preparation of the vital tooth 34 for the installation of an all-ceramic crown is planned for a 38-year-old man. The man suffers from ischemic heart disease. What anesthesia is advisable in this case?
a. Infiltration
b. Torusal
c. Tuberal
d. Mental
*e. Intraligamentary

537. A 63-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of missing lower lateral teeth. Objectively, his teeth 35, 36, 37, 38, 45, 46, 47, and 48 are missing. Orthopantomogram shows resorption of the alveolar processes that amounts to 1/3 of the height of interdental septa in the area of the remaining teeth. What dental orthopedic appliance would be optimal in this case?
a. Partial removable laminar denture
b. Mamlok splint
c. Elbrecht splint
*d. Clasp (bugel) denture with a multi-link clasp (clammer)
e. Dental bridge-splint

538. A 5-year-old child was diagnosed with chronic gangrenous pulpitis of tooth 55. What substance would be optimal for antiseptic treatment of the root canals in this case?
a. Furacilin (Nitrofural) solution
*b. Sodium hypochlorite solution
c. Formalin (Formaldehyde) solution
d. Hydrogen peroxide solution
e. Ethonium solution

539. Decay-missing-filled index of a 6.5-year-old child is DMF+df=7. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.5. Fissures in the permanent molars are intact, deep, and open. What method of caries prevention would be advisable in this case?
a. Application of remineralization solution
b. Electrophoresis-aided application of remineralization solution
c. Application of fluoride varnish
*d. Noninvasive fissure sealing
e. Invasive fissure sealing

540. A 42-year-old woman with diabetes mellitus developed weakness, palpitations, agitation, hand tremors, and dimming vision after physical exertion. A few minutes later she lost her consciousness. Objectively, her skin is pale, moist, with normal turgor. The pulse is 88/min., rhythmic, of satisfactory volume. Blood pressure - 130/75 mm Hg. The respiration is vesicular. The eyeball tonus remains unchanged. The muscle tone is increased, hyperreflexia is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Uremic coma
*b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Ketoacidotic coma
d. Lactic acidotic coma
e. Hyperosmolar coma

541. A 49-year-old patient complains of bleeding, itching, and sore gums. Objectively, the gums are bright red and edematous, seropurulent exudate  is produced from the periodontal pockets during palpation, individual teeth exhibit mobility of the first degree. What changes in the complete blood count are characteristic of such course of the disease?
a. Neutrophilic left shift, thrombocytopenia
*b. Neutrophilic left shift, increased ESR
c. Neutrophilic right shift, increased ESR
d. Neutrophilic left shift, polycythemia
e. Neutrophilic left shift, decreased ESR

542. What dental appliances are used for the treatment of distal occlusion in the milk bite period?
a. Combined action appliances
b. Mechanical action appliances
*c. Functional action appliances
d. Edgewise technique
e. Extraoral appliances

543. A 56-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of acute pain and swelling in the submandibular region that intensify during eating sour foods. The patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic calculous sialadenitis with the concrement localization in the middle part of the gland duct. What is the optimal method of treatment in this case?
a. Removal of the gland
*b. Duct dissection and stone removal
c. Salivation-inducing diet
d. Pharmacotherapy
e. Duct bougienage

544. A man presents with clinical signs that resemble acute herpetic stomatitis. This diagnosis will be confirmed, if cytology detects the presence of the following cells:
a. Atypical mononuclear cells
b. Tzanck cells
c. Gaucher cells
*d. Multinucleated giant cells
e. Niemann-Pick cells

545. A 28-year-old man has received a trauma of the mental region. X-ray shows a bilateral mental fracture of the lower jaw. In what direction will the displacement of the lesser fragment occur?
a. Downwards and forwards
b. Upwards and backwards
c. -
d. No displacement occurs
*e. Downwards and backwards

546. What drugs are not used for premedication in dentistry?
*a. Psychostimulants and adaptogens
b. Analgesics
c. Muscarinic antagonists
d. Antihistamines
e. Sedatives

547. A 67-year-old woman complains of an ulcer on her oral mucosa and pain when eating. She has a history of decompensated valvular heart diseases. Examination detected in the posterior portion of her left buccal region an irregularly shaped ulcer with white-gray coating. Surrounding mucosa is not inflamed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Cancerous ulcer
b. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
*c. Trophic ulcer
d. Decubitus ulcer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

548. A 44-year-old man came to a dentist for sanation of the oral cavity. Objectively, the crown of his tooth 17 is completely destroyed. Having conducted additional examinations, the dentist made the following diagnosis: chronic fibrous periodontitis of tooth 17. Extraction of tooth 17 is indicated in this case. What type of conduction anesthesia should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
a. Torusal anesthesia
b. Incisor and infraorbital anesthesia
*c. Tuberal and palatine anesthesia
d. Plexual anesthesia
e. Infraorbital and palatine anesthesia

549. An 18-year-old young man complains of a cavity in his tooth 37 and pain that occurs when food gets into this cavity. The tooth was painful one year ago but he did not make an appointment with the doctor back then. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 37 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Overgrown granulation tissue protrudes from the perforation into the pulp chamber and fills practically the whole carious cavity. Probing of the granulations provokes bleeding and slight pain. Percussion is painless. Mucosa in the projection of the roots of tooth 37 is pale pink and has no pathologic changes. Electric pulp testing - 60 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Granulations from the area of root  bifurcation
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Hypertrophic papillitis

550. A person was provisionally diagnosed with sialolithiasis with stone localization in a salivary gland. What examination method can be used to detect X-ray-negative stones in the salivary glands?
a. Rheography
b. Thermometry
c. Targeted radiography
d. Computed radiography
*e. Ultrasound diagnostics

551. A 49-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, teeth 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, 36 are missing on his lower jaw. The remaining teeth on the lower jaw are intact, stable, without inclination, with a well-defined equator. It is recommended to make a clasp (bugel) denture for the patient's lower jaw. What type of clasp (clammer) should be used on abutment teeth 47 and 37 in this case?
a. Circumferential clasp
b. Roach clasp
c. Reverse action clasp
d. Bonwill clasp
*e. Akers clasp

552. A 32-year-old woman complains of bleeding gums and a mild pain in the area of her tooth 36 during eating. Objectively, her tooth 36 has a filling on its distal surface; there is no contact point between teeth 37 and 36; the interdental papilla is atrophied; the periodontal pocket is 4 mm deep. X-ray shows resorption of the apex of the interalveolar septum between teeth 37 and 36 and signs of osteoporosis; there are no changes in the other areas. What is the primary cause of the described condition?
a. Decreased local resistance
b. Traumatic occlusion
c. Virulent microflora
d. Insufficient hygiene
*e. Impractical installation of a filling

553. A 6-month-old child was diagnosed with bilateral bronchopneumonia and prescribed broad-spectrum antibiotics. The child is formula-fed and presents with maldigestion (dyspepsia). What pathologic changes can occur in the hard dental tissues in this case?
a. Hutchinson teeth
b. Local hypoplasia
c. Fournier teeth
d. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
*e. Systemic enamel hypoplasia

554. According to the professional standards, a dental orthopedist with work experience of 7 years and 6 months received qualification category I. How long must be the dentist's record of service, to be eligible for the next certification?
a. 15 years
b. 12 years
c. 9 years
d. 8 years
*e. 10 years

555. A 25-year-old man was diagnosed with acute deep caries of tooth 13, Black class V. Photopolymer composite material is planned to be used for aesthetical restoration of tooth 13. What material should be used as a lining for the floor of the carious cavity in this case?
*a. Calcium-containing paste
b. Iodoform paste
c. Dentin paste
d. Devitalizing paste
e. Resorcin-formalin paste

556. The parents of a 5-year-old girl complain that their child developed acute fever of 39°C, weakness, sore throat, and rash on the body, and started refusing to eat. Objectively, her oral mucosa is dry, the tongue is bright red and has edematous papillae, the mucosa of the tonsils, palatal arches, and soft palate is sharply hyperemic. Submandibular lymphadenitis is observed. Bright red, fine rashes that merge together are observed on the skin of the child's face and neck, except the nasolabial triangle. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
b. Measles
*c. Scarlet fever
d. Diphtheria
e. Infectious mononucleosis

557. A man complains of pain in his lower right jaw and impaired mouth opening. Objectively on visual examination his face is symmetrical, mouth opening is slightly impaired, trismus of the 1 degree is observed. Mucosa behind tooth 47 is swollen, hyperemic, and painful on palpation. Medial cusps of tooth 48 are visible, while the tooth itself has not fully erupted. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Acute odontogenic periostitis
b. Abscess of the pterygomandibular space
*c. Pericoronitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

558. A 12-year-old girl complains of general weakness, high temperature, and swelling of the face on both sides. She has been ill for two days. In the school where the child studies, some students have similar complaints. Examination detects the following: body temperature - 38.5°С, swelling of both parotid salivary glands, the skin over the glands is not discolored, palpation is painful, especially when pressing in the area of the mastoid processes. The mucosa in the area of the salivary gland openings is edematous and hyperemic. Salivation is reduced. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Concrementous sialadenitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic parenchymal parotitis
*c. Acute epidemic parotitis
d. Herzenberg's pseudoparotitis
e. Acute bacterial parotitis

559. Missing tooth 12 of a 35-year-old patient is being restored with a ceramic crown fixed on an individual zirconium dioxide abutment. What method allows obtaining a digital model of the denture bed tissues?
a. CAD/CAM
*b. Scanning
c. Obtaining an impression
d. Wax modelling
e. Digital modelling

560. A 39-year-old man came to a dentist with complains of mobility of his upper and lower teeth. Objectively, the bite is orthognathic, the dentition is continuous, the teeth have pathological mobility of the I-II degree. The marginal periodontium is in a satisfactory condition. What type of dentition stabilization must be used in this case?
a. Frontosagittal
b. -
c. Parasagittal
*d. Arched
e. Sagittal

561. 9.5-year-old child complains of destruction of an upper right lateral tooth. Objectively, the crown part of tooth 16 is destroyed and its dental cavity is exposed. Probing at the level of root canal entrances is slightly painful and provokes intensive hemorrhage. Percussion of the tooth is painless. Alveolar mucosa in the projection of the roots of tooth 16 has a fistula. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

562. A 20-year-old girl came to a dentist for a preventive examination. She has no complaints. Objectively, on the vestibular surface of her tooth 17 within the enamel there is a carious cavity with a wide opening. The enamel of the cavity walls and floor is dense and pigmented. Probing of the carious defect is painless. There is no response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of the tooth is painless. What is the diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic initial caries
b. Acute superficial caries
*c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute initial caries
e. Chronic median caries

563. A 49-year-old man has been hospitalized into the maxillofacial department in a severe condition with the diagnosis of phlegmon of the mouth floor with the purulent process spreading to the neck. While lying on the operating table, the patient developed signs of asphyxia. What measures should be taken first in this case?
a. Provide symptomatic pharmacotherapy
b. Perform phlegmon dissection under face mask anesthesia
*c. Perform a tracheotomy
d. Place the patient into an upright position
e. Perform fixation of the tongue

564. When administering anesthesia, the dentist made an injection into the mucogingival junction of the upper jaw between teeth 12 and 11. The dentist directed the needle upwards, backwards, and outwards, pushed it to a depth of 1.5 cm, and released 1.7 mL of 4% articaine. What nerve endings will be blocked after receiving this type of anesthesia?
a. Middle superior alveolar nerve
b. Posterior superior alveolar nerve and pes anserinus minor
c. Anterior superior alveolar nerve and nasopalatine nerve
d. Posterior superior alveolar nerve
*e. Middle and anterior superior alveolar nerves and infraorbital nerve

565. A 55-year-old woman is undergoing a treatment for generalized parodontitis (II-III degree). In the course of treatment, it is necessary to extract a large number of teeth with III degree mobility. When should the immediate denture be installed after the operation?
a. 2 months later
*b. The day when the teeth are extracted
c. 14 days later
d. 24 hours later
e. 7 days later

566. During preventive examination a 40-year-old man presents with the following changes: marginal gingiva is enlarged, torus-shaped, cyanotic, slightly bleeding when touched with a dental probe; there is no pain. Staining the gums with Lugol's iodine solution results in light-brown coloring of mucosa. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
*b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis

567. A 57-year-old man presents with habitual mandibular dislocation. To reduce mouth opening, Yadrova apparatus was made. How long should the treatment last in this case?
*a. 3 months
b. 12 months
c. 9 months
d. 18 months
e. 6 months

568. A woman complains of pain in her gums, unpleasant smell from her mouth, difficult eating, general weakness, low-grade fever. Objectively her gums are hyperemic, with areas of ulceration, covered in necrotic deposit. Microscopy revealed fusospirochetosis. Choose the medication for etiotropic treatment:
a. Chlorhexidine
b. Galascorbin
c. Chymotrypsin
*d. Metronidazole
e. Keratoline

569. A child is 9 years old. The central upper incisors are rotated around their axis. What abnormal tooth position is it?
a. Vestibular position
b. Infraocclusion
*c. Torsiversion
d. Transposition
e. Supraocclusion

570. A 57-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of the mobility of a large group of his teeth. After examination, it was decided to make him a removable splint as a part of treatment complex. What clasps (clammers) ensure the splinting properties of removable dental splints?
a. Abutment clasps
b. Dentoalveolar clasps
c. Retaining clasps
*d. Polyunit and mesiodistal clasps
e. Vestibular clasps

571. A 32-year-old man has been hospitalized ith the following diagnosis: displaced open traumatic right-sided angle fracture of the mandible. What is the typical direction of the larger fragment displacement in such cases?
a. Upwards, forwards, and away from the fracture
b. Upwards, forwards, and towards the fracture
c. Downwards, backwards, and away from the fracture
*d. Downwards, backwards, and towards the fracture
e. Upwards, backwards, and towards the fracture

572. A 43-year-old man complains of bleeding gums when he brushes his teeth and sore gums around some of his teeth. The patient was diagnosed with localized periodontitis. An occlusogram shows the points of extreme occlusal contact. What tactics should the doctor choose in this case?
a. Make metal crowns
b. Make porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns
c. Conduct functional tests
d. Make mouthguard splints
*e. File down the occlusal surfaces

573. A 5-year-old boy has been referred for consultation to the pediatric maxillofacial surgery department. Examination and palpation revealed in the right submandibular area a painful round dense mobile infiltrate 1.5 cm in diameter that is not fused with the underlying tissues. The infiltrate appeared one week ago. The skin over the infiltrate is not discolored and can be pinched into a fold. The oral cavity is sanitized. The child has a past history of tonsillitis. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Acute serous non-odontogenic  lymphadenitis
b. Acute purulent odontogenic  lymphadenitis
c. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis
d. Lateral neck cyst
e. Acute purulent non-odontogenic  lymphadenitis

574. During Eschler-Bittner test the profile of a 12-year-old girl with posterior occlusion has shown some improvement. Specify the condition that resulted in the development of posterior occlusion in this patient:
a. Maxillary overdevelopment
b. Mandibular overdevelopment
c. Mandibular underdevelopment and maxillary overdevelopment
*d. Mandibular underdevelopment
e. Maxillary underdevelopment

575. A 46-year-old man needs a classic 2-stage surgical installation of implants into the upper jaw. How long should be the interval between stages 1 and 2?
a. 2 months
b. 1.5 months
c. 0.5 months
*d. 3-6 months
e. 1 month

576. Removable complete dentures are being made for a 70-year-old man with completely edentulous jaws and marked progenia. What artificial teeth are not placed in such dentures?
a. Second molars on the lower jaw
b. First premolars on the lower jaw
c. Second premolars on the lower jaw
d. Second molars on the upper jaw
*e. Second premolars on the upper jaw

577. A 45-year-old man came to the dental orthopedist's office. He complains of pain on biting in the area of tooth 45. The method of electric pulp testing was used to confirm the diagnosis. What value of electric pulp testing will indicate the presence of pulp necrosis and apical periodontitis?
a. 20-40 microamperes
b. 2-6 microamperes
c. 50-60 microamperes
*d. 100 microamperes or more
e. 10-12 microamperes

578. A 35-year-old man complains of thickening of his maxillary alveolar process. Preliminary diagnosis of maxillary radicular cyst was made. What substance will be obtained as the result of the puncture of the alveolar process in the area of buccal thickening?
*a. Yellowish liquid
b. Pus
c. Epithelium
d. Turbid infiltration
e. Blood

579. A 5-year-old girl has a round soft elastic neoplasm up to 2 cm in diameter on the front surface of her neck on the midline. The neoplasm is painless to palpation and moves upwards during swallowing. This formation has been slowly growing over the course of the last 2 years. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Retention cyst of a sublingual salivary gland
b. Cyst of a submandibular salivary gland
*c. Midline cervical cyst
d. Chronic hyperplastic lymphadenitis
e. Cervical dermoid cyst

580. When examining a 58-year-old patient, the dentist detected a deformity and decreased size of the tongue that is dense and bluish-red. Gummatous infiltration is observed on the palatine mucosa. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Fissured tongue
*b. Tertiary syphilis
c. Median rhomboid glossitis
d. Desquamative glossitis
e. Congenital anomaly of the tongue

581. A 44-year-old man complains of a constant dull pain in the area of his tooth 37 that was extracted two days ago. The pain intensifies during eating. Objectively, the socket of the extracted tooth has a gray coating. Mucosa around the socket is hyperemic, edematous, and painful when palpated. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*b. Acute serous alveolitis
c. Acute serous periostitis
d. Pericoronitis
e. Chronic destructive osteomyelitis

582. A dental orthodontist has prescribed a complex of myogymnastic exercises with an equilibrator to an 8-year-old boy with the Angle's class II, subclass 1, closure of the first permanent molars. What muscle is trained using this dental appliance?
a. Pharyngeal muscles
b. Tongue muscles
c. Respiratory muscles
d. Mandibular elevator muscles
*e. Orbicularis oris muscle

583. In a maternity clinic, conversations were held with pregnant women about the importance of nutrition for the budding and development of the teeth of unborn children. At what week of intrauterine development does the bud stage of temporary tooth follicles begin in a fetus?
a. 18th week
*b. 7th week
c. 12th week
d. 15th week
e. 4th week

584. A 67-year-old man needs a partial removable denture for the upper jaw. Where should the denture border be located in relation to the patient's natural front teeth?
a. Overlapping crowns by 2/3 of their height
b. Reaching the necks of the teeth
c. Overlapping crowns by their full height
*d. Overlapping crowns by 1/3 of their height
e. Located below the necks of the teeth

585. During the administration of a conduction anesthesia for a 15-year-old child, the child developed complaints of a hoarseness, heavy respirations, and enlarged lips and tongue. Objectively, there is an edema of the lips and tongue that is displaced posteriorly, the respirations are frequent and difficult, the voice is hoarse. What is the likely diagnosis?
*a. Quincke's edema
b. Unconsciousness
c. Collapse
d. Vertigo
e. Anaphylactic shock

586. The maxillofacial surgery unit received a patient with complaints of inability to close his mouth. This condition occurred when the patient was biting an apple. Objectively there is a frightened expression on the patient's face, the mouth is open wide, the chin is displaced to the left, salivation is observed. Palpation through the external acoustic meatus detected no movements of the right articular head. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Right temporomandibular joint dislocation
b. Acute temporomandibular arthritis
c. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome
d. Fracture of the mandibular process
e. Bilateral temporomandibular joint dislocation

587. A 12-year-old boy complains of constant pain in the upper tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 26 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Thermal stimuli and probing of the cavity floor are painless. Percussion is sharply painful. Mucosa in the area of tooth 26 exhibits mild signs of inflammation. X-ray of tooth 26 shows no changes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative periodontitis

588. What manipulation of those listed below is textbf{NOT a part of typical  procedure of tooth extraction with forceps?
a. Closure of forceps handles
b. Tooth dislocation and extraction from the socket
*c. Applying tip of forceps jaw to the edge of alveolar process
d. Applying forceps jaw to the tooth
e. Pushing forceps jaw to the cementoenamel junction

589. A 42-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of bad breath and tooth mobility. Objectively, the gums in the area of all her teeth are edematous, hyperemic, cyanotic, and bleed when touched. Traumatic occlusion is observed in the area of the lower front teeth, the necks of these teeth are exposed, the periodontal pockets are 3.5-5 mm deep and filled with purulent exudate. The teeth have mobility of the I-II degree. X-ray shows resorption of interdental septa up to 1/3-1/2 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Generalized periodontitis, degree I,  chronic progression
*b. Generalized periodontitis, degree  II, exacerbation
c. Localized periodontitis, chronic  progression
d. Generalized periodontitis, degree II,  chronic progression
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis, degree II,  exacerbation

590. A 47-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of missing teeth 12, 11 and 21. After an examination, it was decided to make him a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge with teeth 13, 22 and 23 as the abutment. Paracervical ledges are being created on the abutment teeth during their preparation. Within what limits can their width vary?
a. 0.1-0.2 mm
b. 3.0-3.2 mm
c. 2.0-2.5 mm
*d. 0.5-1.0 mm
e. 2.5-3.0 mm

591. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of bleeding and edematous gums. Objectively, the gums on his upper and lower jaws are hyperemic and edematous, there are deposits of supra- and subgingival calculus. What diagnostic method must be used to make a final diagnosis?
a. Microbiological method
b. Immunological method
c. Clinical method
*d. Radiological method
e. Biochemical method

592. A 44-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in the area of the left cheek, deterioration of his general condition, and a fever of 38°С. Objectively, in the area of his left cheek, there is edema that is painful to palpation. The mucosa of the cheek and the mucogingival junction on the left is hyperemic and edematous, it has imprints of teeth and protrudes into the oral cavity. The left lower molars are destroyed, their remains have sharp edges. The patient was diagnosed with a deep phlegmon of the cheek on the left. What incision would be optimal in this case?
*a. Mucosal incision from within the oral cavity
b. Incision along the nasolabial fold
c. External buccal incision above the center of the infiltrate
d. Incision along the edge of the mandible
e. Submandibular skin incision 2 cm below the edge of the mandible

593. An 11-year-old child undergoes an orthodontic treatment. The child is prescribed a dental appliance with combined action (functional direction and mechanical action). What structural elements are likely to be present in this dental appliance?
a. Omega loop, screw
b. Occlusive onlays, labial bandages
c. Inclined plane, tongue shield
d. Occlusive onlays, buccal shields
*e. Occlusive onlays, screw

594. A 16-year-old girl came to a dentist complaining of darkened crowns of her teeth 11 and 12. According to the girl, about one year ago she had a sports trauma. Objectively, the crowns of teeth 11 and 12 are dark gray, intact, painless on percussion. The mucosa of the alveolar process is unchanged. X-ray shows round areas of bone tissue destruction in the region of the root apices of teeth 11 and 12. These bone lesions are 0.3-0.4 cm in diameter and have clear margins. What tactics would you choose?
a. No treatment is needed
*b. Conservative treatment of teeth 11 and 12
c. Monitoring the condition of teeth 11 and 12 for six months
d. Removal of teeth 11 and 12
e. Conservative surgical treatment of teeth 11 and 12

595. A 30-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a cavity in her upper right tooth. Objective examination detected a carious cavity with a wide opening on the masticatory surface of tooth 16. The cavity is located within dense and pigmented peripulpal dentin. The carious cavity does not communicate with the pulp chamber. Probing of the cavity walls and floor, cold stimuli, and percussion are painless. Electric pulp testing - 12 microamperes. Make the diagnosis.
a. Chronic median caries
*b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

596. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of bleeding gums, teeth mobility on both his jaws, and bad breath. Examination was performed and the diagnosis was made: generalized periodontitis of moderate severity. After therapeutic treatment it is necessary to splint the intact dentitions. What splint design would be optimal in this case?
a. Cap splint
b. Clasp (bugel) denture with continuous  clammers
c. Mamlok splint
*d. Elbrecht's cast continuous splint
e. Crown splint

597. A 21-year-old man came to the dentist complaining of general weakness, muscle pain, body temperature up to 38.3^oC, indigestion, excessive salivation, and rashes in the oral and nasal cavities, urethra, on the wings of the nose, and in the interdigital folds. These symptoms appeared after ingestion of milk during the patient's stay in the village. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Behcet's disease
b. Herpes zoster
c. Herpetic stomatitis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
*e. Murrain

598. Six months ago a 40-year-old man had his tooth 26 extracted; afterwards his oral cavity and maxillary sinus became communicating and the patient developed the first signs of maxillary sinusitis. What surgical procedure should be performed in this case?
a. Fistula packing with Iodoform gauze
*b. Maxillary sinusotomy with simultaneous plastic surgery for repair of the fistula
c. Fistula plication
d. Osteotomy of the alveolar process
e. Caldwell-Luc surgery

599. An 8-year-old girl complains of pain in her mouth during eating. Objectively, on the mucosa of the mucogingival fold in the frontal part of the mandible there is an oval erosion with a yellowish coating and red margin, 5x7 mm in size. The erosion appeared one year ago. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. -
c. Behcet disease
*d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Sutton aphthae

600. A 27-year-old man received a trauma of the lower jaw. After X-ray examination he was diagnosed with a displaced unilateral open mandibular fracture at the level of the mental foramen. The patient has retained all his teeth. The fracture line passes between teeth 34 and 35. What splint should be used in this case?
a. Smooth dental brace
b. Two-jaw splint with a spreader arch
c. Splint with an inclined plane
*d. Two-jaw splint with wire loops
e. Splint with a corrective loop

601. A 7-year-old boy was brought to the dentist. Objectively his gums are hyperemic and bleeding, the teeth are mobile and covered in plaque, their roots are exposed, periodontal pockets are pathologic and filled with granulations. The child is registered for regular check-ups with the pediatrician. According to the mother, lately the child's condition has been deteriorating. The boy presents with diabetes insipidus and exophthalmos. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Taratinov disease (eosinophilic granuloma of bone)
*b. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
c. Gaucher disease
d. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
e. Letterer-Siwe disease

602. A 43-year-old man came to the admission room. He complains of facial edema and enlarged upper lip and tongue. This condition developed approximately 40 minutes ago, when he took aspirin. Objectively the patient is anxious, his skin is of normal color, respiration is partially disturbed. The upper lip, eyelids, cheeks, tongue, and soft palate are swollen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
*b. Quincke edema
c. Lymphedema of the lips
d. Cheilitis glandularis
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

603. A 32-year-old man complains of a moderate periodical dull aching pain in the left temporomandibular joint. He notes stiffness in the left temporomandibular joint and limited mouth opening at the end of the day. X-ray shows a joint space narrowing in the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pain dysfunction syndrome of the left temporomandibular joint
*b. Chronic arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
e. Acute arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint

604. A 50-year-old person was hospitalized with a gunshot wound to the lower jaw and a bone defect in the mental region. What method of immobilization is indicated in this case?
a. Double jaw splint with a spreader arch
b. Double jaw splint with hook loops and  mandibulomaxillary elastic extension
c. Single jaw splint-brace
d. Bone suture
*e. Rudko extraoral appliance

605. A 25-year-old man complains of a cavity in his lower left tooth, pain after eating sweet, sour, or solid food. Objectively in tooth 16 there is a deep carious cavity filled with light-colored softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful, pain stimulus is painful, but cold abates immediately after the stimulus is removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute focal pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

606. A porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge is being made for the upper jaw of a 40-year-old man. The patient made a visit for fitting the metal frame of the denture. What material should be used during the adjustments to achieve the complete fit of the frame to the abutment teeth?
a. Base silicone mass
b. "Orthocor" material
*c. Corrective silicone mass
d. Base wax
e. Copying paper

607. A patient received a chemical burn to the face. The burn was caused by sulfuric acid. What substance should be used in the wound processing to neutralize this acid?
a. Acid
b. Flowing water
c. Antiseptic
*d. Alkali
e. Alcohol

608. A 15-year-old girl complains of a carious cavity in her tooth, spontaneous pain that quickly abates. The child is somatically healthy. Objectively in tooth 36 there is a carious cavity within the parapulpar dentin, response to a cold stimulus is painful, pain abates in 1-2 miuntes. Probing is painful in one spot. Percussion is painless. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute local serous pulpitis
*b. Pulp hyperemia
c. Acute diffuse serous pulpitis
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Acute deep caries

609. Extraction of tooth 36 is indicated for a 39-year-old woman because of destruction of its bifurcation. The crown part of the tooth was removed together with the mesial root. The distal root of tooth 36 is destroyed below the gum level. What instrument should be used to remove the distal root of tooth 36?
a. Converging beak-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet root forceps
*c. Angle elevator right (outward facing)
d. Straight elevator
e. Angle elevator left (inward facing)

610. In a state of inebriation a 36-year-old woman suffered a domestic accident 4 hours ago. She was delivered to the maxillofacial surgery unit. On examination she was provisionally diagnosed with a deep perforating incised wound of the lateral surface of her face with injured perioral area and parotid gland. The woung edges are gaping. This gaping is caused by:
a. Specifics of facial innervation
b. Depth of the wound
*c. Location of facial muscles
d. Location of masticatory muscles
e. Wound communication with the oral cavity

611. A 46-year-old man complains of facial asymmetry, intense pain in the area of his teeth 17 and 18, severe headache, body temperature of 39^oC, and general weakness. Objectively, his face is asymmetrical due to a slight edema of the right buccal, zygomatic, and lower temporal regions. His mouth opening is limited. The crown of tooth 18 is destroyed. The mucosa of the mucogingival fold in the projection area of the roots of tooth 18 is hyperemic and edematous. Palpation reveals a painful infiltrate behind the right maxillary tuberosity. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Odontogenic abscess of the  pterygopalatine fossa
b. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Odontogenic buccal phlegmon
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Odontogenic acute purulent periostitis

612. One week ago a patient received removable dentures for the upper and lower jaws. During a follow-up visit to the dentist the patient complains of accidental cheek-biting and pain. Objectively he presents with hyperemia, edema, ulceration of the buccal mucosa along the line of teeth closure in the area of the artificial molars. What is the likely cause of this condition?
a. Incorrectly measured height of the occlusion
*b. Cusps of the molars on the upper and lower jaw are closing in one vertical plane
c. Toxic-allergic reaction to the plastic components of denture base
d. Due to diabetes mellitus, mucosa is more susceptible to trauma
e. Fixed anterior occlusion

613. When pressing plastic dough, a dental technician several times opened and closed the cuvette to check the quantity of the plastic mass in it. These actions may result in the development of:
a. Compression porosity
b. Gas porosity
*c. Granular porosity
d. Cracks in the plastic
e. Residual stresses in the structure of a  denture

614. A 10-year-old boy complains of a painful ulcer in his mouth. The ulcer has been persisting and increasing in size for 1.5 months. Objectively, on the buccal mucosa there is a soft shallow ulcer 1 cm in diameter with uneven undermined edges. The floor of the ulcer is bumpy and covered in a yellow-gray coating. The ulcer is surrounded with numerous small yellowish tubercles. The regional lymph nodes are elastic, painful, and matted together. These signs are characteristic of the following disease:
a. Lichen ruber planus
*b. Tuberculosis
c. Syphilis
d. Cancer
e. Actinomycosis

615. Examination of a woman by a dentist detects marked hyperemia of her oral mucosa that in places is covered in a whitish coating that can be easily removed by scraping. Angular cheilitis is observed in the corners of her mouth. Her cervical and axillary lymph nodes are enlarged. For the last 3 months she was presenting with general weakness, temperature increasing to 37.5°С in the evening, weight loss, and prolonged diarrheas. What examination method can confirm the diagnosis in this case?
a. Lymph node biopsy
b. Complete blood count
c. Inoculation to obtain blood culture
d. Microscopy of the coating
*e. Blood test for antibodies to HIV

616. An 18-year-old girl, having returned from a summer vacation, developed complaints of a mild pain in the lips, her lips are dry and peeling. Objectively, her lower lip is bright-red, its red border is dry and covered in small silvery-white scales. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic exematous cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Glandular glandularis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis
*e. Actinic cheilitis

617. During preventive examination, a 20-year-old man was found to have enamel defects that look like irregularly shaped coarse white spots in the vestibular precervical area of teeth 11 and 12. The spots stain with 2% methylene blue solution. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute superficial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class III
b. Focal enamel hypoplasia of teeth 11 and 12
c. Acute superficial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class V
*d. Acute initial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class V
e. Acute initial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class III

618. A 13-year-old girl complains of pain and swelling in her right submandibular region and a fever of 38.5^oC) Objectively, her general condition is moderately severe, her face is asymmetrical due to a soft tissue edema in the right submandibular region. Palpation detected a dense painful circumscribed infiltrate; the skin over the infiltrate is hyperemic and cannot be pinched into a fold; fluctuation sign is positive. In the oral cavity, the crown of tooth 46 is destroyed and discolored, tooth percussion is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Odontogenic abscess of the right  submandibular area originating from tooth 46
b. Acute odontogenic serous periostitis of the mandible originating from tooth 46
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 46
d. Acute odontogenic purulent periostitis of the mandible originating from tooth 46
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the  mandible originating from tooth 46

619. Removable partial dentures for both jaws are being made for a 60-year-old man. The patient has a history of chronic angular stomatitis. When making his dentures, special attention should be paid to the:
*a. Restoration of the interalveolar height
b. Choice of material for denture base
c. Final processing of the denture base
d. Choice of impression material
e. Oral cavity sanation

620. A woman complains of spontaneous attacks of acute pain, with practically no intermissions and irradiation into the temple; cold water slightly mitigates the pain. In tooth 26 examiantion revealed deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity bottom is acutely painful, the tooth is tender on vertical percussion. Make the provisional diagnosis regarding tooth 26:
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Pulpal hyperemia
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

621. During preventive examination a 10-year-old child was found to have matt white spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth. The spots are located in the area of tooth cervix. Enamel surface in the affected area is undamaged and can be stained with methylene blue. Subjectively the child has no complaints. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
*a. Remineralization therapy
b. ART technique
c. Teeth sealing
d. Impregnation method
e. Preparation and filling

622. A 23-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of fever of 38^oC, headache, general weakness, pain during eating, bleeding gums, and bad breath. Objectively, her gingival margin has uneven contours and is covered in grayish-yellow plaque that can be easily removed exposing bleeding erosions and ulcers. Microscopy of the material obtained from the ulcer surface reveals a large number of spindle-shaped fusobacteria and spirochetes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Werlhof's disease
b. Acute leukemia
c. Tertiary syphilis
d. Diabetes mellitus
*e. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

623. A non-removable porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge is being made for a 35-year-old woman. Two-layer impressions were obtained using ''Silafex'' silicone material. The impression were sent for disinfection. What antiseptic should be used to process the impressions?
a. 3% chloramine solution
b. 70% alcohol solution
c. 0.5% hydrogen peroxide solution
d. 1.5% sodium bicarbonate solution
*e. 0.5% hypochlorite sodium solution

624. The sum of the transverse dimensions of certain teeth is used to build the Hawley-Herber-Herbst diagram and is taken as the radius AB. What teeth are measured for this purpose?
a. 31, 32, 41, 42
b. 11, 12, 21, 22
c. 51, 52, 61, 62
*d. 11, 12, 13
e. 31, 32, 33

625. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with ulcerative gingivitis. After processing the patient's oral cavity with an antiseptic, the doctor applied anesthesia and removed dental plaque and necrotic coating. Final part of the medical appointment is the application of gingival dressing. What etiotropic drug should this dressing contain?
*a. Metronidazole
b. Methyluracil
c. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
d. Terrilytin
e. Pimafucin (Natamycin)

626. A child with unilateral nonunion of the upper lip underwent Limberg cheiloplasty. What is normally the optimal period for the surgical treatment of an upper lip nonunion?
a. 4-6 years
b. 1-1.5 years
c. The first days after birth
*d. 6-8 months
e. 2-3 years

627. A 6-year-old child complains of pain and edema in the upper right jaw, body temperature up to 37.9^oC, and deterioration of general well-being. Symptom onset was 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue edema of buccal and infraorbital regions on the right. The crown of 54 is destroyed by 1/2, percussion is painful; the tooth previously had been treated for complicated caries. On the palatine side of the affected tooth area there is a painful infiltration with fluctuation in its center; the tissues over the infiltration are hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of 54
c. Acute serous periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54
*d. Acute suppurative periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla

628. A 45-year-old woman complains of acute pain in her mouth, inability to eat, body temperature of 38^oC, pain in her muscles and joints, and general weakness. Her condition developed after an overexposure to cold. Objectively, on her hyperemic and edematous oral mucosa she has vesicles and erosions with fibrinous coating. There are bloody scabs on the vermilion border of her lips. Nikolsky's sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
*b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
c. Pemphigus
d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Chronic recurrent herpes

629. A child is diagnosed with congenital cleft in the soft palate and posterior part of the hard palate. What type of anesthesia should be given to the patient for uranostaphyloplasty?
a. Anesthesia mask
*b. Intubation narcosis
c. Infiltration anesthesia
d. Conduction anesthesia
e. Intravenous narcosis

630. A 34-year-old man complains of soft tissues edema in his lower left jaw and fistulae in the submandibular area. Teeth 36 and 37 are destroyed. Alveolar mucosa is swollen and hyperemic at the level of 36 and 37. X-ray detected sequestra in the mandibular body on the left. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Antibacterial treatment
*b. Extraction of teeth 36 and 37 and mandibular sequestrectomy
c. Extraction of teeth 36 and 37
d. Puncture of the inflamed area
e. Mandibular sequestrectomy

631. A 49-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect, speech disorders, and problems with eating. Objectively, his teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 and 23 are missing, while teeth 17, 16, 15, 14, 24, 25, 26 and 27 are intact, but have a pathological mobility of the I-II degree. The lower dentition is preserved. Generalized periodontitis of the I degree, chronic progression, is observed. What denture can be used to eliminate the defect in the frontal maxillary region and stabilize the remaining teeth?
*a. Clasp (bugel) denture with continuous  clammers
b. Clasp (bugel) denture with beam  fixation system
c. Clasp (bugel) denture with telescopic fixation system
d. Crown splint for the lateral teeth and a  partial removable laminar denture
e. Partial removable laminar denture

632. A practically healthy 7-year-old child complains of a broken crown of the upper right front tooth and pain in this tooth. Objectively, 1/3 of the crown of tooth 11 is missing, the pulp is exposed in one spot, acutely painful, red, and bleeds when probed. Percussion of the tooth is slightly painful. The trauma was 2 hours ago. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
*b. Biological method
c. Vital amputation
d. Devital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

633. How often should a dentist's office be thoroughly cleaned?
*a. No less than once a week
b. No less than once every 2 weeks
c. No less than once a year
d. No less than twice a week
e. No less than once a month

634. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated infiltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the infiltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the infiltration there is a fistula. In the oral cavity the crown of 46 is destroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the fistula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Actinomycosis
b. Cheek furuncle
c. Odontogenic lymphadenitis
*d. Migrating facial granuloma
e. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis

635. A 29-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect in the form of a pigmented spot on his upper front tooth. Objectively, tooth 21 is slightly rotated along its axis and has a brown spot with clear boundaries on its mesial contact surface. The surface of the spot is slightly rough when probed. Thermal stimuli provoke no pain response. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Endemic fluorosis
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Enamel necrosis
d. Chronic superficial caries
*e. Chronic initial caries

636. Parents of a 4-year-old child complain of a discolored upper front teeth in their child. Objectively, white spots were detected on the vestibular surfaces of teeth 52, 51, 61 and 62 in their cervical areas. The enamel above the spots has lost its luster and is rough when probed. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Filing down the defects
*b. Deep fluoridation
c. ART method
d. Surgical treatment
e. -

637. A 21-year-old man complains of difficult mouth opening and visible facial deformation throughout the last 2 years. He has a history of facial trauma several years ago. Examination shows the right side of the face to be flattened, the chin is displaced to the right. Palpation detects diminished excursion of the articular head in the left lower jaw. Mouth opening is reduced to 1 cm. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Exacerbated chronic arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Anterior dislocation of the lower jaw
d. Acute arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
*e. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint

638. A 45-year-old woman complains of stiffness of movements in her temporomandibular joints, especially in the morning, and creaking when she opens her mouth. No external changes were detected in the area of the joints. X-ray shows deformation of the articular head, articular tubercle, and joint space with the joint space narrowing. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Habitual dislocation
b. False joint (pseudoarthrosis)
*c. Arthrosis
d. Neuromuscular syndrome
e. Chronic arthritis

639. A 33-year-old man complains of paroxysmal pain in his upper left tooth. The pain intensifies at night and in response to various stimuli and radiates into the left temple and eye. Similar pain attacks were occurring three months ago, but the patient did not consult a doctor. Objectively, tooth 25 has a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing at the point of communication is sharply painful, percussion is mildly painful. Mucosa in the area of the root apex projection of tooth 25 is unchanged. Thermodiagnostics is markedly positive, the pain attack is long-lasting. Electric pulp testing - 60 microamperes. X-ray shows slight widening of the periodontal fissure near the root apex of tooth 25. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

640. The dental surgery department received a women with complaints of swollen right side of the fase and indisposition. According to her medical history, one week ago she sensed itching in the right side of her face and noticed there a small dense nodule. She started to apply various ointments. Swelling was gradually increasing, the woman developed pain and fever. Objectively her condition is of moderate severity, body temperature is 39^oC) Her right buccal region is swollen, with hyperemic skin; in the center there is an oval edema elevated above the surrounding tissues with a black scab visible on its apex. Palpation detects a painful infiltration, 3.5 cm in diameter, and enlarged and painful submandibular lymph nodes. Mouth opening is slightly impaired, oral cavity is clean. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Furuncle
b. Acute lymphangitis
c. Acute lymphadenitis
d. Phlebitis of the facial vein
e. Carbuncle

641. An 8-year-old boy was diagnosed by a dentist with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 36. Previously, the treatment and extraction of temporary teeth was performed with local anesthesia. What would be the most rational treatment method in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Devital extirpation
c. Devital amputation
d. Biological method
*e. Vital amputation

642. A 6-month-old child has a spherical formation on the mucosa of the crest of the maxillary alveolar process. The formation is soft-elastic, 6 mm in diameter, translucent, with its blue-tinted content visible through. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Radicular cyst
b. Follicular cyst
c. Fibroma
d. Papilloma
*e. Eruption hematoma

643. Parents of a 3-year-old child complain of food periodically getting into the child's nasal cavity during feeding. Objectively there is a fissure in the area of the soft palate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cleft hard palate
b. Combined cleft palate
c. Congenital hidden cleft palate
*d. Isolated partial nonunion of the soft palate
e. Isolated nonunion of the hard and soft palate

644. A 59-year-old woman complains that fixation of her partial removable laminar denture became worse. She has been using this denture for one year. Objectively, the alveolar process in the edentulous areas is atrophied, the denture base corresponds with the denture bed, the denture is easy to place in and take out. What would be the doctor's tactics in this case?
a. Rebasing the denture
b. Making a denture with an elastic lining
*c. Activation of the retaining clasps (clammers)
d. Making the denture base smaller
e. Making a new denture

645. A 42-year-old woman came to a dentist. The doctor noted that her respiration became deep and noisy. Objectively, she presents with pallor, dry skin and mucosa, decreased skin turgor, soft eyeballs, weak pupillary response to light, deep and loud breathing, acetone smell from the mouth, weak pulse (70/min.), and blood pressure of 80/40 mm Hg. The patient has a history of diabetes mellitus. What emergency condition did she develop in this case?
a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Bronchial asthma attack
c. Hypoglycemic coma
*d. Hyperglycemic coma
e. Epileptic seizure

646. During intraoral examination the dentist suspected that the patient has syphilis. What should the dentist do in this case?
a. Decline to provide dental services for this patient
b. Inform the patient of the suspected diagnosis and end the visit
c. Obtain the impressions to study the diagnostic models
*d. Complete the examination and refer the patient for necessary tests
e. Continue the examination and start the teeth preparation

647. A 12.5-year-old child came to the dentist for oral cavity sanitation. Objectively caries progression in this child is severe: decay-missing-filled index is DMF=2+0+4=6. Green-Vermillion index is 1.7. Gingival mucosa is pale pink. What toothpastes should be prescribed in this case for oral hygiene?
a. Enzyme
b. Herbal extract
c. Salt supplement
*d. Amine fluoride
e. Antiseptic

648. A 48-year-old woman was hospitalized after a car accident. The patient complains of a cheek wound, intense headache, nausea, and dizziness. After a thorough examination, the following diagnosis was established: a contused lacerated cheek wound, closed craniocerebral injury, concussion. What type of trauma is it?
a. Multiple
*b. Compound
c. Isolated
d. Combined
e. Single

649. A 14-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of dry mouth and decreased salivation. During examination, her oral mucosa is matte and dry, with areas of whitish deposits. Hyperkeratosis of the excretory ducts of the salivary glands is observed. The skin of her face is pale and rough, her hair is dry, her nails are brittle and have transverse striations. Such symptoms can indicate the lack of a certain vitamin in the body. Name this vitamin.
a. B_1
b. B_2
c. К
d. D_3
*e. А

650. A child under 1 year of age with a congenital facial defect was hospitalized into the maxillofacial department. Objectively, there is a midline cleft of the soft and hard palate that reaches the incisive foramen, the vomer is located in the middle. The alveolar process and tissues of the upper lip are without deformities. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Combined cleft palate
*b. Isolated complete cleft of the hard and  soft palate
c. Complete cleft of the soft palate and  incomplete cleft of the hard palate
d. Isolated incomplete cleft of the hard and soft palate
e. Hidden cleft of the hard and soft palate

651. 10-year-old child complains of pain in the area of the upper front teeth during eating cold food. The pain started occurring one month ago after a trauma. Examination shows missing crown corner of tooth 21, the incisal edge of tooth 11 is broken off, with the fracture line located within the dentin. Probing of teeth 11 and 21 is painless. Response to a cold stimulus is painful, short-term. Electric pulp test - 7 microamperes. What filling material should be used in this case?
a. Microfilled composite
b. Amalgam
c. Dental compomer
*d. Microhybrid composite
e. Glass ionomer

652. A 40-year-old man presents with a medial defect of the hard palate 2x3 cm in size. Dentition is intact. What type of obturator would be optimal in this case?
a. Plate prosthesis with obturator
b. Floating obturator
c. Pomerantseva-Urbanska obturator
*d. Palatal plate
e. Ilina-Markosian obturator

653. A 13-year-old child complains of acute pain in an upper tooth. The pain intensifies during biting on this tooth. Objectively, the distal surface of tooth 16 has a deep carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity. Thermal stimuli and probing are painless. Tooth percussion is sharply painful. The tooth has the I degree mobility. The mucosa in the projection of the roots of tooth 16 is hyperemic and edematous. After necrectomy, the dental cavity was opened and purulent exudate was obtained. X-ray detects no changes. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Acute purulent periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute circumscribed pulpitis

654. A 15-year-old boy fell from a bicycle and hit his face. He came to a doctor for medical aid. After examination, the doctor established that the patient had a closed mechanical injury of the soft tissues without any visible violation of their anatomical integrity. Make the diagnosis.
a. Abrasion
b. Wound
c. Hematoma
d. Bruise
*e. Contusion

655. A 9-year-old girl complains of persisting pain in tooth 11 that one month ago sustained a trauma resulting in broken crown. The tooth received no treatment. Objectively the 1/4 of the tooth crown of 11 is broken off, the remaining crown is grayish, the dental cavity is not exposed. Percussion is acutely painful. The mucogingival fold is hyperemic and acutely painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse suppurative pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*e. Acute traumatic periodontitis

656. A 15-year-old girl complains of enlarged gums in the area of her upper and lower front teeth. Objectively, the gums are hypertrophied, loose, and bleeding. False periodontal pockets are observed. The girl was provisionally diagnosed with hypertrophic gingivitis. The proliferative processes in the patient's gums are most likely to be associated with:
a. Endocrine diseases
b. Diseases of the digestive system
c. Hypovitaminosis
d. Unsatisfactory oral hygiene
*e. Hormonal dysfunction

657. A removable full denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 75-year-old man. Objectively the alveolar process is slightly atrophied. Herbst tests are performed during fitting of an impression tray. When lips are stretched forwards the tray slips off. Where should the tray edge be shortened in this case?
a. Along the mylohyoid line
*b. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
c. From canine to canine on the lingual side
d. From behind the mandibular tuberosity to the mylohyoid line
e. In the premolar area on the lingual side

658. A 65-year-old patient complains of poor mandibular fixation of the clasp (bugel) denture that was made one month ago. Objectively, teeth 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 46 are preserved, the denture balances when one of ist sides is pressed. At what stage of making the clasp denture did a mistake occur?
a. Determining the centric occlusion
b. Obtaining the impressions
*c. Casting the frame
d. Modeling the clasps (clammers)
e. Performing parallelometry

659. A 35-year-old woman complains of marked pain, a submucosal nodule that appeared on the vestibular surface of the lower jaw in the area of her teeth 44 and 45, and lower lip numbness on one side. The first complaints developed after a surgery in this area. Palpation detects a limited painful nodule approximately 1 cm in diameter. The nodule is dense, elastic, with a smooth round surface. Its overlying mucosa is unchanged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Fibroma
*b. Traumatic neuroma
c. Epulis
d. Papilloma
e. Lipoma

660. A 15-year-old girl has been provisionally diagnosed with localized parodontitis by the dentist. What instrument should be used to measure the depth of the periodontal pockets?
a. Endodontic ruler
*b. Periodontal probe
c. Gracey curette
d. Periodontal knife
e. Button probe

661. A victim of a traffic accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. How should this patient be transported?
a. Positioned on the side on a soft stretcher
*b. In the prone position on a soft stretcher
c. In the sitting position with the head thrown back
d. Positioned on the side on a rigid stretcher
e. In the sitting position with air tube inserted into the upper airways

662. A 47-year-old man complains of discolored teeth 11 and 21. Objectively, his teeth 11 and 21 are pink, their canals are sealed to the apex. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns are planned for teeth 11 and 21. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of proximal surfaces of the abutment teeth?
a. 0^o
b. 15^o
c. 20^o
d. 10^o
*e. 5^o

663. A 35-year-old woman, who works as a teacher, came to an orthopedic dentistry clinic with complaints of an aesthetical defect, inability to bite food, and problematic articulation. Objectively, her teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22 are missing due to an injury, while teeth 13 and 23 are stable and intact, with painless percussion. What anesthesia should be provided for this group of teeth before their preparation for the making of a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge?
a. Central conduction anesthesia
*b. Infiltration anesthesia
c. Topical anesthesia
d. Tuberal anesthesia
e. Spongy anesthesia

664. A 14-year-old girl complains of a pulsing pain in her upper left teeth that lasts for 3 days already and sharply increases on biting. Objectively there is a carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity floor is painless. Vertical and horizontal percussion is sharply painful. Mucosa in the area of tooth 16 is hyperemic. What is the diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Pulpitis complicated with periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute serous pulpitis
*e. Acute purulent periodontitis

665. A 38-year-old man complains of a fever of 40°С and constant pain in his right lower jaw that radiates to the neighboring areas. Objectively, he has edema of soft tissues around the body of the mandible on the right, the skin is hyperemic. The mouth opening is reduced, the oral mucosa is edematous and hyperemic on both sides of the alveolar process in the area of teeth 45, 46, 47. The crown of tooth 46 is completely destroyed. Percussion of teeth 45, 46, 47 is painful, the teeth are mobile. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Acute odontogenic periostitis
b. Acute purulent odontogenic lymphadenitis
*c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 46
e. Odontogenic abscess of the right submandibular area

666. Parents of a 5-year-old girl brought her to the pediatric dentist for oral cavity sanation. After clinical examination she was diagnosed with chronic deep caries in 54. What filling material would be optimal for the treatment of tooth 54 in this case?
a. Zinc phosphate cement
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Composite
d. Silicophosphate cement
e. Silicate cement

667. A 28-year-old woman came to a dentist for a preventive examination. Objectively, the pericervical region of her teeth 13 and 23 has irregular-shaped defects of hard tissues located within the deep layers of enamel. The floor of the defects is rough, their edges are matte white, without luster. What should be the doctor's tactics regarding these defects?
a. Silvering of the defects
b. Filing-off of the defects
c. Composite filling without preparation
d. Remineralizing therapy
*e. Preparation and filling

668. A 45-year-old woman complains of bleeding gums. The bleeding occurs when she brushes her teeth or eats hard food. Objectively, in the frontal area of her lower jaw the gums are hyperemic, edematous, and bleed when palpated. In the other areas, her oral mucosa is normal. The woman has a deep bite. Her teeth are stable, except for teeth 41 and 31 (the I degree of mobility). X-ray shows resorption of the interalveolar septa in the area of teeth 41, 42, 31, and 32 to 1/3 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage
b. Generalized periodontitis, I degree
*c. Localized periodontitis
d. Catarrhal gingivitis
e. Periodontosis, I degree

669. A 26-year-old man came to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. Objective examination of tooth 16 revealed on its masticatory surface a hard tissue defect  within the mantle dentin. The dentin is dense and pigmented. Probing, thermal testing, and percussion are painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute median caries
*b. Chronic median caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic deep caries

670. A 21-year-old woman complains of short-term pain attacks in her lower left tooth that are provoked by thermal stimuli and quickly stop after the stimulus is removed. On the masticatory surface of tooth 47, examination reveals a carious cavity with a narrow entrance that is filled with light softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor and percussion of tooth 47 are painless. Probing of the cavity walls is painful. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic median caries

671. A 45-year-old man complains of persisting dull pain in 46 that occurs in response to thermal and chemical stimuli. Examination of 46 detected in the precervical area of its vestibular surace a deep carious cavity filled with soft pigmented dentin. Probing is sharply painful at one point. Cold water stimulus induces a dull pain that gradually intensifies. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Acute deep caries
*d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

672. A 54-year-old man came to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. He has a single small erosion on the vermilion border of his lower lip, located laterally at the distance of 1/3 from the right mouth angle. The erosion has an irregular shape, deep red color, and a smooth glossy surface. Palpation detects no induration of its base, regional lymph nodes are not palpable. The lesion first appeared 3 years ago. Usually, it is observed for 1.5-2 months, then it heals and reappears. Sometimes it is covered in a scab. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Recurrent herpes
b. Primary syphiloma, erosive form
c. Bowen's disease
*d. Manganotti's abrasive precancerous  cheilitis
e. Leukoplakia, erosive form

673. A 17-year-old girl complains of involuntary pain in her upper tooth, which occurred for the first time this morning. The pain lasted for up to 2 minutes. Objectively, her tooth 15 has a deep carious cavity on its masticatory surface. A cold stimulus provokes a pain attack. The cavity floor is tender when probed. Percussion is painless. Electric pulp testing - 12 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis
*e. Pulpal hyperemia

674. A 7-year-old girl was brought to the clinic by her parents during the first hours after she received a trauma of her upper central incisor. The girl complains of pain in the tooth on touching. Objectively, during examination the traumatized tooth is slightly mobile in one direction, its percussion is painful, no changes are observed in the surrounding tissues. The tooth became pink-colored. What is the cause of tooth discoloration?
a. Disturbed intactness of the marginal periodontium
b. Trauma of the oral mucosa in the area of the causative tooth
c. Trauma of the interdental papilla
d. Disturbed intactness of the growth zone
*e. Disturbed intactness of the neurovascular bundle

675. X-ray of the patient shows a focus of bone destruction 3x4 cm in size in the mandibular body. The focus is structured as numerous small cavities different in size and shape and separated by septa. Tumor puncture yielded brown liquid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Radicular cyst of the mandible
*b. Giant cell tumor of the mandible
c. Mandibular ameloblastoma
d. Soft odontoma of the mandible
e. Carcinoma of the mandible

676. A 5-year-old child developed a hemorrhage after pulp extirpation of 74 due to exacerbated chronic pulpitis. The child suffers from Von Willebrand disease. What actions should be taken by the dental surgeon to stop bleeding?
a. To plug the cavity with epsilon-aminocaproic acid dressing
b. To plug the cavity with hemostatic sponge
c. To place sutures on the mucosa
d. To hospitalize the child to the maxillofacial unit
*e. To hospitalize the child to the hematological unit

677. A 58-year-old woman came to an orthopedic dentist complaining that her partial removable denture for the upper jaw had broken. She had been using this denture for 2 years. The denture base is broken. What plastic must be used to repair the denture?
*a. Redont
b. Stomaplast
c. Carboplast
d. Ethacryl
e. Phthorax

678. A 29-year-old man needs to replace a number of dentition defects on his upper jaw. The defects can be replaced with dental bridges with aesthetical coating. ''Sinma-M'' plastic coating is securely attached to the frame of the full cast metal-plastic dental bridges with:
a. Thorough polishing of the frame
b. EDA varnish
c. ''Conalor'' dental resin
*d. Retention spheres
e. Sandblasting

679. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed a hemorrhage from the socket of the extracted tooth. What tactics should the dentist choose in this case?
*a. Tightly pack the tooth socket with a strip of iodoform gauze
b. Administer vicasol (menadione) solution intramuscularly
c. Place sutures into the soft tissues
d. Administer 5-10 mL of 10% calcium chloride solution intravenously
e. Insert a gauze pack soaked in 3% hydrogen peroxide solution

680. A 32-year-old man was hit in the face with a blunt object. He lost his consciousness for a short time. The patient complains of dizziness, double vision, and pain in the area of the upper jaw. Objectively, his face is asymmetric because of edema in the infraorbital region, palpation detects a bony "step-off" and pathological mobility along the zygomaticomaxillary suture. What fracture can be suspected in this case?
*a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
c. Zygomatic fracture
d. Nasal fracture
e. Le Fort III maxillary fracture

681. A 68-year-old man complains of a neoplasm on his cheek. Recently, the neoplasm started increasing in size. He had this tumor for about 5 years. Examination detects a painless neoplasm 3 cm in size, palpable in the buccal region. The neoplasm is soft and doughy, has clear borders, and is not fused with the surrounding tissues. The skin over the neoplasm is not discolored. Make the provisional diagnosis.
*a. Lipoma
b. Fibroma
c. Migratory granuloma
d. Chronic lymphadenitis
e. Atheroma

682. A 4-year-old child with mouth breathing is registered for regular check-ups with an orthodontist. One year ago the child underwent an adenotomy. Objectively, the child has deciduous occlusion, the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by 1/3, the distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are located in one vertical plane. What preventive appliance is the most advisable in this case for elimination of the bad habit of mouth breathing?
a. Kraus vestibulo-oral plate
b. Frankel functional regulator, type I
*c. Schonherr standard vestibular plate
d. Dass activator
e. Janson bionator

683. A 32-year-old man complains of a swelling in his left mandibular angle. Objectively, in his lower jaw at the level of missing tooth 38 there is a bone thickening. The alveolar mucosa is unchanged. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. X-ray shows a round focus of lucency in the bone tissue. The focus is 3.5 cm in diameter with clear smooth margins and a rim of sclerosed tissue on its periphery. The crown part of impacted tooth 38 is facing the cavity within this focus of lucency. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Adamantinoma
b. Odontoma
*c. Follicular cyst
d. Radicular cyst
e. Giant-cell tumor of bone

684. A 56-year-old man during obtaining a full anatomical impression of the upper jaw with alginate mass developed acute dyspnea, pale skin, increased sweating, cyanosis, and wheezing respirations. What urgent condition developed in this case?
*a. Aspiration asphyxia
b. Bronchial asthma attack
c. Pneumothorax
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Overactive gag reflex

685. A porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for tooth 11 is being made for the patient. The tooth will be left vital. What measures should be taken during treatment to prevent pulpitis in this tooth?
a. Anti-inflammatory preparations
b. Fluorine preparations
c. Physical therapy
*d. Pharmaceutical crown
e. Calcium preparations

686. A 37-year-old woman complains of a tumor on her lower lip on the surface that faces the oral cavity. The tumor appeared approximately 2 weeks ago, gradually enlarges, and makes lip movement problematic. Objectively, within the lower lip there is a circumscribed round elastic painless induration fused to the mucosa. The mucosa over the induration is transparent, while around the induratuion it remains unchanged. The regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Fibroma of the lip
b. Papilloma of the lip
c. Lip abscess
*d. Retention cyst of the lip
e. Lipoma of the lip

687. A 56-year-old man complains of swelling and pain  in his right parotid area. The swelling was noticed 5-6 months ago. Objectively right-sided paresis of the facial muscles can be determined. Palpation reveals there a modrately painful tuberous tumor fused with surrounding tissues. In the center of the tumor there is an area of softening. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and dense. The mouth can be opened without restriction. There is no saliva outflow from the opening of the right parotid gland. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Actinomycosis of the right parotid gland
b. Mixed tumor of the right parotid gland
c. Chronic non-epidemic parotitis
d. Chronic lymphadenitis of the right parotid area
*e. Adenocarcinoma of the right parotid gland

688. A 40-year-old man came to a dental surgeon for extraction of tooth 16. The crown of tooth 16 is retained. What forceps should be used to extract tooth 16 in this case?
a. Straight forceps
*b. S-shaped right-sided forceps
c. Bayonet crown forceps
d. S-shaped forceps
e. S-shaped left-sided forceps

689. Parents of an 8-year-old girl complain of their child having an aesthetic defect of her teeth. Objectively the patient's lower face is shortened. Her chin protrudes forwards and her upper lip is sunken. During teeth closure the deep underbite becomes apparent. Mesio-occlusion is observed in the lateral areas. Choose the apparatus optimal for the treatment:
a. Osadchy apparatus
b. Frankel functional regulator - 1
c. Frankel functional regulator - 2
*d. Frankel functional regulator - 3
e. Andresen-Haupl activator

690. A 25-year-old man was brought to the hospital for specialized medical care 48 hours after he received a shrapnel wound of the maxillofacial area. Examination shows a large gaping wound of irregular shape in the soft facial tissues. Wound edges are infected and swollen. What type of surgical wound treatment should be conducted at this stage?
a. Secondary
b. -
c. Early primary
*d. Late primary
e. Delayed primary

691. A 30-year-old man came to the dental orthopedist's office. He complains of an included defect of the lower dentition. On examination there are no pathologies of periodontal tissues. It is planned to make a dental bridge for this patient. What should be the ratio of the summary coefficient of masticatory efficiency of abutment teeth to the summary coefficient of masticatory efficiency of  lost teeth?
a. 1:1.5
*b. 1:0.8
c. 1:2
d. 1:2.5
e. 1:1

692. A 60-year-old man needs a removable partial denture for the upper jaw. Arrangement of the artificial teeth on the wax base was checked in the oral cavity of the patient. What is the next stage in the making of a removable partial denture?
a. Placing the plaster casts in an articulator
*b. Fitting and fixation of the removable partial dentures in the oral cavity
c. Measurement and fixation of the centric jaw relation
d. Final modelling of the denture base
e. Final polishing of the denture

693. A 45-year-old man complains of a pain in his upper jaw. Two days ago he had a trauma. Objectively, he has a disturbed occlusion. On palpation, the maxillary alveolar process is mobile. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Maxillary contusion
b. Zygomatic fracture
c. Le Fort maxillary fracture, type III
*d. Le Fort maxillary fracture, type I
e. Le Fort maxillary fracture, type II

694. A dentist treats chronic gangrenous pulpitis of tooth 47 in a 28-year-old man. What results of electric pulp testing confirmed the diagnosis of chronic gangrenous pulpitis?
a. Electric pulp testing - 2-6 microamperes
b. Electric pulp testing - 110 microamperes
c. Electric pulp testing - 10-12  microamperes
d. Electric pulp testing - 20 microamperes
*e. Electric pulp testing - 60 microamperes

695. A 29-year-old man complains of pain in the oral cavity, inability to eat, and a fever of 38°С. According to the patient's medical history, several days ago the patient had acute food poisoning. Objectively, the complexion is pale, hypersalivation is observed, there are sharply painful ulcers with a dirty-gray coating on the mucosa of the lips, cheeks, gums, and floor of the mouth. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful to palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Sutton's stomatitis
b. Miliary ulcerative tuberculosis
c. Acantholytic pemphigus
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*e. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

696. A woman came to a dentist with complaints of periodically occurring pain in the area of the gonial angle on the right and difficulty opening her mouth. Extraction of tooth 48 is indicated. What forceps should be used to extract the tooth in this case?
a. Beak-shaped converging forceps
*b. Forceps curved along the plane
c. Beak-shaped forceps with spikes
d. Beak-shaped non-converging forceps
e. Bayonet forceps

697. A serviceman has received a shrapnel wound to the oropharynx. As a result of the tongue sinking and blocking the upper respiratory tracts, the patient developed the signs of asphyxia. What type of asphyxia is it?
a. Stenotic asphyxia
b. Aspiration asphyxia
c. Obstructive asphyxia
d. Valve asphyxia
*e. Dislocation asphyxia

698. A 35-year-old man complains of missing teeth on his lower jaw. Objectively, teeth 36, 37, and, 38 are missing. Teeth 34 and 35 are intact. What type of dentition restoration would be optimal in this case?
a. Porcelain-fused-to-metal cantilever  denture with abutment crowns on teeth 34 and 35
b. Clasp (bugel) denture with a continuous clasp (clammer) for the lower jaw
c. Adhesive dental bridge
d. Removable partial laminar denture for the lower jaw
*e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns with abutment implants in place of teeth 36 and 37

699. A 65-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of bleeding gums, mobility of her teeth, and exposure of their necks. At the examination stage, the depth of the periodontal pockets was measured and the degree of tooth root bifurcation involvement in the periodontal pocket was determined. How many degrees of tooth root bifurcation involvement in the periodontal pocket are there?
a. One
*b. Three
c. Four
d. Five
e. Two

700. During an appointment with the dentist, a 42-year-old man developed anaphylactic shock after he was given an analgesic. What emergency first-line drug should be administered in this case?
a. Antihistamine
*b. Adrenaline (epinephrine)
c. Glucocorticosteroid
d. Inhaled short acting beta-2-agonist
e. Oxygen

701. A 47-year-old man complains of partial loss of his upper teeth. The patient's medical history states loss of teeth due to trauma sustained 3 months ago. 11 and 12 are lost. 13, 21, and 22 are destroyed by 2/3 and restored with fillings. Occlusion is orthognathic. What denture construction would be optimal for this patient, considering his occupation as a lecturer?
a. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture with attachments
b. Removable partial laminar denture for the upper jaw
c. Swaged-soldered metal dental bridge with faceted intermediate part
d. Plastic dental bridge
*e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge

702. What are diamond dental burs with red markings used for in dentistry?
a. Universal application
b. Opening carious cavities
c. Quick removal of dental tissues
d. Finishing composite fillings
*e. Preliminary polishing of composite fillings

703. What prosthodontic appliance has mechanical type of action?
a. Frankel functional regulator
b. Schonherr vestibular plate
c. Bynin appliance
*d. Expansion plate with Coffin spring
e. Case obturator

704. A 50-year-old woman complains of pain and creaking in her temporomandibular joint. Objectively there are multiple premature occlusal contacts and localized pathologic tooth wear. The teeth are stable, with exposed cervices; the gingival margin is hyperemic. Selective teeth shaving is planned. How many visits to the dentist are necessary for the full procedure?
*a. 3-4 visits at one-week intervals
b. 2-3 visits at one-day intervals
c. 1-2 visits within a year
d. A single visit
e. 2-3 visits at one-month intervals

705. A 42-year-old woman had her tooth 36 extracted 2 months ago. In the left buccal region, she has a dense infiltrate, painful to palpation. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. Teeth 34, 35, and 37 are mobile. The mucosa in the area of the mobile teeth is doughy, cyanotic, and has a fistula. The socket of tooth 36 produces purulent discharge. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic rarefying periostitis
b. Migrating facial granuloma
c. -
d. Odontogenic abscess of the buccal region
*e. Chronic limited osteomyelitis

706. To extract tooth 27, the patient was given tuberal and palatal anesthesia. When the needle was being pulled out from the soft tissues after the palatal anesthesia, the patient developed bleeding. What should be done to stop the bleeding in this case?
a. Intravenous administration of 10% calcium chloride solution
b. Intramuscular administration of vicasol (menadione)
*c. Press the place of injection with a tampon
d. Place sutures
e. Ligate the external carotid artery

707. The parents of a 7-year-old girl brought her to a dentist with complaints that the child feels pain in her lower lateral tooth during eating. Objectively, tooth 75 has a Black's class I carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the communication area is very painful, a drop of blood appeared in the process. Percussion is painless. Thermal test results are weakly positive. Make the diagnosis.
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

708. A 60-year-old woman complains of a pain in the oral cavity that increases during eating. She has a history of ischemic heart disease. Objectively, her oral mucosa is pale pink, without visible pathological changes. On the lateral surface of the tongue there is an ulcer 0.7 cm in diameter. The ulcer has clear and even margins, is covered in a gray coating, and is painful on palpation. In the surrounding tissues there is no inflammatory reaction. Make the correct diagnosis:
a. Decubitus ulcer
b. Syphilitic chancre
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Cancerous ulcer
*e. Trophic ulcer

709. A partial removable laminar denture is to be made for the upper jaw of a 53-year-old man. He has teeth 16, 15, 23, 24, and 27. What type of clasp (clammer) fixation would be optimal in this case?
a. Linear sagittal fixation
*b. Plane fixation
c. Point fixation
d. Linear diagonal fixation
e. Linear transverse fixation

710. A 48-year-old woman complains of problems with chewing, caused by missing teeth. Objectively, her teeth 31, 32, 33, and 41, 42, 43 have tall crowns and the I degree of mobility. The decision was reached to make a clasp denture splint for her. What type of clasps (clammers) will ensure the splinting function of this construction?
a. Retaining
*b. Continuous
c. Abutment
d. Vestibular
e. Dentoalveolar

711. A 28-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of an ulcer on his tongue. Objectively, on the left lateral surface of his tongue there is a painless red erosion about 1.5 cm in diameter. The erosion has a smooth shiny floor, smooth clear margins, and a dense infiltrate in its base. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Primary syphilis
b. Tuberculous ulcer
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Decubital ulcer
e. Actinomycosis of the tongue

712. The mother of a 3-year-old girl brought her to a dentist with complaints of destruction of the child's front teeth. Objectively, teeth 51, 52, 54, 61, 62, 65, 71, 72, 74, 75, 81, 82, 85 are affected by caries of superficial and medium depth and varying localization. Additional examination methods allowed diagnosing the child with multiple caries. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Preparation and filling using glass ionomer cements
b. Preparation and filling using photopolymer materials
*c. Silver impregnation
d. Preparation and filling using zinc phosphate cements
e. Deep fluoridation of enamel

713. A 32-year-old woman complains of white and pigmented spots on her teeth. She lives in an area, where fluorine levels in drinking water are 1.7 mg/L. She was diagnosed with fluorosis, chalky-speckled form. What toothpastes are indicated in this case?
a. Fluorine-containing toothpastes
b. Highly abrasive toothpastes
*c. Calcium phosphate-containing  toothpastes
d. Herbal toothpastes
e. Triclosan-containing toothpastes

714. A man complains of gingival bleeding that has been persisting for the last 2 years. Objectively he presents with chronic diffuse catarrhal gingivitis, teeth mobility is of the I degree, periodontal pockets are 2-3 mm deep with small amount of serous exudate, occlusion is markedly traumatic. X-ray shows damaged cortical plate, enlarged periodontal fissure in the apical areas of the interalveolar septa, osteoporosis, and interalveolar septa resorption by 1/3 of their height. Make the diagnosis:
a. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, exacerbated development
b. Generalized periodontitis, early stage, chronic development
*c. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, chronic development
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Parodontosis, stage I

715. A 9-year-old boy complains of an incorrect placement of his teeth. Because of his chronic rhinitis, he has been registered for regular check-up by an otolaryngologist since he was four. Objectively, during the examination his mouth is slightly open, the nostrils do not participate in breathing, his upper incisors protrude from under the upper lip. The chin is slanted backwards. The sagittal fissure is 5 mm. What is the etiology of the occlusal pathology in this child?
a. Bad habits
b. Jaw injury
c. Sagittal reduction of the upper jaw
d. Heredity
*e. Pathology of the upper respiratory tract

716. A 42-year-old man, a teacher, came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his upper front teeth exhibit a mobility of the III degree. It is planned to make him a direct denture. How soon after the tooth extraction should such dentures be installed?
a. In one month
b. In one day
c. In three days
d. In one week
*e. Immediately after the extraction

717. When inspecting the finished full removable laminar denture received from the dental laboratory, the dentist discovered a characteristic "marble" pattern in the form of whitish lines on the surface and in the thick of the base plastic, from which the denture was made. What is the likely cause of these lines appearing on the denture?
a. Insufficient pressure applied to the plastic dough during polymerization
b. Incorrect temperature during polymerization
*c. Insufficient amount of monomer in the plastic dough during packing
d. Insufficient polishing of the denture
e. Insufficient amount of plastic dough during packing

718. A 45-year-old woman complains of a mildly painful tumor-like formation in her right parotid region. The formation appeared 2 months ago for no apparent reason. The woman notes weakness and occasional temperature of 37.2-37.6^oC) Two weeks ago she underwent an anti-inflammatory therapy that produced no positive results. Objectively, her face is asymmetrical due to a slight swelling in the right parotid region. Palpation detects a round dense-elastic neoplasm with smooth contours. The neoplasm is mildly painful and not fused to the skin. A small amount of clear saliva is being produced from the Stensen duct. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. -
b. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
c. Parotid atheroma
d. Sjogren sialopathy
*e. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis

719. A man with distal bite underwent Eschler-Bittner test for the purpose of differential diagnostics. The shape and profile of his face have notably improved. What type of distal bite is it, according to the test results?
*a. Underdeveloped lower jaw
b. Maldevelopments and growth  abnormalities of the both jaws
c. Overdeveloped lower jaw
d. Underdeveloped upper jaw
e. Overdeveloped upper jaw

720. A 38-year-old man, an arc welder, is a chain smoker. He came to the dentist to have a denture made for him. Howerver, in the middle of his lower lip against the background of unchanged vermillion border there is a gray-white polygonal lesion 6x4 mm with clear margins. The lesion is covered with tightly attached small scales and is level with the vermillion border (neither protruding nor retracted). Palpation of the lesion focus is painless, the lesion has no thickened base; lateral palpation detects thickened surface of the lesion. Regional lymph nodes are unchanged. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Verrucous precancer
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Cancer of the lower lip
d. Lichen ruber planus, hyperkeratotic form
*e. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis

721. A 40-year-old man presents with pathologic teeth grinding caused by their functional overload due to the loss of many antagonist teeth. With direct occlusion, vertical grinding of the front teeth resulted in protrusion of the patient's lower jaw forwards. Interalveolar space is diminished, the lower third of the face is shortened. What would be the most advisable treatment in this case?
*a. Prosthetics that increase interalveolar height
b. Teeth shortening
c. Prosthetic treatment
d. Instrumental surgical treatment
e. Prothetic treatment

722. A 23-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of short-term sharp pain in the area of her left lower molars and premolars, caused by cold stimuli. Objectively, the mesial masticatory surface of tooth 36 has a carious cavity within the softened, light yellow peripulpal dentin. Thermal testing results are positive, the pain stops immediately after the stimulus is removed. Cavity walls and floor are tender when probed, percussion of tooth 36 is painless. Make the diagnosis.
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute limited pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute median caries

723. A 42-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of bleeding gums and bad breath. After examination, he was provisionally diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis, II degree. What examination will provide the most informative findings for making a final diagnosis in this case?
a. Determining the degree of teeth mobility
*b. X-ray
c. Measuring the depth of periodontal  pockets
d. Koetzshke test
e. Kulazhenko test

724. A 35-year-old man complains of involuntary acute paroxysmal pain in his tooth 25. The pain attacks last up to 30 minutes and intensify at night, with painless intervals up to three hours. The pain is provoked and exacerbated by thermal stimuli. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 25 there is a deep carious cavity filled with softened dentin; the pulp chamber is not breached; probing is sharply painful at one point - the projection of a pulp horn. Electric pulp testing - 25 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pulpal hyperemia
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute limited pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

725. The width of the dentition of a 15-year-old girl is being measured using the Pont analysis. Name the Pont index for measured molar value and measured premolar value:
a. Premolar index - 86, molar index - 72
b. Premolar index - 82, molar index - 68
c. Premolar index - 78, molar index - 32
*d. Premolar index - 80, molar index - 64
e. Premolar index - 74, molar index - 68

726. A 47-year-old man complains of pain in the throat on the left that intensifies during talking and swallowing, reduced mouth opening, and generally feeling unwell. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is limited, the jaw cannot be moved to the right. The mucosa in the area of the left pterygomandibular fold and tooth 38 is hyperemic and painful. A painful infiltrate is palpable on the inner surface of the left gonial angle. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Phlegmon of the left parapharyngeal space
b. Peritonsillar abscess
*c. Phlegmon of the left pterygomandibular space
d. Acute purulent pericoronitis in the area of tooth 38
e. Abscess of the lingual sulcus on the left

727. A 45-year-old woman complains of burning sensations in her tongue and a metallic taste in her mouth. Three months ago, a gold dental bridge that uses teeth 16 and 14 as the abutment was made for her. Oral cavity examination detects no objective changes. Teeth 36, 37, and 46 have amalgam fillings in them. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Chemical factors
b. Allergic reaction
c. Mechanical injury
d. -
*e. Galvanic currents

728. A 45-year-old woman who works at a chemical factory came to a dentist with complaints of a toothache provoked by thermal and chemical stimuli. Examination revealed matte enamel with chalky spots on the vestibular surface of the upper front teeth, as well as defects with chipped enamel and exposed dark dentin. What will be the diagnosis in this case?
a. Cuneiform defects
*b. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
c. Enamel erosion
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Systemic hypoplasia

729. Implant-supported removable dentures are being made for a 60-year-old woman. Objectively, gingiva formers have been installed on her edentulous maxilla. It is planned to obtain impressions using a silicone material with transfers. What impression technique should be used in this case?
*a. Open tray impression
b. Compression impression
c. Decompressive impression
d. Functional impression
e. Dual arch impression

730. A 27-year-old man presents with missing crown of 11. Objectively teeth 21 and 12 are intact; intraoral spot film X-ray shows the root of 11 to be filled to the apex, no changes in the periapical tissues, no pathologic mobility. What construction of the denture should be recommended for this patient?
a. Stump inlay with overlaying plastic crown
b. Stump inlay with overlaying swaged crown
c. Stump inlay with overlaying full cast metal crown
d. Remove the root of 11 and perform implantation
*e. Metal stump inlay with overlaying porcelain-fused-to-metal crown

731. A woman complains of pain response to thermal stimuli in her lower right jaw.  The pain quickly abates after the stimulus is withdrawn. Objectively on the masticatory surface of the 26 there is a carious cavity with narrow ''entrance'' located within the mantle dentin. The dentin is soft and light-colored. Percussion of the 26 is painless. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic median caries

732. A man with hemophilia came to a dental clinic to have his tooth 36 extracted. His previous tooth extraction resulted in a prolonged bleeding. What tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Proper preoperative preparation must be provided in the clinic
b. To extract the tooth in the outpatient department and provide the patient with follow-up recommendations
c. -
*d. To extract the tooth in the inpatient department with proper pre- and postoperative preparation
e. To extract the tooth in the clinic under the supervision of a hematologist

733. After adenotonsillectomia it is necessary to break the mouth breathing habit in a 4-year-old child. The orthodontist recommends application of an oral vestibular shield (Kerbitz' vestibular plate). Vestibular shield facilitates training of the following muscle:
a. Lateral pterygoid muscle
*b. Orbicular muscle
c. Medial pterygoid muscle
d. Temporal muscle
e. Masseter muscle

734. Two-jaw removable laminar dentures are being made for a 70-year-old man. Alginate impressions need to be obtained to make diagnostic casts of the patient's jaws. The doctor prepares the alginate mass by mixing the powder with water in a rubber flask. What should be the water temperature?
a. 10-15^oС
b. 45-50^oС
c. 35-40^oС
*d. 20-25^oС
e. Under 10^oС

735. A 75-year-old patient complains of being unable to use his complete removable laminar denture for the lower jaw because its fixation became worse and it frequently breaks. The denture was made 7 years ago. Objectively, the alveolar part of the lower jaw is significantly atrophied, the denture sways, balancing in place, and cannot be properly fixated. What is the most likely cause of poor denture fixation and its frequent breakages?
a. Eating solid foods
b. Using the denture when sleeping
c. Mistakes were made during the denture manufacturing
*d. Exceeding the service life of the denture
e. Incorrect usage of the denture

736. What nerve branches are blocked in tuberal anesthesia?
a. Branches of the lesser palatine nerve
b. Middle superior alveolar nerves
c. Branches of the greater palatine nerve
d. Branches of the inferior alveolar nerve
*e. Posterior superior alveolar nerves

737. A 38-year-old man has undergone the first stage of a two-stage dental implant installation in the area of his tooth 45. At this stage, the root part of the implant was installed. What minimum period must pass before the second stage of the procedure can be performed?
a. 1-2 months
b. 7-8 months
*c. 3-4 months
d. 5-6 months
e. 10-12 months

738. A 24-year-old woman complains of a neoplasm on the gums of her right lower jaw, The neoplasm has been growing over the past few months. Objectively, on the vestibular side of the alveolar process of the mandible on the right there is a bright-red soft painless formation that bleeds when palpated. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Angiomatous epulis
b. Giant cell granuloma
c. Fibroma
d. Cavernous hemangioma
e. Fibrous epulis

739. A 48-year-old man, who for several years already has been suffering from enterocolitis, complains of painful lesions that from time to time appear in different places of his oral mucosa. Objective examination of the mucosa reveals isolated areas of epithelial damage. They are under 5 mm in diameter, have a regular oval shape, hyperemic border, and yellow-white coating. Their palpation is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Chronic recurrent herpes
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Allergic stomatitis

740. A 13-year-old girl complains of painful bleeding gums and bad breath. The signs appeared approximately six months ago. Objectively, the gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of her lower front teeth are hypertrophied, edematous, cyanotic, and bleed easily when touched. There is soft plaque in the paracervical region of the teeth. Hygiene index - 3. The dentist performed a local anti-inflammatory therapy to relieve the exacerbation. What further tactics should the doctor choose during the follow-up visit?
*a. Complete professional oral hygiene
b. Pocket curettage
c. Gingivotomy
d. Vestibuloplasty
e. Physiotherapy

741. A patient has a tumor on the upper lip. The tumor is 1.5x2.0 cm in size, cyanotic. The ''compression-filling'' sign is positive. What is the likely diagnosis?
a. Epulis
*b. Cavernous hemangioma
c. Hematoma
d. Fibroma
e. Pigment spot

742. X-ray of the lower jaw of a 14-year-old boy shows a round homogeneous  lucency with clear margins. This neoplasm is located within the body of the mandible in the area of tooth 36 that was extracted 7 months ago. A puncture of the neoplasm yielded a yellowish liquid with cholesterol crystals. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Cementoma
b. Radicular cyst
*c. Residual cyst
d. Follicular cyst
e. Paradental cyst

743. A 60-year-old woman complains of pain in her ears and in the area of her temporomandibular joint and her teeth clacking when she talks. Her removable complete dentures were made two weeks ago. Objectively, her nasolabial folds are smoothed out, her masticatory muscles are strained. What tactics shoud be chosen by a dental orthopedist in this case?
a. Correct the occlusal surfaces of the both dentures
b. Make a new denture for the upper jaw
c. Correct the occlusal surface of the lower denture
*d. Make new dentures
e. Correct the occlusal surface of the upper denture

744. A 50-year-old man complains of painful defect that manifests as a crack in his lower lip. The defect appeared one month ago. Objectively the lower lip is dry, intactness of the vermillion border of the lower lip is linearly disturbed by a lesion that is located in the middle of the lip, is covered in dried blood, and extends to the labial mucosa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
b. Chronic lymphedema of lips
*c. Chronic lip fissure
d. Atopic cheilitis
e. Miescher cheilitis granulomatosa

745. In the orthopedic dental clinic a 26-year-old man undergoes preparation to have a denture made for him. Objectively, teeth 45 and 46 are lost; teeth 44 and 47 are intact and stable. Dentoalveolar elongation by 1/3 of the crown length is observed in the area of teeth 15 and 16. What method should be used to correct the deformation of the occlusal surfaces?
a. Occlusal correction
b. Teeth extraction
c. Teeth shortening
d. Surgical
*e. Orthodontic

746. A 45-year-old man complains of a discomfort in his tooth 27 and aching pain when biting on this tooth. He has a history of a gingival fistula that opens after an overexposure to cold. Objectively, the crown of tooth 27 is discolored; there is a filling on its masticatory surface; there is a fistula scar on the mucosa in the area of this tooth. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

747. On the second day after the fixation of partial laminar dentures, a man developed complaints of a burning sensation and an unpleasant taste in his mouth, when using the dentures. Examination revealed hyperemic mucosa and hypersalivation. Prior to making new dentures, he was using the old ones for 5 years and had no such complaints. What is the likely cause of this phenomenon?
a. Improper oral hygiene
b. Poor quality of the base plastic
*c. The presence of a residual monomer in the denture base
d. Incorrect usage of the dentures
e. Allergic reaction to the components of the base plastic

748. During a tooth extraction, a 37-year-old patient suddenly complained of intense headache, dizziness, palpitations, dry mouth, nausea, and impaired vision. Objectively, the following is observed: hyperemic face, moist skin, pulse - 92/min., blood pressure - 190/100 mm Hg. What condition has developed in the patient?
a. Angina pectoris attack
b. Acute cerebrovascular accident
c. Myocardial infarction
*d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Anaphylactic shock

749. A 40-year-old woman came to a dentist to have dentures made for her teeth 12 and 13. These teeth are pink and were previously treated. After examination, a porcelain-fused-to-metal design of crowns was selected. No contraindications were found for the use of such dentures by the patient. What material must be used to obtain a working cast?
a. Plaster
b. Repin
c. Stomalgin
d. Orthocor
*e. Speedex

750. The decay-missing-filled index of a mbox 6-year-old girl is DMF+df=3. Her Fedorov-Volodkina Hygiene Index is 3. Her first permanent molars have deep, open, and poorly mineralized fissures. What method of caries prevention wouldl be optimal for these teeth?
a. Preparation and preventive filling
b. Applications with 3% remodent solution
c. Silver nitrate impregnation
*d. Fissure sealing
e. Coating the teeth with fluoride varnish

751. In an orthopedic dentistry clinic, a partial removable laminar denture for the patient's upper jaw was made. However, when the denture was received by the dentist, the doctor noticed chalk-like streaks and spots on the surface of the denture base. Why did this flaw occur?
a. A sharp increase in the temperature at  the polymerization stage
b. Rapid cooling during polymerization
c. Insufficient compression of parts of the cuvette
*d. Insufficient amount of the monomer
e. Insufficient polishing of the denture  surface

752. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic. He complains of inability to chew his food due to partial loss of teeth. Objectively in the lateral regions teeth 18, 16, 15, 25, 26, 28, 38, 35, 36, 44, 46, 48 are missing. Other teeth present with I-II degrees of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of the II degree. What type of denture would be optimal for this patient?
a. -
*b. Clasp-retained (bugel) dentures with splinting elements
c. Metal-based dentures
d. Removable partial laminar denture
e. Non-removable full cast dental bridges

753. A 35-year-old man complains of pain and mobility in his upper jaw when he closes his mouth. The condition developed after an injury received on the day before, when he had been beaten by an unknown person. Objectively, palpation detects bilateral mobility of the maxillary alveolar process; the Malevich sign (cracked pot sound) is positive. X-ray shows the fracture line in the area of the inferior wall of the piriform aperture and zygomaticoalveolar crests. The transparency of the maxillary sinuses is decreased. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (superior)
*b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (inferior)
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture (median)
d. Nasal fracture
e. Displaced zygomatic fracture

754. A 37-year-old man complains of an unpleasant sensation in his gums on the lower left jaw that developed after he underwent treatment for dental caries several months ago. Examination reveals permanent fillings on the contact surfaces of teeth 36 and 37. The edges of the fillings are hanging over the interdental papilla. The gum in the area of teeth 36 and 37 is hyperemic and edematous. The periodontal pocket is up to 3 mm deep. What treatment will be etiological in this case?
a. Closed curettage
b. Thorough personal hygiene
*c. High-quality filling
d. Pharmacological treatment
e. Professional hygiene

755. A 55-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic to have a denture made for him. Tooth 11 is missing in the patient. Two days ago he was released from the in-patient unit after a case of myocardial infarction. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Make a dental bridge with 12 and 21 as abutment teeth
b. Make a clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
c. Perform implantation
d. Temporarily refrain from making a denture
*e. Make a temporary removable denture

756. A 10-year-old child complains of pain, dryness, enlargement, and peeling of the lips. Exaination detected hyperemic labial mucosa and enlarged lips; when the lips are pulled taut, secretion resembling ''dewdrops'' is being produced from minor salivary glands. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Exfoliative cheilitis
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
*c. Cheilitis glandularis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Actinic cheilitis

757. The parents of a 6-year-old child complain that their child for the last three days has been presenting with body temperature of 39^oC, weakness, loss of appetite, pain on swallowing. Objectively, the mucosa of the tonsils, palatine arches, retromolar space, and posterior and lateral pharyngeal walls is swollen and covered in a dirty-gray coating that is tightly attached to the underlying tissues. The coating is very difficult to remove. When removed, it exposes a bleeding surface. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Scarlet fever
c. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
*d. Diphtheria
e. Infectious mononucleosis

758. A 19-year-old young man complains of cosmetic defect of all his teeth, which developed immediately after the teeth eruption. Objectively on the vestibular and masticatory surfaces of all patient's teeth there are enamel defects, tooth crowns present with dark brown discoloration. Percussion and probing are painful. In this area fluoride levels in water are 2.6 mg/L. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Fluorosis
b. Enamel erosion
c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Chronic initial caries

759. A 65-year-old woman complains of a painless neoplasm on her upper lip that slowly enlarges. Objectively on the upper lip there is a neoplasm 1x1 cm in size that looks like a gray-red nodule with a funnel-shaped indent in its center, filled with a dense keratinized mass. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Bowen's disease
*b. Keratoacanthoma
c. Cutaneous horn
d. Flat leukoplakia
e. Verrucous precancer

760. A 6-year-old girl fell ill 2 days ago. She complains of an increase in body temperature up to 37.3°C, weakness, photophobia, lacrimation, low appetite, and disturbed sleep. Objectively, her face is pale, there are no rashes on her skin, an enanthema was detected on the mucosa of the soft palate. There are punctate whitish spots of varying size on the buccal mucosa in the area of molars. The spots resemble lime splashes, are scattered on the mucosa and slightly rise above its surface. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Chickenpox
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Shingles
*d. Measles
e. Scarlet fever

761. A 30-year-old man needs to have his tooth 26 extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively, the crown of his tooth 26 is decayed by 1/3. What forceps must be used for tooth extraction in this case?
a. Bayonet root forceps
*b. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
c. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
d. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
e. Straight forceps

762. A 28-year-old woman complains of general weakness and pain during eating and swallowing. The disease onset was acute and manifested as elevated body temperature of 37.9^oC and muscle pain. Objectively, against the background of edematous and hyperemic mucosa of the soft palate, anterior arches, and posterior pharyngeal wall there are single vesicles and their clusters filled with serohemorrhagic content, as well as mildly painful to touch eroded areas of varying size with scalloped edges and fibrine coating. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Influenza-associated stomatitis
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Shingles
d. Foot-and-mouth disease
*e. Herpangina

763. Based on the principle of its action, the Angle's arch belongs to the following group of orthodontic appliances:
a. Appliances with a combined action
*b. Mechanically-acting appliances
c. Functionally-guiding appliances
d. Functionally-acting appliances
e. -

764. A patient complains of a slowly growing neoplasm in the frontal area on the left. The neoplasm is mobile, painless, and fused with the skin. Punctate skin depressions can be observed on its surface. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Frontal atheroma
b. Exophytic form of skin cancer
c. Frontal lipoma
d. Frontal fibroma
e. Frontal keratoacanthoma

765. A 67-year-old woman during an appointment with a dentist complained of an acute vision deterioration, visual snow, nausea, headache, and dizziness. Objectively, the skin of her face is hyperemic, her blood pressure is 200/110 mm Hg, her pulse is rhythmic, 80/min., tense. What is the most likely cause of the patient's condition?
*a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Angina pectoris attack
c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Acute cerebrovascular accident
e. Rupture of an aortic aneurysm

766. A 45-year-old man was hospitalized with the following diagnosis: a non-displaced closed midline fracture of the mandible in the area of teeth 41 and 31. Objectively, the integrity of the upper and lower dentition is preserved, teeth are intact, bone tissue atrophy in the alveolar process of the mandible reaches 1/3 of the dental root length, teeth mobility of the I-II degree is observed. What type of splint would be optimal in treatment of this fracture?
a. Vankevich splint
b. Smooth splint-bracket
*c. Weber dentogingival splint
d. Vasiliev splint
e. Tigerstedt splint with hooks

767. A 30-year-old man complains of lost dental filling on his upper right jaw. Objectively in tooth 16 there is a deep carious cavity filled  with dense pigmented dentin. What dentin layer forms as the result of tooth irritation in the course of caries process?
*a. Tertiary
b. Primary
c. Predentin
d. Hybrid
e. Secondary

768. A 35-year-old man suffers from localized periodontitis of the front teeth on his lower jaw. Objectively on the upper jaw his dentition is uninterrupted, while on the lower jaw teeth 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 are missing, other teeth present with mobility of the II degree, tremata, and diastema. What tactics should a prosthodontist choose in this case?
a. Restore the height of the occlusion with a  clasp-retained (bugel) denture
b. Splinting of the mobile teeth followed by prosthesis-making
c. Restore the height of the occlusion with a partial removable laminar denture
d. Temporary splinting of the teeth on the lower jaw
*e. Orthodontic treatment followed by splinting and prosthesis-making

769. During regular check-up a 6.5-year-old child presents with carious cavity on the distal proximal surface of 65 within mantle dentin. Cavity walls and bottom are pigmented, dense, painless on probing; there is no response to cold stimulus; percussion is painless. During tooth preparation there is tenderness at the level of dentinoenamel junction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute median caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Chronic median caries

770. A 52-year-old man complains of a sharply painful inflammation focus and edema of the soft tissues in the right half of the face, a fever of 37.8°С, and impaired general condition. The patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for the last 8 years. Objectively, in the right buccal region, there is an inflammatory infiltrate approximately 3 cm in diameter. The skin over the infiltrate is hyperemic, edematous, and fused with the underlying tissues. A necropurulent shaft was detected in its center. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Phlegmon of the right buccal region
b. Abscess of the right buccal region
c. Carbuncle of the right buccal region
*d. Furuncle of the right buccal region
e. Anthrax carbuncle of the right buccal region

771. The parents of a 14-year-old girl brought her to a dentist, complaining that she has some kind of growth on her tongue. It appeared approximately 1.5 years ago and has been slowly growing since then. Objectively, on the lateral surface of her tongue there is a neoplasm on the left. It is pink, mobile, painless, hard, and spherical. It has clear margins, wide base, and smooth surface. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Papilloma
b. Hemangioma
c. Lymphangioma
d. Atheroma
*e. Fibroma

772. A 15-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums and pain during eating. These signs have been observed for the last year. Objectively the interdental papillae in the area of teeth 31, 32, 33, 41, 42, and 43 are enlarged and cover the tooth crowns by 1/2 of their height. The gums present with bright-red granulations and are painful on palpation. Mineralized dental plaque is observed on the teeth. X-ray shows no changes of the alveolar process. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis
b. Localized periodontitis
c. Catarrhal gingivitis
d. Ulcerative gingivitis
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

773. An 8-year-old girl complains of tooth 21 discoloration and pain response to hot stimulus. Several months ago tooth 21 was treated for acute diffuse pulpitis by means of vital amputation. Objectively tooth 21 is filled, percussion is painless. X-ray shows the rooth to be formed by 2/3, cortical plate of the tooth socket remains intact in the area of root radix. What material should be used for root canal filling in this case?
a. -
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Resorcinol-formalin paste
*d. Calcium hydroxide paste
e. Zinc phosphate cement

774. A 30-year-old woman complains of pain in the area of an incised cheek wound. She received a domestic injury 4 days ago, but did not seek medical aid. Objectively, the healing occurs by granulation tissue gradually filling the pus-filled wound cavity with its subsequent epithelization and scar formation. What type of healing is it?
a. -
*b. Secondary intention healing
c. Healing under the scab
d. Combined healing
e. Primary intention healing

775. Removable full dentures are being made for a 65-year-old man. Progenic occlusion is determined. What are the specifics of teeth placement in case of progenic occlusion of edentulous jaws?
a. Inferior dental arch is shortened by two premolars
*b. Superior dental arch is shortened by two premolars
c. Anterior teeth are placed in direct occlusion
d. Short-bite anterior teeth
e. Anterior teeth are placed in orthognathic occlusion

776. A child was bitten in the area of the upper lip by the family's dog. What aid must be provided first in this case?
a. Apply a tourniquet
b. Apply a sterile gauze pad
*c. Wash the wound with a 10% solution of household soap with water
d. Administer an anesthetic solution
e. Administer anti-tetanus serum

777. A 25-year-old woman complains of an intense pain in her upper jaw. The pain increases when she eats hot food or drinks hot beverages, while cold liquid relieves the pain. Objectively, in tooth 24 there is a carious cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is sharply painful, percussion is positive. Electric pulp test - 50 microamperes. What method of treatment would be the most advisable?
a. Biological method
b. Devital extirpation
c. Vital amputation
d. Devital amputation
*e. Vital extirpation

778. A 39-year-old woman developed Quincke's edema at the dentist's office. The signs of asphyxia are intensifying. What must the dentist do to prevent stenotic asphyxia in this case?
*a. Perform a tracheostomy
b. Administer adrenomimetics
c. Perform artificial respiration
d. Administer desensitizers
e. Administer glucocorticoids

779. A 70-year-old man came to a dental orthopedist complaining of all his teeth missing. Objectively, he has a slight uniform atrophy of the mandibular alveolar process that is covered with a moderately pliable mucosa. What type of edentulous jaw according to the Keller's classification is it, as indicated by these characteristics?
a. Second
*b. First
c. Third
d. Fourth
e. -

780. One of the stages of making a removable full denture includes fitting of an impression tray and obtaining the functional impression. What material is applied to the edges of the impression tray?
a. Plaster
b. Thiodent
*c. Orthocor
d. Stomalgin
e. Kromopan

781. A 48-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of acute short-term toothache provoked by thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli. After stimulation stops, the pain ceases immediately. Examination of tooth 36 reveals a deep carious cavity (Black's class V) with a narrow opening, filled with a large amount of softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful. The carious cavity and the dental cavity do not communicate. Percussion of tooth 36 is painless. Electric pulp testing - 11 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
*b. Acute deep caries
c. Pulpal hyperemia
d. Acute limited pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

782. A dentist makes a dental bridge for the lower jaw of a 45-year-old man due to missing teeth 44 and 45. Anesthesia was provided before preparing the abutment teeth. A few minutes after receiving anesthesia, the patient complained of dizziness and feeling unwell. Objectively, his skin is pale, he has broken out in cold sweat, his limbs are cold, the pulse is thready, the muscles are atonic, the patient is conscious but apathetic. Blood pressure - 80/40 mm Hg. What emergency condition has likely developed in this case?
a. Toxic effect
*b. Collapse
c. Acute cerebrovascular accident
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Syncope

783. When receiving mandibular anesthesia with a 4% Ultracain D-S solution, a 13-year-old boy complained of sudden weakness, difficulty breathing, nausea, abdominal pain, and fear. Objectively, his skin is pale and covered in cold sweat, spots of hyperemia are observed on the skin of the face and neck. The pulse is weak, the blood pressure is low (60/40 mm Hg), the respiration is rapid and shallow, the hands are cold. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Collapse
b. Quincke's edema
c. Urticaria
d. Syncope
*e. Anaphylactic shock

784. A patient needs endodontic treatment of tooth 21. The canal is being processed with manually operated endodontic instruments. Name one such instrument made by means of conical spiral threading (turning) of a steel wire with round cross-section (milling):
a. K-reamer
b. K-file
*c. H-file
d. Plugger
e. Spreader

785. A 65-year-old woman came to a dentist complaining of a mildly painful ulcer on the mucosa of her tongue. The ulcer appeared 2-3 weeks ago. The woman has a history of chronic circulatory failure. On the lateral surface of the tongue, examination detects a shallow ulcer up to 1 cm in diameter, covered in a gray-white coating and moderately painful to palpation. The color of the surrounding mucosa is unchanged. The oral cavity is sanated. What type of ulcer is likely in this case?
a. Decubitus ulcer
b. Tubercular ulcer
*c. Trophic ulcer
d. Syphilitic ulcer
e. Cancerous ulcer

786. A 53-year-old woman complains of pain and clicking in her left temporomandibular joint. Objectively, her face is symmetrical, palpation of the lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left. The mouth opening is reduced. Tomography shows smooth bone contours of the joint surfaces. This clinical presentation is characteristic of:
a. Joint ankylosis
*b. Temporomandibular joint dysfunction
c. Acute posttraumatic arthritis
d. Rheumatic arthritis
e. Deforming arthrosis

787. A 50-year-old man complains to a dentist of pain and creaking in his left temporomandibular joint when eating, especially solid foods. After the irritation is removed, the pain gradually subsides in 20-30 minutes. In the morning there is no pain. Objectively, the patient chews food mainly on the left side. X-ray of the left temporomandibular joint shows narrowing of the joint space. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute arthritis of the left  temporomandibular joint
b. Pain dysfunction of the  temporomandibular joint
c. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
*e. Chronic arthritis of the left  temporomandibular joint

788. A 38-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgery department. He complains of sudden elevation of his body temperature. There is a bright red spot on his skin that quickly spreads. Objectively it has uneven but clear flame-like raised margins. The affected skin is edematous, taut, hot to touch, and moderately painful at the periphery. Make the diagnosis:
a. Lyell's syndrome
*b. Facial erysipelas
c. Quincke's edema
d. Buccal phlegmon
e. Lupus erythematosus

789. A 48-year-old man presents with verruciform, dense, gray-white growths on the buccal mucosa. The growths protrude above the neighbouring tissues and are surrounded by keratinized gray-white spots that cannot be scraped off. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Verrucous leukoplakia
b. Bowen's disease
c. Erosive leukoplakia
d. Papillomatosis
e. Erythroplasia of Queyrat

790. A 12-year-old child complains of high body temperature of 39.7^oC, enlarged lymph nodes, sore throat, runny nose, and cough. Objectively, acute catarrhal stomatitis is observed in the oral cavity, some of the palatine tonsils have a yellow-gray coating that crumbles and can be easily removed. The cervical, occipital, and submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, and slightly painful. Laboratory blood testing shows leuko-, lympho-, and monocytosis and atypical mononuclear cells. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Loeffler bacillus
b. Coxsackievirus
*c. Epstein-Barr virus
d. Hemolytic streptococcus
e. Herpes simplex virus

791. During examination the child presents with micrognathia and open bite. X-ray shows no joint space, the right branch of the lower jaw immediately continues as the temporal bone. Make the diagnosis:
a. First and second branchial arch syndrome
b. Chronic right-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
*c. Right-sided bony ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
d. Right-sided sclerosing arthrosis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Right-sided fibrous ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint

792. A 42-year-old man complains of sharp pain and creaking in his right temporomandibular joint and a burning sensation in the area of the right external auditory meatus. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, the bite is orthognathic, the movements of the lower jaw are stair-like, with short-term blocking moments in the joint and acute pain. During intraoral palpation of the areas of the lateral pterygoid muscles, the patient feels pain on the right. In the tomograms, no changes were detected in the contours of the bone structure of the articular surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Neuromuscular syndrome
b. Acute post-traumatic arthritis
c. Ankylosis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Deforming arthrosis

793. A 51-year-old woman has been diagnosed with chronic interstitial parotitis of the right parotid salivary gland, a clinically manifested stage. What changes will be detected by X-ray during sialography in this case?
a. Uneven intermittent borders of the ducts
b. Clearly demarkated filling defect in the acini and ducts of the gland
*c. Sharp narrowing of the II-IV order ducts
d. Uneven widening of the II-IV order ducts
e. Numerous small cavities in the parenchyma of the gland

794. The parents of a 12-year-old boy are concerned about their child having white spots on his upper front teeth. The spots appeared half a year ago. The child's teeth are sensitive to chemical stimuli. Objectively, his teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 have chalky spots in the cervical region of their vestibular surface. The enamel there is dull and coarse when probed. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Dental fluorosis
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Acute superficial caries
*d. Acute initial caries
e. Systemic enamel hypoplasia

795. A 60-year-old woman came to a dental surgeon to have her central upper incisors extracted. The crown part of the incisors is retained. What forceps are needed to extract these teeth?
a. S-shaped right-sided forceps
b. S-shaped forceps
c. Beak-shaped crown forceps without  spikes
d. Bayonet forceps
*e. Straight forceps

796. A 14-year-old child complains of an aesthetic defect of the front teeth. Objectively, the enamel of teeth 11, 12, 21, 22, 31, 32, 41, and 42 on their cutting edge is thin and has a groove parallel to the cutting edge. The groove encircles the teeth and is 1.5 mm wide. The cusps of teeth 16, 26, 36, and 46 are underdeveloped and conical. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Amelogenesis imperfecta
*b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
c. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
d. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
e. Local enamel hypoplasia

797. The hospital received a 19-year-old patient injured in a landmine explosion with an open displaced mandibular fracture in the area of the left mandibular angle and a contused lacerated wound of the left submandibular area. The patient is in moderately severe condition, pulse is 80/min., blood pressure is 110/80 mm Hg. What anesthesia should be given to the patient for initial surgical d-bridement?
*a. Endotracheal anesthesia
b. Conduction anesthesia
c. Intravenous anesthesia
d. Conduction anesthesia with premedication
e. Neuroleptanalgesia

798. The parents of an 8-year-old girl brought her to a dental orthodontist for a preventive examination. Objectively, her lower lip protrudes, the shape of her upper dentition is trapezoidal, while the lower dentition is normal. Between the upper and lower front teeth there is a sagittal gap 2 mm wide, the closure of the first permanent molars is Angle's class III. What dental appliance can be used to treat this occlusion pathology?
a. Frankel functional regulator, type I
*b. Frankel functional regulator, type III
c. Schonherr plate
d. Bracket system
e. Muhlemann propulsor

799. A full removable denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 65-year-old man. Currently, the individual tray is being fitted in the patient's oral cavity. When the patient swallows saliva, the tray falls off. In what area should its edge be shortened in this case?
a. From canine to canine on the lingual side
b. In the premolar area on the lingual side
c. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
*d. From the place behind the retromolar  tubercle to the mylohyoid line
e. Along the mylohyoid line

800. A 36-year-old man complains of severe headache, fever of 38.5^oC, and indisposition. Objectively, there is a slight facial asymmetry caused by the soft tissue edema in the left infraorbital region. The crown of tooth 26 is destroyed. Percussion of tooth 26 is sharply painful. The mucosa on the vestibular side of teeth 25 and 26 is edematous and hyperemic. Breathing through the left nostril is difficult, a purulent exudate is being discharged. X-ray shows a homogeneously darkened left half of the maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Acute odontogenic purulent  lymphadenitis
c. Suborbital phlegmon
d. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary  sinusitis

801. A 36-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Objectively there is a carious cavity on the mesial masticatory surface of tooth 46, interdental contact is disturbed. Dental inlay is to be made for this patient. According to Black's classification of dental caries this cavity is class:
a. 1
b. 5
c. 4
*d. 2
e. 3

802. A removable partial laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for the patient. The central occlusion is determined and fixed. What stage is next?
a. Replacing wax with plastic
b. Arrangement of artificial teeth
*c. Fitting the wax model of the denture in the oral cavity
d. Measuring the interalveolar height
e. Determining the edges of the base

803. A 21-year-old man with facial furuncle was brought to the maxillofacial department. What facial localization of furuncles and carbuncles is often complicated by trombophlebitis of the angular vein?
a. Lower lip and jaw angle
b. Lower lip and chin
c. Nose and external canthus of the eye
*d. Upper lip and infraorbital area
e. Cheek and parotid-masseteric region

804. Parents of a 6-month-old child complain of their child having a large amount of dental deposit in the oral cavity. Objectively the oral mucosa is hyperemic, covered in white easily removed deposit that resembles curdled milk. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Coxsackie virus
*b. Candida fungi
c. Herpes simplex virus
d. Epstein-Barr virus
e. Klebs-Loeffler bacillus

805. The parents of a 6-year-old girl complain of the child's fever of 38^oC and a rash in her mouth and on the skin of her face and scalp. Objectively, the mucosa of the hard palate and tongue has small round vesicles and erosions with an inflammed margin, some of which are covered in grayish coating. On the torso, face, and scalp, there are blisters 4-5 mm in diameter with transparent contents. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Chickenpox
b. Measles
c. Scarlet fever
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

806. A 28-year-old man is referred for oral cavity sanation. On examination there is a filling on the masticatory surface of tooth 17, percussion is painless. Mucosa in the root apex projection of 17 is cyanotic, vasoparesis symptom is positive. X-ray shows foci of bone tissue destruction with fuzzy margins in the area of root apices, root canals are not filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Radicular cyst

807. A 19-year-old young man complains of the presence of a spherical thickening on his lower tooth. Objectively, on the oral surface of tooth 46, in its cervical region, there is a teardrop-shaped thickening 2-3 mm in diameter covered with enamel. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Supernumerary tooth
b. Marble disease
*c. Hyperplasia
d. Fluorosis
e. Local hypoplasia

808. A patient is undergoing treatment for chronic granulating periodontitis of tooth 26. The root canals were irrigated with an antiseptic that can penetrate into the structures of biofilms, destroy them, and dissolve organic tissues. What antiseptic was used by the doctor?
a. Hydrogen peroxide solution
b. Furacilin (nitrofurazone) solution
*c. Hypochlorite sodium solution
d. Physiological saline
e. Chlorhexidine solution

809. A 14-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of enlarged interdental papillae in the frontal regions of her upper and lower jaw. Examination shows that the interdental papillae are hyperemic, edematous, cover the crowns to 1/2 of their height, and bleed when touched. What system in this case has a pathology that plays the main role in the etiology of this disease?
*a. Endocrine system
b. Central nervous system
c. Cardiovascular system
d. Immune system
e. Digestive system

810. A regular check-up of a 7-year-old girl detected chalk-like spots on the vestibular surface of her teeth 11 and 21. The surface of the spots is matt, smooth when probed, and can be stained with methylene blue. What treatment method would be rational in this case?
a. Impregnation therapy of teeth 11 and 21
b. Filing down the defects of teeth 11 and 21
*c. Deep fluoridation of teeth 11 and 21
d. Regular check-ups to monitor the  child's condition
e. Filling of teeth 11 and 21

811. A 20-year-old man complains of a missing upper right tooth and an aesthetic defect. Objectively, tooth 12 is missing, its adjacent teeth are intact, stable, with distinct anatomical shape and tall crowns. The patient has direct occlusion. During the interview, the patient informed the doctor of his congenital heart disease. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Swaged-soldered dental bridge
b. Plastic dental bridge
*c. Adgesive dental bridge
d. Plastic-fused-to-metal dental bridge
e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge  with teeth 14 and 13 as the abutment

812. A 7-year-old boy underwent fissure sealing in teeth 36 and 46. Fissure sealing would be most effective:
a. If permanent teeth are affected with caries
b. After permanent occlusion is formed
*c. Immediately after eruption of the permanent tooth
d. In 3-4 years after tooth eruption
e. In 1-2 years after tooth eruption

813. A 7.5-year-old practically healthy child complains of crown fracture and pain in the upper right incisor. Objectively 2/3 of crown of 11 is absent, the pulp is exposed and red; on probing it is acutely painful and bleeding; tooth percussion is painful. The trauma occurred 2 hours ago. What would be the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Biological approach
b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital extirpation
*e. Vital amputation

814. A 37-year-old man was prescribed an extraction of tooth 25 under a local anesthesia. Where should the doctor be positioned in relation to the patient during the extraction of tooth 25?
a. Behind and to the right of the patient
b. Behind and to the left of the patient
c. In front and to the left of the patient
d. Directly in front of the patient
*e. In front and to the right of the patient

815. A man came to a dental therapy clinic with complaints of isolated transversal furrows on the crowns of his front and lateral teeth. The furrows were detected immediately after the teeth eruption. In his childhood, in the age of under a year, he had frequent acute raspiratory viral infections. Objectively, the crowns of teeth 16, 11, 21, and 26 have a single indentation (a band) in their middle within the enamel. The furrows do not stain with methylene blue. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Enamel hyperplasia
b. Fluorosis
*c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Amelogenesis imperfecta
e. Erosion of hard dental tissues

816. A 26-year-old woman, who works with chemical substances at a factory, came to a dentist with complaints of teeth discoloration and extreme sensitivity to cold, sweet, and sour foods in her upper front teeth. Objectively, on the vestibular surface of teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23, at their equator, there are white spots that spread to the cutting edges. Probing detects rough and fragile enamel in the affected areas. Vital staining is positive. Make the clinical diagnosis:
a. Hyperesthesia of hard dental tissues
*b. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Erosion of hard dental tissues
e. Acute initial caries

817. A patient came to the dentist for sanation. The patient has diabetes mellitus. 30 minutes before his visit to the dentist, he was administered insulin and ate an apple. During examination the patient developed a sensation of anxiety and hunger, whole body tremors, dyplopia, and pallor. He started sweating large drops. No acetone breath was detected. Hypersthenia of the eyeballs is observed. The pulse is rapid and tense, blood pressure is 130/90 mm Hg. His heart sounds are clear and breathing is even. Make the diagnosis:
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Hyperglycemic coma
c. Unconsciousness
*d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Collapse

818. During examination the child presents with retracted mucosa on the soft palate and uvula. The child was diagnosed with congenital submucous cleft soft palate. What surgical operation is necessary in this case?
*a. Veloplasty
b. Uranostaphyloplasty
c. Cheiloplasty
d. Rhinocheiloplasty
e. Uranoplasty

819. A 63-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of a painless formation with a wide base (up to 2 cm) on the skin of his left cheek. In the center of the formation, there is a crater-like depression in its base, filled with keratinized masses. The formation appeared 4 months ago. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Atheroma
b. Melanoma
c. Cutaneous horn
*d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Fibroma

820. A 35-year-old woman came to the dental office complaining of teeth mobility. Objectively, teeth 42, 41, 31, 32 have II degree mobility and teeth 43, 33 have I degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact. The patient presents with deep occlusion. X-ray shows resorption of the interdental septa by 1/3 of the root height. What splint construction is advisable in this case for temporary use?
a. Cap splint
b. Clasp-retained (bugel) denture
c. Consisting of equator crowns
d. Consisting of semi-crowns
*e. Made of armored composite

821. A 2.5-year-old child is registered for regular check-ups with the orthodontist. The I stage of physiogical occlusion development corresponds with eruption of the following group of temporary teeth:
a. Temporary canines
*b. Temporary molars
c. Front teeth
d. Temporary lateral incisors
e. Temporary central incisors

822. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist two days after the fixation of a removable partial denture. He complains of an ulcer that appeared on his oral mucosa. What has caused the mucosal lesion near the edge of the denture base?
a. Eating coarse food
*b. Mechanical trauma of the mucosa with the edge of the denture base
c. Mistakes when fitting the artificial teeth
d. Incorrectly placed clasps
e. Poorly fixed denture

823. A 14-year-old teenager complains of dry and chapped lips especially in autumn and winter. Objetively the vermillion border is dry, infiltrated, and covered in numerous scales. Skin of the lips is dense, pigmented, with pronounced pattern, peeling, and radial cracks. At the same time the skin of the face is dry, lichenified, and excoriated. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
*b. Atopic cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis
e. Actinic cheilitis

824. Complete removable laminar dentures are being made for a patient. Objectively, the alveolar processes of the jaws are mildly atrophied, the mucosa is moderately pliable. Anatomical impressions were obtained. What is the next clinical stage of denture-making?
*a. Obtaining functional impressions
b. Determining the central ratio of the jaws
c. Making individual impression trays
d. Checking the placement of the teeth
e. Checking the wax models of the dentures

825. The parents of a 17-year-old teenager brought him to a dental surgeon with complaints of a neoplasm on his left upper lip. The neoplasm appeared several months ago. Objectively, on the mucosa of the upper lip there is a wart-like pedunculated growth, clearly separated from the surrounding tissues. Its surface is bumpy and coarse-grained, resembling a cauliflower. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Cutaneous horn
b. Verrucous precancer
c. -
d. Fibroma
*e. Papilloma

826. A 24-year-old patient was diagnosed with sialolithiasis for the first time with the stone localization in the duct of the submandibular salivary gland. Choose the optimal treatment tactics.
a. Lithotripsy
*b. Stone removal
c. Salivary gland removal
d. Pharmacotherapy
e. Marsupialization surgery

827. A 28-year-old woman complains of dull pain when biting on tooth 16. Upon examination she was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. She is prescribed extaction of tooth 16. What forceps should be used for tooth extraction in this case?
a. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps
b. Straight forceps
*c. S-shaped right forceps
d. Beak-shaped curved forceps
e. S-shaped left forceps

828. A 13.5-year-old girl complains of swollen gums that bleed when she brushes her teeth. This condition has been observed for the last half a year. Objectively gingival mucosa surrounding the front teeth of the upper jaw is swollen and cyanotic. Interdental papillae are round, dense, and enlarged, they cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height. Teeth 13 and 23 are positioned vestibularly. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis, degree I
e. Localized periodontitis, degree I

829. A 16-year-old young man complains of temperature increase up to 38.7^oC, pain when eating and swallowing, foul acrid smell from his mouth. Lymph nodes, especially cervical ones, are enlarged, mobile, and painless. Objectively the patient presents with generalized hyperemia of the oral mucosa, multiple petechiae, necrotic spots, and profuse coating of the anterior pharynx. Blood test: increased ESR, marked leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypical mononuclear cells, thrombocytopenia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vincent stomatitis (acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis)
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Herpetic angina
e. Monoblastic leukemia

830. An 18-year-old girl complains of pain in her parotid regions and general indisposition. Examination shows bilateral swelling of the parotid regions, painful mouth opening. In the oral cavity, mucosa near the openings of parotid salivary glands is hyperemic and swollen. There are signs of general intoxication: body temperature of 38^oC and myalgia. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Phlegmon of the parotid-masseteric region
*b. Acute epidemic parotitis
c. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Acute suppurative lymphadenitis

831. A 43-year-old man came to the orthopedic dental clinic with complaints of difficult chewing and aesthetical defect. Objectively, teeth 15 and 16 are lost on the upper jaw and teeth 46, 47, 48 are lost on the lower jaw. What class of partial dentition defects can be diagnosed on the jaws according to the Kennedy classification?
a. Upper jaw - class 4, lower jaw - class 2
b. Upper jaw - class 2, lower jaw - class 2
c. Upper jaw - class 3, lower jaw - class 3
d. Upper jaw - class 1, lower jaw - class 3
*e. Upper jaw - class 3, lower jaw - class 2

832. A 13-year-old child complains of periodical gingival bleeding during teeth brushing, which has been observed for half a year. Objectively the gingival mucosa in the frontal mandibular area presents with congestive hyperemia and edema. Decay-missing-filled (DMF) index equals 4. Oral cavity hygiene is unsatisfactory. In this case it is necessary to recommend the patient the toothpastes with:
a. Zinc citrate
b. Calcium glycerophosphate
*c. Herbal extracts
d. Amine fluorides
e. Salt additives

833. A 62-year-old man came to a dentist to have his tooth 44 extracted. During examination he suddenly fell unconscious. His breathing and pulse are slow, his head is bowed, his arms are flexed in the elbows and wrists, his legs are stretched out, and his jaws are clenched tight. The patient developed clonic convulsion and started foaming at the mouth. His pupils are dilated and unresponsive to light. 1.5 minutes later, the patient's muscles relaxed. The patient is mentally confused. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Epileptic seizure
b. Syncope
c. Acute cerebrovascular accident
d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Paroxysmal tachycardia attack

834. A 37-year-old man complains of a whitish spot on the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively, against the background of visually unchanged vermilion border of the lower lip in the middle between the lip midline and the mouth angle, there is a grayish-white irregular (polygonal) lesion 7x4 mm in size. The lesion is slightly concave and covered in small scales tightly attached to its surface. Palpation detects no induration of the lesion base, though lateral palpation of the lesion detects a superficial induration. Regional lymph nodes remain unchanged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Manganotti cheilitis
*b. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Cancer of the lower lip
e. Flat leukoplakia

835. Complete removable dentures are being made for the upper and lower jaws of a 67-year-old patient. To place the artificial teeth correctly, the movements of the lower jaw were recorded. What is the average angle of the sagittal joint path?
a. 110°
b. 12°
c. 63°
d. 17°
*e. 33°

836. A dentist diagnosed a 20-year-old patient with acute initial caries of tooth 12. What treatment is indicated in this case?
a. Preparation of the defect followed by its filling
b. Professional hygiene
c. ART technique
d. Enamel filing-down without filling
*e. Remineralizing therapy

837. A 52-year-old man complains of unpleasant sensations during swallowing and erosions on the oral mucosa. The disease onset was over a month ago. Objectively, on the normal mucosa of the soft palate, cheeks, and gums there are bright red erosions with the remains of erupted vesicles. The mucosa easily sloughs off. The Nikolsky's sign is positive. What medicines must be prescribed for the treatment first?
a. Antifungal agents
b. Proteolytic enzymes
c. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
*d. Corticosteroids
e. Antibiotics

838. An 11-year-old girl was diagnosed with chronic parenchymatous parotitis. What X-ray sign indicates this disease?
a. ''String of pearls'' sign
b. Filling defect
c. Fluctuation sign
d. ''Leafless tree'' sign
*e. ''Bunch of grapes'' sign

839. A 35-year-old woman came to a dentist for treatment of caries in her tooth 37. After local anesthesia, she felt fear and anxiety, developed tingling skin on her hands and face, tinnitus, headache, nausea, abdominal pain, marked skin pallor, acrocyanosis, a sharp decrease in blood pressure, and broke out in cold sticky sweat. Then convulsions started and the patient lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Collapse
*b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Fainting
d. Acute cerebrovascular accident
e. Acute myocardial infarction

840. A 62-year-old man came to the dentist for extraction of tooth 44. During examination the patient suddenly fell unconscious. His respiration and pulse were slow. The head was bowed, the elbows and wrists were flexed, the legs were stretched, the jaws were clenching convulsively. After that the patient developed clonic convulsions and started frothing at the mouth. The pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light. After 1.5 minutes after the onset of the seizure the patient's muscles relaxed. His consciousness is clouded. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute disturbance of cerebral circulation
b. Unconsciousness
c. Hypertensic crisis
*d. Epileptic seizure
e. Paroxysmal tachycardia attack

841. A 28-year-old man has received a hit to the chin. He complains of pain in the right side of his face. Examination shows asymmetrical face due to tissue swelling in the upper right parotid area, mouth opening is painful, limited, the jaw is displaced to the right, right-sided crossbite is observed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Displaced traumatic double fracture of the body of the mandible
b. Displaced traumatic mental fracture of the mandible
c. Displaced traumatic central fracture of the mandible
d. Displaced traumatic unilateral fracture of the body of the mandible
*e. Displaced traumatic fracture of the cervix of the mandibular articular process

842. A 16-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of frequent injuries to the inner surface of his lower lip during his boxing training. Examination revealed a reverse overlap of his front teeth. It is recommended to make him a boxing mouthguard from <<Elastoplast>>. For what jaw should such a gear be made in this case?
a. Maxillary dentition
b. Mandibular dentition
c. Both maxillary and mandibular dentition
d. Maxillary dentition, maxillary alveolar  process, and hard palate
*e. Mandibular dentition and mandibular  alveolar process

843. One hour ago a patient received a blunt object trauma to the middle area of his face. X-ray revealed a fracture line in the bone tissue that passes through the nasal root, medial wall of the eyesocket, pterygoid processes of the sphenoid bone, and zygomatic arch. Make the diagnosis:
a. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
*c. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
d. Nasal and zygomatic bone fracture
e. Zygomatic bone fracture

844. An 18-year-old young man complains of a cavity in 27 and pain when eating solid food. He has a history of severe pain in 27 one year ago; he requested no medical help at the time. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 27 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. The cavity is nearly completely filled with overgrown granulation tissue. Probing of the granulations leads to mild pain and bleeding. Percussion is painless. EPT is 45 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis

845. A man came to a dentist with complaints of a painless tumor-like formation on his left lower jaw. Palpation detects Dupuytren's sign. The crown of tooth 36 has a deep carious cavity. In the area of the rooth apices of tooth 36, X-ray shows an area of bone destruction 2x2 cm in size with clear margins. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Radicular cyst of the lower jaw
b. Follicular cyst of the lower jaw
c. Mandibular ameloblastoma
d. Mandibular keratocyst
e. Giant-cell tumor of bone

846. A patient is indicated extraction of tooth 46, the crown of which is completely destroyed, its distal and mesial roots are separated at the point of bifurcation. What forceps should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
a. Forceps curved in a plane
b. Beak-shaped non-converging forceps
c. Bayonet forceps
*d. Beak-shaped converging forceps
e. Beak-shaped forceps with spikes

847. A 45-year-old man has been diagnosed with a maxillary fracture. The fracture line passes between teeth 43 and 44. Pathological wear is observed in his lower teeth, the crowns of the teeth are low, wire splint fixation is difficult, the fragments can be easily repositioned manually. What laboratory-made splint should be used in this case?
*a. Limberg splint
b. Vasiliev splint
c. Port splint
d. Zbarzh splint
e. Vankevych splint

848. A 48-year-old woman was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis of the temporomandibular joint. What is characteristic of this condition?
*a. Bilateral nature of the condition
b. Concomitance with arthrogenic  contracture
c. Mandibular stiffness in the morning
d. A history of chronic trauma
e. Decreased hearing acuity

849. A 35-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic with complaints of teeth mobility on his lower jaw. What type of occlusion stabilization is recommended in this case?
a. Sagittal
b. Parasagittal
c. Frontosagittal
d. Frontal
*e. Arch

850. A woman complains of a neoplasm in her sublingual area. The neoplasm makes eating and speaking difficult. In the sublingual area examination detects a soft-elastic neoplasm 1cm in diameter with smooth surface and clear margins. The sign of fluctuation is noticeable on palpation. Oral mucosa is stretched tightly over the neoplasm and is blue-tinged and semi-transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Calculous sialoadenitis
b. Hemangioma of the submandibular region
*c. Ranula of the sublingual gland
d. Mixed tumor of the submandibular gland
e. Adenolymphoma

851. An 8-year-old boy during a preventive examination presents with chalk-like spots on the vestibular surface of teeth 11 and 21. The surface of the spots is dull and smooth on probing. No pain response to thermal stimuli. Choose the additional method of examination to confirm the diagnosis In this case:
*a. Vital staining
b. Intraoral X-ray
c. Electric pulp testing
d. Ultraviolet stomatoscopy
e. Orthopantomography

852. A man complains of muscle weakness, constipations, dry mouth, inability to swallow food, and vision impairment. The day before, he was eating homemade canned fish. Objectively, his skin and visible mucosa are pale; he has diplopia and bilateral ptosis. What disease can be suspected in this case?
*a. Botulism
b. Salmonellosis
c. Food poisoning
d. Cholera
e. Shigellosis

853. Parents of a 2.5-year-old child complain of gradual destruction of the upper front teeth of their child for the last several months. Objectively there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the contact and vestibular surfaces of 52, 51, 61, and 62. The cavities are filled with softened pigmented dentin that can be easily removed with dental excavator. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic deep caries
*b. Acute median caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute deep caries

854. A 12-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of spontaneous, paroxysmal pain with short painless intervals. The pain radiates to the temple in the area of her upper right teeth and intensifies at night. The pain first occurred 2 days ago. Objective examination reveals a deep carious cavity in tooth 16, filled with softened dentin. Probing is painful all over the cavity floor. Vertical percussion is slightly painful. The pain intensifies in response to thermal stimuli. Pulp electrical excitability is 15-20 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
b. Acute limited pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
*e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

855. A 2-year-old child received a dental trauma. Objectively the crowns of 51 and 61 are shorter than the crowns of adjacent teeth by 1/3. Mucosa in the area of 51 and 61 is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray shows no periodontal fissure in the apical area of the roots of 51 and 61. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
*a. Dispensary observation
b. Reimplantation
c. Ligature splinting
d. Extraction of teeth 51, 61
e. Reposition of teeth 51, 61

856. The mother of a 3-year-old boy complains of an increase in his body temperature to 39^oC, sharply painful small wounds in his mouth, and excessive salivation. Objectively, the gums are hyperemic, edematous, and bleeding. On the hard palate and mucosa of the cheeks and lips, there are numerous small oval erosions up to 2 mm in diameter with whitish coating. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, soft-elastic, and painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
c. Chickenpox
*d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Acute candidal stomatitis

857. A 35-year-old man has developed edema and hyperemia that first appeared in the area of his wings of the nose and eventually spread to the upper lip and cheeks. Examination detected a fissure in the area of the lower external edge of the left nostril. The skin there is taut, dense, purple-blue, with smoothed out pattern. The local temperature is elevated. Palpation is painful. The affected area has clear irregularly-shaped margins. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Allergic dermatitis
*b. Erysipelas
c. Lymphangitis
d. Odontogenic subcutaneous granuloma
e. Eczema

858. An implant-supported removable denture is planned to be made for a 70-year-old patient to replace a complete defect in the lower dentition. Objectively, the alveolar processes of both jaws are significantly atrophied, the edentulous jaws are positioned in an orthognathic bite. What minimum number of implants is required for fixation of the denture in this case?
a. 4
b. 1
c. 8
*d. 2
e. 6

859. A doctor has received a removable partial denture from the laboratory. On examination of the denture, the following defect is observed: the denture has a marble-like appearance (white streaks). What mistake has been made by a dental technician, when replacing wax with plastic?
a. Inadequate stirring of the plastic dough
b. Packing during the ''sand-like'' phase
c. Excessive monomer
d. Packing during the ''rubber-like'' phase
*e. Non-compliance with the polymerization regimen

860. A 32-year-old man has been brought into the maxillofacial department of a clinic. He was diagnosed with an open displaced bilateral fracture of the lower jaw in the area of the gonial angle. X-ray shows a large diastasis between the fragments and muscle interposition. What main treatment technique should be chosen for this patient?
a. Make a Vankevich splint for the fixation of the lower jaw
b. Make a Port splint for the fixation of the lower jaw
c. Apply a smooth splint-bracket
*d. Bilateral osteosynthesis of the lower jaw
e. Apply a splint with wire loops to the  lower jaw

861. When undergoing treatment of acute pulpitis of tooth 35 under infiltration anesthesia, a 26-year-old patient complained of dizziness, tinnitus, and dimming vision. Objectively, the following is observed: pale skin, cold sweat, pulse - 110/min., weak, blood pressure - 90/60 mm Hg, loss of consciousness for one minute. What complication did the patient develop during the treatment?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Anaphylactic shock
*d. Syncope
e. Collapse

862. In an outpatient dental surgeon's office, a patient undergoes extraction of tooth 36. After administering anaesthesia, the doctor started working with an elevator. Suddenly, the patient complained of dizziness, ringing in the ears, and vision blackout. Objectively, the patient's face is pale, the patient has broken out in a cold sweat, a short-term loss of consciousness up to 1 minute has occurred. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Unconsciousness
b. Collapse
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Shock
e. Hypoglycemic coma

863. A 19-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of intermittent pain, provoked by biting on a right lower tooth. Objectively, her tooth 46 is discolored; on its masticatory surface it has a carious cavity that communicates with the dental cavity. Probing and percussion are painless. A fistula was detected on the mucosa in the area of the projection of the roots of tooth 46. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

864. A 23-year-old woman complains of a sharp pain in her gums, inability to eat, foul smell from the mouth, temperature up to 38^oC, general weakness. On examination, the patient is pale and her lymph nodes are enlarged. Edema, hyperemic gingival papillae, and separate ulcers covered in a fibrinous coating are observed in the patient. What additional examination needs to be performed first in this case?
a. Allergy testing
b. Complete urinalysis
c. Survey X-ray
d. Blood sugar levels
*e. Complete blood count

865. A 54-year-old woman complains of a neoplasm on her lower lip that appeared 6 month ago. Twenty days ago it suddenly started growing rapidly. Objectively, on the vermillion border of the lower lip there is a round red-gray node that rises 0.5 cm above the underlaying tissues. It is distinguished from the surrounding tissues and has a funnelform depression in its center, filled with keratinized masses. On palpation, the nodule is dense, mobile, and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Manganotti's cheilitis
*b. Keratoacanthoma
c. Verrucous leukoplakia
d. Papilloma
e. Verrucous precancer

866. A dental bridge needs to be made for the lower jaw of a 48-year-old man,  with teeth 45 and 47 used as an abutment. Objectively, tooth 47 is distally inclined (diverges). What surface of tooth 47 must be filed down more during the preparation of abutment teeth?
a. Buccal
b. Masticatory
*c. Distal
d. Mesial
e. Lingual

867. The parents of a 6-year-old boy complain of an edema on the right side of the child's face, a fever of 39^oC, and a deterioration of his general condition. Objectively, the child's face is asymmetrical because of a soft tissue edema in the buccal and submandibular areas on the right. In the oral cavity, the crown of tooth 84 is destroyed, percussion of teeth 83, 84 and 85 is painful, the teeth have the mbox{I-II degree of mobility, the alveolar mucosa of the right lower jaw is hyperemic and edematous on its lingual and vestibular sides. Vincent's sign is positive. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute odontogenic purulent  lymphadenitis
b. Phlegmon of the right submandibular  region
c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis  of tooth 84
*e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

868. A 6-year-old boy with congenital heart disease (pulmonary artery stenosis) presents with suppurative periostitis of the maxilla. The child needs surgical treatment. What unit should he be referred to?
a. The out-patient or in-patient unit at the discretion of the child's parents
b. The out-patient unit, no precautions are necessary
c. The out-patient unit after preliminary cardiological treatment
d. The cardiology unit
*e. The pediatric maxillofacial unit

869. A 55-year-old woman needs removable implant-retained dentures for both jaws. It is necessary to choose the type, the number and the placement of implants. What additional examination method will be the most efficient in making this decision?
a. Occlusography
b. Ultraviolet densitometry
c. Spot X-ray
*d. Computed tomography
e. Study of diagnostic models

870. A 23-year-old man complains of acute gingival bleeding and unpleasant smell from the mouth that appeared 5 days ago. Objectively gingival papillae and marginal gingiva are friable, bright red, swollen, painful, and bleed profusely on palpation. Gingival pockets are 3 mm deep. X-ray shows marked osteoporosis of the interalveolar septa, periodontal fissure in the apical areas of the interalveolar septa is enlarged. Cortical plate is intact. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, exacerbated development
c. Acute leukemia
d. Hypovitaminosis C
e. Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis

871. A bus driver received a head injury in a traffic accident. Concussion was diagnosed at the site of the accident. After being brought to a hospital, in the admission room the patient started vomiting and developed heavy cough and signs of asphyxia. What type of asphyxia is observed in this case?
a. Obstructive asphyxia
*b. Aspiration asphyxia
c. Valve asphyxia
d. Stenotic asphyxia
e. Dislocation asphyxia

872. A dentist has witnessed a car accident and had to provide emergency aid for bleeding from the femoral artery - applying a tourniquet. What is the maximum time for a tourniquet to be left on?
a. 2.5 hours in winter, 3 hours in summer
*b. 1.5 hours in winter, 2 hours in summer
c. 3 hours in winter and in summer
d. 2 hours in winter, 2.5 hours in summer
e. 3 hours in winter, 3.5 hours in summer

