1. During examination of schoolchildren, the orthodontist noticed that some of them present with strained orbicularis oris muscle. What dental appliance can be used for exercising of the orbicularis oris muscle?
a. Andresen-Haupl activator appliance
b. Bruckl appliance
c. Angle appliance
d. Frankel functional regulator III
*e. Dass activator appliance

2. A 34-year-old woman complains of dark brown spots on her upper front teeth. The spots formed approximately 18 months ago. Objectively, the contact surfaces of teeth 22 and 23 have pigmented areas of brown enamel with clear margins. Probing is painless. The surface of the spots is rough, the probe does not catch on it. After drying with a chip-blower, the surface of the spots has lost its luster and become matte. Percussion and thermodiagnostics are painless. Electric pulp testing - 4 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Fluorosis
c. Tetracycline teeth
*d. Chronic initial caries
e. Local enamel hypoplasia

3. A 9-year-old girl complains of persisting pain in tooth 11 that one month ago sustained a trauma resulting in broken crown. The tooth received no treatment. Objectively the 1/4 of the tooth crown of 11 is broken off, the remaining crown is grayish, the dental cavity is not exposed. Percussion is acutely painful. The mucogingival fold is hyperemic and acutely painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse suppurative pulpitis
*c. Acute traumatic periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

4. A 44-year-old man came to the dental polyclinic to have a denture made for him. He complains of problematic chewing and aesthetical defects. Objectively teeth 14, 15, and 22 are missing. According to Agapov, the loss of masticatory efficiency in this case is:
a. 9%
b. 16%
*c. 18%
d. 20%
e. 12%

5. A 35-year-old man complains of thickening of his maxillary alveolar process. Preliminary diagnosis of maxillary radicular cyst was made. What substance will be obtained as the result of the puncture of the alveolar process in the area of buccal thickening?
a. Epithelium
b. Blood
c. Turbid infiltration
*d. Yellowish liquid
e. Pus

6. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a deteriorated fixation of his complete removable denture for the upper jaw. He has been using this denture for 5 years. Objectively, the prosthetic bed does not correspond with the denture base due to the atrophy of the jaw. How long can a complete removable denture be used before it becomes necessary to make a new one?
a. 1-2 years
b. 7-8 years
*c. 3-4 years
d. 5-6 years
e. 9-10 years

7. A 32-year-old woman complains of white and pigmented spots on her teeth. She lives in an area, where fluorine levels in drinking water are 1.7 mg/L. She was diagnosed with fluorosis, chalky-speckled form. What toothpastes are indicated in this case?
a. Fluorine-containing toothpastes
b. Highly abrasive toothpastes
c. Triclosan-containing toothpastes
d. Herbal toothpastes
*e. Calcium phosphate-containing  toothpastes

8. A 21-year-old man came to the dentist complaining of general weakness, muscle pain, body temperature up to 38.3^oC, indigestion, excessive salivation, and rashes in the oral and nasal cavities, urethra, on the wings of the nose, and in the interdigital folds. These symptoms appeared after ingestion of milk during the patient's stay in the village. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Herpetic stomatitis
c. Herpes zoster
d. Behcet's disease
*e. Murrain

9. The parents of a 7-year-old girl brought her to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. Examination detected a small carious cavity with a narrow opening in the limited area of a fissure in her tooth 46. The probe catches in the softened mantle dentin. Choose the optimal treatment tactics in this case.
a. Invasive sealing
b. Deep fluoridation
*c. Preventive filling
d. Impregnation method
e. Non-invasive sealing

10. A 4-year-old practically healthy child came for oral cavity sanation. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 75 there is a carious cavity within mantle dentin. The cavity is filled with softened dentin. Dentinoenamel junction is painful on probing. What material would be optimal for permanent filling?
a. Composite material
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Phosphate cement
d. Silicate cement
e. Silicophosphate cement

11. A 50-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his dental formula is as follows: 13 12 11/ 21 22 23, 33 32 31/ 41 42 43. The mounting of the diagnostic casts into a universal articulator using plaster is planned. What will allow the positioning of the occlusal plane in relation to the temporomandibular joint axes in the articulator?
a. Bite rims
b. Parallelometer
c. Bite registrator
*d. Facial arch
e. Silicone key

12. A 33-year-old man came to a dental surgeon complaining of frequent exacerbations of pain and inflammation in his lower right wisdom tooth within the last 6 months. Currently, the patient is not in pain, the mouth opens freely. Examination detects visible mesial cusps of an atypically located impacted tooth 48. Mandibular X-ray shows dystopic tooth 48 on the right, the crown of which presses into tooth 47. What should the doctor do in this case?
a. Excision of the operculum over tooth 48
b. Monitoring until complete eruption of  tooth 48
c. Referral for orthodontic treatment
d. Extraction of tooth 47
*e. Atypical extraction of tooth 48

13. A 38-year-old man complains of aching pain in the area of his right lower tooth, observed for the past two days. Objectively, the distal surface of tooth 46 has a carious cavity within the peripulpal dentin, probing of ist bottom is painless, vertical percussion is positive, thermal testing results are negative. The mucosa in the area of the projection of tooth 46 root apices is hyperemic. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of localized parodontitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

14. A man complains of muscle weakness, constipations, dry mouth, inability to swallow food, and vision impairment. The day before, he was eating homemade canned fish. Objectively, his skin and visible mucosa are pale; he has diplopia and bilateral ptosis. What disease can be suspected in this case?
*a. Botulism
b. Salmonellosis
c. Food poisoning
d. Shigellosis
e. Cholera

15. A 59-year-old woman complains that fixation of her partial removable laminar denture became worse. She has been using this denture for one year. Objectively, the alveolar process in the edentulous areas is atrophied, the denture base corresponds with the denture bed, the denture is easy to place in and take out. What would be the doctor's tactics in this case?
*a. Activation of the retaining clasps (clammers)
b. Making a new denture
c. Rebasing the denture
d. Making the denture base smaller
e. Making a denture with an elastic lining

16. A 35-year-old patient undergoes treatment of chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 25. The canal is to be filled using the warm gutta-percha vertical condensation technique. What instrument is needed for gutta-percha condensation?
*a. Plugger
b. Endodontic probe
c. K-file
d. Spreader
e. Root needle

17. A 21-year-old young man came to an orthodontist complaining about his markedly visible labiomental fold. Objectively, the lower third of his face is reduced and the labiomental fold is markedly visible. Intraoral examination reveals no contact between the front teeth of both jaws when they are closed, the sagittal fissure is 4 mm, the anterior buccal cusp of the first upper molar is in contact with its counterpart of the first lower molar. What abnormal bite is it characteristic of?
a. Mesial bite
b. Crossbite
c. Open bite
d. Deep bite
*e. Distal bite

18. A 12-year-old boy complains of constant pain in the upper tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 26 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Thermal stimuli and probing of the cavity floor are painless. Percussion is sharply painful. Mucosa in the area of tooth 26 exhibits mild signs of inflammation. X-ray of tooth 26 shows no changes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute suppurative pulpitis
e. Acute odontogenic periostitis

19. A 42-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling on his left cheek and skin redness. Objectively, on the skin of his left cheek there is an inflammatory infiltrate 2.5x1.5 cm in size with clear margins. The skin over the infiltrate is sharply thinned-out, cyanotic, and glossy. On the oral mucosa along the mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 37, a band can be palpated. The band is connected to the lesion focus on the patient's cheek. Tooth 37 underwent a volumetric restoration. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Buccal carbuncle
b. Buccal phlegmon
*c. Subcutaneous migrating granuloma
d. Buccal lymphadenitis
e. Buccal furuncle

20. A dental orthodontist has prescribed a complex of myogymnastic exercises with an equilibrator to an 8-year-old boy with the Angle's class II, subclass 1, closure of the first permanent molars. What muscle is trained using this dental appliance?
a. Respiratory muscles
b. Tongue muscles
*c. Orbicularis oris muscle
d. Pharyngeal muscles
e. Mandibular elevator muscles

21. After a trauma, a man has developed complaints of displaced tooth 32 and pain that intensifies when he bites food. Examination shows edema of the lower lip and mucosal hematoma in the area of tooth 32. Tooth 32 has the I degree of mobility and a slight sagittal displacement. X-ray shows a widening of the periodontal fissure. Make the diagnosis:
a. Impacted dislocation of tooth 32
b. Root fracture of tooth 32
c. Contusion of tooth 32
d. Complete dislocation of tooth 32
*e. Incomplete dislocation of tooth 32

22. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic. He complains of inability to chew his food due to partial loss of teeth. Objectively in the lateral regions teeth 18, 16, 15, 25, 26, 28, 38, 35, 36, 44, 46, 48 are missing. Other teeth present with I-II degrees of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of the II degree. What type of denture would be optimal for this patient?
a. -
b. Metal-based dentures
c. Non-removable full cast dental bridges
*d. Clasp-retained (bugel) dentures with splinting elements
e. Removable partial laminar denture

23. A 35-year-old man has developed edema and hyperemia that first appeared in the area of his wings of the nose and eventually spread to the upper lip and cheeks. Examination detected a fissure in the area of the lower external edge of the left nostril. The skin there is taut, dense, purple-blue, with smoothed out pattern. The local temperature is elevated. Palpation is painful. The affected area has clear irregularly-shaped margins. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Erysipelas
b. Eczema
c. Odontogenic subcutaneous granuloma
d. Lymphangitis
e. Allergic dermatitis

24. A 64-year-old man undergoes fixation of a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. The dentist examined the denture base and noticed there a clearly visible ''marble pattern''. This net of white lines runs through the whole plastic base. What is the most likely cause of this defect?
*a. Disturbed process of acrylic resin polymerization
b. Fractures in the denture base caused by mechanical damage
c. Disturbed process of denture base polishing
d. Foreign admixtures in the denture base
e. Uneven moistening of acrylic resin with a monomer

25. A 42-year-old man complains of painful bleeding gums that especially trouble him during eating. There are also complaints of muscle weakness, pain in the limbs, and chills. For the last 15 years, he has been living in the North and engaging in hard physical labor. Objectively, his skin is dry, brown, and peeling. His oral mucosa is edematous and hyperemic with a cyanotic tinge. His gingival papillae cover the tooth crowns to the half of their height and bleed in response to the slightest stimulus. Teeth mobility of the I degree is observed. There are numerous petechiae on the mucosa of the soft palate. These signs are likely to indicate the following type of avitaminosis:
a. Vitamin B_2
b. Vitamin PP
c. Vitamin A
*d. Vitamin C
e. Vitamin B_1

26. A 49-year-old man has been hospitalized into the maxillofacial department in a severe condition with the diagnosis of phlegmon of the mouth floor with the purulent process spreading to the neck. While lying on the operating table, the patient developed signs of asphyxia. What measures should be taken first in this case?
a. Provide symptomatic pharmacotherapy
b. Perform phlegmon dissection under face mask anesthesia
c. Perform fixation of the tongue
*d. Perform a tracheotomy
e. Place the patient into an upright position

27. A 27-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his gums, bad breath, bleeding, and general weakness for 3 days. Prior to his visit, he requested no physician's help. Examination shows that the patient is pale, his regional lymph nodes are enlarged, their palpation is painful. The gums on the both jaws are edematous and hyperemic. The gums have several ulcers with dirty-gray coating. What group of medicines must be used for the etiotropic treatment of this condition?
*a. Antibacterial agents
b. Proteolytic enzymes
c. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
d. Antihistamines
e. Steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

28. A 47-year-old man complains of frequent recurrent jaw dislocations. Objectively, the teeth are retained and the molars are covered with artificial crowns. What treatment tactics should be chosen in this case?
a. Myogymnastics, physiotherapy
b. Restriction of the mouth opening, using the Schroeder appliance
c. Immobilization of the jaw with teeth ligation
d. Physiotherapy
*e. Restriction of the mouth opening, using the Petrosov appliance

29. A 44-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in the area of the left cheek, deterioration of his general condition, and a fever of 38°С. Objectively, in the area of his left cheek, there is edema that is painful to palpation. The mucosa of the cheek and the mucogingival junction on the left is hyperemic and edematous, it has imprints of teeth and protrudes into the oral cavity. The left lower molars are destroyed, their remains have sharp edges. The patient was diagnosed with a deep phlegmon of the cheek on the left. What incision would be optimal in this case?
a. Incision along the nasolabial fold
b. External buccal incision above the center of the infiltrate
*c. Mucosal incision from within the oral cavity
d. Submandibular skin incision 2 cm below the edge of the mandible
e. Incision along the edge of the mandible

30. A 40-year-old man presents with pathologic teeth grinding caused by their functional overload due to the loss of many antagonist teeth. With direct occlusion, vertical grinding of the front teeth resulted in protrusion of the patient's lower jaw forwards. Interalveolar space is diminished, the lower third of the face is shortened. What would be the most advisable treatment in this case?
a. Prosthetic treatment
b. Instrumental surgical treatment
*c. Prosthetics that increase interalveolar height
d. Prothetic treatment
e. Teeth shortening

31. A 44-year-old man came to a dentist for sanation of the oral cavity. Objectively, the crown of his tooth 17 is completely destroyed. Having conducted additional examinations, the dentist made the following diagnosis: chronic fibrous periodontitis of tooth 17. Extraction of tooth 17 is indicated in this case. What type of conduction anesthesia should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
a. Infraorbital and palatine anesthesia
*b. Tuberal and palatine anesthesia
c. Incisor and infraorbital anesthesia
d. Plexual anesthesia
e. Torusal anesthesia

32. A clasp (bugel) denture is being made for the upper jaw of a 64-year-old man, who has a Kennedy's class II dentition defect. After parallelometry, the types of boundary lines were determined on the abutment teeth. Tooth 24 has a type 1 boundary line. What type of clasp (clammer) according to the Ney classification is indicated in this case?
a. Type IV
*b. Type I
c. Type II
d. Type V
e. Type III

33. A 25-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of increased sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli in the area of her upper lateral teeth on the left. Objectively, in the pericervical area of the vestibular surface of tooth 26, there is a chalk-like spot with a shallow defect in its center. When stained with a 3% solution of methylene blue, the enamel in the area of the spot stains blue. The affected area is tender when probed. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Cuneiform defect
c. Enamel erosion
d. Enamel necrosis
*e. Acute superficial caries

34. A 28-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling that she discovered accidentally in the area of her maxillary alveolar process on the left. Her mouth opening is unhindered. Objectively, in the area of the maxillary alveolar process on the left, in the projection of the roots of teeth 22 and 23, there is a deformity that looks like a round induration and is painless to palpation. Teeth 22, 23, 24 are intact. X-ray shows an area of bone tissue rarefaction with clear boundaries, up to 1 cm in diameter, located between teeth 22 and 23; their periodontal fissure is preserved, the roots are divergent. Electric pulp testing results are within the normal range. Make the provisional diagnosis.
*a. Globulomaxillary cyst
b. Cementoma
c. Nasopalatine cyst
d. Follicular cyst
e. Ameloblastoma

35. A victim of a traffic accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. What measures should be taken to prevent complications in this case?
a. Fixation of the tongue to the patient's collar
b. Removal of foreign bodies from the oral cavity
*c. Fixation of the lower jaw and tongue with standard Entin's head-chin strap
d. Excision of injured mucosal flaps
e. Tracheostomy and artificial pulmonary ventilation

36. A 55-year-old man complains of heartburn and unpleasant sensations in his tongue. The patient has been suffering from gastritis with low acidity for approximately 5 years. What changes in the tongue are the most likely to be detected in this patient?
*a. Atrophied and smoothed out lingual papillae
b. Erosions on the lateral surfaces of the tongue
c. Hypertrophic lingual papillae
d. Fissured tongue
e. Coated tongue

37. The parents of a 2-month-old boy brought him to a dentist with complaints of a congenital defect of the upper lip in the child. Objectively, there is a fissure-like defect in the tissues of the upper lip on the left, which passes through all the tissues of the lip and does not reach the nasal passage by 4 mm. The integrity of the alveolar process and hard palate is preserved. Make the diagnosis.
a. Congenital incomplete bilateral non-union of the upper lip
b. Congenital complete left-sided non-union of the upper lip
c. Congenital hidden left-sided non-union of the upper lip
d. Oblique non-union of the face
*e. Congenital incomplete left-sided non-union of the upper lip

38. During the preparation of teeth for installation of an orthopedic construction, a 65-year-old woman indistinctly complained of a sharp headache, sensation of heat, nausea, and numbness of her limbs. Her face is asymmetrical due to a smoothed out nasolabial fold on one side. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Angina pectoris
b. Unconsciousness
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Pneumothorax
*e. Acute disturbance of cerebral circulation

39. A 2-year-old child received a dental trauma. Objectively the crowns of 51 and 61 are shorter than the crowns of adjacent teeth by 1/3. Mucosa in the area of 51 and 61 is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray shows no periodontal fissure in the apical area of the roots of 51 and 61. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Extraction of teeth 51, 61
b. Reimplantation
c. Ligature splinting
*d. Dispensary observation
e. Reposition of teeth 51, 61

40. A 65-year-old woman came to a dentist complaining of a mildly painful ulcer on the mucosa of her tongue. The ulcer appeared 2-3 weeks ago. The woman has a history of chronic circulatory failure. On the lateral surface of the tongue, examination detects a shallow ulcer up to 1 cm in diameter, covered in a gray-white coating and moderately painful to palpation. The color of the surrounding mucosa is unchanged. The oral cavity is sanated. What type of ulcer is likely in this case?
a. Tubercular ulcer
*b. Trophic ulcer
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Syphilitic ulcer
e. Decubitus ulcer

41. An 11-year-old child undergoes an orthodontic treatment. The child is prescribed a dental appliance with combined action (functional direction and mechanical action). What structural elements are likely to be present in this dental appliance?
a. Occlusive onlays, labial bandages
*b. Occlusive onlays, screw
c. Inclined plane, tongue shield
d. Omega loop, screw
e. Occlusive onlays, buccal shields

42. During the treatment of tooth 11 due to exacerbation of chronic pulpitis, a dentist obstructs the root canal using the lateral condensation of cold gutta-percha technique. What instrument is needed for this sealing method?
a. Root needle
b. Endodontic probe
*c. Spreader
d. Gutta-percha condenser
e. Plugger

43. A patient complains of a painless neoplasm on the lower lip, which appeared 2 weeks ago after an injury. Objectively, there is a painless dense spherical translucent neoplasm approximately 5 mm in diameter, with clear margins and signs of fluctuation. The mucosa around this formation is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Fibrous epulis
b. Trophic ulcer
c. Angiomatous epulis
*d. Retention cyst of the salivary gland
e. Decubital ulcer

44. How to separate teeth for orthodontic crowns?
*a. With elastics
b. With separating discs
c. With volcanic discs
d. With a diamond-tipped bore
e. No separation is needed

45. The parents of a 12-year-old boy are concerned about their child having white spots on his upper front teeth. The spots appeared half a year ago. The child's teeth are sensitive to chemical stimuli. Objectively, his teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 have chalky spots in the cervical region of their vestibular surface. The enamel there is dull and coarse when probed. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
*b. Acute initial caries
c. Acute superficial caries
d. Chronic initial caries
e. Dental fluorosis

46. A 54-year-old man came to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. He has a single small erosion on the vermilion border of his lower lip, located laterally at the distance of 1/3 from the right mouth angle. The erosion has an irregular shape, deep red color, and a smooth glossy surface. Palpation detects no induration of its base, regional lymph nodes are not palpable. The lesion first appeared 3 years ago. Usually, it is observed for 1.5-2 months, then it heals and reappears. Sometimes it is covered in a scab. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Recurrent herpes
b. Primary syphiloma, erosive form
*c. Manganotti's abrasive precancerous  cheilitis
d. Leukoplakia, erosive form
e. Bowen's disease

47. A 35-year-old patient has a fresh mental fracture of the mandible without visible displacement of the fragments. What orthopedic appliance is indicated in this case?
a. Reponation appliance
*b. Fixation appliance
c. Forming appliance
d. Combined appliance
e. Replacement appliance

48. A 25-year-old man complains of a dull pain in the area of his lower right second molar. This tooth was treated for pulpitis one day ago. The carious cavity has a temporary filling. Objectively, X-ray of tooth 47 shows a perforation in the area of root bifurcation within the bone tissue. The root canals are filled and there are no pathologic changes in the periapical tissues. The depth of dentogingival probing in the bifurcation area is normal. What treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. Tooth replantation
*b. Perforation closure with MTA
c. Perforation closure with glass-ionomer cement
d. Tooth extraction
e. Crown lengthening

49. A 14-year-old patient has an anomaly of teeth positioning, detected by a dentist during an examination. Tooth 23 occupies the place of tooth 24, while tooth 24 takes the place of tooth 23. What is the correct diagnosis in this case?
a. Distal position of tooth 23
b. Mesial position of tooth 24 and distal  position of tooth 23
c. Semi-retention of teeth 23 and 24
*d. Transposition of teeth 23 and 24
e. Mesial position of tooth 24

50. A 6-year-old girl took paracetamol to treat a case of URTI two days ago, which resulted in the development of her present condition. The disease onset was acute with temperature increase up to 39.8^oC)  Objectively there are cockade-shaped maculopapular rashes on her face. The vermilion border is swollen, hyperemic, covered in massive brown crusts, and presents with bleeding cracks. Conjunctivitis is detected. Swollen and hyperemic oral mucosa presents with numerous erosions covered with fibrinous incrustations; the erosions are sharply painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Pemphigus

51. A 25-year-old man was brought to the hospital for specialized medical care 48 hours after he received a shrapnel wound of the maxillofacial area. Examination shows a large gaping wound of irregular shape in the soft facial tissues. Wound edges are infected and swollen. What type of surgical wound treatment should be conducted at this stage?
a. Early primary
b. -
c. Delayed primary
*d. Late primary
e. Secondary

52. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated infiltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the infiltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the infiltration there is a fistula. In the oral cavity the crown of 46 is destroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the fistula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
b. Odontogenic lymphadenitis
c. Cheek furuncle
d. Actinomycosis
*e. Migrating facial granuloma

53. A 53-year-old man complains of increased teeth sensitivity to chemical stimuli. Objectively, the gums are pale pink, the roots are exposed by 1/3 of their length. A small amount of dental deposit is observed. Teeth 15, 14, 24, 41, 31, 42, and 32 have cuneiform defects. Probing of the defects and exposed cervices is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Catarrhal gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis, II degree
c. Generalized periodontitis, I degree
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Periodontosis, I degree

54. Parents of a 3-year-old child complain of food periodically getting into the child's nasal cavity during feeding. Objectively there is a fissure in the area of the soft palate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Combined cleft palate
b. Isolated nonunion of the hard and soft palate
c. Congenital hidden cleft palate
d. Cleft hard palate
*e. Isolated partial nonunion of the soft palate

55. A clasp (bugel) denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 59-year-old man. At the stage of denture design, the parallelometry must be performed using any suitable method. What is determined at this stage?
*a. Border line
b. Line A
c. Smile line
d. Equator
e. Midline

56. In an orthopedic dentistry clinic, a partial removable laminar denture for the patient's upper jaw was made. However, when the denture was received by the dentist, the doctor noticed chalk-like streaks and spots on the surface of the denture base. Why did this flaw occur?
*a. Insufficient amount of the monomer
b. Rapid cooling during polymerization
c. Insufficient compression of parts of the cuvette
d. Insufficient polishing of the denture  surface
e. A sharp increase in the temperature at  the polymerization stage

57. A 4-year-old child with mouth breathing is registered for regular check-ups with an orthodontist. One year ago the child underwent an adenotomy. Objectively, the child has deciduous occlusion, the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by 1/3, the distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are located in one vertical plane. What preventive appliance is the most advisable in this case for elimination of the bad habit of mouth breathing?
a. Kraus vestibulo-oral plate
b. Frankel functional regulator, type I
c. Dass activator
*d. Schonherr standard vestibular plate
e. Janson bionator

58. The patient with shallow vestibule of mouth and edentulous mandible underwent a surgery: a mucoperiosteal flap was relocated from the alveolar ridge to the body of the mandible and fixed with denture acting as a bandage. What surgical procedure was used for vestibular deepening?
a. Kazanjian
b. Trauner
c. Rhermann
*d. Rumpel
e. Thiersch

59. A 47-year-old man has lost his lower left premolars. After that the teeth at the edges of the defect have been gradually sliding inside the defect. At the same time the antagonist teeth started to protrude toward the edentulous segment of the alveolar bone. In the medical literature, such clinical presentation is called:
*a. Popov-Godon phenomenon
b. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
c. Phenomenon of relative tooth-alveolar lengthening
d. Kourliandski phenomenon
e. Castaigne syndrome

60. In an outpatient dental surgeon's office, a patient undergoes extraction of tooth 36. After administering anaesthesia, the doctor started working with an elevator. Suddenly, the patient complained of dizziness, ringing in the ears, and vision blackout. Objectively, the patient's face is pale, the patient has broken out in a cold sweat, a short-term loss of consciousness up to 1 minute has occurred. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Shock
b. Collapse
*c. Unconsciousness
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Hypoglycemic coma

61. A 45-year-old man came to the dental orthopedist's office. He complains of pain on biting in the area of tooth 45. The method of electric pulp testing was used to confirm the diagnosis. What value of electric pulp testing will indicate the presence of pulp necrosis and apical periodontitis?
a. 2-6 microamperes
b. 50-60 microamperes
*c. 100 microamperes or more
d. 10-12 microamperes
e. 20-40 microamperes

62. The mother of a 4-year-old girl complains that her child has fever of 39^oC, cough, and runny nose. Examination of the oral cavity detects punctate whitish spots that resemble splashes of lime on the hyperemic buccal mucosa in the area of the molars. Palpation of the affected areas detects a mucosal unevenness. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Varicella
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*d. Measles
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

63. A 21-year-old woman complains of short-term pain attacks in her lower left tooth that are provoked by thermal stimuli and quickly stop after the stimulus is removed. On the masticatory surface of tooth 47, examination reveals a carious cavity with a narrow entrance that is filled with light softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor and percussion of tooth 47 are painless. Probing of the cavity walls is painful. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic superficial caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Acute deep caries

64. A 37-year-old man complains of an unpleasant sensation in his gums on the lower left jaw that developed after he underwent treatment for dental caries several months ago. Examination reveals permanent fillings on the contact surfaces of teeth 36 and 37. The edges of the fillings are hanging over the interdental papilla. The gum in the area of teeth 36 and 37 is hyperemic and edematous. The periodontal pocket is up to 3 mm deep. What treatment will be etiological in this case?
a. Closed curettage
*b. High-quality filling
c. Thorough personal hygiene
d. Pharmacological treatment
e. Professional hygiene

65. A patient was diagnosed with cancer of the right parotid gland, T2N2M0. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Radiation therapy
b. Surgical removal of the lymph node
c. Surgical removal of the neoplasm
*d. Combined therapy
e. Chemotherapy

66. A removable partial laminar denture was made for the upper jaw of a 55-year-old patient. During assessment of its quality, small pores were detected all throughout the denture base. What has caused the formation of pores in the denture?
a. Using plastic with an expired expiration date
b. Insufficient pressure applied to the plastic during its polymerization
c. Rapid cooling of the cuvette after plastic polymerization
d. Insufficient amount of monomer in the plastic dough
*e. Rapid temperature increase during plastic polymerization

67. A 2-year-old girl has a bright red neoplasm 1x1.5 cm in size on her upper lip. The neoplasm does not protrude above the mucosa and becomes paler, when pressed. The regional lymph nodes have no pathology. The results of blood and urine analysis are normal for her age. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Capillary hemangioma
b. Systemic hemangiomatosis
c. Cavernous hemangioma
d. Capillary lymphangioma
e. Cavernous lymphangioma

68. An 80-year-old man needs a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. How should the denture boder be located relative to the natural teeth?
a. Covers the crowns by 1/3 of their height
b. Located below dental cervices
c. Fully covers the crowns
d. Reaches dental cervices
*e. Covers the crowns by 2/3 of their height

69. Examination of a woman by a dentist detects marked hyperemia of her oral mucosa that in places is covered in a whitish coating that can be easily removed by scraping. Angular cheilitis is observed in the corners of her mouth. Her cervical and axillary lymph nodes are enlarged. For the last 3 months she was presenting with general weakness, temperature increasing to 37.5°С in the evening, weight loss, and prolonged diarrheas. What examination method can confirm the diagnosis in this case?
a. Microscopy of the coating
b. Complete blood count
c. Inoculation to obtain blood culture
*d. Blood test for antibodies to HIV
e. Lymph node biopsy

70. A 24-year-old woman is at the III trimester of her pregnancy. She complains of white spots appearing on her lower front teeth. Examination detects chalk-like lesions on the vestibular surfaces of teeth 41, 42, 31, 32 in the precervical area. The lesions can be stained with dyes. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Preparation without filling
*b. Remineralization therapy
c. Preparation and filling
d. ART-technique
e. Impregnation with silver nitrate

71. The parents of a 5-year-old girl complain that their child developed acute fever of 39°C, weakness, sore throat, and rash on the body, and started refusing to eat. Objectively, her oral mucosa is dry, the tongue is bright red and has edematous papillae, the mucosa of the tonsils, palatal arches, and soft palate is sharply hyperemic. Submandibular lymphadenitis is observed. Bright red, fine rashes that merge together are observed on the skin of the child's face and neck, except the nasolabial triangle. Make the provisional diagnosis.
*a. Scarlet fever
b. Measles
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Diphtheria
e. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis

72. A 48-year-old woman complains of low-grade fever and a gradually enlarging ulcer on her gingival mucosa near the molars; the teeth in the affected area are mobile. Objectively on the gingival mucosa between the lower left molars there are two superficial sharply painful ulcers with undermining margins. Floor of the ulcers is granulated and covered in yellow-gray coating. Small tubercles surround the ulcers. Tooth cervices are exposed, pathologic tooth mobility is observed. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and matted together into dense clusters. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Syphilis
b. Cancerous ulcer
c. Trophic ulcer
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Acute aphthous stomatitis

73. A 47-year-old woman complains of dry mouth, taste disturbance, and a burning sensation in the tip of her tongue that disappears during eating, but intensifies in the evening. These complaints first appeared after a psychic trauma. The patient suffers from carcinophobia and disturbed sleep. What disease can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Chronic candidiasis
b. Median rhomboid glossitis
*c. Glossodynia
d. Desquamative glossitis
e. Neuritis of the lingual nerve

74. A non-removable dental bridge screw-retained on two implants was made for a 45-year-old patient to restore the missing lower premolars and molars on the right. Preventive examination one year after installing the denture detects its mobility. X-ray shows signs of peri-implantitis. What is the management tactics for this patient?
a. Perform professional hygiene
b. Prescribe anti-inflammatory treatment
c. Prescribe antimicrobial treatment
d. Tighten the screws
*e. Remove the denture

75. A child born with cleft palate needs an obturator. What is the optimal age for installing a palatal obturator in this case?
a. 3-4 years
b. 5-6 years
*c. The first days after birth
d. 1 year
e. 1.5 years

76. During regular check-up a 6.5-year-old child presents with carious cavity on the distal proximal surface of 65 within mantle dentin. Cavity walls and bottom are pigmented, dense, painless on probing; there is no response to cold stimulus; percussion is painless. During tooth preparation there is tenderness at the level of dentinoenamel junction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute median caries
c. Chronic deep caries
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

77. On the 7 day after an abdominal surgery, a 69-year-old man has developed pain and swelling in the area of his left parotid gland. His body temperature is 39^oC, his mouth is dry. Massage of the salivary gland produces purulent exudate from the excretory duct. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute mumps
b. Phlegmon of the parotid-masseteric region
*c. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
d. Phlegmon of the submassseteric region
e. Herzenberg parotitis

78. What are the contraindications to the use of liquid flowing composites in dental practice?
a. Invasive sealing of fissures
b. Creating a "shock-absorbing" underlying pad, when restoring the masticatory teeth
*c. Filling of Black's class IV carious cavities
d. Filling of small pericervical cavities
e. Non-invasive sealing of fissures

79. After the unsuccessful treatment for chronic granulomatous periodontitis of tooth 15 by dental therapist, the 47-year-old man came to extract this tooth. What forceps should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
a. S-shaped right-sided forceps
b. Straight forceps
c. S-shaped left-sided forceps
*d. S-shaped forceps
e. Bayonet forceps

80. Partial removable laminar dentures are being made for a 65-year-old man. Complete anatomical impressions of both jaws were obtained using "Kromopan" alginate material. What solution should be used for the disinfection of the obtained impressions?
a. 0.2% "Dezoxon-1"
b. 70% ethyl alcohol
*c. 0.5% sodium hypochlorite
d. 0.6% hydrogen peroxide
e. 0.75% chloramine B

81. During the extraction of tooth 37, the dentist accidentally pushed the root into the perimandibular soft tissues. The root is located under the alveolar mucosa and can be clearly palpated with a finger. What are the doctor's tactics in this case?
a. Remove the root through a  submandibular surgical access
b. Remove the root through the tooth socket
c. Refer the patient for X-ray imaging to  determine further tactics
d. Leave the root in the soft tissues
*e. Dissect the soft tissues over the root and  remove it

82. A 36-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Objectively there is a carious cavity on the mesial masticatory surface of tooth 46, interdental contact is disturbed. Dental inlay is to be made for this patient. According to Black's classification of dental caries this cavity is class:
a. 5
b. 1
c. 4
d. 3
*e. 2

83. A patient from a psychiatric clinic was referred to a dentist for treatment. After the examination she was diagnosed with acute median caries of tooth 16 (Black's class I). The patient has problems with communication and is afraid of injections. The doctor decided to use the ART technique. What filling material should be used in this case?
a. Hybrid composite
b. Microfilled composite
c. Amalgam
*d. Glass ionomer cement
e. Macrofilled composite

84. A 29-year-old woman complains of itching, burning, and pain in the vermilion border of her lips. These signs appear in spring and summer, and disappear during other seasons. The onset of the disease was 5 years ago. Objectively, the vermilion border of the lower lip is hyperemic and edematous. It has isolated fissures and small vesicles and erosions up to 3 mm in diameter, covered in scabs that are painful to the touch. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Erosive lupus erythematosus of the  vermilion border
d. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
e. Acute eczematous cheilitis

85. During administration of infraorbital anesthesia, a patient developed a focus of skin pallor in the infraorbital region. The general condition of the patient did not deteriorate. The doctor diagnosed skin ischemia in the patient. What aid must be provided in this case?
*a. This condition needs no treatment, the  ischemia will pass on its own
b. Administer tavegyl (clemastine) or  suprastin (chloropyramine) solution  intramuscularly
c. Give liquid ammonia to smell
d. Administer 1 mL of cordiamine  intramuscularly
e. Administer 1 mL of 10% caffeine solution subcutaneously

86. A 7-year-old girl was brought to the clinic by her parents during the first hours after she received a trauma of her upper central incisor. The girl complains of pain in the tooth on touching. Objectively, during examination the traumatized tooth is slightly mobile in one direction, its percussion is painful, no changes are observed in the surrounding tissues. The tooth became pink-colored. What is the cause of tooth discoloration?
a. Disturbed intactness of the growth zone
b. Trauma of the oral mucosa in the area of the causative tooth
c. Disturbed intactness of the marginal periodontium
*d. Disturbed intactness of the neurovascular bundle
e. Trauma of the interdental papilla

87. A 52-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Upon objective examination a removable partial laminar denture is determined to be optimal denture construction in her case. What material should be applied to the impression tray edges?
*a. Orthocor
b. Plaster
c. Wax
d. Stens
e. Silast

88. In a state of inebriation a 36-year-old woman suffered a domestic accident 4 hours ago. She was delivered to the maxillofacial surgery unit. On examination she was provisionally diagnosed with a deep perforating incised wound of the lateral surface of her face with injured perioral area and parotid gland. The woung edges are gaping. This gaping is caused by:
a. Specifics of facial innervation
*b. Location of facial muscles
c. Depth of the wound
d. Wound communication with the oral cavity
e. Location of masticatory muscles

89. Partial removable laminar dentures are being made for the upper and lower jaws of a 59-year-old man. The stage of determining the central occlusion was completed. What laboratory stage will be next?
a. Making wax bite rims
b. Making plaster impressions in a cuvette
c. Teeth placement
d. Making final casts
*e. Making plaster impressions in an occluder

90. A removable full denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 75-year-old man. Objectively the alveolar process is slightly atrophied. Herbst tests are performed during fitting of an impression tray. When lips are stretched forwards the tray slips off. Where should the tray edge be shortened in this case?
a. Along the mylohyoid line
b. In the premolar area on the lingual side
*c. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
d. From canine to canine on the lingual side
e. From behind the mandibular tuberosity to the mylohyoid line

91. A 7-year-old child complains of pain in the upper right molar during eating. The masticatory surface of tooth 55 has a carious cavity, filled with softened dentin. The cavity is located within the parapulpar dentin and communicates with the dental cavity. Probing of the communication point provokes sharp pain and moderate bleeding. Tooth percussion is painless. X-ray shows no changes in the periodontium of tooth 55. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic gangrenous  pulpitis
*b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

92. A 35-year-old woman came to the dental office complaining of teeth mobility. Objectively, teeth 42, 41, 31, 32 have II degree mobility and teeth 43, 33 have I degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact. The patient presents with deep occlusion. X-ray shows resorption of the interdental septa by 1/3 of the root height. What splint construction is advisable in this case for temporary use?
a. Consisting of equator crowns
b. Clasp-retained (bugel) denture
*c. Made of armored composite
d. Consisting of semi-crowns
e. Cap splint

93. During planned sanation of a 3-year-old child, a deep carious cavity filled with food debris and softened dentin is detected in tooth 54. After tooth preparation the pulp of 54 is bleeding, probing is sharply painful. To treat pulpitis by means of devital amputation, during the first visit it is necessary to use:
*a. Paraformaldehyde paste
b. Calcium-containing paste
c. Dentin paste
d. Zinc-eugenol paste
e. Iodoform paste

94. A 7-year-old boy during primary examination was found to have a habit of sleeping with his fist under the cheek. What bite anomaly can develop due to this habit?
a. Mesial bite
*b. Crossbite
c. Prognathism
d. Open bite
e. Deep bite

95. A 22-year-old man complains of tearing, throbbing, constant, intensifying pain in the tooth on the upper left jaw. The pain has been persisting for 4 days. Objectively tooth 26 has deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing is painless. Percussion is acutely painful. The tooth is mobile. Mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 26 is painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Acute local pulpitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute suppurative pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

96. A 26-year-old man came to a dentist complaining of facial asymmetry that developed because of a painful swelling in the left parotid area that appeared 3 days ago. His body temperature is 37.2^oC) Two weeks ago he had a case of acute respiratory disease. Objectively, in the left parotid area there is a dense round infiltration up to 2 cm in size that is slightly mobile and moderately painful. The excretory duct of the parotid gland produces clear transparent saliva. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Herzenberg parotitis
b. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland
c. Acute purulent parotitis
d. Mikulicz disease
e. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis

97. A 20-year-old woman complains of pain in the area of tooth 38. The pain increases during swallowing and opening her mouth wide. Objectively, the crown of tooth 38 is partially covered in mucosa, from under which a purulent exudate is being discharged. Palpation is painful. The mucosa over tooth 38 is hyperemic and swollen. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute catarrhal pericoronitis
b. Acute serous periostitis
*c. Acute suppurative pericoronitis
d. Acute suppurative periostitis
e. Acute ulcerative pericoronitis

98. A 25-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for oral cavity sanation. Objectively the crown of tooth 37 is destroyed by 2/3. Gingival mucosa around tooth 37 is without changes. What anesthesia should the dental surgeon give to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Intraoral infraorbital nerve block
*b. Mandibular and buccal anesthesia
c. Mental nerve block
d. Tuberal anesthesia
e. Mandibular anesthesia

99. A 65-year-old patient complains of poor mandibular fixation of the clasp (bugel) denture that was made one month ago. Objectively, teeth 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 46 are preserved, the denture balances when one of ist sides is pressed. At what stage of making the clasp denture did a mistake occur?
*a. Casting the frame
b. Performing parallelometry
c. Modeling the clasps (clammers)
d. Obtaining the impressions
e. Determining the centric occlusion

100. A 44-year-old man complains of his gums bleeding when he brushes his teeth. Objectively, the following is observed: congestively hyperemic gingival papillae on the upper and lower jaws, mild edema of the gingival margin, mineralized and non-mineralized dental deposits. What test can confirm the presence of periodontal pockets?
a. Vacuum test
b. Benzidine test
c. Glycogen test
d. Rotter test
*e. Formalin test

101. A 23-year-old man complains of acute gingival bleeding and unpleasant smell from the mouth that appeared 5 days ago. Objectively gingival papillae and marginal gingiva are friable, bright red, swollen, painful, and bleed profusely on palpation. Gingival pockets are 3 mm deep. X-ray shows marked osteoporosis of the interalveolar septa, periodontal fissure in the apical areas of the interalveolar septa is enlarged. Cortical plate is intact. Make the diagnosis:
a. Hypovitaminosis C
b. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, exacerbated development
c. Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
d. Acute leukemia
*e. Acute catarrhal gingivitis

102. A woman complains of pain response to thermal stimuli in her lower right jaw.  The pain quickly abates after the stimulus is withdrawn. Objectively on the masticatory surface of the 26 there is a carious cavity with narrow ''entrance'' located within the mantle dentin. The dentin is soft and light-colored. Percussion of the 26 is painless. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
*b. Acute median caries
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Chronic median caries

103. A dental bridge is being made for a 43-year-old man. Anesthesia was provided before the preparation of the abutment teeth. Two minutes later, the patient suddenly paled, broke out in cold sweat, his limbs became cold and cyanotic, he developed rapid thready pulse and muscle weakness, his blood pressure became 80/50 mm Hg. The patient is conscious but apathetic. What emergency condition has likely developed in this case?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Epileptic seizure
c. Acute cerebrovascular accident
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Collapse

104. A 12-year-old girl complains of pain in her lower front tooth during eating sweet foods. Objectively, her tooth 32 has a Black's class IV carious cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing of the carious cavity in the area of the dentinoenamel junction provokes pain. Choose the optimal material for the cavity filling.
a. Compomer
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Chemically-cured composite
d. Silicate cement
*e. Light-cured composite

105. A 13-year-old child complains of periodical gingival bleeding during teeth brushing, which has been observed for half a year. Objectively the gingival mucosa in the frontal mandibular area presents with congestive hyperemia and edema. Decay-missing-filled (DMF) index equals 4. Oral cavity hygiene is unsatisfactory. In this case it is necessary to recommend the patient the toothpastes with:
a. Salt additives
*b. Herbal extracts
c. Calcium glycerophosphate
d. Zinc citrate
e. Amine fluorides

106. An 18-year-old young man complains of tooth sensitivity in his lower left jaw when eating sweet food. Examination shows enamel defects in the fissures on the masticatory surface of tooth 37. The enamel there is dull white and fragile when (chips off) probed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries of tooth 37
b. Chronic median caries of tooth 37
c. Acute initial caries of tooth 37
*d. Acute superficial caries of tooth 37
e. Chronic initial caries of tooth 37

107. A woman complains of a neoplasm in her sublingual area. The neoplasm makes eating and speaking difficult. In the sublingual area examination detects a soft-elastic neoplasm 1cm in diameter with smooth surface and clear margins. The sign of fluctuation is noticeable on palpation. Oral mucosa is stretched tightly over the neoplasm and is blue-tinged and semi-transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Calculous sialoadenitis
*b. Ranula of the sublingual gland
c. Adenolymphoma
d. Mixed tumor of the submandibular gland
e. Hemangioma of the submandibular region

108. A partial removable laminar denture is to be made for the upper jaw of a 53-year-old man. He has teeth 16, 15, 23, 24, and 27. What type of clasp (clammer) fixation would be optimal in this case?
a. Linear transverse fixation
*b. Plane fixation
c. Point fixation
d. Linear diagonal fixation
e. Linear sagittal fixation

109. A 52-year-old man complains of unpleasant sensations during swallowing and erosions on the oral mucosa. The disease onset was over a month ago. Objectively, on the normal mucosa of the soft palate, cheeks, and gums there are bright red erosions with the remains of erupted vesicles. The mucosa easily sloughs off. The Nikolsky's sign is positive. What medicines must be prescribed for the treatment first?
a. Antifungal agents
b. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
c. Antibiotics
*d. Corticosteroids
e. Proteolytic enzymes

110. One hour ago a patient received a blunt object trauma to the middle area of his face. X-ray revealed a fracture line in the bone tissue that passes through the nasal root, medial wall of the eyesocket, pterygoid processes of the sphenoid bone, and zygomatic arch. Make the diagnosis:
a. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
*b. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
c. Nasal and zygomatic bone fracture
d. Zygomatic bone fracture
e. Le Fort II maxillary fracture

111. In the maxillofacial department a 6-month-old boy was hospitalized due to bleeding from a wound in the frenulum of his tongue. He has a medical history of frenulotomy the day before. The bleeding started 6 hours after the surgery. Suturing the wound was ineffective against the bleeding. The child was brought to the hematology department, where the bleeding was stopped by intravenous administration of coagulation factor IX concentrate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Iron-deficiency anemia
*b. Hemophilia B
c. Suppurated tongue wound
d. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Willebrand disease

112. A 14-year-old girl came to a dentist with complaints of dry mouth and decreased salivation. During examination, her oral mucosa is matte and dry, with areas of whitish deposits. Hyperkeratosis of the excretory ducts of the salivary glands is observed. The skin of her face is pale and rough, her hair is dry, her nails are brittle and have transverse striations. Such symptoms can indicate the lack of a certain vitamin in the body. Name this vitamin.
a. D_3
b. К
c. B_2
d. B_1
*e. А

113. A man with distal bite underwent Eschler-Bittner test for the purpose of differential diagnostics. The shape and profile of his face have notably improved. What type of distal bite is it, according to the test results?
a. Underdeveloped upper jaw
b. Maldevelopments and growth  abnormalities of the both jaws
c. Overdeveloped upper jaw
*d. Underdeveloped lower jaw
e. Overdeveloped lower jaw

114. A 19-year-old young man, who was waiting for the appointed time at the dentist's, suddenly developed an attack: his face became purple, bloody foam flowed from his mouth (bitten tongue), pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light, the patient developed first tonic then clonic convulsions that stopped spontaneously, after that he calmed down and fell asleep quickly. What happened with the patient?
a. Sympathoadrenal crisis
b. Pulmonary embolism
*c. Epileptic seizure
d. Spasmophilia
e. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome

115. An 11-year-old child presents with protrusion of the upper front teeth, there are tremata and diastema between the child's teeth. What apparatus can be used for treatment of this pathology?
a. Frankel, type 3
b. Mershon
c. Vasylenko
d. Brukle
*e. Osadchy

116. A 12-year-old girl complains of a painful neoplasm under the tongue on the left. It appears during eating (especially salty or sour foods) and then slowly diminishes. Mouth opening is unrestricted; the duct orifice of the left sublingual salivary gland is dilated and hyperemic; saliva is clear with pus admixtures. Bimanual palpation detects an induration of a part of the duct. Ultrasound reveals a hyperechogenic zone with an ''absorption path''. This clinical presentation is characteristic of the following disease:
a. Sclerosing submaxillitis
*b. Calculous submaxillitis
c. Parenchymatous parotitis
d. Sialodochitis
e. Interstitial parotitis

117. A 40-year-old man has a fresh mental mandibular fracture without visible displacement of the fragments. What dental orthopedic appliance is recommended in this case?
a. Reponating
b. Replacing
c. Directing
d. Forming
*e. Fixing

118. A hit to the face has forced the upper central incisors of a 15-year-old boy to sink into the jaw to the half of their crown height. What treatment tactics should the dentist choose?
*a. Surgical repositioning of 11 and 21, teeth immobilization, endodontic treatment if necessary
b. Dynamic observation, endodontic treatment of 11 and 21 if necessary
c. Extraction of 11 and 21, their replacement with dentures
d. Transplantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, endodontic treatment
e. Replantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, ligation

119. A 5-year-old boy has been referred for consultation to the pediatric maxillofacial surgery department. Examination and palpation revealed in the right submandibular area a painful round dense mobile infiltrate 1.5 cm in diameter that is not fused with the underlying tissues. The infiltrate appeared one week ago. The skin over the infiltrate is not discolored and can be pinched into a fold. The oral cavity is sanitized. The child has a past history of tonsillitis. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis
b. Lateral neck cyst
*c. Acute serous non-odontogenic  lymphadenitis
d. Acute purulent non-odontogenic  lymphadenitis
e. Acute purulent odontogenic  lymphadenitis

120. A 20-year-old man complains of spontaneous pain attacks (5-7 minutes) in the area of 36 that occur for the last 24 hours. Objectively in 36 there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface. Probing is painful at one point, response to cold stimulus is painful, with an aftereffect that lasts for 5 minutes. Percussion is painless. X-ray shows root canals to be slightly curved, canal lumen is clearly visible. The tooth is planned to be used as an abutment for a dental bridge. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Devital amputation
b. Vital amputation
c. Filling of the carious cavity
d. Biological approach
*e. Vital extirpation

121. After adenotonsillectomia it is necessary to break the mouth breathing habit in a 4-year-old child. The orthodontist recommends application of an oral vestibular shield (Kerbitz' vestibular plate). Vestibular shield facilitates training of the following muscle:
a. Masseter muscle
b. Temporal muscle
*c. Orbicular muscle
d. Medial pterygoid muscle
e. Lateral pterygoid muscle

122. A 51-year-old woman came to a clinic with complaints of multiple burns caused by hot steam. Objectively, the skin of her nose, frontal, buccal, and mental regions is brightly hyperemic, edematous, and sharply painful. Her regional lymph nodes are unchanged and painless. Name the degree of burns in this case:
a. II
b. IV
c. ІІІa
*d. І
e. ІІІb

123. The parents of a 6-year-old child complain that their child for the last three days has been presenting with body temperature of 39^oC, weakness, loss of appetite, pain on swallowing. Objectively, the mucosa of the tonsils, palatine arches, retromolar space, and posterior and lateral pharyngeal walls is swollen and covered in a dirty-gray coating that is tightly attached to the underlying tissues. The coating is very difficult to remove. When removed, it exposes a bleeding surface. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
*b. Diphtheria
c. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
d. Scarlet fever
e. Measles

124. A 36-year-old woman with a pacemaker complains of bleeding gums when she brushes her teeth. Objectively, the gums are stagnantly hyperemic, edematous, with gingival pockets that are 4-5 mm deep; the teeth exhibit the I-II degree mobility and have large amounts of supra- and subgingival calculus. The woman was diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis of the II degree. What method of dental plaque removal is contraindicated in this clinical case?
*a. Ultrasound
b. Air flow abrasive system
c. -
d. Instrumental
e. Chemical

125. A dentist has witnessed a car accident and had to provide emergency aid for bleeding from the femoral artery - applying a tourniquet. What is the maximum time for a tourniquet to be left on?
a. 3 hours in winter, 3.5 hours in summer
b. 2 hours in winter, 2.5 hours in summer
*c. 1.5 hours in winter, 2 hours in summer
d. 2.5 hours in winter, 3 hours in summer
e. 3 hours in winter and in summer

126. A man complains of destroyed crown of the 16 tooth. Objectively the crown portion of the 16 tooth is completely destroyed. The patient is diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 16 tooth and this tooth needs to be extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used for this procedure?
a. Infraorbital and tuberal anesthesia
b. Tuberal anesthesia
c. Infraorbital anesthesia
*d. Tuberal and palatal anesthesia
e. Tuberal and incisor anesthesia

127. When a dentist was administering tuberal anesthesia to an 11-year-old girl, the patient developed a buccal hematoma. What should be done first in this case?
*a. Press with the hand the injection site
b. Prescribe physiotherapy
c. Apply cold to the the injection site
d. Apply a warm compress to the the injection site
e. Prescribe Troxevasin (Troxerutin) to be applied locally

128. A 30-year-old man came to a  dentist with complaints of short-term pain provoked by cold stimuli in a lower tooth. The pain disappears immediately after the stimulus removal. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 47 there is a carious cavity filled with light-colored softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor causes slight pain, thermal test is positive during the action of the stimulus. X-ray shows no changes in the periapical tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute limited pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

129. A 46-year-old woman complains of bleeding gums, suppuration, teeth mobility. She has been presenting with these signs for 10 years. On examination her upper and lower gums are hyperemic, swollen, bleed on touch. In the area of 42, 41, 31, and 32 periodontal pockets are up to 8 mm deep, contain purulent discharge; these teeth demonstrate mobility of the II degree, other teeth present with mobility of the I degree. In the area of 42, 41, 31, and 32 X-ray shows interalveolar septa resorption by 1/2 of the root length and signs of osteoporosis. What is the most advisable method of surgical treatment in this case?
a. Gingivotomy
b. Gingivectomy
c. Flap surgery
d. Curettage
*e. Osteoplasty

130. A 40-year-old serviceman came to the orthopedic dentistry department with complaints of dull intermittent aching pain in his left temporomandibular joint, its morning stiffness and creaking. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, the distance between the cutting edges of the central incisors during the maximum opening of the mouth is 2.5 cm. During movements of the lower jaw, joint noise and clicking are observed. Skin over the joint has no visible changes. X-ray shows deformation of the articular surfaces of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Mandibular subluxation
b. Pain dysfunction of the left  temporomandibular joint
c. Bone ankylosis of the left  temporomandibular joint
*d. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
e. Acute arthritis of the left  temporomandibular joint

131. A 42-year-old woman complains of sharp pain in her right temporomandibular joint. The pain intensifies during lower jaw movements. Three days ago, she was injured (fell and hit her chin on a hard object). Objectively, her face is symmetrical, the bite is orthognathic, the mouth opening is limited to 2 cm. X-ray shows smooth and straight contours of the bone tissues of the articular surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ankylosis of the right  temporomandibular joint
b. Right-sided anterior dislocation of the  mandible
c. Rheumatic arthritis of the  temporomandibular joint
d. Pain dysfunction of the right  temporomandibular joint
*e. Acute post-traumatic arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint

132. A 45-year-old woman complains of acute pain in her mouth, inability to eat, body temperature of 38^oC, pain in her muscles and joints, and general weakness. Her condition developed after an overexposure to cold. Objectively, on her hyperemic and edematous oral mucosa she has vesicles and erosions with fibrinous coating. There are bloody scabs on the vermilion border of her lips. Nikolsky's sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Pemphigus
d. Chronic recurrent herpes
*e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

133. A 45-year-old man came to the prosthodontic department to have a denture made for him. Before the preparation of the hard tissues of the intact teeth, the patient was given an infiltration anesthesia with 0.5% lidocaine solution. Several minutes later he developed depressed level of consciousness, his blood pressure dropped, convulsions started, and involuntary urination occurred. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Heart failure
c. Syncope
d. Collapse
e. Pain shock

134. A 43-year-old patient complains of a sharp pulsing pain in the area of the right upper jaw. The pain appeared three days ago. Objectively, an inflamed round infiltration can be palpated on the vestibular surface of gingival mucosa of tooth 26, closer to the gingival margin. The tooth is intact, with II degree mobility. Its horizontal and vertical percussion is painful. Periodontal pockets are 4-5 mm deep. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Maxillary periostitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
*e. Periodontal abscess

135. A 7.5-year-old practically healthy child complains of crown fracture and pain in the upper right incisor. Objectively 2/3 of crown of 11 is absent, the pulp is exposed and red; on probing it is acutely painful and bleeding; tooth percussion is painful. The trauma occurred 2 hours ago. What would be the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Biological approach
b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital extirpation
*e. Vital amputation

136. A 29-year-old man came to a dentist to have a denture made for him. He complains of frequent destruction of dental restorations in his upper front tooth. Objectively, his tooth 11 is restored with a filling material to 2/3 of its coronal portion; thermal stimulation and percussion are painless. What type of orthopedic installation is indicated in this case?
a. Plastic crown
b. Swaged metal crown
c. Crown made using the Belkin technique
*d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. Telescopic crown

137. A 25-year-old man complains of brief pain attacks in response to sweet foods in one of his lower teeth and food retention in a carious cavity. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 there is a carious cavity within the parapulpar dentin. The dentin is soft. The carious cavity does not communicate with the dental cavity, probing of its floor is painful. Percussion of tooth 36 and palpation of gingival mucosa in the projection of root apex are painless. Thermal stimuli cause pain that quickly stops after the simulus is removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Pulp hyperemia

138. A 39-year-old woman complains of bad breath, bleeding and sore gums, and loose teeth. Objectively, the gums are hyperemic and edematous, the lower front teeth exhibit the I-II degree mobility. Periodontal pockets are 4-5 mm deep. X-ray shows resorption of interdental septa up to 1/2 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Generalized periodontitis, II degree,  chronic progression
*b. Generalized periodontitis, II degree,  exacerbated progression
c. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  exacerbated progression
d. Generalized periodontitis, I degree,  chronic progression
e. Generalized periodontitis, III degree,  chronic progression

139. Based on the principle of its action, the Angle's arch belongs to the following group of orthodontic appliances:
a. Functionally-guiding appliances
b. Appliances with a combined action
*c. Mechanically-acting appliances
d. Functionally-acting appliances
e. -

140. A 42-year-old man came to an orthopedic dentistry clinic to have a denture made for him. Objectively, his teeth 34, 35, 36, 43, and 16 are missing. Examination shows the patient's face to have a notably high and wide forehead, the face resembles a pyramid with its base facing upwards. This face shape can be classified as:
a. Respiratory
b. Muscular
c. Digestive
d. Mixed
*e. Cerebral

141. Two-jaw removable laminar dentures are being made for a 70-year-old man. Alginate impressions need to be obtained to make diagnostic casts of the patient's jaws. The doctor prepares the alginate mass by mixing the powder with water in a rubber flask. What should be the water temperature?
a. Under 10^oС
b. 35-40^oС
c. 45-50^oС
*d. 20-25^oС
e. 10-15^oС

142. A 48-year-old man came to a clinic for oral cavity sanation. He has a history of mild diabetes mellitus. Objective examination reveals whitish papulae against the background of normal buccal mucosa. The papulae are slightly raised above the mucosa. They are located symmetrically, predominantly in the retromolar space, and form a lace-like pattern. On the upper jaw there are two soldered dental bridges, tooth 37 has an amalgam filling, tooth 36 is covered with a cast metal crown. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leukoplakia
b. Chronic atrophic candidiasis
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Secondary syphilis
*e. Lichen ruber planus

143. A 23-year-old man with an asthenic built came to a dental surgeon for the planned extraction of tooth 18. During the objective examination, the patient complained of general weakness, nausea, and darkened vision and lost his consciousness for several seconds. The skin of his face is pale and covered in sweat, the pulse is thready, the blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Epilepsy attack
c. Quincke's edema
*d. Syncope
e. Collapse

144. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist with complaints of brief attacks of toothache caused by eating sweets. Objectively there is a shallow carious cavity within enamel. On probing cavity walls and bottom are coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel hypoplasia
*b. Acute superficial caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Endemic fluorosis
e. Acute median caries

145. A 54-year-old woman complains of a neoplasm on her lower lip that appeared 6 month ago. Twenty days ago it suddenly started growing rapidly. Objectively, on the vermillion border of the lower lip there is a round red-gray node that rises 0.5 cm above the underlaying tissues. It is distinguished from the surrounding tissues and has a funnelform depression in its center, filled with keratinized masses. On palpation, the nodule is dense, mobile, and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Papilloma
*b. Keratoacanthoma
c. Verrucous precancer
d. Verrucous leukoplakia
e. Manganotti's cheilitis

146. A 6-year-old child complains of food retention in a tooth on the lower jaw. Objectively, in tooth 75 on its masticatory surface within mantle dentin there is a carious cavity with a wide opening. The dentin of the cavity walls and floor is dense and pigmented. Probing of the carious cavity and percussion of the tooth are painless. Thermal stimuli provoke no response. Mucosa in the area of tooth 75 is without pathologic changes. The child belongs to health group I. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute deep caries
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic deep caries

147. A 28-year-old man complains of painless sore in his mouth that persists despite the attempts at self-treatment. Objectively the regional lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painless. Mucosa of the left cheek presents with round ulcer, 1 cm in diameter, with raised margins and cartilage-like infiltration in its basis. The surface of the ulcer is colored meat red and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus vulgaris
b. Cancer
*c. Primary syphilis
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Decubitus ulcer

148. A 60-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his right temporomandibular joint when he opens his mouth. During external examination, the joint must be palpated. Where should the index fingers be placed to diagnose the distal displacement of the articular head?
a. Behind the auricle
b. On the posterior wall of the external acoustic meatus
c. -
*d. On the anterior wall of the external acoustic meatus
e. In front of the tragus

149. The parents of a 5-month-old boy came to a dentist complaining that their child frequently cries, refuses to eat, has an increased body temperature of 37.3°С and his gums became red. Examination detected brightly hyperemic and edematous gums in the frontal area of the lower jaw, with bluish spots. What is the likely cause of the gingival inflammation in this case?
*a. Tooth eruption
b. Herpetic infection
c. Scarlet fever
d. Acute candidiasis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

150. A 39-year-old woman developed Quincke's edema at the dentist's office. The signs of asphyxia are intensifying. What must the dentist do to prevent stenotic asphyxia in this case?
a. Perform artificial respiration
*b. Perform a tracheostomy
c. Administer glucocorticoids
d. Administer adrenomimetics
e. Administer desensitizers

151. After a car accident, a 42-year-old man was hospitalized. Examination detects an edema of the tissues in the middle face region, bilateral hemorrhages into the lower eyelids, open bite, mobility of the nasal bones, and a <<step sign>> along the lower edge of the both eye sockets and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest. Palpation of the oral cavity detects mobility of the upper jaw. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
b. Zygomatic fracture
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
d. Nasal fracture
e. Le Fort I maxillary fracture

152. What prosthodontic appliance has mechanical type of action?
a. Bynin appliance
b. Case obturator
c. Frankel functional regulator
d. Expansion plate with Coffin spring
e. Schonherr vestibular plate

153. A 47-year-old woman complains of an itching sensation in her gums and increased teeth sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively, the roots of most of her teeth are exposed to 1/3 of their length, the gums are pale pink, no periodontal pockets. X-ray shows osteosclerosis of the alveolar process bone tissue, disturbed intactness of the lamina dura on the apices of the interdental septa. The patient was diagnosed with initial periodontosis. What should be prescribed in this case for local treatment of the systemic dental hyperesthesia?
a. Keratoplastics
b. Desensitizers
c. Keratolytics
d. Antiseptics
e. Anesthetics

154. A 15-year-old patient has been diagnosed with pulpal hyperemia of tooth 27. The treatment was carried out using the vital amputation method. What must be done in this method of pulpitis treatment?
a. Preserving the vitality of the crown pulp and root pulp
b. Removal of the crown pulp followed by the application of a mummifying paste to the root canal openings
c. Pulp extirpation in the accessible canals and its mummification in the canals that are difficult to access
d. Removal of the crown pulp and root pulp under anesthesia
e. Removal of the crown pulp and preservation of the root pulp vitality

155. Biopsy material was obtained from the focus of a lesion in the retromolar space. Pathohistological findings: cellular polymorphism in the stratum spinosum, increased mitotic number, giant multinucleate cells, acanthosis, some cells in the stratum spinosum exhibit signs of parakeratosis, keratin pearls are detected. These pathohistological findings indicate the following disease:
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Leukoplakia
c. Bowen disease
d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Lichen ruber planus, verrucous form

156. A 13-year-old child complains of acute pain in an upper tooth. The pain intensifies during biting on this tooth. Objectively, the distal surface of tooth 16 has a deep carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity. Thermal stimuli and probing are painless. Tooth percussion is sharply painful. The tooth has the I degree mobility. The mucosa in the projection of the roots of tooth 16 is hyperemic and edematous. After necrectomy, the dental cavity was opened and purulent exudate was obtained. X-ray detects no changes. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

157. A 20-year-old girl came to a dentist for a preventive examination. She has no complaints. Objectively, on the vestibular surface of her tooth 17 within the enamel there is a carious cavity with a wide opening. The enamel of the cavity walls and floor is dense and pigmented. Probing of the carious defect is painless. There is no response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of the tooth is painless. What is the diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute initial caries
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

158. A person was provisionally diagnosed with sialolithiasis with stone localization in a salivary gland. What examination method can be used to detect X-ray-negative stones in the salivary glands?
a. Computed radiography
b. Targeted radiography
c. Ultrasound diagnostics
d. Thermometry
e. Rheography

159. A 63-year-old woman has an oval neoplasm on the lateral surface of her neck. The neoplasm has a smooth surface and is approximately 3 cm in size. On palpation it is soft and dough-like, mobile, and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Fibroma
b. Lateral cyst of the neck
c. Lymphoma
d. Adenoma
e. Lipoma

160. A 35-year-old man complains of pain and mobility in his upper jaw when he closes his mouth. The condition developed after an injury received on the day before, when he had been beaten by an unknown person. Objectively, palpation detects bilateral mobility of the maxillary alveolar process; the Malevich sign (cracked pot sound) is positive. X-ray shows the fracture line in the area of the inferior wall of the piriform aperture and zygomaticoalveolar crests. The transparency of the maxillary sinuses is decreased. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Displaced zygomatic fracture
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (inferior)
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture (median)
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (superior)
e. Nasal fracture

161. A 42-year-old man complains of a whitish neoplasm that appeared on his lower lip and is painful and bleeding when the patient bites on it. The patient associates it with work outdoors and increased insolation. The patient has been smoking for approximately 15 years. Objectively, on the vermilion border of the lower lip, to the left from its center, there is a clearly demarkated polygonal area 0.5x1.0 cm in size. It does not protrude above the level of the vermilion border, is covered in small, tightly attached, grayish-white scales, and has a thin whitish border on its periphery. The surrounding area of the vermilion border has no signs of inflammation, the mucosa and skin of the lips are not affected. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Meteorological cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Manganotti's abrasive precancerous cheilitis
d. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis
e. Leukoplakia

162. A 62-year-old man came to a dentist to have his tooth 44 extracted. During examination he suddenly fell unconscious. His breathing and pulse are slow, his head is bowed, his arms are flexed in the elbows and wrists, his legs are stretched out, and his jaws are clenched tight. The patient developed clonic convulsion and started foaming at the mouth. His pupils are dilated and unresponsive to light. 1.5 minutes later, the patient's muscles relaxed. The patient is mentally confused. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Paroxysmal tachycardia attack
c. Epileptic seizure
d. Syncope
e. Acute cerebrovascular accident

163. A 60-year-old man needs a removable partial denture for the upper jaw. Arrangement of the artificial teeth on the wax base was checked in the oral cavity of the patient. What is the next stage in the making of a removable partial denture?
a. Placing the plaster casts in an articulator
b. Final polishing of the denture
c. Measurement and fixation of the centric jaw relation
d. Fitting and fixation of the removable partial dentures in the oral cavity
e. Final modelling of the denture base

164. A 45-year-old man came to an orthopedic dentist with complaints of an aesthetic defect of the shape of his face. According to the patient, this defect was caused by a dysfunction of his maxillofacial system. Anthropometric examination shows that the upper and lower parts of his face are approximately equal in size and the straight hairline in the forehead area gives his face a square shape. What type of face is it according to Bauer?
a. Respiratory
b. Muscular
c. Cerebral
d. Digestive
e. Progenic

165. Parents of a 2.5-year-old child complain of gradual destruction of the upper front teeth of their child for the last several months. Objectively there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the contact and vestibular surfaces of 52, 51, 61, and 62. The cavities are filled with softened pigmented dentin that can be easily removed with dental excavator. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic superficial caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Chronic median caries

166. A 7-year-old boy was brought to the dentist. Objectively his gums are hyperemic and bleeding, the teeth are mobile and covered in plaque, their roots are exposed, periodontal pockets are pathologic and filled with granulations. The child is registered for regular check-ups with the pediatrician. According to the mother, lately the child's condition has been deteriorating. The boy presents with diabetes insipidus and exophthalmos. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Taratinov disease (eosinophilic granuloma of bone)
b. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
c. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
d. Letterer-Siwe disease
e. Gaucher disease

167. At the dentist's office, a patient diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 14 undergoes a typical tooth extraction. What stage precedes the application of forceps?
a. Advancement of forceps
b. Luxation
c. Fixation
d. Syndesmotomy
e. Traction

168. A 24-year-old woman complains of a neoplasm on the gums of her right lower jaw, The neoplasm has been growing over the past few months. Objectively, on the vestibular side of the alveolar process of the mandible on the right there is a bright-red soft painless formation that bleeds when palpated. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Angiomatous epulis
b. Cavernous hemangioma
c. Giant cell granuloma
d. Fibroma
e. Fibrous epulis

169. A 7-year-old boy is diagnosed with epidemic parotitis (mumps). Name the most likely complication of this disease:
a. Dermatitis
b. Cholecystitis
c. Pneumonia
d. Orchitis
e. Colitis

170. Six months ago a 40-year-old man had his tooth 26 extracted; afterwards his oral cavity and maxillary sinus became communicating and the patient developed the first signs of maxillary sinusitis. What surgical procedure should be performed in this case?
a. Caldwell-Luc surgery
b. Fistula packing with Iodoform gauze
c. Maxillary sinusotomy with simultaneous plastic surgery for repair of the fistula
d. Fistula plication
e. Osteotomy of the alveolar process

171. A 12-year-old girl complains of pain in her mouth that occurs during eating. According to her medical history these symptoms reemerge once or twice per year. Objectively on the mucogingival fold there are 3 aphthae 5-7 mm in size, they have yellowish coating and inflamed red border and are acutely painful on touch. Name the most likely diagnosis:
a. Chronic recurrent herpetic stomatitis
b. Toxic-allergic drug-induced stomatitis
c. Erythema multiforme exudativum
d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

172. After examination, a 6-month-old infant was diagnosed with a complete labial cleft. What surgical operation should be performed in this case to remove this defect?
a. Frenulectomy
b. Uranoplasty
c. Cheiloplasty
d. Uranostaphyloplasty
e. Frenulotomy

173. The parents of a 10-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling on the right side of the child's neck. The swelling appeared 4 days ago. During examination, a round, dense and elastic, mildly painful formation is palpable in the right upper neck region. The formation is not fused with the adjacent tissues, 3 cm in diameter, without skin discoloration above it. Intraorally, destroyed tooth 85 was detected. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Atheroma of the right upper neck region
b. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis
c. Lateral cyst of the neck
d. Migratory granuloma
e. Acute purulent odontogenic lymphadenitis

174. A 18-year-old boy complains of bleeding and pain in her gums. The disease onset was 4 days ago. Objectively the skin is pale, body temperature is 38.5^oC) Her submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged, painful, non-fused with the surrounding tissues. The gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37 are hyperemic, ulcerated, and covered in necrotic deposit. Teeth present with soft dental plaque. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. -
c. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis

175. A 40-year-old man came to a dental surgeon for extraction of tooth 16. The crown of tooth 16 is retained. What forceps should be used to extract tooth 16 in this case?
a. S-shaped right-sided forceps
b. S-shaped left-sided forceps
c. Bayonet crown forceps
d. Straight forceps
e. S-shaped forceps

176. A 30-year-old woman after an overexposure to cold complains of facial asymmetry and fever of 37.9^oC) Objectively, she can not wrinkle her forehead on the left or close her left eye. Her left nasolabial fold is smoothed out and her lips cannot close tightly. No superciliary reflex can be observed on the left. Name this pathology:
a. Progressive facial hemiatrophy
b. Facial hemispasm
c. -
d. Facial nerve neuropathy
e. Trigeminal neuralgia

177. A 5-year-old girl has a round soft elastic neoplasm up to 2 cm in diameter on the front surface of her neck on the midline. The neoplasm is painless to palpation and moves upwards during swallowing. This formation has been slowly growing over the course of the last 2 years. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Cyst of a submandibular salivary gland
b. Chronic hyperplastic lymphadenitis
c. Midline cervical cyst
d. Cervical dermoid cyst
e. Retention cyst of a sublingual salivary gland

178. A 47-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a growth on his lower lip that appeared one month ago. Apart from its inaesthetic appearance, it causes the patient no discomfort. Objectively, against the background of visually unchanged vermilion border of the lower lip, there is a formation (diameter - 6 mm, height - 3 mm) with a bumpy bluish-red surface, covered in grayish scales. The formation is moderately dense and painless to palpation. It has no infiltrate in ist base or on the periphery. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Cancer of the lower lip
b. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis
c. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion  border
d. Pyogenic granuloma
e. Keratoacanthoma

179. A 60-year-old woman came to a dental surgeon to have her central upper incisors extracted. The crown part of the incisors is retained. What forceps are needed to extract these teeth?
a. Beak-shaped crown forceps without  spikes
b. Bayonet forceps
c. S-shaped right-sided forceps
d. S-shaped forceps
e. Straight forceps

180. A 13.5-year-old girl complains of swollen gums that bleed when she brushes her teeth. This condition has been observed for the last half a year. Objectively gingival mucosa surrounding the front teeth of the upper jaw is swollen and cyanotic. Interdental papillae are round, dense, and enlarged, they cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height. Teeth 13 and 23 are positioned vestibularly. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Generalized periodontitis, degree I
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Localized periodontitis, degree I
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis

181. Due to lack of timely specialized treatment a 44-year-old man presents with incorrectly healed displaced mandibular fracture. Objectively the lower jaw narrows sharply, vestibular cusps of the lower teeth contact with oral cusps of the upper teeth. The patient declined surgical treatment. What treatment tactics should be chosen by the dentist in this case?
a. Make a non-removable dental bridge with movable joint
b. Make a dentogingival laminar denture
c. Correct the malocclusion via instrumental surgical method
d. Make a prosthesis with double dentition
e. Correct the malocclusion by filing down the patient's teeth

182. A 48-year-old woman was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis of the temporomandibular joint. What is characteristic of this condition?
a. Decreased hearing acuity
b. Bilateral nature of the condition
c. A history of chronic trauma
d. Mandibular stiffness in the morning
e. Concomitance with arthrogenic  contracture

183. A patient needs a removable full laminar denture for the upper jaw. Objectively on the mucosa of the denture bed there are numerous dense papillomas of varying size. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Remove papillomas and make a denture with a double layered base lined with elastic material
b. Reduce the area of the denture base
c. Make a denture base from metal
d. Removable dentures are contraindicated in this case
e. Make a 3D-model of the denture base

