1. Which food item selections made by a client who needs to restrict sodium indicates correct understanding regarding the sodium content of food?
a. A grilled American cheese sandwich on two slices of white bread
b. One cup of cottage cheese and a sliced chilled tomato
*c. A chicken leg, one slice of whole wheat bread with butter, and ? cup of steamed carrots
d. A ham and cheddar cheese sandwich on two slices of whole wheat bread
e. -

2. The client who is being treated with radiation for cervical cancer asks if she should bother having a mammogram, especially because she is currently being exposed to radiation. What is the nurse's best response?
a. Although you should delay the mammogram until your therapy is finished, perform a breast self-exam monthly.
b. The radiation therapy you are receiving will protect you against other cancer development, so it is okay to skip the mammogram this year.
c. -
*d. Being treated for one kind of cancer does not prevent the development of another type of cancer. Have the mammogram.
e. Absolutely do not have the mammogram this year, because you are already over the limit for safe exposure levels to radiation.

3. Which surgery is considered a type of rehabilitative surgery for cancer?
a. Removal of a mole that is present in area of constant irritation
b. Creation of a colostomy during surgery for colorectal cancer
*c. Creation of a new vagina following radical therapy for pelvic cancer
d. Removing a wedge of tissue for cytologic examination from a lung lesion of uncertain origin
e. -

4. How does surgery for cure differ from surgery for palliation?
a. Curative surgery increases physical function.
b. Palliative surgery is less painful than surgery for cure.
*c. Palliative surgery may not extend the client's survival time.
d. Curative surgery prevents cancer.
e. -

5. The client who has just had a mastectomy for breast cancer is crying as the nurse enters the room. When asked why she is crying, the client responds I know I shouldn't cry because this surgery may well save my life, but I was so pleased with my figure before and I know that things will not be the same. What is the nurse's best response?
a. Would you like to talk to someone who also has had a mastectomy?
b. You're right. It is silly to carry on like this when a prosthesis is available.
*c. It is all right to cry. Mourning this loss is important in getting past this point.
d. How have you coped with difficult situations in the past?
e. -

6. For which types of cancer is radiation therapy most effective?
a. -
*b. Cancers that are localized to one tissue or body area
c. Superficial cancers on the outside of the body
d. Cancers of the blood, such as leukemia
e. Cancers that are large, with evidence of distant metastasis

7. What is the most important precaution or advice the nurse should teach the client receiving radiation therapy for thyroid cancer with an injection of iodine-131 as an unsealed source?
a. You are only radioactive when the radiation machine is turned on.
b. Avoid all contact with other people until the radiation device is removed.
c. -
*d. Do not share a toilet with other people for about three days.
e. No special precautions are needed because this type of radiation is weak.

8. Which health problem in a woman who had radiation therapy 10 years ago for cancer in the right breast is most likely to be a consequence of the therapy?
a. Chronic esophagitis with gastroesophageal reflux
b. -
c. Asthma
d. Myocardial infarction
*e. Pathologic fracture of two ribs on the right chest

9. The bedridden client has cancer metastasis to the bone. Which intervention is most important for the nurse to implement to prevent injury for this client?
a. Providing small, frequent meals that are rich in calcium and phosphorus
b. Ensuring that the client's heels are not touching the mattress
*c. Using a lift sheet when repositioning the client
d. Applying pressure for a full 5 minutes after any intramuscular injections
e. -

10. The client with a diagnosis of lung cancer is scheduled to have a liver scan and asks why this procedure is being done. What is the nurse's best response?
a. -
*b. The treatment for lung cancer is different if it has spread to the liver than if it is confined to only the lungs.
c. Some treatments are toxic to the liver and it is best to test liver function before these treatments are started.
d. Cigarette smoking can also cause liver cancer.
e. An enlarged liver can interfere with cancer therapy, so the doctor wants to make certain of the liver's size and position before therapy is started.

11. Whic Which pre-existing client problem or characteristic would preclude the use of radiation therapy for breast cancer treatment?
*a. The client has severe arthritis and cannot assume the position needed for radiation therapy.
b. The client is over 75 years of age.
c. -
d. The client underwent a lumpectomy for the breast cancer one month ago.
e. The client is a Jehovah's Witness.

12. The client scheduled to undergo radiation therapy for breast cancer asks why 6 weeks of daily treatment are necessary. What is the nurse's best response?
a. It is less likely that your hair will fall out or that you will become anemic if the radiation is given in small doses over a longer time period.
b. -
c. Your cancer is widespread and requires more than the usual amount of radiation treatment.
d. The cost of giving larger doses of radiation for a shorter period of time is unjustified by the results.
*e. Research has shown that more cancer cells are killed if the radiation is given in smaller doses over a longer time period.

13. The client is a 56-year-old woman receiving brachytherapy with a sealed radiation source for cervical cancer. Which nurse should be assigned to provide personal care to this client while the radiation source is within the client?
a. The 60-year-old nurse, who is also assigned to provide care to 2 other clients receiving brachytherapy
b. -
c. The 35-year-old male nurse, who has never worked with a client receiving brachytherapy
d. The 28-year-old pregnant nurse, who has special expertise in oncology
*e. The 30-year-old nurse, who is experienced with brachytherapy and efficient in her work

14. Upon entering the room of a 74-year-old client receiving brachytherapy for cervical cancer, the nurse finds that the radiation implant and the position-holding devices are in the client's bed. What is the nurse's first best action?
*a. Use tongs to place the implant into the radiation container.
b. Notify the physician and move the client to a different room.
c. -
d. Don gloves and attempt to reposition the implant and position-holding device.
e. Assess the client's mental status.

15. For which type of cancer is chemotherapy most beneficial?
a. -
*b. Cancers that are large, with evidence of distant metastasis
c. Superficial cancers on the outside of the body
d. Brain tumors
e. Cancers that are localized to one tissue or body area

16. The client who is receiving intravenous chemotherapy (into a peripheral line) with an agent that is an irritant says that her arm burns terribly at and around the IV site. What is the nurse's best first action?
a. -
*b. Discontinue the infusion.
c. Slow the rate of infusion.
d. Check for a blood return.
e. Apply a cold compress to the site.

17. The client receiving intravenous chemotherapy asks the nurse why the nurse is wearing a mask, gloves, and gown when giving the drugs to the client. What is the nurse's best response?
*a. The drugs are powerful and I handle them every day. The clothing protects me from accidentally absorbing these strong, cancer-killing drugs.
b. Because your immunity is reduced by this therapy, I am preventing the spread of infection from you to me or any other client here.
c. -
d. The hospital policy is for any nurse giving these drugs to wear a gown, glove, and mask to prevent other people from getting cancer.
e. These drugs will reduce your immune response and, with these coverings, I am protecting you from getting an infection from me.

18. The client's spouse reports that the last time the client received lorazepam (Ativan) before receiving chemotherapy, the client didn't remember the drive home. What is the nurse's best action?
a. -
*b. Explain to the client and spouse that this is a normal response to the drug and that the client shouldn't drive home.
c. Perform a Mini-Mental Status Examination and assess the client's pupillary reflexes before administering the lorazepam.
d. Hold the dose of lorazepam for this round of chemotherapy until the client is seen by the physician.
e. Document the response as the only action.

19. The client is receiving chemotherapy with an agent that causes thrombocytopenia. Which intervention is most important to teach the client for this problem?
a. Avoid using mouthwashes that contain alcohol.
b. -
c. Eat a low-bacteria diet.
d. Take your temperature daily.
*e. Use a soft-bristled toothbrush and do not floss.

20. The client has chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia. Which agent should the nurse be prepared to administer?
a. Filgrastim (Neupogen)
b. Sargramostim (Prokine)
c. -
*d. Oprelvekin (Neumega)
e. Epoetin alfa (Procrit)

21. The client with chemotherapy-induced bone marrow suppression has received filgrastim (Neupogen). Which laboratory finding or clinical manifestation indicates that this therapy is effective?
*a. The client's segmented neutrophil count is 3500/mm3.
b. The client's hematocrit is 38%.
c. -
d. The client's segmented neutrophil count is 2500/mm3.
e. The client's hematocrit is 28%.

22. What is the priority nursing diagnosis for the client experiencing chemotherapy-induced anemia?
a. Risk for Injury related to poor blood clotting
b. Imbalanced Nutrition, Less than Body Requirements related to anorexia
c. -
*d. Fatigue related to decreased cellular oxygenation
e. Disturbed Body Image related to skin color changes

23. It is time for the client's third round of chemotherapy for colon cancer. After checking the client's white blood cell count, the decision is made to delay the treatment for an additional week because of the low white blood cell count and the increased risk for infection. The client is upset at the delay. What is the nurse's best response?
a. I will call the physician and request a prescription for something to calm your nerves.
b. -
c. This extra time will give your hair a chance to grow back in.
d. This is for the best. It is too dangerous to give you the chemotherapy now.
*e. Try not to worry. Your counts will probably be high enough next week and the chemotherapy will work just as well then.

24. The client who has just been diagnosed with breast cancer asks why her treatment plan does not include the new drug, Herceptin, that she has read about. What is the nurse's best response?
a. -
*b. Your breast cancer does not have the protein that this drug works on, so you would not benefit from this therapy.
c. This drug is experimental and too dangerous for you to take before trying other therapies.
d. Your immune system is too weak to tolerate Herceptin.
e. Your breast cancer does not have the protein that this drug works on, so you would not benefit from this therapy.

25. For what type of cancer should the nurse be prepared to administer chemotherapy by the intrathecal route?
a. Ovarian tumor
b. Lung tumor
*c. Brain tumor
d. Prostate tumor
e. -

26. The client with prostate cancer is taking estrogen daily to control tumor growth. He reports that his left calf is swollen and painful. What is the nurse's best first action?
a. Document this expected response to hormonal manipulation.
b. -
c. Instruct the client to keep the leg elevated for two days.
d. Apply ice to the calf after massaging it for at least 5 minutes.
*e. Measure the calf circumference and assess for Homan's sign.

27. What is the priority nursing diagnosis for the client receiving interleukin-2 (IL-2) therapy for cancer?
a. Risk for Injury related to excessive bleeding
b. Risk for Infection related to drug-induced neutropenia
c. -
*d. Impaired Comfort related to drug side effect.
e. Deficient Fluid Volume related to persistent diarrhea

28. The client receiving tamoxifen asks how this therapy helps fight breast cancer. What is the nurse's best response?
a. The breast cancer cells need estrogen to continue growing. This agent causes you to secrete testosterone instead of estrogen.
b. The breast cancer cells need estrogen to continue growing. This agent decreases your circulating levels of estrogen.
*c. The breast cancer cells need estrogen to continue growing. This agent blocks the receptors for estrogen, reducing its availability to the cancer cells.
d. The breast cancer cells need estrogen to continue growing. This agent kills off both the normal estrogen-secreting cells and the cancer cells.
e. -

29. Which laboratory result in a client with cancer who has gained 2 pounds in 1 day suggests the possibility of SIADH?
a. Hematocrit of 40%
b. Serum potassium of 5.2 mmol/L
*c. Serum sodium of 120 mmol/L
d. BUN of 10 mg/dL
e. -

30. The client with hypercalcemia from advanced cancer is being treated with intravenous mithramycin. Which clinical manifestation indicates to the nurse that the treatment is effective?
*a. Bowel sounds are present and active in all four quadrants.
b. The pulse rate is 68 and bounding.
c. -
d. Urine output has increased.
e. The client's serum sodium level is 138 mmol/L.

31. Which intervention is most important for the nurse to implement to prevent complications from tumor lysis syndrome during chemotherapy?
*a. Ensure that the client has a fluid intake of 3000 to 5000 mL per day.
b. Apply pressure to all injection sites for 5 minutes.
c. -
d. Assist the client in all ambulatory activities.
e. Monitor electrocardiograph rhythms every hour during therapy.

32. Which clinical manifestation indicates that the client's superior vena cava syndrome is resolving?
a. Breath sounds are clear bilaterally.
b. Pedal edema is present.
c. -
*d. The client's hands are less swollen.
e. The client's back pain is relieved.

33. The client is a 64-year-old man with late-stage colon cancer being cared for at home by his 63-year-old wife. Which nursing diagnosis has the highest priority for teaching the wife how to manage symptoms?
*a. Acute Pain related to metastasis
b. Constipation related to decreased activity and medication regimen
c. -
d. Activity Intolerance related to dyspnea and fatigue
e. Imbalanced Nutrition, Less than Body Requirements related to fatigue and increased metabolism

34. Which client should the nurse consider at an increased risk for infection as a result of a chronic health problem?
a. 48-year-old client with a known hypersensitivity to latex
b. 28-year-old client who wears contact lenses
*c. 28-year-old client with type 1 diabetes mellitus
d. 48-year-old client taking analgesics for migraine headaches
e. -

35. Which client is at greatest risk for development of a bacterial cystitis?
a. Middle-aged female client who has never been pregnant
b. Older male client with mild congestive heart failure
*c. Older female client not taking estrogen replacement
d. Middle-aged male client who takes an aspirin every day
e. -

36. Which disorder is caused by a microorganism that uses the bloodstream as its main portal of entry?
a. Hepatitis A
b. Syphilis
*c. Lyme disease
d. Genital herpes
e. -

37. What type of protection should the nurse use in addition to standard precautions when caring for a client who has meningococcal meningitis?
a. -
*b. Airborne precautions
c. Droplet precautions
d. Contact precautions
e. Sharps precautions

38. Under which circumstance is washing hands with soap and water more necessary than just using an alcohol-based hand rub for decontaminating the hands?
a. -
*b. After providing direct care to an older client who is taking antibiotics
c. Before donning sterile gloves when preparing to insert a urinary catheter
d. After removing the gloves after starting an IV on an adult client
e. Before carrying a dinner tray to a client who is infected with methicillin-resistant S. aureus

39. How does palliative surgery differ from any other type of surgery?
*a. Palliative surgery is performed to provide temporary relief of distressing symptoms rather than to cure a problem or condition.
b. There are fewer risks associated with palliative surgery than with any other type of surgery.
c. -
d. The outcomes of palliative surgery cannot be ensured to produce the desired effect or restoration of functional ability.
e. The main purpose is cosmetic in nature rather than functional repair or comfort.

40. In which situation is the nurse performing the role of client advocate during the preoperative period?
a. -
*b. Assuring the client whose religion does not permit blood transfusions that his or her wishes will be followed
c. Teaching the client how to perform coughing and deep breathing exercises
d. Serving as a witness to the informed consent procedure
e. Ensuring that the client's impaired hearing problem is clearly communicated to the entire surgical team

41. The client undergoing preoperative assessment before an elective procedure tells the nurse that she has been taking 10 mg of prednisone daily for rheumatoid arthritis. What is the nurse's best action?
a. Document the information as the only action.
b. Suggest that the client switch to a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent for pain relief.
c. -
*d. Notify the surgeon and anesthesiologist.
e. Reschedule the surgery in 2 weeks when the client has cleared the drug from her system.

42. The client tells the nurse during the preoperative history that he is a three-pack a day cigarette smoker. This information alerts the nurse to which potential complication during the intraoperative and postoperative periods?
*a. An increased risk for atelectasis and hypoxia
b. A decreased clotting ability
c. -
d. An increased risk for excessive scar tissue formation
e. A decreased tolerance to pain

43. On admission to the preoperative area, the client who is scheduled for a hip replacement tells the nurse that she has made three autologous blood donations for this surgery in the past 5 weeks. What is the nurse's best action?
a. Check the client's international normalized ratio (INR).
b. Inform the client that an autologous transfusion does not eliminate her risk for the development of bloodborne diseases.
c. -
*d. Call the laboratory to ensure that the blood is physically available at the operating facility.
e. Ensure that the client has given consent to receive blood if a transfusion is necessary.

44. The client receiving preoperative medication tells the nurse that all of the following medications (drugs or herbs) were ingested yesterday. Which one should the nurse report to the surgical team?
a. Vitamin C
b. Acetaminophen (Tylenol)
*c. Motherwort
d. Diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
e. -

45. What is the priority nursing diagnosis for an older adult client with sensory deficits who is scheduled for surgery?
a. Decreased Cardiac Output related to poor circulation and venous return
b. Risk for Impaired Skin Integrity related to incontinence and thin skin
*c. Deficient Knowledge related to difficulty with sensory processing
d. Risk for Activity Intolerance related to decreased respiratory reserve
e. -

46. When the nurse brings the preoperative medication to the client about to have abdominal surgery, she tells the nurse that she does not need the injection because she had a good night's sleep last night. What is the nurse's best first action?
a. Tell the client that her surgeon has ordered the medication; therefore, she should go ahead and take the medication because the surgeon knows what is best.
b. Document the client's statement and notify the charge nurse.
c. -
*d. Tell the client that the preoperative medication is ordered to reduce the risk of some problems during surgery rather than to ensure adequate rest.
e. Appropriately discard the preoperative medication and notify the surgeon.

47. On discharge, the nurse teaches the patient to observe for signs of surgically induced hypothyroidism. The nurse would know that the patient understands the teaching when she states she should notify the MD if she develops:
a. -
*b. Progressive weight gain
c. Dry skin and fatigue
d. Insomnia and excitability
e. Intolerance to heat

48. If a client has severe bums on the upper torso, which item would be a primary concern?
a. Administering antibiotics
b. Establishing a patent IV line for fluid replacement
*c. Frequently observing for hoarseness, stridor, and dyspnea
d. Debriding and covering the wounds
e. -

49. Contractures are among the most serious long-term complications of severe burns. If a burn is located on the upper torso, which nursing measure would be least effective to help prevent contractures?
*a. Helping the client to rest in the position of maximal comfort
b. Encouraging the client to chew gum and blow up balloons
c. -
d. Changing the location of the bed or the TV set, or both, daily
e. Avoiding the use of a pillow for sleep, or placing the head in a position of hyperextension

50. Ms. Sy undergoes surgery and the abdominal aortic aneurysm is resected and replaced with a graft. When she arrives in the RR she is still in shock. The nurse's priority should be
a. Monitoring her hourly urine output
b. Placing her in a trendeleburg position
c. -
*d. Assessing her VS especially her RR
e. Putting several warm blankets on her

51. Forty-eight hours after a burn injury, the physician orders for the client 2 liters of IV fluid to be administered q12 h. The drop factor of the tubing is 10 gtt/ml. The nurse should set the flow to provide:
a. 18 gtt/min
b. 36 gtt/min
c. -
*d. 28 gtt/min
e. 32 gtt/min

