1. A 38-year-old patient complains of tension and enlargement of her lower lip and eyelids occuring after taking aspirin for headache. The edema resolves soon after taking antihistaminic drugs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Quinckes edema
b. Erysipelas of lips
c. Meige trophedema
d. Lymphadenic macrocheilitis
e. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome

2. One minute after perfoming torus anaesthesia with 2% novocaine solution (4ml) during extraction of the 17 tooth the patient complained about respiration obstruction. Objectively: upper and lower lips are edematic, mucous membrane of larynx and oral cavity is edematic and extremely hyperemic. What complication turned up in this patient?
a. Collapse
b. Acute pulmonary insufficiency
c. Anesthetic intoxication
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Quinckes edema

3. A soldier was delivered to the regiment medical station with dislocation asphyxia caused by a gunshot wound. What actions should be taken for asphyxia suppression?
*a. Pul the tongue forwards and sew it through
b. Tracheostoma establishment
c. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
d. Artificial airway
e. Intubation of trachea

4. During pulpitis treatment of the 25 tooth a 30-year-old patient received an injection of 2% lidocaine as anaesthetic. A few minutes after the injection th patient presented with numb tongue, asphyxia, dry cough, cyanosis, anxiety, convulsions. Arterial pressure fell down to 90/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Syncope
b. Acute heart failure
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Quinckes edema
e. Epilepsy

5. A 35-year-old woman was admitetd to the oral surgery department two hours after a road accident. Objectively: cutaneous integuments are pale, there are beads of sweat on her face. Respiration is heavy and obstructed. Pulse rate is 120 bmp, AP is 70/60 mm Hg. There is wound penetrating to the oral cavity on the left cheek. During transportation the woman was in supine position with her head thrown backwards. What kind of asphyxia is likely to develop in this patient?
a. Stenotic
b. Valvular
*c. Aspirating
d. Obturative
e. Dislocational

6. A 66-year-old male patient suffers from coronary heart disease (CHD) and atherosclerosis. During stomatological treatment the patient complained about acute retrosternal pain with irradiation to the left scapula, that was accompanied by stupor of the left hand. Objectively: the skin was pale, the sweat stood out on his forehead. The arterial pressure was 140/90 mm Hg, pulse was rhythmic 75 bpm. The pain wasnt relieved by Validol but it started to abate after nitroglycerin intake. What disease provoked the attack in this patient?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Myocardial infarction
*c. Stenocardia
d. Tachycardia
e. Paroxysmal tachycardia

7. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on both jaws by means of fullcast combined dental bridges. The patient has a history of essential hypertension. Which haemostatic drug textbfSHOULD NOT be used for the gums retraction?
*a. Noradrenaline
b. Aluminium chloride
c. Tetrahydrozoline
d. Iron sulphate
e. Hydrogen peroxide

8. A 5-year-old child had to undergo an operated for ankyloglossya. There were no external symptoms of preoperative anxiety. Aafter injection of 1,5 ml of 0,5% novocaine solution the child presented with motor anxiety, vomiturition, stomachache. Objectively: the child is conscious, face and neck skin is hyperemic, tachypnoe is present, pulse is rapid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pain shock
b. Giddiness
c. Overdosage of anesthetics
*d. Allergic reaction to novocaine
e. Cardiovascular collapse

9. A 7-year-old child was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 64, 85 teeth. The child suffers from hemophilia A. Specify the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of teeth is possible in both in-patient and out-patient hospitals
b. Extraction of teeth can be performed in the oral surgery department
c. Extraction of teeth is contra-indicated because of high risk of haemorrhage
*d. Extraction of teeth in hematological department after due pretreatment
e. Extraction of teeth can be performed in an out-patient hospital with the following socket tamponade by means of haemostatic sponge

10. A 42-year-old woman came to prosthetic dentistry to make dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 18 . . . . 13 12 11&21 22 23 . . . . 2848 47 46 45 44 43 42 41&31 32 33 34 35 36 37endtabular. The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
b. Dental bridges
*c. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base
d. Partial removable lamelalr prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps
e. Clasp denture

11. A 53-year-old patient presented to a dental clinic for the orthopaedic treatment of the 27 tooth. During preparation for local anesthesia, the patient felt sick (weakness, pallor, hyperperspiration), and lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Syncope
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Cardiogenic shock
d. Traumatic shock
e. Collapse

12. A 62-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about orthopaedic treatment of the 12, 21, 22 teeth. The arterial pressure was 165/110 mm Hg before prosthetic procedure. Because of emotional stress arterial pressure rose up to 220/130 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory failure
b. Syncope
c. Collapse
*d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Acute heart failure

13. A 25-year-old got a polytrauma as a result of a road accident. On examination, he was diagnosed with dislocation asphyxia. What kind of first aid should be rendered?
*a. Tongue fixation
b. Artificial ventilation of lungs
c. Removal of mucus and foreign bodies from the upper airways
d. Medicamental management of laryngeal stenosis
e. Tracheotomy

14. An injured man was hospitalized to the oral surgery department with rupture of soft tissues of palate and pharynx. In process of respiration the dangling flap from the wound partially or completely blocks the larynx aperture. What kind of asphyxia may develop in this patient?
a. Stenotic
*b. Valvular
c. Obturative
d. Aspirating
e. Dislocational

15. A 27-year-old female patient is pregnant, duration of gestation is 21 weeks. She has indication for extraction of the 28 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis after ineffective therapeutic treatment. What kind of anaesthesia should be used for tooth extraction?
a. Mandibular
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Infraorbital and palatinal
d. Tuberal and incisor
e. Torus

16. During extration of the 26 tooth a 34-year-old patient developed tinnitus, skin pallor, weakness. She was diagnosed with vertigo. What is the most appropriate tactics of emergency care?
a. Intravenous injection of cordiamin
b. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
c. Intravenous injection of 50% analgin
d. Intravenous injection of 0,1% adrenalin
*e. Placing the patient in Trendelenburg position

17. A patient with haemophilia consulted a dental surgeon about decay of a right lower tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 46 tooth is completely decayed below the gum level. Percussion causes minor pain reaction. It is planned to extract the 46 tooth. The extraction procedure should be performed in:
a. Stomatological clinic
b. Stomatological clinic and following administration of haemostatic drugs
c. Maxillofacial surgery department
*d. Haematological department
e. Maxillofacial surgery department after the consultation with a haematologist

18. A 40-year-old patient has been given anesthesia, immediately after which he developed severe weakness, heart palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, skin is markedly hyperemic, there is acute headache, AP is 180/100 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. What state is it?
*a. Hypertensic crisis
b. An attack of stenocardia
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Cardial pain
e. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock

19. A 32-year-old 3-month pregnant patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic for the prosthetics. Objectively: the 16 tooth is missing. It is planned to fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 15 and 17 teeth. The patient was given an anaesthetic of articaine group Ultracain DS. The orthopaedist chose this anaesthetic because:
a. It is most commonly used in the stomatological practice
b. It doesnt contain sulphites
c. It is low-toxic
d. It reduces the volume of uteroplacental circulation
*e. It is low-toxic, is not capable of crossing the hemato-placental barrier

20. A 3-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic for the traumatic loss of an upper central incisor. The patient hasnt undergone prosthetics before. He has a history of asthma. What are the first-priority measures of bronchospasm prevention?
*a. Tests for plastic and metal allergy
b. Teeth treatment with a remineralizing solution
c. Administration of sedative drugs
d. Fabrication of a temporary construction
e. Preparation following the anaesthetization

