1. A pregnant woman is 28 years old. Anamnesis: accelerated labor complicated by the II degree cervical rupture. The following two pregnancies resulted in spontaneous abortions at the terms of 12 and 14 weeks. On mirror examination: the uterine cervix is scarred from previous ruptures at 9 and 3 hours, the cervical canal is gaping. On vaginal examination: the cervix is 2 cm long, the external orifice is open 1 cm wide, the internal orifice is half-open; the uterus is enlarged to the 12th week of pregnancy, soft, mobile, painless, the appendages are without changes. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Cervical pregnancy, 12 weeks
*b. Isthmico-cervical insufficiency, habitual noncarrying of pregnancy
c. Incipient abortion, habitual noncarrying of pregnancy
d. Threatened spontaneous abortion
e. Cervical hysteromyoma, habitual noncarrying of pregnancy

2. On the day 4 after the cesarean section a woman developed fever with body temperature up to 39°C and abdominal pain. Pulse - 104/min. She vomited twice. The patient is sluggish, her tongue is dry and has gray coating. The abdomen is distended. Signs of peritoneal irritation are positive in all segments. Peristalsis cannot be auscultated. No passage of gas occurs. Uterine fundus is located at the level of the navel. The uterus is painful on palpation. The discharge is moderate and contains blood and pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Diffuse peritonitis
b. Progressive thrombophlebitis
c. Parametritis
d. Pelvic peritonitis
e. Metroendometritis

3. A 58-year-old woman came to the gynecological clinic. She complains of bloody discharge from her genital tracts. Menopause is 8 years. Gynecological examination: the uterus is slightly enlarged, dense to touch, with limited mobility; the uterine appendages cannot be detected; parametrium is free. Fractional curettage of the uterine cavity yields a significant amount of medullary substance in the scrape. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Uterine cervix cancer
b. Hormone-producing ovarian tumor
c. Adenomyosis
d. Chorioepithelioma
*e. Uterine corpus cancer

4. A 48-year-old woman complains of disturbed menstrual cycle: her periods last for 7-9 days and are excessively profuse throughout the last half-year. She notes occasional hot flashes in her head, insomnia, irritability, and headaches. Her skin is of normal color. Blood pressure - 150/90 mm Hg, pulse - 90/min., rhythmic. The abdomen is soft and painless. Bimanual examination shows no uterine enlargement, the appendages cannot be detected. The vaginal fornices are free. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adrenogenital syndrome
b. Premenstrual syndrome
*c. Climacteric syndrome
d. Stein-Leventhal syndrome (polycystic ovary syndrome)
e. Uterine myoma

5. A 30-year-old multigravida has been in labour for 18 hours. 2 hours ago the pushing stage began. Fetal heart rate is clear, rhythmic, 136/min. Vaginal examination reveals complete cervical dilatation, the fetal head in the pelvic outlet plane. Sagittal suture is in line with obstetric conjugate, the occipital fontanel is near the pubis. The patient has been diagnosed with primary uterine inertia. What is the further tactics of labor management?
a. Vacuum extraction of the fetus
*b. Outlet forceps
c. Cesarean section
d. Labour stimulation
e. Skin-head Ivanov’s forceps

6. A woman is 40 weeks pregnant. The fetus is in the longitudinal lie and cephalic presentation. Pelvic size: 26-29-31- 20. Expected weight of the fetus is 4800 gram. The labor contractions has been lasting for 12 hours, within the last 2 hours they were extremely painful, the parturient woman is anxious. The waters broke 4 hours ago. On external examination the contraction ring is located 2 finger widths above the navel, Henkel-Vasten sign is positive. Fetal heart rate is 160/min., muffled. On internal examination the uterine cervix is fully open, the head is engaged and pressed to the entrance into the lesser pelvis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hyperactive uterine contractions
b. Complete uterine rupture
*c. Threatened uterine rupture
d. Abruption of the normally positioned placenta
e. Anatomically contracted pelvis

7. A 23-year-old woman came to the gynecological clinic. She complains of pain, itching, and burning in her vulva, general weakness, indisposition, elevated body temperature up to 37.2°C, and headache. On examination in the vulva there are multiple vesicles up to 2-3 mm in diameter with clear contents against the background of hyperemia and mucosal edema. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Genital herpes infection
b. Papillomavirus infection
c. Cytomegalovirus infection
d. Vulvar cancer
e. Primary syphilis

8. A woman with the pregnancy term of 8 weeks complains of elevated temperature up to 37.6°C, skin rash that can be characterized as macular exanthema, enlargement of posterior cervical and occipital lymph nodes, small amount of bloody discharge from the genital tracts. She was examined by the infectious diseases specialist and diagnosed with rubella. What tactics should the obstetrician-gynecologist choose?
a. Prescription of antibacterial therapy
b. Treatment of incipient abortion
c. Prescription of hemostatic therapy
*d. Abortion
e. Prescription of antiviral therapy

9. A 16-year-old girl has primary amenorrhea, no pubic hair growth, normally developed mammary glands; her genotype is 46 ХY; uterus and vagina are absent. What is your diagnosis?
a. Cushing disease
*b. Testicular feminization syndrome
c. Cushing syndrome
d. Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome
e. Sheehan syndrome

10. A 46-year-old woman came to the maternity clinic with complaints of moderate blood discharge from the vagina, which developed after the menstruation delay of 1.5 months. On vaginal examination: the cervix is clean; the uterus is not enlarged, mobile, painless; appendages without changes. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding
b. Ectopic pregnancy
c. Cancer of the uterine body
d. Submucous uterine myoma
e. Adenomyosis

11. A 25-year-old woman was brought into the gynecological department with profuse bloody discharge from her genital tracts. She is 12 weeks pregnant, the pregnancy is planned. Within the last 3 days she was experiencing pains in her lower abdomen that eventually started resembling cramps, she developed bleeding. Her skin is pale, pulse - 88/min., blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg, body temperature - 36.8°C. Vaginal examination: the uterus size corresponds with 11 weeks of pregnancy, the cervical canal allows inserting 1 finger and contains fragments of the fertilized ovum, the discharge is bloody and profuse. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Disturbed menstrual cycle, hyperpolymenorrhea
b. 12-week pregnancy, threatened spontaneous abortion
*c. 12-week pregnancy, spontaneous abortion in progress
d. Disturbed menstrual cycle, amenorrhea
e. Full-term pregnancy, term labor

12. A 30-year-old woman came to the gynecological department. She complains of sharp pain in her lower abdomen and temperature of 38.8°C. She has a history of extramarital sexual activity and 2 artificial abortions. On gynecological examination the uterus is unchanged. The appendages are bilaterally enlarged and painful. Profuse purulent discharge is being produced from the vagina. What examination needs to be conducted to clarify the diagnosis?
*a. Bacteriological and bacterioscopic analysis
b. Curettage of the uterine cavity
c. Laparoscopy
d. Colposcopy
e. Hysteroscopy

13. It is the 3rd day after the first normal term labor; the infant is rooming-in with the mother and is on breastfeeding. Objectively: the mother’s general condition is satisfactory. Temperature is 36.4°C, heart rate is 80/min., BP is 120/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are soft and painless; lactation is moderate, unrestricted milk flow. The uterus is dense, the uterine fundus is located 3 finger widths below the navel. Lochia are sanguino-serous, moderate in volume. Assess the dynamics of uterine involution:
a. Pathologic involution
b. Hematometra
c. Subinvolution
d. Lochiometra
*e. Physiological involution

14. A 28-year-old woman complaining of irregular menstruations and infertility came to the gynecological clinic. Menstruations occur since the age of 15, irregular, with delays up to 2 months. On examination she presents with marked hirsutism and excessive body weight. On vaginal examination the uterus is reduced in size and painless. The ovaries on the both sides are dense and enlarged. Ultasound shows microcystic changes in the ovaries, the ovaries are 5х4 cm and 4.5х4 cm in size with dense ovarian capsule. Basal body temperature is monophasic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bilateral adnexitis
b. Ovarian carcinoma
c. Krukenberg tumor
d. Endometrioid cysts
*e. Polycystic ovary syndrome

15. An 18-year-old girl was brought into the gynecology deparment with complaints of elevated body temperature up to 37.8°C, sharp pain in her lower abdomen, more intense on the right, and difficult defecation. Vaginal examination detected a painful dense elastic formation 5x6 cm in the area of her right ovary. Pregnancy test is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Appendicitis
b. Ectopic pregnancy
*c. Torsion of ovarian tumor pedicle
d. Ovarian cyst rupture
e. Ovarian apoplexy

16. A 26-year-old woman presents with amenorrhea. 10 months ago she gave birth for a second time. In her early postpartum period she developed a massive hypotonic hemorrhage. No breasfeeding. Lately she has been presenting with loss of weight, loss of hair, and indisposition. Gynecological examination revealed atrophy of the external genitals, the uterus is abnormally small, no uterine appendages can be detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Physiological amenorrhea
b. Stein-Leventhal syndrome (polycystic ovary syndrome)
c. Galactorrhea-amenorrhea syndrome
*d. Sheehan syndrome (postpartum pituitary gland necrosis)
e. Suspected progressing ectopic pregnancy

17. A 45-year-old woman came to the maternity clinic with complaints of periodical pains in her mammary glands that start 1 day before menstruation and stop after the menstruation begins. Palpation of the mammary glands detects diffuse nodes predominantly in the upper outer quadrants. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hyperprolactinemia
b. Breast cyst
c. Breast cancer
d. Mastitis
*e. Fibrocystic mastopathy

18. A 14-year-old girl came to the general practitioner with complaints of weakness, loss of appetite, headache, rapid fatigability. Her last menstruation was profuse and lasted for 14 days after the previous delay of 2 months. Objectively: the skin is pale, heart rate is 90/min., BP is 110/70 mm Hg, Hb is 88 g/L. Rectal examination: the uterus and its appendages are without changes, no discharge from the genital tracts. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Gastritis
b. Dysmenorrhea
c. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction of hypotonic type
d. Migraine
*e. Posthemorrhagic anemia

19. A 22-year-old postparturient woman on the 12th day after the normal childbirth informs of elevated body temperature up to 39°C for the last 3 days and pain in her right mammary gland. The right mammary gland is enlarged, hot to touch, tense, hyperemic, and painful. Palpation reveals there a dense infiltration 8x8 cm with a fluctuation in its center. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Postpartum period, day 12. Right-sided serous mastitis
b. Postpartum period, day 12. Right-sided phlegmonous mastitis
c. Postpartum period, day 12. Right-sided lactostasis
*d. Postpartum period, day 12. Right-sided infiltrative-purulent mastitis
e. Postpartum period, day 12. Right-sided gangrenous mastitis

20. A 35-year-old pregnant woman with degree 1 essential hypertension, developed edemas and headache at the 33 week of her pregnancy. Objectively her general condition is satisfactory, blood pressure - 160/100 mm Hg, normal uterine tone. Fetal heart rate is 140/min., rhythmic. She was diagnosed with daily proteinuria - 4 g/L, daily diuresis - 1100 mL. Creatinine - 80 mcmol/L, urea - 7 mmol/L, platelets - 100×109/L. What complication of pregnancy occurred?
*a. Moderate preeclampsia
b. Mild preeclampsia
c. Renal failure
d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Severe preeclampsia

21. A 24-year-old pregnant woman on her 37th week of pregnancy has been brought to the maternity obstetric service with complaints of weak fetal movements. Fetal heartbeats are 95/min. On vaginal examination the uterine cervix is tilted backwards, 2 cm long, external orifice allows inserting a fingertip. Biophysical profile of the fetus equals 4 points. What tactics of pregnancy management should be chosen?
a. Treatment of placental dysfunction and repeated analysis of the fetal biophysical profile on the next day
b. Urgent preparation of the uterine cervix for delivery
c. Treatment of fetal distress; if ineffective, then elective cesarean section on the next day
*d. Urgent delivery via a cesarean section
e. Doppler measurement of blood velocity in the umbilical artery

22. During regular preventive gynecological examination a 30-year-old woman was detected to have dark blue punctulated ”perforations” on the vaginal portion of the uterine cervix. The doctor suspects endometriosis of the vaginal portion of the uterine cervix. What investigation method would be most informative for diagnosis confirmation?
a. US of the lesser pelvis
b. Curettage of the uterine cavity
c. Hormone testing
*d. Colposcopy, target biopsy of the cervix
e. Hysteroscopy

23. A parturient woman is 30 years old, stage I of the labor is ongoing. The fetus is in the cephalic presentation. Auscultation of the fetal heart sounds detects bradycardia. Evaluation of cardiotocogram yielded the following data: decrease of basal heart rate down to 90/min., variability - monotonous (2 and less); late decelerations with amplitude of 50/min. Make the diagnosis and choose the obstetrical tactics necessary in this case:
a. Fetal distress. Vacuum extraction delivery
b. Fetal distress. Stimulation of uterine contractions
c. Fetal distress. Forceps delivery
*d. Fetal distress. Urgent cesarean section delivery
e. Normal condition of the fetus. Vaginal birth

24. A 27-year-old woman complains of foul-smelling discharge from her genital tracts, pain in her lower abdomen, and elevated temperature. The complaints arose 2 days ago. She has a history of surgical abortion at the term of 8 weeks one week ago. Mirror examination: the uterine cervix is clear, external orifice produces foulsmelling discharge. Vaginal examination: the uterus lies in anteflexion, is mobile, painful, and slightly enlarged. The appendages are without changes. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Enterocolitis
b. Acute respiratory disease
c. Salpingoophoritis
*d. Postabortal endometritis
e. Appendicitis

25. A 17-year-old girl has made an appointment with the doctor. She plans to begin her sex life. No signs of gynecological pathology were detected. In the family history the patient’s grandmother had cervical cancer. The patient was consulted about the maintenance of her reproductive health. What recommendation will be the most helpful for prevention of invasive cervical cancer?
a. Immunomodulators
b. Vitamins, calcium, omega-3
*c. Vaccination against human papillomavirus (HPV)
d. Antiviral and antibacterial drugs
e. Timely treatment of sexually transmitted diseases

