1. A newborn girl has Apgar score of 7-8 points at the 1-5 minutes after birth. During the labor there was a brief difficulty with extraction of the shoulder girdle. After birth the baby presents with disturbed function of the proximal segment and forced position of the right arm. The shoulder is rotated inwards, the elbow is extended, the forearm is pronated, and the whole upper limb resembles an arm of a doll. What is the most likely clinical diagnosis in this case?
a. Intracranial hemorrhage
b. Soft tissue injury of the right arm
c. Thoracic spine trauma
d. Osteomyelitis of the right arm
*e. Erb-Duchenne palsy

2. Disease onset was acute. A child developed general weakness, pain in the joints, and elevated temperature. Later these signs became accompanied by itching skin rash manifested as erythematous spots 2- 5 mm in size. The rash gradually turned hemorrhagic. Large joints are painful and swollen; pain attacks periodically occur in the paraumbilical area; there are signs of intestinal hemorrhage. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatism
*b. Hemorrhagic vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein purpura)
c. Hemorrhagic meningoencephalitis
d. Scarlet fever
e. Streptococcal impetigo

3. A 13-year-old girl for the last two weeks has been complaining of dyspnea and shin and foot edemas that appear after a physical exertion. In the morning the edemas significantly decrease. Clinical examination revealed enlarged liver and coarse systolic murmur over the heart area. Blood test and urinalysis are without changes. What is the most likely cause of edemas in this child?
*a. Heart failure
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Hepatic cirrhosis
d. Angioneurotic edema
e. Nephrotic syndrome

4. A 7-year-old boy has severe pulmonary mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis). He complains of dyspnea and blood expectoration. Objectively he presents with lagging physical development, acrocyanosis, hepatomegaly, drumstick fingers, and nail plates resembling a ”clock face”. Provisional diagnosis of chronic pulmonary heart disease is made. What examination would be the most informative for diagnosis confirmation?
a. Ultrasound of the liver
*b. Doppler echocardiography
c. Chest X-ray
d. Electrocardiography
e. Rheography of the pulmonary artery

5. Mother of a 5-year-old child noticed on the the head of her child a round ”bald” spot 3 cm in diameter. All the hairs in the focus are broken off at the length of 5-6 mm. The day before the child was petting a stray cat. Make the diagnosis:
a. Superficial trichophytosis
b. Psoriasis
c. Alopecia areata
*d. Microsporia
e. Deep trichophytosis

6. A 2-year-old child with persisting cough and subfebrile body temperature after a case of URTI developed dyspnea, cyanosis of the nasolabial triangle, percussion dullness and weakened respiration in the lower lobe of the right lung, and a slight mediastinal displacement to the left. What pulmonary pathology is likely to cause this clinical presentation?
*a. Pleurisy
b. Pneumonia
c. Bronchitis
d. Atelectasis
e. Emphysema

7. During examination a 4-month-old child with meningococcemia presents with acrocyanosis, cold extremities, tachypnea, and thready pulse, blood pressure of 30/0 mm Hg, anuria, and sopor. What clinical syndrome is it?
a. Exicosis
b. Neurotoxicosis
*c. Toxic shock syndrome
d. Encephalic syndrome
e. Acute renal failure

8. At night a 2-year-old child with upper respiratory tract infection suddenly developed dyspnea with labored inspiration. Objectively the skin is pale, perioral cyanosis and slight acrocyanosis are observed. Breathing is loud, respiration rate is 32/min. Jugular, supra- and infraclavicular fossae retract during breathing. Respiration is coarse on auscultation. Heart sounds are clear and sonorous, heart rate is 120/min. What condition was complicated by the development of the upper respiratory tract infection?
*a. Stenosing laryngotracheitis
b. Obstructive bronchitis
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Bronchiolitis
e. Airway foreign body

9. A 1-year-old child with a case of URTI suddenly developed noisy respirations with difficult inspiration, intercostal retractions, and barking cough on the 2nd night after the disease onset. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute bronchiolitis
*b. Stenosing laryngotracheobronchitis
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Acute pulmonary inflammation
e. Acute bronchitis

10. A 10-year-old boy with symptoms of arthritis and myocarditis was brought to a hospital. Based on clinical examination the provisional diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis was made. What symptom is the most contributive for the diagnostics of this disease?
*a. Reduced mobility of the joints in the morning
b. Affection of the large joints
c. Increased heart rate
d. Enlarged heart
e. Regional hyperemia of the joints

11. A 7-year-old girl has been twice treated with antibacterial agents for urinary tract infection. US shows no severe renal defects. The child presents with recurrence of leukocyturia and bacteriuria, elevated body temperature up to 38.5°C, and pain in her left lumbar area. What examination should be conducted first to clarify the cause of urinary infection recurrence?
a. Immunogram
b. Radioisotope renography
c. Excretory urography
d. Retrograde pyelography
*e. Micturating cystourethrography

12. A child is 1 year old. After solid food was introduced into the diet, within the last several months the child developed loss of appetite, diarrhea with large amount of feces, and occasional vomiting. Body temperature remains normal. Body weight is 7 kg. The child is very pale, has leg edemas and extremely distended abdomen. Feces analysis detects high levels of fatty acids and soaps. Diagnosis of celiac disease was made and gluten-free diet was prescribed. What should be excluded from the diet in this case?
*a. Cereals - wheat, oats
b. Fruits
c. Easily digestible carbohydrates
d. Animal protein
e. Milk and dairy products

13. A 7-year-old boy has been an inpatient for 1.5 months. He had been brought to the hospital with complaints of edemas all over his body, low urine output, and headache. Clinical urinalysis: proteins - 7.1 g/L, leukocytes - 1-2 in the vision field, erythrocytes - 3-4 in the vision field. During the course of treatment the edemas gradually dissipated, headache abated, diuresis normalized. Daily urine proteins - 3 g/L. Biochemical blood test: total protein - 43.2 g/L, urea - 5.2 mmol/L, cholesterol - 9.2 mmol/L. What glomerulonephritis syndrome is the most likely to be present in the patient?
a. Isolated urinary
b. Nephritic
*c. Nephrotic
d. Hematuric
e. Mixed

14. A 3-month-old child with signs of rickets presents with positive Chvostek, Trousseau, and Maslov signs. One day ago the parents witnessed a cyanotic attack in their child - the child broke into a cold sweat, the eyes bulged, and respiratory arrest occurred. One minute later the child drew in a loud breath and the child’s condition normalized again. What is the cause of the described signs of the disease?
a. Increase of blood calcium levels
b. Increase of blood phosphorus levels
c. Metabolic acidosis
*d. Decrease of blood calcium levels
e. Decrease of blood phosphorus levels

15. A newborn with gestational age of 31 weeks presents with hypotonia and depressed consciousness. Hematocrit is 35%, general cerebrospinal fluid analysis shows increased content of erythrocytes and protein, and low glucose. These data correspond with the clinical presentation of:
a. Intrauterine infection
*b. Intracranial hemorrhage
c. Sepsis
d. Meningitis
e. Anemia

16. A newborn has Apgar score of 9. When should this infant be put to the breast?
a. After 12 hours
b. On the 2nd day
c. On the 3rd day
*d. In the delivery room
e. After 2 hours

17. A 3-week-old infant developed large, flaccid vesicles with purulent contents on the skin of chest and abdomen. The vesicles rupture quickly. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Vesiculopustulosis
b. Pemphigus syphiliticus
c. Pseudofurunculosis
*d. Pemphigus neonatorum
e. Toxic erythema

18. 10 hours after birth a child developed jaundice, hypotonia, hyporeflexia, and moderate hepatosplenomegaly. Feces and urine are of normal color. Umbilical cord blood bilirubin is 51 mcmol/L due to unconjugated bilirubin levels. In venous blood: erythrocytes - 3.5·1012/L, Нb- 140 g/L, reticulocytes - 1.5%, bilirubin - 111 mcmol/L, conjugated - 11 mcmol/L, ALT- 40 U/L, AST30 U/L. Mother’s blood group is А(II) Rh(- ), child’s blood group is А(II) Rh(+). What laboratory test can confirm the diagnosis?
a. Measurement of erythrocyte osmotic resistance
b. Viral hepatitis markers analysis
*c. Coombs test
d. Erythrocytometry
e. Measurement of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase levels in erythrocytes

19. A 6-month-old child on breastfeeding is hospitalized in the inpatient department. After the child recovers, the doctor recommends the mother to start introducing solid food to the child’s diet. What products should be introduced to the child’s diet first?
a. Buckwheat porridge
*b. Vegetable puree
c. Grated apple
d. Fermented dairy products
e. Semolina porridge

20. The 5-year-old child has been ill for 2 weeks. Cough attacks developed first and were then followed by reprises. During coughing the child’s face turns red and cervical veins bulge. The cough attacks induce vomiting. X-ray shows intensified bronchial pattern. Blood test: leukocytes - 16×109/L , lymphocytes - 72%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 4 mm/hour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Foreign body
*b. Pertussis
c. Pneumonia
d. Obstructive bronchitis
e. Adenovirus infection

21. A 3-year-old child presents with dyspnea that abates in the sitting position, occasional loss of consciousness and seizures, delayed physical development, cyanosis, drumstick fingers. Echocardioscopy detects aortic dextraposition, ventricular septal defect, pulmonary artery stenosis, and right ventricular hypertrophy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Coarctation of the aorta
b. Ventricular septal defect
c. Acquired valvular disease
*d. Tetrad of Fallot
e. Transposition of the great vessels

22. A 15-year-old girl complains of dizziness and sensation of lack of air that she develops in emotionally straining situations. Relief occurs after she takes corvalol. Objectively: hyperhidrosis and marble-like pattern of the skin of her palms and feet. Clinical and instrumental examination revealed no organic changes in the central nervous, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Obstructive bronchitis
b. Stenosing laryngotracheitis
c. Acute epiglottitis
*d. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
e. Bronchial asthma

23. A 1.5-month-old child on breasfeeding presents from birth with daily vomiting, irregular liquid foamy feces, and meteorism, which are resistant to antibacterial and probiotic therapy; no increase of body mass is observed. The child’s condition improved, when breastmilk was substituted with ”NAN low lactose” formula. What pathology is it?
*a. Lactase deficiency
b. Infectious enteritis
c. Functional dyspepsia
d. Drug-induced enteritis
e. Intestinal lambliasis (Giardiasis)

24. A 13-year-old girl for a month has been complaining of fatigability, dull pain in her right subcostal area, abdominal distension, and constipations. Abdominal palpation reveals positive Kehr, Murphy, and Ortner signs, while Desjardins and Mayo-Robson points are painless. Total bilirubin is 14.7 mcmol/L, predominantly indirect, ALT- 20 U/L, AST- 40 U/L, amylase - 6.3 mmol/L. Echocholecystography shows practically no contraction of the gallbladder. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Hyperkinetic biliary dyskinesia
b. Acute pancreatitis
c. Chronic hepatitis
*d. Hypokinetic biliary dyskinesia
e. Chronic pancreatitis

25. A 22-day-old infant developed subcutaneous red nodes from 1.0 to 1.5 cm in size on the scalp; later the nodes suppurated. Temperature increased up to 37.7°C, intoxication symptoms appeared, regional lymph nodes enlarged. Complete blood count: anemia, leukocytosis, neutrocytosis, increased ESR. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Vesiculopustulosis
b. Pemphigus
*c. Pseudofurunculosis
d. Scalp phlegmon
e. -

26. A 10-year-old boy was brought into the hospital with complaints of expiratory dyspnea, respirations are 30/min. He explains his state by a change in the weather conditions. For the last 4 years the boy has been registered for regular check-ups due to his diagnosis of third degree persistent bronchial asthma. To provide emergency aid for this child, first he needs to be given:
*a. Salbutamol or short-acting ?2-agonists
b. Adrenaline
c. Claritin (Loratadine)
d. Euphylline (Aminophylline)
e. Dexamethasone

27. A 3-year-old child has been brought to a hospital with complaints of pain in the legs, fever, and loss of appetite. Objectively: pale skin and mucosa, hemorrhagic rash. Lymph nodes are enlarged, painless, dense and elastic, not matted together. Bones, joints, and abdomen are painful. The liver and spleen are enlarged. Hemogram: Hb- 88 g/L, color index - 1.3, platelets - 80×109/L, leukocytes - 25.8×109/L, lymphoblasts - 70%, ESR- 52 mm/hour. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Hemorrhagic vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein purpura)
c. Thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Acute rheumatic fever
*e. Acute leukemia

28. During an outdoors school event in hot weather, a 10-year-old girl lost her consciousness. Body temperature - 36.7°C. Objectively her skin is pale and cold to touch, her pupils are dilated. Blood pressure - 90/50 mm Hg. Heart rate - 58/min. What pathology occurred in this case?
a. Sunstroke
b. -
c. Sympathicotonic collapse
d. Paralytic collapse
*e. Syncope

29. A 13-year-old girl has 30% of excessive body mass, she started to gain weight at the age of 3. She has a family history of obesity. Her height and sexual development are normal for her age. The appetite is excessive. She complains of periodical headaches. Blood pressure - 120/80 mm Hg. Subcutaneous fat is evenly distributed, she has no stretch marks. There is juvenile acne on her face. What type of obesity is it?
a. Hypothalamic obesity
b. Hypothalamic syndrome of puberty
c. Hypothyroid obesity
*d. Alimentary constitutive obesity
e. Adrenal obesity

30. An 8-year-old girl complains of frequent painful urination in small amounts and urinary incontinence. The signs have been present for 2 days already. She explains her disease by overexposure to cold. Costovertebral angle tenderness is absent. Complete blood count is without pathologies. Urine test: leukocytes - 20-30 in the vision field, erythrocytes - 40-50 in the vision field, unchanged, bacteriuria. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vulvitis
b. Glomerulonephritis
c. Urolithiasis
*d. Cystitis
e. Pyelonephritis

