1. During medical examination a cadet in the naval college was detected to have a painless dense ulcer 1.5x0.5 in size in his perianal area at the 2 o’clock position. The ulcer floor resembles ”old fat”. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Rectal fistula
b. Rectal fissure
*c. Hard syphilitic chancre of the rectum
d. Anal cancer
e. Anal crypt suppuration

2. A 32-year-old woman complains of tumorlike formation on the anterior surface of her neck that appeared 2 years ago. Within the last 3 months the tumor has been rapidly growing. It hinders swallowing and impairs speech; the tumor causes a sensation of pressure. Objectively the skin moisture is normal, pulse is 80/min., rhythmic, blood pressure is 130/80 mm Hg. In the right lobe of the thyroid gland there is a dense lumpy node 3.0x3.5 cm that moves during swallowing. Scanning image shows a ”cold nodule” in the thyroid gland. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Thyroid cyst
b. Thyroid adenoma
*c. Thyroid cancer
d. Nodular goiter
e. Autoimmune thyroiditis

3. After a surgery for a left thigh phlegmon the disease progression was complicated by sepsis. On the 7th day after the surgery there are marked signs of a generalized inflammatory reaction, in blood there are signs of toxic anemia and progressing hypoproteinemia, bilirubin levels are 40 mcmol/L, AST and ALT exceed the norm by 2.5 times. Oliguria persists (700 mL of urine per day). Name the phase of sepsis progression:
a. Recovery phase
b. Mixed phase
c. Stress phase
d. Anabolic phase
*e. Catabolic phase

4. A 10-year-old boy, who was outdoors in windy and cold weather, developed moderate pain and tingling in his fingers and toes. When he returned home, his parents noticed that the tips of his fingers and toes were white and their sensitivity was lost. As the affected areas were warming up, the fingers and toes developed tingling and painful sensations. Skin pallor changed into redness, tingling stopped, mild itching and swelling of the fingers appeared. Determine the frostbite degree in this child:
a. Frostbite of the III degree
b. Frostbite of the IV degree
c. Perniosis
d. Frostbite of the II degree
*e. Frostbite of the I degree

5. A 16-year-old patient has made an appointment with an otolaryngologist. He complains of elevated body temperature and sore throat. Disease onset was 2 days ago, after the patient ate two portions of ice-cream. Pharyngoscopy shows hyperemic mucosa of the palatine tonsils, with purulent exudate in the lacunae. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute pharyngitis
b. Pseudomembranous (Vincent’s) tonsillitis
c. Follicular tonsillitis
d. Diphtheria
*e. Lacunar tonsillitis

6. A 35-year-old woman complains of high body temperature and pain in the upper outer quadrant of her right buttock, which developed after an injection. She has been presenting with this condition for 3 days. At the site of injection the skin is hyperemic; there is a painful infiltrate with an area of softening in its center. The woman is diagnosed with a postinjection abscess of the right buttock. What tactics should the surgeon choose in this case?
a. 10-15 minutes of low-intensity laser radiation directed at the right buttock
b. Antipyretic agents, massage, and application of dry heat to the right buttock
c. Hospitalization, prescription of antibiotics, UHF
d. Abscess puncture, pus removal followed by application of antiseptics
*e. Abscess incision, sanation and drainage of the cavity

7. A 65-year-old woman on abdominal palpation presents with a tumor in the umbilical region and above it; the tumor is 13x8 cm in size, moderately painful, nonmobile, pulsing. On auscultation systolic murmur can be observed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Arteriovenous aneurysm
b. Gastric tumor
*c. Abdominal aortic aneurysm
d. Tricuspid insufficiency
e. Bicuspid insufficiency

8. A 32-year-old man complains of pain in his legs that intensifies during walking, intermittent claudication, numbness of his toes, extremity coldness, and inability to walk more that 100 meters. When he sleeps, his leg usually hangs down. The patient has been smoking since he was 16. He drinks alcohol in excess. The left leg is colder than the right one; the skin of the extremities is dry. No pulse can be detected on the pedal arteries, while pulsation of the femoral arteries is retained. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Raynaud disease
b. Deep thrombophlebitis
c. Diabetic angiopathy
d. Leriche syndrome (aortoiliac occlusive disease)
*e. Obliterating endarteritis

9. A 50-year-old patient was brought to a hospital with complaints of blood in urine. Urination is painless and undisturbed. Macrohematuria had been observed for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys cannot be palpated, suprapubic area is without alterations, external genitalia are nonpathologic. On rectal investigation: prostate is not enlarged, painless, has normal structure. Cystoscopy revealed no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Varicocele
b. Bladder tuberculosis
*c. Renal carcinoma
d. Dystopic kidney
e. Necrotic papillitis

10. A 59-year-old man complains of pain in his left eye and left side of his head, significant vision impairment of the left eye, nausea, and vomiting. Visual acuity of the right eye is 1.0. Visual acuity of the left eye is 0.03, attempts at correction bring no improvement. Right eye intraocular pressure - 21 mm Hg, left eye intraocular pressure - 65 mm Hg. Congestive injection is observed on the sclera of the left eye. The cornea is thick and swollen. The anterior chamber is shallow, moist, and clear. The pupil is dilated and unresponsive to the light, the fundus of the eye is not visible. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Stage II intraocular tumor of the left eye
b. Acute iridocyclitis of the left eye
*c. Acute attack of glaucoma of the left eye
d. Endophthalmitis of the left eye
e. Panophthalmitis of the left eye

11. On the 15th day after a small trauma of the right foot, the patient developed indisposition, fatigability, irritability, headache, elevated body temperature, and sensation of constriction, tension, and twitching in the muscles of the right shin. What disease can be suspected?
a. Anaerobic gas gangrene
b. Acute thrombophlebitis
c. Thrombophlebitis of the popliteal artery
*d. Tetanus
e. Erysipelas

12. A patient has the second and third degree burns of the 15% of the body surface. On the 20th day after the trauma the patient presents with sharp increase of body temperature, general weakness, rapid vesicular respiration; facial features are sharpened, BP is 90/50 mm Hg, heart rate is 112/min. What complication is it?
a. Purulent bronchitis
b. Anaerobic infection
c. Pneumonia
d. Acute intoxication
*e. Sepsis

13. 2 hours after a traffic accident a 28-yearold man in a grave condition was brought to a hospital. The patient complains of abdominal pain. He received a blow to the abdomen with the steering wheel. Objective examination revealed the following: the abdomen does not participate in respiration, is tense and acutely painful on palpation; the abdominal muscles are defensively tense, peritoneal irritation signs are positive, hepatic dullness is absent. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart rate is 120/min. What further treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Laparoscopy
b. Ultrasound investigation
c. Laparocentesis
*d. Laparotomy
e. Cold to the abdomen

14. A 48-year-old woman has arrived to the surgical unit with wounds in her thigh. On examination the wound surface has dirty-gray coating with unpleasant sweet smell. Wound content resembles raspberry jelly. Skin tissues around the wound are glossy and turgid. Palpation reveals moderate crepitation in the tissues. What microflora is the most likely to cause such inflammation?
a. Streptococci
b. Anaerobic non-clostridial
*c. Anaerobic clostridial
d. Staphylococci
e. Blue pus bacillus

15. After a pain attack in the right subcostal area, a 58-year-old woman with overnutrition developed icteric skin and sclera, lightcolored feces, and dark urine. Her abdomen is distended and painful on palpation in the right subcostal area. Palpation detects liver enlargement by 2-3 cm. Blood test: total bilirubin - 90 mcmol/L, conjugated bilirubin - 60 mcmol/L. What method of examination will be the most informative for diagnosis clarification?
a. Intravenous cholegraphy
b. Percutaneous transhepatic cholegraphy
c. US of the hepatopancreatobiliary zone
*d. Retrograde cholangiopancreatography
e. Infusion cholegraphy

16. An 11-year-old boy for a month has been presenting with increasing pain in the right femur. In the painful area there is a nonmobile painful tumor with unclear margins. The child complains of general indisposition, weakness, increased body temperature up to 39°C. X-ray shows widened medullary cavity, small foci of cancellous bone destruction, and onion-like lamellar exfoliation of the cortical layer. What is the most likely pathology resulting in such clinical presentation?
*a. Ewing sarcoma
b. Fibrosarcoma
c. Juxtacortical sarcoma
d. Chondrosarcoma
e. Osteogenic sarcoma

17. A 43-year-old man complains of a protrusion in the right inguinal region, that enlarges due to strain. He has been presenting with this condition for 6 months. Within this period the protrusion has grown. Objectively in the right inguinal region an elastic protrusion 8x5 cm is visible. On palpation it disappears, leaving an empty space 4x4 cm between the pedicles of the Poupart ligament. ”Cough push” sign is positive over this opening. Make the diagnosis:
a. Right-sided reducible arcuate line hernia
*b. Right-sided reducible inguinal hernia
c. Cyst of the right spermatic cord
d. Right-sided reducible femoral hernia
e. Right-sided inguinal lymphadenitis

18. A 78-year-old man with a prostate adenoma underwent a herniotomy for a direct inguinal hernia. After the surgery he presents with absent urination. Enlarged urinary bladder is detectable above the patient’s pubis. What measures should be taken in this case?
a. Apply cold to the urinary bladder area
b. Prescribe proserin (neostigmine) intramuscularly
c. Prescribe antispasmodics subcutaneously
*d. Bladder catheterization
e. Prescribe processing of the postoperative wound with UHF field

19. A 38-year-old patient has been brought by an ambulance to the surgical department with complaints of general weakness, indisposition, black stool. On examination the patient is pale, there are dotted hemorrhages on the skin of his torso and extremities. On digital investigation there are black feces on the glove. Blood test: Hb- 108 g/L, thrombocytopenia. Anamnesis states that a similar condition was observed 1 year ago. Make the diagnosis:
a. Hemophilia
b. Rectal tumor
c. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
*d. Thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Ulcerative bleeding

20. A 30-year-old man came to the family physician. 2 months ago he underwent a surgery for open fracture of the humerus. On examination the patient’s condition is satisfactory; in the area of the postoperative wound there is a fistula that discharges a small amount of pus; the area itself is red; fluctuation is detected. X-ray shows destruction of the humerus with sequestra. What complication did the patient develop during the postoperative period?
a. Hematogenous osteomyelitis
b. Posttraumatic phlegmon
c. Suture sinus
*d. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
e. Wound suppuration

21. 3 hours after a trauma, a young man developed bradycardia of 46/min., anisocoria D>S, hemi-hyperreflexia S>D, hemihypesthesia on the left, and a convulsive disorder. The character of this process needs to be clarified. What method of examination will be the most accurate for this purpose?
a. Electroencephalography
b. Skull X-ray
*c. Brain CT
d. Echoencephalography
e. Lumbar puncture

22. The body of a 24-year-old woman with suspected poisoning has been found on the street. Forensic medical examination was requested by an investigator during examination of the site and the body. According to the Criminal Procedure Code currently in force in Ukraine, forensic medical examination is required when it is necessary to determine the:
a. Mechanism of death
*b. Cause of death
c. Time of death
d. Manner of death
e. Mode of death

23. A 37-year-old patient complains of pain in the spinal column, reduced mobility. The condition persists for 7 years. ”Sway back” is observed, there is no movement in all spinal regions. X-ray shows ”bamboo spine” vertebral column. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteochondrosis
b. Tuberculous spondylitis
c. Spondylolisthesis
*d. Ankylosing spondyloarthritis
e. Spondylitis deformans

24. A surgery unit received a person with an incised stab wound on the upper third of the right thigh. Examination detects an incised stab wound 3.0x0.5x2.0 cm in size on the inner surface of the upper third of the right thigh. Bright-red blood flows from deep within the wound in a pulsing stream. Characterize this type of bleeding:
a. Venous
b. Capillary
c. Mixed
*d. Arterial
e. Parenchimatous

25. A 47-year-old man developed the signs of decompensated laryngeal stenosis against the background of acute flegmonous laryngitis. He presents with inspiratory dyspnea at rest, forced position, cyanotic skin covered in cold sweat, tachycardia, deficient pulse, and low blood pressure. What urgent treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Oxygen therapy
*b. Tracheostomy
c. Intravenous administration of dehydrating agents
d. Oral administration of hyposensitization substances and broncholytics
e. Administration of glucocorticoid hormones

26. Heart X-ray of a 31-year-old man has revealed the following: with tightly filled opacified esophagus there is a marginal filling defect in its middle third on the posterior wall; the defect is 1.8x1.3 cm in size with clear oval border. Mucosal folds are retained and envelop the defect; wall peristalsis and elasticity are not affected. There are no complaints regarding the condition of the patient’s alimentary canal. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Barrett esophagus
*b. Esophageal tumor
c. Esophageal burns
d. Achalasia cardiae
e. Diverticulum

27. A 25-year-old man was hospitalized with complaints of pain in his lower abdomen and right lumbar area that appeared one hour ago. Patient’s general state is moderately severe. Body temperature - 38.2°C, heart rate - 102/min. The tongue is dry. The abdomen is painful on deep palpation in the right iliac area and in the Petit triangle. AureRozanov and Gabay signs are positive. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Acute appendicitis
b. Cecal tumor
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Intestinal obstruction
e. Right-sided renal colic

28. A 45-year-old man diagnosed with acute pulmonary abscess suddenly developed sharp pain in his chest on the right and dyspnea up to 30/min. Examination detects facial cyanosis and shallow rapid respirations. Auscultation reveals acutely weakened respiration throughout the whole right lung; percussion reveals a vesiculotympanitic (bandbox) resonance at the lung apex and dullness in the lower lobe. What complication developed in this patient?
a. Pneumothorax
b. Pleuropneumonia
*c. Pyopneumothorax
d. Acute mediastinitis
e. Esophageal perforation

29. A 5-year-old child was brought to the ENT department by an ambulance. The child presents with cough and difficult respiration. From the patient’s history it is known that the child was playing with a toy construction set, when suddenly started coughing and developed labored breathing. Examination detects periodical cough, labored expiration, and respiratory lag in the left side of the child’s thorax. Auscultation: diminished respiration on the left. Percussion: tympanitis. X-ray shows a displacement of the mediastinal organs to the right. Make the diagnosis:
a. A foreign body in the left bronchus, complete bronchostenosis
b. A foreign body in the right bronchus, partial bronchostenosis
c. A foreign body in the right bronchus, valvular bronchostenosis
d. A foreign body in the trachea
*e. A foreign body in the left bronchus, valvular bronchostenosis

30. A 30-year-old man was brought to the neurosurgical department with complaints of constant headaches, nausea, vomiting, fever, and weakness of the right-side limbs. Anamnesis states that one month ago the patient had a surgery for left-sided suppurative otitis and mastoiditis. He has been undergoing treatment in an ENT department. Approximately 2 weeks ago the temperature increased, and the patient developed headaches. Objectively: heart rate - 98/min., BP- 140/90 mm Hg, temperature - 38.3°C. Neurologically manifested stiff neck: bilateral Kernig’s symptom, unsteadiness during the Romberg’s maneuver. Computer tomography of the brain revealed a threedimensional growth with a capsule in the left hemisphere. Make the diagnosis:
a. Echinococcus
b. Hydrocephalus
c. Arnold-Chiari malformation
*d. Cerebral abscess
e. Hemorrhage

31. The burns unit received a patient, who 6 hours ago during a fire received flame burns. On the patient’s body there is graybrown area of necrosis that covers 3/4 of the body perimeter. Occasionally there are small blisters with hemorrhagic contents and patches of shredded epidermis. What local therapy is necessary in this case?
a. Necrectomy with xenotransplantation
b. Necrectomy with dermal autograft
c. Chemical necrolysis
d. Blister puncture
*e. Decompression necrectomy

32. A woman in her early- to mid-thirties has lost her consciousness 3-5 minutes ago. On examination: the skin is pale, no pulse over the carotid arteries, no spontaneous respiration, pupils are dilated; the patient is nonresponsive, presents with atony. The patient’s condition can be determined as:
a. Comatose state
*b. Clinical death
c. Syncope
d. Natural death
e. Brain death

33. A boy had a foreign body removed from under his nail plate. 3 days later he developed a sharp throbbing pain at the end of his distal phalanx, which intensifies when the phalanx is pressed, hyperemia of the nail fold, elevated body temperature up to 38.5°C, and nail plate discoloration. Make the diagnosis:
a. Erysipeloid
b. Abscess
c. Erysipelas
d. Paronychia
*e. Subungual panaritium

34. A 32-year-old woman complains of body weight loss despite her increased appetite, nervousness, and tremor of the extremities. Objectively: the skin is moist; the thyroid gland is diffusely enlarged, painless, soft, and mobile. Blood test: increased level of T3, T4, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (THS). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis
b. Thyroid carcinoma
*c. Diffuse toxic goiter
d. Thyroid adenoma
e. Diffuse nontoxic goiter

35. A 19-year-old young man complains of cough with expectoration of purulent sputum in the amount of 100 mL per day, hemoptysis, dyspnea, increased body temperature up to 37.8°C, general weakness, weight loss. The patient’s condition lasts for 4 years. Exacerbations occur 2-3 times a year. The patient presents with malnutrition, pale skin, cyanosis of the lips, drumstick (clubbed) fingers. Tympanic percussion sound in the lungs, weakened respiration, numerous various moist crackles in the lower pulmonary segments on the left can be observed. In blood: erythrocytes - 3.2·1012/L, leukocytes - 8.4·109/L, ESR- 56 mm/hour. On X-ray: lung fields are emphysematous, the left pulmonary root is deformed and dilated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Multiple bronchiectasis of the left lung
b. Chronic abscess of the left lung
c. Suppuration of the cyst in the left lung
d. Left-sided pulmonary cystic dysplasia
e. Chronic left-sided pneumonia

36. A 57-year-old woman during a regular ultrasound examination presented with a space-occupying heterogeneous lesion in the right kidney. What is the most informative method of renal tumor diagnostics?
a. Radioisotope renography
b. Three glass urine test
c. Excretory urography
d. Retrograde pyelography
*e. Spiral computed tomography

37. A 40-year-old victim of a traffic accident sustained the following injuries: closed diaphyseal femur fracture, brain concussion, multiple rib fractures, hemopneumothorax, degloving shin injuries. What injuries require the most urgent attention?
*a. Multiple rib fractures, hemopneumothorax
b. Brain concussion
c. All injuries are equivalent
d. Degloving shin injuries
e. Closed diaphyseal femur fracture

38. At the railroad crossing a passenger train collided with a bus. In this collision 26 bus passenges died, another 18 passengers received mechanical injuries of varying severity. Where will be professional medical aid provided for the victims of this accident? Who will provide this aid?
a. In medico-prophylactic institutions; specialized second-response emergency teams
b. In medical institutions; all listed types of healthcare workers
c. At the site of the accident; first-response emergency teams
d. At the site of the accident; specialized second-response emergency teams
*e. In medico-prophylactic institutions; general physicians and surgeons

39. A 45-year-old man underwent a cardiac surgery one week ago. His general state has been deteriorating since then: dyspnea at rest, retrosternal pain that irradiates to the neck, marked weakness. Objectively his body temperature is hectic. His cardiac borders are expanded, apical beat is weakened. Auscultation detects pericardial friction rub. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute myogenic dilatation of the heart
b. Pulmonary embolism
c. Acute cardiac aneurysm
d. Myocardial infarction
*e. Acute pericarditis

40. A 45-year-old man was brought by an ambulance into the emergency hospital. He complains of sudden pain in the lumbar area, frequent painful urination, and vomiting. Examination detects pain in the lumbar area, costovertebral angle tenderness, pain on palpation of kidneys and along the ureter on the right. Urine test: proteins, fresh erythrocytes, leukocytes. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Urolithiasis, renal colic
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Polycystic kidney disease
d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute pyelonephritis

