1. A 25-year-old woman has been suffering from diabetes mellitus since she was 9. She was admitted into the nephrology unit with significant edemas of the face, arms, and legs. Blood pressure - 200/110 mm Hg, Hb- 90 g/L, blood creatinine - 850 mcmol/L, urine proteins - 1.0 g/L, leukocytes - 10-15 in the vision field. Glomerular filtration rate - 10 mL/min. What tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Transfer into the endocrinology clinic
b. Renal transplantation
c. Active conservative therapy for diabetic nephropathy
d. Dietotherapy
*e. Transfer into the hemodialysis unit

2. A 59-year-old woman was brought into the rheumatology unit. Extremely severe case of scleroderma is suspected. Objectively she presents with malnourishment, ”mask-like” face, and acro-osteolysis. Blood: erythrocytes - 2.2×109/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 40 mm/hour. Urine: elevated levels of free oxyproline. Name one of the most likely pathogenetic links in this case:
*a. Formation of antibodies to collagen
b. Formation of antibodies to blood corpuscles
c. Formation of antibodies to vessel wall
d. Formation of antibodies to transversely striated muscles
e. Formation of antibodies to native DNA

3. A 34-year-old man on the 3rd day of ceftriaxone treatment for acute otitis (daily dosage - 2 grams) developed diarrhea occurring 5-6 times per day. Feces are without mucus or blood admixtures. Temperature is 36.6°C. Gregersen reaction (occult blood in feces) is negative. Stool culture detected no pathogenic germs. What is the most likely cause of diarrhea in this case?
a. Ulcerative colitis
b. Crohn’s disease (regional enteritis)
c. Intestinal dysbiosis
d. Bacterial overgrowth syndrome
*e. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea

4. A chronic alcoholic was hospitalized into the therapeutic inpatient unit due to pneumonia. On the day 5 of his hospitalization he became disoriented in time and space, developed fear-inducing visual hallucinations and motor agitation. Full body tremor and tremor of the limbs are observed. X-ray and physical examinations detect the signs of his convalescence from pneumonia. What tactics should be chosen regarding this patient?
a. Transfer into the neuroresuscitation department
b. Continue the treatment in the therapeutic department
*c. Transfer into the inpatient narcology department
d. Compulsory medical treatment for alcoholism
e. Discharge from the hospital

5. After eating shrimps, a 25-year-old man suddenly developed skin itching, some areas of his skin became hyperemic or erupted into vesicles. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute urticaria
b. Urticaria pigmentosa
c. Scabies
d. Psoriasis
e. Hemorrhagic vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein purpura)

6. A 25-year-old woman complains of fatigue, dizziness, hemorrhagic rashes on the skin. She has been presenting with these signs for a month. Blood test: erythrocytes - 1.0×1012/L, Hb- 37 g/L, color index - 1.1, leukocytes - 1.2×109/L, platelets - 42×109/L. What analysis would be the most advisable for diagnosismaking in this case?
a. Splenic biopsy
b. Coagulation studies
c. US of the gastrointestinal tract
*d. Sternal puncture (bone marrow biopsy)
e. Liver biopsy

7. A 35-year-old man complains of rapidly incresing fatigue, palpitations, ”visual snow”, and dizziness. He has a history of peptic ulcer of the stomach. Objectively the skin is pale. Vesicular respiration is observed in the lungs. Systolic murmur is detected over the cardiac apex, heart rate is 100/min., BP is 100/70 mm Hg. The epigastrium is slightly tender on palpation. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3.2×1012/L, Нb- 100 g/L, color index - 0.95. What type of anemia is the most likely present in this case?
a. Hypoplastic anemia
*b. Posthemorrhagic anemia
c. Chronic iron-deficiency anemia
d. Sideroblastic anemia
e. Hemolytic anemia

8. A 62-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of pain in the thorax on the right during breathing, dyspnea, and dry cough. Ten days ago he slipped and fell hitting his right side. On examintaion: the patient lies on the left side. The right side of the thorax lags during breathing. On the right there are crepitation and pain in the III-IV ribs. Dullness of percussion sound and sharply diminished breath sounds can be observed. On X-ray: signs of exudate, fracture of the III-IV ribs. On pleurocentesis: blood is detected. Choose the further tactics:
*a. Transfer to a thoracic surgery department
b. Perform repeated pleural taps
c. Refer to a traumatologist
d. Apply a fixation bandage to the rib cage
e. Prescribe conservative therapy

9. A 51-year-old man complains of vomiting with blood. He has been drinking alcohol excessively. Health disorder has been observed since he was 40, when he first developed jaundice. On examination the skin and visible mucosa are icteric, with a stellate vascular pattern. The patient is malnourished and presents with abdominal distension, umbilical hernia, and ascites. The edge of the liver is tapered and painless, +3 cm, the spleen is +2 cm. Blood test: Hb- 80 g/L, leukocytes - 3·109/L, platelets - 85·109/L. What is the cause of portal hypertension in this patient?
a. Constrictive pericarditis
b. Budd-Chiari syndrome
c. Thrombosis of the splenic vein
d. Hemochromatosis
*e. Hepatic cirrhosis

10. A young man has made an appointment with the dermatologist. He complains of a painful facial rash in the beard and mustache area. This condition has been persisting for several weaks already. After shaving, the patient’s condition aggravates. The diagnosis of sycosis is made. What primary morphological elements can be observed in the rash in this case?
a. Maculae, nodes
*b. Pustules, papulae
c. Pustules, bumps
d. Nodes, nodules
e. Phlyctenae, maculae

11. At night a 63-year-old woman suddenly developed an asphyxia attack. She has a 15- year-long history of essential hypertension and had a myocardial infarction 2 years ago. Objectively her position in bed is orthopneic, the skin is pale, the patient is covered with cold sweat, acrocyanosis is observed. Pulse - 104/min. Blood pressure - 210/130 mm Hg, respiration rate - 38/min. Pulmonary percussion sound is clear, with slight dullness in the lower segments; throughout the lungs single dry crackles can be heard that become bubbling and non-resonant in the lower segments. What is the most likely complication in this patient?
a. Paroxysmal tachycardia
b. Pulmonary embolism
c. Acute right ventricular failure
*d. Acute left ventricular failure
e. Bronchial asthma attack

12. A 26-year-old woman is suspected to suffer from systemic lupus erythematosus due to systemic lesions of skin, vessels, joints, serous tunics, and heart that developed after photosensitization. The following is detected: LE cells, antibodies to native DNA, isolated anti-centromere antibodies, rheumatoid factor is 1:100, Wassermann reaction is positive, circulating immune complex is 120 units. What immunological indicators are considered to be specific to this disease?
a. Rheumatoid factor
b. Immunoglobulin A
c. Increased circulating immune complex
*d. DNA antibodies
e. Anti-centromere antibodies

13. A woman came to the doctor with complaints of increased body temperature up to 37.8°C and moderately sore throat for the last 3 days. Objectively: mandibular lymph nodes are enlarged up to 3 cm. Palatine tonsils are hypertrophied and covered with gray coating that spreads to the uvula and anterior pillars of the fauces. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pseudomembranous (Vincent’s) tonsillitis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
*c. Oropharyngeal diphtheria
d. Agranulocytosis
e. Oropharyngeal candidiasis

14. A 42-year-old man, a dispatcher, suffes from peptic ulcer disease of the duodenum. The disease is of moderate severity. He wants to be assigned a disability group. Make the conclusion regarding his working ability:
a. Capable of working, non-employable
b. Second group of disability
c. Third group of disability
*d. Capable of working, employable
e. First group of disability

15. A 58-year-old man complains of weakness and tumor-like formations that appeared on the anterior surface of his neck and in the inguinal region. Palpation detects soft painless mobile cervical and inguinal lymph nodes up to 2 cm in diameter. The liver protrudes by 2 cm from the edge of the costal margin, the lower splenic pole is at the umbilical level. In blood: erythrocytes - 3.5×1012/L, Hb- 88 g/L, leukocytes - 86×109/L, band neutrophils - 1%, segmented neutrophils - 10%, lymphocytes - 85%, eosinophils - 2%, basocytes - 0%, monocytes - 2%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 15 mm/hour, Gumprecht shadows. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute leukemia
b. Lymphocytic leukemoid reaction
*c. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
d. Chronic myeloleukemia
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

16. A 23-year-old man complains of facial edemas, headache, dizziness, low urinary output, and urine discoloration (dark red). These complaints arose after a case of acute tonsillitis. On examination there are facial edemas, the skin is pale, temperature is 37.4°C; heart rate is 86/min., blood pressure is 170/110 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, the II heart sound is accentuated over the aorta. What etiological factor is the most likely in this case?
a. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
*b. Beta-hemolytic streptococcus
c. Streptococcus viridans
d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Streptococcus pyogenes

17. An 18-year-old young man complains of pain in his knee and elbow joints and body temperature up to 39.5°C. One week and a half earlier he developed sore throat. On examination his body temperature is 38.5°C. Swelling of the knee and elbow joints is observed. Pulse is 106/min., rhythmic. Blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg. Cardiac borders are unchanged, heart sounds are weakened, at the cardiac apex there is a soft systolic murmur. What factor would be the most indicative of the likely disease etiology?
a. Seromucoid
*b. Anti-streptolysin O
c. Creatine kinase
d. C-reactive protein
e. Rheumatoid factor

18. A woman has been provisionally diagnosed with pheochromocytoma. At the stage of intermission her BP is within norm; there is a tendency towards tachycardia. No urine pathologies. The decision has been made to perform a provocative test with histamine. What drug should be kept close at hand for emergency aid in case of positive test result?
*a. Phentolamine
b. Nifedipine
c. Prednisolone
d. Mesaton (Phenylephrine)
e. Pipolphen (Promethazine)

19. A 40-year-old man with Bekhterev disease (ankylosing spondylitis) complains of elevated body temperature up to 37.8°C, back pain and stiffness, especially observed during the second half of the night. This condition has been lasting for 2 years. Objectively: reduced spinal mobility, painful sacroiliac joint, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 45 mm/hour. X-ray shows narrowing of the intervertebral disc space and of the sacroiliac joint. What eye pathology is often associated with this type of disease progression?
*a. Iridocyclitis
b. Cataract
c. Blepharitis
d. Optic nerve atrophy
e. Retinal detachment

20. A 63-year-old man complains of unmotivated weakness and pressing and bursting sensation in the left subcostal area. According to him, these signs have been present for a year already. Previously he was healthy. He took part in containment measures during the accident at the Chornobyl Nuclear Power Plant. Objectively: the skin is pale, peripheral lymph nodes are not enlarged, the liver is +3 cm, the spleen is +10 cm. Complete blood count: erythrocytes - 3.1×1012/L, Hb- 100 g/L, leukocytes - 46×109/L, blasts - 2%, promyelocytes - 10%, myelocytes - 18%, band neutrophils - 27%, segmented neutrophils - 10%, lymphocytes - 12%, eosinophils - 6%, basocytes - 3%, monocytes - 2%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 20 mm/hour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemolytic anemia
b. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
c. Hepatic cirrhosis
d. Acute leukemia
*e. Chronic myeloleukemia

21. For three years a 31-year-old woman has been complaining of pain and swelling of her radiocarpal and metacarpophalangeal articulations and their reduced mobility in the morning, which persisted up to 1.5 hours. Two weeks ago she developed pain, swelling, and reddening of her knee joints, her body temperature increased up to 37.5°C. The treatment was untimely. Examination of the internal organs revealed no pathologic alterations. Diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis was made. What changes are most likely to be visible on the arthrogram?
a. Joint space narrowing, subchondral osteosclerosis
b. Numerous marginal osteophytes
c. Epiphyseal osteolysis
*d. Joint space narrowing, usuration
e. Cysts in the subchondral bone

22. A 52-year-old woman has been suffering for 2 years from dull, occasionally exacerbating pain in her right subcostal area, occurring after eating high-fat foods, bitter taste in her mouth in the morning, constipations, and flatulence. Objectively she has excess weight, her body temperature is 36.9°C; there is a coating on the root of her tongue; the abdomen is moderately distended and painful in the area of gallbladder projection. What examination would be the most helpful for diagnosismaking?
a. Duodenoscopy
b. Liver scanning
c. Duodenal intubation
d. Cholecystography
*e. Ultrasound

23. A 57-year-old woman complains of weakness, dyspnea, loss of appetite, and liquid feces. She has been suffering from this condition for 2 years. Objectively she presents with pale skin, subicteric sclerae, and bright-red fissured tongue. Lymph nodes are not enlarged. Pulse - 100/min. BP- 105/70 mm Hg. Liver +3 cm, the spleen cannot be palpated. Blood test: erythrocytes - 1.2×1012/L, Нb- 56 g/L, color index - 1.4, macrocytes, leukocytes - 2, 5×109/L, eosinophils - 1%, juvenile - 1%, metamyelocytes - 1%, band neutrophils - 8%, segmented neutrophils - 47%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 4%, reticulocytes - 0.1%, platelets - 100×109/L, ESR- 30 mm/hour, indirect bilirubin - 26 mmol/L. What changes can be expected in the bone marrow puncture material?
a. Erythroid hyperplasia
b. Increased number of sideroblasts
*c. Prevalence of megaloblasts
d. Presence of blast cells
e. Prevalence of lymphoid tissue

24. A 35-year-old man suffers from insulindependent diabetes mellitus and chronic cholecystitis. He takes NPH insulin: 20 units in the morning and 12 units in the evening. After a meal he developed pain in the right subcostal area, nausea, vomiting, sleepiness, and increased polyuria. What prehospital measures will be the most effective for prevention of crisis within the next several hours?
a. Exclude fats from the diet
b. Decrease carbohydrates in the diet
c. Take analgesics
d. Take cholagogues
*e. Change insulin regimen

25. A 45-year-old woman complains of intolerable paroxysmal facial pain on the left with attacks that last for 1-2 minutes. Attacks are provoked by chewing. The disease onset was two months ago after the overexposure to cold. Objectively: pain at the exit points of the trigeminal nerve on the left. Touching near the wing of the nose on the left induces a pain attack with tonic spasm of the facial muscles. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular joint arthritis
b. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
*c. Trigeminal neuralgia
d. Facial migraine
e. Maxillary sinusitis

26. A 28-year-old man complains of skin rash and itching on the both of his hands. The condition persists for 1.5 years. The exacerbation of his condition he ascribes to the occupational contact with formaldehyde resins. Objectively the lesion foci are symmetrically localized on both hands. Against the background of erythema with blurred margins there are papulae, vesicles, erosions, crusts, and scales. What is the most likely pathology?
a. Simple contact dermatitis
b. Erythema multiforme
c. Idiopathic eczema
d. Allergic dermatitis
*e. Occupational eczema

27. A 20-year-old student after failing an exam developed complaints of a sensation of a round foreign body in her throat, difficult swallowing. She fixates on her condition, limits her diet, often cries, seeks attention, exhibits demonstrative attitude. She is highly susceptible to psychotherapeutic suggestion. What psychiatric diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Hypochondriacal neurosis
b. Obsessive neurosis
c. Paranoid personality disorder
*d. Hysterical neurosis
e. Depressive neurosis

28. A woman with atopic bronchial asthma was found to have one allergen to dog hair +++. Carpets were removed from the apartment, the apartment was renovated, and air conditioner was installed. However, recurrent asphyxia attacks still occur every night, despite the patient undergoing pathogenetic therapy. What long-term treatment tactics can help this patient to decrease her sensitivity to the allergen?
a. Referral for speleotherapy
*b. Specific hyposensitization
c. Antihistamine therapy
d. Continuation of prior treatment
e. Buteyko breathing technique

29. A 25-year-old woman has been suffering from diabetes mellitus since she was 9. She was admitted into the nephrology unit with significant edemas of the face, arms, and legs. Blood pressure - 200/110 mm Hg, Hb- 90 g/L, blood creatinine - 850 mcmol/L, urine proteins - 1.0 g/L, leukocytes - 10-15 in the vision field. Glomerular filtration rate - 10 mL/min. What tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Transfer into the endocrinology clinic
b. Renal transplantation
c. Active conservative therapy for diabetic nephropathy
d. Dietotherapy
*e. Transfer into the hemodialysis unit

30. A 59-year-old woman was brought into the rheumatology unit. Extremely severe case of scleroderma is suspected. Objectively she presents with malnourishment, ”mask-like” face, and acro-osteolysis. Blood: erythrocytes - 2.2×109/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 40 mm/hour. Urine: elevated levels of free oxyproline. Name one of the most likely pathogenetic links in this case:
a. Formation of antibodies to transversely striated muscles
b. Formation of antibodies to vessel wall
c. Formation of antibodies to native DNA
d. Formation of antibodies to blood corpuscles
*e. Formation of antibodies to collagen

31. A 34-year-old man on the 3rd day of ceftriaxone treatment for acute otitis (daily dosage - 2 grams) developed diarrhea occurring 5-6 times per day. Feces are without mucus or blood admixtures. Temperature is 36.6°C. Gregersen reaction (occult blood in feces) is negative. Stool culture detected no pathogenic germs. What is the most likely cause of diarrhea in this case?
a. Intestinal dysbiosis
b. Ulcerative colitis
c. Crohn’s disease (regional enteritis)
*d. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea
e. Bacterial overgrowth syndrome

32. A chronic alcoholic was hospitalized into the therapeutic inpatient unit due to pneumonia. On the day 5 of his hospitalization he became disoriented in time and space, developed fear-inducing visual hallucinations and motor agitation. Full body tremor and tremor of the limbs are observed. X-ray and physical examinations detect the signs of his convalescence from pneumonia. What tactics should be chosen regarding this patient?
a. Transfer into the neuroresuscitation department
b. Continue the treatment in the therapeutic department
*c. Transfer into the inpatient narcology department
d. Compulsory medical treatment for alcoholism
e. Discharge from the hospital

33. After eating shrimps, a 25-year-old man suddenly developed skin itching, some areas of his skin became hyperemic or erupted into vesicles. Make the diagnosis:
a. Urticaria pigmentosa
b. Hemorrhagic vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein purpura)
*c. Acute urticaria
d. Psoriasis
e. Scabies

34. A 25-year-old woman complains of fatigue, dizziness, hemorrhagic rashes on the skin. She has been presenting with these signs for a month. Blood test: erythrocytes - 1.0×1012/L, Hb- 37 g/L, color index - 1.1, leukocytes - 1.2×109/L, platelets - 42×109/L. What analysis would be the most advisable for diagnosismaking in this case?
a. Liver biopsy
b. Splenic biopsy
*c. Sternal puncture (bone marrow biopsy)
d. Coagulation studies
e. US of the gastrointestinal tract

35. A 35-year-old man complains of rapidly incresing fatigue, palpitations, ”visual snow”, and dizziness. He has a history of peptic ulcer of the stomach. Objectively the skin is pale. Vesicular respiration is observed in the lungs. Systolic murmur is detected over the cardiac apex, heart rate is 100/min., BP is 100/70 mm Hg. The epigastrium is slightly tender on palpation. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3.2×1012/L, Нb- 100 g/L, color index - 0.95. What type of anemia is the most likely present in this case?
a. Hypoplastic anemia
*b. Posthemorrhagic anemia
c. Chronic iron-deficiency anemia
d. Sideroblastic anemia
e. Hemolytic anemia

36. A 62-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of pain in the thorax on the right during breathing, dyspnea, and dry cough. Ten days ago he slipped and fell hitting his right side. On examintaion: the patient lies on the left side. The right side of the thorax lags during breathing. On the right there are crepitation and pain in the III-IV ribs. Dullness of percussion sound and sharply diminished breath sounds can be observed. On X-ray: signs of exudate, fracture of the III-IV ribs. On pleurocentesis: blood is detected. Choose the further tactics:
*a. Transfer to a thoracic surgery department
b. Perform repeated pleural taps
c. Refer to a traumatologist
d. Apply a fixation bandage to the rib cage
e. Prescribe conservative therapy

37. A 51-year-old man complains of vomiting with blood. He has been drinking alcohol excessively. Health disorder has been observed since he was 40, when he first developed jaundice. On examination the skin and visible mucosa are icteric, with a stellate vascular pattern. The patient is malnourished and presents with abdominal distension, umbilical hernia, and ascites. The edge of the liver is tapered and painless, +3 cm, the spleen is +2 cm. Blood test: Hb- 80 g/L, leukocytes - 3·109/L, platelets - 85·109/L. What is the cause of portal hypertension in this patient?
*a. Hepatic cirrhosis
b. Hemochromatosis
c. Budd-Chiari syndrome
d. Constrictive pericarditis
e. Thrombosis of the splenic vein

38. A young man has made an appointment with the dermatologist. He complains of a painful facial rash in the beard and mustache area. This condition has been persisting for several weaks already. After shaving, the patient’s condition aggravates. The diagnosis of sycosis is made. What primary morphological elements can be observed in the rash in this case?
a. Pustules, bumps
b. Nodes, nodules
*c. Pustules, papulae
d. Phlyctenae, maculae
e. Maculae, nodes

39. At night a 63-year-old woman suddenly developed an asphyxia attack. She has a 15- year-long history of essential hypertension and had a myocardial infarction 2 years ago. Objectively her position in bed is orthopneic, the skin is pale, the patient is covered with cold sweat, acrocyanosis is observed. Pulse - 104/min. Blood pressure - 210/130 mm Hg, respiration rate - 38/min. Pulmonary percussion sound is clear, with slight dullness in the lower segments; throughout the lungs single dry crackles can be heard that become bubbling and non-resonant in the lower segments. What is the most likely complication in this patient?
a. Acute right ventricular failure
*b. Acute left ventricular failure
c. Bronchial asthma attack
d. Paroxysmal tachycardia
e. Pulmonary embolism

40. A 26-year-old woman is suspected to suffer from systemic lupus erythematosus due to systemic lesions of skin, vessels, joints, serous tunics, and heart that developed after photosensitization. The following is detected: LE cells, antibodies to native DNA, isolated anti-centromere antibodies, rheumatoid factor is 1:100, Wassermann reaction is positive, circulating immune complex is 120 units. What immunological indicators are considered to be specific to this disease?
a. Immunoglobulin A
b. Increased circulating immune complex
c. Rheumatoid factor
d. Anti-centromere antibodies
*e. DNA antibodies

41. A woman came to the doctor with complaints of increased body temperature up to 37.8°C and moderately sore throat for the last 3 days. Objectively: mandibular lymph nodes are enlarged up to 3 cm. Palatine tonsils are hypertrophied and covered with gray coating that spreads to the uvula and anterior pillars of the fauces. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Agranulocytosis
c. Oropharyngeal candidiasis
*d. Oropharyngeal diphtheria
e. Pseudomembranous (Vincent’s) tonsillitis

42. A 42-year-old man, a dispatcher, suffes from peptic ulcer disease of the duodenum. The disease is of moderate severity. He wants to be assigned a disability group. Make the conclusion regarding his working ability:
a. Third group of disability
*b. Capable of working, employable
c. First group of disability
d. Capable of working, non-employable
e. Second group of disability

43. A 58-year-old man complains of weakness and tumor-like formations that appeared on the anterior surface of his neck and in the inguinal region. Palpation detects soft painless mobile cervical and inguinal lymph nodes up to 2 cm in diameter. The liver protrudes by 2 cm from the edge of the costal margin, the lower splenic pole is at the umbilical level. In blood: erythrocytes - 3.5×1012/L, Hb- 88 g/L, leukocytes - 86×109/L, band neutrophils - 1%, segmented neutrophils - 10%, lymphocytes - 85%, eosinophils - 2%, basocytes - 0%, monocytes - 2%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 15 mm/hour, Gumprecht shadows. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
*b. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
c. Acute leukemia
d. Lymphocytic leukemoid reaction
e. Chronic myeloleukemia

44. A 23-year-old man complains of facial edemas, headache, dizziness, low urinary output, and urine discoloration (dark red). These complaints arose after a case of acute tonsillitis. On examination there are facial edemas, the skin is pale, temperature is 37.4°C; heart rate is 86/min., blood pressure is 170/110 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, the II heart sound is accentuated over the aorta. What etiological factor is the most likely in this case?
a. Streptococcus viridans
b. Staphylococcus aureus
*c. Beta-hemolytic streptococcus
d. Streptococcus pyogenes
e. Staphylococcus saprophyticus

45. An 18-year-old young man complains of pain in his knee and elbow joints and body temperature up to 39.5°C. One week and a half earlier he developed sore throat. On examination his body temperature is 38.5°C. Swelling of the knee and elbow joints is observed. Pulse is 106/min., rhythmic. Blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg. Cardiac borders are unchanged, heart sounds are weakened, at the cardiac apex there is a soft systolic murmur. What factor would be the most indicative of the likely disease etiology?
a. Rheumatoid factor
b. Seromucoid
c. C-reactive protein
d. Creatine kinase
*e. Anti-streptolysin O

46. A woman has been provisionally diagnosed with pheochromocytoma. At the stage of intermission her BP is within norm; there is a tendency towards tachycardia. No urine pathologies. The decision has been made to perform a provocative test with histamine. What drug should be kept close at hand for emergency aid in case of positive test result?
a. Prednisolone
*b. Phentolamine
c. Nifedipine
d. Pipolphen (Promethazine)
e. Mesaton (Phenylephrine)

47. A 40-year-old man with Bekhterev disease (ankylosing spondylitis) complains of elevated body temperature up to 37.8°C, back pain and stiffness, especially observed during the second half of the night. This condition has been lasting for 2 years. Objectively: reduced spinal mobility, painful sacroiliac joint, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 45 mm/hour. X-ray shows narrowing of the intervertebral disc space and of the sacroiliac joint. What eye pathology is often associated with this type of disease progression?
a. Cataract
b. Retinal detachment
*c. Iridocyclitis
d. Optic nerve atrophy
e. Blepharitis

48. A 63-year-old man complains of unmotivated weakness and pressing and bursting sensation in the left subcostal area. According to him, these signs have been present for a year already. Previously he was healthy. He took part in containment measures during the accident at the Chornobyl Nuclear Power Plant. Objectively: the skin is pale, peripheral lymph nodes are not enlarged, the liver is +3 cm, the spleen is +10 cm. Complete blood count: erythrocytes - 3.1×1012/L, Hb- 100 g/L, leukocytes - 46×109/L, blasts - 2%, promyelocytes - 10%, myelocytes - 18%, band neutrophils - 27%, segmented neutrophils - 10%, lymphocytes - 12%, eosinophils - 6%, basocytes - 3%, monocytes - 2%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 20 mm/hour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemolytic anemia
b. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
c. Hepatic cirrhosis
d. Acute leukemia
*e. Chronic myeloleukemia

49. For three years a 31-year-old woman has been complaining of pain and swelling of her radiocarpal and metacarpophalangeal articulations and their reduced mobility in the morning, which persisted up to 1.5 hours. Two weeks ago she developed pain, swelling, and reddening of her knee joints, her body temperature increased up to 37.5°C. The treatment was untimely. Examination of the internal organs revealed no pathologic alterations. Diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis was made. What changes are most likely to be visible on the arthrogram?
a. Cysts in the subchondral bone
b. Joint space narrowing, subchondral osteosclerosis
*c. Joint space narrowing, usuration
d. Numerous marginal osteophytes
e. Epiphyseal osteolysis

50. A 52-year-old woman has been suffering for 2 years from dull, occasionally exacerbating pain in her right subcostal area, occurring after eating high-fat foods, bitter taste in her mouth in the morning, constipations, and flatulence. Objectively she has excess weight, her body temperature is 36.9°C; there is a coating on the root of her tongue; the abdomen is moderately distended and painful in the area of gallbladder projection. What examination would be the most helpful for diagnosismaking?
a. Cholecystography
b. Duodenal intubation
*c. Ultrasound
d. Duodenoscopy
e. Liver scanning

51. A 57-year-old woman complains of weakness, dyspnea, loss of appetite, and liquid feces. She has been suffering from this condition for 2 years. Objectively she presents with pale skin, subicteric sclerae, and bright-red fissured tongue. Lymph nodes are not enlarged. Pulse - 100/min. BP- 105/70 mm Hg. Liver +3 cm, the spleen cannot be palpated. Blood test: erythrocytes - 1.2×1012/L, Нb- 56 g/L, color index - 1.4, macrocytes, leukocytes - 2, 5×109/L, eosinophils - 1%, juvenile - 1%, metamyelocytes - 1%, band neutrophils - 8%, segmented neutrophils - 47%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 4%, reticulocytes - 0.1%, platelets - 100×109/L, ESR- 30 mm/hour, indirect bilirubin - 26 mmol/L. What changes can be expected in the bone marrow puncture material?
a. Erythroid hyperplasia
b. Increased number of sideroblasts
*c. Prevalence of megaloblasts
d. Presence of blast cells
e. Prevalence of lymphoid tissue

52. A 35-year-old man suffers from insulindependent diabetes mellitus and chronic cholecystitis. He takes NPH insulin: 20 units in the morning and 12 units in the evening. After a meal he developed pain in the right subcostal area, nausea, vomiting, sleepiness, and increased polyuria. What prehospital measures will be the most effective for prevention of crisis within the next several hours?
a. Take cholagogues
b. Take analgesics
*c. Change insulin regimen
d. Exclude fats from the diet
e. Decrease carbohydrates in the diet

53. A 45-year-old woman complains of intolerable paroxysmal facial pain on the left with attacks that last for 1-2 minutes. Attacks are provoked by chewing. The disease onset was two months ago after the overexposure to cold. Objectively: pain at the exit points of the trigeminal nerve on the left. Touching near the wing of the nose on the left induces a pain attack with tonic spasm of the facial muscles. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Trigeminal neuralgia
b. Temporomandibular joint arthritis
c. Maxillary sinusitis
d. Facial migraine
e. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia

54. A 28-year-old man complains of skin rash and itching on the both of his hands. The condition persists for 1.5 years. The exacerbation of his condition he ascribes to the occupational contact with formaldehyde resins. Objectively the lesion foci are symmetrically localized on both hands. Against the background of erythema with blurred margins there are papulae, vesicles, erosions, crusts, and scales. What is the most likely pathology?
*a. Occupational eczema
b. Allergic dermatitis
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Simple contact dermatitis
e. Idiopathic eczema

55. A 20-year-old student after failing an exam developed complaints of a sensation of a round foreign body in her throat, difficult swallowing. She fixates on her condition, limits her diet, often cries, seeks attention, exhibits demonstrative attitude. She is highly susceptible to psychotherapeutic suggestion. What psychiatric diagnosis can be made in this case?
a. Depressive neurosis
b. Hypochondriacal neurosis
*c. Hysterical neurosis
d. Obsessive neurosis
e. Paranoid personality disorder

56. A woman with atopic bronchial asthma was found to have one allergen to dog hair +++. Carpets were removed from the apartment, the apartment was renovated, and air conditioner was installed. However, recurrent asphyxia attacks still occur every night, despite the patient undergoing pathogenetic therapy. What long-term treatment tactics can help this patient to decrease her sensitivity to the allergen?
a. Continuation of prior treatment
b. Buteyko breathing technique
c. Referral for speleotherapy
*d. Specific hyposensitization
e. Antihistamine therapy

57. A 20-year-old man was hospitalized on the 9th day of the disease. He attributes his disease to eating of insufficiently thermally processed pork. At its onset this condition manifested as periorbital edemas and fever. Objectively his body temperature is 38.5. The face is puffy and the eyelids are markedly swollen. Palpatio of gastrocnemius muscles is sharply painful. Blood test shows hypereosinophilia. What is the etiology of this disease?
a. Echinococci
b. Leptospira
c. Trichuris
d. Ascarididae
*e. Trichinella

58. A 40-year-old man claims that his wife is cheating on him and presents a ”proof” of her infidelity. He repeatedly initiated scandals with his wife at home and at work, demanding that she confess her infidelity, insulted her, and threatened to kill her. What preventive measures should be taken against socially dangerous actions on his part?
a. Consultation with the psychologist
b. Family counseling
c. Outpatient treatment
d. Consultation with the general practitioner
*e. Consultation with the psychiatrist

59. A 55-year-old woman complains of pain and popping sounds in her left knee joint, which occur when she climbs the stairs. Occasionally during movements her joint becomes ”stuck”. 5 years ago she suffered a trauma of her left knee. Complete blood count and biochemical blood analysis show normal results. X-ray shows marked osteosclerosis and osteophytes. The joint space is narrowed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Reactive arthritis
*b. Osteoarthritis
c. Gouty arthritis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Psoriatic arthritis

60. A 40-year-old man, a welder, uses manganese electrodes in his line of work (18 years of experience). He complains of difficulties with writing, bad mood, inertness, gait abnormalities, problems with speech, and hand tremors. Objectively the following is observed in the patient: hypomimia, increased muscle tone of plastic type, and quiet monotonous speech, tremor of the tongue, pill-rolling tremor of the fingers, and retropulsion. What syndrome developed in this patient due to manganese poisoning?
a. Hypothalamic syndrome
b. Meningism
*c. Parkinsonism
d. Polyneuritic syndrome
e. Vestibular syndrome

61. A 45-year-old man developed constricting retrosternal pain that occurs during walks at the distance of 200 m. Objectively: heart rate is 80/min., BP is 160/90 mm Hg. During cardiopulmonary exercise test at 50 W there is a depression of S-T segment by 3 mm below the isoline in V3-V4. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Exertional angina pectoris, functional class II
b. Exertional angina pectoris, functional class IV
*c. Exertional angina pectoris, functional class III
d. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction, hypertension type
e. Alcoholic myocardiodystrophy

62. A 45-year-old man, a farmer, presents with acute onset of a disease. He complains of headache, high temperature, pain in the gastrocnemius muscles, icteric face, and dark urine. Objectively: body temperature - 38°C, blood pressure - 100/70 mm Hg, conjunctival hemorrhages, hepatosplenomegaly, and oliguria. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Trichinosis
*b. Leptospirosis
c. Viral hepatitis
d. Brucellosis
e. Pseudotuberculosis

63. A woman has been working as a polisher for a year and a half. Her workstation is equipped with a grinding machine (grinding wheels). She complains of white discoloration of her fingers and toes that appears when she is nervous. Objectively there are no changes in the coloration of the distal segments of her limbs. Grip strength measured with a dynamometer is 25 kg, algesimetry findings are 0.1; 0.3; 0.5. Cold stimulus is extremely positive on the upper and lower limbs. Internal organs are without pathologies. Make the diagnosis:
a. Polyneuritis
*b. Vibration disease
c. Syringomyelia
d. Raynaud disease
e. Raynaud syndrome

64. A 37-year-old man suddenly developed acute headache accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and impaired consciousness. Objectively blood pressure is 190/120 mm Hg, the face is hyperemic. Patient’s consciousness is clouded, his answers to the questions are short, monosyllabic. Movement and sensory disturbances are absent. Meningeal signs are positive. Cerebrospinal fluid contains blood. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Encephalitis
b. Cerebral vascular embolism
c. Meningitis
d. Ischemic stroke
*e. Subarachnoid hemorrhage

65. A woman undergoing in-patient treatment for viral hepatitis type B developed headache, nausea, recurrent vomiting, memory lapses, flapping tremor of her hands, and rapid pulse. Sweet smell from her mouth is detected. Body temperature is 37.6°C, heart rate is 89/min. What complication developed in the patient?
a. Hypoglycemic shock
b. Meningoencephalitis
c. Ischemic stroke
d. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
*e. Acute liver failure

66. A 43-year-old man, a coal-face worker with 15-year-long record of work, complains of cough, thoracic pain, and dyspnea. The cough is mild, usually dry, occurs mostly in the morning. The pain is localized in the interscapular region and aggravates during a deep intake of breath. Dyspnea occurs during physical exertion. Vesicular respiration in the lungs is weakened. Heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 86/min., blood pressure is 135/80 mm Hg. The abdomen is soft and painless. X-ray shows micronodular pulmonary fibrosis. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Carboconiosis
b. Siderosis
c. Metal pneumoconiosis
d. Berylliosis
e. Byssinosis

67. Having examined a 52-year-old patient, the doctor diagnosed him with obesity (body mass index - 34 kg/m2, waist circumference - 112 cm) and arterial hypertension (170/105 mm Hg). 2-hour postprandial blood sugar is 10.8 mmol/L. What biochemical blood analysis needs to be conducted to diagnose the patient with metabolic syndrome X?
a. Electrolytes
*b. Lipid profile
c. Calcium and phosphorus
d. Bilirubin
e. Creatinine and urea

68. After overexposure to cold a 45- year-old woman developed acute pain in her suprapubic and lumbar areas during urination, sharp pains at the end of urination, false urges to urinate. Urine is turbid with blood streaks. The doctor suspects urinary tract infection. What results of laboratory analysis would be the most indicative of such infection?
a. Daily proteinuria under 3.0
b. Daily proteinuria over 3.0
c. Gross hematuria
d. Increased blood creatinine and blood urea
*e. Leukocyturia, gross hematuria

69. A 62-year-old woman was brought into the admission room with complaints of severe burning retrosternal pain and asphyxia. She has a 10-year-long history of essential hypertension. Objectively her condition is moderately severe. She presents with skin pallor, cyanotic lips, and vesicular respiration over her lungs. The II heart sound is accentuated over the aorta. Blood pressure - 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate (pulse) - 76/min. ECG shows elevation of ST segment in the leads I, AVL, and V5-V6. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive crisis complicated with instable angina pectoris
b. Uncomplicated hypertensive crisis
*c. Hypertensive crisis complicated with acute myocardial infarction
d. Hypertensive crisis complicated with acute left ventricular failure
e. Pulmonary embolism

70. A 35-year-old patient developed an epileptic attack with tonoclonic spasms that lasted for 3 minutes. After the attack the patient fell asleep but in 5 minutes the second attack occurred. The first step of emergency aid would be to:
a. Administer chloral hydrate via an enema
*b. Ensure patency of airways
c. Introduce diazepam intravenously
d. Take blood from the vein for analysis
e. Prescribe antiepileptic drugs

71. A 27-year-old woman, a teacher in the elementary school, complains of frequent stools, up to 3 times per day, with lumpy feces and large amount of mucus, abdominal pain that gradually abates after a defecation, irritability. Her skin is pale and icteric. Pulse is 74/min., rhythmic, can be characterized as satisfactory. Blood pressure is 115/70 mm Hg. The abdomen is soft, moderately tender along the colon on palpation. Fiberoptic colonoscopy detects no changes. What disease can be suspected?
a. Chronic non-ulcerative colitis
b. Crohn disease (regional enteritis)
c. Whipple disease
*d. Irritable bowel syndrome
e. Chronic enteritis

72. A 72-year-old man complains of lower extremity edema, sensation of heaviness in the right subcostal area, dyspnea at rest. For over 25 years he has been suffering from COPD. Objectively: orthopnea, jugular venous distention, diffuse cyanosis, acrocyanosis. Barrel chest is observed, on percussion there is a vesiculotympanitic (bandbox) resonance, sharply weakened vesicular respiration on both sides, moist crepitant crackles in the lower segments of the lungs. Heart sounds are weakened, the II heart sound is accentuated over the pulmonary artery. The liver is +3 cm. What complicated the clinical course of COPD in this patient?
a. Acute left ventricular failure
b. Pulmonary embolism
*c. Chronic pulmonary heart
d. Diffuse pneumosclerosis
e. Community-acquired pneumonia

73. A 72-year-old man with pneumonia complains of marked dyspnea, chest pain, severe cough with expectoration, t o is 39.5-40°C, no urination for a whole day. Objectively the patient is conscious. Respiratory rate is 36/min. Over the right lower pulmonary lobe percussion sound is dull; on auscultation there is bronchial respiration and numerous moist crackles. Blood pressure is 80/60 mm Hg. Heart rate is 120/min. Heart sounds are muffled, there is tachycardia. What tactics should the family doctor choose in the management of this patient?
*a. Hospitalization into the intensive care unit
b. Treatment in the day patient facility
c. Hospitalization into the neurology unit
d. Hospitalization into the pulmonology unit
e. Outpatient treatment

74. 2 hours after eating unknown mushrooms, a 28-year-old man sensed a decrease in his mobility and deterioration of his ability to focus. This condition was then followed by a state of agitation and agression. On examiantion he is disoriented and his speech is illegible. 4 hours later he developed fetor hepaticus and lost his consciousness. What syndrome can be observed in this patient?
a. Cholestatic syndrome
b. Cytolytic syndrome
c. Hepatolienal syndrome
d. Portal hypertension
*e. Acute hepatic failure

75. A 36-year-old man complains of marked dyspnea and cardiac pain. He ascribes his disease to the case of influenza that he had 2 weeks ago. Objectively he leans forward when sitting. The face is swollen, cyanotic, cervical veins are distended. Heart borders are extended on the both sides, heart sounds are muffled, heart rate = Ps = 118/min., BP is 90/60 mm Hg. Blood test: ESR is 46 mm/hour. ECG shows low voltage. Xray shows trapezoidal cardiac silhouette and signs of pulmonary congestion. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Antibiotics
b. Diuretics
*c. Pericardial puncture (pericardiocenthesis)
d. Pericardectomy
e. Glucocorticosteroids

76. A 39-year-old man suffers from chronic rheumatic heart disease. He complains of dyspnea during physical exertion, cough with expectoration, and palpitations. Ausculation detects intensified I heart sound and diastolic murmur; the sound of opening mitral valve can be auscultated at the cardiac apex. The II heart sound is accentuated over the pulmonary artery. The patient is cyanotic. X-ray shows dilated pulmonary root and enlargement of the right ventricle and left atrium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aortic stenosis
b. Coarctation of the aorta
c. Patent ductus arteriosus
*d. Mitral stenosis
e. Pulmonary artery stenosis

77. A 23-year-old man complains of severe pain in his left knee joint. Objectively the left knee joint is enlarged, with hyperemic skin, painful on palpation. Complete blood count: erythrocytes - 3.8×1012/L, Hb- 122 g/L, leukocytes - 7.4×109/L, platelets - 183×109/L. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 10 mm/hour. Bleeding time (Duke method) - 4 min., Lee-White coagulation time - 24 min. Partial thromboplastin time (activated) - 89 seconds. Rheumatoid factor - negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein purpura), articular form
*b. Hemophilia, hemarthrosis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Werlhof disease (immune thrombocytopenia)
e. Thrombocytopathy

78. A 24-year-old woman, a kindergarten teacher, has been sick for 2 days already. Disease onset was acute. She presents with elevated body temperature up to 38.0°C, pain attacks in her lower left abdomen, liquid stool in small amounts with blood and mucus admixtures 10 times a day. Pulse - 98/min., blood pressure - 110/70 mm Hg. Her tongue is moist and coated with white deposits. The abdomen is soft, the sigmoid colon is painful and spastic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Escherichiosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Rotavirus infection
*d. Shigellosis
e. Salmonellosis

