1. A 1,5 y.o. child fell ill acutely with high temperature 38°С, headache, fatigue. The temperature declined on the fifth day, muscular pain in the right leg occured in the morning, there were no movements and tendon reflexes, sensitivity was reserved. What is the initial diagnosis?
a. Viral encephilitis
b. Hip joint arthritis
c. Polyartropathy
*d. Polyomyelitis
e. Osteomyelitis

2. A patient complains of intense pressing pain in the pharynx, mainly to the right, impossibility to swallow even liquid food. The illness started 5 days ago. The patients condition is grave. Body temperature - 38,9°С, speech is difficult, voice is constrained, difficulties in opening the mouth. Submaxillary glands to the right are painful, enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Peritonsillar abscess
b. Diphtheria
c. Vincents disease
d. Pharyngeal tumour
e. Phlegmonous tonsillitis

3. On observation of sanitary conditions of studying at the technical university it was necessary to evaluate the visual regimen of students, who study from 9 a.m to 3 p.m. What index of natural light will be the most informative?
a. Time of the room insolation
b. Depth of study room
c. Presence of mixed (upper-lateral) light
*d. Natural light coefficient
e. Light coefficient

4. A 17 y.o. patient complains of acute pain in the knee joint and t°– 38°С. He was ill with angina 3 weeks ago. Objectively: deformation and swelling of the knee joints with skin hyperemia. Small movement causes an acute pain in the joints. Which diagnose is the most correct?
a. Reactive polyarthritis
*b. Rheumatism, polyarthritis
c. Systemic lupus eritematodes
d. Infectious-allergic polyarthritis
e. Rheumarthritis

5. A 20 y.o. pregnant woman with 36 weeks of gestation was admitted to the obstetrical hospital with complains of pain in the lower abdomen and bloody vaginal discharge. The general condition of the patient is good. Her blood pressure is 120/80 mm Hg. The heart rate of the fetus is 140 bpm, rhythmic. Vaginal examination: the cervix of the uterus is formed and closed. The discharge from vagina is bloody up to 200 ml per day. The head of the fetus is located high above the minor pelvis entry. A soft formation was defined through the anterior fornix of the vagina. What is the probable diagnosis?
a. Uterine rupture
b. Threatened premature labor
c. Premature placental separation
d. Incipient abortion
*e. Placental presentation

6. A female rheumatic patient experiences diastolic thoracic wall tremor (diastolic thrill), accentuated S1 at apex, there is diastolic murmur with presystolic intensification, opening snap, S2 accent at pulmonary artery. What rind of heart disorder is observed?
a. Mitral valve insufficiency
b. Aortic valve insufficiency
c. Opened arterial duct
*d. Mitral stenosis
e. Pulmonary artery stenosis

7. A 43 y.o. woman complains of contact hemorrhages during the last 6 months. Bimanual exam: cervix of the uterus is enlarged, restricted in mobility. Mirrors showed the following: cervix of the uterus is in the form of cauliflower. Chrobak and Schiller tests are positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Polypus of the cervis of the uterus
b. Leukoplakia
c. Nascent fibroid
*d. Cancer of cervix of the uterus
e. Cervical pregnancy

8. A 20 y.o. patient suddely felt ill 12 hours ago. There was pain in epigactric area, nausea, sporadic vomiting. He had taken alcohol before. In few hours the pain localized in the right iliac area. On examination: positive rebound tenderness symptoms. WBC- 12,2×109/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Rightside kidney colic
b. Perforated ulcer
c. Acute pancreatitis
*d. Acute appendicitis
e. Acute cholecystitis

9. A patient complains of pathological lump, appearing in the right inguinal region on exercise. The lump is round-shaped, 4 cm in diameter, on palpation: soft elastic consistency, positions near the medial part of Pouparts ligament. The lump is situated inwards from the spermatic cord. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Right-sided femoral hernia
b. Varicose veins of the right hip
*c. Right-sided direct inguinal hernia
d. Lipoma of the right inguinal area
e. Right-sided oblique inguinal hernia

10. A 35 y.o. woman was admitted to thoracic surgery department with fever up to 40°С, onset of pain in the side caused by deep breathing, cough with considerable quantity of purulent sputum and blood with bad smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Actinomycosis of lungs
b. Bronchiectatic disease
c. Complication of liver echinococcosis
d. Pulmonary tuberculosis
*e. Abscess of the lung

11. A 25 y.o. patient was admitted with chest trauma. Clinical and X-ray examination have revealed tense pneumothorax on the left. What emergency treatment should be undertaken?
a. Intravenous infusions
b. Analgetics
*c. Pleural cavity drainage
d. Intubation
e. Oxigenotherapy

12. A 12 y.o. child with acute glomerulonephritis presented with hypertensive syndrom during first days of the disease. What is the role of angiotesin II in the pathogenesis?
*a. Intensifies production and secretion of aldosterone
b. Increases heart output
c. Increases erythropoetin production
d. Infibits deppresive action of prostaglandins
e. Increases renine level

13. A 18 y.o. female student complains of dyspnea during the intensive exertion. The condition became worse half a year ago. On examination: pulse rate is 88 bpm, accelerated, AP- 180/20 mm Hg, pale skin, heart borders are dilated to the left and up. There is systolic-diastolic murmur in the 2hd intercostal space, S2 at pulmonary artery is accentuated. ECG has revealed both ventricles hypertrophy. Thoracic X-ray has revealed pulsation and protrusion of the left ventricle, lung trunk. What doctors tactics should be?
a. Dispensary observation
b. Administration of therapeutic treatment
c. Continuation of investigation
d. Exemption from physical exercises
*e. Cardiosurgeon consultation

14. Define the basic registration document at the profound study of a case rate with temporary lost labor ability at the industrial enterprise:
a. A ambulatory medical card
b. The inpatient medical record
c. The sick-leave certificate
*d. A card of the personal account of a case rate
e. "The Report on reasons of a temporary lost labor ability"

15. A patient had macrofocal myocardial infarction. He is overweight for 36%, AP is 150/90 mm Hg, blood sugar- 5,9 mmol/L, general cholesterol- 4,9 mmol/L, uric acid- 0,211 mmol/L. Which risk factor should be urgently eradicated during the secondary prevention?
a. Hyperuricemia
b. Arterial hypertension
*c. Obesity
d. Hypercholesterolemia
e. Hyperglycemia

16. A 64 y.o. patient has developed of squeering substernal pain which had appeared 2 hours ago and irradiated to the left shoulder, marked weakness. On examination: pale skin, cold sweat. Pulse- 108 bpm, AP- 70/50 mm Hg, heart sound are deaf, vesicular breathing, soft abdomen, painless, varicouse vein on the left shin, ECG: synus rhythm, heart rate is 100 bmp, ST-segment is sharply elevated in II, III aVF leads. What is the most likely disorder?
a. Pulmonary artery thromboembolia
*b. Cardiogenic shock
c. Disquamative aortic aneurizm
d. Cardiac asthma
e. Cardiac tamponade

17. A 19 y.o. man was admitted to the reception department in 20 minutes after being wounded with the knife to the left chest. The patient is confused. The heart rate is 96 bpm and BP- 80/60 mm Hg. There are the dilated neck veins, sharply diminished apical beat and evident heart enlargement What kind of penetrative chest wound complications has developed in in patient?
a. Valve-likes pneumothorax
b. Massive hemothorax
c. Closed pneumothorax
*d. Pericardium tamponade
e. Open pneumothorax

18. A 30 y.o. patient had deep burn covering 30% of body 30 days ago. Now he presents with continued fever, loss of appetite, night sweats. Burned surface weakly granulates. What is the stage of burn disease?
a. Convalescence
*b. Septicotoxemia
c. Acute burn toxemia
d. Primary burn shock
e. Secondary burn shock

19. The district pediatrician is charged with the analysis of infant mortality. What is taken for the unit of observation in infant mortality investigation?
a. A baby dead at birth
*b. A baby dead at the age up to 12 months
c. A baby dead at the age up to 6 days
d. A baby dead at the age up to 1 months
e. A baby dead at the age over 28 days

20. A 67 y.o. patient complains of palpitation, dizziness, noise in ears, feeling of shortage of air. Objectively: pale, damp skin. Vesicular respiration, respiratory rate- 22 per min, pulse- 200 bpm, AP- 100/70 mm Hg. On ECG: heart rate- 200 bmp, ventricular complexes are widened, deformed, location of segments ST and of wave T is discordant. The wave Р is not changed, superimposes QRST, natural conformity between Р and QRS is not present. What kind of arrhythmia is present?
a. Sinus tachycardia
b. Atrial flutter
*c. Paroxismal ventricular tachycardia
d. Ventricular extrasystole
e. Atrial tachycardia

21. The complications of acute cholecystitis which require surgical intervention are as follows EXCEPT:
a. Cholangitis conditioned by the presence of stones in the bile tract
b. Gall-bladder perforation
c. Emphysematous gall-bladder
*d. Jaundice
e. Empyema of the gall-bladder

22. A boy, aged 9, is examined: height- 127 cm (-0,36), weight - 28,2 kg (+0,96), chest circumference- 64,9 cm (+0,66), lung vital capacity - 1520 ml (-0,16). What is the integrated assessment of the childs physical development?
*a. Harmonious
b. Excessive
c. Below the average
d. Markedly disharmonious
e. Disharmonious

23. An infant aged 1 year on the third day of common cold at night developed inspiratory stridor, hoarse voice and barking cough. Physical examination revealed suprasternal and intercostal chest retractions. There is a bluish skin discoloration moistly seen over the upper lip. The respiratory rate is 52 per min and pulse- 122 bpm. The body temperature is 37,5°С. What disease does the infant have?
a. Acute laryngitis
*b. Acute infectious croup due to viral laryngotracheitis
c. Bronchopneumonia without complications
d. Acute epiglottitis
e. Acute bronchiolitis with respiratory distress

24. A child was born at 34 weeks of gestation in bad condition. The cardinal symptoms show respiratoty disorders: sound prolonged expiration, additional muscles taking part in breathing, crepitation rales on the background of the rough breath sounds. Assesment according to Silvermans scale was 0, in 3 hours- 6 with presence of clinical data. What diagnostic method can determine pneumopathys type in the child?
*a. Chest X-ray
b. Immunologic investigation
c. Blood gases
d. Blood test
e. Proteinogram

25. A 6 y.o child complains of thirst, polyuria, increased appetite for 2 months with weight loss for 3 kg. There has been nocturnal enuresis during last week. On examination: hyperglycemia 14 mol/L. The diagnosis is diabetis mellitus I type. What is the genesis of this disease?
*a. Autoimmune
b. Neurogenic
c. Bacterial
d. Virus-bacterial
e. Viral

26. A 60 y.o. patient experiences acute air insufficiency following of the venoectomy due to subcutaneous vein thrombophlebitis 3 days ago. Skin became cianotic, with grey shade. Marked psychomotor excitement, tachypnea, substernal pain. What postoperative complication has occured?
a. Valvular pneumothorax
b. Hypostatic pneumonia
*c. Thromboembolia of pulmonary artery
d. Hemorrhagia
e. Myocardial infarction

27. A 40 y.o. patient of rheumatic heart disease complains of anorexia, weakness and loss of weigth, breathless and swelling of feet. On examination: t°- 39°С, pulse is 100/min. As ucultation: diastolic murmur in the mitral area. Petechical lesion a round clavicle; spleen was palpable, tooth extraction one month ago
a. Mitral stenosis
b. Aortic stenosis
c. Recurrence of rheumatic fever
d. Thrombocytopenia purpure
*e. Subacute bacteria endocarditis

28. Body temperature of a 12 y.o. girl increased up to 39-40°С in 4-5 hours after she had taken 2 pills of aspirin. Complains of general discomfort, dizziness, sudden appearance of red spots on the skin with blister formation or exfoliation of the epidermis with erosive surface. Lesions on the skin looked like burns of II degree. Nikolsky syndrome is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bullous dermatitis
*b. Acute epidermical necrolysis
c. Duhrings disease
d. Pemphigus vulgaris
e. Polymorphic exudative erythema

29. A 2 m.o. child was delivered at term with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of child
*a. Corresponding to the age
b. Hypotrophy of II grade
c. 150 g less than necessary
d. Paratrophy of I grade
e. Hypotrophy of I grade

30. A 52 y.o. man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detects murmur. What diagnostic method is necessary to apply first?
*a. Ultrasound dopplerography
b. CTof the brain
c. MRI of the brain
d. Cerebral angiography
e. Electroencephalography

31. Ats planned to construct multifield a new hospital in one of the cental city districts. What building type is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Blocked
b. Decentralized
*c. Centralized and blocked
d. Mixed
e. Centralized

32. Deputy of chief medical officer carried out a study of morbidity rate for population which had been served at the polyclinics for the last 5 years. What statistical values can help in calculations of diseases level dissamination?
*a. Relative values
b. Standart values
c. Absolute values
d. Average values
e. Dynamic row

33. There is a dynamic growth of number of congenital abnormalities such as central paralysis, newborns blindness, idiocy among the population that lives near to pesticides production enterprise. Compounds of which pollutant can cause the development of this pathology?
a. Cadmium
b. Iron
*c. Mercury
d. Chrome
e. Strontium

34. A worker, aged 38, working in the slate production during 15 years, complains of expiratory exertional dyspnea, dry cough. On examination: deafening of the percutory sounds in interscapular region, rough breath sounds, dry disseminated rales. On fingers skin - greyish warts. Factorys sectorial doctor suspects asbestosis. Which method is the most informative for diagnosis verification?
a. Blood gases examination
b. Spirography
*c. Thorax roentgenography
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Bronchoalveolar lavage

35. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with vomiting and acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease should be suspected?
a. Perforated gastric ulcer
b. Renal colic
c. Acute enterocolitis
d. Acute appendicitis
*e. Acute pancreatitis

36. The child is 11 m.o. He suffers from nervous-arthritic diathesis. The increased synthesis of what acid is pathogenic at nervous-arthritic diathesis?
a. Hydrochloric acid
*b. Uric acid
c. Phosphoric acid
d. Sulfuric acid
e. Acetic acid

37. A 35 y.o. patient complains of a difficult swallowing, pain behind the breastbone. He can eat only liquid food. While swallowing sometimes he has attacks of cough and dyspnea. Above mentioned complaints are progressing. It is known that the patient has had a chemical burn of esophagus one month ago. What complication does the patient have?
*a. Corrosive esophagitis and stricture
b. Esophageal diverticula
c. Cardiac achalasia
d. Esophagitis
e. Cardiac insufficiency

38. A 43 y.o. patient complains of mass and, pain in the right breast, elevation of temperature to 37,2°С during 3 last months. Condition worsens before the menstruation. On examination: edema of the right breast, hyperemia, retracted nipple. Unclear painful infiltration is palpated in the lower quadrants. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right side acute mastitis
b. Premenstrual syndrome
*c. Cancer of right mammary gland
d. Right side chronic mastitis
e. Tuberculosis of right mammary gland

39. A patient, aged 16, complains of headache, mainly in the frontal and temporal areas, superciliary arch, appearing of vomiting at the peak of headache, pain during the eyeballs movement, joints pain. On examination: excited, t°- 39°С, Ps- 110/min. Tonic and clonus cramps. Uncertain meningeal signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Parainfluenza
*b. Influenza with cerebral edema manifestations
c. Respiratory syncytial virus
d. Adenovirus infection
e. Influenza, typical disease duration

40. A full-term new-born suffered ante- and intranatal hypoxia, was born in asphyxia (Apgar score 2-5 points). After birth babys excitation is progressing, occurs vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, squint, spontaneous Babinski and Moros reflexes. What is the most probable location of the intracranial haemorrhage in this case?
*a. Subarachnoid hemorrhages
b. Periventricular hemorrhages
c. Subdural hemorrhages
d. Haemorrhages in ventricles of brain
e. Small hemorrhages in brain tissue

41. A 26 y.o. woman complains of a mild bloody discharge from the vagina and pain in the lower abdomen. She has had the last menstruation 3,5 months ago. The pulse is 80 bpm. The blood pressure (BP) is 110/60 mm Hg and body temperature is 36,6°С. The abdomen is tender in the lower parts. The uterus is enlarged up to 12 weeks of gestation. What is your diagnosis?
*a. Inevitable abortion
b. Complete abortion
c. Incipient abortion
d. Disfunctional bleeding
e. Incomplete abortion

42. A 52 y.o. male patient suffers from squeezing pain attacks in substernal area which irradiates to the left hand and occurs occasionally and on physical exertion. He has had it for 1 year. On examination: heart boarders are dilated to the left side, sounds are muffled, pulse- 76 bmp, rhythmic, AP- 155/80 mm Hg, ECG: the left type, the rest of signs are normal. What additional examination is necessary to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Echocardiography
*b. Bicycle ergometry
c. Blood lipoproteins
d. Transaminases of blood
e. General blood count

43. The 67 y.o. patient had 5 recurrent fractures of the lower extremities without considerable cause within 5 years. O-shaped deformity of the legs in the knee joints has appeared. The skull, pelvis and lower extremities X-Ray shows the thickening of flat bones. In the long bones there is a hyperostosis along the bone axis.The blood test has not revealed any inflammation activity. Serum calcium is normal. What disease do you consider in this case?
a. Hyperparathyoid dystrophy
b. Myeloma
*c. Pagets disease
d. Mottled disease (marble disease)
e. Chronic osteomyelitis

44. A man, aged 68, complains of tiredness, sweating, enlargement of cervical, submaxillary and axillary lymph nodes. Blood tests: WBC- 35×109/L, lymphocytes - 60%, Botkin and Gumprecht bodies, level of haemoglobin and quantity of thrombocytes is normal. Myelogram showed 40% of lymphocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic myeloleucosis
b. Tuberculous lymphadenitis
*c. Chronic lympholeucosis
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Acute leucosis

45. Male 30 y.o., noted growing fingers and facial scull, changed face. Complains of poor eyesight, weakness, skin darkening, loss of body weight. X-ray shows broadening of sella turcica, thinning of tuberculin sphenoidale, signs of increased intracranial pressure. What diagnosis can you make?
a. Optico - hiasmatic arachnoiditis
*b. Adenoma of hypophysis
c. Adrenal gland tumor
d. Tumor of pondo-cerebellar corner
e. Encephalitis of truncus

46. A male patient presents with swollen ankles, face, eyelids, elevated AP- 160/100 mm Hg, pulse- 54 bpm, daily loss of albumine with urine- 4g. What therapy is pathogenetic in this case?
a. Diuretics
*b. Corticosteroids
c. Calcium antagonists
d. NSAID
e. Antibiotics

47. A 40 h.o. child age has hyperosthesia, CNS depression, dyspepsia. Sepsis is suspected. What should the differential diagnosis be made with?
a. Hyperbilirubinemia
b. Hyperkaliemia
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Hypomagnesemia
*e. Hypoglycemia

48. A 13 y.o. patient was treated in dermatological hospital for atopic dermatitis exacerbation. He was discharged in the condition of clinical remission. What recommendations should the doctor give to prevent exacerbations?
*a. Use of neutral creams to protect skin
b. Frequent skin washing with detergents
c. Avoidance of skin insolation
d. Systematic use of local corticosteroids
e. Systematic skin disinfection

49. 7 y.o. boy with chronic sinusitis and rercurent pulmonary infections has chest X-ray demonstrating a right-sided cardiac silhouette. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cystic fibrosis (mucoviscidosis)
b. Laryngotracheomalacia
*c. Kartagener syndrome
d. ?-antitrypsin deficiency
e. Bronchiolitis obliterans

50. A 27 y.o. gravida with 17 weeks of gestation was admitted to the hospital. There was a history of 2 spontaneous miscarriages. On bimanual examination: uterus is enlarged to 17 weeks of gestation, uterus cervix is shortened, isthmus allows to pass the finger tip. The diagnosis is isthmico-cervical insufficiency. What is the doctors tactics?
a. To administer tocolytic therapy
b. To perform amniocentesis
c. To interrupt pregnancy
*d. To place suture on the uterus cervix
e. To administer hormonal treatment

51. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
a. Common cold prophilaxis
b. Hardening of the child
c. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention
*d. Strict following of feeding regimen
e. Feces observation

52. A newborn aged 3 days with hyperbilirubinemia (428 mkmol/L) developed following disorders. From beginning there were severe jaundice with poor suckling, hypotomia and hypodynamia. Little bit later periodical excitation, neonatal convulsions and neonatal primitive reflexes loss are noted. Now physical examination reveals convergent squint, rotatory nystagmus and setting sun eye sign. How to explain this condition?
a. Hydrocephalus
*b. Encephalopathy due to hyperbilirubinemia
c. Brain tumour
d. Skull injury
e. Spastic cerebral palsy

53. A 43 y.o. woman complains of shooting heart pain, dyspnea, irregularities in the heart activity, progressive fatigue during 3 weeks. She had acute respiratory disease a month ago. On examination: AP- 120/80 mm Hg, heart rate 98 bpm, heart boarders +1,5 cm left side, sounds are muffled, soft systolic murmur at apex and Botkins area; sporadic extrasystoles. Liver is not palpated, there are no edema. Blood test: WBC- 6,7*10*9/L, sedimentation rate- 21 mm/hour. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute myocarditis
b. Rheumatism, mitral insufficiency
c. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
d. Ichemic heart disease, angina pectoris
e. Climacteric myocardiodystrophia

54. At term of a gestation of 40 weeks height of standing of a uterine fundus is less then assumed for the given term. The woman has given birth to the child in weight of 2500 g, a length of a body 53 cm, with an assessment on a scale of Apgar of 4-6 points. Labor were fast. The cause of such state of the child were:
a. Delay of an intra-uterine fetation
b. Prematurity
c. Placental detachment
*d. Chronic fetoplacental insufficiency
e. Infection of a fetus

55. 3 weeks ago the patient was ill with tonsillitis. Clinical examination reveals edema, arterial hypertension, hematuria, proteinuria (1,8 g/per day), granular and erythrocital casts. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Renal amyloidosis
*b. Glomerulonephritis
c. Pyelonephritis
d. Intestinal nephritis
e. Cystitis

56. A patient complains of a tormental (agonizing) cough with expectoration of up to 600 ml/daily purulent chocolatecolor sputum with a decay smell. Onset of illness was abrupt, t°- 39°С, fever of irregular type. There is the area of darkening with a cavity in a center on X-ray film, with irregular contours and level of liquid. What disease is the question?
*a. Gangrene of lung
b. Lobar pneumonia
c. Bronchiectatic illness
d. Tuberculosis
e. Pneumonia complicated by an abscess

57. A patient with unstable angina pectoris was given the following complex treatment: anticoagulants, nitrates, ?-adrenoblockers. However on the third day of treatment the pain still romains. Which in vestigation shoud be carried out to establish diagnosis?
a. Stress-echocardiogram
b. Myocardial scintigraphy
c. Test with dosed physical exercises
d. Esophageal electrocardiac stimulator
*e. Coronarography

58. A 30 y.o. primipara has intensive labor pushings with an interval of 1-2 min and of 50 sec duration. There is a appearing of the fetus head. Perineum is of 4 cm height, has turned pale. What should be done in this case?
a. Observation
*b. Episiotomy
c. Perineotomy
d. Perineum protection
e. Vacuum extraction of the fetus

59. 18 y.o. woman complains of pain in the lower abdomen. Some minutes before she has suddenly appeared unconscious at home. The patient had no menses within last 3 months. On examination: pale skin, the pulse- 110 bpm, BP- 80/60 mm Hg. The Schyotkins sign is positive. Hb- 76 g/L. The vaginal examination: the uterus is a little bit enlarged, its displacement is painful. There is also any lateral swelling of indistinct size. The posterior fornix of the vagina is tendern and overhangs inside. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Ovarian apoplexy
b. Twist of cystoma of right uterine adnexa
c. Acute salpingoophoritis
d. Acute appendicitis
*e. Impaired extrauterine pregnancy

60. A local doctor has to prepare a report about the health condition of the population of his region. What medical indexes of population health condition should he use?
a. Average longevity
b. Social welfare, satisfaction of life quality
c. Average treatment duration, complications
*d. Morbidity, disabilities, demographic, physical development
e. Way of life, genetic, pollution

61. In the gynecologic office a 28 y.o. woman complains of sterility within three years. The menstrual function is not impaired. There were one artificial abortion and chronic salpingo-oophoritis in her case history. Oral contraceptives were not used. Her husbands analysis of semen is without pathology. From what diagnostic method will you start the workup in this case of sterility?
a. Hormone investigation
b. Ultra sound investigation
c. Hysteroscopia
d. Diagnostic scraping out of the uterine cavity
*e. Hysterosalpingography

62. A patient was admitted to the hospital on the 7th day of the disease with complaints of high temperature, headache, pain in the muscles, especially in calf muscles. Dermal integuments and scleras are icteric. There is hemorrhagic rash on the skin. Urine is bloody. The patient was fishing two weeks ago. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Leptospirosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Salmonellosis
d. Trichinellosis
e. Brucellosis

63. A 60 y.o. man complains of significant pain in the right eye, photophobia, lacrimation, reduced vision of this eye, headache of the right part of the head. Pain occured 2 days ago. On examination: Vis OD- 0,03, congested injection of the eye ball, significant cornea edema, front chamber is deep, pupil is narrow, athrophic iris, there is optic nerve excavation on the eye fundus, intraocular pressure- 38 mm Hg. Vis OS- 0,8 unadjustable. The eye is calm, healthy. Intraoccular pressure- 22 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Eye nerves neuritis
b. Maculodystrophy
c. Right eyes uveitis
*d. Acute glaucoma attack
e. Right eyes keratitis

64. A woman complains of high temperature to 38°С, mild pain in the throat during 3 days. On examination: angle lymphatic nodes of the jaw are 3 cm enlarged, palatinel tonsils are enlarged and coated with grey plaque which spreads to the uvula and frontal palatinel arches. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Larynx dyphtheria
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Oropharyngeal candidosis
d. Agranulocytosis
e. Vincents angina

65. A 41 y.o. woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis during 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: marked inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous. In blood: WBC- 9,8×109/L, RBC- 3,0×1012/L, sedimentation rate- 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
a. Kreon
b. Motilium
c. Linex
d. Vikasolum
*e. Sulfasalasine

66. A 2,5 m.o. child presents with muscle hypotonia, sweating, alopecia of the back of the head. The child is prescribed massage, curative gymnastics and vitamind. What is the dosage and frequency of vitamin D administration?
a. 1000 IU daily
b. 1000 IU every other day
c. 500 IU daily
d. 500 IU every other day
*e. 3000 IU daily

67. A 2,9-kg term male infant is born to a mother who developed polyhydramnios at 34 weeks gestation. At birth, the Apgar scores were 9 and 9. The infant develops choking and cyanosis with the first feed. In addition, is unable to place a nasogastric tube. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Laryngomalacia
b. Tracheal atresia
c. Choanal atresia
d. Respiratory distress syndrome
*e. Esophageal atresia

68. A 49 y.o. female patient presents with acute attacks of headache associated with pulsation in temples, increasing AP to 280/140 mmHg. Pheochromocytoma is suspected. What is the mechanism of hypertensive crisis in this patient?
a. Increasing of thyroxine excretion
b. Increasing of plasma renin activity
c. Increasing of aldosterone level in blood
d. Increasing of vasopressin excretion
*e. Increasing of catecholamines concentration

69. A 24 y.o. male patient was transferred to the chest surgery department from general surgical department with acute post-traumatic empyema of pleura. On the X-ray: wide level horizontal of fluid on the right. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. Pneumoectomy
b. Decortication of pleura
*c. Punction and drainage of pleural cavity
d. Thoracoplasty
e. Lobectomy

70. A 27 y.o. man complains of pain in epigastrium which is relieved by food intake. EGDFS shows antral erosive gastritis, biopsy of antral mucous presents Hеlicobacter Pylori. What can be diagnosed in this case?
a. Gastritis of A type
b. Rigid antral gastritis
c. Menetriers disease
*d. Gastritis of type B
e. Reflux - gastritis

71. Chief district pediatrician has to carry out analysis of infant mortality rate. What should he take as a unit of the observation?
a. Child death case at the age up to the first month
b. Child death case during first 7 days of life
c. Child death case on labor
d. Child death case after 28 days of life
*e. Child death case at the age up to 1 year

72. A 75 y.o patient can not tell the month, date and season of the year. After long deliberations she manages to tellher name. She is in irritable and dissatisfied mood. She always carries a bundle with belongings with her, hides a parcel with bread, shoes in her underwear in her bosom as well as "invaluable books". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Behaviour disorder
*b. Senile dementia
c. Dissociated personality (psychopathy)
d. Atherosclerotic (lacunar) dementia
e. Presenile melancholia

73. A 19 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He sufferes from hemophilia B-type. What antihemophilic medicine should be inclended in pre-and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Dried plasma
b. Cryoprecipitate
c. Fresh frosen blood
*d. Fresh frosen plasma
e. Native plasma

74. A 35 y.o. woman is suspected of aplastic anemia. The bone marrow punction has been administered with the diagnostic purpose. What changes in the marrow punctatum are suggested?
a. Absolute lymphocytosis
b. Prevalence of megaloblasts
c. Presence of blast cells
d. Replacement of marrow elements with fibrous tissue
*e. Replacement of marrow elements with adipose tissue

75. A 55 y.o. male patient complains of weakness during 2 months, pain in the right side of the thorax, cough, blood-streaked sputum. On X-ray: intensive triangle shadow in the area of lower lobe that is connected to mediastinum. What is the most likely disorder in the lungs?
a. Bronchiectasia
b. Tuberculosis of lungs
*c. Central cancer of lungs
d. Pulmonary infarction
e. Pleuropneumonia

76. A 37 y.o. woman is suffering from squeezing substernal pain on physical exertion. On examination: AP- 130/80 mm Hg, heart rate=pulse rate 72 bpm, heart boarders are dilated to the left side, aortic systolic murmur. ECG- signs of the left venticle hypertrophy. What method of examination is the most informative in this case?
a. Coronarography
b. X-ray
*c. Echocardiography
d. Sphygmography
e. Phonocardiography

77. During intramuscular DTP vaccination in clinic, a 3 m.o. child developed signs of laryngospasm, paleness of skin, cyanosis of lips, "cock cry", stop of respiration, tension of the whole body with overturned backward head. Allergological history of the child is not complicated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cerebral haemorrhage, tonic spasms
b. Anaphylactic shock, clonic spasms
*c. Spasmophilia, tonic spasms
d. Meningism, clonic and tonic spasms
e. Meningoencephalitic reaction, clonic and tonic spasms

78. A 30 y.o. female with rheumatoid arthritis of five years duration complains of pain in the frist three fingers of her right hand over past 6 weeks. The pain seems especially severe at night often awakening her from sleep.The most likelly cause is?
*a. Carpal tunnel syndrome
b. Sensory peripheral neuropathy
c. Rheumatoid vasculitis
d. Atlanto-axial sublaxation of cervical spine
e. Rheumatoid arthritis without complication

79. A 28 y.o. primagravida, pregnancy is 15-16 weaks of gestation, presents to the maternity clinics with dull pain in the lower part of the abdomen and in lumbar area. On vaginal examination: uterus cervix is 2,5 cm, external isthmus allows to pass the finger tip. Uterus body is enlarged according to the pregnancy term. Genital discharges are mucous, mild. What is the diagnosis?
a. Placenta presentation
b. Stopped pregnancy
*c. Threatened spontaneous abortion
d. Hydatid molar pregnancy
e. Spontaneous abortion which has begun

80. A patient with nosocomial pneumonia has signs of collapse. Which of the following pneumonia complication is the most likely to be accompanied with collapse?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Toxic hepatitis
c. Emphysema
d. Bronchial obstruction
*e. Septic shock

81. A woman in labor, on vaginal inspection: cervix dilation is up to 2 cm, fetal bladder is intact. Sacral cavity is free, sacral promontory is reachable only with a bent finger, the inner surface of the sacrococcygeal joint is accessible for inspection. The head of the fetus presents. Sagittal suture occupies the transverse diameter of pelvic inlet, the small fontanel to the left, on the side. What labor stage is this?
a. Preliminary stage
b. Placental stage
c. Expulsion of fetus stage
*d. Cervix dilation stage
e. Prodromal stage

82. A 2 m.o. breast-fed child suffers from cheek skin hyperemia, sporadic papulous elements on the skin of the chest and back following the apple juice introduction. The child is restless. What is the initial pediatritians tactics?
a. Apply ointment with corticosteroids to affected skin areas
*b. Clarify mothers diet and exlude obligate allergens
c. Administer general ultraviolet irradiation
d. Refer to prescribe dermathologist
e. Treat with claritine

83. A worker was temporarily off work because of illness during 16 days, was under out-patient treatment. The doctor in charge issued a sick-list first for 5 days, then prolonged it for 10 days. Who can further prolong the sick-list to this patient?
*a. The doctor in charge of the case together with the head of department
b. Deputy head physician on the working ability expertise
c. The head of department
d. The doctor in charge of the case with the permission of the head of department
e. Working ability expertise committee

84. A 36 y.o. patient is diagnosed with right sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
*a. Surgical drainage of the pleural cavity
b. Symptomatic therapy
c. Antiinflammation therapy
d. Pleural puncture
e. Thoracotomy

85. A 98 y.o. male patient complains of pain in the left lower limb which intensifies on walking, feeling of cold and numbness in both feet. He has been ill for 6 years. On examination: pale dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Hairy covering is poorly developed on the left shin. "Furrow symptom " is positive on the left. Pulse on foot arteries and popliteal artery isnt palpated, on the femoral artery its weak. On the right limb the artery pulsation is reserved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Obliterating endarteritis
b. Hemoral arthery thombosis
*c. Arteriosclerosis obliterans
d. Buergers disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
e. Raynaulds disease

86. A child, aged 4, has being ill for 5 days, suffers from cough, skin rash, t°- 38,2°С, facial hydropy, photosensitivity, conjunctivitis. On the face, neck, upper part of the chest there is bright maculopapular rash with areas of merging. Hyperemic throat. Seropurulent nasal discharge. In lungs there are dry crackles. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Enterovirus exanthema
b. Adenovirus infection
c. Rubella
d. Scarlet fever
*e. Measles

87. A gravida with 7 weeks of gestation is referred for the artificial abortion. On operation while dilating cervical canal with Hegar dilator №8 a doctor suspected uterus perforation. What is immediate doctors tactics to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Bimanual examination
b. Metrosalpingography
c. Laparoscopy
d. Ultrasound examination
*e. Probing of uterus cavity

88. A 65 y.o. woman complains of complicated mouth opening following foot trauma 10 days ago. Next day she ate with difficulties, there were muscles tension of back, the back of the head and abdomen. On the third day there was tension of all muscle groups, generalized convulsions every 10-15 min. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic stroke
b. Meningoencephalitis
c. Epilepsy
*d. Tetanus
e. Tetania

89. A 2 y.o. girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low–grade fever, severe catarrhal symptoms, non-abundant maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital glands. What is your diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Pseudotuberculosis
*c. Rubella
d. Adenoviral infection
e. Scarlet fever

90. Ambulance was called to a 48 y.o. man. From the words of relatives he has had three episodes of lost consciousness and attacks during the day. On examination: the following fit is observed: patient is unconscious, fell on the floor, tonic and then clonic convuesions of trunk and extremities happened. The attack lasted for 4 minute, ended by involuntary urination. What type of attack was observed?
a. Vegetatic crisis
*b. Major epileptic seizure
c. Fainting
d. Absence
e. Episode of hysteria

91. A woman, primagravida, consults a gynecologist on 05.03.2002. A week ago she felt the fetus movements for the first time. Last menstruation was on 10.01.2002. When should she be given maternity leave?
a. 25 July
*b. 8 August
c. 11 July
d. 22 August
e. 5 September

92. A 30 y.o. woman has second labor which lasts for 14 hours. The fetus heartbeat is mufflet, arrhythmic, 100 bpm. On vaginal examination: complete cervix dilatation, fetus head is in the area of small pelvis outlet. Sagital suture is in the direct size. The small fontanelle is at the symphis. What is the further tactics of the labor?
a. Application of obstetrical cavity forceps
b. Ceasarian section
*c. Application of obstetrical forceps
d. Application of craniodermal forceps by Ivanovs
e. Stimulation of the labor activity with oxitocyne

93. A 31 y.o. woman has suffered from systemic sclerodermia for 14 years. She was treated in hospitals many times. She complains of periodical dull pain in the cardiac area, palpitation, dyspnea, headache, eyelids swelling, weight loss, pain and limbs deformities. Which organs disorder worsens the prognosis?
a. Heart
b. Lungs
*c. Kidneys
d. Gastro-intestinal tract
e. Skin and joints

94. A child was delivered severely premature. After the birth the child has RI symptoms, anasarca, fine bubbling moist rales over the lower lobe of the right lung. Multiple skin extravasations, bloody foam from the mouth have occured after the 2 day. On chest X-ray: atelectasis of the lower lobe of the right lung. In blood: Hb-100 g/L, Ht- 0,45. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Disseminated intravascular clotting syndrome
b. Pulmonary edema
*c. Edematous-hemorrhagic syndrome
d. Hyaline membrane disease
e. Congenital pneumonia

95. A 20 y.o. patient with bronchial asthma experiences dyspnea attacks 3-4 times a week. Nocturnal attacks are 1 time a week. FEV1- 50% of necessary figures, during the day its variations is 25%. What is the severity of bronchial asthma condition?
a. Intermittent flow
b. Asthmatic status
c. Serious condition
d. Mild condition
*e. Moderate severity condition

96. A 18 y.o. male patient complains of pain in knee and ankle joints, temperature elevation to 39,5°С. He had a respiratory disease 1,5 week ago. On examination: temperature- 38,5°С, swollen knee and ankle joints, pulse- 106 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 90/60 mm Hg, heart borders without changes, sounds are weakened, soft systolic apical murmur. What indicator is connected with possible etiology of the process?
*a. Antistreptolysine-0
b. Creatinkinase
c. Seromucoid
d. Rheumatic factor
e. 1-antitrypsine

97. The 28 y.o. woman applied to doctor because of limited loss of the hair. In the anamnesis - she had frequent headache indisposition, arthromyalgia, fever, irregular casual sexual life, drug user. RW is negative. What examination must be done first?
a. Examination for gonorrhea
b. Examination for fungi
c. Examination for trichomoniasis
d. Examination for neuropathology
*e. Examination for HIV

98. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
a. Allergic reaction
*b. Citrate intoxication
c. Citrate shock
d. Pyrogenous reaction
e. Anaphylactic shock

99. A 43 y.o. patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago due to chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has suffered from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. During last 2 weeks jaundice hasnt gone. Stenoutic papillitis 0,5 cm in length has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
a. -
b. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
*c. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
d. To perform external choledoch drain
e. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs

100. A 35 y.o. female patient was admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of ulcerative gastric hemorrhage. Its been the third hemorrhage for the last 2 years. After conservative treatment vomiting with blood stopped, hemoglobin elevated from 60 till 108 g/L. General condition became better. But profuse vomiting with blood reoccured in 2-3- hours. Hemoglobin decreased to 93,1 g/L then to 58,1 g/L. What is the tactics of treatment?
a. Taylors treatment
b. Deferred surgery
*c. Urgent surgery
d. Conservative treatment
e. Conservative treatment with following surgery

101. A 43 y.o. male complains of stomach pain, which relieves with defecation, and is accompanied by abdominal winds, rumbling, the feeling of incomplete evacuation or urgent need for bowel movement, constipation or diarrhea in alternation. These symptoms have lasted for over 3 months. No changes in laboratory tests. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic enterocolitis, exacerbation phase
b. Atonic colitis
c. Colitis with hypertonic type dyskinesia
*d. Irritable bowel syndrome
e. Spastic colitis

102. In an inhabited locality there is an increase of diphtheria during the last 3 years with separate outbursts in families. What measure can effectively influence the epidemic process of diphtheria and reduce the morbidity rate to single cases?
a. Hospitalization of patients
b. Disinfection in disease focus
c. Early diagnostics
*d. Immunization of the population
e. Detection of carriers

103. A 62 y.o. patient with DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. Patient has to undergo an operation for inguinal hernia. What the tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be used?
a. Continue with the current therapy
b. Give Glurenorm in place of Maninilum
c. Prescribe guanyl guanidines
*d. Prescribe fast-acting insulin
e. Prescribe long-acting insulin

104. A patient, aged 25, complains of pain in the I finger on the right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain gets worse. Acute pain appears on touching with the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Articular (joint) panaritium
b. Bone panaritium
*c. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)
d. Paronychia
e. Subcutaneous panaritium

105. Choose a method of a graphic representation of monthly information about number of the registered cases of acute intestinal infection and their comparisons to the average monthly values, obtained for 5 previous years:
a. The sector diagram
*b. The linear diagram
c. The curvilinear disgram
d. The radial diagram
e. The figured diagram

106. A 27 y.o. woman suffers from pyelonephritits of the only kidney. She presents to the maternity welfare centre because of suppresion of menses for 2,5 months. On examination pregnancy 11 weeks of gestation was revealed. In urine: albumine 3,3 g/L, leucocytes cover the field of vision. What is doctors tactics in this case?
*a. Immediate pregancy interruption
b. Maintenance of pregnancy till delivery term
c. Pregnancy interruption after urine normalization
d. Pregnancy interruption at 24-25 weeks
e. Maintenance of pregnancy till 36 weeks

107. A 24 y.o. emotionally-labile woman presents with irritation, depressed mood, palpitation, shooting pain in the heart area, generalized fatigue following the divorce. On examination: palm hyperhydrosis, pulse rate- 72-78 bpm, labile, heart without changes. ECG is normal. What is the most probable pathology in this case?
a. Ipochondric neurosis
b. Compulsive neurosis
c. Depressive neurosis
d. Schizophrenia
*e. Neurasthenia

108. A 30 y.o. male patient complains of itching of the skin which intensifies in the evening. He has been ill for 1,5 months. On examination: there is rash with paired papules covered with bloody crusts on the abdomen, hips, buttocks, folds between the fingers, flexor surfaces of the hand. There are traces of line scratches. What additional investigations are necessary to make diagnosis?
a. Examination for helmints
b. Serologic blood examination
*c. Examination of rash elements scrape
d. Determination of dermographism
e. Blood glucose

109. A patient aged 18 with a cranial injury was in comatose state during several hours. In post-comatose period gets tired quickly, non-productive in dialog - in the beginning answers 2-3 questions, then gets tired and can not understand the point of the question. Which psychotropic should be given to the patient to prevent psychoorganic syndrome?
a. Neuroleptics
b. Tranquillisers
c. Antidepressants
d. Stimulators
*e. Nootropics

110. A 5 y.o. child with stigmas of dysembryogenesis (small chin, thick lips, opened mouth, hyperthelorismus) has systolic murmur in the second intercostal to the right of the sternum. The murmur passes to the neck and along the sternum left edge. The pulse on the left brachial artery is weakened. BP on the right arm is 110/60 mm Hg, on the left - 100/60 mm Hg. ECG results: hypertrophy of the right ventricle. What defect is the most probable?
a. Defect of interatrial septum
b. Defect of interventricular septum
c. Coarctation of the aorta
*d. Aortic stenosis
e. Open aortic duct

111. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
*a. Increase of bleeding speed
b. Presence of hypervolemia
c. Depositing of blood in venous channel
d. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
e. Shunting

112. A 9 y.o. girl has an average height and harmonic growth development. She was ill with acute respiratory infection for five times. Define the group of her health
a. 1st group
b. 3rd group
*c. 2nd group
d. 5th group
e. 4th group

113. A 51 y.o. woman complains of dull pain in the right subcostal area and epigastric area, nausea, appetite decline during 6 months. There is a history of gastric peptic ulcer. On examination: weight loss, pulse is 70 bpm, AP is 120/70 mm Hg. Diffuse tenderness and resistance of muscles on palpation.There is a hard lymphatic node 1x1cm in size over the left clavicle. What method of investigation will be the most useful?
*a. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsy
b. Ultrasound examination of abdomen
c. Ureatic test
d. Stomach X-ray
e. pH-metry

114. A district pediarician has carried out infant mortality rate analysis in his area. What data has been used?
*a. Mortality of children under 1 y.o. structured by age, sex, causes
b. Mortality of district newborn
c. Hospital mortality of children, structured by age
d. Mortality of children under 1 y.o., natimortality
e. Mortality of district adolescents

115. In a forest summer camp children have variable procedures to harden their organisms. What procedure has the most hardening power?
a. Walking on the fresh air
b. Bath with hydromassage
c. Morning exercises on the fresh air
d. Hygienic shower
*e. Contrast shower

116. A 29 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute girdle pain in epigastric area, vomiting in 1 hour after the meal. On examination: pale, acrocyanosis. Breathing is frequent, shallow. Abdominal muscles are tensed, positive Schotkin-Blumbergs symptom. What is the maximal term to make a diagnosis?
a. In 1 hour
*b. In 2 hours
c. In 3 hours
d. In 0,5 hours
e. In 6 hours

117. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the reception room of the Central District Hospital. He complains of a severely painful swelling localized on posterior neck, fever up to 38,4°С and general weakness. In anamnesis: diabetes mellitus within 5 years. On physical examination on the posterior neck surface there is an infiltrate elevated above surrounding skin. The tissues affected by swelling are tense and blue reddish discoloration in central area. There are also several purulent necrotic pustules which are connected with each other and form a large skin necrosis. A thinned necrotic skin of this swelling has holes looking like sieve, pus discharges through out. What disease should a doctor consider first of all?
a. Furuncle
b. Acute skin cellulitis
*c. Carbuncle
d. Carbuncle associated with anthrax
e. Skin abscess

118. A 32 y.o. patient complains of severe weakness, tremor of extremities. On physical examination, there is loss of body weight, wet and warm skin. The thyroid gland is enlarged up to the 3rd degree, painless, elastic. Ps- 108 bpm. BP- 160/55 mm Hg. The rest is in norm. What can be diagnosed?
a. Chronic fibrous thyroiditis
b. Diffuse euthyroid goitre of the 3rd degree
c. Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, hypertrophic type
*d. Diffuse toxic goitre of the 3rd degree, thyrotoxicosis of the average degree
e. Toxiferous adenoma of the thyroid gland

119. A 45 y.o. woman complains of contact bleedings during 5 months. On speculum examination: hyperemia of uterus cervix, looks like cauliflower, bleeds on probing. On bimanual examination: cervix is of densed consistensy, uterus body isnt enlarged, mobile, nonpalpable adnexa, parametrium is free, deep fornixes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Polypose of cervix of uterus
b. Fibromatous node which is being born
c. Cervical pregnancy
*d. Cancer of cervix of uterus
e. Cancer of body of uterus

120. In a 65 y.o. female patient a tumor 13х8 сm in size in the umbilical area and above is palpated, mild tenderness on palpation, unmovable, pulsates. On ausculation: systolic murmur. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Arterio-venous aneurism
b. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
c. Mitral insufficiency
d. Stomach tumor
*e. Abdominal aortic aneurism

121. An employee of a private company was ill with acute respiratory viral infection. Consulted a district doctor, who determined the fact of temporary loss of working ability, but refused to issue a sick-list, arguing that the patient worked in the private and not state-owned company. Should the sick-list be issued to the employees of private companies?
a. Issued only on condition of payment guarantee by the companys proprietor
*b. Issued regardless of companys ownership
c. Issued a medical certificate of a free form
d. Issued only to empties of state-owned companies
e. Issued a medical certificate of a set form

122. A 58 y.o. male patient is examined by a physician and suffers from general weakness, fatigue, mild pain in the left subcostal area, sometimes frequent painful urination. Moderate splenomegaly has been revealed. Blood test: neutrophilic leukocytosis with the progress to myelocyte; basophil- 2%; eosinophil- 5%. There is a urate crystales in urine, erythrocyte- 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Chronic myeloleucosis
b. Urolithiasis
c. Hepar cirrhosis
d. Leukemoid reaction
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

123. A 38 y.o. patient complains of pain in lumbar part of spinal column with irradiation to the back surface of the left leg following the lifting of a heavy object. Pain is increasing on change of the body position and in vertical position. positive stretching symptoms were revealed on examination. What is an initial diagnosis?
a. Polyneuritis
b. Spinal cord tumor
c. Myelopathy
*d. Intervertebral ligaments disorder
e. Arachnomielitis

124. What developes most often after accidental intake of Hydrochloric acid?
a. Acute pancreatitis
*b. Cardiac insufficiency
c. Kutlings syndrome
d. Cushings syndrome
e. Deyladss syndrome

125. A patient, aged 58, was fishing in the winter. On return home after some time felt some pain in the feet. Consulted a doctor. On examination: feet skin was pale, then after rewarming became red, warm to the touch. Edema is not significant, limited to the toes. All types of sensitivity are preserved. No blisters. What degree of frostbite is observed?
a. III degree
*b. I degree
c. II degree
d. V degree
e. IV degree

126. On the 5-th day of the respiratory disease a 24 y.o. man has developed progressive headaches systemic dizziness, feeling of seeing double, paresis of mimic muscles on the right, choking while swallowing. Acute viral encephalitis has been diagnosed. What is the main direction of urgent therapy?
*a. Zovirax
b. Lasix
c. Ceftriaxon
d. Glucocorticoids
e. Hemodesis

127. A patient, aged 40, has been ill during approximately 8 years, complains of pain in the lumbar part of the spine on physical excertion, in cervical and thoracal part (especially when coughing), pain in the hip and knee joints on the right. On examination: the body is fixed in the forward inclination with head down, gluteal muscles atrophy. Spine roentgenography: ribs osteoporosis, longitudinal ligament ossification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Psoriatic spondyloarthropatia
b. Tuberculous spondylitis
c. Spread osteochondrosis of the vertebral column
*d. Ancylosing spondyloarthritis
e. Spondyloarthropatia on the background of Reiters disease

128. A 54 y.o. male patient suffers from dyspnea during mild physical exertion, cough with sputum which is excreted with diffculty. On examination: diffuse cyanosis. Is Barrel-chest. Weakened vesicular breathing with prolonged expiration and dry whistling rales. AP is 140/80 mm Hg, pulse is 92 bpm, rhythmic. Spirography: vital capacity (VC)/predicted vital capacity- 65%, FEV1/FVC– 50%. Determine the type of respiratory insufficiency (RI)
a. RI of obstructive type
*b. RI of mixed type with prevailing obstruction
c. RI of mixed type with prevailing resriction
d. There is no RI
e. RI of restrictive type

129. A primapara with pelvis size 25-28-31-20 cm has active labor activity. Waters poured out, clear. Fetus weight is 4500 g, the head is engaged to the small pelvis inlet. Vastens sign as positive. Cervix of uterus is fully dilated. Amniotic sac is absent. The fetus heartbeat is clear, rhythmic, 136 bpm. What is the labor tactics?
a. Conservative tactics of labor
b. Stimulation of the labor activity
*c. Caesarean section
d. Vacuum extraction of the fetus
e. Obstetrical forseps

130. An unconscious patient presents with moist skin, shallow breathing. There are signs of previous injection on the shoulders and hips. BP- 110/70 mm Hg. Tonus of skeletal muscles and reflexes are increased. Cramps of muscles of the extremities are seen. What is the most likely disorder?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Hyperlactacidotic coma
*c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Hyperosmolar coma
e. Stroke

131. A 14 y.o. child suffers from of vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has developed sympathoadrenal crisis. What medicine should be used for crisis reduction?
a. Euphyline
b. Amisyl
c. No-shpa
d. Corglicone
*e. Obsidan

132. A victim of a road accident, aged 44, is operated on account of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. In which case can the patients blood from the abdominal cavity be used for autotransfusion?
a. Bladder rupture
b. Small intestines rupture
c. Splenic rupture
d. Liver rupture
*e. Stomach rupture

133. A 28 y.o. homeless male was admitted to the hospital because of initial diagnosis "influenza". Roseolo-petechiae rash has appeared on the trunk and internal surfaces of the limbs on the fifth day. Temperature is 41°С, euphoria, face and scleras hyperemia, tongue tremor, tachycardia, splenomegaly, excitement. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Leptospirosis
*c. Typhus
d. Alcogolic delirium
e. Abdominal typhoid

134. A patient, aged 81, complains of constant urinary excretion in drops, feeling of fullness in the lower abdomen. On examination: above pubis there is a spherical protrusion, over which there is a dullness of percussion sound, positive suprapubic punch. What symptom is observed in this patient?
a. Enuresis
b. Pollakiuria
c. Dysuria
*d. Paradoxal ischuria
e. Urinary incontinence

135. The 56 y.o. patient has worked at the aluminium plant more than 20 years. Within 3 last years he has developed loosening of teeth, bone and joint pains, piercing pains in heart area, vomiting. The preliminary diagnosis is:
*a. Fluorine intoxication
b. Phosphorus intoxication
c. Mercury intoxication
d. Lead intoxication
e. Manganese intoxication

136. There were registered 500 cases of urolithiasis per 10000 inhabitants. What kind of statictical indices is presented?
a. Incidence rate
b. Index of compliance
c. Index of visualization
*d. Prevalence rate
e. Correlation coefficient

137. A 52 y.o. woman complains of weakness, painful itching after washing and bathing, sensation of heaviness in the head. On examination: hyperaemia of skin of face, neck, extremities. АP- 180/100 mm Hg. Spleen is 4 cm below the rib arch edge. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Essential hypertension
b. Systemic sclerodermia
c. Dermatomyositis
*d. Erythremia
e. Allergic dermatitis

138. A mother of a newborn child suffers from chronic pyelonephritis. She had acute respiratory viral disease before the labor. Labor in time, with prolonged period without waters. A child had erythematous eruption on the 2 day, then there were seropurulent vesicles about 1cm. Nikolskys symptom is positive. Erosions have occured after vesicle rupture. The child is flabby. The temperature is subfebrile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pseudofurunculosis
b. Vesiculopustulosis
*c. Newborn pemphigus
d. Ritters dermatitis
e. Sepsis

139. A 25 y.o. woman complains of profuse foamy vaginal discharges, foul, burning and itching in genitalia region. She has been ill for a week. Extramarital sexual life. On examination: hyperemia of vaginal mucous, bleeding on touching, foamy leucorrhea in the urethral area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Gonorrhea
*b. Trichomonas colpitic
c. Bacterial vaginosis
d. Vagina candidomicosis
e. Chlamydiosis

140. A 24 y.o. woman presents with prolonged fever, nocturnal sweating. Shes lost weight for 7 kg during the last 3 months. She had irregular intercourses. On examination: enlargement of all lymphaden groups, hepatolienal syndrom. In blood: WBC- 2,2×109/L. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. HIV-infection
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Tuberculosis
d. Chroniosepsis
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

141. A 52 y.o. male patient has become ill gradually. There is pain in the left side of the thorax during 2 weeks, elevation of temperature till 38-39 degree С. On examination: left chest side falls behind in breathing movement no voice tremor over the left lung. Dullness that is more intensive in lower parts of this lung. Right heart border is deviated outside. Sharply weakened breathing over the left lung, no rales. Heart sounds are mufflet, tachycardia. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Atelectasis of lung
*b. Exudative pleuritis
c. Cirrhotic tuberculosis
d. Infarction-pneumonia
e. Spotaneous pneumothorax

142. A 28 y.o. male patient was admitted to the hospital because of high temperature 39°С, headache, generalized fatigue, constipation, sleep disorder for 9 days. There are sporadic roseolas on the abdomen, pulse- 78 bpm, liver is enlarged for 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brucellosis
*b. Abdominal typhoid
c. Typhus
d. Leptospirosis
e. Sepsis

143. In treatment and prevention establishments, regardless of their organisational and proprietary form, the rights of the patients should be observed. Which of these rights is the most significant?
a. The right to the protection from incompetence
b. The right to the information
c. The right to the free choice
*d. The right to the protection of the patients interests
e. The right to be heard

144. A 40 y.o. patient was admitted to the gasteroenterology with skin itching, jaundice, discomfort in the right subcostal area, generalized weakness. On examination: skin is jaundice, traces of scratches, liver is +5 cm, splin is 6x8 cm. In blood: alkaline phosphatase - 2,0 mmol/(hourL), general bilirubin - 60 mkmol/L, cholesterol - 8,0 mmol/L. What is the leading syndrome in the patient?
*a. Сholestatic
b. Liver-cells insufficiency
c. Mesenchymal inflammatory
d. Сytolytic
e. Asthenic

145. A youth, aged 15, from childhood suffers from atopic dermatitis and allergy to the shellfish. In the last 3 months after acquiring aquarium fish, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, itching in the nose developed. What level of immunologic index should be defined in this case?
a. IgA
b. Circulating immunocomplexes
c. IgJ
*d. IgE
e. IgM

146. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m hight on the ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain here. There is microhematuria in the urea. On urography kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Kidneys abruption
b. Paranephral hematoma
*c. Kidneys contusion
d. Multile kidneys ruptures
e. Subcapsular kidneys rupture

147. A 43 y.o. woman complains of severe pain in the right abdominal side irradiating in the right supraclavicular area, fever, dryness and bitterness in the mouth. There were multiple vomitings without relief. Patient relates the onset of pain to the taking of fat and fried food. Physical examination: the patient lies on the right side, pale, dry tongue, tachycardia. Right side of abdomen is painful during palpation and somewhat tense in right hypochondrium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Right-sided renal colic
*c. Perforative ulcer
d. Acute bowel obstruction
e. Acute appendicitis

148. A 20 daily y.o. female patient is suffering from chronic bronchitis. Recently there has been production about 0,5 L of purulent sputum with maximum discharge in the morning. Fingers are like "drum sticks", there are "watching glass" nails. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic bronchitis
b. Tuberculosis
c. Gangrene of lungs
*d. Bronchiectasia
e. Pneumonia

149. A 19 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with closed abdominal trauma. On operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can determine patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. A surgeon
b. A traumotologist
c. A laboratory physician
*d. A doctor of any speciality
e. An anaesthesilogist

150. The physician must undertake measures for primary prophylaxis of iron deficiency anemia. Which of the following categories of patient are subject to such primary prophylactic measures?
a. Workers of industrial enterprises
b. Patients after 60
c. All children
*d. Pregnant women
e. Patients after operation

151. Patient with thyrotoxicosis is in the 2-beds hospital ward of therapeutic department. The area of the ward is 18 m2, height 3 m, ventilation rate 2,5/hr. Air temperature - 20°С, relative humidity 45%, air movement velocity 0,3 m/s, light coefficient ⅕, noise level 30 dB. Make hygienic evaluation of the conditions
a. All conditions are OK
b. High level of noise
*c. Discomfortable microclimate
d. Poor lighting
e. Non-effective ventilation

152. A girl, aged 13, consults the school doctor on account of moderate bloody discharge from the genital tracts, which appeared 2 days ago. Secondary sexual characters are developed. What is the most probable cause of bloody discharge?
*a. Menarche
b. Werlhofs disease
c. Haemophilia
d. Endometrium cancer
e. Juvenile haemorrhage

153. A 3 y.o. child with weight defficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. There was a history of some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different moist rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 mol/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchiectasis
*b. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
c. Pulmonary hypoplasia
d. Recurrent bronchitis
e. Bronchial asthma

154. A 26 y.o. male patient with postoperative hypothyroidism take thyroxine 100 mg 2 times a day. He has developed tachycardia, sweating, irritability, sleep disorder. Determine further treatment tactics
a. To increase thyroxine dosage
b. To administer sedatives
c. To administer betablockers
d. To add mercasolil to the treatment
*e. To decrease thyroxine dosage

155. The woman who has delivered twins has early postnatal hypotonic uterine bleeding reached 1,5% of her bodyweight. The bleeding is going on. Conservative methods to arrest the bleeding have been found ineffective. The conditions of patient are pale skin, acrocyanosis, oliguria. The woman is confused. The pulse is 130 bpm, BP– 75/50 mm Hg. What is the further treatment?
a. Putting clamps on the uterine cervix
*b. Uterine extirpation
c. Inner glomal artery ligation
d. Supravaginal uterine amputation
e. Uterine vessels ligation

156. A male patient complains of heartburn which gest stronger while bending the body, substernal pain during swallowing. There is a hiatus hernia on X-ray. What disoeder should be expected at gastroscopy?
*a. Gastroesophageal reflux
b. Chronic gastritis
c. Acute erosive gastritis
d. Duodenal peptic ulcer
e. Gastric peptic ulcer

157. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with stopped recurrent peptic ulcer bleeding. On examination he is exhausted, pale. Нb– 77 g/L, Нt– 0,25. Due to anemia there were two attempts of blood transfution of identical blood group А(ІІ)Rh+. Both attempts were stopped because of anaphylactic reaction. What blood transfution environment is desirable in this case?
a. Erythrocyte mass (native)
*b. Washed erythrocytes
c. Erythrocyte mass poor for leucocytes and thrombocytes
d. Erythrocyte emulsion
e. Freshcitrated blood

158. On medical observation a doctor identified girl (162 cm tall and 59 kg weight) who complained loss of ability to see surrounding objects clearly in the evening. On examination: dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Her daily ration includes the following vitamines: vitamine А– 0,5 mg, vit.В1– 2,0 mg, vit.В2– 2,5 mg, vit.В6– 2 mg, vit.С– 70 mg. What is the hypovitaminosis type?
*a. A-hypovitaminosis
b. B6-hypovitaminosis
c. B1-hypovitaminosis
d. C-hypovitaminosis
e. B2-hypovitaminosis

159. A 2 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with weight loss, unstable discharges, anorexia, following the semolinas introduction (since 5 months). The child is adymanic, flabby, pale dry skin, subcutaneous layer is emaciated. Distended and tensed abdomen, tympanitis on percussion of the upper part of the abdomen, splashing sounds, feces are foamy, of light color, foul. On coprocytogram: a lot of neutral fat. What is the cause of the disease?
a. Intestinal dysbacteriosis
b. Chronic enteritis
c. Disaccharidase insufficiency
d. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
*e. Celiakia (celiac disease)

160. A 40 y.o. man complains of headache in occipital area. On physical examination: the skin is pale; face and hand edema, BP- 170/130 mm Hg. On EchoCG: concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle. Ultrasound examination of the kidneys reveals thinned cortical layer. Urine analysis shows proteinuria of 3,5 g/day. What is the probable diagnosis?
a. Cushings disease
b. Chronic pyelonephritis
c. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*d. Essential arterial hypertension
e. Polycystic disease of the kidneys

161. A 7 y.o. child had elevation of temperature tol 40°С in anamnesis. For the last 3 months he presents fusiform swelling of fingers, ankle joints and knee joint, pain in the upper part of the sternum and cervical part of the spinal column. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Toxic synovitis
*b. Juvenile rheumatic arthritis
c. Osteoarthrits
d. Septic arthritis
e. Rheumatism

162. A 14 y.o. girl complains of profuse bloody genital discharges during 10 days after suppresion of menses for 1,5 months. Similiar bleedings recur since 12 years on the background of disordered menstrual cycle. On rectal examination: no pathology on the internal genitalia. In blood: Нb– 70 g/L, RBC- 2,3×1012/L, Ht– 20. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Juvenale bleeding, posthemorrhagic anemia
b. Hormonoproductive ovary tumor
c. Werlholfs disease
d. Polycyst ovarian syndrome
e. Noncomplete spontaneous abortion

163. 33 y.o. woman works as the secretary. Her diet contains 150 g of protein (including 100 g of animal protein), 200 g of fat, 600 g of carbohydrates. What pathology can develop from this diet?
a. Uterine fibromyoma
b. Schizophrenia
c. Common cold
d. Paradontosis
*e. Obesity

164. A 56 y.o. man, who has taken alcoholic drinks regularly for 20 years, complains of intensive girdle pain in the abdomen. Profuse nonformed stool 2-3- times a day has appeared for the last 2 years, loss of weight for 8 kg for 2 years. On examination: abdomen is soft, painless. Blood amylase - 12g/L. Feces examination-neutral fat 15 g per day, starch grains. What is the most reasonable treatment at this stage?
a. Contrykal
b. Levomicytine
c. Aminocapron acid
*d. Pancreatine
e. Imodium

165. A 31y.o. patient has had mental disorder for a long time. He suffers from insomnia for a long time. He has developed fears, suicidal thoughts, tried to hang himself. His mood is depressed, he refuses from treatment. What measures are the most expedient for the prevention of suicide?
*a. Admission to the mental hospital
b. Psychotherapeutic conversation
c. Admission to the nu erological department
d. Strict home supervision
e. Out-patient treatment

166. The girl of 11 y.o. She is ill for 1 month. She has "butterfly"-type rash on face (spots and papules), pain and swelling of small joints on arms and legs, signs of stomatitis (small-sized ulcers in mouth). CBC: Нb– 80 g/L, RBC– 2,9×1012/L, WBC– 15×109/L, ESR- 40 mm/hour. Urinalysis: protein– 0,33 g/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dermatomyositis
b. Periarteriitis nodosa
*c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Acute rheumatic fever
e. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, systemic type

167. A 14 y.o. patient suddenly fell ill when high fever, acute pain in the right shin. In two weeks X-ray showed translucent spaces (destructive focuses) with unevel countours in the middle third of tibia diaphysis. Along the bone edge there was a narrow line of shadow (periostitis) 1-2 mm from the surface. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bone cyst of tibia
b. Right shin syphilis
c. Right shin trauma
*d. Right shin osteomielitis
e. Right shin tuberculosis

168. The patient has developed pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is marked, the tongue is coated by white coating. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodules are determined in the axillary area. The skin is erythematous and glistering over the lymphatic nodules. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Anthrax
*b. Bubonic plague
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Tularemia
e. Acute purulent lymphadenitis

169. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for potable water in the field conditions
a. River water
b. Water from melted snow
c. Rain water
d. Spring water
*e. Artesian well water

170. A 33 y.o. male patient was admitted to a hospital. A patient is pale, at an attempt to stand up he complains of strong dizziness. There was vomiting like coffee-grounds approximately hour ago. BP- 90/60 mm Hg., pulse- 120 b/min. In anamnesis, a patient has suffered from ulcer of the stomach, painless form during 4 years. An ulcer was exposed at gastrofiberoscopy. Your diagnosis:
a. Acute myocardial infarction, abdominal form
b. Erosive gastritis
*c. Ulcer of stomach, complicated with bleeding
d. Ulcer of duodenum, complicated with bleeding
e. Acute pleurisy

171. A sample of milk was taken for testing from a 5 ton milk batch. Lab analysis showed the following: fat content 2%, specific density- 1,04 g/cm3, acidity 21°С, reductase probe – weak positive. What way the product is to be used in? What would you advise?
a. Utilize technically
b. Sell without limitations
c. Annihilate the product
*d. Sell but inform customers about milk quality
e. Write the product off for animal feeding

172. A 18 y.o. woman complains of weakness, dizziness, loss of appetite, menorrhagia. There are petechiae on the skin of the upper extremities. Blood test: Hb– 105 g/L; RBC- 3,2×1012/L; coloured index– 0,95; thromb.– 20×109/L. The sedimantation time according to Lee White is 5; hemorrhagia duration according to Duke is 8, "pinch and tourniquet" test is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Iron deficiency anemia
c. Hemorrhagic diathesis
d. Marchiafava-Michelis disease
e. Hemophilia

173. A 36 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with sharp pain in substernal area following occasional swallowing of a fish bone. On esophagoscopy the foreign body wasnt revealed. The pain increased and localized between scapulas. In a day temperature elevated, condition became worse, dysphagia intensified. What complication has developed?
a. Esophageal hemorrhage
b. Obstruction of esophagus
c. Pulmonary atelectasis
d. Aspirative pneumonia
*e. Perforation of esophagus with mediastinitis

174. A 55 y.o. patient complains of distended abdomen and rumbling, increased winds evacuation, liguid foamy feces with sour smell following the diary products consumption. What is the correct name of this syndrome?
a. Malabsorption syndrome
*b. Syndrome of fermentative dyspepsia
c. Syndrome of decayed dyspepsia
d. Dyskinesia syndrome
e. Syndrome of fatty dyspepsia

175. At year-end hospital administration has obtained the following data: annual number of treated patients and average annual number of patient-used beds. What index of hospital work can be calculated based upon this data?
a. Average annual bed occupacy
*b. Bed turnover
c. Average bed idle time
d. Average duration of patients presence in the hospital
e. Bed resources of the hospital

176. A patient, aged 25, suffering from stomach ulcer. Had a course of treatment in the gastroenterological unit. 2 weeks later developed constant pain, increasing and resistant to medication. The abdomen is painful in epigastric area, moderate defence in pyloroduodenal area. Which complication development aggravated the patients state?
a. Stenosis
b. Penetration
*c. Malignisation
d. Haemorrhage
e. Perforation

177. After delivery and revision of placenta there was found the defect of placental lobe. General condition of woman is normal, uterine is firm, there is moderate bloody discharge. Inspection of birth canal with mirrors shows absence of lacerations. What is the following necessary action?
*a. Manual exploration of the uterine cavity
b. Use of hemostatic medications
c. Use of uterine contracting agents
d. External massage of uterus
e. Urine drainage, cold at lower abdomen

178. A 74 y.o. female patient complains of pain, distended abdomen, nausea. She suffers from heart ichemia, post-infarction and diffusive cardiosclerosis. On examination: grave condition, distended abdomen, abdominal wall fails to take active part in breathing. On laparoscopy: some cloudy effusion, one of the bowel loops is dark-blue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Mesenterial vessels thrombosis
b. Ichemic abdominal syndrome
c. Acute intestinal obstruction
d. Volvulus
e. Erysipelas

179. A 27 y.o. woman turns to the maternity welfare centre because of infertility. She has had sexual life in marriage for 4 years, doesnt use contraceptives. She didnt get pregnant. On examination: genital development is without pathology, uterus tubes are passable, basal (rectal) temperature is one-phase during last 3 menstrual cycles. What is the infertility cause?
a. Immunologic infertility
b. Genital endometriosis
c. Abnormalities in genital development
d. Chronic adnexitis
*e. Anovular menstrual cycle

180. A 38 y.o. woman complains of a purulent discharge from the left nostril. The body temperature is 37,5°С. The patient is ill during a week and associates her illness with common cold. Pain on palpation of her left cheek reveals tenderness. The mucous membrane in the left nasal cavity is red and turgescent. The purulent exudates is seen in the middle meatus in maxillary. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent frontitis
*b. Acute purulent maxillary sinusitis
c. -
d. Acute purulent ethmoiditis
e. Acute purulent sphenoiditis

181. A woman, aged 40, primigravida, with infertility in the medical history, on the 42-43 week of pregnancy. Labour activity is weak. Longitudinal presentation of the fetus, I position, anterior position. The head of the fetus is engaged to pelvic inlet. Fetus heart rate is 140 bmp, rhythmic, muffled. Cervix dilation is 4 cm. On amnioscopy: greenish colour of amniotic fluid and fetal membranes. Cranial bones are dense, cranial sutures and small fontanel are diminished. What should be tactics of delivery?
a. Medication sleep, amniotomy, labour stimulation
*b. Caesarean section
c. Fetal hypoxia treatment, conservative delivery
d. Fetal hypoxia treatment, in the ІІ period - forceps delivery
e. Amniotomy, labour stimulation, fetal hypoxia treatment

182. Full term newborn has developed jaundice at 10 hours of age. Hemolytic disease of newborn due to Rh-incompatibility was diagnosed. 2 hours later the infant has indirect serum bilirubin level increasing up to 14 mmol/L. What is most appropriate for treatment of hyperbilirubinemia in this infant?
*a. Exchange blood transfusion
b. Intestinal sorbents
c. Infusion therapy
d. Phenobarbital
e. Phototherapy

183. What methods of the collecting of the information is preferable for study of housing conditions of students of medical HIGH SCHOOL for a training period?
a. Statistical
b. Interviewing
*c. Questioning
d. Selecting of materials
e. A method of the directed selection

184. A female, aged 20, after smoking notices a peculiar inebriation with the feeling of burst of energy, elation, irreality and changing of surroundings: the world gets full of bright colours, the objects change their dimensions, peoples faces get cartoon features, loss of time and space judgement. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Barbiturism
*b. Cocainism
c. Nicotinism
d. Cannabism
e. Morphinism

185. A 42 y.o. man died in a road accident after the haemorrhage on the site, due to acute hemorrhagic anaemia. What minimum percentage volume of the total blood loss would result in death at acute haemorrhage?
*a. 25-30%
b. 15-20%
c. 6-9%
d. 35-50%
e. 10-14%

186. Examination of placenta, which has just been born, reveals defect 2x3 cm in size. There is no bleeding. What tactics is the most reasonable?
a. Instrumental uterus cavity revision
b. External uterus massage
c. Administration of uterotonic medicines
d. Parturient supervision
*e. Manual uretus cavity revision

187. A 18 y.o. woman consulted a gynecologist with complaints of the pain in the lower part of the abdomen, fever up to 37,5°С, considerable mucopurulent discharges from the genital tract, colic during urinating. After mirror and vagina examination the results are the following: the urethra is infiltrated, cervix of the uterus is hyperemic, erosive. The uterus is painful, ovaries are painful, thickened, free. Bacterioscopy test showed diplococcus. What diagnosis is the most probable?
*a. Recent acute ascending gonorrhea
b. Chlamydiosis
c. Trichomoniasis
d. Candydomycosis
e. Chronic gonorrhea

188. A man, aged 30, complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39°С. Sudden onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic without definite borders and without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Gout
b. Osteoarthritis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Infectional arthritis
e. Erysipelatous inflammation

189. A 70 y.o. male patient with mild headaches complains of speech disorder, weakness in right limbs. There was a history of miocardial infarction and arrhythmia. On nu eroligical examination there are elements of motor aphasia, central paresis of VII and XII cranial nerves pairs on the right side, cental type of hemiparesis and hemihyperesthisia on the same side. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic stroke
b. Epidural hematoma
c. Transitory ischemic attack
*d. Ischemic stroke
e. Cerebral tumor

190. A child from the first non-complicated pregnancy but complicated labor had cephalhematoma. On the second day there developed jaundice. On the 3th day appeared changes of neurologic status: nystagmus, Graefes sign. Urea is yellow, feces- golden-yellow. Mothers blood group is А(II)Rh-, child- А(II)Rh+. On the third day childs Hb is 200 g/L, RBC- 6,1*10^12/L, bilirubin in blood - 58 mk mol/L due to unconjugated bilirubin, Ht- 0,57. What is the childs jaundice explanation?
a. Bile ducts atresia
*b. Brain delivery trauma
c. Physiologic jaundice
d. Hemolytic disease of newborn
e. Fetal hepatitis

191. A 38 y.o. patient was urgently admitted to the hospital with complaints of sudden weakness, dizziness, loss of consciousness, body weight loss, nausea, vomiting, severe pain in epigastric area, diarrhea, skin hyperpigmentation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pellagra
b. Acute gastroenteritis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Scleroderma
*e. Addisonic crisis

192. A 35 y.o. male patient suffers from chronic glomerulohephritis and has been on hemodialysis for the last 3 years. He has developed irregularities in the heart activity, hypotension, progressive weakness, dyspnea. On ECG: bradycardia, 1st degree atrioventicular block, high sharpened T-waves. Before he had severely disturbed the drinking and diet regimen. What is the most likely cause of these changes?
a. Hyperhydratation
*b. Hyperkaliemia
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Hypernatremia
e. Hypokaliemia

193. A 41 y.o. man complains of acute pain in the right side of the thorax and sudden increase of dyspnea following the lifting of heavy object. The patients condition is serious: lips and mucous are cyanotic, breathing rate is 28 per min, pulse- 122 bpm., AP- 80/40 mm Hg. There is tympanitis on percussion and weakened breathing on auscultaion on the right. S2 is accentuated over pulmonary artery. What is the urgent measure on the prehospital stage?
a. Epinephrine introduction
b. Euphilline introduction
*c. Air aspiration from the pleural cavity
d. Oxygen inhalation
e. Call for cardiologic team

194. What preparations are used for prevention of fungal infection?
a. Captopril, Enalapril
b. Cytosar, Cormyctin, Lomycitin
c. Isoniazid, Ftibazid, Pyrazinamid
*d. Fluconozol, Orungol, Nisoral
e. Rubomycin, Bleomycin, Mytomycin C

195. The girl is 12 y.o. Yesterday she was overcooled. Now she complains on pain in suprapubic area, frequent painful urination by small portions, temperature is 37,8°С. Pasternatsky symptom is negative. Urinalysis: protein- 0,033 g/L, WBC– 20-25 in f/vis, RBC– 1-2 in f/vis. What diagnosis is most probable?
a. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
b. Urolithiasis
*c. Acute cystitis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Acute pyelonephritis

196. 30 y.o. woman, had mild trauma of 5th finger of the left hand 15 days ago. She has treated her self at home. She presents to the hospital due to deterioration of the condition and temperature rise. Objectively: hyperemia and swelling on the ventral surface of finger. Restricted movements of the finger. X-ray of the left hand: an early stage of оsteomyolitis of the fifth finger could not be excluded. The diagnosis: panaris of 5th finger of the left hand. What form of panaris has occurred in the patient?
a. Hypodermic
b. Joints type
c. Tendon type
d. Paronychia
*e. Bony

197. On physiologic-sanitary examination of railway department work it was revealed that loaders work is of III degree of difficulty. They unload vagons with sand, manually break coagulated mass by shovel and shift it. What criteria was used to evaluate work of loaders?
a. Time of passive observation,% to the shift duration
*b. Maximun load weigh which is shifted
c. Time of active activities,% to the shift duration
d. Intellectual efforts
e. Value of static loading for the shift

198. 47 y.o. patient complains of intensive skin itching, jaundice, bone pain. The skin is hyperpigmentated. There is multiple xanthelasma palpebrae. The liver is +6 cm enlarged, hard with acute edge. The blood analysis revealed total bilirubin 160 mkmol/L, direct – 110 mkmol/L, AST (asparate aminotransferase)- 2,1 mmol/L per hour, ALT– 1,8 mmol/L, alkaline phosphotase- 4,6 mmol/L per hour, cholesterol– 9,2 mmol/L, antimitochondrial antibodies M2 in a high titer. What is probable diagnosis?
a. Acute viral hepatitis B
*b. Primary biliary liver cirrhosis
c. Alcoholic liver cirrhosis
d. Chronic viral hepatitis B
e. Primary liver cancer

199. A 52 y.o. hard smoker patient complains of persistent cough with purulent sputum discharge especially in mornings, dyspnea provoked even by slight physical exertion, wheezing chest, tahypnoe, general weakness. He considers himself to be ill during 12 years. The overwritten conditions appear 3-4 times per year usually after common cold and have tendency to progress. What disease do you think about first of all?
a. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
b. Bronchoectatic disease
c. Aspergillosis
d. Bronchial asthma
*e. Chronic obstructive lung disease

200. A 24 y.o. patient complains of nausea, vomiting, headache, shortness of breath. He had an acute nephritis being 10 y.o. Proteinuria was found out in urine. Objectively: a skin is grey-pale, the edema is not present. Accent of II tone above aorta. BP 140/100-180/100 mm Hg. Blood level of residual N2- 6,6 mmol/L, creatinine- 406 mmol/L. Days diuresis- 2300 ml, nocturia. Specific density of urine is 1009, albumin- 0,9 g/L, WBC- 0-2 in f/vis. RBC- single in f/vis., hyaline casts single in specimen. Your diagnosis?
a. Nephrotic syndrome
b. Feochromocitoma
*c. Chronic nephritis with violation of kidney function
d. Stenosis of kidney artery
e. Hypertensive illness of the II degree

201. A patient has got pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is evident, the tongue is coated with white coating. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodes are revealed in the axillary area. The skin is erythematous and glistering over the lymphatic nodes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis
b. Lymphogranulomatosis
c. Tularemia
d. Anthrax
*e. Bubonic plague

202. A 33 y.o. woman has been suffering from DM (diabetes mellitus) for 5 years. For the last 3 years she has been taking more than 100 units of insulin per day. Body weight has increased up to 10 kg. Fasting blood glucose is 13 mmol/L, glucoseuria - 3%. Generalized microangiopathy. By increasing the dose of insulin the parameters of glycemia do not change. The diagnosis is:
*a. DM 1st type, severe form, decompensation, insulin resistant
b. DM 1st type, severe form, decompensation, allergic reaction to insulin
c. DM st type, severe form, subcompensation, Somoji phenomenon
d. DM 2nd type, severe form, decompensation
e. DM 2nd type, moderate form, Zabrodi phenomenon

203. A healthy 75 y.o. woman who leads a moderately active way of life went through a preventive examination that revealed serum concentration of common cholesterol at the rate of 5,1 mmol/L and HDL (high-density lipoproteins) cholesterol at the rate of 70 mg/dl. ECG reveals no pathology. What dietary recommendation is the most adequate?
a. Increase of cellulose consumption
b. Decrease of carbohydrates consumption
c. Decrease of cholesterol consumption
*d. Any dietary changes are not necessary
e. Decrease of saturated fats consumption

204. People who live in the radiation polluted regions are recommended to include pectins into their dietary intake for the radioactive nuclides washout. What products are the main source of pectins?
a. Meat
*b. Fruit and vegetebles
c. Macaroni
d. Milk
e. Bread

205. A worker was temporarily off work because of illness for 16 days, was under out-patient treatment. The doctor in charge issued a sick-list first for 5 days, then prolonged it for 10 days. Who can further prolong the sick-list of this patient?
a. The doctor in charge of the case with the permission of the head of department
b. Deputy head physician on the working ability expertise
*c. The doctor in charge of the case together with the head of department
d. Working ability expertise committee
e. The head of department

206. A patient is 16 y.o. In the last year his behaviour has gradually changed: he secluded himself, was not interested in communication with friends, in learning. He became indifferent towards relatives, motivelessly rude, was speaking or laughing to himsel He answers the questions formally correctly, laconically. Considers himself to be absolutely healthy but a little tired, says, hes thinking about writing a book "Projection of humanity on the plane of Universe". He always has a copy-book with which is full of a great many of the same daggers. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Schizoid personality disorder
*b. Schizophrenia
c. Picks disease
d. Depressive disorder
e. Autistic personality disorder

207. A 60 y.o. patient complains of having passing reduction of strength in his left extremities for a month. Some time later he has got persistent weakness of extremities in the mornings. Objectively: AP- 140/90 mm Hg, conscious, central paresis of the VII and XII pair of left-side cranial nerves, central hemiparesis and hemihyperesthesia also on the left side. What medicines should be chosen for the differentiated treatment of the patient?
a. Hemostatics
b. Hypotensive
*c. Anticoagulants
d. Diuretics
e. Corticosteroids

208. A 2,5 m.o. child has got muscle hypotony, sweating, occipital alopecia. Along with massage and therapeutic exercises the child was prescribed vitamind. What dosage and frequency are correct?
a. 1000 IU every day
b. 500 IU every other day
c. 1000 IU every other day
*d. 3000 IU every day
e. 500 IU every day

209. A 40 y.o. patient was diagnosed: 1. Medullary thyroid gland cancer. 2. pheochromocytoma. What operation should be performed at first?
a. Vanachs operation
b. Operation on thyroid gland
*c. Operation on account of feochromocytoma
d. Krails operation
e. Subtotal resection of thyroid gland and fascicular resection of limphatic nodes

210. A 32 y.o. woman has been suffering for 5 months from pain in lumbar region, low grade fever, frequent urination. Urine analysis: moderate proteinuria, leukocytes occupy the whole field of sight, bacteriuria. Blood analysis: leukocytosis, increased ESR. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chronic pyelonephritis
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Urolithiasis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

211. The family doctor examined a patient and diagnosed an acute bleeding of an intestine. What is professional tactics of the doctor in this situation?
*a. The urgent hospitalization in surgical department
b. To inject intravenously the aminocapronic acid
c. Treatment at home
d. The urgent hospitalization in therapeutic department
e. Treatment at a day time hospital

212. A 43 y.o. woman complains of contact hemorrhages during the last 6 months. Bimanual examination: cervix of the uterus is enlarged, its mobility is reduced. Mirrors showed the following: cervix of the uterus is in the form of cauliflower. Chrobak and Schiller tests are positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Cancer of cervix of the uterus
b. Cervical pregnancy
c. Leukoplakia
d. Nascent fibroid
e. Polypus of the cervis of the uterus

213. A 2 m.o. child was delivered in time with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
a. Hypotrophy of the I grade
b. 150 g less than necessary
c. Hypotrophy of the II grade
*d. Corresponding to the age
e. Paratrophy of the I grade

214. A 3 y.o. child with weight defficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 mmol/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Pulmonary hypoplasia
*c. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
d. Bronchiectasis
e. Recurrent bronchitis

215. A 50 y.o. male patient was taken to the emergency department with diffuse abdominal pain and signs of cardiovascular collaps. On arrival he had BP- 95/60 mm Hg, Ps- 120/min, diuresis - 20 ml/h, HgB- 100 g/L, RBC- 2,1*10^12/L. The patient needs introduction of:
a. Crystalloid and 5% dextrose
*b. Crystalloid and colloid
c. 5% dextrose and colloid
d. Crystalloid and red blood cells
e. 5% dextrose and red blood cells

216. A 41 y.o. woman complains of weakness, fatigue, fever up to 38°С, rash on the face skin, pain in the wrists and the elbows. On physical examination: erythematous rash on the cheeks with "butterfly" look, the wrists and elbow joints are involved symmetrically, swollen, sensitive, friction rub over the lungs, the heart sounds are weak, regular, HR- 88/min, BP- 160/95 mm Hg. CBC shows anemia, leucopenia, lymphopenia; on urine analysis: proteinuria, leukocyturia, casts. What is the main mechanism of disease development?
a. Production of myocytes antibodies
b. Production of antibodies to endothelial cells
*c. Production of antibodies to double-stranded DNA
d. Production of antimitochondrial antibodies
e. Production of myosin antibodies

217. A 74 y.o. female patient complains of pain, abdominal distension, nausea. She suffers from heart ichemia, post-infarction and atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis. On examination: grave condition, distended abdomen, abdominal wall fails to take active part in breathing. On laparoscopy: some cloudy effusion in abdominal cavity, one of the bowel loops is dark-blue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Mesenterial vessels thrombosis
b. Volvulus
c. Acute intestinal obstruction
d. Ichemic abdominal syndrome
e. Erysipelas

218. The disease of a 21 y.o. patient began with raise of temperature up to 39,0°С, headache, chill, repeated vomiting. Rigidity of occipital muscles is determined. The analysis of liquor revealed: cytosis - 1237 in 1 ml, including: 84% of neutrophils, 16% of lymphocytes. On bacterioscopy: gram-negative cocci are found in liquor. What is the most probable disease?
a. Serous meningitis
b. Meningococcal infection: serous meningitis
c. Secondary purulent meningitis
*d. Meningococcal infection: purulent meningitis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

219. A 70 y.o. man is ill with ischemic heart disease. His mood is evidently depressed, anxious. As a result of continious sleeplessness he has got fears, suicidal thoughts. He would sit for a long time in the same pose, answer after a pause, in a low, monotonous voice. His face has a look of suffering, pain, fear. What is the main psychopathologic syndrome?
*a. Depressive syndrome
b. Asthenic syndrome
c. Obsessive syndrome
d. Paranoid syndrome
e. Phobic syndrome

220. According to results of medical and pedagogical observation during the gymnastics lesson in the 9th grade there was a plotted physiological curve characterized by gradual increasing of pulse rate during the opening part of lesson, 80% increase during the main part; the curve has 4 waves. How can the lessons structure be assessed?
a. Exercise stress is adequate
*b. Long interval between exercises
c. Exercise stress is insufficient
d. The lessons structure is correct
e. Exercise stress is excesive

221. A 48 y.o. patient has been staying in the emergency department for 2 days on account of acute anteroseptal myocardial infarction. In the course of examination he suddenly "snored". There was a tonic contraction of skeletal muscles; eye pupils dilatated. Pulse on a.carotis is absent. What is the immediate tactics?
a. Intracardiac introduction of adrenalin with atropine
b. Precardiac stroke
c. Saphars triple airway maneuver
*d. Electric defibrillation
e. ECG record

222. In a city with population 400000 people 5600 fatal cases were recorded, including 3300 cases because of blood circulation diseases, 730 - because of tumors. What index will allow to characterize mortality from blood circulation diseases in this city?
*a. Intensive index
b. Extensive index
c. Relative intensity index
d. Visuality index
e. Correlation index

223. A girl, aged 13, consulted the school doctor on account of moderate bloody discharge from the genital tracts, which appeared 2 days ago. Secondary sexual characters are developed. What is the most probable cause of bloody discharge?
*a. Menarche
b. Endometrium cancer
c. Werlhofs disease
d. Haemophilia
e. Juvenile hemorrhage

224. In course of observation of sanitary conditions of studying at the technical university it was necessary to evaluate the visual regimen of students, who study from 9 a.m to 3 p.m. What index of natural light will be the most informative?
a. Presence of mixed (upper-lateral) light
*b. Natural light coefficient
c. Light coefficient
d. Time of the room insolation
e. Depth of study room

225. A 28 y.o. patient complains of pain in legs during walking, chill of feet and toes. He has been ill for a year. Objectively: leg skin is pale, cool; turgor is decreased, hypotrichosis. Femoral and popliteal artery pulsation is weak, it is palpable on the foot arteries only after nitroglycerine test. Rheographic index is <1. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic thrombophlebitis
b. Buergers disease
c. Obliterating aterosclerosis
*d. Obliterating endarteritis
e. Raynauds disease

226. A 56 y.o. patient has worked at the aluminium plant over 20 years. Within 3 last years he has got loosening of teeth, bone and joint pains, piercing pains in heart area, vomiting. The preliminary diagnosis is:
a. Lead intoxication
b. Phosphorus intoxication
c. Manganese intoxication
*d. Fluorine intoxication
e. Mercury intoxication

227. A patient complains of pathological lump, appearing in the right inguinal region on exercise. The lump is round-shaped, 4 cm in diameter, on palpation: soft elastic consistency, is positioned near the medial part of Pouparts ligament. The lump is situated inwards from the spermatic cord. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Right-sided femoral hernia
b. Varicose veins of the right hip
c. Lipoma of the right inguinal area
*d. Right-sided direct inguinal hernia
e. Right-sided oblique inguinal hernia

228. After delivery and revision of placenta there was found the defect of placental lobe. General condition of woman is normal, uterus is firm, there is moderate bloody discharge. Inspection of birth canal with mirrors shows absence of lacerations and raptures. What action is nesessary?
*a. Manual exploration of the uterine cavity
b. Use of hemostatic medications
c. Urine drainage, cold on the lower abdomen
d. External massage of uterus
e. Use of uterine contracting agents

229. A 14 y.o. girl complains of profuse bloody discharges from genital tracts during 10 days after suppresion of menses for 1,5 month. Similiar bleedings recur since 12 years on the background of disordered menstrual cycle. On rectal examination: no pathology of the internal genitalia. In blood: Нb- 70 g/L, RBC- 2,3×1012/L, Ht- 20. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Polycyst ovarian syndrome
*b. Juvenile bleeding, posthemorrhagic anemia
c. Noncomplete spontaneous abortion
d. Hormonoproductive ovary tumor
e. Werlholfs disease

230. Choose a method of graphic representation of monthly information about the number of registered cases of acute intestinal infection and their comparison to the average monthly values, obtained for 5 last years:
*a. The linear diagram
b. The sector diagram
c. Curvilinear diagram
d. The radial diagram
e. The figured diagram

231. A 54 y.o. man was admitted to the hospital with complaints of sudden intense headache in occipital region and vomiting. In the medical history: moderate arterial hypertension, the patient was taking hydrochlorothiazide. Three days ago he consulted a therapeutist about intense headache that was suppressed by an analgesic. Objectively: consciousness is confused, left pupil is mydriatic. Evident photophobia and tension of neck muscles. Left-side hemiparesis with increased muscle tonus and reflexes. Body temperature is low, rash is absent. AP- 230/130 mm Hg, Ps- 50 bpm, BR- 12/min. What is your preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Acute subdural hematoma
b. Myasthenia
c. Disseminated sclerosis
d. Migraine
e. Acute bacterial meningitis

232. At year-end hospital administration has obtained the following data: annual number of treated patients and average annual number of beds used for patients treatment. What index of hospital work can be calculated based upon this data?
a. Average annual bed occupancy
*b. Bed turnover
c. Average duration of patients presence in the hospital
d. Bed resources of the hospital
e. Average bed idle time

233. Condition of a parturient woman has been good for 2 hours after live birth: uterus is thick, globe-shaped, its bottom is at the level of umbilicus, bleeding is absent. The clamp put on the umbilical cord remains at the same level, when the woman takes a deep breath or she is being pressed over the symphysis with the verge of hand, the umbilical cord drows into the vagina. Bloody discharges from the sexual tracts are absent. What is the doctors further tactics?
*a. To do manual removal of afterbirth
b. To apply Abduladze method
c. To introduct oxitocine intravenously
d. To apply Credes method
e. To do curettage of uterine cavity

234. A boy, aged 9, was examined: height - 127 cm (-0,36), weight - 28,2 kg (+0,96), chest circumference - 64,9 cm (+0,66), lung vital capacity - 1520 ml (-0,16). What is the complex assessment of the childs physical development?
a. Disharmonious
*b. Harmonious
c. Excessive
d. Apparently disharmonious
e. Below the average

235. A 35 y.o. woman was admitted to thoracic surgery department with fever up to 40°С, onset of pain in the side caused by deep breathing, cough with considerable quantity of purulent sputum and blood with bad smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Abscess of the lung
b. Complication of liver echinococcosis
c. Pulmonary tuberculosis
d. Bronchiectatic disease
e. Actinomycosis of lungs

236. A mother of a 5 y.o. girl consulted a doctor about doughters involuntary urination at night, nightmares, sleep disorders, slow gaining of body weight. Objectively: malnutrition, intellectual development is good, the girl can read and explains common situations quite adultly. Her skin is very pale, liver is enlarged in size. Her mother suffers from cholelithiasis. What type of diathesis is the most probable in the child's case?
a. Allergic diathesis
*b. Gouty diathesis
c. Lymphohypoplastic diathesis
d. Urine acid diathesis
e. Exudative diathesis

237. A 34 y.o. patient has been suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis for 7 years; he complains of muscle weakness, weight loss, diarrhea, frequent urination. Objectively: hyperpigmentation of skin, gums, internal surface of cheeks. AP- 90/58 mm Hg. Blood count: RBC- 3,1×1012/L, Hb- 95 g/L,c.I.- 0,92; leukocytes - 9,4×109/L, eosinophils - 7, segmentonuclear leukocytes - 45, stab neutrophils - 1, lymphocytes - 40, monocytes - 7, Na+- 115 mmol/L, К+- 7,3 mmol/L. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Primary hyperaldosteronism
*b. Primary adrenocortical insufficiency
c. Diabetes insipidus
d. Congenital adrenocortical hyperplasia
e. Pheochromocytoma

238. The doctors in maternity hospital made a newborn boy the following diagnosis: congenital heart disease (interventricular septal defect). At the age of 2 months the boy has got a dyspnea. Objectively: BR- up to 60/min, tachycardia up to 170/min, liver is 3 cm below the costal margin. What medicines must be immediately prescribed?
a. Glucocorticoids
*b. Cardiac glycosides
c. ?-adrenoceptor blockers
d. Potassium preparations
e. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs

239. A patient at a doctor complains of temperature rise up to 38,2°С, edema in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: upper lip is evidently edematic, in the middle of edema there is a cone-shaped swelling. Skin and mucous membrane over it are dark-red. Diagnosis: labial furuncle. A surgeon cut the furuncle, treated the wound with hydrogen peroxide solution and applied a bandage with hypertensive solution. What therapeutic regimen should be recommended?
a. In-patient treatment with bed rest
b. Out-patient treatment
c. First out-patient treatment, then out-patient treatment
d. -
*e. In-patient treatment with common regimen

240. A 26 y.o. woman complains of sudden pains in the bottom of abdomen irradiating to the anus, nausea, giddiness, bloody dark discharges from sexual tracts for one week, the delay of menses for 4 weeks. Signs of the peritoneum irritation are positive. Bimanual examination: borders of the uterus body and its appendages are not determined because of sharp painfullness. The diverticulum and painfullness of the back and dextral fornixes of the vagina are evident. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Torsion of the crus of the ovary tumour
b. Acute appendicitis
c. Acute right-side adnexitis
d. Apoplexy of the ovary
*e. Broken tubal pregnancy

241. A man, aged 68, complains of tiredness, sweating, enlargement of cervical, submaxillary and axillary lymph nodes. Blood test: WBC- 35×109/L, lymphocytes - 60%, Botkin and Gumprecht bodies, level of haemoglobin and quantity of thrombocytes is normal. Myelogram showed 40% of lymphocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous lymphadenitis
*b. Chronic lympholeucosis
c. Chronic myeloleucosis
d. Acute leucosis
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

242. A 7 y.o. boy suddenly felt pain in his right knee, it became edematic. The day before he took part in a cross-country race. Family anamnesis has no data about hemophilia and bleeding sickness. Objectively: body temperature is 37,5°С. The knee is painful, hot to the touch, edematic with local tissue tension over it. Blood count: Нb- 123 g/L, leukocytes - 5,6×109/L, thrombocytes - 354×109/L, prothrombin time - 12 seconds (normally 10-15 seconds), partly activated thromboplastin time - 72 seconds (normally 35-45 seconds). Hemorrhage time is normal, VIII:C factor is 5% of norm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Schoenlein-Henoch disease
b. Thrombocytopenia
*c. Hemophilia A
d. Vitamin K deficiency
e. Hemophilia B

243. A man, aged 30, complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39°С. There was acute onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic without definite borders and without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelatous inflammation
*b. Gout
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Infectional arthritis
e. Osteoarthritis

244. A 5 y.o. girl was by accident closed in a dark room for several minutes. When the door was opened, the child was standing motionless in the middle of the room staring at one point, her face had a look of terror, she didnt respond to any stimuli. 40 minutes after her state changed into crying. On the next day she could remember nothing of this incident. What is the most probable mechanism of this reaction?
a. Endogenically organic
b. Endogenic
c. Conditioned reflex
d. Exogenously organic
*e. Psychogenic

245. A mother of a newborn child suffers from chronic pyelonephritis. She had acute respiratory viral disease before the labor. Labor in time, with prolonged period without waters. A child had erythematous eruption on the 2 day, then there were seropurulent vesicles for about 1cm large. Nikolskys symptom is positive. Erosions have occured after vesicle rupture. The child is flabby. The temperature is subfebrile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Sepsis
b. Ritters dermatitis
c. Vesiculopustulosis
*d. Newborn pemphigus
e. Pseudofurunculosis

246. A 70 y.o. patient complains of weakness, dizziness, short periods of loss of consciousness, pain in the region of heart. Objectively: HR- 40/min, sounds are rhytmic, the 1st sound is dull, occasionally very intensive. AP- 180/90 mm Hg. What is the most probable reason of hemodynamic disorders?
a. І degree atrioventricular heart block
b. Bradysystolic form of the atrial fibrillation
*c. ІІІ degree atrioventricular heart block
d. Complete block of the left branch of His bundle
e. Sinus bradycardia

247. A 27 y.o. woman complains of having the disoders of menstrual function for 3 months, irregular pains in abdomen. On bimanual examination: in the dextral appendage range of uterus there is an elastic spherical formation, painless, 7 cm in diameter. USI: in the right ovary - a fluid formation, 4 cm in diameter, unicameral, smooth. What method of treatment is the most preferable?
a. Operative treatment
b. Dispensary observation of the patient
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
*d. Prescription of an estrogen-gestogen complex for 3 months with repeated examination
e. Chemotherapeutic treatment

248. An 18 y.o. patient complains of painfulness and swelling of mammary glands, headaches, irritability, edemata of lower extremities. These symptoms have been present since the begin of menarche, appear 3-4 days before regular menstruation. Gynecological examination revealed no pathology. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Renal disease
b. Neurasthenia
c. Mastopathy
*d. Premenstrual syndrome
e. Disease of cardiovascular system

249. A 7 y.o. boy has been treated in a hospital for a month. At the time of admission he had evident edemata, proteinuria - 7,1 g/L, protein content in the daily urine - 4,2 g. Biochemical blood analysis reveals permanent hypoproteinemia (43,2 g/L), hypercholesterolemia (9,2 mmol/L). What variant of glomerulonephritis is the most probable?
*a. Nephrotic
b. Isolated urinary
c. Hematuric
d. Nephritic
e. Mixed

250. A 24 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about continued fever, night sweating. She lost 7 kg within the last 3 months. She had casual sexual contacts. Objectively: enlargement of all lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome. Blood count: leukocytes - 2,2×109/L. What disease can be suspected?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
*b. HIV-infection
c. Chroniosepsis
d. Tuberculosis
e. Infectionous mononucleosis

251. A 32 y.o. patient lives in an endemic echinococcous region. For the last 6 months he has been having pain in the right hypochondrium, temperature rise. An echinococcus liver affection is suspected. What type of examination will be the most informative in this case?
*a. USI examination
b. Angiography
c. Biochemical laboratory analysis
d. Liver scanning
e. Plan radiography of abdominal cavity

252. A 62 y.o. patient suffers from DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. Patient has to undergo an operation on inguinal hernia. What tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be used?
*a. Prescribe fast-acting insulin
b. Continue with the current therapy
c. Give Glurenorm in place of Maninilum
d. Prescribe long-acting insulin
e. Prescribe guanyl guanidines

253. A 19 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia B-type. What antihemophilic medicine should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Native plasma
b. Dried plasma
c. Cryoprecipitate
d. Fresh frozen blood
*e. Fresh frozen plasma

254. A patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of occasional pains at the bottom of abdomen that get worse during menses, weakness, indisposition, nervousness, some dark bloody discharges from vagina on the day before and the day after menses. Bimanual examination results: body of womb is enlarged, appendages cannot be determined, posterior fornix has tuberous surface. Laparoscopy results: ovaries, peritoneum of rectouterine pouches and pararectal fat are covered with "cyanotic spots". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Ovarian cystoma
b. Polycystic ovaries
c. Genital organs tuberculosis
d. Chronic salpingitis
*e. Widespread form of endometriosis

255. A pregnant woman in her 8-th week was admitted to the hospital for artificial abortion. In course of operation during dilatation of cervical canal of uterus by means of Hegars dilator № 8 the doctor suspected uterus perforation. What is the immediate tactics for confirmation of this diagnosis?
a. Bimanual examination
*b. Uterine probing
c. Laparoscopy
d. US examination
e. Metrosalpingography

256. A 34 y.o. patient 3 hours ago was bitten by a dog. He has got a non-bleeding wound in his left arm caused by the dogs bite. What surgical care would you provide to the patient?
a. Cream bandage
b. Complete suturing of the wound
c. Incomplete suturing of the wound
d. Aseptic bandage
*e. Wound bathing with detergent water and antiseptic application

257. On the 3rd day after the acute anterior myocardial infarction a 55 y.o. patient complains of dull ache behind his breast bone, that can be reduced by bending forward, and of dyspnea. Objectively: AP- 140/180 mm Hg, heart sounds are dull. ECG results: atrial fibrillation with frequence of ventricular contractions at the rate of 110/min, pathological Q wave and S-T segment raising in the right chest leads. The patient refused from thrombolisis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dissecting aortic aneurysm
b. Pulmonary embolism
c. Tietzes syndrome
d. Dresslers syndrome
*e. Acute pericarditis

258. A youth, aged 15, from childhood suffers from atopic dermatitis and allergy to the shellfish. In the last 3 months after acquiring aquarium fish rhinitis, conjunctivitis, itching in the nose developed. Level of what immunologic index should be defined in this case?
a. Circulating immunocomplexes
*b. IgE
c. IgA
d. IgJ
e. IgM

259. A 42 y.o. woman suffers from micronodular cryptogenic cirrhosis. During the last week her condition has been worsening: she had spasms, consciousness aberration, jaundice. What examination may account for the worsening of the patients condition?
a. Estimation of ?-fetoprotein content
b. Estimation of cholesterol esters
c. Estimation of alkaline phosphatase level
*d. Estimation of serum ammonia
e. Estimation of alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase

260. Plan radiography of the patients abdominal cavity reveals some hemispherical lucent areas situated above distinct horizontal levels. What is the cause of such X-ray picture?
a. Perforative ulcer
b. Cancer of large intestine
c. Meteorism
d. Prices disease
*e. Intestinal obstruction

261. An employee had an abortion by medical indications on the 6.03.2001 and she stayed in a hospital till 17.03.2001. What term is the medical sick-list issued for?
a. For 4 days
b. For 3 days
*c. For 12 days
d. For 10 days
e. For 11 days

262. A boy of 7 y.o. had an attack of asthma and distant whistling rales after playing with a dog. In the medical hystory: atopic dermatitis caused by eating eggs, chicken, beef. What group of allergens is the reason of the development of bronchial astma attacks?
*a. Epidermal
b. Dust
c. Itch mite
d. Pollen
e. Chemical

263. A 60 y.o. man complains of sense of heaviness in the region of scrotum. Objectively: scrotum edema in the left part. Testicle is of normal size, but there is a soft, scrotum limited edema over it that can be pressed and disappears when the patient lies down. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Varicosity of subcutaneous veins
b. Inguinal hernia
*c. Varicocele
d. Inguinal lymphadenopathy
e. Ectopic testicle

264. 3 weeks ago a patient was ill with tonsillitis. Clinical examination reveals edema, arterial hypertension, hematuria, proteinuria (1,8 g/per day), granular and erythrocital casts. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Glomerulonephritis
b. Intestinal nephritis
c. Renal amyloidosis
d. Cystitis
e. Pyelonephritis

265. A 35 y.o. male patient suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis and has been treated with hemodialysis for the last 3 years. He has got irregularities in the heart activity, hypotension, progressive weakness, dyspnea. On ECG: bradycardia, 1st degree atrioventricular block, high sharpened T-waves. Some time before he had seriously broken the water consumption and dietary pattern. What is the most likely cause of these changes?
a. Hyperhydratation
b. Hypokaliemia
*c. Hyperkaliemia
d. Hypernatremia
e. Hypocalcemia

266. During the medical examination a port crane operator complained of dizziness, nausea, sense of pressure against tympanic membranes, tremor, dyspnoea, cough. He works aloft, the work is connected with emotional stress. Workers are affected by vibration (general and local), noise, ultrasound, microclimate that warms in summer and cools in winter. What factor are the workers complaints connected with?
a. Intensity of work
b. Vibration
c. Altitude work
*d. Infrasound
e. Noise

267. A 46 y.o. patient complains of skin itch, sweating, especially at night, body temperature rise up to 38,6°С. Objectively: chest skin has marks of scratching, supraclavicular lymph nodes are as big as a pigeon egg, they are not matted together with skin. What test is the most reasonable?
a. Common blood count
b. Immunogram
*c. Punction of an enlarged lymph node
d. Whole protein and protein fractions
e. Plan radiography of thorax

268. A child was born with body weight 3250 g and body length 52 cm. At the age of 1,5 month the actual weight is sufficient (4350 g), psychophysical development corresponds with the age. The child is breast-fed, occasionally there are regurgitations. What is the cause of regurgitations?
*a. Aerophagia
b. Pylorospasm
c. Esophageal atresia
d. Acute gastroenteritis
e. Pylorostenosis

269. A 6 y.o. asthmatic child was taken to the emergency hospital because of severe coughing and wheezing for the last 24 hours. Physical examination reveals that the child is excitable, has intercostal and suprasternal retractions, expiratory wheezing throughout all lung fields, RR- 60/min. Initial treatment may include the prescription of:
a. Intravenous fluids in the first 2 h to compensate water deficiency
*b. Subcutaneous epinephrine
c. N-acetyl cysteine and cromolyn by inhalation
d. Parenteral phenobarbital
e. Parenteral gentamicyn

270. A 25 y.o. woman complained of fatigue, hair loss and brittle nails. The examination revealed pallor of skin, Ps- 94/min, BP- 110/70 mm Hg. On blood count: Hb- 90 g/L, RBC- 3,5×1012/L,c.I.- 0,7; ESR- 20 mm/h. Serum iron level was 8,7 mcmol/L. What treatment would you initiate?
a. Iron dextrin injections
b. Packed RBCs transfusion
c. Vitamin B12 intramuscularly
d. Blood transfusion
*e. Ferrous sulfate orally

271. A 25 y.o. patient complains of body temperature rise up to 37°С, pain at the bottom of her abdomen and vaginal discharges. Three days ago, when she was in her 11th week of pregnancy, she had an artificial abortion. Objectibely: cervix of uterus is clean, uterus is a little bit enlarged in size, painful. Appendages cannot be determined. Fornixes are deep, painless. Vaginal discharges are sanguinopurulent. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Parametritis
b. Postabortion uterus perforation
c. Hematometra
d. Pelvic peritonitis
*e. Postabortion endometritis

272. A 2 month old child who was born with body weight 5100 g has jaundice, hoarse cry, umbilical hernia, developmental lag. His liver is +2 cm, spleen isnt enlarged. Stool and urine are of normal color. In anamnesis: delayed falling-away of umbilical rest. Blood count: Hb- 120 g/L, RBC- 4,5×1012/L, ESR- 3 mm/h. General level of serum bilirubin - 28 mcmol/L, unconjugated bilirubin - 20 mcmol/L, conjugated bilirubin - 8 mcmol/L. What disease would you think about first of all?
a. Cytomegalovirus infection
b. Congenital hepatitis
c. Hemolitic anemia
*d. Congenital thyreoid deficiency
e. Conjugated jaundice

273. A 33 y.o. patient with first time detected diabetes mellitus keeps the diet and maintains glycemia at the level of 10,0 mmol/L after meal. He keeps himself from insulinotherapy. What examination is the most important for differentiation of the 1st (insulin-dependent) and the 2nd (insulin-independent) types of diabetes?
a. Fructosamine estimation
b. Glucose-tolerant test
c. Estimation of glucolized blood hemoglobin
d. Glycemia examination on an empty stomach
*e. Determination of insular cells antibodies

274. A 7 y.o. girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
a. Meningoencephalitis
*b. Encephalitis
c. Meningitis
d. Myelitis
e. Neurotoxic syndrome

275. A 37 y.o. patient complains of pain in the right arm which increases during motion, raised body temperature up to 39°С. In the right cubital fossa there is a trace of injection, hyperemia and thickening along the vein. Your diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Phlegmon
c. Abscess
*d. Phlebit
e. Inflammation of lymph

276. A 3 y.o. girl has had a temperature rise up to 38°С, rhinitis, dry superficial cough, flabbiness, appetite loss. Palpation didnt reveal any changes over her lungs. Percussion sound has a wooden resonance, auscultation revealed puerile breathing, no rales. In blood: leukopenia, lymphocytosis, increased ESR. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute obstructive bronchitis
b. Recurrent bronchitis, acute condition
c. Acute simple bronchitis
*d. Acute simple tracheitis
e. Bilateral microfocal pneumonia

277. A 25 y.o. pregnant woman in her 34th week was taken to the maternity house in grave condition. She complains of headache, visual impairment, nausea. Objectively: solid edemata, AP- 170/130 mm Hg. Suddenly there appeared fibrillary tremor of face muscles, tonic and clonic convulsions, breathing came to a stop. After 1,5 minute the breathing recovered, there appeared some bloody spume from her mouth. In urine: protein - 3,5 g/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cerebral hemorrhage
b. Epilepsy
*c. Eclampsia
d. Cerebral edema
e. Stomach ulcer

278. A 52 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea caused even by moderate physical activity, cough with hardly secreted sputum. He has been ill for 12 years. Objectively: BR- 26/min. Lung examination: tympanitis, diminished vesicular breathing with prolonged expiration, disseminated dry rales. In the past he was taking only theopecym or aminophylline inravenously. Prescribe him the basic treatment after the exacerbation is suppressed:
a. Inhacort
b. Tilade
c. Aminophylline
d. Alupent
*e. Atrovent

279. Fluorography of a 45 y.o. man revealed some foci of small intensity with nondistinct outlines on the top of his right lung. The patient does not feel worse. He has been smoking for many years. Objectively: vesicular resonance over lungs, respiration is vesicular, rales are absent. Blood count is not changed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
b. Peripheral cancer of lung
c. Eosinophilic pneumonia
d. Bronchiolitis
e. Disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis

280. A 15 y.o. boy was twice attacked by bees, as a result he had severe anaphylactic shock. What is the most effective prophylaxis method?
a. Protective clothing
b. Long-term prophylactic treatment with antihistamines
c. Limitation of outside staying during summer months
*d. Desensibilisation by means of bee venom extract
e. Prescription of corticosteroids for summer

281. A 47 y.o. woman complains of having paroxysmal headaches for the last 5 years. The pain is one-sided, intense, localised in frontal region of head, accompanied by nausea and stomach discomfort, begins one of a sudden. Onset is usually preceded by vision reduction. Anamnesis gives evidence of periodical AP rise, but at the moment the woman doesnt take any medicines. Inbetween the onsets of headache her state is satisfactory. Objectively: high-calorie diet (body weight index - 29), AP- 170/95 mm Hg. Neurologic state has no pecularities. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Benign intracranial hypertension
b. Epilepsy
*c. Migraine
d. Hypertensive encephalopathy
e. Chronic subdural hematoma

282. A 48 y.o. farmer was admitted to the hospital with complaints of headache, nausea, vomiting, cough with sputum, breath shortage, weak sight, sweating, salivation. He was cultivated the garden with phosphoorganic pesticides. Blood count: RBC- 4,1×1012/L, Нb- 136 g/L,c.I.- 0,9, leukocytes - 13,0×109/L, ESR- 17 mm/h. His diagnosis is acute intoxication with phosphoorganic pesticides. What is the most important diagnostic criterion for this pathology?
a. Leukocytosis
b. Anemia
c. Thrombocytopenia
d. Reticulocytosis
*e. Low level of choline esterase

283. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subcapsular kidneys rupture
b. Paranephral hematoma
c. Multiple kidneys ruptures
d. Kidneys abruption
*e. Kidneys contusion

284. Examination of a hanged mans corpse revealed the following: livores mortis disappear when pressed, restore in 50 seconds, rigor mortis is moderately evident only in masseteric muscles, neck muscles and fingers. Body temperature is 31,0°С. What is the prescription of death coming?
a. 16-24 hours
b. 8-10 hours
c. 10-18 hours
*d. 6-7 hours
e. 1-2 hours

285. A 45 y.o. man has complained of having epigastric and right subcostal aching pain, pruritus, indigestion, dark color of the urine and acholic stool, fever and significant weight loss for 1 month. On examination: jaundice, presence of Curvuasiers sign. US scan did not reveal stones in the gallbladder and choledochus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic cholangitis
b. Chronic pancreatitis
c. Chronic hepatitis
*d. Cancer of the pancreas head
e. Gallbladder stones

286. A girl is 12 y.o. Yesterday she was overcooled. Now she is complaining on pain in suprapubic area, frequent painful urination by small portions, temperature is 37,8°С. Pasternatsky symptom is negative. Urine analysis: protein - 0,033 g/L, WBC- 20-25 in f/vis, RBC- 1-2 in f/vis. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Urolithiasis
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
*e. Acute cystitis

287. A 17 y.o. patient complains of acute pain in the knee joint and t°- 38°С. He was ill with angina 3 weeks ago. Objectively: deformation and swelling of the knee joints with skin hyperemia. Small movement causes an acute pain in the joints. Which diagnose is the most correct?
a. Infectious-allergic polyarthritis
b. Reactive polyarthritis
*c. Rheumatism, polyarthritis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Systemic lupus erythematodes

288. A patient has undergone an operation on account of perforated ulcer of stomach, terminal phase of diffuse peritonitis and endotoxic shock. In the post-operative period he is prescribed artificial pulmonary ventilation with 60% oxygen inhalation. Blood gases: РаО2- 70-78 mm Hg, hypoxemy doesnt ecrease, CVP (central venous pressure) - 150-180 mm of water column, AP- 90/60 mm Hg (against the backgound of taking big doses of dopamine). Radiogram shows diffuse pulmonary infiltration. What cause the refractory arterial hypoxemia?
a. Mendelsons syndrome
b. Pneumothorax
c. Pulmonary edema
d. Bilateral pneumonia
*e. Respiratory distress syndrome

289. Vaginal inspection of a parturient woman revealed: cervix dilation is up to 2 cm, fetal bladder is intact. Sacral cavity is free, sacral promontory is reachable only with a bent finger, the inner surface of the sacrococcygeal joint is accessible for examination. The fetus has cephalic presentation. Sagittal suture occupies the transverse diameter of pelvic inlet, the small fontanel to the left, on the side. What labor stage is this?
a. Preliminary stage
*b. Cervix dilatation stage
c. Placental stage
d. Prodromal stage
e. Stage of fetus expulsion

290. In treatment and prevention establishments, regardless of their organisational and proprietary form, the rights of patients should be observed. Which of these rights are the most significant?
a. The right to be heard
b. The right to the protection from incompetence
c. The right to the free choice
*d. The right to the protection of the patients interests
e. The right to the information

291. A district doctor was commisioned with a task to work out a plan of treatment-and-prophylaxis actions for the population of his district. What actions of secendary prophylaxis must he include into this plan?
a. Improvement of populations living conditions
b. Elimination of disease causes
c. Disease prevention
*d. Prevention of disease complications
e. Rehabilitation actions

292. A 14 y.o. child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for atack reduction?
a. Euphyline
b. No-shpa
c. Amisyl
d. Corglicone
*e. Obsidan

293. A 32 y.o. patient who has been staying in a hospital on account of acute abscess of his right lung suddenly felt pain after coughing in the right half of thorax, he got heavy breathing, cyanosis. What complication is the most probable?
a. Infarction-pneumonia
*b. Pyopneumothorax
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Exudative pleurisy
e. Esophagus perforation

294. A 30 y.o. woman is in her second labor that has been lasting for 14 hours. Fetal heartbeats are muffled, arrhythmic, 100/min. Vaginal examination results: cervical dilatation is complete, fetal head is close to the exit of small pelvis. Sagittal suture has the direct diameter, small crown is close to the pubis. What is the further tactics of labor management?
*a. Use of obstetrical forceps
b. Cesarean section
c. Craniodermal forceps
d. Use of cavity forceps
e. Labor stimulation by means of oxitocine

295. A 58 y.o. woman had voluminous bleeding from the ruptured varicous node on the left crus. What first aid should be provided?
a. Z-shaped stitch on the raptured varicose node
*b. Heightened position of extremity, compressive sterile bandage
c. Troyanov-Trendelenburg operation
d. Distal tourniquet
e. Proximal turniquet

296. A patient has complained of great weakness for 6 years. He fell seriously ill, the illness is accompanied by body temperature rise, indisposition, pain in joints and along the legs muscles. Objectively: violet-bluish erythema around eyes and over knee joints. HR- 120/min, heart sounds are weak. Blood count: leukocytes - 12×109/L, ESR- 40 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Rheumathoid arthritis
b. Atopic dermatitis
*c. Dermatomyositis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Reactive polyarthritis

297. A 41 y.o. patient complains of acute pain in the right side of the thorax and sudden progress of dyspnea following the lifting of a heavy object. The patients condition is grave: lips and mucous membranes are cyanotic, BR- 28/min, Ps- 122 bpm., AP- 80/40 mm Hg. There is tympanitis on percussion and weakened breathing on auscultaion on the right. S2 sound is accentuated above pulmonary artery. What is the main urgent measure on the prehospital stage?
a. Oxygen inhalation
b. Euphilline introduction
*c. Air aspiration from the pleural cavity
d. Call for cardiologic team
e. Epinephrine introduction

298. After manual reposition and application of plaster splint a patient with fractures of forearm bones had an edema of hand and fingers, he felt pain and lack of sensitivity. What tactics should the doctor choose?
a. To repeat reposition
*b. To cut the bandage that fastens the splint
c. To remove the plaster
d. Its a natural phenomena, the edema will dissipate in a day
e. To prescribe analgetics and diuretics

299. A 38 y.o. man complains of having occasional problems with swallowing of both hard and fluid food for many months. Sometimes he feels intense pain behind his breast bone, epecially after hot drinks. There are asphyxia onsets at night. He has not put off weight. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory, skin is of usual colour. Examination revealed no changes of gastrointestinal tract. X-ray picture of thorax organs presents esophagus dilatation with level of fluid in it. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Myastenia
b. Cancer of esophagus
c. Gastroesophageal reflux
*d. Esophagus achalasia
e. Esophagus candidosis

300. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for drinking water in the field conditions
a. River water
b. Rain water
c. Water from melted snow
d. Spring water
*e. Artesian well water

301. An 18 y.o. woman consulted a gynecologist about the pain in the lower part of abdomen, fever up to 37,5°С, considerable mucopurulent discharges from the genital tracts, painful urination. Vaginal examination with mirrors: the urethra is infiltrated, cervix of the uterus is hyperemic, erosive. The uterus is painful, ovaries are painful, thickened; fornixes are free. Bacterioscopy test revealed diplococcus. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Chlamydiosis
b. Trichomoniasis
c. Chronic gonorrhea
*d. Recent acute ascending gonorrhea
e. Candydomycosis

302. A 43 y.o. patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenoutic papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
a. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
b. To perform external choledoch drainage
c. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs
d. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
*e. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy

303. A 60 y.o. woman complains of unbearable pains in the right hypochondrium. In the medical hystory: acute pancreatitis. Body temperature is 38,2°С. Objectively: sclera icteritiousness. No symptoms of peritonium irritation are present. There are positive Ortners and Hubergrits-Skulskis symptoms. Urine diastase is 320 g/h. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Acute cholangitis
b. Chronic cholecystitis
*c. Chronic pancreatitis
d. Cancer of pancreas
e. Acute cholecystitis

304. A 35 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about occasional pains in paraumbilical and iliac region that reduce after defecation or passage of gases. Defecation takes place up to 6 times a day, stool is not solid, with some mucus in it. Appetite is normal, she has not put off weight. First such symptoms appeared 1,5 year ago, but colonoscopy data reveals no organic changes. Objectively: abdomen is soft, a little bit painful in the left iliac region. Blood and urine are normal. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Celiac disease
*b. Irritable bowels syndrome
c. Pseudomembranous colitis
d. Dispancreatism
e. Crohns disease

305. A 31 y.o. patient has been suffering from systemic scleroderma for 14 years. She has been treated in hospital many times. She complains of occasional dull pain in the heart region, palpitation, dyspnea, headache, eye-lid edemata, weight loss and deformation of extremities joints. What organ affection worsens the disease prognosis?
a. Gastrointestinal tract
b. Lungs
*c. Kidneys
d. Heart
e. Skin and joints

306. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: t°- 37,3°С, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
b. Exudative pleuritis
*c. Cancer of lung
d. Bronchoectatic disease
e. Macrofocal pneumonia

307. A 40 y.o. woman is ill with rheumatic disease with composite mitral disease with prevalence of the stenosis of left venous foramen.Complains of palpitation, fatigability, progressing dyspnea, attacks of dyspnea and hemoptysis. Now she cannot be engaged even in the easy activities. What tactics is the most expedient?
a. Prescription of anticoagulants
b. -
*c. Mitral comissurotomia
d. Conduction of current bicilino-prophilaxis
e. Prescription of venous vasodilatators

308. The results of a separate diagnostic curettage of the mucous of the uterus cervix and body made up in connection with bleeding in a postmenopausal period: the scrape of the mucous of the cervical canal revealed no pathology, in endometrium - the highly differentiated adenocarcinoma was found. Metastases are not found. What method of treatment is the most correct?
a. -
b. Radial therapy
c. Surgical treatment and radial therapy
*d. Surgical treatment and hormonotherapy
e. Surgical treatment + chemotherapy

309. A 28 y.o. patient without permanent residence was admitted to the hospital with the preliminary diagnosis influenza. On the fith day of illness he got a maculopapular petechial rash on his body and internal surfaces of extremities. Body temperature is 41°С, euphoria, face hyperemia, sclera reddening, tongue tremor, tachycardia, splenomegaly, excitement. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Typhoid fever
b. Measles
c. Delirium alcoholicum
d. Leptospirosis
*e. Epidemic typhus

310. A 20 y.o. patient complains of amenorrhea. Objectively: hirsutism, obesity with fat tissue prevailing on the face, neck, upper part of body. On the face there are acne vulgaris, on the skin - striae cutis distense. Psychological and intellectual development is normal. Gynecological condition: external genitals are moderately hairy, acute vaginal and uterine hypoplasia. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Turners syndrome
b. Stein-Leventals syndrome
*c. Itsenko-Cushing syndrome
d. Shichans syndrome
e. Babinski-Froehlich syndrome

311. A 10 y.o. boy was ill with angina 2 weeks ago, has complaints of joint pain and stiffness of his left knee and right elbow. There was fever (38,5 degree C) and ankle disfunction, enlargement of cardiac dullness by 2 cm, tachycardia, weakness of the 1st sound, gallop rhythm, weak systolic murmur near apex. What diagnosis corresponds with such symptoms?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosis
b. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
c. Reiters disease
d. Reactive arthritis
*e. Acute rheumatic fever

312. A 42 y.o. patient was admitted 3 hours after a trauma with evident subcutaneous emphysema of the upper part of his body, dyspnea, tachycardia 120/min. X-ray examination revealed no pneumothorax, significant dilatation of mediastinum to the both sides. What emergency care is needed?
*a. Drainage of anterior mediastinum
b. Pleural cavity punction
c. Toracotomy
d. Toracoscopy
e. Pleural cavity drainage

313. A 2 y.o. girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Adenoviral infection
*b. Rubella
c. Scarlet fever
d. Pseudotuberculosis
e. Measles

314. A 31 y.o. patient has had mental disorder for a long time. He suffers from insomnia for a long time. He has got fears, suicidal thoughts, tried to hang himsel. His mood is depressed, he refuses from treatment. What measures are the most expedient for the prevention of suicide?
a. Out-patient treatment
b. Admission to the neurological department
*c. Admission to the mental hospital
d. Psychotherapeutic conversation
e. Strict supervision at home

315. What guarantees against the preconceived attitude to the physician in cases of professional law violations do you know?
a. Draw up a statement about forensic medical examination
b. Conduct forensic medical examination by district forensic medicine expert
*c. Sanction of public prosecutor, inquiry by preliminary investigator of prosecutors office, committee of experts
d. Utilisation copy of medical documents
e. Conduct an inquiry by preliminary investigator of police department

316. Ambulance was called to a 48 y.o. man. According to the relatives he has had three episodes of lost consciousness and attacks during the day. Patient is unconscious, fell on the floor, tonic and then clonic convulsions of trunk and extremities happened. The attack lasted for 4 minutes, ended by involuntary urination. What type of attack was observed?
a. Fainting
*b. Major epileptic seizure
c. Absence
d. Vegetatic crisis
e. Episode of hysteria

317. A 60 y.o. patient complains of pain in interphalangeal joints of hand that gets worse during working. Objectively: distal and proximal joints of the II-IV fingers are defigured, with Heberdens and Bouchards nodes, painful, stif. X-ray picture of joints: joint spaces are constricted, there are marginal osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Reiters disease
*b. Osteoarthritis
c. Bechterews disease
d. Psoriatic arthritis
e. Rheumatic arthritis

318. A 41 y.o. woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis for 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: evident inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous membrane. In blood: WBC- 9,8×109/L, RBC- 3,0×1012/L, sedimentation rate - 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
a. Kreon
*b. Sulfasalasine
c. Vikasolum
d. Motilium
e. Linex

319. For the persons who live in a hot area after an accident at a nuclear object, the greatest risk within the first decade is represented by cancer of:
a. Skin
b. Breast
c. Reproduction system organs
*d. Thyroid gland
e. Lungs

320. A full-term newborn child has a diagnosis Rh-factor hemolytic disease of newborn. Bilirubin rate is critical. The childs blood group is В(III), his mothers blood group - А(II). The child has indication for hemotransfusion. What donor blood must be chosen?
a. Blood group B(III), Rh (+)
b. Blood group А(II), Rh (+)
c. Blood group О(I), Rh (-)
*d. Blood group В(III), Rh (-)
e. Blood group А(II), Rh (-)

321. A mother with an infant visited the pediatrician for expertise advice. Her baby was born with body weight 3,2 kg and body length 50 cm. He is 1 year old now. How many teeth the baby should have?
a. 6
b. 20
c. 10
d. 12
*e. 8

322. In course of herniotomy of a 12 y.o. patient doctors revealed a testicle in the hernial sac. What type of hernia is it?
a. Direct inguinal hernia
b. Femoral hernia
c. Obturator hernia
d. Acquired oblique inguinal hernia
*e. Congenital oblique inguinal hernia

323. A 50 y.o. woman who suffers from chronic pyelonephritis was prescribed a combination of antibiotics for the period of exacerbation - gentamicin (80 mg 3 times a day) and biseptol (960 mg twice a day). What consequences may be caused by such a combination of antibiotics?
a. Acute suprarenal insufficiency
b. Glomerulosclerosis
*c. Acute renal insufficiency
d. Chronic renal insufficiency
e. Antibiotic combination is optimal and absolutely safe

324. A 51 y.o. patient complains of having intensive bloody discharges from vagina for 15 days after delay of menstruation for 2,5 months. In anamnesis: disorders of menstrual function during a year, at the same time she felt extreme irritability and had sleep disorders. US examination results: uterus corresponds with age norms, appendages have no pecularities, endometrium is 14 mm thick. What is the doctors tactics?
a. Conservative treatment of bleeding
b. Supravaginal amputation of uterus without appendages
*c. Diagnostic curettage of uterine cavity
d. TORCH-infection test
e. Hysterectomy

325. A 52 y.o. male patient suffers from squeezing pain attacks in substernal area which irradiates to the left hand and occurs occasionally and on physical exercises. He has had it for 1 year. On examination: heart borders are enlargement to the left side, sounds are muffled, Ps- 76 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 155/80 mm Hg, ECG: the left type, the rest signs are normal. What additional examination is necessary to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Veloergometry
b. Transaminases of blood
c. Echocardiography
d. General blood count
e. Lipoprotein test

326. Examination of a just born placenta reveals defect 2x3 cm large. Hemorrhage is absent. What tactic is the most reasonable?
a. Prescription of uterotonic medicines
*b. Manual uretus cavity revision
c. Instrumental uterus cavity revision
d. Parturient supervision
e. External uterus massage

327. A woman consulted a doctor on the 14th day after labor about sudden pain, hyperemy and induration of the left mammary gland, body temperature rise up to 39°С, headache, indisposition. Objectively: fissure of nipple, enlargement of the left mammary gland, pain on palpation. What pathology would you think about in this case?
a. Lacteal cyst with suppuration
*b. Lactational mastitis
c. Fibrous adenoma of the left mammary gland
d. Phlegmon of mammary gland
e. Breast cancer

328. A laboratory obtained a milk sample sent for analysis. Analysis gave the following data: color - whitish, smell - has no pecularities, taste - typical for milk, density - 1,038, acidity - Turners 350, fat - 3,2%. What is the quality level of this milk?
a. The milk is of high quality
*b. The milk is of poor quality
c. The milk is of reduced quality
d. The milk is falsificated
e. The milk is nominally qualified

329. A 30 y.o. man complains of intense pain, skin reddening in the region of ankle joint, temperature rise up to 39°С. He fell ill suddenly. In the past there were such onsets that lasted for 5-6 days and didnt cause any residual changes of the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic, without distinct outlines and infiltrative bank at the periphery. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Infectional arthritis
b. Osteoarthrosis
c. Erysipelatous inflammation
*d. Gout
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

330. A 36 y.o. woman is in the 12-th week of her first pregnancy. She was treated for infertility in the past. She contacted a child who fell ill with rubella 2 days after their meeting. Woman doesnt know if she has ever been infected with rubella. What is the adequate tactics?
a. Interferon prescription
b. Cyclovin prescription
c. Immunoglobulin injection
*d. Monitoring of the specific IgG IgM with the ELISA
e. Fetus wastage

331. A 58 y.o. man complained of severe inspiratory dyspnea and expectoration of frothy and blood-tinged sputum. He has been suffering from essential hypertension and ischemic heart disease. On examination: acrocyanosis, "bubbling" breathing, Ps- 30/min, BP- 230/130 mm Hg, bilateral rales. Choose medicines for treatment
a. Strophanthine, potassium chloride, plathyphylline
*b. Morphine, furosemide, nitroprusside sodium
c. Albuterol, atropine, papaverine
d. Theophylline, prednisolon
e. Cordiamine, isoproterenol

332. A 50 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of blood in urine. There was no pain or urination disorders, hematuria has lasted for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys are not palpable, suprapubic region has no pecularities, external genitals have no pathology. Rectal examination revealed: prevesical gland is not enlarged. Cytoscopy revealed no changes. What disease would you think about first of all?
a. Necrotic papillitis
b. Tuberculosis of urinary bladder
c. Kidney dystopy
d. Varicocele
*e. Cancer of kidney

333. An 18 y.o. patient was admitted to the hematologic department with complaints of headache, general weakness, poor appetite, body temperature rise up to 39°С, neck swelling. Objectively: skin and mucous membranes are extremely pale, lymph nodes on the both sides of neck are up to 1 cm large, painless. Liver is enlarged +1 cm, painless, spleen +0,5 cm, t°- 38°С. Blood count: Нb- 98g/L, RBC- 2,9*10^12/L, leukocytes - 32*10^9/L, stab neutrophils - 0%, segmental leukocytes - 28%, monocytes - 2%, lymphocytes - 39%, blasts - 31%, reticulocytes - 31%, thrombocytes - 120*10^9/L, ESR- 36 mm/h. What form of leukosis does the patient have?
a. Chronic lympholeukosis
b. Undifferentiated leukosis
*c. Acute lymphoblastic leukosis
d. Chronic myeloleukosis
e. Acute myeloblastic leukosis

334. A 40 y.o. patient with rheumatic heart disease complains of anorexia, weakness and loss of weigth, breathlessness and swelling of feet. The patient had tooth extraction one month ago. On examination: t°- 39°С, Ps- 100/min. Auscultation: diastolic murmur in the mitral area. Petechial lesion are round of clavicle; spleen was palpable
a. Mitral stenosis
b. Aortic stenosis
c. Recurrence of rheumatic fever
*d. Subacute bacteria endocarditis
e. Thrombocytopenia purpura

335. A patient has got a sudden attack of severe substernal pain at night. On examination: confusion, pallor of the skin, acrocyanosis, cold sweat, BP- 80/50 mm Hg, Ps- 120/min, irregular and weak pulse. What condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Acute vascular insufficiency
b. Radicular syndrome
c. Acute right-side heart failure
*d. Cardiogenic shock
e. Acute left-side heart failure

336. A 60 y.o. woman has had increased BP up to 210/110 mm Hg for the last 7 years. On examination: heart apex is displaced to the left. There are signs of left ventricular hypertrophy on ECG. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cardiomyopathy
*b. Essential hypertension, 2nd stage
c. Symptomatic hypertension
d. Essential hypertension, 1st stage
e. Ischemic heart disease

337. A 38 y.o. woman suffers from paroxysmal AP rises up to 240/120 mm Hg accompanied by nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, excessive sweating. During the onset blood is hyperglycemic. After the onset there is voluminous urination. Kidneys sonography revealed accessory mass bordering upon the upper pole of the right kidney, presumably it belongs to the adrenal gland. What laboratory test will allow to make a more precise diagnosis?
a. Estimation of thyroxin and thyrotropic hormon in blood
*b. Estimation of catecholamine and vanillylmandelic acid excretion with urine
c. Estimation of glomerular filtration rate
d. Estimation of renin content in blood
e. Estimation of insulin and C-peptide content in blood

338. A 15 y.o. girl was examined. Her medical history registers gradual onset of fever, malaise, loss of weight. There was nothing typical about the kind of fever which has been present for more than 7-10 days and changed quickly. Physical examination didnt give evident results. What is the only most important examination for excluding miliary tuberculosis?
a. Liver or bone marrow biopsy
*b. Chest X-ray
c. Sputum smear and culture of m. tuberculosis
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Tuberculin skin testing

339. A 12 y.o. girl took 2 pills of aspirine and 4 hours later her body temperature raised up to 39-40°С. She complains of general indisposition, dizziness, sudden rash in form of red spots and blisters. Objectively: skin lesions resemble of second-degree burns, here and there with erosive surface or epidermis peeling. Nikolskys symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Duhrings disease
b. Bullous dermatitis
c. Polymorphous exudative erythema
*d. Acute epidermal necrolisis
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

340. 200 patients suffering from essential hypertension were examined in order to obtain data about patients arterial pressure and age. What statistic value should be applied in order to measure relation between these characteristics?
a. Representation error
b. Students coefficient
c. Sygmal deviation
d. Coefficient of variation
*e. Correlation coefficient

341. A 43 y.o. patient complains of formation and pain in the right mammary gland, rise of temperature up to 37,2°С during the last 3 months. Condition worsens before the menstruation. On examination: edema of the right breast, hyperemia, retracted nipple. Unclear painful infiltration is palpated in the lower quadrants. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis of the right mammary gland
b. Right-side acute mastitis
c. Premenstrual syndrome
d. Right-side chronic mastitis
*e. Cancer of the right mammary gland

342. A 15 y.o. patient has a developmental lag, occasionally he has skin yellowing. Objectively: spleen is 16х12х10 cm, cholecystolithiasis, skin ulcer of the lower third of left crus. Blood count: RBC- 3,0×1012/L, Hb- 90 g/L,c.I.- 1,0; microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Total serum bilirubin is 56 mcmol/L, unconjugated - 38 mcmol/L. What therapy will be the most appropriate?
a. Omentosplenopexy
b. Portacaval shunt
*c. Splenectomy
d. Spleen transplantation
e. Omentohepatopexy

343. A 54 y.o. patient has been suffering from osteomyelitis of femoral bone for over 20 years. In the last month there appeared and gradually progressed edemata of lower extremities. Urine analysis: proteinuria - 6,6 g/L. Blood analysis: disproteinemia in form of hypoalbuminemia, increase of ?2- and ?-globulins, ESR- 50 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
*b. Secondary renal amyloidosis
c. Myelomatosis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

344. A patient, aged 25, complains of pain in the I finger on the right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain is getting worse. Acute pain appears during the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Subcutaneous panaritium
b. Paronychia
c. Articular (joint) panaritium
*d. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)
e. Bone panaritium

345. A 74 y.o. patient has been ill with benign prostate hyperplasy for the last 5 years. 4 days ago, after alcochol consumption, there was an acute retention of urination. At the pre-admission stage his urinary bladder was catheterized with metallic catheter. Examination revealed: right epididymis is enlarged, thick and painful, there are purulent discharges from urethra. What way of emergency care must be chosen?
*a. Trocar or open epicystostomy
b. Placing of intraprostatic stent
c. Introduction of permanent urethral catheter
d. Transuretral resection or prostatectomy
e. Microwave thermotherapy of prostate

346. A 56 y.o. woman has an acute onset of fever up to 39°С with chills, cough, and pain on respiration in the right side of her chest. On physical examination: HR- 90/min, BP- 95/60 mm Hg, Ps- 26/min. There is dullness over the right lung. On X-ray: infiltrate in the right middle lobe of the lung en palpation. What is the diagnosis?
a. Hospital-acquired lobar pneumonia
b. Acute pleurisy
*c. Community-acquired lobar pneumonia with moderate severity
d. Community-acquired bronchopneumonia
e. Acute lung abscess

347. A 38 y.o. woman complains of a purulent discharge from the left nostril. The body temperature is 37,5°С. The patient has been ill for a week and associates her illness with common cold. There are a pain and tenderness on palpation of her left cheek. The mucous membrane in the left nasal cavity is red and turgescent. The purulent exudate is seen in the middle meatus in maxillary. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent ethmoiditis
b. Acute purulent frontitis
c. -
*d. Acute purulent maxillary sinusitis
e. Acute purulent sphenoiditis

348. A 23 y.o. patient has a gunshot wound of his left arm.The bones of the arm are not damaged. What appropriate surgical care must be provided to the patient?
a. Wound drying with towel gauzes
b. Aseptic dressing of the wound
*c. Primary surgical processing with a flowing suction
d. Wound saturing
e. Wound saturing and drying

349. A 49 y.o. female patient was admitted to the hospital with acute attacks of headache accompanied by pulsation in temples, increasing AP up to 280/140 mm Hg. Pheochromocytoma is suspected. What mechanism of hypertensive atack does this patient have?
*a. Increasing of catecholamines concentration
b. Increasing of thyroxine excretion
c. Increasing of vasopressin excretion
d. Increasing of plasma renin activity
e. Increasing of aldosterone level in blood

350. Examination of a 32 y.o. patient who had apendectomy because of gangrenous appendicitis revealed clinical picture of pelvic abscess. What is the best way to expose pelvic abscess of this patient?
a. Through the obturator foramen
*b. Through the rectum
c. Through the anterior abdominal wall
d. Through the postoperative wound
e. By means of the sacral approach

351. The Transcarpathian region is characterized by constant high (over 80%) air moisture. Population of this region feels an intense cold in winter when the temperature is temperately low. What way of heat emission becomes more active?
a. Conduction
b. Irradiation
*c. Convection
d. Evaporation
e. Radiation

352. A 30 y.o. man complains of sharp pain in the right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 m, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
a. Chronic secretory otitis media
b. Acute mastoiditis
c. Eustachian tube disfunction
d. Chronic purulent otitis media
*e. Acute purulent otitis media

353. A patient of a somatic hospital has got psychomotor agitation as a result of high fever: he tried to run about the department; thought that some water was running down the walls, he pretended to see rats and cockroaches on the floor. Claimed he were in a hostel, recognized his "aquaintances". After introduction of sedative drugs he fell asleep. In the morning he remembered this condition. What psychopathologic syndrome is it?
*a. Delirium
b. Oneiric syndrome
c. Maniacal syndrome
d. Hallucinatory paranoid syndrome
e. Twilight disorder of consciousness

354. A pregnant woman (35 weeks), aged 25, was admitted to the hospital because of bloody discharges. In her medical history there were two artificial abortions. In a period of 28-32 weeks there was noted the onset of hemorrhage and USD showed a placental presentation. The uterus is in normotonus, the fetus position is transversal (Ist position). The heartbeats is clear, rhythmical, 140 bpm. What is the further tactics of the pregnant woman care?
*a. To perform a delivery by means of Cesarean section
b. To perform the hemotransfusion and to prolong the pregnancy
c. To keep the intensity of hemorrhage under observation and after the bleeding is controlled to prolong the pregnancy
d. To introduct the drugs to increase the blood coagulation and continue observation
e. Stimulate the delivery by intravenous introduction of oxytocin

355. A 5 tons milk batch was sampled. The lab analysis revealed: fat content 2%, specific density - 1,04 g/cm3, acidity - 210Т, reductase probe - weak-positive. What way is the product to be used in?
a. Do the product away
b. Discard for animal feeding
c. Technical utilization
d. Sell without limitations
*e. Sell but inform customers about milk quality

356. A 32 y.o. woman has got the Laiels syndrome after taking the biceptol. What immunotrope medicines are to be prescribed in this situation?
a. Specific immune modulators
b. Interferons
c. Non-steroid immunosupressants
*d. Steroid immunosupressants
e. Non-specific immune modulators

357. Name a statistical observation unit for determination of blood sugar impact on the healing of wounds surface in a postoperative period:
a. The patient who was discharged on an after-care
b. An amount of blood sugar
c. Blood analysis
*d. The patient in a postoperative period
e. The patient who has a wound surface

358. A 15 year old adolescent was taken to the hospital with complaints of poor night vision. Objectively: increased darkness adaptation time, Bitots spots on conjuctiva. The patients skin is dry, scales off, folliculitis signs of the face skin are present. What is the cause of this disease?
a. Folic acid deficit
*b. Retinole deficit
c. Napthtochynones deficit
d. Biotin deficit
e. Thiamine deficit

359. A child with chronic cardialtis, cardial insufficiency ІІА that is being treated with digoxin has got progressing bradycardia, nausea, vomiting. dizziness, sleep disorders. ECG results: extrasystole, PQ- 0,18. What is the most probable cause of this condition?
a. Hypokaliemia
b. Pulmonary edema
*c. Cardiac glucosides overdose or intolerance
d. Acute enteric infection
e. Atrioventricular heart block of the І degree

360. A 76 y.o. woman complains of progressing swallowing disorder, mostly she has had problems with solid food for the last 6 weeks. Sometimes she has regurgitation of solid masses. Swallowing is not painful. She lost 6 kg. 10 years ago she had myocardiac infarction, she takes constantly aspirine and prolonged nitrates. She consumes alcochol in moderate proportions, smokes. Objectively: icteric skin, neck has no pecularities, lymph nodes are not enlarged. Thorax has no changes, cardiovascular system has no evident changes. Liver is +3 cm. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Cancer of esophagus
b. Myasthenia
c. Diaphragmatic hernia
d. Diffuse constriction of esophagus
e. Esophageal achalasia

361. A surgical department admitted a newborn boy with foamy discharges from nose and mouth, cyanosis attacks. X-ray examination: blind end of esophagus is at the level of the II thoracic vertebra, gastric air bubble is under the left cupula of diaphragm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Esophagus atresia, tracheo-esophageal fistula
b. Paraesophageal hernia
c. Bronchoesophageal fistula
d. Esophagus atresia without a fistula
e. Total esophagus atresia

362. 8 hours after a road accident an unconscious victim with closed craniocerebral trauma was admitted to the hospital. Objectively: anisocoria, wound in the parietal region - 3,0х1,0 cm, neck muscles rigidity, Ps- 58/min, tense. Convulsive syndrome. What is the most important indication for the immediate surgical procedure?
*a. Intracranial hemorrhage
b. Unconsciousness
c. Intensification of convulsions
d. Wounds
e. Anisocoria

363. An 18 y.o. girl complains of weakness, dizziness, loss of appetite, menorrhagia. There are many-coloured petechiae on the skin of the upper extremities. Blood test: Hb- 105 g/l; RBC- 3,2×1012/L;c.I.- 0,95; thromb.- 20×109/L. The sedimentation time according to Lee White is 5; hemorrhagia duration according to Duke is 8, "pinch and tourniquet" test is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Iron deficiency anemia
b. Hemophilia
c. Hemorrhagic diathesis
d. Marchiafava-Michelis disease
*e. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura

364. Studying of pulmonary tuberculosis incidence provided data about patients socioeconomic living conditions and bad habits. What method allows to estimate the impact of these factors on tuberculosis incidence?
a. Calculation of correspondence index
b. Standardized index calculation
*c. Calculation of correlation coefficient
d. Calculation of regression coefficient
e. Calculation of reliability coefficient

365. A pregnant woman was registered in a maternity welfare clinic in her 11th week of pregnancy. She was being under observation during the whole term, the pregnancy course was normal. What document must the doctor give the pregnant woman to authorize her hospitalization in maternity hospital?
a. Appointment card for hospitalization
b. Medical certificate
*c. Exchange card
d. Sanitary certificate
e. Individual prenatal record

366. It is determined that 30 of a 100 women with risk factor had preterm labor, and of a 100 women without risk factor 5 women had preterm labor. What method of statistic data processing should the doctor use in order to estimate reliability of differences between the compared groups?
a. Correlation analysis
b. Standardization method
*c. Students criterion calculation
d. Relative numbers calculation
e. Average computing

367. A 1,5 y.o. child fell seriously ill: chill, body temperature rise up to 40,1°С, then rapid dropping to 36,2°С, skin is covered with voluminous hemorrhagic rash and purple cyanotic spots. Extremities are cold, face features are sharpened. Diagnosis: meningococcosis, fulminant form, infection-toxic shock. What antibiotic must be used at the pre-admission stage?
a. Lincomycin
b. Gentamycin
c. Penicillin
d. Sulfamonometoxin
*e. Soluble Levomycetine succinate

368. A 52 y.o. hard smoker complains of persistent cough with purulent sputum discharge especially in the mornings, dyspnea provoked even by slight physical exercises, wheezing chest, tachypnoe, general weakness. He considers himself to be ill for 12 years. The foresaid presentations appear 3-4 times per year usually after a common cold and have tendency to progress. What disease do you think about first of all?
*a. Chronic obstructive lung disease
b. Bronchoectatic disease
c. Aspergillosis
d. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
e. Bronchial asthma

369. An 8 y.o. boy was ill with B hepatitis one year ago. In the last 2 months he has complaints of undue fatiguability, sleep disorder, appetite loss, nausea, especially in the mornings. Skin isnt icterious, liver and spleen are 1 cm below the costal margins, painless. Alanine aminotransferase activity is 2,2 mcmol/L. How can this condition be estimated?
a. Residual effects of old viral hepatitis type B
b. Development of liver cirrhosis
c. Recurrance of viral hepatitis type B
d. Biliary dyskinesia
*e. Development of chronic hepatitis

370. A mineshaft is situated on the territory of homestead land, it is 20 m away from the house, 10 m - from the toilet and 15 m - from the neighbours house. What is the smallest distance that, according to the sanitary code, should be established between the well and the source of probable water pollution?
a. 25 m
b. 20 m
*c. 30 m
d. 10 m
e. 15 m

371. A triad of symptoms (“stearing spot”, “terminal film”, “blood dew”) have been revealed on examination of a patient. What disease should you think about?
*a. Psoriasis
b. Vasculitis
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Ritters disease
e. Seborrhea

372. A 20 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of having skin and sclera icteritiousness, dark urine, single vomiting, appetite loss, body temperature rise up to 38°С for 2 days. Three weeks ago he went in for fishing and shared his dishes with friends. Objectively: the patient is flabby, t°- 36,8°С, skin and scleras are icteritious, liver sticks from under the costal margin by 3 cm, it is sensitive; spleen isnt palpable. Urine is dark, stool is partly acholic. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Virus A hepatitis
b. Leptospirosis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Intestinal yersiniosis
e. Hemolytic anemia

373. Patient with thyreotoxicosis is in the 2 beds hospital ward of therapeutic department. The area of the ward is 18 m2, height 3 m, ventilation rate 2,5/hr. Air temperature - 20°С, relative humidity - 45%, air movement velocity - 0,3 m/s, light coefficient - ⅕, noise level - 30 db. Do hygienic evaluation of the conditions meet the standards?
a. Poor lighting
*b. Discomfortable microclimate
c. All conditions meet the requirements
d. High level of noise
e. Non-effective ventilation

374. A 42 y.o. man who has been ill with duodenal ulcer for 20 years complains of getting a sense of heaviness in stomach after meal, foul-smelling eructation, vomiting, weight loss. Objectively: his state is relatively satisfactory, tissue turgor is diminished. On palpation the belly is soft, there are no symptoms of peritenium irritation, "splashing sounds" in epigastrium. Defecation - once in 3 days. What complication corresponds with the patients state and described clinical
a. Ulcer penetration
b. Stomach cancer
c. Chronic pancreatitis
*d. Ulcerative pyloric stenosis
e. Concealed ulcer perforation

375. A 29 y.o. woman is critically ill. The illness is presented by high fever, chills, sweating, aching pain in lumbar area, discomfort during urination and frequent voiding. Pasternatskys sign is positive in both sides. On lab examination: WBC- 20×109/L; on urine analysis: protein - 0,6g/L, leukocyturia, bacteriuria. Your preliminary diagnosis
a. Nephrolithiasis
*b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Acute cystitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic pyelonephritis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

376. A 28 y.o. man fell seriously ill, he feels chill, has got a fever, body temperature raised up to 38,5°С, paroxysmal pain in the left iliac region, frequent defecation in form of fluid bloody and mucous mass. Abdomen palpation reveals painfulness in its left half, sigmoid colon is spasmed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute dysentery
b. Malignant tumors of large intestine
c. Amebiasis
d. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
e. Colibacillosis

377. Ambulace brought to the hospital a patient with acute respiratory viral infection. The illness began suddenly with temperature rise up to 39,9°С. He complains of headache in frontotemporal lobes, pain in eyeballs, aching of the whole body, nose stuffiness, sore throat, dry cough. At home he had a nasal hemorrhage twice. What type of acute respiratory viral infection is it?
a. RS-infection
b. Enterovirus infection
c. Adenoviral infection
d. Parainfluenza
*e. Influenza

378. A 40 y.o. patient complains of yellowish discharges from the vagina. Bimanual examination: no pathological changes. The smear contains Trichomonas vaginalis and blended flora. Colposcopy: two hazy fields on the front labium, with a negative Iodum test. Your tactics:
a. Cryolysis of cervix of the uterus
b. Cervix ectomy
c. Diathermocoagulation of the cervix of the uterus
d. Specific treatment of Trichomonas colpitis
*e. Treatment of specific colpitis and with the subsequent biopsy

379. A baby boy was born in time, it was his mothers 1st pregnancy. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it progressed. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were presented. The indirect bilirubin level was 275 mcmol/L, the direct bilirubin level - 5 mcmol/L, Hb- 150 g/L. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. Make a diagnosis
a. Physiological jaundice
b. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder
*c. Hemolytic disease of newborn (АВО incompatibility), icteric type
d. Hemolytic disease of newborn (Rh - incompatibility)
e. Hepatitis

380. A man, 42 years old, died in a road accident after the hemorrhage on the spot, because of acute hemorrhagic anemia. What minimum percent of the whole blood volume could result in death by acute hemorrhage?
a. 35-50%
b. 15-20%
c. 10-14%
*d. 25-30%
e. 6-9%

381. A 16 y.o. teenager complains of weakness, dizziness, sense of heaviness in the left hypochondrium. Objectively: skin and visible mucous membranes are icteric. Steeple skull. Liver +2 cm, the lower pole of spleen is at the level of navel. Blood test: RBC- 2,7*10^12/L, Hb- 88 g/L, WBC- 5,6*10^/L, ESR- 15 mm/h. What is the most probable reason of bilirubin level change?
a. Decrease of conjugated bilirubin
b. Increase of unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin
*c. Increase of unconjugated bilirubin
d. Decrease of unconjugated bilirubin
e. Increase of conjugated bilirubin

382. A 27 y.o. man complained of aching epigastric pain right after meal, heartburn and nausea. Stomach endoscopy revealed a large amount of mucus, hyperemia and edema of mucous membrane in gastric fundus with areas of atrophy. Make a diagnosis
a. Menetriers disease
b. Chronic gastritis of type B
*c. Chronic gastritis of type A
d. Peptic ulcer of stomach
e. Chronic gastritis of type C

383. A woman is admitted to the maternity hospital with stopped birth activity and mild bloody discharges from the vagina. The condition is serious, the skin is pale, consciousness is confused. AP- 80/40 mm Hg. The palpitation of the fetus is not determined. In medical hystory there was a Cesarean section a year ago. Make a diagnosis:
a. Abjointing of the mucous fuse from cervix of the uterus
b. Premature expultion of the amniotic waters
c. Presentation of the cord
d. Placental presentation
*e. Hysterorrhesis

384. A 30 y.o. primigravida woman has got intensive labor pains every 1-2 minutes that last 50 seconds. The disengagement has started. The perineum with the height of 4 cm has grown pale. What actions are necessary in this situation?
a. Perineum protection
*b. Episiotomy
c. Expectant management
d. Vacuum extraction of fetus
e. Perineotomy

385. A 32 y.o. man is divorced, has an irregular sexual life. He complains of falling out of hair in the region of eyelashes, eyebrows, scalp. Objectively: diffuse alopecia is observed, eyebrow margin is absent, eyelashes are stair-like (Pinkus sign). What examination should be carried out first of all?
*a. Wasserman test, IFT
b. CBC
c. Consultation of neuropathist
d. T.pallidum Immobilization Test (TPI)
e. Detection of the nasal mucous membrane for Micobacterium Leprae Hansen

386. A 61 y.o. man complained of sneezing and substernal pain on exertion. In the last 2 weeks such pain appeared at rest, with increased frequency, and couldnt be suppressed by 1 tablet of nitroglycerin. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Stable angina pectoris of the III functional class
b. Angina pectoris of a new onset
*c. Unstable angina pectoris
d. Radiculitis
e. Myocarditis

387. A 28 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about edematic face, moderate legs edemata; occasionally her urine has colour of "meat slops". When she was a teenager she often fell ill with angina. Objectively: skin is pallor, body temperature is 36,8°С, Ps- 68/min, rhythmic. AP- 170/110 mm Hg. What urine changes are the most probable?
a. Increase of relative density, hematuria, bacteriuria
*b. Proteinuria, hematuria, cylindrouria
c. Erythrocyturia and urinozuria
d. Decrease of relative density, proteinuria
e. Decrease of relative density, proteinuria, some urinary sediment

388. 47 y.o. patient complains of intensive skin itching, jaundice, bone pain. The skin is hyperpigmentated. There are multiple xanthelasma palpebrae. The liver is +6 cm enlarged, solid with acute edge. The blood analysis revealed total bilirubin -160 mkmol/L, direct - 110 mkmol/L, AST- 2,1 mmol/L, ALT- 1,8 mmol/L, alkaline phosphotase - 4,6 mmol/L, cholesterol- 9,2 mmol/L, antimitochondrial antibodies M2 in a high titer. What is the probable diagnosis?
a. Primary liver cancer
b. Chronic viral hepatitis B
*c. Primary biliary liver cirrhosis
d. Alcoholic liver cirrhosis
e. Acute viral hepatitis B

389. A 4 y.o. child attends the kindergarten. Complains of poor appetite, fatigue. Objective examination: skin and mucous membrane are pale, child is asthenic. In the hemogram: hypochromatic anemia 1st, leucomoide reaction of the eosinophile type. What pathology must be excluded first of all?
a. Duodenal ulcer
b. Lymphoprolipherative process
*c. Helminthic invasion
d. Atrophic gastritis
e. Hypoplastic anemia

390. In the gynecologic office a 28 y.o. woman complains of sterility within three years. The menstrual function is not impaired. There were one artificial abortion and chronic salpingo-oophoritis in her case history. Oral contraceptives were not used. Her husbands analysis of semen is without pathology. What diagnostic method will you start from the workup in this case of sterility?
a. Ultra sound investigation
b. Hysteroscopia
*c. Hysterosalpingography
d. Hormone investigation
e. Diagnostic scraping out of the uterine cavity

391. A 2 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with weight loss, unstable feces, anorexia, following the semolinas introduction (since 5 months). The child is adynamic, flabby, his skin is pale and dry, subcutaneous fat layer is emaciated. Distended and tensed abdomen, tympanitis on percussion of the upper part of abdomen, splashing sounds, feces are foamy, of light color, foul. On coprocytogram: a lot of neutral fat. What is the most probable cause of the disease?
a. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
*b. Celiakia (celiac disease)
c. Disaccharidase insufficiency
d. Intestinal dysbacteriosis
e. Chronic enteritis

392. A 19 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can determine the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. A traumatologist
b. A laboratory physician
c. An anaesthesilogist
*d. A doctor of any speciality
e. A surgeon

393. A 31 y.o. woman has complained for 3 years of pain and swelling of radiocarpal and metacarpophalangeal articulations, morning stiffness that lasts up to 1,5 hours. Two weeks ago she felt pain, swelling and reddening of knee joints, body temperature raised up to 37,5 degree С. Examination of her internal organs revealed no pathologic changes. Her diagnosis was rheumatoid arthritis. What changes in X-ray pictures of her joints are the most probable?
a. Multiple marginal osteophytes
b. Epiphysis osteolysis
c. Constriction of joint space, subchondral osteosclerosis
d. Cysts in subchondral bone
*e. Constriction of joint space, usura

394. A 33 y.o. patient, works as a secretary. Her diet contains 150 g of protein (including 100 g of animal protein), 200 g of fat, 600 g of carbohydrates. What pathology can result from this diet?
a. Schizophrenia
b. Common cold
c. Uterine fibromyoma
d. Paradontosis
*e. Obesity

395. A patient complains of skin painfullness and reddness of the right gastrocnemius muscle. Objectively: body temperature is 38,5°С, enlarged and painful inguinal lymph nodes on the right. Skin of extremity is edematic, hyperemic, covered with eruption in form of vesicles containing dark fluid; its palpation is painful. There is distinct border between normal and hyperemic skin. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Crus phlegmon
*b. Erysipelas, hemorrhagic form
c. Anthrax, dermal form
d. Chickenpox
e. Herpetic infection

396. A 28 y.o. woman consulted a doctor with the complaints of enlargening in size of an inborn pigment nevus, it was also wetting and itching. What test should not be used for diagnostics in this case?
a. Radioisotope diagnostics
*b. Incision biopsy
c. Glass-print
d. Termography
e. Yakss reaction

397. A full-term new-born suffered from ante- and intranatal hypoxia, was born in asphyxia (Apgar score 2-5 points). After birth babys excitation is progressing, occurs vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, squint, spontaneous Babinski and Moros reflexes. What is the most probable location of the intracranial hemorrhage in this case?
a. Small hemorrhages in brain tissue
b. Hemorrhages in ventricles of brain
*c. Subarachnoid hemorrhages
d. Periventricular hemorrhages
e. Subdural hemorrhages

398. A 63 y.o. woman complains of motiveless weakness, rapid fatigability, loss of appetite, aversion to meat. Two days ago she had stomach bleeding. Objectively: temperature - 37,5°С, BR- 20/min, Ps- 96/min, AP- 110/75 mm Hg. On palpation in epigastrium - pain and muscle tension. Blood count: Hb- 82 g/L, ESR- 35 mm/h. What examination will allow to make a diagnosis?
a. Stomach content examination
b. Endoscopy
*c. Cytologic
d. Coprology
e. Radiography

399. A 37 y.o. primigravida woman has been having labor activity for 10 hours. Labor pains last for 20-25 seconds every 6-7 minutes. The fetus lies in longitude, presentation is cephalic, head is pressed upon the entrance to the small pelvis. Vaginal examination results: cervix of uterus is up to 1 cm long, lets 2 transverse fingers in. Fetal bladder is absent. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Normal labor activity
b. Pathological preliminary period
*c. Primary uterine inertia
d. Discoordinated labor activity
e. Secondary uterine inertia

400. An employee has been invalid for 6 months as a result of a hip fracture. Who has the right to authorize the issue of the medical sick-list for the last 2 months?
*a. MSEC
b. DCC together with the head physician of a polyclinic
c. Head physician of the polyclinic
d. Deputy head physician on working capacity
e. DCC

401. A 40 y.o. woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Painless movable induration
b. Painful movable induration
c. Pure discharges from the nipple
d. Bloody discharges from the nipple
*e. Skin induration with inverted nipple

402. Heart auscultation of a 16 y.o. boy without clinical symptoms revealed accent of the S II and systolic murmur above the pulmonary artery. Heart sounds are resonant, rhythmic. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Defection of interatrial septum
*b. Functional murmur
c. Nonclosure of Botallos duct
d. Stenosis of pulmonary artery valve
e. Insufficiency of pulmonary artery valve

403. A 54 y.o. woman complains of increasing fatigue and easy bruising of 3 weeks duration. Physical findings included pale, scattered ecchymoses and petechiae and mild hepatosplenomegaly. In blood: RBC- 2,5×1012/L; Hb- 73 g/L; HCT- 20%; PLT- 23×109/L; and WBC- 162×109/L with 82% blasts, that contained Auric rods; peroxidase stain was positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Chronic leukemia
*c. Acute leukemia
d. Megaloblastic anemia
e. Hemolytic anemia

404. In course of observation of sanitary conditions of studying at the technical university it was necessary to evaluate the visual regimen of students, who study from 9 a.m to 3 p.m. What index of natural light will be the most informative?
a. Depth of study room
b. Light coefficient
c. Time of the room insolation
d. Presence of mixed (upper-lateral) light
*e. Natural light coefficient

405. A 37 y.o. patient complains of pain in the right arm which increases during motion, raised body temperature up to 39°С. In the right cubital fossa there is a trace of injection, hyperemia and thickening along the vein. Your diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Abscess
c. Phlegmon
*d. Phlebitis
e. Inflammation of lymph

406. A patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of periodical pain in the lower part of abdomen that gets worse during menses, weakness, malaise, nervousness, dark bloody smears from vagina directly before and after menses. Bimanual examination revealed that uterus body is enlarged, appendages cannot be palpated, posterior fornix has tuberous surface. Laparoscopy revealed: ovaries, peritoneum of rectouterine pouch and pararectal fat have "cyanotic eyes". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis of genital organs
b. Chronic salpingitis
c. Polycystic ovaries
*d. Disseminated form of endometriosis
e. Ovarian cystoma

407. A patient who takes diuretics has developed arrhythmia as a result of cardiac glycoside overdosE. What is the treatment tactics in this case?
a. Reduced magnesium concentration in blood
b. Increased sodium consentration in blood
c. -
d. Increased calcium level in blood
*e. Increased potassium concentration in blood

408. A 30 y.o. man complains of sharp pain in the right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 m, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
a. Chronic purulent otitis media
b. Acute mastoiditis
*c. Acute purulent otitis media
d. Chronic secretory otitis media
e. Eustachian tube disfunction

409. A 28 y.o. patient who has no permanent residence was admitted to the hospital with preliminary diagnosis "influenza", on the 5-th day of disease there are appeared maculopapular and petechial rash on his body and internal surfaces of his extremities. Body temperature is 41°С, euphoria, hyperemic face, scleras reddening, tongue tremor, tachycardia, splenomegaly, excitement. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Measles
b. Leptospirosis
c. Typhoid fever
d. Delirium alcoholicum
*e. Spotted fever

410. A 58 y.o. patient complains of weakness, leg edemata, dyspnea, anorexia. He has been suffering from chronic bronchitis for many years. During the last 5 years he has been noting intensified discharge of sputum that is often purulent. Objectively: RR- 80/min, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Disseminated edemata, skin is dry and pale, low turgor. In urine: intense proteinuria, cylindruria. Specify the most probable pathological process in kidneys:
a. Chronic pyelonephritis
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Interstitial nephritis
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*e. Renal amyloidosis

411. A patient has got pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is evident, the tongue is coated with white coating. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodes are revealed in the axillary area. The skin is erythematous and glistering over the lymphatic nodes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
*b. Bubonic plague
c. Anthrax
d. Acute purulent lymphadenitis
e. Tularemia

412. A district doctor keeps the record of reconvalescents after infectious diseases, people who are disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases, patients with chronic pathologies. What category of patients should belong to the III health group?
a. All above mentioned categories
b. People with chronic pathologies and disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases
c. Reconvalescents after infectious diseases and patients with chronic pathologies
*d. People with chronic diseases
e. People disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases

413. A 50 y.o. woman for 1 year complained of attacks of right subcostal pain after fatty meal. Last week the attacks have repeated every day and become more painful. What diagnostic study would you recommend?
a. Liver function tests
*b. Ultrasound examination of the gallbladder
c. Blood cell count
d. X-ray examination of the gastrointestinal tract
e. Ultrasound study of the pancreas

414. A 10 y.o. child who is at oligoanuretic stage of acute renal insufficiency has got sensations of pricking in the mucous membrane of oral cavity and tongue, extremities numbness, reduced reflexes, respiratory disturbance, arrhythmia. What are these symptoms caused by?
a. Hyperazotemia
b. Acidosis
*c. Hyperkaliemia
d. Alkalosis
e. Hyponatremia

415. A young man has painful indurations in the peripapillary regions of both mammary glands. The most reasonable action will be:
a. To remove them
*b. To leave these indurations untouched
c. To cut and drain them
d. To administer steroids locally
e. To take an aspirate for bacterial inoculation and cytology

416. A 75 y.o. man with IHD (atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis, atrial fibrillation, cardiac insufficiensy stage 2 B; chronic pyelonephritis) was prescribed digoxin. During the first 6 days the digoxin dose amounted 0,25 mg twice per day that let to abatement of dyspnea, edemata and cyanosis. But on the 7-th day the patient developed nausea and bradycardia. What is the most probable cause of digoxin intoxication?
a. Treatment complex doesnt include unitiole
b. Too long intake of saturating dose
c. Disturbed metabolism of digoxin in liver
d. Exceeding daily saturating dose
*e. Disturbed elimination of the medication by kidneys

417. The patient was admitted to the hospital on the 7-th day of the disease with complaints of high temperature, headache, pain in the muscles, especially in calf muscles. The dermal integuments and scleras are icteric. There is hemorrhagic rash on the skin. Urine is bloody. The patient went fishing two weeks ago. What is the diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Brucellosis
c. Yersiniosis
d. Trichinellosis
*e. Leptospirosis

418. A 19 y.o. girl was admitted to Emergency Department: unconsionsness state, cyanosis, myotic pupil, superficial breathing - 12/min. BP- 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action corresponding to this clinical situation:
*a. Controlled respiration
b. Caffeine injection
c. Oxygen inhalation
d. Gastric lavage
e. Cordiamine injection

419. A 3 m.o. child fell seriously ill, body temperature rised up to 37,8°С, there is semicough. On the 3-rd day the cough grew worse, dyspnea appeared. On percussion: tympanic sound above lungs, on auscultation: a lot of fine moist and wheezing rales during expiration. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchopneumonia
b. Acute respiratory viral infection, focal pneumonia
c. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis
d. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis with asthmatic component
*e. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchiolitis

420. 3 weeks ago a patient was ill with tonsillitis. Clinical examination reveals edema, arterial hypertension, hematuria, proteinuria (1,8 g/per day), granular and erythrocital casts. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Intestinal nephritis
b. Pyelonephritis
c. Cystitis
*d. Glomerulonephritis
e. Renal amyloidosis

421. A child is 2 m.o. Inguinofemoral folds contain acutely inflamed foci with distinct borders in form of spots that are slightly above the surrounding areas due to skin edema. The rash has appeared during the week. Vesiculation and wetting are absent. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Napkin-area dermatitis
b. Psoriasis
c. Complicated course of scabies
d. Infantile eczema
e. Dermatomycosis

422. A child was born with body weight 3250 g and body length 52 cm. At the age of 1,5 month the actual weight is sufficient (4350 g), psychophysical development corresponds with the age. The child is breast-fed, occasionally there are regurgitations. What is the cause of regurgitations?
a. Pylorostenosis
b. Esophageal atresia
*c. Aerophagia
d. Pylorospasm
e. Acute gastroenteritis

423. A 30 y.o. patient has got multiple body skin rash consisting of small paired elements that are scattered on the skin diorderly and mostly focally, they are accompanied by itch. The rash appeared a few days after attending sport centre and sauna. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Allergic dermatitis
*b. Scabies
c. Neurodermitis
d. Contact dermatitis
e. Eczema

424. A primigravida woman appealed to the antenatal clinic on the 22.03.03 with complaints of boring pain in the lower part of abdomen. Anamnesis registered that her last menstruation was on the 4.01.03. Bimanual examination revealed that uterine servix is intact, external fauces is closed, uterus is enlarged up to the 9-th week of pregnancy, movable, painless. What complication can be suspected?
a. Hysteromyoma
b. -
*c. Risk of abortion in the 9-th week of pregnancy
d. Vesicular mole
e. Abortion that started in the 9-th week of pregnancy

425. An 8 y.o. child presents with low-grade fever, arthritis, colicky abdominal pain, and a purpuric rash limited to the lower extremities. laboratory studies reveal a guaiac-positive stool, a urinalysis with red blood cell (RBC) casts and mild proteinuria, and a normal platelet count. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
b. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
c. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
*e. Henoch-Schonleins vasculitis

426. A 49 y.o. female patient was admitted to the hospital with acute attacks of headache accompanied by pulsation in temples, AP rised up to 280/140 mm Hg. Pheochromocytoma is suspected. What mechanism of hypertensive atack does this patient have?
a. Increasing of plasma renin activity
*b. Increasing of catecholamines concentration
c. Increasing of thyroxine excretion
d. Increasing of aldosterone level in blood
e. Increasing of vasopressin excretion

427. A 24 y.o. patient 13 months after the first labour consulted a doctor about amenorrhea. Pregnancy has concluded by a Cesarean section concerning to a premature detachment of normally posed placenta hemorrhage has made low fidelity 2000 ml owing to breakdown of coagulability of blood. Choose the most suitable investigation:
*a. Determination of the level of Gonadotropins
b. USI of organs of a small pelvis
c. Progesteron assay
d. Computer tomography of the head
e. Determination of the contents of Testosteron-Depotum in Serum of blood

428. A 52 y.o. patient with previously functional Class II angina complains of 5 days of intensified and prolonged retrosternal pains, decreased exercise tolerance. Angina is less responsive to Nitroglycerinum. Which of the following diagnosis is most likely?
a. Myocarditis
b. Cardialgia due to spine problem
c. Myocardial dystrophy
*d. IHD. Unstable angina
e. IHD. Functional Class II angina

429. A 42 y.o. patient complains of weakness, heartbeat, nasal hemorrhages, cutaneous hemorrhages. His condition has been worsening progressively for a month. Objectively: grave condition, the extremities and body skin has spotted and petechial hemorrhages, lymph nodes are not palpable, Ps- 116/min, liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not palpable. Blood has evident pancytopenia. What disease should you think about first of all?
a. Acute agranulocytosis
b. Acute leukosis
c. Hemorrhagic vasculitis
d. Werlhofs disease
*e. Hypoplastic anemia

430. A patient who has been contacting with benzol for 6 years has a non evident leukopenia, moderate reticulocytosis, gingival hemorrhage, dizziness, asthenovegetative syndrome. What a severity degree of chronic intoxication with benzol corresponds with described symptoms?
a. Severe
b. Disease is not connected with work conditions
*c. Minor
d. Moderate
e. -

431. The patients has sustained blunt trauma to the chest. Which of the following would most likely be the cause of acute cardiopulmonary collapse?
a. Rib fractures
b. Acute adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
c. Pulmonary contusion
*d. Pneumothorax
e. Hemothorax

432. Laparotomy was performed to a 54 y.o. woman on account of big formation in pelvis that turned out to be one-sided ovarian tumor along with considerable omental metastases. The most appropriate intraoperative tactics involves:
a. Ablation of an ovary and omental metastases
b. Ablation of omentum and both ovaries with tubes
c. Biopsy of omentum
d. Biopsy of an ovary
*e. Ablation of omentum, uterus and both ovaries with tubes

433. A 74 y.o. patient has been suffering from hypertension for 20 years. He complains of frequent headache, dizziness, he takes enalapril. Objectively: accent of the SII above aorta, Ps- 84 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 180/120 mm Hg. What group of hypotensive medications could be additionally prescribed under consideration of the patients age?
a. Central sympatholytics
b. alpha-adrenoceptor blockers
*c. Thiazide diuretics
d. beta-adrenoceptor blockers
e. Loop diuretics

434. A woman was hospitalised with full-term pregnancy. In survey: the uterus is morbid, the abdomen is tense, heart sounds of the fetus are not auscultated. What is the most probable complication of pregnancy?
a. Preterm labour
b. Hydramnion
c. Acute hypoxia of a fetus
*d. Premature detachment of the normally posed placenta
e. Back occipital presentation

435. X-ray pattern of thorax organs revealed a large intensive inhomogeneous opacity with indistinct outlines on the right side at the level of the 4-th rib. In the centre of this opacity there is a horizontal level and clearing of lung tissue above it. What disease does this X-ray pattern correspond with?
*a. Abscess of the right lung
b. Right-sided pneumothorax
c. Tuberculoma of the right lung
d. -
e. Peripheral cancer

436. A 44 y.o. man has acute disarthria, right-sided Horners syndrome, hiccup, right-sided ataxia, loss of pain sensation of his face to the right and of his body to the left. The man is conscious. Computer tomography of brain is normal. The most reasonable measure will be:
a. Out-patient observation
b. Endarterectomy of the right carotid artery
c. Surgical cerebral decompression
d. Endarterectomy of the left carotid artery
*e. Introduction of direct coagulants and observation

437. A 40 weeks pregnant woman in intrinsic obstetric investigation: the cervix of a uterus is undeveloped. The oxytocin test is negative. Upon inspection at 32 weeks it is revealed: AP- 140/90 mm Hg, proteinuria 1 g/l, peripheric edemata. Reflexes are normal. Choose the most correct tactics of guiding the pregnant:
a. Strict bed regimen for 1 month
b. Complex therapy of gestosis for 7 days
c. Cesarean section immediately
*d. Laborstimulation after preparation
e. Complex therapy of gestosis for 2 days

438. A patient consulted a doctor about acure respiratory viral infection. The patient was acknowledged to be off work. The doctor issued him a medical certificate for 5 days. The patient is not recovering. What measures should the doctor take in order to legalize the further disability of patient?
a. To prolong the medical certificate at his own discretion but no more than for 6 days in total
b. To prolong the medical certificate together with department superintendent
c. To send the patient to the medical consultative commission
*d. To prolong the medical certificate at his own discretion but no more than for 10 days in total
e. To send the patient to the medical social expert comission

439. A full-term child survived antenatal and intranatal hypoxia, it was born in asphyxia (2-5 points on Apgar score). After birth the child has progressing excitability, there are also vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, strabismus, spontaneous Moros and Babinskys reflexes. What localization of intracranial hemorrhage is the most probable?
a. Periventricular hemorrhages
b. Hemorrhages into the brain ventricles
*c. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
d. Small cerebral tissue hemorrhages
e. Subdural hemorrhage

440. A 21 y.o. man complains of having morning pains in his back for the last three months. The pain can be relieved during the day and after physical exercises. Physical examination revealed reduced mobility in the lumbar part of his spine, increase of muscle tonus in the lumbar area and sluch during moving. X-ray pattern of spine revealed bilateral sclerotic changes in the sacrolumbal part. What test will be the most necessary for confirming a diagnosis?
*a. HLA-B27
b. ESR
c. Antinuclear antibodies
d. Uric acid in blood plasma
e. Rheumatoid factor

441. The 10 y.o. boy has complains on headache, weakness, fever 40°С, vomiting, expressed dyspnea, pale skin with flush on right cheek, lag of right hemithorax respiratory movement, dullness on percussion over low lobe of right lung, weakness of vesicular respiration in this zone. The abdomen is painless and soft at palpation. Which disease lead to these symptoms and signs?
a. Flu
b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Intestinal infection
*d. Pneumonia croupousa
e. Acute appendicitis

442. A woman had the rise of temperature up to 39°С on the first day after labour. The rupture of fetal membranes took place 36 hours before labour. The investigation of the bacterial flora of cervix of the uterus revealed hemocatheretic streptococcus of groupa. The uterus body is soft, tender. Discharges are bloody, mixed with pus. Specify the most probable postnatal complication:
*a. Metroendometritis
b. Infection of the urinary system
c. Infected hematoma
d. Thrombophlebitis of pelvic veins
e. Apostatis of junctures after the episiotomy

443. A 30 y.o. man complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39°С. There was acute onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic without definite borders and without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectional arthritis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Erysipelatous inflammation
*d. Gout
e. Osteoarthritis

444. A 25 y.o. patient complains of pain in the I finger on the right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain is getting worse. Acute pain appears during the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Subcutaneous panaritium
b. Articular (joint) panaritium
*c. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)
d. Bone panaritium
e. Paronychia

445. Poorly refined wastes of an industrial plant are usually thrown into the river that supplies drinking water. It causes perishing of some microorganisms, disturbs processes of water self-purification and worsens its quality that can have negative influence upon peoples health. How is this effect of environmental factors called?
a. Direct
b. Combined
c. Complex
*d. Indirect
e. Associated

446. A 32 y.o. woman consulted a gynecologist about having abundant long menses within 3 months. Bimanual investigation: the body of the uterus is enlarged according to about 12 weeks of pregnancy, distorted, tuberous, of dense consistence. Appendages are not palpated. Histological test of the uterus body mucosa: adenocystous hyperplasia of endometrium. Optimal medical tactics:
a. Phase by phase vitamin therapy
b. Radial therapy
*c. Surgical treatment
d. Phytotherapy
e. Hormonetherapy

447. A 70 y.o. man is ill with ischemic heart disease. His mood is evidently depressed, anxious. As a result of continious sleeplessness he has got fears, suicidal thoughts. He would sit for a long time in the same pose, answer after a pause, in a low, monotonous voice. His face has a look of suffering, pain, fear. What is the main psychopathologic syndrome?
a. Obsessive syndrome
*b. Depressive syndrome
c. Phobic syndrome
d. Asthenic syndrome
e. Paranoid syndrome

448. A 14 y.o. girl got a bad mark at the lesson of math as well as teachers reprimand that made her cry for a long time. At the end of the lesson she suddenly lost consciousness and fell down. Objectively: skin is of pale pink colour, Ps- 100 bpm, satisfactory, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Eyelids are closed and dont give away to the tries of their opening. There are no evident injuries. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Hysteric syncope
b. Epilepsy
c. Long QT syndrome
d. Vagotonic syncope
e. Sympathicotonic collapse

449. A 32 y.o. patient has been suffering from systematic scleroderma for 14 years. She was repeatedly exposed to treatment in the in-patient department. Complains of periodical dull cardiac pain, dyspnea, headache, eyelid edemata, weight loss, pain and deformation of extremities joints. What organs lesion deteriorates the prognosis for the disease?
*a. Kidneys
b. Gastrointestinal tract
c. Lungs
d. Skin and joints
e. Heart

450. A 7 d.o. boy is admitted to the hospital for evaluation of vomiting and dehydration. Physical examination is otherwise normal except for minimal hyperpigmentation of the nipples. Serum sodium and potassium concentrations are 120 meq/L and 9 meq/L respectively. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Pyloric stenosis
*b. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
c. Panhypopituitarism
d. Hyperaldosteronism
e. Secondary hypothyroidism

451. An aircraft factory processes materials with use of lasers. It is determined that the device radiates in the light spectrum and that levels of laser radiation at the workplaces exceed the alarm level. Specify, what organs will be affected in the first place?
a. Kidneys
b. Liver
c. Skin
d. Spleen
*e. Eyes

452. A 70 y.o. patient complains of weakness, dizziness, short periods of unconsciousness, pain in the cardiac area. Objectively: HR- 40 bpm, heart sounds are rhythmic, the S1 is dull, periodically amplified. AP is 180/90 mm Hg. What is the most probable cause of hemodynamic disturbances?
*a. Atrioventricular block type III
b. Bradysystolic form of ciliary arrhythmia
c. Atrioventricular block type I
d. Complete left bandle-branch block
e. Sinus bradycardia

453. A 38 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in pain in the lumbar part of spine irradiating to the posterior surface of his left leg. The pain increases during changing body position and also in the upright position. Examination revealed positive symptoms of tension. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Arachnomyelitis
b. Myelopathy
*c. Pathology of intercostal disks
d. Polyneuritis
e. Spinal cord tumor

454. A 25 y.o. woman complained of fatigue, hair loss and brittle nails. The examination revealed pallor of skin, Ps- 94/min, BP- 110/70 mm Hg. On blood count: Hb- 90 g/L, RBC- 3,5×1012/L,c.I.- 0,7; ESR- 20 mm/h. Serum iron level was 8,7 mcmol/l. What treatment would you initiate?
a. Packed RBCs transfusion
b. Vitamin B12 intramuscularly
c. Blood transfusion
*d. Ferrous sulfate orally
e. Iron dextrin injections

455. A 60 y.o. asthmatic man comes for a check up and complains that he is having some difficulty in "starting to urinate". Physical examination indicates that the man has blood pressure of 160/100 mm Hg, and a slight enlarged prostate. Which of the following medications would be useful in treating both of these conditions:
a. Propranolol
*b. Doxazosin
c. Labetalol
d. Phentolamine
e. Isoproterenol

456. The 7 m.o. infant is suffering from acute pneumonia which was complicated by cardiovascular insufficiency and respiratory failure of II degree. The accompanied diagnosis is malnutrition of II degree. Choose the best variant of therapy:
*a. Ampiox and Amicacin
b. Gentamycin and Macropen
c. Macropen and Penicillin
d. Penicillin and Ampiox
e. Ampiox and Polymixin

457. A 43 y.o. woman complains of contact hemorrhages during the last 6 months. Bimanual examination: cervix of the uterus is enlarged, its mobility is reduced. Mirrors showed the following: cervix of the uterus is in the form of cauliflower. Chrobak and Schiller tests are positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Leukoplakia
b. Polypus of the cervis of the uterus
c. Cervical pregnancy
*d. Cancer of cervix of the uterus
e. Nascent fibroid

458. A 30 y.o. victim of fire has thermal burns of III-A and III-B degree that amount 20% of total skin coverlet. AP is 110/70 mm Hg, HR- 120/min. What transfusion means shoul be used for blind infusion correction during transportation?
a. Albumin
b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Polyglucine
d. 10% glucose solution
*e. Salines

459. A 42 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in acute pain in the right half of his chest, increased dyspnea. The patients condition is grave: cyanosis of lips and mucous membranes, RR is 28 pm, Ps- 122 bpm. On percussion there is tympanitis above the right half of chest, on auscultation - stongly diminished breath sounds; accent of the II heart sound above the pulmonary artery. AP is 80/40 mm Hg. What is the main emergency action at the pre-admission stage?
a. Calling a cardiological brigade
b. Aminophylline introduction
c. Oxygen inhalation
*d. Air aspiration from the pleural cavity
e. Adrenaline introduction

460. A 23 y.o. woman who suffers from insulin-dependent diabetes was admitted to the acute care department with mental confusion, inadequate anxious behaviour, hyperhidrosis, excessive salivation, tachycardia. What examination will be a primary task?
a. Clinical blood analysis
b. Gaseous composition of arterial blood
c. Blood urea and creatinine test
*d. Blood test for sugar
e. Plasma electrolytes test

461. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: t°- 37,3°С, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lung cancer
b. Macrofocal pneumonia
c. Bronchoectatic disease
d. Exudative pleuritis
e. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis

462. An anestesiologist gives narcosis to the patient, he uses a non-reversive contour. Anesthetic is halothane. Air temperature in the operation room is 21°С, humidity 50%, level of noise 30 db. What occupational hazard is the principal one under these conditions?
a. High level of noise
b. Mental overfatigue
*c. Air pollution with anesthetic
d. Improper occupational microclimate
e. Compelled working pose

463. Prevalence of a disease in region N amounted 1156 occurences per 1000 of inhabitants. What of the mentioned indices characterizes the disease prevalence?
a. Visual index
b. Standardized
*c. Intensive
d. Extensive
e. Ratio

464. A 15 y.o. patient has developmental lag, periodical skin yellowing. Objectively: spleen is 16х12х10 cm large, holecistolithiasis, skin ulcer on the lower third of his left crus. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,0×1012/L, Hb- 90 g/L,c.I.- 1,0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Blood bilirubin - 56 mmole/L, indirect bilirubin - 38 mmole/L. Choose the way of treatment:
a. Omentohepatopexy
b. Portocaval anastomosis
c. Spleen transplantation
d. Omentosplenopexy
*e. Splenectomy

465. A 75 y.o. woman with coronary heart disease constantly takes warfarin. She was taken to the acute care department with complaints of sudden sensation of weakness in the left half of her body and eyeball deviation to the left. What examination of the patient will be a primary task?
a. Spinal punction
b. Electroencephalogram
c. Magnetic resonance tomography of brain
d. Ultrasonic examination of carotid arteries
*e. Computer tomography of brain

466. A girl 13 y.o. consulted the school doctor on account of moderate bloody discharge from the genital tracts, which appeared 2 days ago. Secondary sexual characters are developed. What is the most probable cause of bloody discharge?
*a. Menarche
b. Juvenile hemorrhage
c. Werlhofs disease
d. Endometrium cancer
e. Haemophilia

467. A 14 y.o. child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for atack reduction?
a. Amisyl
b. Corglicone
c. Euphyline
*d. Obsidan
e. No-shpa

468. A worker at a porcelain factory who has been in service for 10 years complains of cough, dyspnea, ache in his chest. What occupational disease are these complaints most typical for?
*a. Silicosis
b. Occupational bronchial asthma
c. Chronic dust bronchitis
d. Multiple bronchiectasis
e. Chronic cor pulmonale

469. Name a statistical observation unit for determination of influence amount of bloodsugar on the healing of wounds surface in a postoperative period:
a. An amount of bloodsugar
b. The patient who was discharged on an after-care
c. Blood analysis
d. The patient who has a wound surface
*e. The patient in a postoperative period

470. A 58 y.o. man complaines of severe inspiratory dyspnea and expectoration of frothy and blood-tinged sputum. He has been suffering from essential hypertension and ischemic heart disease. On examination: acrocyanosis, "bubbling" breathing, Ps- 30/min, BP- 230/130 mm Hg, bilateral rales. Choose medicines for treatment
a. Theophylline, prednisolon
*b. Morphine, furosemide, nitroprusside sodium
c. Cordiamine, isoproterenol
d. Strophanthine, potassium chloride, plathyphylline
e. Albuterol, atropine, papaverine

471. For the persons who live in a hot area after an accident at a nuclear object, the greatest risk within the first decade is represented by cancer of:
*a. Thyroid gland
b. Lungs
c. Skin
d. Reproduction system organs
e. Breast

472. A 7 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital. He complains of unpleasant sensations in the heart region, pain in the epigastrium, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: evident paleness of skin, dyspnea, jugular pulse. Heart borders are within the normal range. Heart sounds are clear, HR- 170/min, small pulse. AP- 90/50 mm Hg. EKG showed: paroxysm of ventricular tachycardia. The paroxysm can be suppressed by:
a. Strophanthine
b. Enalapril
c. Nifedipine
*d. Lidocain
e. Morphine

473. At a machine-building plant the casts are cleaned by means of abrasion machines that are a source of local vibration. What are the most efficient preventive measures for preventing harmful effect of vibration on workers organisms?
a. Warm hand baths
*b. Use of gloves that reduce vibration
c. Preliminary and periodical medical examinations
d. Hand massaging
e. Giving sanitary instructions to the workers

474. A number of viable fetuses per 1000 women at the age between 15 and 44 is determined by:
*a. Genital index
b. Obstetric rate
c. Birth rate
d. Reproductive level
e. Perinatal rate

475. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with stopped repeated ulcerative bleeding. He was pale and exhausted. Blood count: Нb- 77 g/l, Нt- 0,25. In view of anemia there were made two attempts of blood transfusion of the same group - А(ІІ) Rh+. In both cases the transfusion had to be stopped because of development of anaphylactic reaction. What transfusion medium would be advisable in this case?
*a. Washed erythrocytes
b. Fresh citrate blood
c. Erythrocytic suspension
d. Erythrocytic mass (native)
e. Erythrocytic mass poor in leukocytes and thrombocytes

476. Medical examination of a 43 y.o. man revealed objectively pailness of skin and mucous membranes, smoothness of lingual papillas, transverse striation of nails, fissures in the mouth corners, tachycardia. Hemoglobin content amounts 90 g/l; there are anisocytosis, poikilocytosis. The most probable causative agent of this condition is deficiency of the following microelement:
*a. Iron
b. Selenium
c. Zinc
d. Magnesium
e. Copper

477. A woman in her 39-th week of pregnancy, the second labor, has regular birth activity. Uterine contractions take place every 3 minutes. What criteria describe the beginning of the II labor stage the most precisely?
*a. Cervical dilatation no less than 4 cm
b. Rupture of membranes
c. Cervical smoothing over 90%
d. Presenting part is in the lower region of small pelvis
e. Duration of uterine contractions more than 30 seconds

478. A patient complains of nycturia, constant boring pain in perineum and suprapubic region, weak urine jet, frequent, obstructed and painful urination. He has been ill for several months, pain in perineum appeared after getting problems with urination. Rectal examination revealed that prostate is enlarged (mostly owing to the right lobe), dense, asymmetric, its central sulcus is flattened, the right lobe is dense, painless, tuberous. What disease can it be?
*a. Cancer of prostate
b. Chronic congestive prostatitis
c. Prostate sclerosis
d. Prostate tuberculosis
e. Urolithiasis, stone of the right lobe of prostate

479. A 19 y.o. girl admitted to the hospital complained of pain in the knee and fever of 38,6°С. She is ill for 2 weeks after acute tonsillitis. On exam, hyperemia and swelling of both knees, temperature is 37,4°С, HR- 94/min, BP- 120/80 mm Hg, and heart border is displaced to the left; S1 is weak, systolic murmur is present. Total blood count shows the following: Hb- 120 g/L, WBC- 9,8×109/L, ESR of 30 mm/L. ECG findings: the rhythm is regular, PQ = 0,24 sec. What is a causative agent of the disease?
a. Autoimmune disorder
b. Viral-bacterial association
*c. Beta-hemolytic streptococci
d. Staphylococci
e. Ricchetsia

480. A 39 y.o. patient complains of having dyspnea during physical activity, crus edemata, palpitation, heart intermissions. Objectively: HR is 150 bpm, atrial fibrillation. Heart is both ways enlarged. Heart sounds are muted. Liver is 6 cm below the costal margin. Echocardiogram reveals dilatation of heart chambers (end diastolic volume of left ventricle is 6,8 cm) is 29% EF, valve apparatus is unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Dilated cardiomyopathy
b. Restrictive cardiomyopathy
c. Thyreotoxic cardiomyopathy
d. Exudative pericarditis
e. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

481. A 65 y.o. man who has problems with urination as a result of benign prostate gland adenoma dveloped fever and chill, hypotension, sinus tachycardia. Skin is warm and dry. Clinical blood analysis revealed absolute granulocytopenia. These hemodynamic changes are most likely to be caused by:
a. Secondary reflex vasodilatation as a result of lowered cardiac output
*b. Endotoxemia with activation of complement system
c. Secondary circulation insufficiency with retained systolic function as a result of peripheral vasoconstriction
d. Reflex vagus stimulation with lowered cardiac output
e. Secondary endothelial changes as a result of bacterial lesion

482. The family doctor examined a patient and diagnosed an acute bleeding of an intestine. What is the doctors professional tactics in this situation?
*a. The urgent hospitalization in to the surgical department
b. The urgent hospitalization in to tthe herapeutic department
c. Treatment at a day time hospital
d. Aminocapronic acid intravenously
e. Treatment at home

483. A 41 y.o. woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis for 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: evident inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous membrane. In blood: WBC- 9,8×109/L, RBC- 3,0×1012/L, sedimentation rate - 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
a. Vikasolum
b. Linex
c. Kreon
d. Motilium
*e. Sulfosalasine

484. A 74 y.o. patient complains of abdomen pain and sweling, nausea. She suffers from ischemic heart disease, postinfarction and atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, abdomen is swollen, abdominal wall doesnt take active part in respiration. Laparoscopy revealed a small amount of muddy effusion in abdominal cavity, one of the loops of small intestine is dark-cyan. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
b. Ischemic abdominal syndrome
c. Erysipelas
d. Acute intestinal obstruction
e. Twisted bowels

485. A 2 y.o. girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
*a. Rubella
b. Measles
c. Pseudotuberculosis
d. Scarlet fever
e. Adenoviral infection

486. A 7 y.o. boy has crampy abdominal pain and a rash on the back of his legs and buttocks as well as on the extensor surfaces of his forearms. Laboratory analysis reveals proteinuria and microhematuria. He is most likely to be affected by:
a. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
*b. Anaphylactoid purpura
c. Dermatomyositis
d. Polyarteritis nodosa
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

487. The patient 25 y.o. was admitted on the 1st day of the disease with complaints of double vision in the eyes, heavy breathing. The day before the patient ate home-made mushrooms. On objective examination: paleness, widened pupils, disorder of swallowing, bradycardia, constipation are marked. What is the diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis, gastrointestinal form
*b. Botulism
c. Yersiniosis
d. Leptospirosis
e. Lambliasis

488. An 18 y.o. woman consulted a gynecologist about the pain in the lower part of abdomen, fever up to 37,5°С, considerable mucopurulent discharges from the genital tracts, painful urination. Vaginal examination with mirrors: the urethra is infiltrated, cervix of the uterus is hyperemic, erosive. The uterus is painful, ovaries are painful, thickened; fornixes are free. Bacterioscopy test revealed diplococcus. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Trichomoniasis
b. Chronic gonorrhea
c. Candydomycosis
d. Chlamydiosis
*e. Recent acute ascending gonorrhea

489. A 14 y.o. girl complains of profuse bloody discharges from genital tracts during 10 days after suppresion of menses for 1,5 month. Similiar bleedings recur since 12 years on the background of disordered menstrual cycle. On rectal examination: no pathology of the internal genitalia. In blood: Нb- 70 g/L, RBC- 2,3×1012/L, Ht- 20. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Juvenile bleeding, posthemorrhagic anemia
b. Polycyst ovarian syndrome
c. Hormonoproductive ovary tumor
d. Werlholfs disease
e. Noncomplete spontaneous abortion

490. A 35 y.o. patient was admitted to the local hospital a week after a road accident with clinical picture of clotted hemothorax. What is the most appropriate treatment tactic for prevention of acute pleural empyema?
a. Complex conservative therapy
b. Treatment by pleural punctions
*c. Surgical removal of clotted hemothorax
d. Passive drainage of pleural cavity
e. Active drainage of pleural cavity

491. An 8 y.o. boy complains of constant cough along with discharge of greenish sputum, dyspnea during physical activities. At the age of 1 year and 8 months he fell ill for the first time with bilateral pneumonia that had protracted course. Later on there were recurrences of the disease 5-6 times a year, during the remission periods there was constant productive cough. What examination results will be the most important for making a final diagnosis?
a. Spirography
b. Roentgenography of thorax organs
*c. Bronchography
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Bacterial inoculation of sputum

492. A 42 y.o. woman works at the factory on the fabrication of mercury thermometers, complains of the headache, swoons, reduction of memory, small and frequent flutter of fingers of drawn hands, the eyelids and the tongue, bleeding gums, gingivitis. What preparation is it nessesary to use for the elimination of mercury from the organism?
a. Seduxen
*b. Unithiol
c. Pentoxil
d. Magnesium sulphate
e. Sodium hydrate of carbon

493. A 43 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of high temperature of the body and severe headache. On examination: carbuncle is revealed on the forearm. There are intense edema around it, insignificant pain, regional lymphadenitis. The patient is a worker of cattle-ranch. What disease is it necessary to think about first?
a. Erysipeloid
*b. Anthrax
c. Carcinoma of skin
d. Eczema
e. Erysipelas

494. A 34 y.o. woman in the 10-th week of gestation (the second pregnancy) consulted a doctor of antenatal clinic with purpose of statement on the dyspensary record. In the previous pregnancy there took place hydramnion, the childs birth weight was 4086. What method of examination is necessary for carrying out, first of all?
a. USI of the fetus
b. Bacteriological investigation of discharge from the vagina
c. Determination of the contents of fetoproteinum
*d. The test for tolerance to glucose
e. A cardiophonography of fetus

495. A 60 y.o. patient cpmplains of weakness, dizziness, heaviness in the upper part of abdomen, paresthesia of toes and fingers. Objectively: skin icteritiousness, tongue is crimson, smooth. Hepatomegaly. In blood: Hb- 90 g/l, erythrocytes - 2,3×1012/l, reticulocytes - 0,2%; color index - 1,2, macrocytosis; Jollys bodies, Cabots ring bodies. What medication is the most appropriate for treatment?
a. Dyspherol
b. Feroplex
c. Packed red blood cells
*d. Vitamin В12
e. Prednisolone

496. A doctor of the general practice has registered the following death causes for the previous year: the first place was taken by cardiovascular diseases (60%), the second - by tumors (18%), then - traumas (8,3%) etc. What diagrams will provide the most substantial information about the registered ocurrences?
a. Cartogram
b. Line diagram
c. Circle diagram
*d. Pie diagram
e. Column diagram

497. A 22 y.o. patient complains of having boring pain in the right iliac region for one week, morning sickness, taste change. Delay of menstruation is 3 weeks. Objectively: AP- 110/70 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min, t°- 37,0°С. Bimanual examination revealed that uterus is a little enlarged, soft, movable, painless. Appendages palpation: a painful formation 3х4 cm large on the right, it is dense and elastic, moderately movable. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Cyst of the right ovary
c. Uterine pregnancy
d. Interrupted tubal pregnancy
*e. Progressing tubal pregnancy

498. A 43 y.o. patient complains of periodical pain attacks in the right half of her face. The attack is characterized by spasm of mimetic muscles of the right faces half, reddening of skin on this side. Blood has no pathologies. She was diagnosed with right-sided trifacial neuralgia. What medication should be prescribed?
a. Indometacin
*b. Finlepsin
c. Analgine
d. Prednisolone
e. Actovegine

499. A 41 y.o. patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with hemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
a. Intravenous administration of pituitrin
*b. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube
c. Hemostatic therapy
d. Administration of plasma
e. Operation

500. A 19 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia B-type. What antihemophilic medicine should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Fresh frozen blood
*b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Dried plasma
d. Native plasma
e. Cryoprecipitate

501. A patient with a history of coronary artery disease and atrial fibrillation has the onset of sudden pain and weakness of the left leg. Examination reveals a cool, pale extremity with absent pulses below the groin and normal contralateral leg. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Dissecting aortic aneurysm
*b. Arterial embolism
c. Arterial thrombosis
d. Cerebrovascular accident
e. Acute thrombophlebitis

502. A 25 y.o. man who has been suffering from disseminated sclerosis for 4 years complains of increasing unsteadyness, weakness of his lower extremities, urinary retention. Objectively: central tetraparesis. Cerebellar ataxia. Disturbed function of pelvic organs. What is the most appropriate therapy in this case?
a. Vitamins
*b. Glucocorticoids
c. Nootropics
d. Antibiotics
e. Desensitizing medications

503. A 75 y.o. man has acute pain in the paraumbilical region accompanied by vomiting and feeling of abdominal swelling in approximately 30 minutes after meals. He lost 10 kg during the last months because he doesn't eat in order to avoid pain. Abdomen examination reveals no changes in the periods between pain attacks. Above the right femoral artery a murmur can be auscultated, peripheral pulsation in the lower extrimities is weak. X-ray examination of stomach and colonoscopy reealed no changes. What is the leading factor of this pathogenesis?
a. Neoplastic process
b. Transient obstruction
*c. Ischemia
d. Psychogenic changes
e. Inflammation

504. The parameter of infantile mortality for the last year was - 16,3, in present year - 15,7. Name a kind of the diagram that can be used for a graphic representation of it:
a. Linear
b. Sector
c. Radial
*d. Stylar
e. Intrastylar

505. Elderly people develop tumors more frequently. One of the main causes is:
a. Increased disfunctioning of mitoses
b. Increased intensity of antibodies formation
*c. Decreased activity of cellular immunity
d. Decreased intensity of antibodies formation
e. Increased activity of cellular immunity

506. A patient is staying in the hospital with the diagnosis of abdominal typhus. During the 3-d week from the beginning of the disease the patient stopped keeping diet and confinement to bed. As a result the body temperature and rapid pulse decreased and melena appeared. What kind of complications should we think about first of all?
*a. Intestinal haemorrhage
b. Hepatite
c. Nephroso-nephritis
d. Meningitis
e. Thrombophlebitis

507. A 40 y.o. patient complains of yellowish discharges from the vagina. Bimanual examination: no pathological changes. The smear contains Trichomonas vaginalis and blended flora. Colposcopy: two hazy fields on the front labium, with a negative Iodum test. Your tactics:
*a. Treatment of specific colpitis and with the subsequent biopsy
b. Diathermocoagulation of the cervix of the uterus
c. Cryolysis of cervix of the uterus
d. Cervix ectomy
e. Specific treatment of Trichomonas colpitis

508. Atmospheric air of an industrial centre is polluted with the following wastes of metallurgical plants: sulphuric, nitric, metal, carbon oxides that have negative influence upon the inhabitants health. The effct of these hazards can be characterized as:
a. Complex
b. Associated
c. Adjacent
d. Mixed
*e. Combined

509. A 5 tons milk batch was sampled. The lab analysis revealed: fat content 2%, specific density - 1,04 g/cm3, acidity - 210Т, reductase probe - weak-positive. What way is the product to be used in?
*a. Sell but inform customers about milk quality
b. Sell without limitations
c. Discard for animal feeding
d. Technical utilization
e. Do the product away

510. The disease began acutely. The frequent watery stool developed 6 hours ago. The bodys temperature is normal. Then the vomiting was joined. On examination: his voice is hoarse, eyes are deeply sunken in the orbits. The pulse is frequent. Blood pressure is low. There is no urine. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Typhoid fever
b. Toxic food-borne infection
c. Salmonellosis
*d. Cholera
e. Dysentery

511. A 35 y.o. patient experienced a strong nervous stress that resulted in formation of reddened and edematic areas on the back surface of her hands with further formation of small inflammated nodules, vesicles and then erosions accompanied by profuse discharge of serous liquid. The process is also accompanied by intense itching. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Allergic dermatitis
b. Common contact dermatitis
c. Microbial eczema
*d. Common eczema
e. Toxicodermia

512. 6 m.o. infant was born with bodys mass 3 kg and length 50 cm. He is given natural feeding. How many times per day the infant should be fed?
a. 4
*b. 5
c. 7
d. 6
e. 8

513. The child has complains of the "night" and "hungry" abdominal pains. At fibroscopy in area a bulbus ofa duodenum the ulcerrative defect of 4 mms diameter is found, the floor is obtected with a fibrin, (H.p+). Administer the optimum schemes of treatment:
a. Maalox - Ranitidin
*b. Omeprasole - Trichopolum - Claritromicin
c. Trichopolum
d. De-nol
e. Vicalinum - Ranitidin

514. A 38 y.o. patient has been treated in a hospital. A fever of 39°С, chest pain which is worsened by breathing, cough, brownish sputum appeared on the 7-th day of the treatment. Chest X- ray shows left lower lobe infiltrate. Which of the following is the treatment of choice for this patient?
a. Penicillin
*b. Cephalosporins of the III generation
c. Streptomycin
d. Erythromycin
e. Tetracycline

515. A 19 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can determine the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. A laboratory physician
b. An anaesthesilogist
c. A traumatologist
*d. A doctor of any speciality
e. A surgeon

516. A triad of symptoms ("stearing spot", "terminal film", "blood dew") have been revealed on examination of a patient. What disease should you think about?
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Seborrhea
c. Vasculitis
*d. Psoriasis
e. Ritters disease

517. Medical examination of a man revealed "geographic tongue". This microsymptom is the evidence of the following vitamin deficiency:
*a. Vitamins of B group
b. Vitamin C
c. Vitamin PP
d. Vitamin D
e. Vitamin A

518. A 20 y.o. man has a stab knife wound in the left half of thorax close to nipple. AP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 130/min, BR- 32/min. During inspiration there is increase of pulse wave in the region of jugular vein, decrease of peripheral arterial pulse and reduction of AP. Respiratory murmurs are unchanged. X-ray pattern of thorax organs has no pecularities. After introduction of 2 l of isotonic solution the AP stayed low, CVP raised up to 32 cm of water column. The first step in further treatment of the patient will be:
a. Catheterization of left pleural cavity while the outer end of catheter is submerged in water
*b. Echocardiogram
c. Introduction of loop diuretics in order to reduce CVP
d. Continued parenteral introduction of fliud in order to raise AP
e. Introduction of peripheral vasodilatators in order to reduce CVP

519. A 30 y.o. woman has the 2-nd labour that has been lasting for 14 hours. Hearbeat of fetus is muffled, arrhythmic, 100/min. Vaginal examination: cervix of uterus is completely opened, fetus head is level with outlet from small pelvis. Saggital suture is in the straight diameter, small crown is near symphysis. What is the further tactics of handling the delivery?
a. Cesarean section
b. Cranio-cutaneous (Ivanovs) forceps
*c. Use of obstetrical forceps
d. Use of cavity forceps
e. Stimulation of labour activity by oxytocin

520. On the 4-th day of injections a 60 y.o. patient felt pain and tissue induration in the left buttock. Objectively: the skin in the superexternal quadrant of the left buttock is red and hot, palpation reveals a painful infiltrate 6х6 cm large with softening in the centre. Body temperature is 37,9°С. What action is necessary to diagnose an abscess?
a. X-ray investigation
b. Biopsy
c. Ultrasonic examination
*d. Punction
e. Clinical blood analysis

521. A patient has been suffering from morning cough accompanied by discharge of small amount of sputum, dyspnea for 8 years. He has been smoking for 10 years. Objectively: cyanosis, prolonged expiration, dry rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Idiopatic fibrosing alveolitis
*b. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
c. Multiple bronchiectasis
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Chronic non-obstructive bronchitis

522. A 56 y.o. patient ill with cholecystectomy suddenly had an intense hemorrhage. She needs blood transfusion. Her blood group is АВ(ІV) Rh-. Hemotransfusion station doesnt dispose of this group. What group of donors can be involved?
*a. Donors of rare blood groups
b. Relatives
c. Reserve donors
d. Emergency donors
e. Donors of active group

523. A 35 y.o. patient who suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis and has been hemodialysis-dependent for the last three years developed intermissions of heart activity, hypotension, increasing weakness, dyspnea. ECG showed bradycardia, atrioventricular block type I, high pointed wavest. The day before the flagrant violation of diet took place. What is the most probable cause of these changes?
a. Hypokaliemia
*b. Hyperkaliemia
c. Hyperhydratation
d. Hypernatriemia
e. Hypocalciemia

524. A 42 y.o. woman complains of dyspnea, edema of the legs, and tachycardia during small physical exertion. Heart borders are displaced to the left and S1 is accentuated, there is diastolic murmur on apex. The liver is enlarged by 5 cm. What is the cause of heart failure?
a. Tricuspid regurgitation
b. Aortic stenosis
c. Tricuspid stenosis
*d. Mitral stenosis
e. Mitral regurgitation

525. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for drinking water in the field conditions
a. Spring water
b. River water
c. Rain water
d. Water from melted snow
*e. Artesian well water

526. A healthy 75 y.o. woman who leads a moderately active way of life went through a preventive examination that revealed serum concentration of common cholesterol at the rate of 5,1 mmol/l and HDL (high-density lipoproteins) cholesterol at the rate of 70 mg/dl. ECG reveals no pathology. What dietary recommendation is the most adequate?
a. Increase of cellulose consumption
b. Decrease of saturated fats consumption
c. Decrease of carbohydrates consumption
d. Decrease of cholesterol consumption
*e. Any dietary changes are necessary

527. A 50 y.o. woman who suffers from chronic pyelonephritis was prescribed a combination of antibiotics for the period of exacerbation - gentamicin (80 mg 3 times a day) and biseptol (960 mg twice a day). What consequences may be caused by such a combination of antibiotics?
a. Chronic renal insufficiency
b. Glomerulosclerosis
*c. Acute renal insufficiency
d. Acute suprarenal insufficiency
e. Antibiotic combination is optimal and absolutely safe

528. A woman consulted a doctor on the 14-th day after labor about sudden pain, hyperemy and induration of the left mammary gland, body temperature rise up to 39°С, headache, indisposition. Objectively: fissure of nipple, enlargement of the left mammary gland, pain on palpation. What pathology would you think about in this case?
a. Lacteal cyst with suppuration
b. Fibrous adenoma of the left mammary gland
c. Phlegmon of mammary gland
*d. Lactational mastitis
e. Breast cancer

529. A 7 y.o. girl fell ill abruptly: fever, headache, severe sore throat, vomiting. Minute bright red rash appear in her reddened skin in 3 hours. It is more intensive in axillae and groin. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is hyperemic. Greyish patches is on the tonsills. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. What is your diagnosis?
a. Measles
*b. Scarlet fever
c. Pseudotuberculosis
d. Rubella
e. Enteroviral infection

530. A 45 y.o. man complains of having intensive pain in the epigastric region 1,5-2 hours later after food intake. He has been suffering from ulcer for 11 years. Objectively: t°- 36,5°С, RR- 16/min, Ps- 70 bpm, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. On palpation: local painfulness in the right epigastric region. What parameters of intragastric Ph-meter in the region of stomach body are the most typical for this patients disease?
a. рН = 5,0-6,0
b. рН = 3,0-4,0
*c. рН = 1,0-2,0
d. рН = 4,0-5,0
e. рН = 6,0-7,0

531. A 62 y.o. patient suffers from DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. Patient has to undergo an operation on inguinal hernia. What tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be used?
a. Prescribe long-acting insulin
b. Continue with the current therapy
c. Prescribe guanyl guanidines
*d. Prescribe fast-acting insulin
e. Give Glurenorm in place of Maninilum

532. Fluorography of a 45 y.o. man revealed some little intensive foci with indistinct outlines on the top of his right lung for the first time. The patient doesnt feel worse. He has been smoking for many years. Objectively: pulmonary sound above lungs on percussion, respiration is vesicular, no rales. Blood count is unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Peripheral cancer of lung
*b. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis
d. Eosinophilic pneumonia
e. Bronchopneumonia

533. A 28 y.o. woman comes to the Emergency Room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot", 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Superficial venous thrombosis
b. Cellulitis
c. Subcutaneous hematoma
d. Early deep vein thrombosis
e. Insect bite

534. A 58 y.o. patient developed acute myocardium infarction 4 hours ago, now he is in the acute care department. ECG registers short paroxysms of ventricular tachycardia. The most appropriate measure will be to introduct:
a. Veropamil
b. Propafenone
*c. Lidocain
d. Amyodaron
e. Flecainid

535. The total area of ground intended for building of a regional hospital is 2,0 hectare. What is the highest possible capacity of the in-patient hospital that can be built upon this ground?
a. 800 beds
b. 400 beds
c. Over 1000 beds
*d. 100 beds
e. 200 beds

536. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Kidneys abruption
b. Subcapsular kidneys rupture
*c. Kidneys contusion
d. Multiple kidneys ruptures
e. Paranephral hematoma

537. A 46 y.o. patient complains of colicky pain in the right lumbar region that is irradiating to the lower part of abdomen, nausea. She didnt have such pains before. Survey radiograph of abdominal cavity organs didnt reveal any pathological stains. Ultrasonic sonogram revealed in the enlarged right renal pelvis a hyperechoic mass approximately 1,5 cm large that gives rise to an "ultrasonic track". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Renal tuberculosis
b. Malignant tumor of kidney
c. Benign tumor of kidney
*d. Renal calculus
e. Renal cyst

538. A patient of 32 y.o. complains of severe weakness, tremor of extremities. Objective examination: body weight loss, wet and warm skin. The thyroid gland is enlarged up to the 3-rd degree, painless, elastic. Ps- 108/min. BP- 160/55 mm Hg. There are no other abnormalties. The diagnosis is:
a. Chronic fibrous thyroiditis
b. Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, hypertrophic type
*c. Diffuse toxic goiter of the 3-rd degree, thyrotoxicosis of the average degree
d. Toxiferous adenoma of the thyroid gland
e. Diffuse euthyroid goiter of the 3-rd degree

539. A 9 y.o. child with diagnosis "chronic tonsillitis" stands dispanserization control. Within 1 year of observation there was one exacerbation of disease. Physical condition is satisfactory. The general state is not infringed. Define group of health:
a. I-st
b. III (b)
c. III (c)
*d. III (a)
e. II-d

540. What guarantees against the preconceived attitude to the physician in cases of professional law violations do you know?
a. Conduct an inquiry by preliminary investigator of police department
b. Draw up a statement about forensic medical examination
c. Conduct forensic medical examination by district forensic medicine expert
d. Utilisation copy of medical documents
*e. Sanction of public prosecutor, inquiry by preliminary investigator of prosecutors office, committee of experts

541. A 10 y.o. child has average indices of body length and her chest circumference exceeds average indices, body weight index is heightened due to lipopexia. Functional characteristics of physical development are below average. Physical development of this child can be estimated as:
a. Harmonic
*b. Disharmonic
c. Average
d. Below average
e. Deeply disharmonic

542. Patient 27 y.o. was hospitalized to the psychiatric hospital for the 4-th time during 2 years. Heard voices commenting on his actions, had delusions of persecution (was sure that the Mafia wanted to kill him). After a course of treatment with neuroleptics was discharged from hospital with the diagnosis of schizophrenia, state of remission. The secondary prevention of the relapses of schizophrenia requires:
a. Psychoanalytic treatment
*b. Supportive treatment with neuroleptics of prolonged action
c. Psychiatric observation
d. Participation in a self-help group
e. Long-term hospitalization

543. An engineer-chemist at the age of 47 often fells ill with an occupational skin disease. Who makes a decision to transfer him to other job accepts?
a. The chief of shop
*b. DCC
c. The attending physician
d. MSEC
e. A head physician

544. A 2 m.o. child with birth weight 5100 g has jaundice, hoarse cry, umbilical hernia, physical development lag. Liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not enlarged. In anamnesis: delayed falling-away of umbilical cord rest. In blood: Hb- 120 g/L, erythrocytes - 4,5×1012/L, ESR- 3 mm/h. Whole serum bilirubin is 28 mcmole/L, indirect - 20 mcmole/L, direct - 8 mcmole/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemolitic anemia
b. Congenital hepatitis
c. Conjugated jaundice
d. Cytomegalovirus infection
*e. Congenital hypothyreosis

545. A 20 y.o. patient complains of amenorrhea. Objectively: hirsutism, obesity with fat tissue prevailing on the face, neck, upper part of body. On the face there are acne vulgaris, on the skin - striae cutis distense. Psychological and intellectual development is normal. Gynecological condition: external genitals are moderately hairy, acute vaginal and uterine hypoplasia. What diagnosis is the most probable?
*a. Itsenko-Cushing syndrome
b. Babinski-Froehlich syndrome
c. Stein-Leventals syndrome
d. Turners syndrome
e. Shichans syndrome

546. A 54 y.o. woman has been ill with osteomyelitis of femoral bone for over 20 years. During the last month there appeared and have been steadily increasing edemata of lower extremities. Urine analysis revealed: proteinuria - 6,6 g/l. Blood analysis: disproteinemia in form of hypoalbuminemia, raise of ?2- and ?-globulines, ESR- 50 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
*b. Secondary renal amyloidosis
c. Chronic glomerulonephritis
d. Systematic lupus erythematosus
e. Myelomatosis

547. An infant is 2 d.o. It was full-term born with signs of intrauterine infection, thats why it was prescribed antibiotics. Specify, why the gap between antibiotic introductions to the new-born children is longer and dosage is smaller compared to the older children and adults?
a. The newborns have reduced activity of glucuronil transferase
b. The newborns have lower concentration of protein and albumins in blood
*c. The newborns have a lower level of glomerular filtration
d. The newborns have bigger hematocrit
e. The newborns have diminished blood pH

548. A 4 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with complaints of dyspnea, rapid fatigability. His anamnesis registers frequent respiratory diseases. On percussion: heart borders are dilatated to the left and upwards. On auscultation: amplification of the SII above pulmonary artery, a harsh systolodyastolic "machine" murmur is auscultated between the II and the III rib to the left of breast bone, this murmur is conducted to all other points including back. AP is 100/20 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Opened arterial duct
b. Interventricular septal defect
c. Interatrial septal defect
d. Valvar aortic stenosis
e. Isolated stenosis of pulmonary arterial orifice

549. A 27 y.o. patient has been having for almost a year fatigue, hyperhidrosis, heaviness in the left hypochondrium, especially after meals. Objectively: spleen and liver enlargement. In blood: erythrocytes - 3,2*10^12/l, Hb- 100 g/l, colour index - 0,87, leukocutes - 100*10^9/l, basophils - 7%, eosinophils - 5%, myelocytes - 15%, juveniles - 16%, stab neutrophils - 10%, segmentonuclear leukocytes - 45%, lymphocytes - 2%, monocytes - 0%, reticulocytes - 0,3%, thrombocytes - 400*10^9/l, ESR- 25 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chronic myeloleukosis
b. Acute leukosis
c. Hepatocirrhosis
d. Chronic lympholeukosis
e. Erythremia

550. A worker diagnosed with "acute dysentery" was sent to the infectious department by a doctor of aid post. What document should be used for registration of this disease?
*a. Urgent report on infectious disease
b. Outpatients card
c. Inpatients card
d. Statistic coupon for registration of final diagnoses
e. Statistic card of the patient who left in-patient hospital

551. The major repair of a hospital included renewal of colour design of hospital premises because it is of great psychological and aesthetical importance; and so the walls of patient wards will be painted under consideration of:
a. Hospital profile
b. Creation of cozy atmosphere
c. Diseases of patients who will be staying in these wards
d. Wall reflection coefficient
*e. Windows orientation

552. A patient complains of feeling heaviness behind his breast bone, periodical sensation of food stoppage, dysphagy. During the X-ray examination barium contrast revealed a single saccular outpouching of anterodextral esophagus wall with regular contours and rigidly outlined neck. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Esophageal polyp
b. Hiatal hernia
c. Varix dilatation of esophageal veins
*d. Esophageal diverticulum
e. Cancer of esophagus

553. A 51 y.o. women was taken to the emergency department in convulsive status epilepticus. The first means of medical management should be:
a. Inserting a tongue blade
b. Injecting 5 mg of diazepam followed by a loading dose of phenytoin
c. Inducing pentobarbital coma
d. Administering an instravenous bolus of 50% dextrose
*e. Ensuring that the airway is open and the patient is oxygenating

554. A 34 y.o. woman in her 29-th week of pregnancy, that is her 4-th labor to come, was admitted to the obstetric department with complaints of sudden and painful bloody discharges from vagina that appeared 2 hours ago. The discharges are profuse and contain grumes. Cardiac funnction of the fetus is rhytmic, 150 strokes in the minute, uterus tone is normal. The most probable provisional diagnosis will be:
a. Vasa previa
b. Bloody discharges
c. Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndrome
*d. Placental presentation
e. Detachment of normally located placenta

555. A 7 y.o. girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
a. Meningitis
b. Neurotoxic syndrome
c. Meningoencephalitis
*d. Encephalitis
e. Myelitis

556. A 41 y.o. woman complains of weakness, fatigue, fever up to 38°С, rash on the face skin, pain in the wrists and the elbows. On physical examination: erythematous rash on the cheeks with "butterfly" look, the wrists and elbow joints are involved symmetrically, swollen, sensitive, friction rub over the lungs, the heart sounds are weak, regular, HR- 88/min, BP- 160/95 mm Hg. Hematology shows anemia, leucopenia, lymphopenia; on urinalysis: proteinuria, leukocyturia, casts. What is the main mechanism of disease development?
a. Production of antibodies to endothelial cells
b. Production of antimitochondrial antibodies
c. Production of myocytes antibodies
d. Production of myosin antibodies
*e. Production of antibodies to double-stranded DNA

557. The highest risk of congenital anomalies probably occurs when human embryos or fetuses are exposed to ionizing radiation. During which part of gestational period does it occur?
a. The first 7 days
*b. 18-45 days after conception
c. 10-14 days after conception
d. The third trimester
e. 90-120 days after conception

558. A 16 y.o. female presents with abdominal pain and purpuric spots on the skin. Laboratory investigations reveals a normal platelet count, with haematuria and proteinuria.The most likely diagnosis:
a. Heavy metal poisoning
*b. Schonlein-Henoch purpura
c. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Sub acute bacterial endocarditis
e. Haemolytic uraemic syndrome

559. By the end of the 1st period of physiological labour the clear amniotic waters were given vent. Contractions lasted 35-40 sec every 4-5 min. Palpitation of the fetus is 100 bpm. The AP is 140/90 mm Hg. Diagnosis:
a. Labors before term
b. Back occipital presentation
*c. Acute hypoxia of the fetus
d. Hydramnion
e. Premature detachment of normally posed placenta

560. A 3 y.o. child with weight defficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 mmol/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary hypoplasia
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
d. Recurrent bronchitis
e. Bronchiectasis

561. A patient suffers from chronic recurrent pancreatitis with evident disturbance of exocrinous function. After intake of rich spicy food and spirits his stool becomes fatty. Reduced production of what factor is the most probable cause of steatorrhea?
*a. Lipase
b. Alkaline phosphatase
c. Tripsin
d. Amylase
e. Acidity of gastric juice

562. A patient with hepatic cirrhosis drank some spirits that resulted in headache, vomiting, aversion to food, insomnia, jaundice, fetor hepaticus, abdominal swelling. What complication of hepatic cirrhosis is meant?
a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
b. Hemorrhage from varicosely dilatated veins of esophagus
*c. Hepatocellular insufficiency
d. Portal hypertension
e. Acute stomach ulcer

563. A 33 y.o. woman survived two operations on account of extrauterine pregnancy, both uterine tubes were removed. She consulted a doctor with a question about possibility of having a child. What can be advised in this case?
a. Induction of ovulation
b. Substitutional maternity
c. Insemination with her husbands semen
*d. Extracorporal fertilization
e. Artifical fertilization with donors semen

564. A patient with nosocomial pneumonia presents signs of collapse. Which of the following pneumonia complications is most likely to be accompanied with collapse?
a. Emphysema
b. Toxic hepatitis
c. Exudative pleuritis
d. Bronchial obstruction
*e. Septic shock

565. A 30 y.o. man presents with a history of recurrent pneumonias and a chronic cough production of foul smelling, pirulent sputum, ocassionally glood tinged, which is worse in the morning and on lying down. On physical examination, the patient appears chronically ill with clubbing of fingers, inspiratory rales at the base of lungs posteriorly. Most likely diagnosis:
*a. Bronchoectasis
b. Pulmonary neoplasm
c. Chronic bronchitis
d. Disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Chronic obstructive emphysema

566. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine and vomiting. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease is suspected?
*a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Renal colic
c. Perforative gastric ulcer
d. Acute enterocolitis
e. Acute appendicitis

567. After delivery and revision of placenta there was found the defect of placental lobe. General condition of woman is normal, uterus is firm, there is moderate bloody discharge. Inspection of birth canal with mirrors shows absence of lacerations and raptures. What action is nesessary?
a. Use of uterine contracting agents
b. Use of hemostatic medications
c. Urine drainage, cold on the lower abdomen
*d. Manual exploration of the uterine cavity
e. External massage of uterus

568. A male, 50 y.o., has a black flat mole on the skin of the leg for 10 years. Since 4 months ago the shapes of the mole become irregular. What diagnostic methods should be used?
a. Thermography
*b. Excision biopsy
c. Incision biopsy
d. Fine needle biopsy
e. Smear for microscopic examination

569. Which gestational age gives the most accurate estimation of weeks of pregnancy by uterine size?
a. Between 12 and 20 weeks
b. Between 31 and 40 weeks
c. Over 40 weeks
d. Between 21 and 30 weeks
*e. Less that 12 weeks

570. A patient is 65 y.o. He has been a smoker for 40 years. He has lost 10 kg during the last 3 months. Complains of pain in the epigastric area after taking meals, diarrhea, jaundice. Physical examination revealed enlarged, painless gallbladder. Feces are light-coloured and clay-like. Blood analysis revealed increased level of whole and direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphotase and glutaminepyruvate transferase. Clinical urine analysis showed positive bilirubin reaction and negative urobilinogene reaction. Where is the initial process that caused these changes?
a. In common bile duct
b. In gallbladder
*c. In pancreas
d. In liver
e. In duodenum

571. A 28 y.o. man fell seriously ill, he feels chill, has got a fever, body temperature raised up to 38,5°С, paroxysmal pain in the left iliac region, frequent defecation in form of fluid bloody and mucous mass. Abdomen palpation reveals painfulness in its left half, sigmoid colon is spasmed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Colibacillosis
b. Amebiasis
*c. Acute dysentery
d. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
e. Malignant tumors of large intestine

572. On the 15-th day after a minor trauma of the right foot a patient felt malaise, fatigability, irritability, headache, high body temperature, feeling of compression, tension and muscular twitching of his right crus. What disease can it be?
*a. Tetanus
b. Anaerobic gas gangrene
c. Thromboembolism of popliteal artery
d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Erysipelas

573. A 56 y.o. woman has an acute onset of fever up to 39°С with chills, cough, and pain on respiration in the right side of her chest. On physical examination: HR- 90/min, BP- 95/60 mm Hg, RR- 26/min. There is dullness over the right lung on percussion. On X-ray: infiltrate in the right middle lobe of the lung. What is the diagnosis?
*a. Community-acquired lobar pneumonia with moderate severity
b. Community-acquired bronchopneumonia
c. Hospital-acquired lobar pneumonia
d. Acute pleurisy
e. Acute lung abscess

574. A 22 y.o. man complains of acute throat pain, increasing upon swallowing during 3 days. Body temperature 38,3°С, neck lymph nodules are slightly enlarged and painful. Pharyngoscopically - tonsilar hyperemia, enlargement and edema, tonsils are covered by round yellow fibrinous patches around crypts openings. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus in swab analysis. What is the diagnosis?
a. Pharyngeal diphtheria
b. Іnfectious mononucleosis
c. Pharyngeal candidosis
*d. Acute membranous tonsilitis
e. Acute follicular tonsilitis

575. A 10 y.o. boy with hemophilia has signs of acute respiratory viral infection with fever. What of the mentioned antifebrile medications are contraindicated to this patient?
a. Panadol extra
*b. Acetylsalicylic acid
c. Paracetamol
d. Analgin
e. Pipolphen

576. In treatment and prevention establishments, regardless of their organisational and proprietary form, the rights of patients should be observed. Which of these rights are the most significant?
a. The right to the protection from incompetence
b. The right to the information
c. The right to be heard
d. The right to the free choice
*e. The right to the protection of the patients interests

577. Mother of a newborn child suffers from chronic pyelonephritis. She survived acute respiratory viral infection directly before labour. Delivery was at term, the period before discharge of waters was prolonged. On the 2-nd day the child got erythematous rash, later on - vesicles about 1 cm large with seropurulent content. Nikolskys symptom is positive. Dissection of vesicles results in erosions. The child is inert, body temperature is subfebrile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Sepsis
b. Vesicular pustulosis
*c. Impetigo neonatorum
d. Pseudofurunculosis
e. Ritters dermatitis

578. A 30 y.o. primigravida woman has got intensive labor pain every 1-2 minutes that lasts 50 seconds. The disengagement has started. The perineum with the height of 4 cm has grown pale. What actions are necessary in this situation?
a. Perineum protection
b. Vacuum extraction of fetus
c. Expectant management
*d. Episiotomy
e. Perineotomy

579. A 63 y.o. patient was operated on account of big multinodular euthyroid goiter. Despite of techical difficulties a forced subtotal resection of both parts of the thyroid gland was performed. On the 4-th day after the operation the woman had cramps of face muscles and upper extremities, stomach ache. Positive Chvosteks and Trousseaus signs. What is the most probable cause of such condition?
a. Tracheomalacia
*b. Insufficiency of parathyroid glands
c. Injury of recurrent nerve
d. Thyrotoxic crisis
e. Postoperative hypothyroidism

580. A 43 y.o. patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenoutic papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
a. To perform external choledoch drainage
b. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs
*c. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
d. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
e. To perform choledochoduodenostomy

581. A 34 y.o. patient 3 hours ago was bitten by a dog. He has got a non-bleeding wound in his left arm caused by the dogs bite. What surgical care would you provide to the patient?
a. Cream bandage
b. Complete suturing of the wound
c. Aseptic bandage
*d. Wound bathing with detergent water and antiseptic application
e. Incomplete suturing of the wound

582. A 34 y.o. patient has been suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis for 7 years; he complains of muscle feebleness, weight loss, diarrheas, increased frequency of urination. Objectively: hyperpigmentation of skin, gums, internal cheek surfaces. AP is 90/58 mm Hg. Blood count: erythrocutes - 3,1*10^12/L, Hb- 95 g/L,c.I.- 0,92; leukocytes - 9,4*10^9/L, eosinophils - 7, segmentonuclear leukocytes - 45, stab neutrophils - 1, lymphocytes - 40, monocytes - 7, Na+- 115 mmole/L, К+- 7,3 mmole/L. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Primary hyperaldosteronism
b. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
c. Diabetes insipidus
d. Pheochromocytoma
*e. Primary insufficiency of adrenal cortex

583. 10 years ago a patient had a fracture in the middle one-third of his left femoral bone, and during the last 7 years he has been having acute inflammation in the area of old fracture accompanied by formation of a fistula through which some pus with small fragments of bone tissue is discharged. After a time the fistula closes. What complication of the fracture is it?
a. False joint
*b. Chronic osteomyelitis
c. Trophic ulcer
d. Soft tissue phlegmon
e. Bone tuberculosis

584. A 56 y.o. patient has worked at the aluminium plant over 20 years. Within 3 last years he has got loosening of teeth, bone and joint pains, piercing pains in heart region, vomiting. The provisional diagnosis is:
a. Phosphorus intoxication
*b. Fluorine intoxication
c. Manganese intoxication
d. Lead intoxication
e. Mercury intoxication

585. A 65 y.o. patient has acute pain, paresthesia, paleness of his left extremity. Pulse in thea. dorsalis pedis is absent. There is skin coldness and paleness that gradually spreads upwards. These symptoms are most likely to be the evidence of:
a. Thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
b. Hernia of lumbar disc
*c. Arterial occlusion
d. -
e. Thrombophelebitis of deep veins

586. Patient 22 y.o., was admitted to trauma center with complains of pain in the left ankle joint, which increased while movements and weight bearing. On the clinical examination it was found, that the patient had the closed fracture of medial malleolus without displacement. In which position the foot has to be fixed in plaster cast?
a. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
b. In position of planter flexion of foot
*c. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot
d. In position of pronation
e. In position of supination

587. A 39 y.o. woman complaines of squeezed epigastric pain 1 hour after meal and heartburn. She had been ill for 2 years. On palpation, there was moderate tenderness in pyloroduodenal area. Antral gastritis was revealed on gastroscopy. What study can establish genesis of the disease?
a. Examination of stomach secretion
*b. Revealing of Helicobacter infection in gastric mucosa
c. Gastrin level in blood
d. Detection of autoantibodies in the serum
e. Examination of stomach motor function

588. A 40 y.o. patient with rheumatic heart disease complains of anorexia, weakness and loss of weight, breathlessness and swelling of feet. The patient had tooth extraction one month ago. On examination: t°- 39°С, Ps- 100/min. Auscultation: diastolic murmur in the mitral area. Petechial lesion around the clavicle; spleen was palpable
a. Thrombocytopenia purpura
b. Recurrence of rheumatic fever
c. Aortic stenosis
d. Mitral stenosis
*e. Subacute bacteria endocarditis

589. After a long periode of subfebrility a patient registered increase of dyspnea, pain in the right hypochondrium, leg edemata. Objectively: neck veins are edematic. Ps is 120 bpm, sometimes it disappears during inspiration. Heart sounds are very weakened. ECG showed low-voltage waves of ventricular complex. A month ago there was raise of ST V1-V4 segment. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged, roundish. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Exudative pericarditis
b. Metabolic postinfection myocardiopathy
c. Small-focal myocardial infarction
d. Postinfarction cardiosclerosis
e. Primary rheumatic carditis

590. A child is 1 y.o. Within the last months after the begining of supplemental feeding the child has appetite loss, diarrhea with massive defecation, sometimes vomiting. Objectively: body temperature is normal. Body weight is 7 kg. Evident pallor of skin, leg edemata, enlarged abdomen. Coprogram shows a lot of fatty acids and soaps. The child was diagnosed with celiac disease and prescribed gluten-free diet. What shoul be excluded from the dietary intake in this case?
a. Animal protein
b. Milk and dairy produce
c. Fruit
*d. Cereals - wheat, oats
e. Digestible carbohydrates

591. A 13 y.o. teenager who suffers from hemophilia A was taken to the hospital after a fight at school. His diagnosis is right-sided hemarthros of knee joint, retroperitoneal hematoma. What should be primarily prescribed?
*a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Aminocapronic acid
c. Placental albumin
d. Dry plasma
e. Washed thrombocytes

592. A full-term newborn child has a diagnosis newborns Rh-factor hemolytic disease. Bilirubin rate is critical. The childs blood group is B(III), his mothers blood group - A(II). The child has indication for hemotransfusion. What donor blood must be chosen?
a. Blood group A(II) Rh-
b. Blood group O(I) Rh-
*c. Blood group B(III) Rh-
d. Blood group B(III) Rh+
e. Blood group A(II) Rh+

593. A 30 y.o. parturient woman was taken to the maternity house with complaints of having acute, regular labour pains that last 25-30 seconds every 1,5-2 minutes. Labour activity began 6 hours ago. Uterus is in higher tonus, head of the fetus is above the opening into the small pelvis. Fetal heartbeat is 136/min. P.V: cervical dilatation is 4 cm, uterine fauces is spasming at a height of parodynia. Head is level with opening into the small pelvis, it is being pushed off. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Primary powerless labour activity
b. Pathological preliminary period
*c. Discoordinated labour activity
d. Secondary powerless labour activity
e. Normal labour activity

594. A 38 y.o. woman is seriously ill. She complains of frequent paroxysms of expiratory dyspnea. The last paroxysm lasted over 12 hours and failed to respond to theophylline. The skin is palish gray, moist, RR of 26/min. On auscultation, breath sounds are absent over some areas. Your preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Bronchial asthma, status asthmaticus
b. Atopic bronchial asthma, respiratory failure of the III degree
c. Bronchiectasis, respiratory failure of the II-III degree
d. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
e. Ischemic heart disease, pulmonary edema

595. A newborn child has purulent discharges from the umbilical wound, skin around the umbilicus is swollen. Objectively: the childs skin is pale, of yellow-greyish colour, generalized hemorrhagic rash. Body temperature is of hectic nature. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic disease of newborn
*b. Sepsis
c. Hemolytic disease of newborn
d. Omphalitis
e. Thrombocytopathy

596. A 2 m.o. child was delivered in time with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
a. Hypotrophy of the II grade
*b. Corresponding to the age
c. 150 g less than necessary
d. Paratrophy of the I grade
e. Hypotrophy of the I grade

597. The patient with acute respiratory viral infection (3-rd day of disease) has complaints on pain in lumbar region, nausea, dysuria, oliguria. Urinalysis - hematuria (100-200 RBC in eyeshot spot), specific gravity - 1002. The blood creatinin level is 0,18 mmol/L, potassium level - 6,4 mmol/L. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute glomerylonephritis
b. Acute renal colic
*c. Acute interstitial nephritis
d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute cystitis

598. A 13 y.o. girl complains of having temperature rises up to febrile figures for a month, joint ache, periodical skin rash. Examination revealed steady enhancing of ESR, LE-cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphoblast leukosis
*b. Systematic lupus erythematosus
c. Rheumatics
d. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
e. Systematic scleroderma

599. A 30 y.o. man was always reserved by nature. He never consulted psychiatrists. He complains of headache, sensation "as if something bursts, moves, bubbles under his skin". Objectively: no pathology was revealed. What is the most probable psychopathologic symptom in this case?
*a. Cenestopathy
b. Dysmorphopsia
c. Paresthesia
d. Hallucination
e. Hypersthesia

600. A 24 year old patient complains about general weakness, dizziness, body temperature rise up to 37,5oC, sore throat, neck edema, enlargement of submaxillary lymph nodes. Objectively: mucous membrane of oropharynx is edematic and cyanotic, tonsils are enlarged and covered with films that spread beyond the tonsils and cannot be easily removed. What is the leading mechanism of this illness development?
*a. Action of bacterial exotoxin
b. Action of bacterial endotoxin
c. Bacteriemia
d. Allergic
e. Accumulation of suboxidated products

601. A 28 year old woman was admitted to the emergency room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot" 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Early deep vein thrombosis
b. Subcutaneous hematoma
c. Insect bite
d. Cellulitis
*e. Superficial venous thrombosis

602. If a child has adherent fingers on his right hand, then what will be your diagnosis?
*a. Syndactyly
b. Ectromelia
c. Macrodactyly
d. Ectrodactyly
e. Polydactyly

603. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
*a. A doctor of any speciality
b. A laboratory physician
c. A traumatologist
d. A surgeon
e. An anaesthesilogist

604. A 40 year old patient complains of yellowish discharges from the vagina. Bimanual examination revealed no pathological changes. The smear contains Trichomonas vaginalis and blended flora. Colposcopy revealed two hazy fields on the frontal labium, with a negative Iodine test. Your tactics:
a. Cryolysis of cervix of the uterus
b. Cervix ectomy
c. Specific treatment of Trichomonas colpitis
*d. Treatment of specific colpitis and subsequent biopsy
e. Diathermocoagulation of the cervix of the uterus

605. A patient with acute respiratory viral infection (3rd day of disease) complains of pain in lumbar region, nausea, dysuria, oliguria. Urinalysis - hematuria (100-200 RBC in eyeshot spot), specific gravity - 1002. The blood creatinin level is 0,18 millimole/l, potassium level - 6,4 millimole/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute cystitis
b. Acute glomerylonephritis
c. Acute renal failure
d. Acute renal colic
*e. Acute interstitial nephritis

606. A patient who takes diuretics has developed arrhythmia as a result of cardiac glycoside overdose. What is the treatment tactics in this case?
a. Increased sodium consentration in blood
b. Reduced magnesium concentration in blood
c. -
*d. Increased potassium concentration in blood
e. Increased calcium concentration in blood

607. A 26 year old woman had the second labour within the last 2 years with oxytocin application. The childs weight is 4080 gr. After the placent birth there were massive bleeding, signs of hemorrhagic shock. Despite the introduction of contractive agents, good contraction of the uterus and absence of any cervical and vaginal disorders, the bleeding proceeds. Choose the most probable cause of bleeding:
a. Injury of cervix of the uterus
b. Hysterorrhexis
c. Delay of the part of placenta
d. Hypotonia of the uterus
*e. Atony of the uterus

608. A 30 year old patient undergoes treatment because of Werlhofs disease. Objectively: the patient is pale, there are petechial haemorrhages on the extension surfaces of forearms. Ps is 92 bpm, AP is 100/60 mm Hg. The lower edge of spleen is at a level with umbilicus. Blood count: erythrocytes: 2,8×1012/l, Hb - 90 g/l, Ht - 0,38, thrombocytes – 30×109/l. The patient is being prepared for splenectomy. What transfusion medium should be chosen in the first place for the preoperational preparation?
*a. Thrombocytic mass
b. Native erythrocytic mass
c. Stored blood
d. Erythrocytic suspension
e. Washed erythrocytes

609. A 30 year old man complains of acute pain in his right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 mm, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
a. Acute mastoiditis
b. Eustachian tube disfunction
c. Chronic secretory otitis media
d. Chronic purulent otitis media
*e. Acute purulent otitis media

610. A patient has got pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is evident, the tongue is coated with white deposit. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodes are revealed in the axillary area. The skin over the lymph nodes is erythematous and glistering. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tularemia
b. Acute purulent lymphadenitis
c. Anthrax
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
*e. Bubonic plague

611. A woman complains of having slight dark bloody discharges and mild pains in the lower part of abdomen for several days. Last menses were 7 weeks ago. The pregnancy test is positive. Bimanual investigation: the body of the uterus indicates for about 5-6 weeks of pregnancy, it is soft, painless. In the left appendage there is a retort-like formation, 7 х 5 cm large, mobile, painless. What examination is necessary for detection of fetus localization?
a. Cystoscopy
b. Colposcopy
*c. Ultrasound
d. Hromohydrotubation
e. Hysteroscopy

612. An 18 year old woman consulted a gynecologist about the pain in the lower part of abdomen, fever up to 37,5oC, considerable mucopurulent discharges from the genital tracts, painful urination. Vaginal and speculum examination results: the urethra is infiltrated, cervix of the uterus is hyperemic, erosive. The uterus is painful, ovaries are painful, thickened; fornixes are free. Bacterioscopy test revealed diplococcus. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Chronic gonorrhea
*b. Recent acute ascending gonorrhea
c. Trichomoniasis
d. Chlamydiosis
e. Candydomycosis

613. A patient complained about problems with pain and tactile sensitivity, pain in the nail bones at the end of the working day. He works at a plant with mechanical devices. What pathology can be suspected?
a. Hypovitaminosis of B1
*b. Vibration disease
c. Overwork symptoms
d. Caisson disease
e. Noise disease

614. Internal obstetric examination of a parturient woman revealed that the sacrum hollow was totally occupied with fetus head, ischiadic spines couldnt be detected. Sagittal suture is in the straight diameter, occipital fontanel is directed towards symphysis. In what plane of small pelvis is the presenting part of the fetus?
*a. Plane of pelvic outlet
b. Narrow pelvic plane
c. Wide pelvic plane
d. Plane of pelvic inlet
e. Over the pelvic inlet

615. Clinical and statistical study was devoted to the effect of a new pharmacological medication upon the patients with coronary heart disease. What parametric criterion (coefficient) can be used for estimation of results validity?
a. Wilcoxons t-criterion
b. Kolmogorov-Smirnovs criterion
c. Conformity coefficient
*d. Students coefficient (t)
e. Sign criterion

616. Prophylactic photoroentgenography examination of a 25 year old man revealed focal shadowings of small and medium intensity with irregular contours in the 1st and 2nd segments of the right lung. Which clinical form can be suspected?
a. Miliary
b. Disseminated
c. Fibro-cavernous
*d. Focal
e. Tuberculoma

617. A 24 years old primipara was hospitalised with complaints about discharge of the amniotic waters. The uterus is tonic on palpation. The position of the fetus is longitudinal, it is pressed with the head to pelvic outlet. Palpitation of the fetus is rhythmical, 140 bpm, auscultated on the left below the navel. Internal examination: cervix of the uterus is 2,5 cm long, dense, the external os is closed, light amniotic waters out of it. Point a correct component of the diagnosis:
a. Pathological preterm labour
*b. Antenatal discharge of the amniotic waters
c. The beginning of the 1st stage of labour
d. Early discharge of the amniotic waters
e. The end of the 1st stage of labour

618. A 50 year old woman with a 2-year history of mild, diffuse, tender thyroid enlargement complains of 10 pound weight gain and fatigue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Papillary thyroid carcinoma
b. Subacute thyroiditis
c. Riedels thyroiditis
d. Suppurative thyroiditis
*e. Hashimotos thyroiditis

619. A parturient woman is 27 year old, it was her second labour, delivery was at term, normal course. On the 3rd day of postpartum period body temperature is 36,8oC, Ps - 72/min, AP - 120/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are moderately swollen, nipples are clean. Abdomen is soft and painless. Fundus of uterus is 3 fingers below the umbilicus. Lochia are bloody, moderate. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subinvolution of uterus
b. Lactostasis
c. Remnants of placental tissue after labour
d. Postpartum metroendometritis
*e. Physiological course of postpartum period

620. A pregnant woman may be diagnosed with hepatitis if it is confirmed by the presence of elevated:
a. BUN
b. Sedimentation rates
*c. SGOT (ALT)
d. Alkaline phosphatase
e. WBCs

621. A patient complained about general weakness, fever, painful rash on his trunk skin . He has been suffering from this for 3 days. Objectively: lateral surface of trunk on the left is hyperemic and edematic, there are some groups of vesicles with serous and haemorrhagic contents. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatosis
b. Microbial eczema
c. Contact dermatitis simplex
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Contact allergic dermatitis

622. A 14 year old patient complains of chest pain, temperature up to 38,5oC, breathlessness. He had acute tonsillitis 2 weeks ago. He is in grave condition. The skin is pale. Heart borders are dilated, heart sounds are quiet. Above total heart area you can hear pericardium friction sound. Electrocardiogram: the descent of QRS voltage, the inversion T. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm. ESR - 4 mm/h, ASL - 0 - 1260, C-reactive protein +++. Your diagnosis:
a. Rheumatic myocarditis
b. Septic endocarditis
c. Rheumatic pericarditis
d. Rheumatic endocarditis
*e. Rheumatic pancarditis

623. A 3 year old child fell acutely ill, body temperature rose up to 39,5oC, the child became inert, there appeared recurrent vomiting, headache. Examination revealed positive meningeal symptoms, after this lumbal puncture was performed. Spinal fluid is turbid, runs out under pressure, protein concentration is 1,8 g/l; Pandy reaction is +++, sugar concentration is 2,2 millimole/l, chloride concentration - 123 millimole/l, cytosis is 2,35×109 (80% of neutrophils, 20% of lymphocytes). What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Purulent meningitis
b. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
c. Brain tumour
d. Serous viral meningitis
e. Serous tuberculous meningitis

624. An 8 year old child has low-grade fever, arthritis, colicky abdominal pain and a purpuric rash llocalized on the lower extremities. laboratory studies reveal a guaiac-positive stool, urinalysis with red blood cell (RBC) casts and mild proteinuria, and a normal platelet count. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
c. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
*e. Henoch-Schonleins vasculitis

625. A pregnant woman in her 40th week of pregnancy undergoes obstetric examination: the cervix of uterus is undeveloped. The oxytocin test is negative. Examination at 32 weeks revealed: AP 140/90 mm Hg, proteinuria 1 g/l, peripheral edemata. Reflexes are normal. Choose the most correct tactics:
a. Absolute bed rest for 1 month
b. Complex therapy of gestosis for 2 days
c. Caesarian section immediately
d. Complex therapy of gestosis for 7 days
*e. Labour stimulation after preparation

626. At year-end hospital administration has obtained the following data: annual number of treated patients and average annual number of beds used for patients treatment. What index of hospital work can be calculated on the base of this data?
*a. Bed turnover
b. Average bed idle time
c. Average annual bed occupancy
d. Average duration of patients presence in the hospital
e. Bed resources of the hospital

627. A 40 year old woman has a self-detected hard breast mass. The procedure of choice for confirming the diagnosis is:
a. Thermography
b. Aspiration biopsy with cytology
c. Mammography
*d. Excision biopsy
e. Ultrasonography

628. A 30 year old patient complains about inability to become pregnant over 3 years of married life. The patient is of supernutrition type, she has hair along the median abdominal line, on the internal thigh surface and in the peripapillary area. Menses started at the age of 16, they are infrequent and non-profuse. US revealed that the uterus was of normal size, ovaries were 4х5х5 cm large and had a lot of cystic inclusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic oophoritis
b. Menstrual irregularity
c. Bilateral ovarian tumours
d. Ovarian cystoma
*e. Polycystic ovaries

629. A 3 year old child has been suffering from fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis for 4 days. He has been taking sulfadimethoxine. Today it has fever up to 39oC and maculopapular rash on its face. Except of rash the childs skin has no changes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Rubella
*b. Measles
c. Allergic rash
d. Scarlet fever
e. Pseudotuberculosis

630. A 3 year old child with weight defficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 millimol/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Recurrent bronchitis
c. Pulmonary hypoplasia
*d. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
e. Bronchiectasis

631. A 28 year old patient was admitted to the clinic with complaints of the temperature rise up to 39,0oC, headache, weakness, constipation on the 9th day of the disease. On examination: single roseolas on the skin of the abdomen are present. The pulse rate is 78 bpm. The liver is enlarged by 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Typhoid fever
b. Leptospirosis
c. Brucellosis
d. Malaria
e. Sepsis

632. A fitter of a metallurgic factory with occupational exposure to high concentrations of mercury fumes for 16 years presents instability of pulse and blood pressure, general hyperhydrosis, asymmetric innervations of facial muscles and tongue, positive subcortical reflexes, hand tremor on physical examination. A dentist revealed paradontosis and chronic stomatitis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mercury encephalopathy
b. Parkinson syndrome
c. Neuroinfection
d. Acute mercury intoxication
*e. Chronic mercury intoxication

633. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in an inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for drinking water in the field conditions:
a. Spring water
b. Melt snow water
*c. Artesian well water
d. Rain water
e. River water

634. A 52 year old woman complains about face distortion. It appeared 2 days ago after supercooling. Objectively: body temperature is 38,2oC. Face asymmetry is present. Frontal folds are flattened. Left eye is wider than right one and doesnt close. Left nasolabial fold is flattened, mouth corner is lowered. Examination revealed no other pathology. Blood count: leukocytes – 10×109/l, ESR - 20 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemicrania (migraine)
b. Brain tumour
*c. Facial neuritis
d. Ischemic stroke
e. Trigeminus neuralgia

635. A patient has a stab wound on his right foot. On the fourth day after injury the patients body temperature rose up to 38oC, inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and painful, skin over them reddened. What complication might be suspected?
a. Phlegmon
b. Tetanus
*c. Lymphadenitis
d. Erysipelas
e. Lymphangitis

636. A 9 year old girl with a history of intermittent wheezing for several years is brought to the pediatrician. The child has been taking no medications for some time. Physical examination reveals agitation and perioral cyanosis. Intercostal and suprasternal retractions are present. The breath sounds are quiet, and wheezing is audible bilaterally. The child is admitted to the hospital. Appropriate interventions might include all of the following EXCEPT:
a. Administer supplemental oxygen
*b. Prescribe nebulized cromolyn sodium
c. Prescribe intravenous aminophylline
d. Prescribe nebulized metaproterenol
e. Prescribe intravenous corticosteroids

637. A woman in her 39th week of pregnancy, the second labour, has regular birth activity. Uterine contractions take place every 3 minutes. What criteria describe the beginning of the II labor stage the most precisely?
a. Rupture of fetal bladder
*b. Cervical dilatation by no less than 4 cm
c. Duration of uterine contractions over 30 seconds
d. Presenting part is in the lower region of small pelvis
e. Cervical smoothing over 90%

638. In order to study impact of microclimate upon the human organism it is necessary to make systematic observation of air temperature over 3 days. Choose a device that will allow to make the most precise temperature records:
*a. Thermograph
b. Augusts psychrometer
c. Assmann psychrometer
d. Mercury thermometer
e. Alcohol thermometer

639. A child was born with body weight 3250 g and body length 52 cm. At the age of 1,5 month the actual weight is sufficient (4350 g), psychophysical development corresponds with the age. The child is breast-fed, occasionally there are regurgitations. What is the cause of regurgitations?
*a. Aerophagia
b. Acute gastroenteritis
c. Pylorostenosis
d. Pylorospasm
e. Esophageal atresia

640. During inspection of sanitary conditions of studying at a technical university it was necessary to evaluate the visual regimen of students, who study from 9a.m to 3 p.m. What index of natural light will be the most informative?
a. Time of the room insolation
*b. Natural light coefficient
c. Light coefficient
d. Depth of study room
e. Presence of mixed (superolateral) light

641. A child is 6 years old. Within one year of observation he had URI that lasted 8 days. Physical state is satisfactory. Specify his health group:
a. III (a)
b. II
c. III (c)
*d. I
e. III (b)

642. A 68 year old patient complains about acute pain in his right foot, toe edema and darkening of skin of the IV toe. He has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years, doesnt receive regular treatment. What complication of diabetes mellitus is it?
a. Haematoma
b. Panaritium
*c. Gangrene of the IV toe on the right foot
d. Erysipelas
e. Fracture of the IV toe on the right foot

643. Three weeks after acute angina the patient is still weak, inert, subfebrile, his retromaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged. Tonsils are flabby, stick together with arches, there are purulent plugs in lacunae. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Paratonsillitis
b. Acute lacunar tonsillitis
c. Chronic pharyngitis
*d. Chronic tonsillitis
e. Tonsillar tumour

644. A 43 year old patient had right-sided deep vein thrombosis of iliofemoral segment 3 years ago. Now he is suffering from the sense of heaviness, edema of the lower right extremity. Objectively: moderate edema of shin, brown induration of skin in the lower third of shin, varix dilatation of superficial shin veins are present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Parkes-Weber syndrome
b. Acute thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
c. Acute thrombosis of right veins
*d. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome, varicose form
e. Lymphedema of lower right extremity

645. The observed patients movements are retarded, she answers no questions. Sometimes she spontaneously stays in strange postures. It is possible to set her body and limbs into different positions artificially. If the psychiatrist lifts her arm or leg, so that she remains standing on the other leg, the patient can stay in such a position for quite a long time. Name the probable disorder:
a. Dissociative stupor, dissociative psychosis
*b. Catatonic stupor, schizophrenia
c. Depressive stupor, bipolar disorder
d. Psychogenic stupor, stress disorder
e. Apathetic stupor, schizophrenia

646. Among the following causes of acute renal failure, the one that would be classified as "postrenal" is:
a. Septicemia
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Cardiac failure
d. Rhabdomyolysis
*e. Calculi

647. A 7 year old girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
*a. Encephalitis
b. Meningitis
c. Neurotoxic syndrome
d. Myelitis
e. Meningoencephalitis

648. A 7 year old boy has periods of loss of attention that last 10-15 seconds and occur several times a day. During these periods he stands still in one position, doesnt answer the questions or react when he is called by his name. Neurological examination revealed no changes. What diagnostic method should be applied to specify his diagnosis?
a. Examination of evoked potentials
*b. Electroencephalography
c. Computer tomogram
d. Skull roentgenogram
e. Echoencephalography

649. In order to improve organism tolerance of boarding-school pupils a doctor developed a program. The program is based upon the following principles: graduality, consistency, individuality, coomplexity. What of the main principles of organism tempering wasnt taken into account?
a. Increase of influence force
*b. Systematicness
c. Increase of influence intensity
d. Autodefense increase
e. Increase of resistance

650. A 19 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia of B type. What antihemophilic medications should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Dried plasma
*b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Cryoprecipitate
d. Fresh frozen blood
e. Native plasma

651. A 37 year old farmer complains about general weakness, spastic pain in the lower parts of his abdomen, mainly in the left iliac area, frequent defecations up to 18 times a day, feces contain admixtures of mucus and blood. The illness began abruptly 3 days ago with chill, fever, headache. General condition is moderately severe, body temperature is 37,8oC. Sigmoid colon is spasmed and painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Yersiniosis
b. Salmonellosis
*c. Dysentery
d. Amebiasis
e. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis

652. The average body lenth of newborn boys is 50,9 cm at a sigma 1,66; and average mass - 3432 at a sigma 5,00. What criterion is necessary to compare degree of variability of these signs?
a. Sigma
b. Limit
*c. Coefficient of variation
d. Coefficient of association
e. Amplitude

653. An outpatient hospital made record of 11600 diseases within one year. Among them influenza and ARD make up 5800, circulatory system diseases - 3480, digestion diseases - 1300, other diseases - 1020. What relative index can be calculated according this data?
a. -
b. Intensive
c. Correlation
d. Visualization
*e. Extensive

654. A rounded well-defined shadow was found in the costo-vertebral angle on the chest roentgenogram of an otherwise healthy 9 year old girl. Make a preliminary diagnosis:
a. Sympatoblastoma
*b. Ganglioneuroma
c. Sarcoma of the vertebra
d. Sympatogonioma
e. Ganglioneuroblastoma

655. A 23 year old man complains about face edemata, headache, dizziness, reduced urination, change of urine colour (dark-red). These presentations appeared after pharyngitis. Objectively: face edemata, pale skin, temperature - 37,4oC; heart rate - 86/min, AP - 170/110 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, the II sound is accentuated above aorta. What etiological factor is probable in this case?
*a. ?-hemolytic streptococcus
b. Pyogenic streptococcus
c. Saprophytic staphylococcus
d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Alpha-hemolytic streptococcus

656. A 3 month old child has occiput alopecia, anxious sleep, excessive sweating. What disease might be suspected?
*a. Rachitis
b. Phosphate diabetes
c. Spasmophilia
d. Anemia
e. Chondrodystrophy

657. A 25 year old pediatrician fell ill a week ago: body temperature rose up to 37,6oC, there appeared a slight swelling on his neck. His illness was diagnosed as ARD, cervical lymphadenitis. Treatment course included erythromycin, hot compress on the neck. In course of treatment body tempearture rose up to 39oC, there appeared headache, repeated vomiting, meningeal syndrome. What studies are necessary for the final diagnosis?
a. Sputum test for secondary flora
b. Roentgenological examination of lungs
c. Puncture of cervical lymph node
*d. Cerebrospinal puncture
e. Complete blood count

658. A 23 year old patient fell ill 3 weeks ago when she noticed a very painful induration in her axillary crease. 4-5 days later it burst and discharged a lot of pus. After that some new infiltrations appeared around the affected area. The patient has never suffered from skin diseases before. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mycosis
b. Herpes zoster
c. Furuncle
d. Streptococcal impetigo
*e. Hydradenitis

659. A man in grave condition was delivered to the admission ward of a hospital on the 2nd day of illness. Examination revealed body temperature of 36,1oC, sharpened features of face, dry skin that makes a fold, aphonia, convulsive twitching of some muscle groups. Acrocyanosis is present. Heart sounds are muffled, Ps is 102 bpm, AP is 50/20 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, drawn-in, painless. Anuria is presnt. Stool is liquid in form of rice water. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Cholera
b. Escherichiosis
c. Salmonellosis
d. Acute dysentery
e. Intestinal amebiasis

660. A 50 year old patient has been admitted to the clinics with atrophic gastritis. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,8×1012/l, Hb - 68 g/l,c.i. - 1, macroanisocytosis, poikilocytosis. There is megaloblastic type of haemopoesis. A number of leukocytes, reticulocytes and thrombocytes is lreduced. Which pathology is suspected?
a. Thalassaemia
b. Post-hemorrhagic anemia
c. Irondeficiency anemia
d. Hemolytic anemia
*e. B12-deficiency anemia

661. During preventive examination a 16 year old patient presented no problems. Objectively: the patient has signs of malnutrition, he is asthenic, AP is 110/70 mm Hg, Ps is 80 bpm, cardiac border is normal, auscultation above the cardiac apex reveals three sounds, cardiac murmur is absent. ECG shows no pathological changes, phonocardiogram shows that the third sound comes 0,15 s after the second one above the apex. How are these changes called?
a. IV physiological sound
b. Protodiastolic gallop rhythm
*c. III physiological sound
d. Atrial gallop rhythm
e. Fout-ta-ta-rou (reduplication of the 2nd sound)

662. A 48 year old woman complains about weakness, weight loss, appetite loss, headache. The patient had acute glomerulonephritis when she was young. She has been suffering from arterial hypertension since she was 25. She didnt undergo systematic treatment, consulted a doctor rarely. Examination revealed signs of chronic renal insufficiency of the I stage (creatinine - 0,43 millimole/l). What dietary recommendations are the most reasonable?
a. Restriction of carbohydrate consumption
b. Diet with high content of "alkaline" dishes
c. Restriction of fat consumption
d. Consumption of higher amounts of liquid
*e. Restriction of protein consumption

663. A 75 year old man who has been suffering from diabetes for the last six months was found to be jaundiced. He was asymptomatic except for weight loss at the rate of 10 pounds in 6 months. Physical examination revealed a hard, globular, right upper quadrant mass that moves during respiration. A CT scan shows enlargement of the head of the pancreas, with no filling defects in the liver. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Metastatic disease of liver
b. Infectious hepatitis
*c. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
d. Haemolytic jaundice
e. Malignant biliary stricture

664. A 26 year old man was admitted to the hospital because of stabbing back pain on inspiration and dyspnea. Examination results: BT of 37oC, Ps of 24/min, HR of 92/min, vesicular breath sounds. There is a dry, grating, low-pitched sound heard on both expiration and inspiration in the left inferior lateral part of the chest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocarditis
b. Pneumonia
c. Pneumothorax
d. Acute bronchitis
*e. Acute fibrinous pleuritis

665. A 9 year old boy has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for a year. He gets insulin injections (humulin R, NPH), the dose makes up 0,4 units per 1 kg of body weight a day. Insulin is untroduced subcutaneously (into the shoulder) by means of a syringe. What measures should be taken in order to prevent lipodystrophy?
a. To administer antioxidants
b. To reduce insulin dose
*c. To change point of introduction
d. To apply periodically other types of insulin
e. To limit fats in the boys diet

666. A patient with acute purulent otitis media complicated by mastoiditis was admitted to a hospital. Roentgenogram of mastoid processes showed the shadiowing of the cellular system on the lesion, absence of bone septa was present. What are the necessary therapeutic +actions at the second stage of mastoiditis?
a. Cateterization of the Eustachian tube
b. Paracentesis of the drum
*c. Mastoidotomy
d. Radical operation on the middle ear
e. Tympanoplasty

667. A 3 year old boy fell ill abruptly: fever up to 39oC, weakness, vomitng. Haemorrhagic rash of various size appeared on his lower limbs in 5 hours. Meningococcemia with infective - toxic shock of the 1 degree was diagnosed. What medications should be administered?
a. Chloramphenicol succinate and interferon
b. Ampicillin and immunoglobulin
c. Penicillin and immunoglobulin
*d. Chloramphenicol succinate and prednisone
e. Penicillin and prednisone

668. A 46 year old woman who has been suffering from hypertension for 5 years was diagnosed with hypertensive crisis. She complains about palpitation, sense of head pulsation; heart rate is 100/min, AP is 190/100 mm Hg (haemodynamics is of hyperkinetic type). What medication should be the medication of choice?
a. Dihydropyridine calcium antagonist
b. Diuretic
c. Adenosine pyrophosphate inhibitor
*d. beta-adrenoceptor blocker
e. alpha-adrenoceptor blocker

669. Preventive examination of a 55 year old patient revealed diabetes mellitus. The patient hasnt received treatment for it. Objectively: height is 170 cm, weight is 106 kg, skin humidity is normal. Ps is 76 bpm, rhythmic, left border of relative heart dullness is deviated by 1 cm to the left from the middle clavicular line, heart sounds are quiet, AP is 140/80 mm Hg. Glycemia on an empty stomach is 6,9 millimole/l. Glucose rate in the daily urine is 0,5%, diuresis makes up 2,5 l. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
*a. To administer dietotherapy
b. To administer metformin
c. To administer glibenclamid
d. To administer repaglinide
e. To administer insulin

670. A 33 year old male patient was brought to Emergency Department with the signs of cardiovascular collapse: BP - 60/30 mm Hg, Ps - 140 bpm, the skin is pale and moist, diuresis 20 ml/h, Hb - 80 g/l, red blood cell count - 2,5*10^12/l. The reduction of blood volume averages:
a. 25-30%
b. 10-15%
c. 15-20%
*d. 30-40%
e. 20-25%

671. An onset of severe preeclampsia at 16 weeks gestation might be caused by:
a. Anencephaly
b. Maternal renal disease
c. Interventricular defect of the fetus
*d. Hydatidiform mole
e. Twin gestation

672. A 50 year old woman complained of attacks of right subcostal pain after fatty meal she has been suffering from for a year. Last week the attacks repeated every day and became more painful. What diagnostic study would you recommend?
a. Blood cell count
b. X-ray examination of the gastrointestinal tract
*c. Ultrasound examination of the gallbladder
d. Ultrasound study of the pancreas
e. Liver function tests

673. During examination a patient is unconscious, his skin is dry and hot, face hyperemia is present. The patient has Kussmauls respiration, there is also smell of acetone in the air. Symptoms of peritoneum irritation are positive. Blood sugar is at the rate of 33 millimole/l. What emergency actions should be taken?
a. Intravenous infusion of sodium chloride saline
*b. Intravenous infusion of short-acting insulin
c. Introduction of long-acting insulin
d. Intravenous infusion of neohaemodesum along with glutamic acid
e. Intravenous infusion of glucose along with insulin

674. A 56 year old man complains of fatigue, dyspnea on exertion and palpitations. He has had a murmur since childhood. Examination reveals a lift at the left sternal border, split S1, and fixed splitting of S2. There is a grade 3/6 midsystolic pulmonic murmur and a 1/6 middiastolic tricuspid murmur at the lower left sternal border. Chest x-ray shows right ventricular enlargement and prominent pulmonary arteries. ECG demonstrates atrial fibrillation with a right bundle branch block. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Coarctation of the aorta
b. Ventricular septal defect
*c. Arterial septal defect
d. Tetralogy of Fallot
e. Patent ductus arteriosus

675. A 6 week old child is admitted because of tachypnea. Birth had been uneventful, although conjunctivitis developed on the third day of life and lasted for about 2 weeks. Physical examination reveals tachypnea, bilateral inspiratory crackles and single expiratory wheezing. Bilateral pneumonia is evident on chest X-ray. The child is afebrile and has no history of fever. White blood cell count is 15×109/l, with 28% of eosinophils. The most likely cause of this childs symptoms is:
*a. Clamydia trachomanis
b. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
c. Varicella
d. Pneumocystis carinii
e. Visceral larva migrans

676. A severely traumatized patient who has been receiving prolonged parenteral alimentation develops diarrhea, mental depression, alopecia and perioral and periorbital dermatitis. Administration of which of the following trace elements is most likely to reverse these complications?
a. Copper
*b. Zinc
c. Iodine
d. Silicon
e. Selenium

677. A 2 month old full-term child was born with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
*a. Corresponding to the age
b. Hypotrophy of the II grade
c. Hypotrophy of the I grade
d. 150 g less than necessary
e. Paratrophy of the I grade

678. A 60 year old man complains of fever, significant weight loss, bone and joint pain, bleeding gums. Examination revealed paleness, lymphadenopathy, hepato- and splenomegaly. CBC: WBC – 270*10^9/l with 13% lymphocytes, 1% monocytes, 21% basophiles, 29% neutrophils, 9% blasts, 12% promyelocytes, 12% myelocytes, 2% metamyelocytes, 1% eosinophils. ESR - 22 mm/h. Name the drug for treatment:
a. Prednisolone
*b. Myelosan
c. Vinblastine
d. Cytosar
e. Blood transfusion

679. A 35 year old woman consulted a doctor about affection of arm skin and lower third of forearm in form of a large edema, hyperemia, vesiculation and maceration. The disease developed after using a laundry detergent "Lotos". The patient has been using it for a month. She hasnt suffered from dermatological diseases before. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Allergic dermatitis
b. Localized neurodermatitis
c. Dermatitis simplex
d. Microbial eczema
e. Toxicoallergic dermatitis

680. Examination of a 4 month old child revealed some lemon-yellow squamae with fatty crusts on the scalp. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Milk crust
b. Infantile eczema
c. Pseudofurunculosis
*d. Gneiss
e. Strophulus

681. A patient, aged 48, complains of heaviness in the right hypochondrium, itching of the skin. Repeatedly he had been treated in infectious diseases hospital because of icterus and itch. Objectively: meteorism, ascitis, dilation of abdominal wall veins, protruding navel, spleen enlargement. Diagnosis is:
*a. Liver cirrhosis
b. Gallstones
c. Cancer of the liver
d. Viral hepatitis B
e. Cancer of the head of pancreas

682. A 52 year old patient with history of functional Class II angina complains of having intense and prolonged retrosternal pains, decreased exercise tolerance for 5 days. Angina is less responsive to nitroglycerine. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Myocarditis
b. Cardialgia due to spine problem
*c. IHd. Unstable angina
d. IHd. Functional Class II angina
e. Myocardial dystrophy

683. A 52 year old patient complains about pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with a lot of foul-smelling albuminoid sputum in form of "meat slops". Objectively: the patients condition is grave, cyanosis is present, breathing rate is 31/min, percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed different rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung abscess
b. Pleura empyema
c. Chronic pneumonia
*d. Lung gangrene
e. Multiple bronchiectasis

684. A 35 year old patient who suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis and has been hemodialysis-dependent for the last three years developed intermissions of heart activity, hypotension, progressing weakness, dyspnea. ECG showed bradycardia, atrioventricular block type I, high pointed waves T. The day before the flagrant violation of diet took place. What is the most probable cause of these changes?
a. Hyperhydratation
b. Hypernatriemia
c. Hypokaliemia
d. Hypocalciemia
*e. Hyperkaliemia

685. Esophagus wall of a 72 year old patient with severe concomitant pathology was injured during urgent fibroesophagogastroscopy. This resulted in progressing of acute respiratory failure and collapse of the left lung. What aid should be rendered?
a. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus and mediastinum wound
b. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus wound
c. Buelaus drainage of pleural cavity, antibacterial therapy
d. Endoscopic closure of esophagus wound, drainage
*e. Drainage of pleural cavity by Bullaux method, mediastinum drainage, antibacterial therapy

686. A 12 year old girl complains about abrupt weakness, nausea, dizziness, vision impairment. The day before she ate home-made stockfish, bee Examination revealed skin pallor, a scratch on the left knee, dryness of mucous membranes of oral pharynx, bilateral ptosis, mydriatic pupils. The girl is unable to read a simple text (mist over the eyes). What therapy would be the most adequate in this case?
a. Parenteral introduction of antibiotics
b. Gastric lavage
c. Parenteral disintoxication
d. Parenteral introduction of antitetanus serum
*e. Parenteral introduction of polyvalent antibotulinic serum

687. An 18 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with complaints of headache, weakness, high temperature, sore throat. Objectively: enlargement of all groups of lymph nodes was revealed. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm, spleen - by 1 cm. In blood: leukocytosis, atypical lymphocytes - 15%. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Angina
b. Diphtheria
*c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Acute lymphoid leukosis
e. Adenoviral infection

688. A 62 year old patient suffers from DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. The patient has to undergo an operation on inguinal hernia. What tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be chosen?
a. Give Glurenorm instead of Maninilum
b. Prescribe guanyl guanidines
*c. Prescribe fast-acting insulin
d. Prescribe long-acting insulin
e. Continue with the current therapy

689. A 49 year old female patient was admitted to a hospital with acute attacks of headache accompanied by pulsation in temples, AP rose up to 280/140 mm Hg. Pheochromocytoma is suspected. What mechanism of hypertensive atack does this patient have?
a. Increase of thyroxine secretion
b. Increase of aldosterone level in blood
c. Increase of plasma renin activity
d. Increase of vasopressin secretion
*e. Increase of catecholamine concentration

690. A 5 month old boy was born prematurely, he didnt suffer from any disease at the infant age and later on. Examination at an outpatients hospital revealed paleness of skin, sleepiness. Blood count: Hb - 95 g/l, erythrocytes - 3,5×1012/l, reticulocytes - 90/00, colour index - 0,7, osmotic stability of erythrocytes - 0,44-0,33%, serum iron - 4,9 micromole/l. What is the most probable cause of anemia?
a. Infectious process
*b. Iron deficit
c. Erythrocyte hemolysis
d. Hemogenesis immaturity
e. B12 deficit

691. A 56 year old patient has worked at the aluminium plant over 20 years. Within 3 last years he has been experiencing loosening of teeth, bone and joint pains, piercing pains in heart region, vomiting. The provisional diagnosis is:
a. Phosphorus intoxication
b. Lead intoxication
*c. Fluorine intoxication
d. Mercury intoxication
e. Manganese intoxication

692. A woman consulted a therapeutist about fatigability, significant weight loss, weakness, loss of appetite. She has been having amenorrhea for 8 months. A year ago she born a full-term child. Haemorrhage during labour made up 2 l. She got blood and blood substitute transfusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Sheehans syndrome
b. Vegetovascular dystonia
c. Shereshevsky-Turners syndrome
d. Homological blood syndrome
e. Stein-Leventhal syndrome

693. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax, it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made in:
a. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line
b. In the projection of pleural sinus
c. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
*d. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
e. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion

694. A woman consulted a doctor on the 14th day after labour about sudden pain, hyperemy and induration of the left mammary gland, body temperature rise up to 39oC, headache, indisposition. Objectively: fissure of nipple, enlargement of the left mammary gland, pain on palpation. What pathology would you think about in this case?
a. Breast cancer
b. Lacteal cyst with suppuration
*c. Lactational mastitis
d. Phlegmon of mammary gland
e. Fibrous adenoma of the left mammary gland

695. A 52 year old patient was admitted to a hospital because of high hemorrhagic diathesis of mucous membranes, massive skin haemorrhages in form of ecchymoses and spots, nasal and stomachal haemorrhages. After clinical examinations her illness was diagnosed as thrombocytopenic purpura. What is the most probable cause of this disease?
*a. Generation of antithrombocytic antibodies
b. Disturbed hemostasis
c. Inherited insufficiency of plasm factors of blood coagulation
d. Iron deficit in blood serum, bone marrow and depot
e. Deficit of the VIII factor of blood coagulation

696. A 28 year old woman had the second labour and born a girl with manifestations of anemia and progressing jaundice. The childs weight was 3 400 g, the length was 52 cm. The womans blood group is B (III) Rh-, the fathers blood group is A (III) Rh+, the childs blood group is B (III) Rh+. What is the cause of anemia?
a. Intrauterine infection
b. Antigen AB incompatibility
*c. Rhesus incompatibility
d. Antigen B incompatibility
e. Antigen A incompatibility

697. A 52 year old man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detected murmur. What diagnostic method is to be applied in the first place?
*a. Ultrasound dopplerography
b. Cerebral angiography
c. Electroencephalography
d. MRI of the brain
e. CT of the brain

698. An excited patient constantly tries to look into the next room because he is sure of his friends presence. He claims to hear his friends and other people talking although no-one is there. He tries to persuade his doctor that people in the next room are disputing about "his punishment", repeats aloud phrases he has allegedly heard from the next room. What state is it?
a. Verbal illusions
b. Confabulations
*c. Acute hallucinosis
d. Obsessional ideas
e. Delusion

699. A 14 year old girl complains of profuse bloody discharges from genital tracts during 10 days after suppresion of menses for 1,5 month. Similiar bleedings recur since 12 years on the background of disordered menstrual cycle. On rectal examination: no pathology of the internal genitalia. In blood: Нb - 70 g/l, RBC- 2,31012/l, Ht - 20. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Incomplete spontaneous abortion
*b. Juvenile bleeding, posthemorrhagic anemia
c. Polycyst ovarian syndrome
d. Hormonoproductive ovary tumor
e. Werlholfs disease

700. A 2 year old girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Adenoviral infection
*b. Rubella
c. Pseudotuberculosis
d. Measles
e. Scarlet fever

701. A 2 year old child has been ill with acute respiratory viral infection of upper thrice a year - in February, in April and in December. How should these occurences be recorded?
a. It is necessary to fill in 3 statistic talons signed (-)
*b. It is necessary to fill in 3 statistic talons signed (+)
c. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (+)
d. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (+) and 2 statistic talons signed (-)
e. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (-)

702. A 54 year old woman complains of increasing fatigue and easy bruising of 3 weeks duration. Physical findings included pale, scattered ecchymoses and petechiae and mild hepatosplenomegaly. Blood count: RBC- 2,5×1012/l; Hb - 73 g/l; Ht - 20%; PLT- 23×109/l; and WBC- 162×109/l with 82% blasts, that contained Auric rods; peroxidase stain was positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Hemolytic anemia
*c. Acute leukemia
d. Chronic leukemia
e. Megaloblastic anemia

703. After delivery and revision of placenta there was found the defect of placental lobule. General condition of woman is normal, uterus is firm, there is moderate bloody discharge. Speculum inspection of birth canal shows absence of lacerations and raptures. What action is nesessary?
a. Introduction of hemostatic medications
b. External massage of uterus
c. Introduction of uterine contracting agents
d. Urine drainage, cold on the lower abdomen
*e. Manual exploration of the uterine cavity

704. Routine examination of an otherwise healthy child with a history of bronchial asthma reveals AP of 140/90 mm Hg. The most likely cause of the hypertension is:
a. Obesity
b. Chronic lung disease
c. Theophylline toxicity
d. Coarctation of the aorta
*e. Renal disease

705. An outbreak of food poisoning was recorded in an urban settlement. The illness was diagnosed as botulism on the grounds of clinical presentations. What foodstuffs should be chosen for analysis in the first place in order to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Tinned food
b. Potatoes
c. Cabbage
d. Pasteurized milk
e. Boiled meat

706. A 25 year old patient complains about weakness, dizziness, appearance of haemorrhagic skin rash. She has been suffering from this for a month. Blood count: erythrocytes: 1,0×1012/l, Hb- 37 g/l, colour index - 0,9, leukocytes - 1,2×109/l, thrombocytes – 42×109/l. What diagnostic method will be the most effective?
a. Abdominal ultrasound
b. Coagulogram
c. Spleen biopsy
d. Liver biopsy
*e. Sternal puncture

707. A patient with frostbite of both feet was delivered to the admission ward. What actions should be taken?
a. To apply an alcohol compress
b. To put feet into hot water
*c. To apply a bandage, to introduce vasodilating medications
d. To administer cardiac medications
e. To rub feet with snow

708. A 34 year old woman in the 10th week of gestation (the second pregnancy) consulted a doctor of antenatal clinic in order to be registered there. In the previous pregnancy hydramnion was observed, the childs birth weight was 4086 g. What examination method should be applied in the first place?
a. Bacteriological examination of discharges from vagina
*b. The test for tolerance to glucose
c. A cardiophonography of fetus
d. Determination of the contents of fetoproteinum
e. US of fetus

709. A woman born a child. It was her fith pregnancy but the first delivery. Mothers blood group is A[II] Rh-, newborns -A[II] Rh+. The level of indirect bilirubin in umbilical blood was 58 micromole/l, hemoglobin - 140 g/l, RBC- 3,8×1012/l. In 2 hours the level of indirect bilirubin turned 82 micromole/l. The hemolytic disease of newborn (icteric-anemic type, Rh-incompatibility) was diagnosed. Choose the therapeutic tactics:
a. Blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
*b. Replacement blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
c. Conservative therapy
d. Symptomatic therapy
e. Antibiotics

710. What guarantees against the preconceived attitude to the physician in cases of professional law violations do you know?
a. Utilisation copy of medical documents
b. Conduct forensic medical examination by district forensic medicine expert
*c. Sanction of public prosecutor, inquiry by preliminary investigator of prosecutors office, committee of experts
d. Draw up a statement about forensic medical examination
e. Conduct an inquiry by preliminary investigator of police department

711. A 57 year old patient abruptly lost the sight of one eye. Examination revealed that his sight made up 0,02 excentrically, eye fundus has haemorrhages of different forms and sizes ("squashed tomato" symptom). Disc of optic nerve is hyperemic. In anamnesis general vascular pathology is recorded. Direct-acting anticoagulants were administered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Embolism of central artery of retina
b. Diabetic retinopathy
*c. Thrombosis of central vein of retina
d. Hypertensive angioneuropathy
e. Hypertensive angiopathy

712. Study of actual diet of an adult revealed the following: proteins make up 16% of energy value of daily ration, fats - 25%, carbohydrates - 59%. Evaluate compliance of protein, fat and carbohydrate share in the energy value of daily ration with the recommended shares of these nutrients?
a. Carbohydrate share is insufficicent
b. Carbohydrate share is excessive
*c. Carbohydrate share is insufficient, there is excess of proteins
d. Fat share is insufficient
e. Nutrient content complies with the recommended shares of energy value

713. During hygienic examination of a hospital it was established that the area for each bed in a double ward was: in the infectious department for children - 7м2, in the infectious department for adults - 8м2, in the burns department - 9м2, in the radiological department - 10м2, in the critical care department - 13м2. In which wards the area for each bed doesnt correspond with hygienic requirements?
a. In infectious wards for adults
b. In radiological wards
c. In infectious wards for children
d. In critical care wards
*e. In burns wards

714. A healthy 75 year old woman who leads a moderately active way of life went through a preventive examination that revealed serum concentration of common cholesterol at the rate of 5,1 millimol/l and HDL (high-density lipoproteins) cholesterol at the rate of 70 mg/dl. ECG reveals no pathology. What dietary recommendation is the most adequate?
a. Decrease of cholesterol consumption
b. Increase of cellulose consumption
*c. Any dietary changes are necessary
d. Decrease of carbohydrates consumption
e. Decrease of saturated fats consumption

715. A 25 year old patient complains of pain in the I finger on his right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain is getting worse. Acute pain appears during the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Bone panaritium
b. Subcutaneous panaritium
c. Paronychia
d. Articular (joint) panaritium
*e. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)

716. A 24 year old patient complained about putting on weight, limosis. Objectively: the patients constitution is of hypersthenic type, body weight index is 33,2 kg/m2, waist circumference is 100 cm. Correlation of waist circumference to the thigh circumference is 0,95. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the I stage, abdominal type
b. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the II stage, gynoid type
c. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the I stage, abdominal type
d. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the III stage, gynoid type
e. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the II stage, abdominal type

717. Generalized low voltage on an ECG (QRS deflection < 5 mm in limb leads and < 10 mm in precordial leads) may be a marker for all of the following disorders EXCEPT:
a. Amyloidosis
*b. Hyperthyroidism
c. Coronary artery disease
d. Cardiac transplant rejection
e. Pericardial effusion

718. A patient has been in a hospital. The beginning of the disease was gradual: nausea, vomiting, dark urine, аcholic stools, yellowness of the skin and scleras. The liver is protruded by 3 cm. Jaundice progressed on the 14th day of the disease. The liver diminished in size. What complication of viral hepatitis caused deterioration of the patients condition?
a. Meningitis
*b. Hepatic encephlopathy
c. Infectious-toxic shock
d. Relapse of viral hepatitis
e. Cholangitis

719. A female 28 years old patient became depressed, her mood is melancholic; this state is accompanied by hypobulia, hypokinesia, slow speed of thinking. Her attitude towards her past, present and future is pessimistic. The pathogenetic mechanism of this state is supposed to involve dysfunction in the:
a. Frontal lobes
b. Corpus callosum
c. Pituitary
*d. Hypothalamus
e. Hippocampus

720. A 34 year old coal miner who has been in service for 10 years was discharged from an occupational disease clinic after examination and treatment. He was diagnosed with the I stage of anthracosilicosis, peribronchitis, 0 stage of respiratory failure. What expert decision should be taken about his working capacity?
a. He can continue working as coal miner provided that sanitary and hygienic conditions are observed
b. He should be referred to the local medical expert comission for determination of percentage of working capacity loss
c. He should stay on the sick-list to consolidate treatment results
d. He should be given medical certificate for the further out-patient treatment
*e. He should be referred to the local medical expert comission for determination of his disability group for the period of re-training

721. A mother consulted a pediatrician about her son. Her son was born with body mass of 3 kg and length of 48 cm. Hes 1 year old now. What is the required normal mass?
a. 9,0 kg
b. 11,0 kg
c. 12,0 kg
*d. 10,5 kg
e. 15,0 kg

722. A 39 year old patient suffering from hypertension felt suddenly intense headache in the region of occiput; there appeared recurrent vomiting. These presentations has been lasting for 5 hours. Objectively: Ps - 88 bpm, AP - 205/100 mm Hg, painfulness of occipital points, rigidity of occipital muscles are present. Kernigs symptom is bilaterally positive. Subarachnoid haemorrhage is also suspected. What diagnostic method will be of the greatest importance for confirmation of provisional diagnosis?
a. Computer tomography
*b. Lumbar puncture
c. Examination of eye fundus
d. Ultrasonic dopplerography
e. EEG

723. A 42 year old woman complains of dyspnea, edema of the legs and tachycardia during minor physical exertion. Heart borders are displaced to the left and S1 is accentuated, there is diastolic murmur on apex. The liver is enlarged by 5 cm. What is the cause of heart failure?
a. Tricuspid stenosis
*b. Mitral stenosis
c. Mitral regurgitation
d. Tricuspid regurgitation
e. Aortic stenosis

724. A 32 year old patient complains about pain in small joints of her hands, paresthesia at the tips of fingers, weakness, difficult diglutition. She has been suffering from this for 13 years. Objectively: face amimia, shortening of nail bones, skin indurations in the area of shoulder girdle are present. Roentgenological examination of lungs revealed basal pneumosclerosis. Fibrogastroscopy revealed esophagus constriction in its cardial part. Blood count: leukocytes - 9,8×109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h, ?-globulin - 22%. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*b. Systemic scleroderma
c. Myxedema
d. Dermatomyositis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

725. Periodical survey of a worker of a chemicals plant revealed a malignant neoplasm on the urinary bladder. This occupational disease was the most probably caused by contact with the following industrial poison:
*a. Benzidine
b. Vinyl chloride
c. Asbestos
d. Nickel carbonyl
e. Arsenic

726. A 52 year old patient has hypervolaemic type of essential hypertension. Which of the following medications is to be prescribed either as monotherapy or in complex with other antihypertensive drugs?
a. Kapoten
b. Nifedipin
*c. Hypothiazid
d. Clonidine
e. Dibazol

727. An 8 year old girl complains about joint pain, temperature rise up to 38oC, dyspnea. Objectively: the left cardiac border is deviated by 2,5 cm to the left, tachycardia, systolic murmur on the apex and in the V point are present. Blood count: leukocytes - 20,0×109/l, ESR - 18 mm/h. What sign gives the most substantial proof for rheumatism diagnosis?
a. Fever
b. Leukocytosis
c. Arthralgia
*d. Carditis
e. Accelerated ESR

728. A primagravida with pregnancy of 37-38 weeks complains of headache, nausea, pain in epigastrium. Objective: the skin is acyanotic. Face is hydropic, there is short fibrillar twitching of blepharons, muscles of the face and the inferior extremities. The look is fixed. AP- 200/110 mm Hg; sphygmus of 92 bpm, intense. Respiration rate is 32/min. Heart activity is rhythmical. Appreciable edemata of the inferior extremities are present. Urine is cloudy. What medication should be administered?
a. Hexenalum of 1% - 2,0 ml
b. Papaverine hydrochloride of 2% - 4,0 ml
c. Dibazolum of 1% - 6,0 ml
d. Pentaminum of 5% - 4,0 ml
*e. Droperidolum of 0,25% - 2,0 ml

729. A 41 year old woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis for 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: evident inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous membrane. In blood: WBC- 9,8×109/l, RBC- 3,0×1012/l, ESR - 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
a. Vikasolum
b. Kreon
c. Motilium
*d. Sulfosalasine
e. Linex

730. A 60 year old patient has been suffering from arterial hypertension for 15 years. After recurrent stroke she started complaining about amotivational bad mood, problems with attention concentration; she forgets to close the entrance door, cannot recall events of the last day. Computer tomography shows areas of postinfarction changes in the cortical postfrontal regions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dissociative amnesia
b. Picks disease
c. Alzheimers disease
*d. Vascular dementia
e. Huntingtons chorea

731. During investigation for chronic, severe, epigastric pain, a 40 year old alcoholic man is found to have multiple areas of narrowing alternating with dilatation ("chain of lakes" appearance) of the main pancreatic duct. The operation of choice is:
a. Total pancreatectomy
b. Sphincterotomy
c. Distal pancreatectomy
d. Distal pancreaticojejunostomy
*e. Lateral pancreaticojejunostomy

732. A 22 year old patient was admitted to trauma center with complaints of pain in the left ankle joint that was getting worse during moving and weight bearing. On the clinical examination it was found that the patient had the closed fracture of medial malleolus without displacement. In which position should the foot be fixed in plaster cast?
a. In position of supination
*b. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot
c. In position of planter flexion of foot
d. In position of pronation
e. In position of dorsal flexion of foot

733. What method is applied to establish rate of correlation between age of men and their mortality due to myocardial infarction?
a. The Indirect method (Student)
b. Method of graduated correlation (Armler)
*c. Method of grade correlation (Spirman)
d. The quadrate method (Pirson)
e. Correlation ratio

734. A 15 year old patient suffers from headache, nasal haemorrhages, sense of lower extremity coldness. Objectively: muscles of shoulder girdle are developed, lower extremities are hypotrophie d. Pulsation on the pedal and femoral arteries is sharply dampened. AP is 150/90 mm Hg, 90/60 on the legs. Systolic murmur can be auscultated above carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Coarctation of pulmonary artery
*b. Aorta coarctation
c. Aorta aneurism
d. Aortal stenosis
e. Aortal insufficiency

735. A 43 year old patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenosing papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
*a. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
b. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
c. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
d. To perform external choledoch drainage
e. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs

736. A patient complains about strong dyspnea that is getting worse during physical activity. Presentations appeared suddenly 2 hours ago at work: acute chest pain on the left, cough. The pain was abating, but dyspnea, dizziness, pallor, cold sweat and cyanosis were progressing. Vesicular respiration is absent, X-ray picture shows a shadow on the left. What pathology might be suspected?
*a. Spontaneous left-sided pneumothorax
b. Left-sided pneumonia
c. Pulmonary infarction
d. Pleuritis
e. Pulmonary abscess

737. A nine year old child is at a hospital with acute glomerulonephritis. Clinical and laboratory examinations show acute condition. What nutrients must not be limited during the acute period of glomerulonephritis?
*a. Carbohydrates
b. Proteins
c. Fats
d. Liquid
e. Salt

738. A 40 year old woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Painless movable induration
b. Pure discharges from the nipple
*c. Skin induration with inverted nipple
d. Painful movable induration
e. Bloody discharges from the nipple

739. An endometrial adenocarcinoma that has extended to the uterine serosa would be classified as stage:
*a. IIIA
b. IIA
c. IVAB
d. IC
e. IIB

740. A 16 year old patient with complaints of frequent pain in the abdomen was diagnosed with melanoma, examination revealed also pigmentation of the mucosa and skin, polyp in the stomach and large intestine. It is know that the patients mother has an analogous pigmentation and has been often treated for anemia. What disease is suspected?
*a. Peytz-Egerss polyposis
b. Chrons disease
c. Adolescent polyposis
d. Hirschprungs disease
e. Tuberculosis of the intestine

741. A 25 year old patient was admitted on the 1st day of the disease with complaints of double vision in the eyes, heavy breathing. The day before the patient ate home-made mushrooms. On objective examination: paleness, mydriatic pupils, difficult diglutition, bradycardia, constipation. What is the diagnosis?
a. Leptospirosis
b. Salmonellosis, gastrointestinal form
c. Lambliasis
*d. Botulism
e. Yersiniosis

742. A triad of symptoms ("stearing spot", "terminal film", "blood dew") has been revealed on examination of a patient. What disease should you think about?
*a. Psoriasis
b. Ritters disease
c. Vasculitis
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Seborrhea

743. A patient with nosocomial pneumonia presents signs of collapse. Which of the following pneumonia complications is most likely to be accompanied by collapse?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Toxic hepatitis
c. Emphysema
*d. Septic shock
e. Bronchial obstruction

744. A child is 1 day old. During delivery there had been problems with extraction of shoulders. Body weight is 4300,0. Right arm hangs down along the body, hand is pronated, movement in the arm is absent. "Scarf" symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tetraparesis
b. Hemiparesis
c. Proximal right-sided obstetric paralysis
*d. Total right-sided obstetric paralysis
e. Distal right-sided obstetric paralysis

745. A 5 tons milk batch was sampled. The lab analysis revealed: fat content 2%, specific density - 1,04 g/cm3, acidity - 210, reductase probe - weak-positive. What way is the product to be used in?
a. Discard for animal feeding
*b. Sell but inform customers about milk quality
c. Sell without limitations
d. Technical utilization
e. Do the product away

746. Adenosine triphosphate may be expected to convert which of the following arrhythmias to sinus rhythm?
*a. Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
b. Ventricular fibrillation
c. Atrial fibrillation
d. Atrial flutter
e. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia

747. A 55 year old patient felt suddenly sick in a hospital corridor, he was immediately examined by a doctor. Examination revealed that the patients skin was pale, autonomous respiration was absent, pulse on carotid arteries couldnt be felt, pupils were mydriatic. What action should be taken at the beginning of cardiac resuscitation?
a. Restoration of airway patency
b. Closed-chest cardiac massage
*c. Precordial thump
d. Defibrillation
e. Mouth-to-mouth ventilation

748. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Leftsided renal colic
b. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
c. Herpes zoster
d. Torsion of the left testicle
e. Sigmoid diverticulitis

749. Five days after a total hip replacement a 72 year old woman becomes acutely short of breath, diaphoretic and hypotensive. Both lung fields are clear to auscultation and percussion, but examination of the neck reveals mild jugular venous distension with prominent A waves. Heart sounds are normal. ECG shows sinus tachycardia with a new right bundle branch block and minor nonspecific ST-T wave changes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Pericarditis
c. Aortic dissection
d. Aspiration
*e. Pulmonary thromboembolism

750. A 70 year old man is suffering from coronary heart disease. His mood is evidently depressed, anxious. As a result of continious sleeplessness he has got fears, suicidal thoughts. He would sit for a long time in the same pose, answer after a pause, in a low, monotonous voice. His face has a look of suffering, pain, fear. What is the main psychopathologic syndrome?
a. Asthenic syndrome
b. Obsessive syndrome
*c. Depressive syndrome
d. Paranoid syndrome
e. Phobic syndrome

751. On the first day after labour a woman had the rise of temperature up to 39oC. Rupture of fetal membranes took place 36 hours before labour. Examination of the bacterial flora of cervix of the uterus revealed hemocatheretic streptococcus of A group. The uterus body is soft, tender. Discharges are bloody, with admixtures of pus. Specify the most probable postnatal complication:
*a. Metroendometritis
b. Apostasis of sutures after the episiotomy
c. Infective contamination of the urinary system
d. Thrombophlebitis of veins of the pelvis
e. Infectious hematoma

752. A 13 year old girl consulted the school doctor on account of moderate bloody discharge from the genital tracts, which appeared 2 days ago. Secondary sexual characters are developed. What is the most probable cause of bloody discharge?
a. Endometrium cancer
b. Werlhofs disease
c. Haemophilia
d. Juvenile hemorrhage
*e. Menarche

753. A 42 year old metalworker has been working at the turning machine for production of heavy large-size parts for 5 years. His work requires using of hand and pedal levers that involves considerable physical force. What means for osteoarthrosis prevention should be recommended?
*a. To limit physical work
b. To improve health at the Black sea coast
c. To go in for weightlifting
d. To administer protein-and-carbohydrate diet
e. To administer protein-and-vitamin diet

754. A full-term infant is 3 days old. On the different parts of skin there are erythemas, erosive spots, cracks, areas of epidermis peeling. The infant has scalded skin syndrome. Nikolskys symptom is positive. General condition of the infant is grave. Anxiety, hyperesthesia, febrile temperature are evident. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of newborn
b. Mycotic erythema
*c. Exfoliative dermatitis
d. Impetigo neonatorum
e. Fingers pseudofurunculosis

755. It is planned to make complete isolation boxes in the infectious department in order to prevent nosocomial airborne infections. The boxes consist of a tambour, a ward and a lock chamber. What structure should be also included in a complete isolation box?
a. Nursing room
b. Doctors consulting room
c. Patients examination room
d. Manipulation room
*e. Bathroom unit

756. A 38 year old man complains about mild pain and muscle weakness of shoulder and pelvic girdles and back that has been progressing for the last 3 weeks. He has also significant problems with getting up, going up and down the stairs and shaving. It is suspected that the patient is suffering from dermatomyositis. Blood count: Hb - 114 g/l, leukocytes - 10,8*10^9/l, eosin - 9%, ESR - 22 mm/h, C-reactive protein (++). Change of the following laboratory factor will be of the greatest diagnostic importance:
a. Sialic acids
b. Ceruloplasmin
c. Antibodies to the native DNA
*d. Creatine phosphokinase
e. gamma-globulins

757. A 52 year old patient with disseminated vertebral osteochondrosis lifted a significant load that resulted in lumbar pain and pain along the sciatic nerve. Objectively: positive Lasegues sign on the left, reduced Achilles reflex. What drug would be the most effective from the pathogenetic point of view?
*a. Diclofenac
b. Novocaine
c. Aspirin
d. Spasmalgon
e. Analgin

758. A 25 year old woman complained of edema on her face and legs, rise of blood pressure up to 160/100 mm Hg and weakness. She fell ill 3 weeks after recovering from angina. Urinalysis data: protein of 0,5 g/l, erythrocytes of 17-20/field, leukocytes of 2-3/field, erythrocyte casts. What treatment should be initiated after specifying the diagnosis?
a. Heparin
b. Ciprofloxacine
*c. Penicillin OS
d. Dipyridamole
e. Ceftriaxone

759. Which of the following IS NOT TYPICAL for Addisons disease?
a. Elevated BUN
*b. High serum Na+
c. Dilute urine
d. Elevated hematocrit
e. High serum K+

760. A 48 year old man complains of fatique and shortness of breath. His Ht is 32%, and Hb - 103 g/l. Peripheral blood smear reveals macrocytosis. Serum vitamin B12 level is 90 pg/ml (normal is 170 to 940); serum folate level is 6 ng/ml (normal is 2 to 14). Possible causes to consider include all of the following EXCEPT:
a. Regional enteritis
b. Pancreatitis
c. Vegetarianism
*d. Colonic diverticulitis
e. Fish tapeworm infection

761. The treatment of choice for duodenal obstruction caused by secondary duodenal hematoma that developed a few days after blunt abdominal injury is:
a. Immediate exploration
b. Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy
*c. Nasogastric decompression and parenteral alimentation
d. Tube duodenostomy
e. Duodenojejunostomy

762. A 3 month old infant suffering from acute segmental pneumonia has dyspnea (respiration rate - 80 per minute), paradoxical breathing, tachycardia, total cyanosis. Respiration / pulse ratio is 1:2. The heart dullness under normal size. Such signs characterise:
a. Myocarditis
b. Respiratory failure of I degree
*c. Respiratory failure of III degree
d. Congenital heart malformation
e. Respiratory failure of II degree

763. The highest risk of congenital anomalies probably occurs when human embryos or fetuses are exposed to ionizing radiation. At what stage of gestational period does it occur?
*a. 18-45 days after conception
b. The first 7 days
c. 10-14 days after conception
d. 90-120 days after conception
e. The third trimester

764. Preventive examination of an 11 year old boy helped to determine his habitus type. It was established that the childs shoulders were deviated and brought forward, with forward flexion of head, the thorax was flattened, abdomen was convex. The childs backbone had signs of deepened cervical and lumbar curvatures. What habitus is it?
*a. Kyphosis
b. Round-shouldered
c. Lordosis
d. Corrected
e. Normal

765. Survey radiograph of chest of a 62 year old smoker who often suffers from "pneumonias" showed a triangle shadow in the right lung, its vertex is pointing towards the lung root. It also showed deviation of heart and mediastinum shadows towards the lesion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung cyst
b. Lung abscess
c. Peripheral cancer of lung
*d. Cenral cancer of lung
e. Atelectasis

766. A 10 year old girl complains about abdominal pain that is arising and getting worse after eating rough or spicy food. She complains also about sour eructation, heartburn, frequent constipations, headache, irritability. She has been suffering from this for 12 months. Objectively: the girls diet is adequate. Tongue is moist with white deposit at the root. Abdomen is soft, painful in its epigastric part. What study method will help to make a diagnosis?
*a. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
b. Biochemical blood analysis
c. Contrast roentgenoscopy
d. Fractional examination of gastric juice
e. Intragastral pH-metry

767. A 25 year old man has a sudden onset of chest pain on the right and dyspnea. His trachea is deviated to the left. All of the following would be anticipated EXCEPT:
*a. Pleural friction rub on the left
b. Absence of rhonchi
c. Hyperresonance over the right chest
d. Distant breath sounds on the right
e. Absence of rales

768. A 29 year old patient underwent surgical treatment because of the benign serous epithelial tumour of an ovary. The postoperative period has elapsed without complications. What is it necessary to prescribe for the rehabilitational period:
a. The patient does not require further care
*b. Hormonotherapy and proteolytic enzymes
c. Lasertherapy and enzymotherapy
d. Antibacterial therapy and adaptogens
e. Magnitotherapy and vitamin therapy

769. A 39 year old patient complained about morning headache, appetite loss, nausea, morning vomiting, periodic nasal haemorrhages. The patient had acute glomerulonephritis at the age of 15. Examination revealed rise of arterial pressure up to 220/130 mm Hg, skin haemorrhages on his arms and legs, pallor of skin and mucous membranes. What biochemical index is of the greatest diagnostic importance in this case?
a. Blood sodium
b. Blood bilirubin
c. Uric acid
d. Fibrinogen
*e. Blood creatinine

770. A 19 year old girl was admitted to emergency department: unconsciousness, cyanosis, myotic pupils are present, superficial breathing is 12/min. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action necessary in this clinical situation:
a. Cordiamine injection
b. Gastric lavage
c. Oxygen inhalation
d. Caffeine injection
*e. Controlled respiration

771. A 26 year old woman who delivered a child 7 months ago has been suffering from nausea, morning vomiting, sleepiness for the last 2 weeks. She suckles the child, menstruation is absent. She hasnt applied any contraceptives. What method should be applied in order to specify her diagnosis?
a. Roentgenography of small pelvis organs
b. Speculum examination
*c. Ultrasonic examination
d. Palpation of mammary glands and pressing-out of colostrum
e. Bimanual vaginal examination

772. A 32 year old patient complains about heartburn and dull pain in the epigastrium that appear 2-3 hours after meal. Exacerbations happen in spring and in autumn. The patient has food intolerance of eggs and fish. Objectively: stomach palpation reveals painfulness in the gastroduodenal area. Electrophasoduodenoscopy revealed a 5 mm ulcer on the anterior wall of duodenum. Urease test is positive. What is the most probable leading mechanism of disease development?
a. Disorder of gastric motor activity
b. Reduced prostaglandin synthesis
c. Dietary allergy
d. Autoantibody production
*e. Chelicobacterial infection

773. Examination of a 3-month-old child revealed scrotum growth on the right. This formation has elastic consistency, its size decreases during sleep and increases when the child is crying. What examination will be helpful for making a correct diagnosis?
a. Palpation of the external inguinal ring
b. Examination of the formation in Trendelenburgs position
c. Puncture of the scrotum
d. Diaphanoscоpy
*e. Palpation of the thickened cord crossing the pubical tubercule (sign of the silk glove)

774. In treatment and prevention establishments, regardless of their organisational and proprietary form, the rights of patients should be observed. Which of these rights is the most significant?
a. The right to the protection from incompetence
*b. The right to the protection of the patients interests
c. The right to the information
d. The right to the free choice
e. The right to be heard

775. Researchers studied disease incidence of influenza and acute respiratory viral infection within the last 5 years. What kind of graphic presentation should be used for the best visualization of this data?
*a. Linear diagram
b. Bar diagram
c. Radial diagram
d. Histogram
e. Pie diagram

776. A woman of a high-risk group (chronic pyelonephritis in anamnesis) had vaginal delivery. The day after labour she complained of fever and loin pains, frequent urodynia. Specify the most probable complication:
a. Apostasis of sutures after episiotomy
b. Endometritis
c. Thrombophlebitis of veins of the pelvis
d. Infectious hematoma
*e. Infectious contamination of the urinary system

777. A patient, aged 49, complains of fever of 37,5oC, heart pain, dyspnea. S1 is clapping; S2 is accentuated in the aortic area; opening snap, presystolic murmur can be auscultated. What is the most efficient examination for valvular disorder assessment?
a. Chest X-ray
b. Ballistocardiogram
*c. Echocardiography+Doppler-Echocardiography
d. Phonocardiography
e. ECG

778. A 52 year old patient complains about headache, weakness of his upper left extremity. Neurological symptoms become more intense during physical stress of the left extremity. Pulsation on the arteries of the left extremity is sharply dampened but it remains unchanged on the carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Occlusion of brachiocephalic trunk
*b. Occlusion of the left subclavicular artery, steal syndrome
c. Takayasus disease
d. Raynauds syndrome
e. Thoracal outlet syndrome

779. A 62 year old patient complains of rest dyspnea, heart pains. 3 years ago he had myocardial infarction. Physical examination: orthopnea, acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins. Ps - 92, total heart enlargement, the liver is enlarged by 7 cm, shin edema. What is the stage of chronic heart failure (CHF)?
*a. CHF- 2 B
b. CHF- 0
c. CHF- 1
d. CHF- 3
e. CHF- 2 А

780. A 27 year old man complains of pains in epigastrium which are relieved by food intake. EGDFS shows antral erosive gastritis, biopsy of antral mucous presents Hеlicobacter Pylori. Diagnosis is:
a. Rigid antral gastritis
b. Menetriers gastritis
c. Reflux-gastritis
*d. Gastritis of type B
e. Gastritis of type A

781. The results of 5 year monitoring allowed to estimate the level of environmental influence upon health indices of popultaion. What statistic method should be chosen?
a. Calculation of coefficient of difference validity
b. Calculation of regression coefficient
c. Calculation of conformity coefficient
*d. Calculation of correlation coefficient
e. Calculation of dynamic indices

782. Maximum permissible concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is considered to be a sanitary index of air purity in a classroom. What concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is accepted as maximum permissible?
a. 0,2%
b. 0,05%
*c. 0,1%
d. 0,3%
e. 0,15%

783. A 2 month old healthy infant with good appetite is given artificial feeding since he turned 1 month old. When is it recommended to start the corrective feeding (fruit juice)?
a. 2,0 months
b. 3,0 months
c. 1,0 months
*d. 4,0 months
e. 1,5 months

784. A 50 year old woman complains about dull cardiac pain, asphyxia, body temperature rise up to 38°C. She had influenza a week ago. Objectively: Ps - 100 bpm, dropped-beat pulse during inspiration. AP - 100/70 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. ECG: reduced voltage, ST segment is above the isoline in all leads. X-ray picture shows extensively enlarged cardiac silhouette. Palmus is of small amplitude. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Exudative pericarditis
b. Myocardium infarction
c. Dilatation cardiomyopathy
d. Stenocardia
e. Myocarditis

785. A child with tetralogy of Fallot is most likely to exhibit:
a. Increased pulmonary blood flow
b. Normal oxygen tension (PaO2) in the left ventricle
*c. Increased pressure in the right ventricle
d. Normal pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve
e. Increased pulse pressure

786. A 34 year old woman fell ill 3 months ago after cold exposure. She complained of pain in her hand and knee joints, morning stiffness and fever up to 38oC. Interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal and knee joints are swollen, hot, with reduced ranges of motions; ESR of 45 mm/h, CRP (+++), Vaaler-Rouse test of 1:128. What group of medicines would you recommend the patient?
*a. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
b. Sulfonamides
c. Fluorchinolones
d. Tetracyclines
e. Cephalosporines

787. A 38 year old man was admitted to a hospital from his working place on July 19 because of hip fracture. He was invalid till November 19. Requires prolongation of treatment. Who decides on the issue of further temporary invalidity?
a. Regional MSEC
b. Interregional general MSEC
*c. Specialized (traumatologic) MSEC
d. The head physician of a polyclinic
e. DCC

788. A 30 year old woman ill with influenza felt palpitation and dull cardiac pain during moderate physical exercise. Objectively: Ps - 96 bpm, AP - 100/60 mm Hg. The first sound is quiet above the apex, soft systolic murmur is present. What complication is indicated by these clinical presentations?
a. Idiopathic myocarditis
b. Neurocirculatory dystonia
c. Myocardiopathy
*d. Acute viral myocarditis
e. Acute allergic infectious myocarditis

789. A 68 year old patient has been suffering from chronic pancreatitis for 35 years. During the last 5 years he has been observing abatement of pain syndrome, abdominal swelling, frequent defecations up to 3-4 times a day (feces are greyish, glossy, with admixtures of undigested food), progressing weight loss. Change of symptom set is caused by joining of:
a. Endocrine pancreatic insufficiency
b. Irritable bowels syndrome
*c. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
d. Chronic enterocolitis
e. Syndrome of lactase deficiency

790. It is suspected that a 34 year old patient has an abscess of Douglas pouches. What diagnostic method is to be chosen?
a. Rectoromanoscopy
b. Percussion and auscultation of stomach
c. R-scopy of abdominal cavity
*d. Digital examination of rectum
e. Laparoscopy

791. A 30 year old man complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39oC. There was an acute onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic and ill-defined, without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Gout
b. Infectious arthritis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Erysipelatous inflammation
e. Osteoarthritis

792. 15 minutes after the second vaccination with diphteria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine a 4 month old boy manifested symptoms of Quinckes edema. What medication should be applied for emergency aid?
a. Seduxen
b. Adrenalin
c. Furosemide
*d. Prednisolone
e. Heparin

793. A patient complains about pyrosis and permanent pain behind his breastbone. When he bends forward after eating there appears regurgitation. Roentgenological examination revealed extrasaccular cardiofunctional hernia of esophageal opening of diaphragm. Esophagoscopy revealed signs of reflux-esophagitis. What is the necessary tretment tactics?
a. Conservative treatment in a surgical department
b. Conservative treatment in an outpatients clinic
c. Conservative treatment in the therapeutic hospital
*d. Operation in a surgical department
e. Treatment at a health resort

794. A 28 year old patient complained about prolongation of intermenstrual periods up to 2 months, hirsutism. Gynaecological examination revealed that the ovaries were enlarged, painless, compact, uterus had no pecularities. Pelvic ultrasound revealed that the ovaries were 4-5 cm in diameter and had multiple enlarged follicles on periphery. Roentgenography of skull base showed that sellar region was dilated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
b. Sheehans syndrome
c. Premenstrual syndrome
d. Morgagni-Stewart syndrome
e. Algodismenorrhea

795. A 4 month old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, there was also one-time vomiting. Objectively: the childs condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctors finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
*b. Ileocecal invagination
c. Helminthic invasion
d. Wilms tumour
e. Pylorostenosis

796. A 14 year old child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for attack reduction?
*a. Obsidan
b. Amysyl
c. No-shpa
d. Aminophylline
e. Corglicone

797. A 56 year old woman has an acute onset of fever up to 39oC with chills, cough, and pain on respiration in the right side of her chest. On physical examination: HR - 90/min, BP- 95/60 mm Hg, RR- 26/min. There is dullness over the right lung on percussion. On X-ray: infiltrate in the right middle lobe of the lung. What is the diagnosis?
a. Acute lung abscess
b. Nosocomial lobar pneumonia
c. Acute pleuritis
d. Community-acquired bronchopneumonia
*e. Community-acquired lobar pneumonia of moderate severity

798. A 41 year old patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with haemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
a. Hemostatic therapy
b. Operation
c. Administration of plasma
d. Intravenous administration of pituitrin
*e. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube

799. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Perforated Meckels diverticulum
b. Ulcerative colitis
c. Ileocecal tuberculosis
*d. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum
e. Acute ileitis

800. A 27 year old man complains of pains in epigastrium which are relieved by food intake. EGDFS shows antral erosive gastritis, biopsy of antral mucous presents Hеlicobacter Pylori. Diagnosis is:
a. Rigid antral gastritis
b. Gastritis of type A
c. Reflux-gastritis
d. Menetriers gastritis
*e. Gastritis of type B

801. Examination of placenta revealed a defect. An obstetrician performed manual investigation of uterine cavity, uterine massage. Prophylaxis of endometritis in the postpartum period should involve following actions:
a. Intrauterine instillation of dioxine
b. Instrumental revision of uterine cavity
c. Haemostatic therapy
*d. Antibacterial therapy
e. Contracting agents

802. A 67 year old female patient complains about edemata of face and legs, pain in the lumbar area that is getting worse at moving; great weakness, sometimes nasal haemorrhages, rise of body temperature up to 38,4oC. Objectively: painfulness of vertebral column and ribs on palpation. Laboratorial study revealed daily proteinuria of 4,2 g, ESR- 52 mm/h. What changes of laboratory indices are to be expected?
a. Albumins - 65%
b. ?-globulins - 14%
c. Haemoglobin - 165 g/l
d. Leukocytes - 15,3 g/l
*e. Whole protein of blood serum - 101 g/l

803. A 43 year old female patient was delivered to the hospital in grave condition. She suffers from Addisons disease. The patient had been regularly taking prednisolone but a week before she stopped taking this drug. Objectively: sopor, skin and visible mucous membranes are pigmented, skin and muscle turgor is lowered. Heart sounds are muffled, rapid. AP- 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 96/min. In blood: Na- 120 millimole/l, K- 5,8 micromole/l. Development of this complication is primarily caused by the deficit of the following hormone:
a. Corticotropin (ACTH)
b. Adrostendion
c. Adrenaline
d. Noradrenaline
*e. Cortisol

804. A 52 year old patient was admitted to a hospital because of high hemorrhagic diathesis of mucous membranes, massive skin haemorrhages in form of ecchymoses and spots, nasal and stomach haemorrhages. After clinical examinations her illness was diagnosed as thrombocytopenic purpura. What is the most probable cause of this disease?
a. Deficit of the VIII factor of blood coagulation
b. Disturbed hemostasis
c. Inherited insufficiency of plasm factors of blood coagulation
d. Iron deficit in blood serum, bone marrow and depot
*e. Generation of antithrombocytic antibodies

805. A 37 year old patient applied to a local therapeutist. As a result of exacerbation of chronic obstructive bronchitis the patient had been temporarily disabled for 117 days within 1 year. What tactics will be legally correct?
a. The therapeutist should extend a medical certificate
b. The therapeutist should issue a new medical certificate
c. The patient should be referred to the medical consultation comission for extension of medical certificate
*d. The patient should be referred to the medicosocial expertise
e. The patient should be referred to the sanatorium-and-spa treatment

806. A patient applied to the traumatology cenre and complained about a trauma of the lower third of the volar forearm surface caused by cut on a piece of galss. Objectively: flexion of the IV and V fingers is impaired, sensitivity of the interior dorsal and palmar surface of hand as well as of the IV finger is reduced. What nerve is damaged?
*a. Ulnar
b. Axillary
c. Radial
d. Median
e. Musculoskeletal

807. A parturient woman is 27 year old, it was her second labour, delivery was at term, normal course. On the 3rd day of postpartum period body temperature is 36,8oC, Ps - 72/min, AP - 120/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are moderately swollen, nipples are clean. Abdomen is soft and painless. Fundus of uterus is 3 fingers below the umbilicus. Lochia are bloody, moderate. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subinvolution of uterus
b. Postpartum metroendometritis
c. Remnants of placental tissue after labour
d. Lactostasis
*e. Physiological course of postpartum period

808. A 43 year old patient was admitted to the infectious diseases hospital with high body temperature and intense headache. The iIlness has lasted for 2 days. Examination revealed a carbuncle on his forearm. The area around it was apparently edematic and slightly painful. Regional lymphadenitis and hepatolienal syndrome were also present. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient works at a cattle-breeding farm. What disease should be suspected in the first place?
a. Erysipelas
b. Eczema
c. Erysipeloid
*d. Anthrax
e. Skin cancer

809. A 28 year old woman has bursting pain in the lower abdomen during menstruation; chocolate-like discharges from vagina. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient suffers from chronic adnexitis. Bimanual examination revealed a tumour-like formation of heterogenous consistency 7х7 cm large to the left from the uterus. The formation is restrictedly movable, painful when moved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic adnexitis
b. Fibromatous node
*c. Endometrioid cyst of the left ovary
d. Follicular cyst of the left ovary
e. Tumour of sigmoid colon

810. A 68 year old patient complains about acute pain in his right foot, toe edema and darkening of skin of the IV toe. He has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years, doesnt receive regular treatment. What complication of diabetes mellitus is it?
a. Erysipelas
b. Fracture of the IV toe on the right foot
*c. Gangrene of the IV toe on the right foot
d. Panaritium
e. Haematoma

811. A 52 year old male patient complains about attacks of asphyxia, pain in his left side during respiration. These manifestations turned up all of a sudden. It is known from his anamnesis that he had been treated for thrombophlebitis of the right leg for the last month. In the admission ward the patient suddenly lost consciousness, there was a sudden attack of asphyxia and pain in his left side. Objectively: heart rate - 102/min, respiratory rate - 28/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery, gallop rhythm, small bubbling rales above the lungs under the scapula on the right, pleural friction rub. What examination method will be the most informative for a diagnosis?
a. Study of external respiration function
*b. Angiography of pulmonary vessels
c. Coagulogram
d. ECG
e. Echocardioscopy

812. A 10 year old boy suffers from chronic viral hepatitis type B with maximal activity. What laboratory test can give the most precise characteristic of cytolysis degree?
a. Weltmans coagulation test
b. Takata-Ara test
c. Prothrombin test
*d. Transaminase test
e. Test for whole protein

813. An infant is full-term. Delivery was pathological, with breech presentation. Examination of the infant revealed limited abduction of the right leg to 50°, positive "clicking" symptom on the right, asymmetric inguinal folds. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Varus deformity of both femoral necks
b. Inborn dislocation of both hips
*c. Inborn dislocation of the right hip
d. Right hip dysplasia
e. Fracture of both femoral necks

814. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
a. Miliaria
*b. Vesiculopustulosis
c. Impetigo
d. Epidermolysis bullosa
e. Impetigo neonatorum

815. Estimation of physical development of a child involved dynamometry and estimation of body weight and length, annual gain in body length, chest circumference, number of permanent teeth, secondary sexual characters, lung vital capacity. Which of the mentioned indices relates to the physiometric ones?
a. Secondary sexual characters
b. Number of permanent teeth
*c. Lung vital capacity, dynamometry
d. Annual gain in body length
e. Body length and weight, chest circumference

816. A 37 year old male patient was admitted to the resuscitation department because of attacks of tonoclonic spasms repeating every half an hour. Between the attacks the patient remains unconscious. AP is 120/90 mm Hg, Ps- 100 bpm. A day before the patient was at wedding and consumed alcohol. 5 years ago he had a closed craniocerebral trauma and brain contusion that later caused single convulsive attacks accompanied by loss of consciousness, but the patient didnt undergo antiepileptic treatment. What drug should be injected for emergency aid?
*a. Diazepam
b. Sodium thiopental
c. Magnesium sulfate
d. Sodium oxybutyrate
e. Aminazine

817. A patient has got pain in the axillary area, rise of temperature developed 10 hours ago. On examination: shaky gait is evident, the tongue is coated with white deposit. The pulse is frequent. The painful lymphatic nodes are revealed in the axillary area. The skin over the lymph nodes is erythematous and glistering. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis
b. Lymphogranulomatosis
c. Anthrax
d. Tularemia
*e. Bubonic plague

818. A 14 year old child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for attack reduction?
a. Amysyl
*b. Obsidan
c. No-shpa
d. Corglicone
e. Aminophylline

819. 1,5 hour after start of gullet bougienage a 48 year old patient suffering from corrosive stricture felt acute abdominal pain. Previously he had been suffering from duodenal ulcer. Examination revealed that abdomen was very tense and painful; Ps- 110 bpm, painful sialophagia, skin pallor. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute myocardium infarction
b. Strangulation of diaphragmal hernia
*c. Perforation of abdominal part of esophagus
d. Perforation of duodenal ulcer
e. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels

820. A 46 year old patient is to be prepared to the operation on account of stomach cancer. Preoperative preparation involves infusion therapy. It was injected up to 3 l of solutions into his right lunar vein. On the next day he got tensive pain in the region of his right shoulder. Examination of interior brachial surface revealed an oblong area of hyperemia, skin edema and painful cord. What complication is it?
a. Phlegmon of paravenous cellular tissue
b. Necrosis of paravenous cellular tissue
c. Vein puncture and edema of paravenous cellular tissue
d. Acute lymphangitis
*e. Acute thrombophlebitis

821. A 2 month old full-term child was born with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
*a. Corresponding to the age
b. Hypotrophy of the II grade
c. 150 g less than necessary
d. Hypotrophy of the I grade
e. Paratrophy of the I grade

822. A 58 year old female patient complains about periodical headache, dizziness and ear noise. She has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. Objectively: heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 76/min, there is diastolic shock above aorta, AP is 180/110 mm Hg. In urine: OD- 1,014. Daily loss of protein with urine is 1,5 g. What drug should be chosen for treatment of arterial hypertension?
*a. Ihibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme
b. Calcium channel antagonist
c. Thiazide diuretic
d. ?-blocker
e. ?-blocker

823. A 9 year old boy had acute respiratory viral infection. After it there appeared polydipsia, polyuria, weakness, nausea. Examination revealed the following symptoms: mental confusion, dry skin, soft eyeballs, Kussmauls respiration, acetone smell from the mouth, muffled heart sounds, soft and painless abdomen. Blood sugar was 19 millimole/l. What acute condition is it?
a. Hyperosmolar coma
*b. Ketoacidotic coma
c. Cerebral coma
d. Hepatic coma
e. Acute renal insufficiency

824. Which of the following symptoms would occur only if a total-body acute radiation exposure exceeded 5.000 rad (50 Gy)
a. Nausea and vomiting
b. Bleeding gums
c. Diarrhea
*d. Hallucinations and impairment of vision
e. Epilation (hair loss)

825. A 42 year old man works in a boiler room. He complains about girdle headache and recurring vomiting. There was also short-term consciousness loss. Objectively: increase of tendon reflexes, spontaneous myofibrillations. AP is 150/80 mm Hg, Ps- 104 bpm. Visible mucous membranes and cutaneous surfaces have crimson colouring. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Poisoning with hydrocyanic acid
*b. Poisoning with carbon monooxide
c. Poisoning with benzine
d. Poisoning with anilin colouring agents
e. Poisoning with methane

826. A 32 year old patient complains about cardiac irregularities, dizziness, dyspnea at physical stress. He has never suffered from this before. Objectively: Ps- 74 bpm, rhythmic. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolic murmur above aorta, the first heart sound was normal. ECG showed hypertrophy of the left ventricle, signs of repolarization disturbance in the I, V5 and V6 leads. Echocardiogram revealed that interventricular septum was 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Myocardium infarction
b. Coarctation of aorta
*c. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
d. Aortic stenosis
e. Essential hypertension

827. Examination of a 22 year old man suffering from polyarthralgia and high fever revealed right-sided exudative pleuritis. X-ray picture showed a homogenous shadow below the IV rib on the right. In the II segment there were single dense focal shadows. Mantoux test with 2 TU resulted in formation of a papula 16 mm largeE. Pleural liquid has increased protein concentration, Rivaltas reaction is positive, there was also increased number of leukocytes with prevailing lymphocytes. What is the most probable etiology of pleuritis?
a. Cancerous
b. Viral
c. Staphylococcal
*d. Tuberculous
e. Autoimmune

828. A woman consulted a therapeutist about fatigability, significant weight loss, weakness, loss of appetite. She has had amenorrhea for 8 months. A year ago she born a full-term child. Haemorrhage during labour made up 2 l. She got blood and blood substitute transfusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Vegetovascular dystonia
b. Homological blood syndrome
c. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
*d. Sheehans syndrome
e. Shereshevsky-Turners syndrome

829. A 36 year old patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Symptomatic therapy
b. Thoracotomy
c. Antiinflammation therapy
d. Pleural puncture
*e. Surgical treatment: drainage of the pleural cavity

830. A patient consulted a venereologist about painful urination, reddening of the external opening of urethra, profuse purulent discharges from the urethra. He considers himself to be ill for 3 days. He also associates the disease with a casual sexual contact that took place for about a week ago. If provisional diagnosis "acute gonorrheal urethritis" will be confirmed, then bacteriological study of urethral discharges will reveal:
*a. Gram-negative diplococci
b. Gram-positive diplococci
c. Mycoplasma
d. Proteus vulgaris
e. Spirochaete

831. A 23 year old female patient complains about periodical chill and body temperature rise up to 40oC, sense of heat taking turns with profuse sweating. The patient has had already 3 attacks that came once in two days and lasted 12 hours. She has lived in Africa for the last 2 months. Liver and spleen are enlarged. In blood: erythrocytes - 2,5×1012/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Spotted fever
b. Haemolytic anaemia
c. Sepsis
*d. Malaria
e. Leptospirosis

832. A 26 year old woman had the second labour within the last 2 years with oxytocin application. The childs weight is 4080 g. After the placent birth there were massive bleeding, signs of hemorrhagic shock. Despite the injection of contractive agents, good contraction of the uterus and absence of any cervical and vaginal disorders, the bleeding proceeds. Choose the most probable cause of bleeding:
a. Delay of the part of placenta
b. Injury of cervix of the uterus
c. Hypotonia of the uterus
d. Hysterorrhexis
*e. Atony of the uterus

833. A 44 year old man has been working in coke industry for 16 years. Dust concentration at his workplace is 5-10 times more than maximum permissible concentration. Roentgenography of lungs revealed changes that are typical for pneumoconiosis. What is the most probable type of pneumoconiosis in this case?
a. Asbestosis
b. Silicatosis
*c. Anthracosis
d. Anthracosilicosis
e. Siderosis

834. It is suspected that a 34 year old patient has an abscess of Douglas pouches. What diagnostic method is to be chosen?
*a. Digital examination of rectum
b. Laparoscopy
c. Percussion and auscultation of stomach
d. R-scopy of abdominal cavity
e. Rectoromanoscopy

835. Female 45 year old patient was admitted to the traumatological ward with the closed fracture of the medial malleolus with its displacement up to 3 mm. The foot is to be fixed with a plaster cast in the following position:
a. In position of supination
b. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
c. In position of pronation
d. In position of planter flexion of foot
*e. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot

836. In the 43rd week of gestation a long, thin infant was delivered. He is apneic, limp, pale, and covered with "pea soup" amniotic fluid. The first step in the resuscitation of this infant at delivery should be:
*a. Suction of the trachea under direct vision
b. Administration of 100% oxygen by mask
c. Artificial ventilation with endotracheal tube
d. Catheterization of the umbilical vein
e. Artificial ventilation with bag and mask

837. The average body lenth of newborn boys is 50,9 cm at a sigma 1,66; and average mass - 3432 at a sigma 5,00. What criterion is necessary in order to compare degree of variability of these signs?
a. Coefficient of association
*b. Coefficient of variation
c. Sigma
d. Amplitude
e. Limit

838. A 27 year old patient suffers from haemophilia. He was admitted to the hospital with melena and skin pallor. Objectively: Ps- 110 bpm, AP- 100/60 mm Hg. In blood: Hb- 80 g/l, erythrocytes - 2,8×1012/l. What medication should be administered in the first place?
a. Packed red blood cells
b. Dicinone
c. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
d. Stored blood
*e. Cryoprecipitate

839. A 4 month old child fell seriously ill: body temperature rose up to 38,5°C, the child became inert and had a single vomiting. 10 hours later there appeared rash over the buttocks and lower limbs in form of petechiae, spots and papules. Some haemorrhagic elements have necrosis in the centre. What is the most probable disease?
*a. Meningococcemia
b. Influenza
c. Rubella
d. Scarlet fever
e. Haemorrhagic vasculitis

840. A 39 year old patient complained about morning headache, appetite loss, nausea, morning vomiting, periodic nasal haemorrhages. The patient had acute glomerulonephritis at the age of 15. Examination revealed rise of arterial pressure up to 220/130 mm Hg, skin haemorrhages on his arms and legs, pallor of skin and mucous membranes. What biochemical index has the greatest diagnostic importance in this case?
a. Fibrinogen
b. Blood bilirubin
c. Blood sodium
*d. Blood creatinine
e. Uric acid

841. A 12 year old child has the ulcer disease of stomach. What is the etiology of this disease?
*a. Intestinal bacillus
b. Influenza
c. Helicobacter pylory
d. Salmonella
e. Lambliosis

842. A 10 year old boy complains about pain in his left eye and strong photophobia after he had injured his left eye with a pencil at school. Left eye examination: blepharospasm, ciliary and conjunctival congestion, cornea is transparent, other parts of eyeball have no changes. Visus 0,9. Right eye is healthy, Visus 1,0. What additional method would you choose first of all?
*a. Staining test with 1% fluorescein
b. X-ray examination of orbit
c. Gonioscopia
d. Tonometria
e. Cornea sensation-test

843. A 63 year old patient was diagnosed with purulent mediastinitis. What of the below listed diseases are NOT the cause of purulent mediastinitis?
a. Deep neck phlegmon
b. Perforation of the cervical part of the oesophagus
c. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
d. Perforation of the thoracic part of the oesophagus
*e. Cervical lymphadenitis

844. A 4 year old girl was playing with her toys and suddenly she got an attack of cough, dyspnea. Objectively: respiration rate - 45/min, heart rate - 130/min. Percussion revealed dullness of percutory sound on the right in the lower parts. Auscultation revealed diminished breath sounds with bronchial resonance on the right. X-ray pictue showed shadowing of the lower part of lungs on the right. Blood analysis revealed no signs of inflammation. The child was diagnosed with foreign body in the right bronchus. What complication caused such clinical presentations?
a. Emphysema
b. Pneumothorax
c. Pneumonia
d. Bronchitis
*e. Atelectasis

845. Five days after a total hip joint replacement a 72 year old woman becomes acutely short of breath, diaphoretic and hypotensive. Both lung fields are clear to auscultation and percussion, but examination of the neck reveals mild jugular venous distension with prominent A waves. Heart sounds are normal. ECG shows sinus tachycardia with a new right bundle branch block and minor nonspecific ST-T wave changes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Aortic dissection
b. Aspiration
*c. Pulmonary thromboembolism
d. Pericarditis
e. Acute myocardial infarction

846. A 3 year old child with weight deficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 millimol/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Recurrent bronchitis
*b. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Pulmonary hypoplasia
e. Bronchiectasis

847. A 34 year old patient complains of profuse sweating at night, skin itching, weight loss (9 kg within the last 3 months). Examination revealed malnutrition, skin pallor. Palpation of neck and inguinal areas revealed dense elastic lymph nodes for about 1 cm in diameter, nonmobile, non-adhering to skin. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymphosarcoma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
c. Burkitts lymphoma
d. Cancer metastases
*e. Lymphogranulomatosis

848. A 47 year old male patient got a flame burn of trunk and upper extremities and was delivered to the hospital. The patient is in grave condition, confused mental state, with fever. AP- 80/50 mm Hg, Ps- 118 bpm. It was locally stated that the patient got III B degree burns with total area of 20%. What medical actions should be taken?
a. Necrotomy of burn surface, haemotransfusion
b. Antibacterial and detoxicating therapy
*c. Injection of narcotic analgetics and powdered blood substitutes
d. Administration of detoxicating blood substitutes
e. Primary surgical pocessing

849. On the third day of life an infants skin got icteric colouring. The child was born with body weight of 3,200 kg, body length of 52 cm. The child is active. There is puerile respiration above the lungs. Respiratory rate is 36/min, heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 130/min. Abdomen is soft, liver comes out from the edge of costal arch by 2 cm, spleen is not palpable. Feces are in form of meconium. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Physiologic jaundice
b. Neonatal sepsis
c. Hemolytic disease of newborn
d. Minkowsky-Shauffard disease
e. Biliary tracts atresia

850. What is the maximum duration of medical certificate in case of tuberculosis?
a. 2 weeks
b. 10 months
c. Week
*d. 2 months
e. Month

851. A 36 year old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
a. Mediastinitis
b. Closed pneumothorax
*c. Valvular pneumothorax
d. Subcutaneous emphysema
e. Open pneumothorax

852. A female patient consulted a doctor about gain in weight, chill, edemata, dry skin, sleepiness, problems with concentration. Objectively: the patients height is 165 cm, weight is 90 kg, gynoid body proportions, t 35,8 degree C, ESR- 58/min, AP- 105/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds are weakened, bradycardia is present. Other internal organs have no changes. Thyroid gland is not palpable. Mammary glands ooze milk droplets. Hormonal study revealed rise of TSH and prolactin concentration, reduction of T4. What factor caused obesity?
a. Hypopituitarism
b. Secondary hypothyroidism
c. Prolactinoma
*d. Primary hypothyroidism
e. Adiposogenital dystrophy

853. A 22 year old female patient complains about frequent and painful urination, urge to urinate at night, enuresis, pain in the suprapubic and lumbar area. Her urine often has beer colouring. She got married a month ago. Objectively: general state is satisfactory. Lung examination revealed vesicular respiration. Heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 78/min, AP- 128/68 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, painful in the suprapubic area. Urine contains 12-18 erythrocytes and 12-15 bacteria within eyeshot. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Primary syphilis
b. Infection of superior urinary tracts - pyelonephritis
c. Gonorrhoea
*d. Infection of inferior urinary tracts - cystitis
e. Urolithiasis

854. On the second day after preventive vaccination a 2 year old boy got abdominal pain without clear localization, body temperature rose up to 38°C. On the third day the child got red papular haemorrhagic eruption on the extensor surfaces of limbs and around the joints. Knee joints were edematic and slightly painful. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathological changes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thrombocytopenic purpura
b. DIC syndrome
c. Meningococcemia
*d. Haemorrhagic vesiculitis
e. Urticaria

855. 15 minutes after the second vaccination with diphteria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine a 4 month old boy manifested symptoms of Quinckes edema. What medication should be applied for emergency aid?
a. Heparin
b. Seduxen
c. Furosemide
d. Adrenalin
*e. Prednisolone

856. A child is 1 day old. During delivery there had been problems with extraction of shoulders. Body weight is 4300,0. Right arm hangs down along the body, hand is pronated, movement in the arm is absent. "Scarf" symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tetraparesis
b. Distal right-sided obstetric paralysis
c. Proximal right-sided obstetric paralysis
d. Hemiparesis
*e. Total right-sided obstetric paralysis

857. A 62 year old patient complains of rest dyspnea, heart pains. 3 years ago he had myocardial infarction. Physical examination: orthopnea, acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins. Ps - 92, total heart enlargement, the liver is enlarged by 7 cm, shin edema. What is the stage of chronic heart failure (CHF)?
a. CHF- 0
b. CHF- 3
c. CHF- 2 А
*d. CHF- 2 B
e. CHF- 1

858. A 3 year old boy has petechial eruption. Examination revealed no other pathological changes. Thrombocyte number is 20*10^9g/l; haemoglobin and leukocyte concentration is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*b. Immune thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Schonlein-Henoch disease
d. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
e. Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy

859. Which of the methods of examination is the most informative in the diagnostics of a tube infertility?
*a. Laparoscopy with chromosalpingoscopy
b. Transvaginal echography
c. Hysterosalpingography
d. Pertubation
e. Bicontrast pelviography

860. A 13 year old patient is suffering from an acute disease with the following symptoms: thirst, polyuria, weakness. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory, there is no smell of acetone. Glucose concentration in blood on an empty stomach is 32 micromole/l, in urine - 6%, acetone +. What treatment should be administered?
a. Long-acting insulin
*b. Short-acting insulin
c. Sulfonylurea
d. Biguanides
e. Diet

861. A patient has got acute macrofocal myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. The latter is progresing under conditions of weak general peripheric resistance and lowered cardiac output. What antihypotensive drug should be injected to the patient in the first place?
a. Prednisolone
b. Adrenaline
c. Noradrenaline
d. Mesatonum
*e. Dopamine

862. A 28 year old patient was admitted to the clinic with complaints of the temperature rise up to 39,0oC, headache, weakness, constipation on the 9th day of the disease. On examination: single roseolas on the skin of the abdomen are present. The pulse rate is 78 bpm. The liver is enlarged by 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Sepsis
*b. Typhoid fever
c. Malaria
d. Leptospirosis
e. Brucellosis

863. A 52 year old woman complains about face distortion. It turned up 2 days ago after supercooling. Objectively: body temperature is 38,2oC. Face asymmetry is present. Frontal folds are flattened. Left eye is wider than right one and doesnt close. Left nasolabial fold is flattened, mouth corner is lowered. Examination revealed no other pathology. Blood count: leukocytes - 10×109/l, ESR - 20 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Ischemic stroke
b. Trigeminus neuralgia
c. Brain tumour
d. Hemicrania (migraine)
*e. Facial neuritis

864. At year-end hospital administration has obtained the following data: annual number of treated patients and average annual number of beds used for patients treatment. What index of hospital work can be calculated on the base of this data?
a. Average duration of patients presence in the hospital
b. Average annual bed occupancy
c. Average bed idle time
*d. Bed turnover
e. Bed resources of the hospital

865. A male patient, 60 years old, tobacco smoker for 30 years, alcoholic, has dysphagia and weight loss since 4 months. Suggested diagnosis?
a. Esophageal diverticulum
*b. Cancer of the esophagus
c. Hanters disease
d. Esophageal achalasia
e. Esophagitis

866. A 54 year old female patient was admitted to the hospital with evident acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins, enlarged liver, ascites. Cardiac borders are dilated. Heart sounds cannot be auscultated, apical beat is undetectable. AP is 100/50 mm Hg. X-ray picture of chest shows enlarged heart shadow in form of a trapezium. What pathology might have caused these symptoms?
a. Acute cardiac insufficiency
*b. Cardiac tamponade
c. Hiatal hernia
d. Exudative pleuritis
e. Complex heart defect

867. A healthy 75 year old woman who leads a moderately active way of life went through a preventive examination that revealed serum concentration of common cholesterol at the rate of 5,1 millimole/l and HDL (high-density lipoproteins) cholesterol at the rate of 70 mg/dl. ECG reveals no pathology. What dietary recommendation is the most adequate?
a. Decrease of cholesterol consumption
b. Increase of cellulose consumption
*c. Any dietary changes are necessary
d. Decrease of saturated fats consumption
e. Decrease of carbohydrates consumption

868. An 18 year old primigravida in her 27-28 week of pregnancy underwent an operation on account of acute phlegmonous appendicitis. In the postoperative period it is necessary to take measures for prevention of the following pegnancy complication:
a. Fetus hypotrophy
b. Late gestosis
c. Intestinal obstruction
*d. Noncarrying of pregnancy
e. Premature placenta detachment

869. The observed patients movements are retarded, she answers no questions. Sometimes she spontaneously stiffens in strange postures. It is possible to set her body and limbs into different positions artificially. If the psychiatrist lifts her arm or leg, so that she remains standing on the other leg, the patient can stay in such a position for quite a long time. Name the probable disorder:
a. Dissociative stupor, dissociative psychosis
b. Psychogenic stupor, stress disorder
c. Apathetic stupor, schizophrenia
d. Depressive stupor, bipolar disorder
*e. Catatonic stupor, schizophrenia

870. The man, aged 42, applied to the therapeutist with complaints of pricking pains in scapulas area, dyspnea on physical exertion, cough with discharge of small amount of sputum. During 10 years he works in coal mining. On percussion-box-note sound in the lower parts, on auscultation- a harsh breathing. There were no changes in the heart. Possible diagnosis?
a. Chronic bronchitis
*b. Silicosis
c. Tuberculosis of lungs
d. Silicatosis
e. Bronchiectatic disease

871. A woman complains of having slight dark bloody discharges and mild pains in the lower part of abdomen for several days. Last menses were 7 weeks ago. The pregnancy test is positive. Bimanual investigation: the body of the uterus indicates for about 5-6 weeks of pregnancy, it is soft, painless. In the left appendage there is a retort-like formation, 7х5 cm large, mobile, painless. What examination is necessary for detection of fetus localization?
*a. Ultrasound
b. Hysteroscopy
c. Cystoscopy
d. Colposcopy
e. Hromohydrotubation

872. A 34 year old patient was delivered to the hospital because of follicular tonsillitis charactirized by high temperature. The patient has been abusing alcohol for 12 years. In the evening on the day of hospitalization he became anxious, couldnt stay in bed, left his ward several times and applied to the staff on duty with different complaints. He reported about seeing alot of spiders and flies in his ward as well as abou hearing threats from the corridor. He was exasperated by the fact that other patients didnt hear them. He lost also spatial orientation. What psychopathological syndrome is it?
*a. Delirious
b. Asthenic confusion
c. Oneiric
d. Twilight state
e. Amentive

873. A patient complains about evaginations in the region of anus that appear during defecation and need to be replaced. Examination with anoscope revealed 1x1 cm large evaginations of mucosa above the pectineal line. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Internal hemorrhoids
b. Acute paraproctitis
c. Anal fissure
d. -
e. External hemorrhoids

874. A 72 year old patient complains about pain and bleeding during defecation. Digital rectal investigation revealed a tumour of anal canal. After verification of the diagnosis the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma. The secondary (metastatic) tumour will be most probably found in:
*a. Lungs
b. Mediastinum
c. Liver
d. Pelvic bones
e. Brain

875. A 45 year old woman complains about unbearable pain attacks in the left part of face lasting 1-2 minutes. Such attacks are provoked by mastication. These symptoms appeared 2 months ago after exposure to cold. Objectively:the pain is localized in the ending points of trigeminus on the left. A touch near nose wing provokes another pain attack and tonic spasm of face muscles. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Arthritis of mandibular joint
b. Maxillary sinusitis
c. Facial migraine
*d. Neuralgia of trigeminus
e. Neuralgia of glossopharyngeal nerve

876. A 38 year old female patient complains about body stiffness in the morning, especially in the articulations of her upper and lower limbs, that disappears 30-60 minutes later after active movements. She has also arthritis of metacarpophalangeal and proximal phalangeal articulations, subfebrile temperature. ESR- 45 mm/h. Roentgenography revealed osteoporosis and erosion of articular surface of small hand and foot articulations. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Psoriatic arthropathy
*c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Osteoarthrosis deformans
e. Reactive polyarthritis

877. In the woman of 24 years about earlier normal menstrual function, cycles became irregular, according to tests of function diagnostics - anovulatory. The contents of prolactin in blood is boosted. Choose the most suitable investigation:
a. Determination of the contents of testosteron-depotum in blood serum
b. Progesterone assay
c. USI of organs of small pelvis
d. Determination of the level of gonadotropins
*e. Computer tomography of the head

878. A 30 year old man complains of intense pain, reddening of skin, edema in the ankle-joint area, fever up to 39oC. There was an acute onset of the illness. In the past there were similar attacks lasting 5-6 days without residual changes in the joint. The skin over the joint is hyperemic and ill-defined, without infiltrative bank on the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Gout
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Erysipelatous inflammation
d. Infectious arthritis
e. Osteoarthritis

879. A woman of a high-risk group (chronic pyelonephritis in anamnesis) had vaginal delivery. The day after labour she complained of fever and loin pains, frequent urodynia. Specify the most probable complication:
a. Endometritis
b. Thrombophlebitis of veins of the pelvis
c. Apostasis of sutures after episiotomy
*d. Infectious contamination of the urinary system
e. Infectious hematoma

880. A 3 month old infant suffering from acute segmental pneumonia has dyspnea (respiration rate - 80 per minute), paradoxical breathing, tachycardia, total cyanosis. Respiration and pulse - ratio is 1:2. The heart dullness under normal size. Such signs characterise:
a. Congenital heart malformation
*b. Respiratory failure of III degree
c. Myocarditis
d. Respiratory failure of I degree
e. Respiratory failure of II degree

881. Indices that characterize population health include demographic indices. What environment is used for calculation of these indices?
a. Number of population being liable to preventive examination
*b. Population number
c. Number of patients
d. Employment number
e. Number of hospitalized people

882. Surgical department admitted a 37 year old patient with a big crushed wound of his left thigh 4 hours after he got this trauma. What is the main provision for successful prevention of gaseous gangrene?
a. Wound lavage with 6% solution of hydrogen peroxide
*b. Removal of necrotic tissues and timely surgical processing of the wound
c. Injection of specific serum 30 000 U
d. Injection of specific serum 3 000 U
e. Infiltration of soft tissues around the wound with antibiotic solution

883. A 50 year old locksmith was diagnosed with typhoid fever. The patient lives in a separate apartment with all facilities. Apart of him there are also 2 adults in his family. What actions should be taken about persons communicating with the patient?
a. Dispensary observation
b. Isolation
*c. Bacteriological study
d. Antibiotic prophylaxis
e. Vaccination

884. Three weeks after acute angina the patient is still weak, inert, subfebrile, his retromaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged. Tonsils are flabby, stick together with arches, there are purulent plugs in lacunae. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic pharyngitis
*b. Chronic tonsillitis
c. Acute lacunar tonsillitis
d. Paratonsillitis
e. Tonsillar tumour

885. A 4 month old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, there was also one-time vomiting. Objectively: the childs condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctors finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Wilms tumour
b. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
*c. Ileocecal invagination
d. Helminthic invasion
e. Pylorostenosis

886. After objective clinical examination a 12 year old child was diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse. What complementary instrumental method of examination should be applied for the diagnosis confirmation?
a. ECG
*b. Echocardiography
c. Veloergometry
d. Phonocardiography
e. Roentgenography of chest

887. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6oC. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5х2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Liver abscess
b. Paravesical liver abscesses
c. Liver cancer
d. Cystous liver cancer
*e. Alveolar echinococcus of liver

888. On the 5th day after labor body temperature of a parturient suddenly rose up to 38,7oC. She complains about weakness, headache, abdominal pain, irritability. Objectively: AP- 120/70 mm Hg, Ps- 92 bpm, t°38,7oC. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged up to 12 weeks of pregnancy, it was dense, slightly painful on palpation. Cervical canal lets in 2 transverse fingers, discharges are moderate, turbid, with foul smell. In blood: skeocytosis, lymphopenia, ESR- 30 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lochiometra
*b. Endometritis
c. Parametritis
d. Metrophlebitis
e. Pelviperitonitis

889. A fitter of a metallurgic factory with occupational exposure to high concentrations of mercury fumes for 16 years presents instability of pulse and blood pressure, general hyperhydrosis, asymmetric innervations of facial muscles and tongue, positive subcortical reflexes, hand tremor on physical examination. A dentist revealed paradontosis and chronic stomatitis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute mercury intoxication
b. Parkinson syndrome
c. Neuroinfection
*d. Chronic mercury intoxication
e. Mercury encephalopathy

890. A 40 year old female patient has been observing excessive menstruation accompanied by spasmodic pain in the lower abdomen for a year. Bimanual examination performed during menstruation revealed a dense formation up to 5 cm in diameter in the cervical canal. Uterus is enlarged up to 5-6 weeks of pregnancy, movable, painful, of normal consistency. Appendages are not palpable. Bloody discharges are profuse. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cervical myoma
b. Cervical carcinoma
*c. Nascent submucous fibromatous node
d. Abortion in progress
e. Algodismenorrhea

891. Examination of a 26 year old female patient revealed a node in the right lobe of thyroid gland. The node appeared no earlier than 3 months ago. The patient associates this node with stress. She doesnt complain either about pain or enlargement of the node. Ultrasonic scanning revealed a 2x2,5 cm large node in the inferior part of the right lobe of thyroid gland. What treatment should be administered?
a. -
b. No need for treatment
c. Dynamic observation
d. Conservative therapy
*e. Surgical intervention

892. A 2 year old girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Scarlet fever
*b. Rubella
c. Adenoviral infection
d. Pseudotuberculosis
e. Measles

893. Administration of a plant producing red lead paint intends to form a group of medical specialists for periodical medical examinations. What specialist must be obligatory included into this group?
a. Psychiatrist
b. Gynaecologist
c. Dermatologist
d. Otolaryngologyst
*e. Neuropathologist

894. Study of morbidity rate in a city N revealed that population of different administrative districts differed in age structure. What statistic method allows to eliminate influence of this factor upon morbidity indices?
*a. Standardization
b. Analysis of dynamic series
c. Correlative regressive analysis
d. Wilcoxons t-criterion
e. Calculation of average values

895. A 33 year old patient has acute blood loss (erythrocytes - 2,2*10^12/l, Hb- 55 g/l), blood group is A(II)Rh+. Accidentally the patient got transfusion of donor packed red blood cells of AB(IV)Rh+ group. An hour later the patient became anxious, got abdominal and lumbar pain. Ps- 134 bpm, AP- 100/65 mm Hg, body temperature - 38,6°C. After catheterization of urinary bladder 12 ml/h of dark-brown urine were obtained. What complication is it?
a. Allergic reaction to the donor red blood cells
b. Cardial shock
c. Toxic infectious shock
d. Citrate intoxication
*e. Acute renal insufficiency

896. A department chief of an in-patient hospital is going to examine resident doctors as to observation of medical-technological standards of patient service. What documentation should be checked for this purpose?
a. Registry of operative interventions
b. Annual report of a patient care institution
*c. Health cards of in-patients
d. Statistic cards of discharged patients
e. Treatment sheets

897. A boy is 1 year old. Previously he had purulent otitis. After that he started complaining about pain in the upper third of his left thigh, body temperature rose up to 39oC. Objectively: the thigh is swollen in its upper third, inguinal fold is smoothed. Extremity is in half-bent position. Active and passive movements are impossible because of acute pain. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute coxitis
b. Brodies abscess
c. Osteosarcoma
d. Intermuscular phlegmon
*e. Acute haematogenic osteomyelitis

898. A woman consulted a doctor on the 14th day after labour about sudden pain, hyperemy and induration of the left mammary gland, body temperature rise up to 39oC, headache, indisposition. Objectively: fissure of nipple, enlargement of the left mammary gland, pain on palpation. What pathology would you think about in this case?
*a. Lactational mastitis
b. Phlegmon of mammary gland
c. Fibrous adenoma of the left mammary gland
d. Breast cancer
e. Lacteal cyst with suppuration

899. The most available and informative diagnostic method for closed trauma of the urinary bladder is:
a. Sonography of the urinary bladder
b. Cystography
*c. Retrograde cystography
d. Pelvic arteriography
e. Palpation and percussion of abdomen

900. The 25 year old patient was admitted on the 1st day of the disease with complaints of double vision in the eyes, difficult respiration. The day before the patient ate home-made mushrooms. On objective examination: paleness, widened pupils, disorder of swallowing, bradycardia, constipation are marked. What is the diagnosis?
a. Yersiniosis
b. Leptospirosis
*c. Botulism
d. Salmonellosis, gastrointestinal form
e. Lambliasis

901. Examination of a 12 year old child revealed diffuse thyroid enlargement of the II degree. Heart auscultation revealed dullness of heart sounds, heart rate was 64/min. The child has frequent constipations, anemia. Concentration of thyreoglobulin antibodies is increased. What disease might have caused such symptoms?
a. Diffuse toxic goiter
b. Thyroid carcinoma
c. Thyroid hyperplasia
*d. Autoimmune thyroiditis
e. Endemic goiter

902. A 60 year old man with unstable angina pectoris fails to respond to heparin, nitroglycerin, beta adrenegic blockers and calcium channel antagonist. The best management includes:
a. Intravenous streptokinase
*b. Coronary artery bypass grafting
c. Antihypertensive therapy
d. Excercise testing
e. Oral aspirin

903. A 29 year old female patient complains about periodical right-sided headache that is usually provoked by strong smells or excitement. The patients mother suffers from the same disease. Objectively: examination of internal organs revealed no pathology. During the attack there are general hyperesthesia and nausea, at the end of the attack polyuria is observed. Palpation of the right temporal artery during the attack revealed tension and painfulness of the artery. Complete blood count and urine analysis reveale dno pecularities. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Epilepsy
b. Neuralgia of trigeminus
c. Neuritis of the facial nerve
*d. Migraine
e. Menieres syndrome

904. A 59 year old female patient applied to a maternity welfare clinic and complained about bloody discharges from the genital tracts. Postmenopause is 12 years. Vaginal examination revealed that external genital organs had signs of age involution, uterus cervix was not erosive, small amount of bloody discharges came from the cervical canal. Uterus was of normal size, uterine appendages were unpalpable. Fornices were deep and painless. What method should be applied for the diagnosis specification?
a. Puncture of abdominal cavity through posterior vaginal fornix
*b. Separated diagnosic curretage
c. Laparoscopy
d. Culdoscopy
e. Extensive colposcopy

905. A 25 year old patient had pharyngitis 2 weeks ago. Now he complains about body temperature rise up to 38oC, general weakness, dyspnea during walking, swelling and shifting pain in the articulations. Objectively: cyanosis of lips, rhythmic pulse of poor volume - 100 bpm. Left cardiac border deviates outwards from the mediaclavicular line by 1 cm. The first heart sound is weakened on the apex, auscultation revealed systolic souffle. What is the most probable aetiological factor that caused this pathological process?
a. Virus
*b. ?-haemolytic streptococcus
c. Staphylococcus
d. Pneumococcus
e. Fungi

906. Study of morbidity with temporary disability among workers of a machine building plant revealed that average duration of a case was 20 days. What diseases influenced upon the index value?
*a. Chronic
b. Acute
c. Preexisting diseases
d. Subacute
e. Hard to determine

907. A 68 year old female patient complains about temperature rise up to 38,3oC, haematuria. ESR- 55 mm/h. Antibacterial therapy turned out to be ineffective. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Renal amyloidosis
b. Polycystic renal disease
c. Urolithiasis
*d. Renal cancer
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

908. A pediatrician talked to a mother of a 7 month old breast-fed boy and found out that the child was fed 7 times a day. How many times should the child of such age be fed?
a. 6 times
b. 7 times
*c. 5 times
d. 3 times
e. 4 times

909. A 72 year old male patient complains about itch in his left shin, especially around a trophic ulcer. Skin is reddened and edematic, there are some oozing lesions, single yellowish crusts. The focus of affection is well-defined. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Microbial eczema
b. Seborrheic eczema
c. Streptococcal impetigo
d. Allergic dermatitis
e. Cutaneous tuberculosis

910. A man, aged 37, working on the collective farm on sowing, was admitted to the infectious hospital with the clinical symptoms: miosis, labored breathing, sweating.What kind of poisoning is it and what is the first aid?
a. Poisoning by vapours of mercury. Treatment: unithiol
b. Poisoning by lead. Treatment: tetacine Calcii
*c. Poisoning by POC. Treatment: atropine
d. -
e. Poisoning by the methylic alcohol. Treatment: ethylic alcohol

911. A 25 year old woman applied to a maternity welfare clinic and complained about being unable to conceive within 3 years of regular sexual life. Examination revealed weight gain, male pattern of hair distribution on the pubis, excessive pilosis of thighs. Ovaries were dense and enlarged, basal temperature was monophase. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tubo-ovaritis
b. Gonadal dysgenesis
*c. Sclerocystosis of ovaries
d. Adrenogenital syndrome
e. Premenstrual syndrome

912. A 52 year old patient has hypervolaemic type of essential hypertension. Which of the following medications is to be prescribed either as monotherapy or in complex with other antihypertensive drugs?
a. Nifedipin
b. Dibazol
*c. Hypothiazid
d. Kapoten
e. Clonidine

913. A woman is 34 years old, it is her tenth labor at full term. It is known from the anamnesis that the labor started 11 hours ago, labor was active, painful contractions started after discharge of waters and became continuous. Suddenly the parturient got knife-like pain in the lower abdomen and labor activity stopped. Examination revealed positive symptoms of peritoneum irritation, ill-defined uterus outlines. Fetus was easily palpable, movable. Fetal heartbeats wasnt auscultable. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Rupture of uterus
b. Risk of uterus rupture
c. Discoordinated labor activity
d. Uterine inertia
e. II labor period

914. A patient complained about problems with pain and tactile sensitivity, pain in the nail bones at the end of the working day. He works at a plant with mechanical devices. What pathology can be suspected?
a. Overwork symptoms
b. Caisson disease
c. Noise disease
*d. Vibration disease
e. Hypovitaminosis of B1

915. A 14 year old girl complains of profuse bloody discharges from genital tracts during 10 days after suppresion of menses for 1,5 month. Similiar bleedings recur since 12 years on the background of disordered menstrual cycle. On rectal examination: no pathology of the internal genitalia. In blood: Нb - 70 g/l, RBC- 2,3×1012/l, Ht - 20. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hormonoproductive ovary tumor
*b. Juvenile bleeding, posthemorrhagic anemia
c. Polycyst ovarian syndrome
d. Incomplete spontaneous abortion
e. Werlholfs disease

916. A 26 year old manual worker complained of 3 weeks history of fevers and fatigue, weight loss with no other symptoms. Physical findings: Temperature 37,6oC, Ps- 88 bpm, blood pressure 115/70 mm Hg, superficial lymph nodes (occipital, submental, cervical, axillary) are enlarged, neither tender nor painful. Rubella-like rash on the trunk and extremities. Herpes simplex lesions on the lips. Candidosis of oral cavity. What infectious disease would you suspect?
a. Rubella
b. Influenza
c. Tuberculosis
*d. HIV infection
e. Infectious mononucleosis

917. Student В. lives in the canalized house in the flat with complete set of sanitary equipment (WC, bath, shower, local water heater). How much water consumption has he got?
a. 50-100 l
b. 300-400 l
c. 500 l
*d. 160-200 l
e. 10-15 l

918. Examination of a 3-month-old child revealed scrotum growth on the right. This formation has elastic consistency, its size decreases during sleep and increases when the child is crying. What examination will be helpful for making a correct diagnosis?
a. Palpation of the external inguinal ring
b. Punction of the scrotum
c. Examination of the formation in Trendelenburgs position
*d. Palpation of the thickened cord crossing the pubical tubercule (sign of the silk glove)
e. Diaphanoscоpy

919. A 48 year old female patient complains about contact haemorrhage. Speculum examination revealed hypertrophy of uterus cervix. It resembles of cauliflower, it is dense and can be easily injured. Bimanual examination revealed that fornices were shortened, uterine body was nonmobile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Endometriosis
*b. Cervical carcinoma
c. Cervical pregnancy
d. Cervical papillomatosis
e. Metrofibroma

920. Prophylactic photoroentgenography examination of a 25 year old man revealed focal shadowings of small and medium intensity with irregular contours in the 1st and 2nd segments of the right lung. Which clinical form can be suspected?
*a. Focal
b. Tuberculoma
c. Disseminated
d. Fibro-cavernous
e. Miliary

921. A 39 year old patient suffering from hypertension suddenly gotb intense headache in the region of occiput; there appeared recurrent vomiting. These presentations has been lasting for 5 hours. Objectively: Ps - 88 bpm, AP - 205/100 mm Hg, painfulness of occipital points, rigidity of occipital muscles are present. Kernigs symptom is bilaterally positive. Subarachnoid haemorrhage is also suspected. What diagnostic method will be of the greatest importance for confirmation of provisional diagnosis?
a. Ultrasonic dopplerography
b. EEG
*c. Lumbar puncture
d. Computer tomography
e. Examination of eye fundus

922. A prematurely born girl is now 8 months old. She has dyspnea, tachycardia, hepatosplenomegaly, physical developmental lag, limb cyanosis. There is also parasternal cardiac hump, auscultation revealed systolodiastolic murmur in the II intercostal space on the left. AP is 90/0 mm Hg. What disease should be suspected?
*a. Patent ductus arteriosus
b. Stenosis of pulmonary artery
c. Stenosis of aortal valve
d. Coarctation of aorta
e. Nonclosure of interventricular septum

923. A 32 year old welder complains of weakness and fever. His illness started as tonsillitis a month before. On exam, BT of 38,9 C, RR of 24/min, HR of 100/min, BP of 100/70 mm Hg, hemorrhages on the legs, enlargement of the lymph nodes. CBC shows Hb of 70 g/l, RBC of 2,2*10^12/l, WBC of 3,0*10^9/l with 32% of blasts, 1% of eosinophiles, 3% of bands, 36% of segments, 20% of lymphocytes, and 8% of monocytes, ESR of 47 mm/h. What is the cause of anemia?
a. Aplastic anema
b. Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia
*c. Acute leukemia
d. Chronic lympholeukemia
e. Chronic hemolytic anemia

924. A 26 year old woman complains about edemata, swelling and painfulness of mammary glands, headache, tearfulness, irritability. These signs turn up 5 days before menstruation and disappear after its start. What clinical syndrome is it?
a. Adrenogenital syndrome
b. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
c. Climacteric syndrome
d. Postcastration syndrome
*e. Premenstrual syndrome

925. A 38 year old patient complains about inertness, subfebrile temperature, enlargement of lymph nodes, nasal haemorrhages, bone pain. Objectively: the patients skin and mucous membranes are pale, palpation revealed enlarged painless lymph nodes; sternalgia; liver was enlarged by 2 cm, spleen - by 5 cm, painless. In blood: erythrocytes - 2,7×1012/l, Hb- 84 g/l, leukocytes – 58×109/l, eosinophils - 1%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 12%, lymphocytes - 83%, lymphoblasts - 2%, smudge cells; ESR- 57 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic myeloleukemia
b. Lymphogranulomatosis
c. Acute myeloleukemia
*d. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
e. Acute lymphatic leukemia

926. A 32 year old patient suffering from chronic viral hepatitis complains about dull pain in the right subcostal area, nausea, dry mouth. Objectively: liver dimensions are 13-21-11 cm (according to Kurlov), spleen is by 2 cm enlarged, aspartate aminotransferase is 3,2 micromole/lh, alanine aminotransferase - 4,8 millimole/lh. Serological study revealed HBeAg, high concentration of DNA HBV. What drug should be chosen for treatment of this patient?
a. Arabinoside monophosphate
b. Essentiale-forte
c. Remantadinum
*d. alpha-interferon
e. Acyclovir

927. A parturient complains about pain in the mammary gland. Palpation revealed a 3х4 cm large infiltration, soft in the centre. Body temperature is 38,5oC. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Birth trauma
b. Pneumonia
c. Pleuritis
d. Retention of milk
*e. Acute purulent mastitis

928. A 3 year old child has been suffering from fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis for 4 days. He has been taking sulfadimethoxine. Today it has fever up to 39oC and maculopapular rash on its face. Except of rash the childs skin has no changes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Pseudotuberculosis
b. Rubella
c. Allergic rash
*d. Measles
e. Scarlet fever

929. A 15 year old girl suddenly got arthralgia, headache, nausea, vomiting; pain and muscle tension in the lumbar area; body temperature rose up to 38-39oC. Pasternatskys symptom was distinctly positive on the right. In the urine: bacteriuria, pyuria. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute pyelonephritis
b. Cystitis
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Renal colic
e. Pararenal abscess

930. A 38 year old man was delivered to the hospital in unconscious state. The symptoms of illness turned up a day before: headache, nausea, vomiting, t 38,5 degree C, dizziness, delusion. For the last 4 days he had been complaining of pain and hearing loss in the left ear. Objectively: sopor, rigidity of occipital muscles, bilateral Kernigs symptom, general hyperesthesia, purulent discharges from the left ear. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Parenchymatous subarachnoidal haemorrhage
b. Subarachnoidal haemorrhage
*c. Secondary purulent meningitis
d. Tuberculous meningitis
e. Primary purulent meningitis

931. During examination a patient is unconscious, his skin is dry and hot, face hyperemia is present. The patient has Kussmauls respiration, there is also smell of acetone in the air. Symptoms of peritoneum irritation are positive. Blood sugar is at the rate of 33 millimole/l. What emergency actions should be taken?
a. Intravenous infusion of sodium chloride saline
b. Intravenous infusion of neohaemodesum along with glutamic acid
c. Introduction of long-acting insulin
*d. Intravenous infusion of short-acting insulin
e. Intravenous infusion of glucose along with insulin

932. A 20 year old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved aplication of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
a. 30 minutes
b. 60 minutes
*c. 120 minutes
d. 15 minutes
e. 180 minutes

933. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. An anaesthesilogist
*b. A doctor of any speciality
c. A surgeon
d. A traumatologist
e. A laboratory physician

934. A 35 year old female patient suffering from cholelithiasis has broken her diet, and this caused an acute pain attack in the right subcostal area. The pain eased off on the third day, but the patient got progressing jaundice. What non-invasive diagnostic method should be applied?
*a. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
b. Duodenal probing
c. Test for bilirubin
d. Survey radiography of abdominal organs
e. Infusive cholecystocholangiography

935. Examination of a 9 month old girl revealed skin pallor, cyanosis during excitement. Percussion revealed transverse dilatation of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed continuous systolic murmur on the left from the breastbone in the 3-4 intercostal space. This murmur is conducted above the whole cardiac region to the back. What congenital cardiac pathology can be suspected?
a. Coarctation of aorta
b. Defect of interatrial septum
*c. Defect of interventricular septum
d. Fallots tetrad
e. Pulmonary artery stenosis

936. A 26 year old woman who delivered a child 7 months ago has been suffering from nausea, morning vomiting, sleepiness for the last 2 weeks. She suckles the child, menstruation is absent. She hasnt applied any contraceptives. What method should be applied in order to specify her diagnosis?
a. Roentgenography of small pelvis organs
b. Palpation of mammary glands and pressing-out of colostrum
*c. Ultrasonic examination
d. Speculum examination
e. Bimanual vaginal examination

937. An 18 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with complaints of headache, weakness, high temperature, sore throat. Objectively: enlargement of all groups of lymph nodes was revealed. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm, spleen - by 1 cm. In blood: leukocytosis, atypical lymphocytes - 15%. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Acute lymphoid leukosis
c. Angina
d. Adenoviral infection
e. Diphtheria

938. A 54 year old male patient complains about permanent dull pain in the mesogastral region, weight loss, dark blood admixtures in the feces, constipations. He put off 10 kg within a year. In blood: erythrocytes: 3,5×1012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, leukocytes - 12,6×109/l, stab neutrophil shift, ESR- 43 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Gastric ulcer
b. Chronic colitis
c. Stomach cancer
*d. Cancer of transverse colon
e. Chronic pancreatitis

939. A patient who takes diuretics has developed arrhythmia as a result of cardiac glycoside overdose. What is the treatment tactics in this case?
a. Increased sodium consentration in blood
*b. Increased potassium concentration in blood
c. Increased calcium concentration in blood
d. -
e. Reduced magnesium concentration in blood

940. It is planned to make complete isolation boxes in the infectious department in order to prevent nosocomial airborne infections. The boxes consist of a tambour, a ward and a lock chamber. What structure should be also included in a complete isolation box?
a. Patients examination room
b. Doctors consulting room
*c. Bathroom unit
d. Nursing room
e. Manipulation room

941. A maternity hospital registered 616 live births, 1 stillbirth, 1 death on the 5th day of life over a 1 year period. What index allows the most precise estimation of this situation?
a. Neonatal mortality
b. Natural increase
c. Natality
d. Crude mortality rate
*e. Perinatal mortality

942. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Leftsided renal colic
b. Herpes zoster
c. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
d. Sigmoid diverticulitis
e. Torsion of the left testicle

943. Indicate the registration medical document for the patient, who 21.02. was addressed to the doctor with diagnosis ARVD for the first time in this year:
a. The statistical coupon for registration of final diagnosis is not necessary
b. The necessary registration form is not indicated
c. It is necessary to fill in the emergency notice on a case of a contagion
*d. The statistical coupon is to be filled in and it is necessary to deliver on a sign (+)
e. The statistical coupon is to be filled in, but a sign (+) is not necessary to be put in

944. A 52 year old patient with history of functional Class II angina complains of having intense and prolonged retrosternal pains, decreased exercise tolerance for 5 days. Angina is less responsive to nitroglycerine. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Myocardial dystrophy
b. IHd. Functional Class II angina
c. Cardialgia due to spine problem
*d. IHd. Unstable angina
e. Myocarditis

945. A woman 26 years old has abused alcohol for 7 years. She has psychological dependence on alcohol, but no withdrawal syndrome. Drinks almost every day approximately 50-100 g of wine. She is in her 4-th week of pregnancy. Primary prevention of fetal alcohol syndrome requires:
*a. Treatment of alcoholism and full abstinance from alcohol during all the period of pregnancy
b. Participation in the A-ANON group
c. Gyneacological observation
d. Medical abortion
e. Decrease of alcohol use

946. A 22 year old woman complained of right subcostal aching pain, nausea, and decreased appetite. She fell ill 2 months after appendectomy when jaundice appeared. She was treated in an infectious hospital. 1 year later above mentioned symptoms developed. On exam: the subicteric sclerae, enlarged firm liver. Your preliminary diagnosis:
*a. Chronic viral hepatitis
b. Gilberts disease
c. Chronic cholangitis
d. Calculous cholecystitis
e. Acute viral hepatitis

947. A 33 year old patient was delivered to the infectious diseases department on the 7-th day of disease. He complained about great weakness, high temperature, pain in the lumbar area and leg muscles, icteritiousness, dark colour of urine, headache. The acute disease started with chill, body temperature rise up to 40°C, headache, pain in the lumbar area and sural muscles. Icterus turned up on the 4th day, nasal and scleral haemorrhages came on the 5th day. Fever has lasted for 6 days. Diuresis - 200 ml. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Typhoid fever
b. Yersiniosis
c. Sepsis
d. Virus A hepatitis
*e. Leptospirosis

948. A 13 year old girl was admitted to the cardiological department because of pain in the muscles and joints. Examination of her face revealed an edematic erythema in form of butterfly in the region of nose bridge and cheeks. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Periarteritis nodosa
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Rheumatism
e. Dermatomyositis

949. A 23 year old patient fell ill 3 weeks ago when she noticed a very painful induration in her axillary crease. 4-5 days later it burst and discharged a lot of pus. After that some new infiltrations appeared around the affected area. The patient has never suffered from skin diseases before. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
b. Mycosis
c. Herpes zoster
*d. Hydradenitis
e. Furuncle

950. A pregnant woman in her 40th week of pregnancy undergoes obstetric examination: the cervix of uterus is undeveloped. The oxytocin test is negative. Examination at 32 weeks revealed: AP 140/90 mm Hg, proteinuria 1 g/l, peripheral edemata. Reflexes are normal. Choose the most correct tactics:
*a. Labour stimulation after preparation
b. Complex therapy of gestosis for 7 days
c. Complex therapy of gestosis for 2 days
d. Caesarian section immediately
e. Absolute bed rest for 1 month

951. A patient has restrained umbilateral hernia complicated by phlegmon hernia, it is necessary to take following actions:
*a. Herniotomy by Mayo-Sapezhko
b. Herniotomy by Grenov
c. Herniotomy by Mayo
d. Herniotomy by Lekser
e. Herniotomy by Sapezhko

952. A 25 year old woman complained of edema on her face and legs, rise of blood pressure up to 160/100 mm Hg and weakness. She fell ill 3 weeks after recovering from angina. Urinalysis data: protein of 0,5 g/l, erythrocytes of 17-20/field, leukocytes of 2-3/field, erythrocyte casts. What treatment should be initiated after specifying the diagnosis?
a. Heparin
b. Dipyridamole
*c. Penicillin OS
d. Ceftriaxone
e. Ciprofloxacine

953. A 40 year old patient was bitten by a stray dog for about an hour ago. The bite can be seen on the patients left shin in form of a wound 4х2х0,5 cm large. What kind of aid would be recommended in this case?
a. Retension sutures
b. Aseptic bandage
c. Salve bandage
d. Blind suture
*e. Wound lavage with soapsuds, retension sutures

954. A plot of land with total area of 2,0 hectare was intended for building of a hospital. The maximal capacity of the hospital will be:
*a. 100 beds
b. 800 beds
c. 400 beds
d. 200 beds
e. Over 1000 beds

955. A 38 year old man worked at roofing and drain pipes production for 15 years. He seeks medical help for expiratory breathlessness on exertion, and dry cough. On exam, wheezes above both lungs, grayish warts on fingers are seen. Factory physician has diagnosed asbestosis. What method is the most important for this diagnosis?
a. Spirography
b. Electrocardiography
c. Blood gas analysis
d. Bronchoscopy
*e. Chest X-ray

956. A patient suffering from gastroesophageal reflux has taken from time to time a certain drug that "reduces acidity" for 5 years. This drug was recommended by a pharmaceutist. The following side effects are observed: osteoporosis, muscle weakness, indisposition. What drug has such following effects?
*a. Aluminium-bearing antacid
b. Metoclopramide
c. Inhibitor of proton pump
d. Gastrozepin
e. Н2-blocker

957. A 52 year old patient complains about headache, weakness of his upper left extremity. Neurological symptoms become more intense during physical stress of the left extremity. Pulsation on the arteries of the left extremity is sharply dampened but it remains unchanged on the carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Raynauds syndrome
b. Takayasus disease
*c. Occlusion of the left subclavicular artery, steal syndrome
d. Thoracal outlet syndrome
e. Occlusion of brachiocephalic trunk

958. A 42 year old man applied to a hospital 10 minutes after he got stung by a bee and complained about face edema and difficult respiration. Objectively: Ps- 98 bpm, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. A doctor on duty injected him 1 ml of 1% dimedrol solution intramuscularly and recommended to apply to his local therapeutist on the next day. What tactics of treatment should be chosen for this patient?
a. Hospitalization for observation
b. Intravenous introduction of calcium chloride and hospitalization
*c. Intravenous introduction of prednisolone and hospitalization
d. Intravenous introduction of calcium chloride
e. The patient needs no further medical aid

959. It was noticed that a 7 year old pupil had been innattentive several times during the lessons. The teacher also noticed that the child had been smacking his lips and had vacant look. There were no falls and convulsions. During such short periods of absence the child didnt react to calling his name. His mother notic such phenomena before but didnt pay much attention to them thinking that the child was deep in thought. What type of epileptic attack (according to the standard classification) is it?
a. Generalized tonoclonic epilepsy
b. Simple partial epilepsy
c. Complex partial epilepsy
d. Jacksonian partial epilepsy
*e. Absentia

960. A 37 year old miner has lifted significant loads and afterwards felt pain in the lumbar area irradiating to his left leg. He walks slowly and carefully. Lumbar lordosis is flattened. There is also left-sided scoliosis and tension of paravertebral muscles. Neris and Dejerines symptoms are positive, there is Lasegues sign on the left from the angle of 350. What method will help to specify the diagnosis?
a. Renal sonography
b. Lumbal puncture
*c. CT of lumbosacral part of vertebral column
d. Descending myelography
e. Electromyography

961. A 41 year old woman has suffered from nonspecific ulcerative colitis for 5 years. On rectoromanoscopy: evident inflammatory process of lower intestinal parts, pseudopolyposive changes of mucous membrane. In blood: WBC- 9,8×109/l, RBC- 3,0×1012/l, ESR - 52 mm/hour. What medication provides pathogenetic treatment of this patient?
*a. Sulfosalasine
b. Linex
c. Kreon
d. Motilium
e. Vikasolum

962. A 19 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia of B type. What antihemophilic medications should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Dried plasma
b. Fresh frozen blood
c. Cryoprecipitate
*d. Fresh frozen plasma
e. Native plasma

963. Infant is 6,5 months now and is given natural feeding since birth. Body mass was 3,5 kg, with length 52 cm at birth. How many times per day the supplement (up feeding) should be given?
a. 3
*b. 2
c. 1
d. 0
e. 4

964. The results of 5 year monitoring allowed to estimate the level of environmental influence upon health indices of popultaion. What statistic method should be chosen?
a. Calculation of dynamic indices
b. Calculation of coefficient of difference validity
c. Calculation of conformity coefficient
d. Calculation of regression coefficient
*e. Calculation of correlation coefficient

965. A 10 month old boy has been ill for 5 days after consumption of unboiled milk. Body temperature is 38-39oC, there is vomiting, liquid stool. The child is pale and inert. His tongue is covered with white deposition. Heart sounds are muffled. Abdomen is swollen, there is borborygmus in the region of ubbilicus, liver is enlarged by 3 cm. Stool is liquid, dark-green, with admixtures of mucus, 5 times a day. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Rotaviral infection
b. Acute shigellosis
c. Staphylococcal enteric infection
d. Escherichiosis
*e. Salmonellosis

966. A 34 year old female patient has been suffering from anxious depression accompanied by panic attacks for 2 years. She has been a patient of a psychotherapist. Treatment resulted in incomplete remission. The patient had to break off psychotherapy because of moving to a new place of residence. Soon after this her condition grew significantly worse, she was almost permanently anxious, panic attacks turned up 5-6 times a day and were accompanied by palpitation, dyspnea, cold sweat, thanatophobia. What drug group is the most appropriate for medicamental therapy?
a. Cardiotonics, respiratory analeptics
b. Antipsychotic neuroleptics
*c. Antidepressants
d. Sedative neuroleptics
e. Lithium drugs

967. The student has the following devices: Geiger counter, Ebert counter, Krotovs apparatus, Mischuk device, Ebert device. What device can he use to assess air germ pollution?
a. Geigers counter
*b. Krotovs apparatus
c. Mischuks device
d. Eberts counter
e. Eberts device

968. A 42 year old woman complains of dyspnea, edema of the legs and tachycardia during minor physical exertion. Heart borders are displaced to the left and S1 is accentuated, there is diastolic murmur on apex. The liver is enlarged by 5 cm. What is the cause of heart failure?
a. Tricuspid stenosis
b. Aortic stenosis
*c. Mitral stenosis
d. Mitral regurgitation
e. Tricuspid regurgitation

969. A 75 year old man who has been suffering from diabetes for the last six months was found to be jaundiced. He was asymptomatic except for weight loss at the rate of 10 pounds in 6 months. Physical examination revealed a hard, globular, right upper quadrant mass that moves during respiration. A CT scan shows enlargement of the head of the pancreas, with no filling defects in the liver. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Metastatic disease of liver
b. Haemolytic jaundice
*c. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
d. Malignant biliary stricture
e. Infectious hepatitis

970. Estimation of community health level involved analysis of a report on diseases registered among the population of district under charge (reporting form 12). What index is calculated on the grounds of this report?
a. Index of pathological affection
b. Index of basic non-epidemic morbidity
*c. Common sickness rate
d. Index of morbidity with temporary disability
e. Index of hospitalized morbidity

971. A 40 year old woman has a self-detected hard breast mass. The procedure of choice for confirming the diagnosis is:
a. Thermography
b. Ultrasonography
*c. Excision biopsy
d. Mammography
e. Aspiration biopsy with cytology

972. A 36 year old female patient complains about general weakness, edemata of her face and hands, rapid fatigability during walking, difficult diglutition, cardiac irregularities. These symptoms turned up 11 days after holiday at the seaside. Objectively: face erythema, edema of shin muscles. Heart sounds are muffled, AP is 100/70 mm Hg. In blood: ASAT activity is 0,95 millimole/hl, ALAT - 1,3 micromole/hl, aldolase - 9,2 IU/l, creatine phosphokinase - 2,5 micromole Р/gl. What method of study would be the most specific?
a. ECG
b. Electromyography
c. Determination of cortisol concentration in blood and urine
*d. Muscle biopsy
e. Echocardiogram

973. A patient complains about strong dyspnea that is getting worse during physical activity. Presentations appeared suddenly 2 hours ago at work: acute chest pain on the left, cough. The pain was abating, but dyspnea, dizziness, pallor, cold sweat and cyanosis were progressing. Vesicular respiration is absent, X-ray picture shows a shadow on the left. What pathology might be suspected?
a. Pulmonary infarction
b. Pulmonary abscess
*c. Spontaneous left-sided pneumothorax
d. Left-sided pneumonia
e. Pleuritis

974. A 28 year old parturient complains about headache, vision impairment, psychic inhibition. Objectively: AP- 200/110 mm Hg, evident edemata of legs and anterior abdominal wall. Fetus head is in the area of small pelvis. Fetal heartbeats is clear, rhythmic, 190/min. Internal investigation revealed complete cervical dilatation, fetus head was in the area of small pelvis. What tactics of labor management should be chosen?
a. Stimulation of labor activity
b. Embryotomy
c. Cesarean
*d. Forceps operation
e. Conservative labor management with episiotomy

975. An outbreak of food poisoning was recorded in an urban settlement. The illness was diagnosed as botulism on the grounds of clinical presentations. What foodstuffs should be chosen for analysis in the first place in order to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Tinned food
b. Boiled meat
c. Pasteurized milk
d. Potatoes
e. Cabbage

976. A 3 year old boy fell ill abruptly: fever up to 39oC, weakness, vomitng. Haemorrhagic rash of various size appeared on his lower limbs within 5 hours. Meningococcemia with infective - toxic shock of the 1 degree was diagnosed. What medications should be administered?
*a. Chloramphenicol succinate and prednisone
b. Penicillin and immunoglobulin
c. Chloramphenicol succinate and interferon
d. Ampicillin and immunoglobulin
e. Penicillin and prednisone

977. A 5 month old boy was born prematurely, he didnt suffer from any disease at the infant age and later on. Examination at an outpatients hospital revealed paleness of skin, sleepiness. Blood count: Hb - 95 g/l, erythrocytes - 3,5×1012/l, reticulocytes - 90/00, colour index - 0,7, osmotic stability of erythrocytes - 0,44-0,33%, serum iron - 4,9 micromole/l. What is the most probable cause of anemia?
a. B12 deficit
b. Hemogenesis immaturity
*c. Iron deficit
d. Erythrocyte hemolysis
e. Infectious process

978. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax, it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made in:
a. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
*b. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
c. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line
d. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion
e. In the projection of pleural sinus

979. A 25 year old patient complains about weakness, dizziness, haemorrhagic skin rash. She has been suffering from this for a month. Blood count: erythrocytes: 1,0×1012/l, Hb- 37 g/l, colour index - 0,9, leukocytes - 1,2×109/l, thrombocytes - 42×109/l. What diagnostic method will be the most effective?
a. Liver biopsy
b. Abdominal ultrasound
*c. Sternal puncture
d. Spleen biopsy
e. Coagulogram

980. An 8 year old boy suffering from haemophilia was undergoing transfusion of packed red cells. Suddenly he got pain behind the breastbone and in the lumbar area, dyspnea, cold sweat. Objectively: pale skin, heart rate - 100/min, AP- 60/40 Hg; oliguria, brown urine. For treatment of this complication the following drug should be administered:
a. Lasix
b. Analgine
*c. Prednisolone
d. Adrenaline
e. Aminophylline

981. A 72 year old female patient has been treated for urolithiasis in the urological department. After atropine injection she got acute pain in her left eye and abrupt vision impairment. Objectively: visual acuity of the left eye is 0,01, the eye is dense but painful on palpation, cornea is opaque, there is cyanotic induration of eyeball vessels. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Degeneration of the left eye cornea
b. Acute iridocyclitis of the left eye
*c. Acute attack of primary glaucoma of the left eye
d. Secondary glaucoma of the left eye
e. Acute keratitis of the left eye

982. What guarantees against the preconceived attitude to the physician in cases of professional law violations do you know?
a. Utilisation copy of medical documents
*b. Sanction of public prosecutor, inquiry by preliminary investigator of prosecutors office, committee of experts
c. Conduct forensic medical examination by district forensic medicine expert
d. Draw up a statement about forensic medical examination
e. Conduct an inquiry by preliminary investigator of police department

983. Immediately after delivery a woman had haemorrhage, blood loss exceeded postpartum haemorrhage rate and was progressing. There were no symptoms of placenta detachment. What tactics should be chosen?
*a. Manual removal of placenta and afterbirth
b. Instrumental revision of uterine cavity walls
c. Uterus tamponade
d. Removal of afterbirth by Credes method
e. Intravenous injection of methylergometrine with glucose

984. As a result of prophylactic medical examination a 35 year old woman was diagnosed with alimentary and constitutive obesity of the III degree. It is known from her anamnesis that the patient doesnt observe rules of rational nutrition: she often overeats, the last food intake is usually 10-15 minutes before going to bed, prefers fattening and rich in carbohydrates food. What is the main alimentary risk factor of obesity development?
a. Lack of cellulose
*b. Energetic unprofitableness of nutrition
c. Excess of carbohydrates
d. Violation of dietary pattern
e. Excess of fats

985. 25 children at the age of 2-3 years who dont attend any child welfare institutions should be observed by a district pediatrician within the current year. How many initial visits of this group of children should be planned?
*a. 50
b. 100
c. 20
d. 40
e. 200

986. A 25 year old patient complains of pain in the I finger on his right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain is getting worse. Acute pain appears during the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Subcutaneous panaritium
b. Bone panaritium
c. Articular (joint) panaritium
d. Paronychia
*e. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)

987. A sergeant was injured by a shell splinter in the left subcostal area. He was bandaged with a first-aid pack on a battlefield. The patient was delivered to the regiment medical aid station. He complains about dizziness, weakness, thirst, abdominal pain. General condition is grave, the patient is pale. Ps is 120 bpm. Abdomen is soft, painful on palpation. The bandage is well fixed but a little bit soaked with blood. The patient should be evacuated to the medical battalion with the following transport and in the following turn:
a. With a passing car in the third turn
b. With a passing car in the second turn
*c. With medical vehicle in the first turn
d. With a passing car in the first turn
e. With medical vehicle in the second turn

988. A nine year old child is at a hospital with acute glomerulonephritis. Clinical and laboratory examinations show acute condition. What nutrients must not be limited during the acute period of glomerulonephritis?
a. Proteins
*b. Carbohydrates
c. Salt
d. Liquid
e. Fats

989. The amount of ultraviolet radiation dose was measured in minutes. What device was applied for measurement of the biodose?
a. Actinometer
*b. Gorbachevs biodosimeter
c. UV-meter
d. Catathermometer
e. Radiometer

990. A patient with acute purulent otitis media complicated by mastoiditis was admitted to a hospital. Roentgenogram of mastoid processes showed the shadiowing of the cellular system on the lesion, absence of bone septa was present. What are the necessary therapeutic actions at the second stage of mastoiditis?
*a. Mastoidotomy
b. Cateterization of the Eustachian tube
c. Paracentesis of the drum
d. Tympanoplasty
e. Radical operation on the middle ear

991. A 30 year old patient complains about inability to become pregnant over 3 years of married life. The patient is of supernutrition type, she has hair along the median abdominal line, on the internal thigh surface and in the peripapillary area. Menses started at the age of 16, they are infrequent and non-profuse. US revealed that the uterus was of normal size, ovaries were 4х5х5 cm large and had a lot of cystic inclusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Menstrual irregularity
b. Bilateral ovarian tumours
c. Ovarian cystoma
*d. Polycystic ovaries
e. Chronic oophoritis

992. A 63 year old patient complained about pain in the lumbar area. He underwent a course of physiological treatment on account of radiculitis but this led to no improvement of his condition. R-graphy of spinal column and pelvic bones revealed osteoporosis and serious bone defects. Blood analysis revealed moderate normochromic anaemia, urine analysis revealed proteinuria. Whole blood protein made up 10,7 g/l. What disease should be suspected?
*a. Myelomatosis
b. Metastases in bones
c. Systemic osteoporosis
d. Acute radiculitis
e. Urolithiasis

993. During preventive examination a 16 year old patient presented no problems. Objectively: the patient has signs of malnutrition, he is asthenic, AP is 110/70 mm Hg, Ps is 80 bpm, cardiac border is normal, auscultation above the cardiac apex reveals three sounds, cardiac murmur is absent. ECG shows no pathological changes, phonocardiogram shows that the third sound comes 0,15 s after the second one above the apex. How are these changes called?
*a. III physiological sound
b. Atrial gallop rhythm
c. Fout-ta-ta-rou (reduplication of the 2nd sound)
d. Protodiastolic gallop rhythm
e. IV physiological sound

994. A patient has been in a hospital. The beginning of the disease was gradual: nausea, vomiting, dark urine, аcholic stools, yellowness of the skin and scleras. The liver is protruded by 3 cm. Jaundice progressed on the 14th day of the disease. The liver diminished in size. What complication of viral hepatitis caused deterioration of the patients condition?
a. Cholangitis
b. Meningitis
c. Infectious-toxic shock
*d. Hepatic encephlopathy
e. Relapse of viral hepatitis

995. A 70 year old man is suffering from coronary heart disease. His mood is evidently depressed, anxious. As a result of continious sleeplessness he has got fears, suicidal thoughts. He would sit for a long time in the same pose, answer after a pause, in a low, monotonous voice. His face has a look of suffering, pain, fear. What is the main psychopathologic syndrome?
a. Paranoid syndrome
b. Asthenic syndrome
*c. Depressive syndrome
d. Phobic syndrome
e. Obsessive syndrome

996. A 16 year old female patient underwent an operation on account of diffuse toxic goiter of the III-IV degree 12 years ago. Now she has recurrence of thyrotoxicosis. The patient was offered operative intervention, but it is necessary first to localize the functioning gland tissue. What method should be applied for this purpose?
a. Roentgenography of esophagus
b. USI
c. Roentgenography of neck
d. Puncture aspiration biopsy
*e. Gland scanning

997. A woman delivered a child. It was her fifth pregnancy but the first delivery. Mothers blood group is A(II)Rh-, newborns - A(II)Rh+. The level of indirect bilirubin in umbilical blood was 58 micromole/l, haemoglobin - 140 g/l, RBC- 3,8×1012/l. In 2 hours the level of indirect bilirubin turned 82 micromole/l. The hemolytic disease of newborn (icteric-anemic type, Rh-incompatibility) was diagnosed. Choose the therapeutic tactics:
*a. Replacement blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
b. Symptomatic therapy
c. Conservative therapy
d. Antibiotics
e. Blood transfusion (conservative therapy)

998. In order to study impact of microclimate upon the human organism it is necessary to make systematic observation of air temperature over 3 days. Choose a device that will allow to make the most precise temperature records:
a. Assmann psychrometer
b. Alcohol thermometer
*c. Thermograph
d. Mercury thermometer
e. Augusts psychrometer

999. A heat station working on solid fuel is located in a residential district. On cloudy foggy days in december there was an increase in diseases with upper airway affection and signs of general intoxication. There were also mortal cases among the elderly people. What is the most likely factor that provoked toxic effect?
a. Calm
*b. Suspended materials
c. Low air temperature
d. Temperature gradient
e. High air humidity

1000. Over a current year among workers of an institution 10% havent been ill a single time, 30% have been ill once, 15% - twice, 5% - 4 times, the rest - 5 and more times. What is the percentage of workers relating to the I health group?
a. 60%
*b. 55%
c. 22%
d. 10%
e. 40%

1001. A 25-year-old woman came to a maternity welfare clinic and complained about being unable to conceive within 3 years of regular sexual life. Examination revealed weight gain, male pattern of hair distribution on the pubis, excessive pilosis of thighs. Ovaries were dense and enlarged, basal temperature was monophase. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tubo-ovaritis
*b. Sclerocystosis of ovaries
c. Adrenogenital syndrome
d. Gonadal dysgenesis
e. Premenstrual syndrome

1002. A patient was delivered to the admission ward 40 minutes after a minor trauma with complaints of pain in the thoracic spine. He has a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. Roentgenography results: suspected compression fracture of the VIII and IX thoracic vertebrae. What pathological process in spine might have stimulated pathological fracture of vertebral bodies?
*a. Tuberculous spondylitis
b. Traumatic fracture
c. Osteomyelitis
d. Malignant tumour metastasis
e. Syphilis

1003. 2 days ago a patient presented with acute pain in the left half of chest, gneral weakness, fever and headache. Objectively: between the 4 and 5 rib on the left the skin is erythematous, there are multiple groups of vesicles 2-4 mm in diameter filled with transparent liquid. What diease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatosis
b. Streptococcal impetigo
c. Pemphigus
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Herpes simplex

1004. 350 workers of a mettalurgical plant had to undergo a yearly preventive examination. A territorial polyclinic carried out preventive examination of 325 workers. As a result of it, 1 worker was recognized as temporarily disabled, 15 workers underwent further rehabilitation at an after-work sanatorium, 10 workers were provided with diet meal. What index characterizing the preventive work of the polyclinic should be applied in this case?
*a. Coverage of preventive medical examinations
b. Frequency of case detection during examinations
c. Percentage of people who were provided with diet meal
d. Percentage of temporarily disabled people
e. Percentage of people who underwent rehabilitation at an after-work sanatorium

1005. A 3-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
*a. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
b. Suture sinus
c. Wound abscess
d. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
e. Posttraumatic phlegmon

1006. A patient suffering from gastroesophageal reflux has taken from time to time a certain drug that "reduces acidity" over 5 years. This drug was recommended by a pharmaceutist. The following side effects are observed: osteoporosis, muscle asthenia, indisposition. What drug has such following effects?
a. Inhibitor of proton pump
*b. Aluminium-bearing antacid
c. Metoclopramide
d. Gastrozepin
e. H2-blocker

1007. A childrens health camp received a party of tinned food. External examination of the tins revealed that they had deep dents; formed a concavity when pressed and didnt immediately return to the initial state; rust was absent; the tins were greased with inedible fat. Specify the bloat type:
*a. Physical
b. Chemical
c. Combined
d. Physicochemical
e. Biological

1008. A 52-year-old patient works as a secretary and has 30 year record of service. She complains of spasms in her right hand during working and inability to type and write. Up to 80% of her work involves hand load. The patient has been presenting with these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: the right hand is tense, there is an increase in muscle tone, attempts to write cause spasms. Examination revealed no pathological changes of CNS. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuralgic form of coordination neurosis
*b. Spastic form of coordination neurosis
c. Hysteric neurosis
d. Paretic form of coordination neurosis
e. Chronic manganese intoxication

1009. 1 day ago a 19-year old male patient got a trauma after a fall from 1,5 m height when he "bestrode" a wooden beam. Urination is extremely difficult, there is macrohematuria, urethrorrhagia. There is a hematoma in the perineum and on the scrotum. Urethrography revealed flowing of contrast medium into the membranous part of urethra. What is the treatment tactics of choice?
*a. Epicystostomy
b. Urine bladder catheterization for urine diversion
c. Primary suturing of urethra
d. Urethra bougienage
e. Cold to the perineum, hemostatic therapy

1010. A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to a hospital for acute transmural infarction. An hour ago the patients contition got worse. She developed progressing dyspnea, dry cough. Respiratory rate - 30/min, heart rate - 130/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled, diastolic shock on the pulmonary artery. There are medium moist rales in the lower parts of lungs on the right and on the left. Body temperature - 36,4°C. What drug should be given in the first place?
a. Aminophylline
b. Dopamine
c. Digoxin
*d. Promedole
e. Heparin

1011. A 16-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital for the reason of intractable nasal haemorrhage and intolerable pain in the right cubital articulation. Objectively: the affected articulation is enlarged and exhibits defiguration and skin hyperaemia. There are manifestations of arthropathy in the other articulations. Ps- 90 bpm; colour index -1,0, WBC - 5,6×1012/l, thrombocytes- 220×1012/l, ESR - 6 mm/h. Lee-White coagulation time: start - 24, finish - 2710. What drug will be the most effective for this patient treatment?
a. Calcium chloride
b. Erythromass
c. Vicasol
*d. Cryoprecipitate
e. Aminocapronic acid

1012. On the next day after being taken by influenza a 46-year-old woman presented with intensified headache, dizziness, nausea. Objectively: the patient is conscious, psychomotor excitement is present; there is general hyperesthesia, moderate meningeal syndrome, nystagmus. Tendon teflexes are higher on the right, right extremities display muscle weakness, right-sided pathological Babinskis sign is present. Liquor is transparent, pressure is 220 mm of water column; cytosis is 46/3 with prevailing lymphocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Influenzal meningoencephalitis
b. Subarachnoidal haemorrhage
c. Bacterial meningoencephalitis
d. Ischemic stroke
e. Parenchymatous subarachnoidal haemorrhage

1013. A 28-year-old parturient complains about headache, vision impairment, psychic inhibition. Objectively: AP- 200/110 mm Hg, evident edemata of legs and anterior abdominal wall. Fetus head is in the area of small pelvis. Fetal heartbeats is clear, rhythmic, 190/min. Internal examination revealed complete cervical dilatation, fetus head was in the area of small pelvis. What tactics of labor management should be chosen?
*a. Forceps operation
b. Cesarean
c. Stimulation of labor activity
d. Conservative labor management with episiotomy
e. Embryotomy

1014. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38°C, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Putrid phlegmon
*b. Sepsis
c. Allergic reaction
d. Erysipelas
e. Erysipeloid

1015. A 3-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital because of ostealgia and body temperature rise up to 39°C. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, unable to stand for ostealgia, there is apparent intoxication, lymph nodesare enlarged up to 1,5 cm. Liver can be palpated 3 cm below the costal margin, spleen - 2 cm below the costal margin. In blood: RBCs - 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, colour index - 0,9, thrombocytes – 190×1012/l, WBCs - 3,2×1012/l, eosinophils - 1, stab neutrophils - 1, segmented neutrophils - 0, lymphocytes - 87, monocytes - 2, ESR - 36 mm/h. What examination should be conducted in order to specify the diagnosis?
a. Lymph node puncture
b. Ultrasound
*c. Sternal puncture
d. Computer tomography
e. Lymph node biopsy

1016. On the 5th day after labor body temperature of a 24-year-old parturient suddenly rose up to 38,7°C. She complains about weakness, headache, abdominal pain, irritability. Objectively: AP- 120/70 mm Hg, Ps- 92 bpm, t°38,7°C. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged up to 12 weeks of pregnancy, it was dense, slightly painful on palpation. Cervical canal lets in 2 transverse fingers, discharges are moderate, turbid, with foul smell. In blood: skeocytosis, lymphopenia, ESR - 30 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lochiometra
b. Pelviperitonitis
c. Parametritis
d. Metrophlebitis
*e. Endometritis

1017. A 40-year-old patient complains of colic pains in the lower abdomen and profuse bloody discharges from the genital tracts. Over the last 2 years she has been having menses for 15-16 days, profuse, with clots, painful. In anamnesis there are 2 medical abortions. On bimanual investigation: in the canal of the uterine cervix some fibromatous nodes are palpable, they are 3 cm in diameter, on the thin crus. Discharges are bloody, moderate. Choose the correct treatment tactics:
a. Hormonal hemostasis
b. Hysterectomy without appendages
c. Step-by-step vitamin therapy
*d. Operation: untwisting of the nodes
e. Supravaginal ablation of the uterus without appendages

1018. A 30-year-old woman with a long history of chronic pyelonephritis complains about considerable weakness, sleepiness, decrease in diuresis down to 100 ml per day. AP- 200/120 mm Hg. In blood: creatinine - 0,62 millimole/l, hypoproteinemia, albumines - 32 g/l, potassium - 6,8 millimole/l, hypochromic anemia, increased ESR. What is the first step in the patient treatment tactics?
a. Haemosorption
b. Enterosorption
*c. Haemodialysis
d. Antibacterial therapy
e. Blood transfusion

1019. Statistic of patients of common medical practice displays constant increase in elderly and old people number. What kind of pathology is expected to prevail in the morbidity structure of population in question?
a. Acute pathology
*b. Chronic pathology
c. Occupational pathology
d. Infectious pathology
e. Non-epidemic pathology

1020. A 9-year-old boy has been suffering from bronchoectasis since he was 3. Exacerbations occur quite often, 3-4 times a year. Conservative therapy results in short periods of remission. The disease is progressing, the child has physical retardation. The childs skin is pale, acrocyanotic, he has "watch glass" nail deformation. Bronchography revealed saccular bronchiectases of the lower lobe of his right lung. What is the further treatment tactics?
*a. Surgical treatment
b. Tempering of the childs organism
c. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
d. Further conservative therapy
e. Physiotherapeutic treatment

1021. A 32-year-old patient consulted a doctor about being inable to get pregnant for 5-6 years. 5 ago the primipregnancy ended in artificial abortion. After the vaginal examination and USI the patient was diagnosed with endometrioid cyst of the right ovary. What is the optimal treatment method?
a. Hormonal therapy with androgenic hormones
b. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Conservative therapy with estrogen-gestagenic drugs
*e. Surgical laparoscopy

1022. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
*a. Bronchography
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Pleural puncture
d. Survey radiograph of lungs
e. Bacteriological analysis of sputum

1023. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, t°35,0°C. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Frostbite of trunk and extremities
b. -
*c. Hypothermia
d. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
e. Apparent death

1024. A 28-year-old patient was delivered to the admission ward in the unconscious state with generalized epileptic attacks taking place every 15-20 minutes. During transportation the patient was given two injections of diazepam, magnesia sulphate, but they failed to bring the patient to consciousness. What department should render emergency aid?
*a. Resuscitation department
b. Surgcal department
c. Therapeutic department
d. Psychiatric department
e. Neurological department

1025. A baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation. Delivery was normal, by natural way. The baby has a large cephalohematoma. The results of blood count are: Hb- 120g/l, Er- 3,5×1012/l, total serum bilirubin - 123 mmol/l, direct bilirubin - 11 mmol/l, indirect - 112 mmol/l. What are causes of hyperbilirubinemia in this case?
a. Mechanical obstruction of the bile outflow
b. Bile condensing
c. Disturbance of the conjugative function of liver
d. Intravascular hemolysis
*e. Erythrocyte hemolysis

1026. A 36-year-old alcoholic patient has cirrhosis and pancreatic insufficiency due to recurrent pancreatitis. He complains of night blindness, decreased ability to taste food, and dry skin with hyperpigmentation. These complaints suggest deficiency of:
a. Copper
b. Manganese
c. Selenium
*d. Zinc
e. Chromium

1027. On the second day after preventive vaccination a 2-year-old boy presented with abdominal pain without clear localization, body temperature rose up to 38°C. On the third day the child got red papular haemorrhagic eruption on the extensor surfaces of limbs and around the joints. Knee joints were edematic and slightly painful. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Urticaria
b. Thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Meningococcemia
*d. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
e. DIC syndrome

1028. A 49-year-old patient undergoes regular medical check-up for uterine fibromyoma. Within the last year the uterus has enlarged up to 20 weeks of gestation. What is the rational way of treatment?
a. Embolization of uterine arteries
*b. Surgical treatment
c. Further surveillance
d. Hormonal therapy
e. Treatment with prostaglandin inhibitors

1029. A worker who undergoes regular medical check-up for duodenal ulcer received a subsidized 24-day sanatorium voucher from his plant. The term of annual leave of a worker is 24 calender days, it will take 4 days more to get to the sanatorium and back home. What is the procedure of obtaining a 4-day sick-leave?
a. Medical Expert Commission issues a 28-day sick list
b. The doctor in charge issues a 4-day sick list
*c. Medical Expert Commission issues a 4-day sick list
d. Medical Expert Commission issues a 4-day health certificate
e. The doctor in charge issues a health certificate and sanatorium patients file for 28 days

1030. Surgical department admitted a 37-year-old patient with a big crushed wound of his left thigh 4 hours after he got this trauma. What is the main provision for successful prevention of gaseous gangrene?
a. Infiltration of soft tissues around the wound with antibiotic solution
b. Injection of specific serum 3 000 U
c. Wound lavage with 6% solution of hydrogen peroxide
d. Injection of specific serum 30 000 U
*e. Removal of necrotic tissues and timely surgical processing of the wound

1031. A 60-year-old patient complains about asphyxia, palpitation, rapid fatiguability. He has 8 year history of essential hypertension. Objectively: the left cardiac border is 2 cm deviated to the left from the medioclavicular line, heart sounds are rhythmic and weak; there is diastolic shock above aorta. AP- 170/100 mm Hg. Liver - +2 cm; shin pastosity is present. ECG shows deviation of cardiac axis to the left, left ventricle hypertrophy. Ejection fraction - 63%. What type of cardiac insufficiency is observed?
a. Systolic
b. Unspecified
c. Its a norm
d. Combined
*e. Diastolic

1032. A 65-year-old patient complains about pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). Prostate- specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
b. Bone scintigraphy
c. Excretory urography
*d. Computer tomography of pelvis
e. Roentgenography of chest

1033. A 47-year-old obese man complained of periodic attacks of acute arthritis in the st left tarsophalangeal joint. Lab exam revealed increased serum rate of uric acid. What is the diagnosis?
a. Osteoarthritis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Rheumatic arthritis
*d. Gout arthritis
e. Reiters disease

1034. A 25-year-old man was admitted to a hospital with a 2 month history of cough and fever. A chest x-ray showed extensive left upper lobe disease with a 2 cm cavity. All three points were strongly positive on direct smear and grew M. Tuberculosis, fully sensitive to all first-line drugs. Patient must be treated with:
a. Kanamycin + ethambutol + pyrazinamide
b. Streptomycin + isoniazid
c. P-aminosalicylic acid + streptomycin
*d. Isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide
e. Isoniazid + ethambutol

1035. On the 4th day after suturing the perforative stomach ulcer a patient with pulmonary emphysema developed spontaneous pneumothorax. What is the best place for pleural drainage?
*a. The second intercostal space along the medioclavicular line
b. The fifth intercostal space along the medioclavicular line
c. The sixth intercostal space along the anterior axillary furrow
d. The eighth intercostal space along the posterior axillary furrow
e. The seventh intercostal space along the anterior axillary furrow

1036. A 14-year-old boy has rheumatism. Over the last 2 years he has had 3 rheumatic attacks. What course of rheumatism does the patient have?
a. Latent
*b. Prolonged
c. Subacute
d. Acute
e. Persistent-reccurent

1037. Head of a department and a trade-union group have appealed to the head of a hospital about dismissal of the senior nurse who has 17 year record of service. The facts of charge were confirmed and recognized by the nurse hersel This nurse lives with a daughter (who is divorced and unemployed) and a 9-month-old grandson. Make an administrative decision:
*a. To continue the worker in office with a warning of dismissal in case of repeated violation of labor discipline
b. To shift the solution of this problem on other officials or public organizations
c. To discharge the worker, i.e. to satisfy demands of the collective
d. To issue the sick list
e. -

1038. HIV displays the highest tropism towards the following blood cells:
a. T-killers
b. Thrombocytes
c. T-suppressors
d. Erythrocytes
*e. T-helpers

1039. A 22-year-old girl has been complaining of having itching rash on her face for 2 days. She associates this disease with application of cosmetic face cream. Objectively: apparent reddening and edema of skin in the region of cheeks, chin and forehead; fine papulovesicular rash. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Neurodermatitis
c. Eczema
d. Dermatitis simplex
*e. Allergic dermatitis

1040. A 62-year-old patient has DM-2. Diabetes is being compensated by diet and Maninilum. Pаtient has to undergo an operation for inguinal hernia. What tactics of hypoglycemic therapy should be chosen?
*a. Prescribe the short-acting insulin
b. To continue with the current therapy
c. Prescribe guanylguanidine
d. Give Glurenorm in place of Maninilum
e. Prescribe thelong-acting insulin

1041. A 67-year-old female patient suffering from the essential hypertension suddenly at night developed headache, dyspnea that quickly progressed to asphyxia. Objectively: the patient is pale, with sweaty forehead, AP- 210/140 mm Hg, heart rate - 120/min, auscultation revealed solitary dry rales and moist rales in the lower parts. The shins are pastose. What kind of emergency aid would be the most efficient in this case?
a. Digoxin and nitroglycerin intravenously
b. Enalapril and furosemide intravenously
c. Nitroglycerin intravenously and capoten internally
*d. Nitroglycerin and furosemide intravenously
e. Labetalol and furosemide intravenously

1042. A 46-year-old patient once took part in elimination of breakdown at an atomic power plant. Currently he is being treated at an in-patient hospital. He was diagnosed with progressing vegetative insufficiency. This disease relates to the following group of ionizing radiation effects:
a. Somatic
b. Genetic
*c. Somato-stochastic
d. Heterosis
e. Hormesis

1043. A 35-year-old man complains about intense lumbar pain irradiating to the inguinal area, external genitalia, thigh; frequent urination, chill, nausea, vomiting. Objectively: positive Pasternatskys symptom. Urine analysis revealed that RBCs and WBCs covered the total field of microscope; the urine exhibited high protein concentration. These clinical presentations were most likely caused by the following pathology:
a. Cholelithiasis, biliary colic
b. Intestinal obstruction
*c. Urolithiasis, renal colic
d. Renal infarct
e. Osteochondrosis, acute radicular syndrome

1044. A 45-year-old driver was admitted to the hospital with 5 hour substernal pain. Nitroglycerin is not effective. He is pale, heart sounds are regular but weak. HR - 96 per minute, BP of 100/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Acute myocarditis
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Stable angina
e. Acute left ventricular failure

1045. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. To use an inhalation of β2-adrenoceptor agonist
b. To make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone
*c. To perform the Heimlich manoever
d. To perform conicotomy immediately
e. To send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him

1046. A patient, aged 52, works as a street cleaner. He has been suffering from pneumoconiosis for 2 years. What treatment should be recommended?
a. Sulfonilamides
b. Broncholitics
c. Antibiotics
d. Oil inhalations
*e. Alkaline inhalations

1047. After supercooling a 38-year-old woman developed muscle pain, body temperature rise up to 39°C, headache, dysuria, positive Pasternatskys symptome. In the urine: leukocyturia, bacteriuria. In blood: Decrease in Hb rate down to 103 g/l, left shift leukocytosis, ESR acceleration up to 32 mm/h. Blood urea - 6,0 millimole/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Renal tuberclosis
b. Acute cystitis
c. Urolithiasis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
*e. Acute pyelonephritis

1048. After examination a 46-year-old patient was diagnosed with left breast cancer T2N2M0, cl. gr. II-a. What will be the treatment plan for this patient?
a. Operation + radiation therapy
b. Radiation therapy only
c. Chemotherapy only
d. Operation only
*e. Radiation therapy + operation + chemotherapy

1049. A 30-year-old patient consulted a doctor about menstruation absence for 2 years after labour, loss of hair, body weight loss. The labour was complicated by a haemorrhage caused by uterus hypotonia. Objectively: the patient is asthenic, external genitals are hypoplastic, the uterus body is small and painless. The appendages are not palpaple. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exhausted overy syndrome
b. Galactorrhea-amenorrhea syndrome
c. Ovarian amenorrhea
*d. Sheehans syndrome
e. Turners syndrome

1050. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6°C. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5х2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Liver abscess
b. Paravesical liver abscesses
c. Liver cancer
*d. Alveolar echinococcus of liver
e. Cystous liver cancer

1051. A 50-year-old locksmith was diagnosed with typhoid fever. The patient lives in a separate apartment with all facilities. Apart of him there are also 2 adults in his family. What actions should be taken about persons communicating with the patient?
a. Isolation
*b. Bacteriological study
c. Vaccination
d. Antibiotic prophylaxis
e. Dispensary surveillance

1052. A 16-year-old female patient underwent an operation on account of diffuse toxic goiter of the III-IV degree 12 years ago. Now she has recurrence of thyrotoxicosis. The patient was offered operative intervention, but it is necessary first to localize the functioning gland tissue. What method should be applied for this purpose?
a. USI
*b. Gland scanning
c. Puncture aspiration biopsy
d. Roentgenography of neck
e. Roentgenography of esophagus

1053. A child is 4 years old, has been ill for 5 days. There are complaints of cough, skin rash, t°38,2°C, face puffiness, photophobia, conjunctivitis. Objectively: there is bright, maculo-papulous, in some areas confluent rash on the face, neck, upper chest. The pharynx is hyperemic. There are seropurulent discharges from the nose. Auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enterovirus exanthema
b. Scarlet fever
*c. Measles
d. Rubella
e. Adenoviral infection

1054. An 18-month-old child was taken to a hospital on the 4-th day of the disease. The disease began acutely with temperature 39, weakness, cough, breathlessness. He is pale, cyanotic, has had febrile temperature for over 3 days. There are crepitative fine bubbling rales on auscultation. Percussion sound is shortened in the right infrascapular region. X-ray picture shows non-homogeneous segment infiltration 8-10 mm on the right, the intensification of lung pattern. Your diagnosis:
a. Grippe
*b. Segmentary pneumonia
c. Bronchiolitis
d. Bronchitis
e. Interstitial pneumonia

1055. Forensic medical expertise of corpse of a newborn revealed: body weight 3500 g, body length 50 cm, the umbilical cord was smooth, moist, glossy, without any signs of drying. Hydrostatic tests were positive. The test results are the evidence of:
a. Secondary atelectasis
b. Primary atelectasis
c. Stillbirth
d. Hyaline membrane disease
*e. Live birth

1056. A 36-year-old female patient complains of general weakness, edemata of her face and hands, rapid fatiguability during walking, difficult diglutition, cardiac irregularities. These symptoms turned up 11 days after a holiday at the seaside. Objectively: face erythema, edema of shin muscles. Heart sounds are muffled, AP is 100/70 mm Hg. In blood: ASAT activity is 0,95 millimole/h×l, ALAT - 1,3 millimole/h×l, aldolase - 9,2 IU/l, creatine phosphokinase - 2,5 millimole Р/g×l. What method of study would be the most specific?
a. Echocardiogram
*b. Muscle biopsy
c. Electromyography
d. Determination of cortisol concentration in blood and urine
e. ECG

1057. A 24-year-old law student is brought to the emergency room complaining of severe abdominal pain of 6-8 hours duration. He had been to a party the night before. The pain is in the epigastrium radiating to the back and is accompanied by nausea. The patient had vomited twice prior to coming to the emergency room. Clinical examination revealed that the young man was anxious, with acute condition, with a regular pulse rate of 100/min, blood pressure of 100/68 mm Hg, and body temperature of 38,1°C. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Mesenteric adenitis
b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Acute appendicitis
*d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Acute diverticulitis

1058. A patient is active, lively, fussy. He opposes the examination. His speech is fast and loud, his statements are spontaneous and inconsequent. Specify the psychopathological state of this patient:
a. Paranoid syndrome
b. Delirium
c. Behavioral disorder
d. Catatonic agitation
*e. Psychomotor agitation

1059. A 26-year-old patient complains about considerable muscle weakness, dizziness, extended abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting giving no relie The disease has been gradually developing within 6 months. There was progress of general weakness, skin darkening. The patient fell into grave condition after an ARD: there appeared abdominal pain and frequent vomiting. Objectively: the skin is dry with diffuse pigmentation. Heart sounds are significantly weakened, heart rate - 60/min, AP- 80/40 mm Hg. The abdomen is slightly painful in the epigastrial region. In blood: WBCs - 8,1×1012/l, glucose - 3,0 millimole/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic adrenal insufficiency. Addisonian crisis
b. Toxic infectious shock
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Acute food poisoning

1060. 13 months after the first labor a 24-year-old patient complained of amenorrhea. Pregnancy ended in Caesarian section because of premature detachment of normally positioned placenta which resulted in blood loss at the rate of 2000 ml owing to disturbance of blood clotting. Choose the most suitable investigation:
*a. Estimation of gonadotropin rate
b. Estimation of testosteron rate in blood serum
c. USI of small pelvis organs
d. Computer tomography of head
e. Progesteron assay

1061. A 32-year-old gravida complains about episodes of unconsciousness, spontaneous syncopes that are quickly over after a change of body position. A syncope can be accompanied byquickly elapsing bradycardia. There are no other complications of gestation. What is the most likely reason for such condition?
a. Vegetative-vascular dystonia (cardial type)
*b. Postcava compresseion by the gravid uterus
c. Psychosomatic disorders
d. Pressure rise in the veins of extremities
e. Pressure fall in the veins of extremities

1062. A 5-grade pupil complains about extensive skin rash accompanied by intensive itch, especially at night. Objectively: there are small red papules set mostly in pairs in the region of interdigital folds on both hands, on the flexor surface of radicarpal articulations, abdomen and buttock skin as well as internal surface of thighs. In the centre of some papules vesicles or serohaemorrhagic crusts can be seen. There are multiple excoriations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatitis
b. Ringworm of body
*c. Scabies
d. Eczema
e. Toxicoderma

1063. A 4-month-old girl with blond hair and blue eyes has "mousy" odor of sweat and urine, delayed psychomotoric development. The most typical laboratory data for this disorder is:
a. High concentration of chlorides in sweat
b. High level of oxyproline in urine
*c. Positive urine ferric chloride test
d. High level of glycosaminoglycanes in urine
e. Low level of thyroid gland hormones in blood

1064. A 35-year-old patient complains about pain and morning stiffness of hand joints and temporomandibular joints that lasts over 30 minutes. She has had these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: edema of proximal interphalangeal digital joints and limited motions of joints. What examination should be administered?
a. Immunogram
b. Proteinogram
c. Rose-Waaler reaction
d. Complete blood count
*e. Roentgenography of hands

1065. A 43-year-old female patiet complains of eruption on her right leg skin, pain, weakness, body temperature rise up to 38°C. The disease is acute. Objectively: there is an edema on the right leg skin in the region of foot, a well-defined bright red spot in form of flame tips which feels hot. There are isolated vesicles in focus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Microbial eczema
b. Toxicoderma
c. Contact dermatitis
d. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
*e. Erysipelas

1066. A 27-year-old patient with a history of ronchial asthma was stung by a bee. He had a sensation of chest compression, breath shortage, difficult expiration, sense of heat in the upper half of body, dizziness, apparent itch, convulsions. Objectively: noisy wheezing breath, AP - 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 110 bpm. Auscultation revealed weak rhythmic heart sounds, rough respiration above lungs, sibilant rales. What drug group should be administered in the first place?
*a. Glucocorticoids
b. Analgetics
c. Anticonvulsive
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Methylxanthines

1067. A 30-year-old patient complains of breathlessness, pain in the right rib arc region, dry cough and the edema of legs. He is ill for 2 months. He had been treated for rheumatic fever without any effect. On exam: cyanosis, edema of legs, BT of 36,6°C, RR of 28/min, HR of 90/min, BP of 110/80 mm Hg, crackles above low parts of both lungs, heart borders are displaced to the left and to the right, weak sounds, systolic murmur above the apex. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Acute myocarditis
b. Rheumatic fever, mitral stenosis
*c. Dilated cardiomyopathy
d. Infectious endocarditis
e. Acute pericarditis

1068. A 36-year-old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
a. Mediastinitis
*b. Valvular pneumothorax
c. Open pneumothorax
d. Subcutaneous emphysema
e. Closed pneumothorax

1069. A 40-year-old woman who has worked in weaving branch for 10 years complains of frequent headache, sleeplessness, irritability, fatigue, tiredness. Physical examination revealed instability of blood pressure, internal organs are without changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Encephalopathy
*b. Noise-induced disease
c. Hypertension
d. Asthenovegetative syndrome
e. Atopic bronchial asthma

1070. The correlation between the service record and eosinophil concentration in blood was studied in workers at dyeing shops of textile factories. What index will be the most informative for the analysis of this data?
a. Fitting criterion
b. Standardized index
c. Sign index
*d. Correlation factor
e. Students criterion

1071. A 33-year-old patient has acute blood loss: erythrocytes - 2,2*10^12/l, Hb- 55 g/l, blood group is A(II)Rh+. Accidentally the patient got a transfusion of donor erythrocyte mass of AB(IV)Rh+ group. An hour later the patient became anxious, got abdominal and lumbar pain. Ps- 134 bpm, AP- 100/65 mm Hg, body temperature - 38,6°C. After catheterization of urinary bladder 12 ml/h of dark-brown urine were obtained. What complication is it?
a. Citrate intoxication
b. Allergic reaction to the donor erythrocyte mass
*c. Acute renal insufficiency
d. Cardial shock
e. Toxic infectious shock

1072. A pediatrician had a conversation with a mother of a 7-month-old breast-fed boy and found out that the child was fed 7 times a day. How many times should the child of such age be fed?
*a. 5 times
b. 4 times
c. 3 times
d. 6 times
e. 7 times

1073. A 50-year-old patient complains about having pain attacks in the right subcostal area for about a year. He pain arises mainly after taking fattening food. Over the last week the attacks occurred daily and became more painful. On the 3rd day of hospitalization the patient presented with icteritiousness of skin and scleras, light- colored feces and dark urine. In blood: neutrophilic leukocytosis - 13,1×1012/l, ESR - 28 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive dyskinesia of gallbladder
b. Chronic recurrent pancreatitis
c. Chronic cholangitis, exacerbation stage
d. Fatty degeneration of liver
*e. Chronic calculous cholecystitis

1074. A 45-year-old male patient was admitted to the intensive care unit because of myocardial infarction. An hour later the ventricular facilitation occurred. Which of the following should be administered?
a. Lidocaine injection
*b. Defibrillation
c. Cardiac pacing
d. External chest compression
e. Adrenalin injection

1075. 2 weeks after recovering from angina an 8-year-old boy developed edemata of face and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Urine is of dark brown colour. Oliguria is present. On urine analysis: relative density - 1,015, protein - 1,2 g/l, RBCs are leached and cover the whole vision field, granular casts - 1-2 in the vision field, salts are represented by urates (big number). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome
b. Nephrolithiasis
*c. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephritic syndrome
d. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome, hematuria and hypertension
e. Acute glomerulonephritis with isolated urinary syndrome

1076. A 35-year-old patient was admitted to the in-patient psychiatric facility for the first time. He was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. What is the most rational treatment method?
a. Vitamin therapy
*b. Neuroleptic therapy
c. Reflex therapy
d. Physiotherapy
e. Psychotherapy

1077. A 30-year-old woman complains of nasal blockage, sneezing, watery nasal discharges. The body temperature is normal. Objectively - edema of nasal mucous membrane on both sides, especially of the lower turbinate (with cyanosis). Blood test data - mild leukocytosis and eosinophilia. What is the diagnosis?
a. Infective rhinitis
b. Acute sinusitis
*c. Allergic rhinitis
d. Foreign body in the nose
e. Atrophic rhinitis

1078. An 18-year-old primigravida in her 27-28 week of gestation underwent an operation on account of acute phlegmonous appendicitis. In the postoperative period it is necessary to take measures for prevention of the following pegnancy complication:
a. Late gestosis
b. Fetus hypotrophy
c. Intestinal obstruction
d. Premature placenta detachment
*e. Noncarrying of pregnancy

1079. A 46-year-old patient is to be prepared to the operation on account of stomach cancer. Preoperative preparation involves infusion therapy. It was injected up to 3,0 l of solutions into his right lunar vein. On the next day he got tensive pain in the region of his right shoulder. Examination of interior brachial surface revealed a stripe of hyperemia, skin edema and a painful cord. What complication is it?
a. Necrosis of paravenous cellular tissue
b. Vein puncture and edema of paravenous cellular tissue
c. Acute lymphangitis
*d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Phlegmon of paravenous cellular tissue

1080. A 60-year-old woman, mother of 6 children, developed a sudden onset of upper abdominal pain radiating to the back, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, fever and chills. Subsequently, she noticed yellow discoloration of her sclera and skin. On physical examination the patient was found to be febrile with temp. of 38,9°C, along with right upper quadrant tenderness. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Malignant biliary stricture
*b. Choledocholithiasis
c. Choledochal cyst
d. Benign biliary stricture
e. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas

1081. A full term infant was born after a normal pregnancy, delivery, however, was complicated by marginal placental detachment. At 12 hours of age the child, although appearing to be in good health, passes a bloody meconium stool. For determining the cause of the bleeding, which of the following diagnostic procedures should be performed first?
a. An upper gastrointestinal series
b. Platelet count, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time
c. Gastric lavage with normal saline
d. An Apt test
*e. Barium enema

1082. In autumn a 25-year-old patient developed stomach ache that arose 1,5-2 hours after having meals and at night. He complains about pyrosis and constipation. The pain is getting worse after consuming spicy, salty and sour food, it can be relieved by means of soda and hot-water bag. The patient has been suffering from this disease for a year. Objectively: furred moist tongue. Abdomen palpation reveals epigastrial pain on the right, resistance of abdominal muscles in the same region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic cholecystitis
*b. Duodenal ulcer
c. Chronic pancreatitis
d. Diaphragmatic hernia
e. Stomach ulcer

1083. A 30-year old woman taken by influenza has empty stomach glycemia at the rate of 11,3 millimole/l, glucosuria at the rate of 25 g/l. The patient is 168 cm tall and weighs 67 kg. What test would be the most informative for the diagnosis specification?
*a. Insulinemia on an empty stomach
b. Daily glycemia variability
c. Glycemia test an hour after taking meals
d. Daily glucosuria variability
e. Glucose tolerance test

1084. A 22-year-old patient is a clerk. His working day runs in a conditioned room. In summer he was taken by an acute disease with the following symptoms: fever, dyspnea, dry cough, pleural pain, myalgia, arthralgia. Objectively: moist rales on the right, pleural friction ru B. X-ray picture showed infiltration of the inferior lobe. In blood: WBC – 11×1012/l, stab neutrophils - 6%, segmented neutrophils - 70%, lymphocytes - 8%, ESR - 42 mm/h. What is the ethiological factor pneumonia?
*a. Legionella
b. Streptococcus
c. Mycoplasm
d. Staphylococcus
e. Pneumococcus

1085. Study of morbidity rate in a city N revealed that population of different administrative districts differed in age structure. What statistic method allows to eliminate influence of this factor upon morbidity indices?
*a. Standardization
b. Analysis of dynamic series
c. Wilcoxons t-criterion
d. Correlative regressive analysis
e. Calculation of average values

1086. A 40-year-old female patient has a history of rheumatism. She complains about acute pain in her left eye, especially at night, vision impairment, photophobia, lacrimation. The patient cannot suggest any reasons for the disease. Objectively: weak pericorneal injection, flattening of iris relief, iris discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Choroiditis
*b. Iridocyclitis
c. Keratitis
d. Iritis
e. Acute attack of glaucoma

1087. Workers of a laboratory producing measuring devices (manometers, thermometers etc) complain about a mettalic taste in mouth, stomatitis, dyspepsia, sleep disturbance, unsteady walk, abrupt decrease in cardiac activity. These presentations must have been caused by the intoxication with the following substance:
*a. Mercury
b. Toluol
c. Manganese
d. Tetraethyl lead
e. Lead

1088. A 32-year-old patient complains of cardiac irregularities, dizziness, dyspnea at physical stress. He has never suffered from this before. Objectively: Ps- 74 bpm, rhythmic. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolic murmur above aorta, the first heart sound was normal. ECG showed hypertrophy of the left ventricle, signs of repolarization disturbance in the I, V5 and V6 leads. Echocardiogram revealed that interventricular septum was 2 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Coarctation of aorta
b. Aortic stenosis
*c. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
d. Essential hypertension
e. Myocardium infarction

1089. A 50-year-old man was examined in the clinic for persistent cavitation and sputum. He was treated with rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambuthol. The most common toxic effect of ethambutol is:
*a. Optic neuritis
b. Mental symptoms
c. Hepatic enzyme elevation
d. Eighth cranial nerve damage
e. Peripheral neuropathy

1090. A man, aged 25, presents with facial edema, moderate back pains, body temperature of 37,5°C, BP- 180/100 mm Hg, hematuria (up to 100 in v/f), proteinuria (2,0 g/l), hyaline casts - 10 in v/f, specific gravity - 1020. The onset of the disease is probably connected with acute tonsillitis 2 weeks ago. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Cancer of the kidney
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

1091. Examination of placenta revealed a defect. An obstetrician performed manual investigation of uterine cavity, uterine massage. Prophylaxis of endometritis in the postpartum period should involve following actions:
a. Instrumental revision of uterine cavity
b. Haemostatic therapy
c. Intrauterine instillation of dioxine
*d. Antibacterial therapy
e. Contracting agents

1092. A 54-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with evident acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins, enlarged liver, ascites. Cardiac borders are dilated. Heart sounds cannot be auscultated, apical beat is undetectable. AP is 100/50 mm Hg. X-ray picture of chest shows enlarged heart shadow in form of a trapezium. What pathology might have caused these symptoms?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Acute cardiac insufficiency
c. Hiatal hernia
d. Complex heart defect
*e. Cardiac tamponade

1093. A 44-year-old man has been working in coke industry for 16 years. Dust concentration at his workplace is 5-10 times higher than maximum permissible concentration. Roentgenography of lungs revealed changes that are typical for pneumoconiosis. What is the most probable type of pneumoconiosis in this case?
a. Asbestosis
b. Silicatosis
c. Siderosis
d. Anthracosilicosis
*e. Anthracosis

1094. A 45-year-old woman, mother of four children, comes to the emergency room complaining of a sudden onset of the epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, radiating to the back, accompanied by vomiting. On examination, tenderness is elicited in the right upper quadrant, bowel sounds are decreased, and laboratory data shows leukocytosis, normal serum levels of amylase, lipase, and bilirubin. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Sigmoid diverticulitis
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Perforated peptic ulcer disease
e. Acute pancreatitis

1095. A 52-year-old male patient has an 18 year history of diabetes mellitus. One year ago he had cystitis. The patient takes 0,005 g of maninil thrice a day. Objectively: height - 176 cm, weight - 82 kg. Glycemia variability on an empy stomach is at the rate of 10,3- 12,4 millimole/l. Analyses revealed proteinuria at the rate of 0,033 g/l. The most efficient way to prevent diabetic nephropathy progress will be:
a. To administer antibacterial therapy
b. To decrease daily caloric content
*c. To replace maninil with insulin
d. To supplement the present therapy with insulin
e. To increase maninil dosage

1096. A 33-year-old man with a history of rheumatic fever complains of fever up to 38- 39°C, abdominal pain, dyspnea, tachycardia. Heart borders are displaced to the left by 2 cm, systolic and diastolic murmurs above aorta, BP of 160/30 mm Hg. Petechial rash occurs after measurement of blood pressure. Liver is enlarged by 3 cm, spleen is palpable. Urine is brown-yellow. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute hepatitis
b. Aortic regurgitation
*c. Infectious endocarditis
d. Acute nephritis
e. Rheumatic fever

1097. A boy is 8 year old. His physical development is compliant with his age. The child has had cardiac murmur since birth. Objectively: skin and visible mucous membranes are of normal colour. AP- 100/70 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolo- diastolic murmur and diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery. ECG shows overload of the left heart. Roentgenoscopy shows coarsening of the lung pattern, heart shadow of normal form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aorta coarctation
b. Patent ductus arteriosus
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
*d. Atrioseptal defect
e. Fallots tetrad

1098. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patients condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min, Ps- 96 bpm, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are moist rales of different types above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exudative pleuritis
*b. Acute pulmonary abscess
c. Pyopneumothorax
d. Acute focal pneumonia
e. Pleural empyema

1099. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
a. Impetigo
b. Impetigo neonatorum
c. Epidermolysis bullosa
*d. Vesiculopustulosis
e. Miliaria

1100. A 34-year-old male patient was delivered to the neurological department with complaints of intense headache, double vision, light and noise intolerance. The attack came suddenly while load lifting. Objectively: torpor, moderate divergent strabismus, diplonia. Bilateral Kernigs symptoms. No paresises. Bloody liquor. What medication should be administered in the first line?
a. Acetylsalicilic acid
b. Glutamic acid
*c. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
d. Nicotinic acid
e. Heparin

1101. A patient with high temperature came to a first-aid post in the evening. The fact of temporary disability was established. Indicate the order of examination in this case:
a. The sick list for up to 3 days should be issued
b. Any document shouldnt be issued
c. The sick list for 1 day should be issued
*d. The night duty doctor should issue a medical certificate, which will be subsequently used for issuing a sick list from the date of the previous day
e. The sick list for 3 days should be issued

1102. A nurse of the kindergarten was taken to the hospital with complaints of accute pain in parumbilical region, convulsions of lower limbs, multiple bile vomiting, frequent watery foul feces of green colour in huge amounts. At the same time all the staff in the kindergarden got ill. Two days ago all of them ate cottage cheese with sour cream. General condition of patients is of moderate severity. Temperature 38,2°C. Heart tones: rhythmic and muted. Heart rate 95/min, arterial pressure: 160 mm/Hg. Abdomen is slightly swollen, painful. Liver +2 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Salmonellosis
b. Cholera
c. Enterovirus infection
d. Food toxic infection
e. Dysentery

1103. A maternity house has admitted a primagravida complaining of irregular, intense labour pains that have been lasting for 36 hours. The woman is tired, failed to fall asleep at night. The fetus is in longitudinal lie, with cephalic presentation. The fetus heartbeat is clear and rhythmic, 145/min. Vaginal examination revealed that the uterine cervix was up to 3 cm long, dense, with retroflexion; the external orifice was closed; the discharges were of mucous nature. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Secondary uterine inertia
b. Primary uterine inertia
*c. Pathological preliminary period
d. Physiological preliminary period
e. Uterine cervix dystocia

1104. A painter working at a motorcar plant was diagnosed with acute intoxication with amide compounds of benzene, moderate severity grade. The in-patient treatment resulted in considerable health improvement. What expert decision should be made in this case?
a. The patient should be referred to the Medical and Social Expert Commission for determination of percentage of work capicty loss
b. -
c. The patient may get back to work providing he will keep to hygiene and sanitary regulations
*d. The patient should be issued a sick list for out-patient treatment
e. The patient should be referred to the Medical and Social Expert Commission for assigning the disability group because of an occupational disease

1105. The patient with aquired heart failure has diastolic pressure of 0 mm Hg. What heart failure does the child have?
a. Mitral insufficiency
*b. Aortal insufficiency
c. Rheumatism
d. Mitral stenosis
e. Aortal stenosis

1106. A 58-year-old patient complains about sensation of numbness, sudden paleness of II-IV fingers, muscle rigidness, intermittent pulse. The patient presents also with polyarthralgia, dysphagia, constipations. The patients face is masklike, solid edema of hands is present. The heart is enlarged; auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. In blood: ESR - 20 mm/h, crude protein - 85/l, -globulines - 25%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatomyositis
b. Raynauds disease
*c. Systemic scleroderma
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

1107. A 30-year-old patient with complaints of occipital headache, disturbed sleep with nightmares came to a policlinic. BP was 150/95 mm Hg. He was diagnosed with hypertensic crisis. The patient should be registered in the following dispensary group for arterial hypertension surveillance:
a. In the fifth
b. In the third
c. In the fourth
*d. In the second
e. In the first

1108. A 1,5-year-old child was taken by an acute disease: body temperature up to 39°C, frequent vomiting up to 5 times. Nervous system tests revealed positive Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs. The given symptoms relate to:
a. Encephalic syndrome
b. Motor disorder syndrome
*c. Meningeal signs
d. Discoordination syndrome
e. Infectious toxicosis signs

1109. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in its volume and composition. Muscle tone is within norm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meningitis
*b. Pylorospasm
c. Craniostenosis
d. Microcephaly
e. Pylorostenosis

1110. Bacterial analysis of air in a living space in winter period by means of Krotovs apparatus revealed that total number of microorganisms in 1m3 of air was 7200. What is the allowed number of microorganisms for the air to be characterized as "pure"?
a. Up to 5500
b. Up to 7500
c. Up to 3500
*d. Up to 4500
e. Up to 2500

1111. A 28-year-old patient underwent endometrectomy as a result of incomplete abortion. Blood loss was at the rate of 900 ml. It was necessary to start hemotransfusion. After transfusion of 60 ml of erythrocytic mass the patient presented with lumbar pain and fever which resulted in hemotransfusion stoppage. 20 minutes later the patients condition got worse: she developed adynamia, apparent skin pallor, acrocyanosis, profuse perspiration. t°38,5°C, Ps- 110/min, AP- 70/40 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic shock
b. Septic shock
c. DIC syndrome
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Hemotransfusion shock

1112. A patient who has been consuming refined foodstuffs for a long time complains about headache, fatiguability, depression, insomnia, irritability. Objectively: muscle asthenia, pain and cramps in the gastrocnemius muscles, during walking the patient lands onto his heel first, then on the external edge of foot. Cardiovascular system exhibits tachycardia, hypoxia, dystrophic changes of myocardium. There are also gastrointestinal disorders. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypovitaminosis B12
b. Hypovitaminosis B2
c. Hypovitaminosis B15
*d. Hypovitaminosis B1
e. Hypovitaminosis B6

1113. A 46-year-old patient was issued a 10-day sick list because of exacerbation of chronic cholecystitis. The patients general condition got better, but the clinical manifestations of the disease are still present. What authority is entitled to extend the sick list?
a. Head doctor
b. Family doctor
c. Deputy head doctor for medical-labour expertise
d. Deputy head doctor for terapeutic management
*e. Medical Expert Commission

1114. A patient has got acute macrofocal myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. The latter is progressing under conditions of weak general peripheric resistance and decreased cardiac output. What antihypotensive drug should be injected to the patient in the first place?
a. Adrenaline
b. Mesatonum
c. Prednisolone
d. Noradrenaline
*e. Dopamine

1115. A maternity hospital registered 616 live births, 1 stillbirth, 1 death on the 5th day of life over a 1 year period. What index allows the most precise estimation of this situation?
a. Neonatal mortality
*b. Perinatal mortality
c. Crude mortality rate
d. Natural increase
e. Natality

1116. A 32-year-old male patient has been suffering from pain in the sacrum and coxofemoral joints, painfulness and stiffness in the lumbar spine for a year. ESR - 56 mm/h. Roentgenography revealed symptoms of bilateral sacroileitis. The patient is the carrier of HLA B27 antigen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Coxarthrosis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Reiters disease
*d. Ankylosing spondylitis
e. Spondylosis

1117. A 34-year-old female patient complains about weakness, 12 kg weight loss within 6 months, sweating, palpitation, irritability. Objectively: III grade thyroid gland is elastic, diffuse enlargement is present, there is also a node in the right lobe. Cervical lymph nodes are not enlarged. What treatment tactics would be the most rational?
*a. Operation after antithyroid therapy
b. Immediate surgical intervention
c. Conservative antithyroid therapy
d. Radioactive iodine administration
e. Immediate gamma-ray teletherapy

1118. Ten hours before initial observation patient had frequent feces and vomiting. Fecal and vomiting masses looked like rice-water. Nausea and abdominal pain werent observed. Hiccup and convulsions of lower limbs, temperature 35,4°C, hoarse voice, greyish wry face, acrocyanosis were observed. Respiratory rate 40/min, threadlike pulse 120/min, blood pressure 40/0 mm/Hg, abdomen is drawn. What treatment measures should be taken first of all?
a. Disintoxicational therapy
b. Cardiac glycosides
c. Antibotulinic serum injection
*d. Intravenous rehydration
e. Antibiotic therapy

1119. A 37-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital in unconscious state. He got a closed abdominal injury. He is suspected to have internal haemorrhage, intraabdominal injury. He is being prepared an emergency operation. By means of standard sera a physician determined his blood group and got the following results: 0(І) - no agglutination, А(ІІ) - no agglutination, В(ІІІ) - no agglutination. What is the patients blood group?
a. АВ(ІV)
b. А(ІІ)
*c. 0(І)
d. -
e. В(ІІІ)

1120. A 32-year-old female patient consulted a doctor about a skin affection of her body, face and extremities which turned up after peroral intake of biseptol. The patient was diagnosed with drug toxicoderma. What treatment methods would be the most effective for this patient?
a. Immunotherapy
*b. Extracorporal therapy
c. Antihistamine therapy
d. Anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Disintoxication therapy

1121. A patient consulted a venereologist about painful urination, reddening of the external opening of urethra, profuse purulent discharges from the urethra. He considers himself to be ill for 3 days. He also associates the disease with a casual sexual contact that took place for about a week ago. If provisional diagnosis "acute gonorrheal urethritis" is confirmed, then bacteriological study of urethral discharges will reveal:
*a. Gram-negative diplococci
b. Proteus vulgaris
c. Gram-positive diplococci
d. Mycoplasma
e. Spirochaete

1122. Estimation of community health level involved analysis of a report on diseases registered among the population of district under charge (reporting form 12). What index is calculated on the grounds of this report?
a. Index of basic non-epidemic morbidity
*b. Common morbidity rate
c. Index of pathological affection
d. Index of hospitalized morbidity
e. Index of morbidity with temporary disability

1123. A 19-year-old patient complains about skin rash that appeared 2 days ago after eating smoked fish. The rash disappears after 4-6 hours but then turns up again. It is accompanied by itch. Objectively: trunk and upper limbs are covered with multiple pink blisters as big as a pea or a bean. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic dermatitis
*b. Acute urticaria
c. Purigo
d. Quinckes edema
e. Toxicodermia

1124. In terms of megacalorie (1000 kcal = 4184 kJ) the ration of an adult includes 30 g of proteins, 37 g of fats, 137 g of carbohydrates, 15 mg of vitamin C, 0,6 mg of thiamine (vitamin B1). The ration is UNBALANCED as to the contents of:
a. Proteins
b. Thiamine
c. Carbohydrates
d. Fats
*e. Vitamin C

1125. A 20-year-old woman has a 3-4 month history of bloody diarrhoea; stool examination proved negative for ova and parasites; stool cultures negative for clostridium, campylobacter and yersinia; normal small bowel series; edema, hyperemia and ulceration of the rectum and sigmoid colon seen on sigmoidoscopic examination. Select the most likely diagnosis:
a. Granulomatous colitis
b. Gastroenteritis
c. Carcinoid syndrome
*d. Ulcerative colitis
e. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome

1126. A driver had been fixing a car in a closed garage and afterwards complained about headache, dizziness, nausea, muscle asthenia, sleepiness. Objectively: pulse and respiratory rate elevation, excitement, hypertension, delirium of persecution. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Posttraumatic encephalopathy
*c. Intoxication with carbon oxide
d. Asthenovegetative syndrome
e. Intoxication with ethyl gasoline

1127. Examination of a 9-month-old girl revealed skin pallor, cyanosis during excitement. Percussion revealed transverse dilatation of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed continuous systolic murmur on the left from the breastbone in the 3-4 intercostal space. This murmur is conducted above the whole cardiac region to the back. What congenital cardiac pathology can be suspected?
*a. Defect of interventricular septum
b. Pulmonary artery stenosis
c. Coarctation of aorta
d. Fallots tetrad
e. Defect of interatrial septum

1128. A child was taken to a hospital with focal changes in the skin folds. The child was anxious during examination, examination revealed dry skin with solitary papulous elements and ill-defined lichenification zones. Skin eruption was accompanied by strong itch. The child usually feels better in summer, his condition is getting worse in winter. The child has been artificially fed since he was 2 months old. He has a history of exudative diathesis. Grandmother by his mothers side has bronchial asthma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Strophulus
b. Urticaria
*c. Atopic dermatitis
d. Contact dermatitis
e. Seborrheal eczema

1129. A 45-year-old man has been exhibiting high activity for the last 2 weeks, he became talkative, euphoric, had little sleep, claimed being able "to save the humanity" and solve the problem of cancer and AIDS, gave money the starangers. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Maniacal onset
b. Panic disorder
c. Agitated depression
d. Catatonic excitation
e. Schizo-affective disorder

1130. A young patient who came to a policlinic was diagnosed with the 1 stage of hypertension. How often should he undergo the medical check-up?
a. 4 times a year
b. 3 times a year
c. Once a year
*d. Twice a year
e. 5 times a year

1131. A puerpera is 25 years old, it is her second day of postpartum period. It was her first labour, it took place at full term. The lochia should be:
a. Serous
b. Mucous
*c. Bloody
d. Sanguino-serous
e. Purulent

1132. A 27-year old patient with malaria caused by P. falciparum was treated with Chloroquine (600 mg base followed by 300 mg base in 6 hours, then 300 mg base a day for 2 days) without clinical and parasitologic responses to the treatment. What is the most likely reason for the failure to respond to the therapy?
*a. Chloroquine resistant strain of P. falciparum
b. Hypersensitivity of the patient to Chloroquine
c. Late recognition of infection due to P. falciparum
d. Inappropriate route of administration
e. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in patient

1133. A 44-year-old patient complains about difficult urination, sensation of incomplete urinary bladder emptying. Sonographic examination of the urinary bladder near the urethra entrance revealed an oval well-defined hyperechogenic formation 2x3 cm large that was changing its position during the examination. What conclusion can be made?
a. Primary ureter tumour
b. Urinary bladder polyp
c. Malignant tumour of the urinary bladder
d. Prostate adenoma
*e. Concrement

1134. A 52-year-old male patient complains about attacks of asphyxia, pain in his right side during respiration. These manifestations turned up all of a sudden. It is known from his anamnesis that he had been treated for thrombophlebitis of the right leg for the last month. In the admission ward the patient suddenly lost consciousness, there was a sudden attack of asphyxia and pain in his side. Objectively: heart rate - 102/min, respiratory rate - 28/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery, gallop rhythm, small bubbling rales above the lungs under the scapula on the right, pleural friction ru B. What examination method will be
a. Echocardioscopy
b. Study of external respiration function
c. Coagulogram
d. ECG
*e. Angiography of pulmonary vessels

1135. A 58-year-old female patient complains about periodical headache, dizziness and ear noise. She has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. Objectively: heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 76/min, there is diastolic shock above aorta, AP is 180/110 mm Hg. In urine: OD- 1,014. Daily loss of protein with urine is 1,5 g. What drug should be chosen for treatment of arterial hypertension?
a. Calcium channel antagonist
b. β-blocker
c. Thiazide diuretic
d. α-blocker
*e. Ihibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme

1136. Which of the following symptoms is the most typical for the adenoid hypertrophy?
a. Giddiness
b. Olfaction disturbance
c. Headache
d. Deglutition disturbance
*e. Nasal obstruction

1137. A 5-year-old boy was progressively getting worse compared to the previous 2 months. A chest x-ray has shown right middle lobe collapse. A tuberculin skin test was strongly positive. What is the most characteristic finding in primary tuberculosis?
a. Atelectasis with obstructive pneumonia
*b. Hilar or paratracheal lymph node enlargement
c. Cavity formation
d. Hematogenous dissemination leading to extrapulmonary tuberculosis
e. Miliary tuberculosis

1138. A 38-year-old patient complains about inertness, subfebrile temperature, enlargement of lymph nodes, nasal haemorrhages, ostealgia. Objectively: the patients skin and mucous membranes are pale, palpation revealed enlarged painless lymph nodes; sternalgia; liver was enlarged by 2 cm, spleen - by 5 cm, painless. In blood: erythrocytes - 2,7×1012/l, Hb- 84 g/l, leukocytes – 58×1012/l, eosinophils - 1%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 12%, lymphocytes - 83%, lymphoblasts - 2%, smudge cells; ESR- 57 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphatic leukemia
*b. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
c. Acute myeloleukemia
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Chronic myeloleukemia

1139. A 43-year-old man who often contacts with ethyl gasoline was admitted to a hospital with complaints of general weakness, dizziness, memory impairment, sleepiness at daytime and insomnia at night, sense of hair in the mouth, colicky pains in the right subcostal region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic lead intoxication
b. Alcoholic delirium
*c. Chronic tetraethyl lead intoxication
d. Chronic manganese intoxication
e. Chronic mercury intoxication

1140. A 68-year-old patient consulted a doctor about a tumour in her left breast. Objectively: in the upper internal quadrant of the left breast there is a neoplasm up to2,5 cm in diameter, dense, uneven, painless on palpation. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cancer
b. Mastopathy
c. Lipoma
d. Fibroadenoma
e. Cyst

1141. A 30-year-old gravida consulted a gynecologist about bright red bloody discharges from the vagina in the 32 week of gestation. She was hospitalized with suspicion of placental presentation. Under what conditions is it rational to conduct the internal examination for the diagnosis specification?
a. In the admission ward of maternity hospital
b. In the examination room of antenatal clinic
c. In the delivery room keeping to all the aseptics regulations
*d. In the operating room prepared for the operation
e. The examination is not to be conducted because of risk of profuse haemorrhage

1142. Which of the following best summarizes indications for operation on an abdominal aortic aneurysm?
a. Only ruptured aneurysm
b. Only symptomatic aneurysm greater than 5 cm in diameter
c. Any abdominal aortic aneurysm
d. Only symptomatic aneurysm
*e. Any aneurysm greater than 5 cm in diameter

1143. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl didnt undergo any treatment. The girls irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl got puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin got a waxen hue. What disease may be assumed?
a. Subacute thyroiditis
*b. Autoimmune thyroiditis
c. Juvenile basophilism
d. Thyroid carcinoma
e. Diffuse toxic goiter

1144. A 6-year-old boy was brought to the emergency room with a 3-hour history of fever up to 39,5°C and sore throat. The child looks alert, anxious and has a mild inspiratory stridor. You should immediately:
a. Examine the throat and obtain a culture
*b. Prepare to establish an airway
c. Order a chest x-ray and lateral view of the neck
d. Obtain an arterial blood gas and start an IV line
e. Admit the child and place him in a mist tent

1145. A 67-year-old female patient complains about edemata of face and legs, pain in the lumbar area that is getting worse at moving; great weakness, sometimes nasal haemorrhages, rise of body temperature up to 38,4°C. Objectively: painfulness of vertebral column and ribs on palpation. Laboratorial study revealed daily proteinuria of 4,2 g, ESR- 52 mm/h. What changes of laboratory indices are to be expected?
a. Albumins - 65%
b. -globulins - 14%
c. Haemoglobin - 165 g/l
*d. Whole protein of blood serum - 101 g/l
e. Leukocytes - 15,3 g/l

1146. A patient is being prepared for the operation on account of varix dilatation of lower extremities veins. Examination of the patients soles revealed flour-like desquamation along the skin folds. All the toenails are greyish-yellow, thickened and partially decayed. What dermatosis should be suspected?
a. Candidosis
b. Microsporia
*c. Rubromycosis
d. Microbial eczema
e. Pityriasis versicolor

1147. A patient came to the traumatology centre and complained about a trauma of the lower third of the volar forearm surface caused by cut on a piece of glass. Objectively: flexion of the IV and V fingers is impaired, sensitivity of the interior dorsal and palmar surface of hand as well as of the IV finger is reduced. What nerve is damaged?
a. Musculoskeletal
*b. Ulnar
c. Radial
d. Median
e. Axillary

1148. In which of the following disorders does the pathophysiology of portal hypertension involve presinusoidal intrahepatic obstruction?
a. Cavernomatous transformation of the portal vein
b. Alcoholic cirrhosis
c. Budd-Chiari syndrome
*d. Congenital hepatic fibrosis
e. Hemochromatosis

1149. A 27-year-old military servant was delivered to the regimental aid post 1,5 hour after getting an abdominal injury with an aerial bomb splinter. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, pale, Ps- 132/min, AP- 80/60 mm Hg. Subcostal area has a bandage on from the first-aid pack, the bandage is soaked with blood. The abdomen is tense. Percussion revealed dullness in flat parts that changes its location with the change of body position. There are symptoms of peritoneal irritation. What department of the regimental aid post should provide medical care?
a. In the manner of self-help
b. Admission-and-sorting tent
c. Isolation ward
d. Evacuation
*e. Dressing ward

1150. Clinic of a research instutute for occupational diseases examined a worker who works at a concentration plant and diagnosed him with chronic dust bronchitis. The case is investigated by a commission including the representatives of: the plant, clinic, territorial SES, department of Social Insurance Fund, trade union. According to the "regulation on investigation of…", the commission should be headed by the representative of the following authority:
a. Plant
b. Clinic
*c. Territorial SES
d. Trade union
e. Social Insurance Fund

1151. A patient suffering from acute posttraumatic pain received an injection of morphine that brought him a significant relie Which of the following mechanisms of action provided antishock effect of morphine in this patient?
a. Intensification of GABA-ergic reactions
*b. Stimulation of opiate receptors
c. Block of central cholinergic receptors
d. Stimulation of benzodiazepine receptors
e. Inhibition of dopamine mediation

1152. On the next day after esophagoscopy and biopsy a 44-year-old female patient developed emphysema of both supraclavicular regions, deglutition pain and pain behind the breastbone, cyanosis. Body temperature - 39°C. In blood: WBCs – 16×1012/l, left shift in the neutrophils. X-ray picture shows a limited shadow of the posterior mediastinum at a level with trachea bifurcation. The patient was diagnosed with esophagus rupture. What treatment tactics would be the most rational?
a. Conservative antibacterial treatment
b. Radical surgical treatment with esophagus suturing
c. Surgical: gastric fistula establishment
d. Surveillance
*e. Surgical: mediastinum drainage, gastric fistula establishment

1153. A 25-year-old patient complains of burning and pain during urination, purulent discharges from the urethra that turned up 2 days ago. Objectively: the urethral labia are edematic, hyperemic, there are profuse purulent discharges from the urethra. Provisional diagnosis: recent acute gonorrheal urethritis. What supplemental data of clinical examinations will alow to specify the diagnosis?
a. Coccal cells detection during discharge microscopy
b. Serological blood analysis
*c. Microscopy of the urethral discharges
d. Common urine analysis
e. Yeast cells detection during discharge microscopy

1154. Basing upon the data of laboratory assessment of sanitary state of soil in a certain territory, the soil was found to be low-contaminated according to the sanitary indicative value; contaminated according to the coli titer; low-contaminated according to the anaerobe titer (Cl. Perfringens). This is indicative of:
*a. Fresh fecal contamination
b. Insufficient insolation and aeration of soil
c. Insufficient intensity of soil humification
d. Constant entry of organic protein contaminations
e. Old fecal contamination

1155. Patient, male, 16 years old was behind other children in development since early childhood and still has moderate mental retardation. He is short, has dismorphic body, his face is round, flattened, his eyes are narrow and slanted, and there are epicantial folds in the corners of his eyes. There is only one transversal flexor line on his palms. What is the probable etiology of this state?
a. Pathological delivery
b. Maternal alcohol abuse during pregnancy
*c. Chromosome abnormality
d. Infection in mother during pregnancy
e. Gene abnormality

1156. A primagravida in her 20th week of gestation complains about pain in her lower abdomen, blood smears from the genital tracts. The uterus has an increased tonus, the patient feels the fetus movements. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus size corresponded the term of gestation, the uterine cervix was contracted down to 0,5 cm, the external orifice was open by 2 cm. The discharges were bloody and smeary. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Incipient abortion
b. Abortion in progress
c. Incomplete abortion
d. Missed miscarriage
e. Risk of abortion

1157. For a patient with a stab injury to the femoral artery, the treatment of choice is:
a. Ligation of both transected ends
*b. End- to-end anastomosis
c. Interposition of Dacron graft
d. Interposition of homologous arterial graft
e. Interposition of autogenous vein graft

1158. A 26-year-old woman complains of having bloody discharges from the genitals for the last 14 days, abdominal pain, general fatiguability, weakness, weight loss, body temperature rise, chest pain, obstructed respiration. 5 weeks ago she underwent induced abortion in the 6-7 week of gestation. Objectively: the patient is pale and inert. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus was enlarges up to 8-9 weeks of gestation. In blood: Hb- 72 g/l. Urine test for chorionic gonadotropin gave the positive result. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Uterine fibromyoma
*b. Chorioepithelioma
c. Uterus perforation
d. Uterine carcinoma
e. Metroendometritis

1159. A 20-year-old man complains about pain arising in the lower third of femoral bone under stress and at rest. He denies having a trauma. Objectively: the skin is of normal colour, deep palpation reveals pastosity and pain, knee joint motions are limited. X-ray picture of the meta-epyphisis of distal femur shows a destruction zone and spicules. In blood: immature cell forms, no signs of inflammation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Osteogenic sarcoma
b. Marble-bone disease
c. Hyperparathyroid dystrophy
d. Myelomatosis
e. Chronic osteomyelitis

1160. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved application of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
a. 60 minutes
*b. 120 minutes
c. 15 minutes
d. 30 minutes
e. 180 minutes

1161. 25 unorganized children in the age 2-3 year will be observed on a pediatric district it in the current year. What scheduled number of initial visitations will make to this group of children?
a. 20
b. 40
c. 100
*d. 50
e. 200

1162. The total area of a ward at the therapeutical department is 28 m2. What is the maximum number of beds that can be exploited in this ward?
a. 5
b. 3
c. 1
*d. 4
e. 2

1163. A 47-year-old male patient got a flame burn of trunk and upper extremities and was delivered to the hospital. The patient is in grave condition, confused mental state, with fever. AP- 80/50 mm Hg, Ps- 118 bpm. It was locally stated that the patient got III B degree burns with total area of 20%. What medical actions should be taken?
a. Administration of detoxicating blood substitutes
*b. Injection of narcotic analgetics and powdered blood substitutes
c. Initial surgical d-bridement
d. Necrotomy of burn surface, haemotransfusion
e. Antibacterial and detoxicating therapy

1164. An 8-year-old boy fell ill acutely: he presents with fever, weakness, headache, abdominal pain, recurrent vomiting, then diarrhea and tenesmus. Stools occur 12 times daily, are scanty, contain a lot of mucus, pus, streaks of blood. His sigmoid gut is tender and hardened. What is your diagnosis?
a. Cholera
b. Staphylococcal gastroenteritis
*c. Dysentery
d. Escherichiosis
e. Salmonellosis

1165. A 42-year-old woman has had hyperpolymenorrhea and progressing algodismenorrhea for the last 10 years. Gynecological examination revealed no changes of uterine cervix; discharges are moderate, of chocolate colour, uterus is slightly enlarged and painful, appendages are not palpable, the fornices are deep and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adnexal endmetriosis
b. Endomyometritis
*c. Uterine endometriosis
d. Subserous uterine fibromyoma
e. Uterine carcinoma

1166. A 26-year-old male patient complains of piercing pain during breathing, cough, dyspnea. Objectively: t°37,3°C, respiration rate - 19/min, heart rate=Ps - 92/min; AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Vesicular respiration. In the inferolateral parts of chest auscultation in both inspiration and expiration phase revealed noise that was getting stronger at phonendoscope pressing and can be still heard after cough. ECG showed no pathological changes. What is the most likely giagnosis?
a. Intercostal neuralgia
b. Pericarditis sicca
c. Subcutaneous emphysema
d. Spontaneous pneumothorax
*e. Acute pleuritis

1167. A department chief of an in-patient hospital is going to inspect resident doctors as to observation of medical-technological standards of patient service. What documentation should be checked for this purpose?
a. Treatment sheets
b. Annual report of a patient care institution
c. Registry of operative interventions
*d. Health cards of in-patients
e. Statistic cards of discharged patients

1168. A 30-year-old patient presented with body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, pain in the small articulations of hands; face edemata and erythema. In blood: RBCs - 2,6*10^12/l; Hb- 98 г/л; WBCs – 2*10^12/l; ESR - 58 mm/h. In the urine: protein - 3,1 g/l; RBCs - 10-15 in the vision field. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Sepsis
b. Periarteritis nodosa
*c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Systemic scleroderma
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

1169. A newborns head is of dolichocephalic shape, that is front-to-back elongated. Examination of the occipital region of head revealed a labour tumour located in the middle between the prefontanel and posterior fontanel. The delivery tok place with the following type of fetus head presentation:
*a. Posterior vertex presentation
b. Anterior vertex presentation
c. Brow presentation
d. Face presentation
e. Presentation of the bregma

1170. A neonate is 5 days old. What vaccination dose of BCG vaccine (in мg) is necessary for vaccination of this child?
*a. 0,05 мg
b. 0,2 мg
c. 0,025 mg
d. 0,1 mg
e. 0,075 mg

1171. A full-term infant has respiratory rate of 26/min, heart rate of 90/min, blue skin, muscle hypotonia. During catheter suction of mucus and amniotic fluid from the nose and mouth the child reacted with a grimace. Low reflexes. Auscultation revealed weakened vesicular respiration above lungs. Heart sounds are loud. After 5 minutes the respiration became rhythmic, at the rate of 38/min, heart rate of 120/min. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
b. Birth trauma
c. Respiratory distress syndrome
d. Inborn pneumonia
*e. Asphyxia

1172. A 28-year-old patient has been admitted to the gynecological department three days after a casual coitus. She complains about pain in her lower abdomen and during urination, profuse purulent discharges from the vagina, body temperature rise up to 37,8°C. The patient was diagnosed with acute bilateral adnexitis. Supplemental examination revealed: the 4th degree of purity of the vaginal secretion, leukocytes within the whole visual field, diplococcal bacteria located both intra- and extracellularly. What is the etiology of acute adnexitis in this patient?
a. Colibacterial
*b. Gonorrheal
c. Staphylococcal
d. Chlamydial
e. Trichomonadal

1173. A 10-year-old girl was admitted to a hospital with carditis presentations. It is known from the anamnesis that two weeks ago she had exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. What is the most likely etiological factor in this case?
a. Pneumococcus
*b. Streptococcus
c. Proteus
d. Klebsiella
e. Staphylococcus

1174. A 45-year-old patient with urolithiasis had an attack of renal colic. What is the mechanism of the attack development?
a. Ureteric twists
*b. Disturbed urine outflow from the kidney
c. Renal artery spasm
d. Increase in relative density of urine
e. Destruction of glomerules

1175. As a result of load lifting a 68-year-old female felt acute pain in the lumbar region, in a buttock, posterolateral surface of her right thigh, external surface of the right shin and dorsal surface of foot. Objectively: weakness of the anterior tibial muscle, long extensor muscle of the right toes, short extensor muscle of the right toes. Low Achilles reflex on the right. Positive Lasegues sign. What examination method would be the most effective for specification of the diagnosis of discogenic compression of L5 root?
a. Spinal column X-ray
*b. Magnetic resonance scan
c. Angiography
d. Lumbar puncture
e. Electromyography

1176. An 11-yearold girl was taken by an acute disease: she got pain in the lumbar region, nausea, vomiting, frequent urination, body temperature 39°C. Objectively: the abdomen is soft, painful on palpation in the lumbar region. Common urine analysis revealed considerable leukocyturia, bacteriuria. The urine contained colibacilli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Acute vulvovaginitis

1177. A sergeant got injured with a shell splinter in the left subcostal region. He was bandaged by his fellow soldiers with an individual field dressing. Afterwards he was delivered to the regimental medical station. The patient complains of dizziness, weakness, thirst, abdominal pain. His general condition is grave, he is pale, Ps- 120 bpm. The abdomen is painful, soft on palpation. The dressing is well-fixed but slightly soaked with blood. The victim should be evacuated to the collecting battalion with the following type of transport and in the following turn:
a. With a passing vehicle in the 2nd turn
b. With a passing vehicle in the 3rd turn
c. With a passing vehicle in the 1st turnd
d. With ambulance vehicle in the 2nd turn
*e. With ambulance vehicle in the 1st turne

1178. A 72-year-old male patient complains about itch in his left shin, especially around a trophic ulcer. Skin is reddened and edematic, there are some oozing lesions, single yellowish crusts. The focus of affection is well-defined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
b. Allergic dermatitis
c. Seborrheic eczema
d. Cutaneous tuberculosis
*e. Microbial eczema

1179. A 68-year-old female patient complains about temperature rise up to 38,3°C, haematuria. ESR- 55 mm/h. Antibacterial therapy turned out to be ineffective. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Chronic glomerulonephritis
b. Renal amyloidosis
c. Polycystic renal disease
*d. Renal cancer
e. Urolithiasis

1180. A 43-year-old female patient was delivered to the hospital in grave condition. She suffers from Addisons disease. The patient had been regularly taking prednisolone but a week before she stopped taking this drug. Objectively: sopor, skin and visible mucous membranes are pigmented, skin and muscle turgor is decreased. Heart sounds are muffled, rapid. AP- 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 96/min. In blood: Na - 120 millimole/l, K - 5,8 millimole/l. Development of this complication is primarily caused by the deficit of the following hormone:
*a. Cortisol
b. Noradrenaline
c. Adrostendion
d. Corticotropin (ACTH)
e. Adrenaline

1181. On the 21 day after appearance of vesiculous chickenpox rash a 7-year-old child developed ataxia, nystagmus, intention tremor, muscle hypotonia. Liquor analysis shows insignificant lymphocytic pleocytosis, slightly increased protein rate. What complication is it?
a. Acute nephritis
b. Purulent meningitis
c. Postherpetic neuralgia
*d. Encephalitis
e. Pneumonitis

1182. The diagnostics of the AIDS epidemic initially was made in the USA by means of:
a. The virological method
b. The viroscopic method
c. The bacteriological method
d. The serological method
*e. The epidemiological method

1183. A surgeon examined a 42-year-old patient and diagnosed him with right forearm furuncle, purulo-necrotic stage. The furuncle was lanced. At the hydration stage the wound dressing should enclose the following medication:
a. Chloramine
b. Vishnevsky ointment
c. Dimexide
*d. Hypertonic solution
e. Ichthyol ointment

1184. A 50-year-old man comes to the emergency room with a history of vomiting of 3 days duration. His past history examination reveals that for about 20 years he has been suffering from epigasric pain lasting for 2 to 3 weeks, during early spring and autumn. He remembers getting relief from pain by taking milk and antacids. Physical examination showed a fullness in the epigastric area with visible peristalsis, absence of tenderness, and normal active bowel sounds. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Volvulus of the colon
*b. Gastric outlet obstruction
c. Small bowel obstruction
d. Cholecystitis
e. Incarcerated umbilical hernia

1185. A 28-year-old patient was hospitalized with preliminary diagnosis influenza. Roseolous-petechial rash appeared on the 5th day of disease on the trunk. The temperature is 41 degree C. Hyperemia of face, reddening of scleras, tremor of tongue, tachycardia, splenomegaly are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leptospirosis
b. Measles
c. Typhoid fever
d. Alcohol delirium
*e. Epidemic typhus

1186. An infant was born with body mass 3 kg and body length 50 cm. Now he is 3 years old. His brother is 7 years old, suffers from rheumatic fever. Mother asked the doctor for a cardiac check up of the 3-year-old son. Where is the left relative heart border located?
*a. 1 cm left from the left medioclavicular line
b. 1 cm right from the left medioclavicular line
c. 1 cm left from he left parasternal line
d. Along the left medioclavicular line
e. 1 cm right from the left parasternal line

1187. During examination at a military commissariat a 15-year-old teenager was found to have interval sysolic murmur on the cardiac apex, diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery, tachycardia. Which of the suuplemental examination methods will be the most informative for the diagnosis specification?
a. Phonocardiography
b. Rheography
*c. Echocardiography
d. Roengenography
e. Electrocardigraphy

1188. Three days ago a boy underwent removal of a foreign body from under a nail plate. 2 days later he felt acute pulsating pain at the end of the nail bone which was getting worse at pressing. Nail fold became hyperemic, body temperature rose up to 37,5°C, there was a change in nail plate colour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Abscess
*c. Subungual panaritium
d. Erysipeloid
e. Paronychia

1189. Apgar test done on a newborn girl at 1st and 5th minute after birth gave the result of 7-8 scores. During the delivery there was a short-term difficulty with extraction of shoulder girdle. After birth the child had the proximal extremity dysfunction and the arm couldnt be raised from the side. The shoulder was turned inwards, the elbow was flexed, there was also forearm pronation, obstetric palsy of brachial plexus. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Trauma of thoracic spine
b. Trauma of right hand soft tissues
c. Right hand osteomyelitis
*d. Duchenne-Erb palsy
e. Intracranial haemorrhage

1190. A 49-year-old woman complains about headache, head and neck going hot, increased perspiration, palpitation, arterial pressure rise up to 170/100 mm Hg, irritability, insomnia, tearfulness, memory impairment, rare and scarce menses, body weight increase by 5 kg over the last half a year. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vegetative-vascular dystonia
*b. Climacteric syndrome
c. Postcastration syndrome
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Premenstrual syndrome

1191. A 40-year-old female patient has been observing profuse menses accompanied by spasmodic pain in the lower abdomen for a year. Bimanual examination performed during menstruation revealed a dense formation up to 5 cm in diameter in the cervical canal. Uterus is enlarged up to 5-6 weeks of pregnancy, movable, painful, of normal consistency. Appendages are not palpable. Bloody discharges are profuse. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Algodismenorrhea
*b. Nascent submucous fibromatous node
c. Cervical carcinoma
d. Abortion in progress
e. Cervical myoma

1192. A patient who works as a nightman was diagnosed with of chronic arsenious intoxication. What form of anemia is characteristic for this disease?
*a. Haemolytic anemia
b. Hyper sideric anemia
c. Iron deficiency anemia
d. Normochromic anemia
e. Aplastic anemia

1193. A 10-year-old girl consulted a doctor about thirst, frequent urination, weight loss. She has been observing these symptoms for about a month. Objectively: no pathology of internal organs was revealed. What laboratory analysis should be carried out in the first place?
a. Glucosuric profile
*b. Blood glucose analysis on an empty stomach
c. Acetone in urine test
d. Glucose tolerance test
e. Glucose in urine test on the base of daily diuresis

1194. A 56-year-old patient with diffuse toxic goiter has ciliary arrhythmia with pulse rate 110 bpm, arterial hypertension, AP- 165/90 mm Hg. What preparation should be administered along with mercazolil?
a. Radioactive iodine
b. Procaine hydrochloride
c. Corinfar
*d. Propranolol
e. Verapamil

1195. A 30-year-old patient presents with sudden loss of consciousness, tonoclonic spasms, AP- 150/100 mm Hg, heart rate - 100/min. Before the attack he felt dizziness, sense of irreality, inexplicable fear. After the attack the patient failed to remember it. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Transitory ischemic attack
b. Vestibular syncope
*c. Epilepsy
d. Hyperventilation ischemic attack
e. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome

1196. A newborn infant has mild cyanosis, diaphoresis, poor peripheral pule, hepatomegaly and cardiomegaly. Respiratory rate is 60 breaths per minute, and heart rate is 230 beats per minute. The child most likely has congestive heart failure caused by:
*a. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
b. A large atrial septal defect and valvular pulmonary stenosis
c. A ventricular septal defect and transposition of the great vessels
d. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
e. Atrial flutter and partial atrioventricular block

1197. A 42-year-old woman complains about bruises on her both legs and prolonged menstruation; general weakness, tinnitus cerebri. Objectively: multiple macular haemorrhages on the legs and body. The patient presents with tachypnoe, tachycardia, systolic murmur in all auscultatory points. AP- 75/50 mm Hg. Blood count: RBC - 1,9*10*12/l, Нb- 60 g/l, colour index - 0,9, WBC - 6,5*10*12/l, thrombocytes – 20*10*12/l, ESR- 12 mm/h. Duke bleeding time - 12 minutes. Bone marrow analysis revealed plenty of juvenile immature forms of megacaryocytes without signs of thrombocyte pinch-of. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute megacaryoblastic leukemia
b. Willebrands disease
c. Type A haemophilia
d. Type B haemophilia
*e. True thrombocytopenic purpura

1198. On the tenth day after discharge from the maternity house a 2-year-old patient consulted a doctor about body temperature rise up to 39°C, pain in the right breast. Objectively: the mammary gland is enlarged, there is a hyperemized area in the upper external quadrant, in the same place there is an ill-defined induration, lactostasis, fluctuation is absent. Lymph nodes of the right axillary region are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess
b. Erysipelas
c. Tumour
d. Dermatitis
*e. Lactational mastitis

1199. A childrens health camp received a party of tinned food (canned food). External examination of the tins revealed that they had deep dents, could be easily concaved when pressed and wouldnt immediately return to the initial state; rust was absent; the tins were greased with inedible fat. Specify the bloat type:
a. Combined
b. Physicochemical
*c. Physical
d. Biological
e. Chemical

1200. During a surgery on a 30-year-old patient a dark ileo-ileal conglomerate was discovered, the intussusceptum intestine was considered to be unviable. The intussuscipiens intestine was dilated to 7-8 cm, swollen, full of intestinal contents and gases. What pathology led to the surgery?
a. Paralytic obstruction
b. Obturation obstruction
c. Strangulation obstruction
d. Spastic obstruction
*e. Invagination (combined) obstruction

1201. A primigravida is 22 years ol d. She has Rh(-), her husband has Rh(+). Antibodies to Rh werent found at 32 weeks of pregnancy. Redetermination of antibodies to Rh didnt reveal them at 35 weeks of pregnancy as well. How often should the antibodies be determined hereafter?
*a. Once a week
b. Montly
c. Once in two weeks
d. Once in three weeks
e. There is no need in further checks

1202. A 7-year-old boy has been managed for a month. Immediately after hospitalization there were apparent edemata, proteinuria - 7,1 g/l, daily urine protein - 4,2 g. Biochemical blood test shows persistent hypoproteinemia (43,2 g/l), hypercholesterolemia (9,2 millimole/l). The patient is most likely have the following type of glomerulonephritis:
a. Hematuric
*b. Nephrotic
c. Isolated urinary
d. Combined
e. Nephritic

1203. On the 2nd day after a surgery for toxic mixed goiter IV a 35-year-old patient complains of heart pain. ECG shows prolonged QT intervals. Chvosteks and Trousseau symptoms cannot be clearly defined. The patient is provisionally diagnosed with latent tetany. What study will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Determination of sodium
b. Determination of potassim
*c. Determination of blood calcium and phosphor
d. Determination of thyroid hormones
e. Determination of thyrotropic hormone

1204. In autumn a 25-year-old patient developed stomach ache arising 1,5-2 hours after having meals and at night. He complains of pyrosis and constipation. The pain is getting worse after consuming spicy, salty and sour food, it can be relieved by means of soda and hot-water bag. The patient has been suffering from this disease for a year. Objectively: furred moist tongue. Abdomen palpation reveals epigastrial pain on the right, resistance of abdominal muscles in the same region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic pancreatitis
*b. Duodenal ulcer
c. Stomach ulcer
d. Diaphragmatic hernia
e. Chronic cholecystitis

1205. A 42-year-old female patient suffers from micronodular cryptogenic cirrhosis. Over the last week her condition has deteriorated: there appeared convulsions, mental confusion, increased jaundice. What study may explain such aggravation?
*a. Determination of serum ammonia
b. Determination of ALAT and ASAT
c. Determination of alpha-phetoprotein rate
d. Determination of cholesterol ethers
e. Determination of alkaline phosphatase rate

1206. A parturient woman is 23 years old. Vaginal obstetric examination reveals full cervical dilatation. There is no fetal bladder. Fetal head is in the plane of pelvic outlet. Sagittal suture is in mesatipellic pelvis, anterior fontanel is closer to pubes. The fetal head diameter in such presentation will be:
a. Biparietal
b. Suboccipitio-frontalis
*c. Suboccipito-bregmaticus
d. Fronto-occipitalis recta
e. Mento-occipitalis

1207. A 49-year-old patient complains of dyspnea, cough. There are no sputum discharges. He has repeatedly used salbutamol and intal but with no effect. Objectively: he is only able to sit while leaning on the table. Cyanosis of face, acrocyanosis are present. Breathing is shallow, laboured, in some parts it cannot be auscultated; there are diffuse rales, expiration is significantly prolonged. Heart sounds are muffled, tachycardia is present. Ps - 112/min., AP - 110/70 mm Hg. Liver is located near the costal arch. There are no peripheral edemat a. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Bronchiale asthma, moderate gravity
b. Foreign object aspiration
c. Cardiac asthma
d. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
*e. Status asthmaticus

1208. A patient who had eaten mushrooms in the morning was delivered to the infectious diseases hospital at night. The disease development was rapi d. The patient presented with stomach pain, frequent diarrhea, intractable vomiting, burning thirst, headache and dizziness. He died on the third day. What mushrooms are most likely to have caused mycetismus?
a. Fly agarics
b. Sulfur-tufts
c. Morels
*d. Deadly amanita
e. Russules

1209. The institutions which take part in carrying out medical examinations can be prevention and treatment facilities, medical board of Ministry of Defense, medical board of Ministry of Home Affairs, medico-social expert commissions, forensic medical boards etc. What institutions are responsible for temporary disability examination?
a. Medico-social expert commissions
b. Sanitary-and-prophylactic institutions
*c. Prevention and treatment facilities
d. Medical boards of Ministry of Home Affairs
e. Medical boards of Ministry of Defense

1210. A 26-year-old patient with left lower lobe pneumonia experiences an acute chest pain on the left during coughing. Objectively: diffuse cyanosis, widening of the left half of chest. Percussion reveals high tympanitis. Auscultation reveals no respiratory murmurs above the left half of chest. There is a deviation of the right cardiac border towards the midclavicular lin e. What examination will be the most informative?
a. Pneumotachometry
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Spirography
d. Bronchography
*e. X-Ray

1211. A 54-year-old female patient consulted a gynaecologist about bloody discharges from the vagina for 1 month. Last menstruation was 5 years ago. Gynaecological examination revealed no pathological changes. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Colposcopy
*b. Diagnostic fractional curettage of uterine cavity
c. USI
d. Cytosmear
e. Symptomatic therapy

1212. A child was born at a gestational age of 34 weeks in grave condition. The leading symptoms were respiratory distress symptoms, namely sonorous and prolonged expiration, involving additional muscles into respiratory process. The Silverman score at birth was 0 points, in 3 hours it was 3 points with clinical findings. Which diagnostic study will allow to diagnose the form of pneumopathy?
a. Proteinogram
b. Determination of blood gas composition
c. Clinical blood test
d. Immunoassay
*e. X-ray of chest

1213. It is required to analyze the level of daylight illumination in a ward of therapeutics unit. What device should be applied to estimate the level of daylight illumination?
a. Psychrometer
b. Katathermometer
*c. Illuminometer
d. Actinometer
e. Anemometer

1214. A 38-year-old male patient has been taking alcohol for 3 years. 3 days after a regular drinking period he felt anxiety and fear. It appeared to him that he was surrounded by spiders and worms, pursued by some "condemnatory voices". His behaviour became aggressiv e. The patient demonstrated correct self-awareness but impairment of temporal and spatial orientation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Alcoholic paranoia
*b. Delirium alcoholicum
c. Alcoholic encephalopathy
d. Pathologic intoxication
e. Alcoholic hallucinosis

1215. A pregnant woman was delivered to the gynecological unit with complaints of pain in the lower abdomen and insignificant bloody discharges from the genital tracts for 3 hours. Last menstruation was 3 months ago. Vaginal examination showed that body of womb was in the 10th week of gestation, a fingertip could be inserted into the external orifice of uterus, bloody discharges were insignificant. USI showed small vesicles in the uterine cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Threat of spontaneous abortion
b. Abortion in progress
c. Incomplete abortion
d. Incipient abortion
*e. Grape mole

1216. A 58-year-old patient complains about sensation of numbness, sudden paleness of II-IV fingers, muscle rigidness, intermittent pulse. The patient presents also with polyarthralgia, dysphagia, constipations. The patients face is masklike, solid edema of hands is present. The heart is enlarged; auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. In blood: ESR - 20 mm/h, crude protein - 85/l, ?-globulines - 25%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Systemic scleroderma
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Dermatomyositis
d. Raynauds disease
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

1217. A 40-year-old patient, the forester, complains of severe headache, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C, trembling limbs. From the patients history we know that he had seriously cut his hand during the dissection of a killed fox. Objectively: depressed mood. The patient asks not to turn on the light or open the door. Any noise causes apparent motor excitation. When he saw a carafe of water, he developed convulsive throat spasms. What tactics should an emergency doctor choose?
a. Deliver the patient to the psychiatric hospital
b. Deliver the patient to the resuscitation department
c. Deliver the patient to the neurological department
d. Let him stay at home and consult a psychiatrist
*e. Deliver the patient to the infectious disease hospital

1218. While asessing the health status of graduates of a secondary school, the doctor found one of them to have grade 3 tonsillar hypertrophy, chronic rhinitis and vegetative-vascular dystonia. The organism functionality is reduced. This student belongs to the following health group:
*a. III
b. II
c. I
d. V
e. IV

1219. A 32-year-old patient consulted a doctor about being inable to get pregnant for 5-6 years. 5 ago the primipregnancy ended in artificial abortion. After the vaginal examination and USI the patient was diagnosed with endometrioid cyst of the right ovary. What is the optimal treatment method?
a. Hormonal therapy with androgenic hormones
b. Conservative therapy with estrogen-gestagenic drugs
*c. Surgical laparoscopy
d. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
e. Anti-inflammatory therapy

1220. A patient is being prepared for the operation on account of varix dilatation of lower extremities veins. Examination of the patients soles revealed flour-like desquamation along the skin folds. All the toenails are greyish-yellow, thickened and partially decayed. What dermatosis should be suspected?
*a. Rubromycosis
b. Microsporia
c. Pityriasis versicolor
d. Candidosis
e. Microbial eczema

1221. A 3-year-old child has been taken to a pediatrician. He has no recent history of any diseases. Objective examination revealed no pathology of the internal organs. The child needs the routine immunization against the following disease:
a. Type B hepatitis
b. Diphtheria and tetanus
c. Pertussis
*d. Poliomyelitis
e. Measles, rubella, parotitis

1222. While staying in a stuffy room a 19-year-old emotionally labile girl developed severe weakness, dizziness, blackout, nausea and loss of consciousness without convulsions. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, the skin is pale, extremities are col d. AP - 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 96/min, deficient, breathing is shallow. Pupillary and tendon reflexes are present. There are no pathological signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hysterical neurosis
b. Vegetovascular paroxysm
c. Epileptic attack
d. Transient ischemic attack
*e. Syncope

1223. A factory worker has ARD complicated by acute bronchitis. He receives treatment in the outpatient setting. The attending doctor has issued him a medical certificate for 5 days and then extended its duration by 5 more days. Patient cant get down to work because of his health status. Who should extend the duration of medical certificate for this patient?
*a. A department chief
b. Deputy medical superintendent in charge of medical treatment
c. Medical advisory commission
d. Medical superintendent
e. Deputy medical superintendent in charge of temporary disability examination

1224. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in respect of its volume and composition. Muscle tonus is within norm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Craniostenosis
b. Microcephaly
*c. Pylorospasm
d. Pylorostenosis
e. Meningitis

1225. A 32-year-old male patient has been suffering from pain in the sacrum and coxofemoral joints, painfulness and stiffness in the lumbar spine for a year. ESR - 56 mm/h. Roentgenography revealed symptoms of bilateral sacroileitis. The patient is the carrier of HLA B27 antigen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Reiters disease
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
*c. Ankylosing spondylitis
d. Coxarthrosis
e. Spondylosis

1226. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl didnt undergo any treatment. The girls irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl got puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin became of a waxen hue. What disease may be suspected?
a. Juvenile basophilism
*b. Autoimmune thyroiditis
c. Subacute thyroiditis
d. Thyroid carcinoma
e. Diffuse toxic goiter

1227. A 38-year-old patient complains of inertness, subfebrile temperature, enlargement of lymph nodes, nasal haemorrhages, bone pain. Objectively: the patients skin and mucous membranes are pale, palpation revealed enlarged painless lymph nodes; sternalgia; liver was enlarged by 2 cm, spleen - by 5 cm, painless. In blood: erythrocytes - 2,7*10^12/l, Hb- 84 g/l, leukocytes – 58*10^9/l, eosinophils - 1%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 12%, lymphocytes - 83%, lymphoblasts - 2%, smudge cells; ESR- 57 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic myeloleukemia
b. Acute lymphatic leukemia
*c. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Acute myeloleukemia

1228. On the 5th day after a surgery for colon injury a patient complains of bursting pain in the postoperative wound, weakness, drowsiness, headache, fever up to 40°C. Objectively: the skin around the wound is swollen, there is gas crepitation. The wound discharges are scarce foul-smelling, of dark-gray color. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Anaerobic clostridial wound infection
b. Abscess
c. Postoperative wound infection
d. Erysipelas
e. Phlegmon

1229. A patient is 50 years old, works as a builder with 20 years of service recor d. He was admitted to the hospital for chest pain, dry cough, minor dyspnea. Objectively: sallow skin, acrocyanosis, asbestos warts on the hands. In lungs - rough respiration, diffuse dry rales. The x-ray picture shows intensification of pulmonary pattern, signs of pulmonary emphysema. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pneumonia
b. Lung cancer
c. Tuberculosis
d. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
*e. Asbestosis

1230. A 68-year-old patient consulted a doctor about a tumour in her left breast. Objectively: in the upper internal quadrant of the left breast there is a neoplasm up to 2,5 cm in diameter, dense, uneven, painless on palpation. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cancer
b. Cyst
c. Lipoma
d. Mastopathy
e. Fibroadenoma

1231. A 50-year-old male suburbanite underwent treatment in rural outpatient clinic for pneumonia. The treatment didnt have effect and the disease got complicated by exudative pleuritis. What prevention and treatment facility should the patient be referred to for further aid?
*a. Central district hospital
b. Tuberculosis dispensary
c. Phthisio-pulmonological dispensary
d. Municipal hospital
e. Regional hospital

1232. A woman consulted a doctor on the 14th day after labour about sudden pain, hyperemy and induration of the left mammary gland, body temperature rise up to 39°C, headache, indisposition. Objectively: fissure of nipple, enlargement of the left mammary gland, pain on palpation. What pathology would you think about in this case?
a. Lacteal cyst with suppuration
b. Breast cancer
c. Fibrous adenoma of the left mammary gland
d. Phlegmon of mammary gland
*e. Lactational mastitis

1233. A 45-year-old man has been exhibiting high activity for the last 2 weeks, he is talkative, euphoric, has little sleep, claims being able "to save the humanity and solve the problem of cancer and AIDS", gives money to starangers. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Agitated depression
b. Panic disorder
*c. Maniacal onset
d. Catatonic excitation
e. Schizo-affective disorder

1234. A 43-year-old female patient complains of unstable defecation with frequent constipations, abdominal swelling, headache, sleep disturbance. Body weight is unchanged. What disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
a. Chronic atrophic gastritis
*b. Irritable colon syndrome
c. Chronic enteritis
d. Chronic pancreatitis
e. Colorectal cancer

1235. An 8-year-old boy suffering from haemophilia was undergoing transfusion of packed red cells. Suddenly he felt pain behind the breastbone and in the lumbar area, dyspnea, cold sweat. Objectively: pale skin, heart rate - 100/min, AP - 60/40 mm Hg; oliguria, brown urine. For the treatment of this complication the following drug should be administered:
*a. Prednisolone
b. Analgine
c. Aminophylline
d. Lasix
e. Adrenaline

1236. A 45-year-old patient, a sailor, was hospitalized on the 2nd day of the disease. A week ago he returned from India. Complains of body temperature of 41°C, severe headache, dyspnea, cough with frothy rusty sputum. Objectively: the patient is pale, mucous membranes are cyanotic, breathing rate - 24/min, tachycardia is present. In lungs: diminished breath sounds, moist rales over both lungs, crepitation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Influenza
b. Sepsis
*c. Pneumonic plaque
d. Ornithosis
e. Miliary tuberculosis

1237. A 47-year-old patient complains of insomnia, heaviness over his entire body, constantly depressed mood. He considers himself good-for-nothing, inadequate. Believes that he is a burden to his family, wants to die. The patient is depressed, inactive, has a hypomimic face with sorrowful expression. He speaks quietly and monotonely,gives short answers. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atherosclerotic depression
b. Late-onset schizophrenia
c. Neurotic depression
d. Initial stage of Alzheimers disease
*e. Major depressive disorder

1238. A 30-year-old patient complains of paroxysmal abdominal pain, frequent liquid stools up to 10 times a day. Throughout the first 3 days he had a fever, since the 2nd day of disease there were scant liquid stools mixed with mucus. On palpation: tenderness of all colon segments. Sigmoid colon was found spastic. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
*b. Acute dysentery
c. Balantidiasis
d. Intestinal amebiasis
e. Cholera

1239. A 32-year-old gravida complains of episodes of unconsciousness, spontaneous syncopes that are quickly over after a change of body position. A syncope can be accompanied by quickly elapsing bradycardia. There are no other complications of gestation. What is the most likely reason for such condition?
a. Pressure fall in the veins of extremities
b. Vegetative-vascular dystonia (cardiac type)
c. Pressure rise in the veins of extremities
*d. Postcava compresseion by the gravid uterus
e. Psychosomatic disorders

1240. A 58-year-old female patient came to the antenatal clinic with complaints of bloody light-red discharges from the genital tracts. Menopause is 12 years. Gynaecological examination found externalia and vagina to have age involution; uterine cervix was unchanged, there were scant bloody discharges from uterine cervix, uterus was of normal size; uterine appendages were not palpable; parametria were free. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atrophic colpitis
b. Granulosa cell tumor of ovary
c. Abnormalities of menstrual cycle with climacteric character
d. Cervical carcinoma
*e. Uterine carcinoma

1241. A 43-year-old female patient was delivered to the hospital in grave condition. She has a history of Addisons disease. The patient had been regularly taking prednisolone but a week before she stopped taking this drug. Objectively: sopor, skin and visible mucous membranes are pigmented, skin and muscle turgor is decreased. Heart sounds are muffled, rapi d. AP- 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 96/min. In blood: Na - 120 millimole/l, K - 5,8 millimole/l. Development of this complication is primarily caused by the deficit of the following hormone:
a. Adrenaline
b. Corticotropin (ACTH)
c. Adrostendion
d. Noradrenaline
*e. Cortisol

1242. 3 hours ago a 65-year-old female patient felt sharp abdominal pain irradiating to the right scapula, there was a single vomiting. She has a history of rheumatoid arthritis. Objectively: pale skin, AP- 100/60 mm Hg, Ps- 60/min. Abdomen is significantly painful and tense in the epigastrium and right subcostal areat, there are positive symptoms of parietal peritoneum irritation over the right costal arch, that is tympanitis. What is the tactics of an emergency doctor?
a. To inject pain-killers and watch the dynamics
b. To inject spasmolytics
*c. To take the patient to the surgical hospital
d. To take the patient to the rheumatological department
e. To perform gastric lavage

1243. While lifting a heavy load a 39-year-old patient suddenly felt a severe headache, pain in the interscapular region,and started vomiting. Objectively: the pulse is rhythmic, 60/min., AP - 180/100 mm Hg. The patient is agitated. He presents with photophobia, hyperacusis. There are positive Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs on both sides. In blood: WBCs – 10×109/l. CSF is bloody, cytosis is 240/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sympathoadrenal crisis
b. Ischemic stroke
c. Meningococcal meningitis
d. Acute hypertonic encephalopathy
*e. Subarachnoid haemorrhage

1244. Examination of a 13-year-old boy reveals that his body length is 147 сm (+2), body weight - 38 kg (+1,5), circumference of chest - 72 cm (+0,2). Estimate the harmonicity of the childs physical development:
a. Supernormal
b. Above the average
*c. Disharmonious
d. Sharply disharmonious
e. Harmonious

1245. An ambulance delivered a 21-year-old woman to the gynaecological department with complaints of colicky abdominal pain and bloody discharges from the genital tracts. Bimanual examination revealed that uterus was soft, enlarged to the size of 6 weeks of gestation, a gestational sac was palpated in the cervical canal. Uterine appendages werent palpable. Fornices are free, deep and painless. Discharges from the genital tracts are bloody and profuse. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cervical pregnancy
b. Threat of abortion
*c. Abortion in progress
d. Incipient abortion
e. Interrupted fallopian pregnancy

1246. HIV displays the highest tropism towards the following blood cells:
*a. T-helpers
b. Thrombocytes
c. Erythrocytes
d. T-killers
e. T-suppressors

1247. A 20 year-old patient complains of nosebleeds, numbness of the lower extremities. Objectively: hyperaemia of face, on the upper extremities AP is160/90 mm Hg, and 80/50 mm Hg on the lower ones. Pulse on the popliteal and pedal arteries is of poor volume, there is systolic murmur over the carotid arteries. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atrial septal defect
*b. Aorta coarctation
c. Dissecting aortic aneurysm
d. Aortopulmonary window
e. Ventricular septal defect

1248. The Carpathian region is characterized by constant high humidity of atmospheric air (over 80%). Inhabitants of this region feel severe cold in corresponding season at a medium low temperatur e. Its caused by heat emission by:
a. Radiation
b. Conduction
c. -
*d. Convection
e. Vaporization

1249. A 53-year-old woman complained of cardiac pain and rhythm intermissions. She had experienced these presentations since childhood. The patients father had a history of cardiac arrhythmias. Objectively: the patient was in grave condition, Ps - 220 bpm, AP - 80/60 mm Hg. ECG: heart rate - 215/min, widening and deformation of QRS complex accompanied by atrioventricular dissociation; positive P wave. Some time later heart rate reduced down to 45/min, there was a complete dissociation of P wave and QRST complex. Which of the following will be the most effective treatment?
a. Calcium antagonists
b. ?-adrenoreceptor blocking agents
*c. Implantation of the artificial pacemaker
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Cholinolytics

1250. The correlation between the service record and eosinophil concentration in blood has been studied in female workers of dyeing shops of textile factories. What index will be the most informative for the analysis of this data?
*a. Correlation factor
b. Fitting criterion
c. Students criterion
d. Sign index
e. Standardized index

1251. The patient complains of a painful swelling in the chin region, malaise, headache. Examination reveals an acutely inflamed cone-shaped dense node. The skin over it is tense, red. In the center of the node there is an ulcer with overhanging edges and a necrotic core of a dirty-green colour. Submandibular lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Carbuncle
b. Parasitic sycosis
*c. Furuncle
d. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous form)
e. Tuberculosis

1252. A 58-year-old patient has a 3-year history diabetes mellitus type II. He has been keeping to a diet and regularly taking glyburide. He has been delivered to a hospital on an emergency basis for acute abdomen. Objectively: the patient is of supernutrition type. The skin is dry. In the lungs vesicular breathing can be auscultated. Heart sounds are regular, 90/min. AP- 130/70 mm Hg. The symptom of "wooden belly" is visible. Blood sugar - 9,8 millimole/l. The patients has indication for laparotomy. What is the most appropriate way of further treatment of diabetes?
a. To administer 1 tablet of Maninil three times a day
b. To administer Semilong to be taken in the morning and insulin - in the evening
c. To continue taking glyburide
d. To administer 1 tablet of Glurenorm three times a day
*e. To administer short insulin

1253. A 16-year-old patient who has a history of intense bleedings from minor cuts and sores needs to have the roots of teeth extracted. Examination reveals an increase in volume of the right knee joint, limitation of its mobility. There are no other changes. Blood analysis shows an inclination to anaemia (Hb- 120 g/l). Before the dental intervention it is required to prevent the bleeding by means of:
a. Dried blood plasma
b. Calcium chloride
c. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
*d. Cryoprecipitate
e. Fibrinogen

1254. A 30-year-old patient was hospitalized with a diagnosis: intestinal obstruction. During the surgery it was revealed that the obstruction of the small intestine had been caused by a mass of helminths. What helminths are these?
a. Guinea worms
b. Pinworms
c. Filarial worms
*d. Ascarids
e. Cysticerci

1255. A 23-year-old patient complains of a dull ache, sensation of heaviness and distention in the epigastrium immediately after meals, foul-smelling eructation; dry mouth, empty stomach nausea, diarrhea. Objectively: the skin is pale, the patient is of thin build. Abdomen is soft on palpation, there is epigastric pain. The liver does not extend beyond the costal arch. In blood: Hb - 110 g/l, RBCs - 3,4×1012/l, WBC count is normal. ESR - 16 mm/h. What is the most informative study that will allow make a diagnosis?
a. pH-metry
*b. Esophageal gastroduodenoscopy
c. X-ray of digestion organs
d. Study of gastric juice
e. Duodenal probing

1256. A 22-year-old vegetarian patient with signs of malnutrition consulted a doctor about smell and taste distortion, angular stomatitis. Objectively: marked blue sclerae. The patient was diagnosed with iron deficiency anemia. What is the dominating clinical syndrome?
*a. Sideropenic
b. Haemologic
c. Anaemic
d. Myelodysplastic
e. Haemolytic

1257. On the 5th day of a respiratory disease accompanied by fever a 24-year-old man developed progressing headaches, systemic dizziness, double vision, facial muscles paresis on the right, choking from swallowing. He was diagnosed with acute viral encephalitis. Identify the main tendency of the emergency treatment:
a. Glucocorticoids
b. Ceftriaxone
c. Haemodezum
*d. Zovirax
e. Lasix

1258. A 60-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital with complaints of dyspnea, tightness in the right subcostal area, abdomen enlargement. These presentations have been progressing for a year. Heart auscultation reveals presystolic gallop rhythm. Objectively: swelling of the neck veins, ascites, palpable liver and spleen. What disease requires differential diagnostics?
a. Lung cancer with invasion to the pleura
*b. Constrictive pericarditis
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Chronic pulmonary heart
e. Hepatocirrhosis

1259. A 43-year-old man who often contacts with ethyl gasoline was admitted to a hospital with complaints of general weakness, dizziness, memory impairment, sleepiness at daytime and insomnia at night, sensation of a hair in the mouth, colicky pains in the right subcostal region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic manganese intoxication
b. Alcoholic delirium
c. Chronic lead intoxication
d. Chronic mercury intoxication
*e. Chronic tetraethyl lead intoxication

1260. 2 weeks after recovering from angina a 29-year-old patient noticed face edemata, weakness, decreased work performance. There was gradual progress of dyspnea, edemata of the lower extremities, lumbar spine. Objectively: pale skin, weakening of the heart sounds, anasarca. AP- 160/100 mm Hg. In urine: the relative density - 1021, protein - 5 g/l, erythrocytes - 20-30 in the field of vision, hyaline cylinders - 4-6 in the field of vision. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Infectious allergic myocarditis
c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Myxedema
e. Essential hypertension

1261. A 22-year-old patient is a clerk. His working day runs in a conditioned room. In summer he was taken by an acute disease with the following symptoms: fever, dyspnea, dry cough, pleural pain, myalgia, arthralgia. Objectively: moist rales on the right, pleural friction rub. X-ray picture showed infiltration of the inferior lobe. In blood: WBC – 11×109/l, stab neutrophils - 6%, segmented neutrophils - 70%, lymphocytes - 8%, ESR - 42 mm/h. What is the ethiological factor of pneumonia?
a. Streptococcus
b. Pneumococcus
*c. Legionella
d. Mycoplasm
e. Staphylococcus

1262. 10 minutes after delivery a woman discharged placenta with a tissue defect 5х6 cm large. Discharges from the genital tracts were profuse and bloody. Uterus tonus was low, fundus of uterus was located below the navel. Examination of genital tracts revealed that the uterine cervix, vaginal walls, perineum were intact. There was uterine bleeding with following blood coagulation. Your actions to stop the bleeding:
a. To put an ice pack on the lower abdomen
b. To administer uterotonics
c. To introduce an ether-soaked tampon into the posterior fornix
d. To apply hemostatic forceps upon the uterine cervix
*e. To make manual examination of uterine cavity

1263. A 38-year-old woman experiences episodic increases in arterial pressure up to 240/120 mm Hg, which is accompanied by nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, increased sweating, hyperglycemia. The attack is usually followed by the excessive urination. Renal sonography reveals an additional formation adjacent to the upper pole of the right kidney and possibly belonging to the adrenal gland. What laboratory test will allow to clarify the diagnosis?
*a. Determination of urinary excretion of catecholamines and vanillylmandelic acid
b. Blood test for thyroxine and thyrotrophic hormone
c. Estimation of glomerular filtration rate by measuring endogenous creatinine clearance
d. Blood test for renin level
e. Blood test for insulin and C-peptide

1264. A 24-year-old patient complains about putting on weight, limosis. Objectively: the patients constitution is of hypersthenic type, body weight index is 33,2 kg/m2, waist circumference is 100 cm. Correlation of waist circumference to the thigh circumference is 0,95. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the III stage, gynoid type
b. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the II stage, gynoid type
c. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the II stage, abdominal type
*d. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the I stage, abdominal type
e. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the I stage, abdominal type

1265. A 65-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). The rate of prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
*a. Computer tomography of pelvis
b. Roentgenography of chest
c. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
d. Bone scintigraphy
e. Excretory urography

1266. A 49-year-old male patient complains of dyspnea of combined nature, cough, shin edemata, abdomen enlargement due to ascites. He has a 20-year history of chronic bronchitis. For the last 3 years he has been disabled (group II) because of cardiac changes. Objectively: mixed cyanosis, edemata. Ps - 92/min, rhythmic, AP - 120/70 mm Hg, respiration rate - 24/min. There is accentuation of the second sound above the pulmonary artery. Auscultation reveals the box resonance above the lungs. There are also dry rales over the entire surface of lungs. What is the mechanism of heart changes development in this patient?
a. Cardiovascular reflex
b. Kitaevs reflex
c. Respiratory reflex
d. Bainbridge reflex
*e. Euler-Liljestrand reflex

1267. A child is 7 months old. Birth weight was 3450, the child is breastfed. Supplemental feeding was introduced on time. Determine the daily protein requirements for the child:
a. 4,0 g/kg
b. 2,0 g/kg
c. 3,5 g/kg
d. 2,5 g/kg
*e. 3,0 g/kg

1268. On the 21 day after appearance of vesiculous chickenpox rash a 7-year-old child developed ataxia, nystagmus, intention tremor, muscle hypotonia. Liquor analysis shows a low-grade lymphocytic pleocytosis, slightly increased protein rate. What complication is it?
*a. Encephalitis
b. Postherpetic neuralgia
c. Purulent meningitis
d. Pneumonitis
e. Acute nephritis

1269. A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to a hospital for acute transmural infarction. An hour later the patients contition got worse. She developed progressing dyspnea, dry cough. Respiratory rate - 30/min, heart rate - 130/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds were muffled, there was also diastolic shock on the pulmonary artery. The patient presented with medium moist rales in the lower parts of lungs on the right and on the left. Body temperature - 36,4°C. What drug should be given in the first place?
a. Aminophylline
b. Dopamine
c. Digoxin
*d. Promedol
e. Heparin

1270. A 7-year-old child was brought to a doctor for a check. The child has a 4-year history of bronchial asthma, asthma attacks occur mainly in spring and summer. Allergy tests revealed hypersensitivity to poplar seed tufts, field herbs. What recommendation should be given?
a. Phytotherapy
b. Needle reflexotherapy
*c. Specific hyposensitization
d. Physiotherapy
e. Treatment at a health resort

1271. 4 hours after having meals a patient with signs of malnutrition and steatorrhea experiences stomach pain, especially above navel and to the left of it. Diarrheas take turns with constipation lasting up to 3-5 days. Palpation reveals moderate painfulness in the choledochopancreatic region. The amylase rate in blood is stable. X-ray reveals some calcifications located above navel. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic calculous cholecystitis
*b. Chronic pancreatitis
c. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
d. Chronic gastroduodenitis
e. Duodenal ulcer

1272. On the 3rd day of life a baby presented with haemorrhagic rash, bloody vomit, black stool. Examination revealed anaemia, extended coagulation time, hypoprothrombinemia, normal thrombocyte rate. What is the optimal therapeutic tactics?
a. Sodium ethamsylate
*b. Vitamin K
c. Fibrinogen
d. Calcium gluconate
e. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid

1273. A 58-year-old female patient complains about periodical headache, dizziness and ear noise. She has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. Objectively: heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 76/min, there is diastolic shock above aorta, AP is 180/110 mm Hg. In urine: OD- 1,014. Daily loss of protein with urine is 1,5 g. What drug should be chosen for treatment of arterial hypertension?
*a. Ihibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme
b. ?-blocker
c. Calcium channel antagonist
d. Thiazide diuretic
e. ?-blocker

1274. After a serious nervous stress a 35-year-old patient has developed on the dorsal surface of hands redness and swelling that were later replaced by small inflammatory nodules, vesicles and following erosion with a significant serous discharge. The process is accompanied by severe itching. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Microbal eczema
b. Allergic dermatitis
c. Toxicoderma
*d. True eczema
e. Simple contact dermatitis

1275. A 45-year-old patient complains of some painless nodular elements tending to peripheral growth and fusion. He has a 2-year history of this disease. Aggravation takes place mainly in spring. In anamnesis: the patients father had similar skin lesions. Objectively: pathological elements looke like guttate and nummular nodules, plaques covered with white scales. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Psoriasis
b. Neurodermitis
c. Pityriasis rosea
d. Seborrheic eczema
e. Lichen ruber planus

1276. A 30-year-old gravida consulted a gynecologist about bright red bloody discharges from the vagina in the 32 week of gestation. She was hospitalized with a suspicion of placental presentation. Under what conditions is it rational to conduct the internal examination in order to make a diagnosis?
*a. In the operating room prepared for the operation
b. In the admission ward of maternity hospital
c. In the delivery room keeping to all the aseptics regulations
d. In the examination room of antenatal clinic
e. The examination is not to be conducted because of risk of profuse haemorrhage

1277. A schizophrenic patient considers himself to be "an outstanding scientist, a brilliant composer and an unrivalled artist". He complains that "family and friends are always jealous of him and want to poison him". Determine the psychopathological syndrome:
a. Paratrophic
b. Paranoid
*c. Paranoiac
d. Manic
e. Hebephrenic

1278. A child is 9 months old. The patients body temperature is 36,7°C, the skin is pale, humid, there is pain in leg muscles. There is no extremities mobility, sensitivity is present. The child has been diagnosed with poliomyelitis. The causative agent of this disease relates to the following family:
a. Adenovirus
b. Rotavirus
c. Paramyxovirus
d. Tohovirus
*e. Picornavirus

1279. A student analyzes noise level of cold-pressing process. What device should be applied for this hygienic study?
a. Pyranometer
b. Noise analyzer
*c. Noise and vibration analyzer
d. Sound tester
e. Actinometer

1280. A 28-year-old patient complains of periodic compressing heart pain. His brother died at the age of 34 from a cardiac disease with similar symptoms. Objectively: the patients skin is pale. Heart borders display no significant deviations. Heart sounds are loud, there is a systolic murmur above all the points with a peak above the aorta. Echocardioscopy reveals thickening of the interventricular septum in the basal parts, reduction of left ventricular cavity. What drug should be administered in order to prevent the disease progression?
a. Captopril
b. Furosemide
*c. Metoprolol
d. Nitroglycerin
e. Digoxin

1281. A 24-years-old patient has chronic glomerulonephritis.Urine test reveals the following: the relative density is 1010, protein - 1,65 g/l, RBCs - 5-7 in the field of vision, WBCs - 2-3 in the field of vision. Blood creatinine - 0,350 millimole/l. Serum sodium - 148 millimole/l. What is the main reason for hyperazotemia in this patient?
a. Reduction of tubular reabsorption rate
b. Increased proteinuria
c. Reduction of renal blood flow
d. Sodium retention in the organism
*e. Reduction of glomerular filtration rate

1282. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
a. Pleural puncture
*b. Bronchography
c. Bronchoscopy
d. Survey radiograph of lungs
e. Bacteriological analysis of sputum

1283. A 9-year-old boy fell from a tree and hit the occipital region, there was a momentary loss of consciousness. Objectively: the childs condition is satisfactory, he complains of the headache and dizziness. The X-ray of skull reveals a comminuted depressed fracture of occipital bone in the region of inion. What treatment is indicated for the patient?
a. Hemostatic therapy
*b. Surgical intervention
c. Complex conservative treatment
d. Anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Therapeutic lumbar punctures

1284. A 60-year-old patient had eaten too much fatty food, which resulted in sudden pain in the right subcostal area, nausea, bilious vomiting, strong sensation of bitterness in the mouth. Two days later the patient presented with jaundice, dark urine. Objectively: sclera and skin are icteric, abdomen is swollen, liver is increased by 3 cm, soft, painful on palpation, Ortners, Kehrs, Murphys, Zakharyins, Mayo-Robsons symptoms are positive. Which method should be applied for diagnosis in the first place?
a. X-ray of abdominal organs
b. Radionuclide scanning of liver and gallbladder
c. Diagnostic laparotomy
*d. USI of gallbladder and biliary duct
e. Fibrogastroduodenoscopy

1285. The air of a foundry workers working zone contains condensation aerosol with dust particles sized 2 nm (90%), 2-5 nm (2%), over 5 nm(6%), below 2 nm (about 2%). Characterize the dust dispersivity:
*a. Fine-dispersed
b. Median-dispersed
c. Ultrafine-dispersed
d. Coarsely dispersed
e. Mist

1286. A 17-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of the left knee joint. Soft tissues of thigh in the affected region are infiltrated, joint function is limited. X-ray picture of the distal metaepiphysis of the left femur shows a destruction focus with periosteum detachment and Codmans triangle found at the defect border in the bone cortex. X-ray of chest reveals multiple small focal metastases. What treatment is indicated?
a. Distance gamma-ray therapy
b. Disarticulation of the lower extremity
c. Radioiodine therapy
*d. Palliative chemotherapy
e. Amputation of the lower extremity

1287. 3 days ago a 29-year-old patient presented with pulsating pain in the region of rectum, fever, general weakness. Objectively: local tenderness in the anal region in the 6 oclock position. Digital investigation of rectum revealed a painful infiltration reaching the pectinate line. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rectum tumour
b. Acute haemorrhoids
*c. Acute periproctitis
d. Acute anal fissure
e. Acute prostatitis

1288. A 30-year-old female patient has been delivered to the gynaecological department with complaints of acute pain in the lower abdomen and body temperature 38,8°C. In history: sexual life out of wedlock and two artificial abortions. Gynaecological examination reveals no changes of uterine. The appendages are enlarged and painful on both sides. Vaginal discharges are purulent and profuse. What study is required to confirm a diagnosis?
*a. Bacteriological and bacterioscopic analysis
b. Curettage of uterine cavity
c. Colposcopy
d. Laparoscopy
e. Hysteroscopy

1289. 350 workers of a metalurgical plant had to undergo a yearly preventive examination. A territorial polyclinic carried out preventive examination of 325 workers. As a result of it, 1 worker was recognized as temporarily disabled, 15 workers underwent further rehabilitation at an after-work sanatorium, 10 workers were provided with diet meal. What index characterizing the preventive work of the polyclinic should be applied in this case?
a. Percentage of temporarily disabled people
*b. Coverage of preventive medical examinations
c. Percentage of people who underwent rehabilitation at an after-work sanatorium
d. Percentage of people who were provided with diet meal
e. Frequency of case detection during examinations

1290. A patient suddenly felt an acute chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Objectively: the patient is excited, with pale skin. Breathing rate - 38/min, AP - 180/110 mm Hg. Later the patient lost consciousness and fell down. Pulse on the great vessels was absent, the pupils were equally dilated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Disorder of the cerebral circulation
b. Heart attack
c. Coma
*d. Clinical death
e. Agonal state

1291. A hospital has admitted a 52-year-old patient with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis, complaints of acute pain in the right half of chest, that developed after going upstairs to the 3rd floor; cough, dyspnea at rest, marked cyanosis. What kind of complication should suspected first of all?
a. Cardiac failure
b. Pleuritis
c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Pulmonary failure
*e. Spontaneous pneumothorax

1292. Environmental pollution is prevented by mechanical separation of nontoxic solid domestic waste. Specify the method which can be used for mechanical utilization of these wastes:
a. Hydrolysis
b. Burial of wastes
c. Waste neutralization in biothermal boxes
d. Burning as power-plant fuel
*e. Compressing of wastes into building blocks

1293. On the fifth day after a casual sexual contact a 25-year-old female patient consulted a doctor about purulent discharges from the genital tracts and itch. Vaginal examination showed that vaginal part of uterine cervix was hyperemic and edematic. There was an erosive area around the external orifice of uterus. There were mucopurulent profuse discharges from the cervical canal, uterine body and appendages exhibited no changes. Bacterioscopic examination revealed bean-shaped diplococci that became red after Grams staining. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bacterial vaginism
*b. Acute gonorrheal endocervicitis
c. Clamydial endocervicitis
d. Candidal vulvovaginitis
e. Trichomonal colpitis

1294. A 62-year-old patient has been delivered to the surgical department with complaints of sudden pain in the umbilical region irradiating to the back and groin, which was accompanied by a syncope. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, umbilical region is tender on palpation, bowel sounds are diminished. AP drop is present. USI reveals: free fluid in the abdomen, thickening of the wall of the abdominal aorta. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Rupture of abdominal aortic aneurism
b. Peritonitis
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Stomach ulcer perforation

1295. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38°C, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Allergic reaction
b. Putrid phlegmon
c. Erysipelas
*d. Sepsis
e. Erysipeloid

1296. A farmer hurt his right foot during working in a field and came to the emergency station. He doesnt remember when he got last vaccination and he has never served in the army. Examination of his right foot revealed a contaminated wound up to 5-6 cm long with uneven edges. The further treatment tactics will be:
a. To make an injection of tetanus anatoxin
*b. To make an injection of tetanus anatoxin and antitetanus serum
c. Surgical d-bridement only
d. To make an injection of antitetanus serum
e. To administer an antibiotic

1297. Working conditions of a building company worker are characterized by cooling microclimate effect, silica-containing dust, caustic alkali (quicklime) and noise. What medical expert should be the chief of the commission that periodically examines the workers of the mentioned category?
a. Otolaryngologist
*b. Therapeutist
c. Neurologist
d. Dermatologist
e. Ophthalmologist

1298. A surgeon examined a 42-year-old patient and diagnosed him with right forearm furuncle at the purulo-necrotic stage. The furuncle was lanced. At the hydration stage the wound dressing should enclose the following medication:
a. Ichthyol ointment
b. Vishnevsky ointment
*c. Hypertonic solution
d. Dimexide
e. Chloramine

1299. After lifting a load a patient felt undurable pain in the loin. He was diagnosed with acute lumbosacral radiculitis. Which of the following is contraindicated for this patient?
a. Dehydrating drugs
b. Intravenous injection of aminophylline
c. Vitamins of B group
d. Analgetics
*e. Warming procedures

1300. A 49-year-old patient complains of deglutition problems, especially with solid food, hiccups, voice hoarseness, nausea, regurgitation, significant weight loss (15 kg within 2,5 months). Objectively: body weight is reduced. Skin is pale and dry. In lungs: vesicular breathing, heart sounds are loud enough, heart activity is rhythmic. The abdomen is soft, painless on palpation. Liver is not enlarged. What study is required to make a diagnosis?
a. X-ray in Trendelenburgs position
b. Study of gastric secretion
*c. Esophageal duodenoscopy along with biopsy
d. Clinical blood test
e. X-ray of digestive tract organs

1301. A 26-year-old woman complains of having bloody discharges from the genitals for the last 14 days, abdominal pain, general fatiguability, weakness, weight loss, fever, chest pain, obstructed respiration. 5 weeks ago she underwent an induced abortion in the 6-7 week of gestation. Objectively: the patient is pale and inert. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged up to 8-9 weeks of gestation. In blood: Hb - 72 g/l. Urine test for chorionic gonadotropin gave the apparently positive result. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Uterine carcinoma
b. Uterine fibromyoma
c. Uterus perforation
d. Metroendometritis
*e. Chorioepithelioma

1302. After a 10-year-old child had been bitten by a bee, he was delivered to a hospital. There were lip, face and neck edemata. The patient felt hot and short of breath. Objectively: breathing was laboured and noisy. There were foamy discharges from the mouth, cough. The skin was pale and cold. There was bradypnoea. Heart sounds were muffled and arrhythmic. Thready pulse was present. What diagnosis was made by the expert in resuscitation?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Cerebral coma
c. Acute cardiovascular collapse
d. Quinckes edema
e. Bronchial asthma

1303. After birth a child was pale and had arrhythmical breathing. Oxygen therapy didnt have any effect. Pulse was weak and rapid. It was difficult to measure arterial pressure accurately. There were no edemata. What is the most likely reason for these symptoms?
a. Congenital pneumonia
b. Intrauterine sepsis
c. Intracranial haematoma
*d. Asphyxia
e. Congestive heart failure

1304. A parturient woman is 25 years old, it is her second day of postpartum period. It was her first full-term uncomplicated labour. The lochia should be:
*a. Bloody
b. Mucous
c. Serous
d. Sanguino-serous
e. Purulent

1305. A full-term baby (the 1st uncomplicated pregnancy, difficult labour) had a cephalogematoma. On the 2nd day there was jaundice, on the third the following changes in neurological status appeared: nystagmus, Graefe syndrome. Urine was yellow, feces were of golden-yellow colour. Mothers blood group is A (II) Rh-, the babys one - A (II) Rh+. On the third day the childs Hb was 200g/l, RBCs - 6,1×1012/l, blood bilirubin - 58 micromole/l at the expense of unbound fraction. What caused the jaundice in the child?
*a. Craniocerebral birth trauma
b. Fetal hepatitis
c. Biliary atresia
d. Neonatal anaemia
e. Physiological jaundice

1306. A 25-year-old female patient complains about having amenorrhea for 3 years. She associates it with difficult labour complicated by massive hemorrhage. She also complains of loss of weight, hair fragility and loss, lack of appetite and depression. Objective examination reveals no pathological changes of uterus and its appendages. What is the desease pathogenesis?
*a. Hypoproduction of gonadotropin
b. Hyperproduction of estrogens
c. Hyperproduction of androgens
d. Hyperproduction of prolactin
e. Hypoproduction of progesterone

1307. On the 1st day of life a full-term girl (2nd labour) weighing 3500g, with Apgar score of 8 points, presented with jaundice. Indirect bilirubin of blood - was 80 micromole/l, 6 hours later - 160 micromole/l. What is the optimal method of treatment?
a. Phototherapy
b. Infusion therapy
*c. Exchange blood transfusion
d. Phenobarbital treatment
e. Enterosorbents

1308. A 14-year-old girl complains of pain in vaginal area and lower abdomen that last for 3-4 days and have been observed for 3 months about the same time. Each time pain is getting worse. Objectively: mammary glands are developed, hairiness corresponds to the age. The virginal membrane is intact, cyanotic and protruded. She has never had menstruation. She has been diagnosed with primary amenorrhea. What is the reason of amenorrhea?
a. Pregnancy
*b. Hymen atresia
c. Sexual development delay
d. Babinski-Frohlich syndrome
e. Turners syndrome

1309. A 42-year-old patient complains of back pain, darkened urine, general weakness, dizziness that occurred after treating a cold with aspirin and ampicillin. Objectively: the patient is pale, with subicteric sclerae. HR - 98 bpm. Liver - +2 cm, spleen - +3 cm. In blood: RBCs - 2,6×1012/l, Hb - 60 g/l, CI - 0,9, WBCs - 9,4×109/l, basophils - 0,5%, eosinophils - 3%, stab neutrophils - 6% segmented neutrophils - 58%, lymphocytes - 25%, monocytes - 7%, ESR - 38 mm/hour, reticulocytes - 24%. Total bilirubin - 38 millimole/l. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
b. Agranulocytosis
c. Cholelithiasis
*d. Acquired hemolytic anemia
e. Toxic hepatitis

1310. A child is 1 year old. Ater the recent introduction of complementary feeding the child has presented with loss of appetite, diarrhea with large amounts of feces and occasional vomiting, body temperature is normal. Objectively: body weight is 7 kg, the child is very pale, there are edemata of both legs, abdomen is significantly enlarged. Coprogram shows many fatty acids and soaps. The child has been diagnosed with celiac disease and administered the gluten-free diet. What is to be excluded from the ration?
*a. Cereals - wheat and oats
b. Animal protein
c. Milk and dairy products
d. Fruit
e. High digestible carbohydrates

1311. 15 minutes after the second vaccination with DTP vaccine a 4-month-old boy exhibited the symptoms of Quinckes edema. What medication should be given for emergency aid?
a. Furosemide
b. Adrenalin
c. Seduxen
d. Heparin
*e. Prednisolone

1312. A 10-year-old boy periodically has short states (up to 10-15 seconds) that can be characterized as a "sudden blackout" and are accompanied by gaze fixation in the upright position, absent-minded and vacant face expression, lack of movements and following amnesia. Specify this state:
*a. Absence
b. Fugue
c. Thought block
d. Trance
e. Obnubilation

1313. Examination of the corpse of a man who died from hanging reveals: death spots disappear when pressed upon and restore after 50 seconds, rigor mortis is moderately expressed only in the masticatory muscles as well as neck and finger muscles, body temperature is of 31°C. The time of death:
a. 16-24 hours ago
b. 10-18 hours ago
*c. 6-7 hours ago
d. 1-2 hours ago
e. 8-10 hours ago

1314. A 42-year-old woman has had hyperpolymenorrhea and progressing algodismenorrhea for the last 10 years. Gynaecological examination revealed no changes of uterine cervix; discharges are moderate, of chocolate colour, uterus is slightly enlarged and painful, appendages are not palpable, the fornices are deep and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Uterine endometriosis
b. Subserous uterine fibromyoma
c. Adnexal endmetriosis
d. Uterine carcinoma
e. Endomyometritis

1315. A municipal hospital reported on the number of operated patients including fatal outcomes following the operations. Which index of hospital work can be calculated on the ground of this data?
*a. Postoperative lethality
b. Index of late hospitalization since a disease incursion
c. Standardized lethality
d. Total lethality
e. -

1316. A therapeutist needs to analyze adult health in the area of service. Which groups of indicators will be included into this analysis?
a. Birth rates, sickness rates, disability
b. Sickness rates, death rates, physical development
c. Demographic, sickness rates, physical development
d. Sickness rates, disability, death rates
*e. Demographic, sickness rates, disability

1317. A 54-year-old male patient complains of aching pain in the lumbar region, that is getting worse after standing in an upright position, physical exercise, supercooling. The patient also reports of experiencing weakness in the afternoon. Pain in the lumbar region, said about 10 years old. Objectively: pale skin, t°37,2°C, AP- 180/100 mm Hg, minor costovertebral angle tenderness (Pasternatsky symptom). In blood: RBCs - 3,5×1012/l, WBCs - 6,5×109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h. In urine: the relative density - 1010, leukocytes - 12-15 in the field of vision, erythrocytes - 2-3 in the field of vision. Urine bacterial count - 100000 in 1 ml. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic glomerulonephritis
b. Amyloidosis
*c. Chronic pyelonephritis
d. Nephrolithiasis
e. Polycystic renal disease

1318. An 8-year-old girl has been admitted to the cardiology department. Objectively: there is a skin lesion over the extensor surfaces of joints with atrophic cicatrices, depigmentation, symmetrical affection of skeletal muscles (weakness, edema, hypotrophy). What disease are these changes most typical for?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Reiters disease
*c. Dermatomyositis
d. Systemic scleroderma
e. Nodular periarteritis

1319. 14 days ago a 49-year-old patient was operated on for perforated appendicitis and disseminated fibrinopurulent peritonitis. The postoperative period was uneventful. On the 9th day the patient presented with low-grade fever, abdominal pain, frequent liquid stools. USI of the left mesogastrium reveals a fluid formation 9x10 cm large. In blood: leukocytosis with the left shift. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Abdominal cavity tumour
*b. Interloop abscess
c. Left kidney cyst
d. Liver abscess
e. Spleen abscess

1320. A 3-year-old child has been delivered to a hospital in soporose state with considerable amyotonia, inhibition of tendon and periosteal reflexes. Miosis and asthenocoria are also present. Corneal reflexes are preserved. Pulse is rapid and weak. AP- 80/50 mm Hg. The parents suspect the child of accidental taking some tablets. Such clinical presentations are typical for intoxication with the following tableted drugs:
a. Antihypertensive drugs
b. Antropine drugs
*c. Tranquilizers
d. Barbiturates
e. Beta-2-adrenoceptor agonists

1321. Topographic percussion of lungs in a patient who got a serious job-related barotrauma revealed that the lower lungs borders were located one rib below normal, there was a significant increase in both lungs height and Kronigs isthmus. What disease should be suspected in the first place?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Pneumothorax
*c. Pulmonary emphysema
d. Exudative pleuritis
e. Chronic bronchitis

1322. A 69-year-old female patient complains of temperature rise up to 38,3°C, haematuria. ESR - 55 mm/h. Antibacterial therapy turned out to be ineffective. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Polycystic renal disease
b. Urolithiasis
c. Renal amyloidosis
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*e. Renal cancer

1323. A 62-year-old male has been hospitalized in the intensive care unit with a continuous attack of retrosternal pain that cannot be relieved by nitroglycerin. Objectively: AP- 80/60 mm Hg, heart rate - 106/min, breathing rate - 22/min. Heart sounds are muffled, a gallop rhythm is present. How would you explain the AP drop?
a. Reduction in peripheral resistance
*b. Reduction in cardiac output
c. Adrenergic receptor block
d. Blood depositing in the abdominal cavity
e. Internal haemorrhage

1324. As a result of lifting a load a 62-year-old female felt acute pain in the lumbar region, in a buttock, posterolateral surface of her right thigh, external surface of the right shin and dorsal surface of foot. Objectively: weakness of the anterior tibial muscle, long extensor muscle of the right toes, short extensor muscle of the right toes. Low Achilles reflex on the right. Positive Lasegues sign. What examination method would be the most effective for specification of the diagnosis of discogenic compression of L5 root?
a. Angiography
b. Spinal column X-ray
*c. Magnetic resonance scan
d. Electromyography
e. Lumbar puncture

1325. A childrens surgical unit admitted a 1-month-old boy who had been prenatally diagnosed with the left-sided pyelectasis. Such studies as drip infusion urography, cystography and USI allowed to reveal initial hydronephrosis. There is no information confirming the secondary pyelonephritis. What tactics of this patient management is most advisable?
*a. 6-month surveillance
b. There is no need in further surveillance and treatment
c. Urgent nephrostomy
d. Antibacterial therapy
e. Anderson-Hynes operation

1326. A 44-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital with complaints of dull, aching pain in the left lumbar region, the admixture of pus in the urine. Examination revealed a grade II staghorn calculus on the left. What method of treatment is indicated for this patient?
a. Distance lithotripsy
*b. Surgery
c. Ascending litholysis
d. Conservative therapy
e. Contact lithotripsy

1327. A 72-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding during defecation. Digital rectal investigation revealed a tumour of the anal canal. After verification of the diagnosis the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma. The secondary (metastatic) tumour will be most probably found in:
*a. Lungs
b. Brain
c. Mediastinum
d. Liver
e. Pelvic bones

1328. A welder at work got the first-degree burns of the middle third of his right shin. 5 days later the skin around the burn became edematic and itchy. Objectively: on a background of a well-defined erythema there is polymorphic rash in form of papules, vesicles, pustules, erosions with serous discharge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Microbal eczema
b. Streptococcal impetigo
c. Toxicoderma
d. True eczema
e. Occupational eczema

1329. An emergency team deliverd a 83-year-old patient complaining of inability of her right leg to support the body after falling on her right side. Objectively: the patient lies on a gurney, her right leg is rotated outwards, the outside edge of foot touches the bed. There is positive straight leg raising sign. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Cotyloid cavity fracture
*b. Femoral neck fracture
c. Femoral diaphysis fracture
d. Hip dislocation
e. Hip joint contusion

1330. After contusion of the right eye a patient complains of sudden loss of vision with remaining light perception. Objectively: the eye is not irritated. The cornea is transparent. Pupil reacts to light. The pupil area is black. The fundus reflex is absent. What is the most likely cause of vision loss?
a. Acute occlusion of retinal vessels
b. Optic nerve avulsion
*c. Hemophthalmia
d. Retinal detachment
e. Traumatic cataract

1331. A patient has an over a year-old history of fast progressive rheumatoid arthritis. X-raying confirms presence of marginal erosions. What basic drug would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Prednisolone
b. Aspirin
*c. Methotrexate
d. Chloroquine
e. Diclofenac sodium

1332. At first appointment with an obstetrician-gynaecologist a pregnant woman is referred to other medical specialists. She must be obligatory examined by the following specialists:
*a. Therapeutist and dentist
b. ENT and ophthalmologist
c. Therapeutist and endocrinologist
d. Dentist and phthisiatrician
e. Dentist and cardiologist

1333. A 27-year-old patient complains of nasal haemorrhages, multiple bruises on the anterior surface of the trunk and extremities, sudden weakness. In blood: Hb- 74 g/l, reticulocytes - 16%, RBCs - 2,5×1012/l, platelets – 30×109/l, ESR- 25 mm/h. What is the most effective measure for the treatment of thrombocytopenia?
a. Cytostatics
b. Iron preparations
*c. Splenectomy
d. Hemotransfusion
e. Vitamin B12

1334. A 47-year-old patient came to see a doctor on the 7th day of disease. The disease developed very fast: after the chill body temperature rose to 40°C and lasted up to 7 hours, then dropped abruptly, which caused profuse sweat. There were three such attacks occuringonce in two days. Two days ago the patient arrived from Africa. Objectively: pale skin, subicteric sclera, significantly enlarged liver and spleen. What is the cause of fever attacks in this disease?
a. Gametocytes
b. Exotoxin of a causative agent
c. Tissue schizogony
d. Endotoxin of a causative agent
*e. Erythrocytic schizogony

1335. According to the report of water quality control, drinking city water has the following characteristics: turbidity - 1,5 mg/m3, odour - 3 points, metallic taste - 2 points, pale yellow colour, colour index - 20o, temperature - 12o. Which of these factors doesnt comply with hygienic requirements?
a. Taste
*b. Odour
c. Temperature
d. Colour index
e. Turbidity

1336. Half an hour after a 30-year-old woman had had some custard cake, she experienced lancinating abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting. Objectively: body temperature - 36,0°C, pale skin, breathing rate - 20/min, Ps- 100/min. AP- 95/65 mm Hg, loud cardiac sounds. Dry tongue. Abdomen was painful in its epigastrial part, there were no signs of peritoneum irritation. What is the first measure to be taken?
a. Intravenous rehydratation
b. Antibiotic therapy
c. Injection of Cerucal
d. Administration of an enterosorbent
*e. Gastric lavage

1337. A patient has a stab wound on his right foot. On the fourth day after injury the patients body temperature rose up to 38 degree C, inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and painful, skin over them reddened. What complication might be suspected?
a. Lymphangitis
b. Tetanus
*c. Lymphadenitis
d. Erysipelas
e. Phlegmon

1338. A teacher of a secondary school was diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis. What is the maximum duration of his medical certificate?
a. Two months
b. A month
c. Five months
d. Four months
*e. Ten months

1339. A 39-year-old patient complains of a tumour on the anterior surface of her neck. The tumour has been observed for 2 years. It is nonmobile and has enlarged recently. The patient has a changed tone of voice, a sense of pressure. Objectively: in the left lobe of the thyroid gland a 3 cm node is palpable; it is very dense, tuberous, painless. Cervical lymph nodes are enlarged. Functional status of the thyroid gland is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Thyroid gland cancer
b. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter
c. Chronic lymphomatous Hashimotos thyroiditis
d. Chronic fibrous Riedels thyroiditis
e. Nodular euthyroid goiter

1340. A child is 2 years old. The child complains of hoarse voice, dyspnea with obstructed inspiration. The disease started 3 days ago from dry cough and nose stuffiness. Objectively: general condition is unbalanced, stridor is present. The childs skin is pale. Body temperature is 37,7°C. The palatine arches are hyperemic. There is no deposit. Heart sounds are rhythmic. Auscultation of lungs reveals rough breathing sounds, crepitation is absent. Parainfluenza virus has been detected in nasopharynx lavage. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epiglottitis
*b. Acute laryngotracheitis
c. Diphtheria
d. Laryngospasm
e. Foreign body

1341. A 58-year-old patient complains of a headache in the occipital region, nausea, choking, opplotentes. The presentations appeared after a physical exertion. Objectively: the patient is excited. Face is hyperemic. Skin is pale. Heart sounds are regular, the 2nd aortic sound is accentuated. AP- 240/120 mm Hg, HR- 92/min. Auscultation reveals some fine moisr rales in the lower parts of the lungs. Liver is not enlarged. ECG shows signs of hypertrophy and left ventricular overload. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Complicated hypertensic crisis
b. Uncomplicated hypertensic crisis
c. Bronchial asthma exacerbation
d. Community-acquired pneumonia
e. Acute myocardial infarction, pulmonary edema

1342. A 28-year-old woman has a 12-year history of chronic glomerulonephritis with latent course. Over the past six months she has developed general weakness, loss of appetite, low work performance, nausea. The patient complains of headache, pain in the joints. On examination: anemia, blood urea - 34,5 millimole/l, blood creatinine - 0,766 millimole/l, hyperkalemia. What complication has developed?
a. Acute renal insufficiency
b. Renal amyloidosis
c. Pyelonephritis
*d. Chronic renal insufficiency
e. Nephrotic syndrome

1343. A 43-year-old patient had been admitted to a hospital with clinical presentations of ischiorectal periproctitis. On the 12th day of treatment the patients condition deteriorated: there was an increase in the rate of intoxication and hepatic failure, the body temperature became hectic, AP was 100/60 mm Hg. USI of liver revealed a hydrophilic formation. In blood: WBCs - 19,6×109/l, RBCs.- 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 98 g/l. What complication was developed?
a. Liver necrosis
*b. Liver abscess
c. Hepatic cyst
d. Pylephlebitis
e. Budd-Chiari syndrome

1344. Examination of a 9-month-old girl revealed skin pallor, cyanosis during excitement. Percussion revealed transverse dilatation of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed continuous systolic murmur to the left of the breastbone in the 3-4 intercostal space. This murmur is conducted above the whole cardiac region to the back. What congenital cardiac pathology can be suspected?
*a. Defect of interventricular septum
b. Fallots tetrad
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
d. Coarctation of aorta
e. Defect of interatrial septum

1345. An 8-month-old baby has had problems with nasal breathing and muco-purulent discharge from the nose for a week. Examination reveals a rhinedema, muco-purulent discharges from the middle nasal meatus as well as on the back of pharynx. What disease are these symptoms most typical for?
a. Frontitis
b. Hemisinusitis
*c. Ethmoiditis
d. Sphenoiditis
e. Maxillary sinusitis

1346. A 22-year-old female patient complains of dull pain in her right iliac area that she has been experiencing for a week, morning sickness and gustatory change. She has a histrory of menstruation delay for 3 weeks. Objectively: AP- 80/50 mm Hg, pulse is 78 bpm, body temperature is 37°C. Bimanual examination reveals that uterus is enlarged, soft, mobile and painless. Uterine appendages are palpable on the right, there is a dense, elastic and moderately painful formation 3x4 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Progressing fallopian pregnancy
b. Right ovarian cyst
c. Interrupted fallopian pregnancy
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Uterogestation

1347. 2 days ago a patient presented with acute pain in the left half of chest, general weakness, fever and headache. Objectively: between the 4 and 5 rib on the left the skin is erythematous, there are multiple groups of vesicles 2-4 mm in diameter filled with transparent liquid. What diease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
b. Herpes simplex
c. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatosis
d. Pemphigus
*e. Herpes zoster

1348. A 62-year-old patient complaining of enlargement of cervical, supraclavicular and axillary lymph nodes, subfebrile temperature for the last 3 months has been admitted to a hospital. In blood: WBCs - 64*10^9/l, lymphocytes - 72%. What method of study should be used to specify the diagnosis?
a. Thermography
*b. Myelogram
c. X-rays
d. Lymphography
e. Lymphoscintigraphy

1349. A patient is 30 years old, works as a carpenter. Six months ago there appeared some behavioural changes: he got interested in philosophy, began writing a treatise on the purpose of his human existence, quitted his job, stopped caring about his children, went out carelessly dressed, heard "voices in his head" that guided his behaviour. The patient claimed sure that he was an Ambassador of God on Earth and was constantly feeling His influence. He is not critical about his disease. What diagnosis can be assumed?
a. Reactive psychosis
*b. Schizophrenia
c. Somatogenic psychosis
d. Alcocholic psychosis
e. Organic psychosis

1350. Examination of a 38-year-old patient who had been hit with a blunt object on the left side of chest revealed a fracture of the X rib with fragments displacement, parietal pneumothorax. The patient complains of pain in the left subcostal area. Objectively: the patient is pale, AP- 80/40 mm Hg, Ps- 138/min, of poor volume. USI reveals fluid in the left abdomen. Splenic rupture is present. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Immediate laparotomy and alcohol-novocaine block of the X rib
b. Immediate upper middle laparotomy and following drainage of the left pleural cavity
*c. Drainage of the left pleural cavity and laparotomy
d. Left-sided thoracotomy and immediately following laparotomy
e. Anti-schock actions and laparotomy following the arterial pressure rise

1351. A 3-year-old girl presents with pertussis-like cough with thick sputum. There have been persistent changes in lungs since the age of 6 months when she was first diagnosed with acute pneumonia. Chloride concentration in the perspiration is 112 mEq/l. The child has been diagnosed with mucoviscidosis. What is the basis for autosomal recessive disease - mucoviscidosis?
a. ?1-antitrypsin deficiency
b. Pulmonary artery hypoplasia
c. Deposition of calcium triphosphates and carbotates in the alveoles
d. Pulmonary cysts
*e. Inadequate transport of sodium and chloride ions

1352. A 47-year-old woman underwent a thyroid gland resection on ccount of nodular euthyroid goiter. What preparations are most likely to prevent the disease recurrence?
a. Thyrotropin
b. Radioactive iodine
c. Antistruminum (potassium iodide)
d. Mercazolil
*e. Thyroid hormones

1353. After a car accident a 37-year-old patient has an acute pain and bleeding in the middle third of his right thigh. Objectively: there is a wound on the anterior surface of the right thigh with massive bleeding, abnormal mobility at the level of the middle third of the thigh. The first aid is to be started with:
a. Immobilization of the extremity with a transportation splint
b. Venipuncture and intravenous infusion of polyglycine
c. Tourniquet application
d. Injection of pain-killers
*e. Digital occlusion of the femoral artery

1354. A 28-years-old woman complains of nausea and vomiting about 10 times per day. She has been found to have body weight loss and xerodermia. The pulse is 100 bpm. Body temperature is 37,2°C. Diuresis is low. USI shows 5-6 weeks of pregnancy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. I degree preeclampsia
*b. Moderate vomiting of pregnancy
c. Mild vomiting of pregnancy
d. Premature abortion
e. Food poisoning

1355. Development of chronic venous insufficiency of lower extremities depends on the functional condition of so-called musculovenous pump. This term refers to the following group of muscles:
a. Abdominal wall muscles
*b. Shin muscles
c. Buttock region muscles
d. Foot muscles
e. Thigh muscles

1356. On the 2 nd day of illness a 27-year-old patient complains of the unbearable headache, repeated vomiting. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition. He is conscious but adynamic. Lies in a forced position with his head thrown back. There is no skin rash. Occipital muscles are evidently rigid, there are Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs. t°39,5°C, Ps- 120/min., AP- 130/80 mm Hg. What is the reason for the leading syndrome of this disease?
a. Liquor hypotension
b. Hyperthermy
c. Affection of the cranial nerve nuclei
d. Haemorrhages into the adrenal glands
*e. Liquor hypertension

1357. A full-term baby was born with body weight of 3200 g, body length of 50 cm, Apgar score - 8-10 points. What is the optimum time for the first breast-feeding?
a. First 48 hours
b. First 24 hours
*c. First 30 minutes
d. After 48 hours
e. First 6 hours

1358. A 40-year-old female patient complain of headache, dizziness, muscle weakness, sometimes - cramps in the extremities. She has been taking antihypertensive medications for 10 years. AP- 180/100 mm Hg. Blood potassium - 1,8 millimole/l, sodium - 4,8 millimole/l. In urine: alkaline reaction, the relative density - 1012, protein and sugar are not found, WBCs - 3-4 in the field of vision, RBCs - 1-2 in the field of vision. Conns syndrome is suspected. Which drug should be chosen for the treatment of arterial hypertension?
a. Clonidine
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Propanolol
d. Enalapril
*e. Spironolactone

1359. Condition of a patient with purulent otitis has abruptly deteriorated: he presents with headache, vomiting, febrile temperature, general hyperesthesia. There are meningeal signs, papilledemas. Focal symptoms are absent. Cerebrospinal fluid is turbid, pressure is high, there is albuminocytologic dissociation with neutrophil predominance. What disease can be suspected?
a. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
b. Primary purulent meningitis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Serous meningitis
*e. Secondary purulent meningitis

1360. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
*a. Vesiculopustulosis
b. Epidermolysis bullosa
c. Impetigo
d. Miliaria
e. Impetigo neonatorum

1361. A secundipara has regular birth activity. Three years ago she had cesarean section for the reason of acute intrauterine hypoxia. During parodynia she complains of extended pain in the area of postsurgical scar. Objectively: fetus pulse is rhythmic - 140 bpm. Vaginal examination shows 5 cm cervical dilatation. Fetal bladder is intact. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Augmentation of labour
b. Obstetrical forceps
*c. Cesarean section
d. Vaginal delivery
e. Waiting tactics of labor management

1362. A 43-year-old female patiet complains of eruption on her right leg skin, pain, weakness, body temperature rise up to 38°C. The disease is acute. Objectively: there is an edema on the right leg skin in the region of foot, a well-defined bright red spot in form of flame tips which feels hot. There are isolated vesicles in focus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Contact dermatitis
b. Microbial eczema
*c. Erysipelas
d. Toxicoderma
e. Haemorrhagic vasculitis

1363. A 56-year-old patient with diffuse toxic goiter has ciliary arrhythmia with pulse rate of 110 bpm, arterial hypertension, AP- 165/90 mm Hg. What preparation should be administered along with mercazolil?
a. Corinfar
b. Radioactive iodine
c. Procaine hydrochloride
*d. Propranolol
e. Verapamil

1364. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. Perform conicotomy immediately
*b. Perform the Heimlich manoever
c. Use an inhalation of ?2-adrenoceptor agonist
d. Send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him
e. Make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone

1365. Forensic medical expertise of corpse of a newborn revealed: body weight 3500 g, body length 50 cm, the umbilical cord was smooth, moist, glossy, without any signs of drying. Hydrostatic tests were positive. The test results are the evidence of:
a. Primary atelectasis
b. Secondary atelectasis
*c. Live birth
d. Hyaline membrane disease
e. Stillbirth

1366. After an accident a patient complains of pain in the hip joint. Objectively: the leg is in the position of flexion, adduction and internal rotation, significantly contracted. There is elastic resistance to passive adduction or abduction of the extremity. Major trochanter is located high above the Roser-Nelaton line. A significant lordosis is present. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Iliac dislocation of hip
b. Inferoposterior dislocation of hip
c. Cotyloid cavity fracture with a central dislocation of hip
d. Femoral neck fracture with a displacement
e. Pertrochanteric fracture of hip

1367. A 6-year-old girl drank some coloured fizzy drink which gave her a feeling of pressure in the throat. 30 minutes later the childs lips got swollen, then edema gradually spread over the whole face, laryngeal breathing became difficult. The child is excited. Ps- 120/min, breathing rate - 28/min, breathing is noisy, indrawing of intercostal spaces is observed. What basic aid is most appropriate for the restoration of laryngeal breathing?
a. Sedative drugs
*b. Corticosteroids
c. Antibacterial drugs
d. Conicotomy
e. Tracheostomy

1368. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
a. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
b. Wound abscess
c. Posttraumatic phlegmon
d. Suture sinus
*e. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis

1369. A 35-year-old patient has been in the intensive care unit for acute renal failure due to crush for 4 days. Objectively: the patient is inadequate. Breathing rate - 32/min. Over the last 3 hours individual moist rales can be auscultated in lungs. ECG shows high T waves, right ventricular extrasystoles. CVP - 159 mm Hg. In blood: the residual nitrogen - 62 millimole/l, K+- 7,1 millimole/l, Cl-- 78 millimole/l, Na+- 120 millimole/l, Ht - 0,32, Hb - 100 g/l, blood creatinine - 0,9 millimole/l. The most appropriate method of treatment would be:
*a. Hemodialysis
b. Plasma filtration
c. Hemosorption
d. Plasma sorption
e. Ultrafiltration

1370. A 46-year-old patient complains of sudden palpitation, which is accompanied by pulsation in the neck and head, fear, nausea. The palpitation lasts for 15-20 minutes and is over after straining when holding her breath. What kind of cardiac disorder may be suspected?
a. An attack of atrial flutter
b. An attack of ventricular paroxysmal tachycardia
c. An attack of extrasystolic arrhythmia
*d. An attack of supraventricular paroxysmal tachycardia
e. An attack of ciliary arrhythmia

1371. A 32-year-old patient has a 3-year history of asthma attacks, that can be hardly stopped with berotec. Over a few last months he has experienced pain in the joints and sensitivity disorder of legs and feet skin. Ps - 80/min, AP - 210/100 mm Hg. In blood: eosinophilia at the rate of 15%. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Wegeners disease
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Systemic scleroderma
*d. Periarteritis nodosa
e. Dermatomyositis

1372. A 3-year-old child was playing in a playpen when he suddenly developed paroxysmal cough and shortness of breath. Objectively: dry cough, mixed dyspnea. Lung auscultation revealed some wheezes. Breathing sounds on the right are diminished. The child doesnt mix with other children. Immunization is age-appropriate. What pathological condition can be suspected?
a. Acute respiratory viral infection
*b. Foreign body in the respiratory tracts
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Pneumonia
e. Pertussis

1373. Bacterial analysis of air in a living space in winter period by means of Krotovs apparatus revealed that total number of microorganisms in 1m3 of air was 7200. What is the permissible number of microorganisms for the air to be characterized as "pure"?
a. Up to 7500
*b. Up to 4500
c. Up to 5500
d. Up to 2500
e. Up to 3500

1374. A 24-year-old female patient complains of acute pain in the lower abdomen that turned up after a physical stress. She presents with nausea, vomiting, dry mouth and body temperature 36,6°C. She has a right ovarian cyst in history. Bimanual examination reveals that uterus is dense, painless, of normal size. The left fornix is deep, uterine appendages arent palpable, the right fornix is contracted. There is a painful formation on the right of uterus. Its round, elastic and mobile. It is 7х8 cm large. In blood: leukocytosis with the left shit. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute metritis
b. Subserous fibromyoma of uterus
c. Right-sided pyosalpinx
*d. Ovarian cyst with pedicle torsion
e. Extrauterine pregnancy

1375. A 10-year-old child has been folowed-up for the dilated cardiomyopathy. The child presents with dyspnea, cardialgia. There are dense, nonmobile edemata on the lower extremities and sacrum. Ps- 120/min. The cardiac borders are extended transversely. Heart sounds are muffled, there is blowing systolic murmur at the apex and over the xiphoid process. Liver is 3 cm enlarged, urine output is reduced. The blood total protein - 58.6 g/l. In urine: protein - 0,025 g/l, WBCs - 2-4 in the field of vision, RBCs - 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the main mechanism of edema syndrome development:
a. Peripheral circulation disorder
b. Secondary nephropathy development
*c. Venous congestion of greater circulation
d. Hypoproteinemia
e. Venous congestion of lesser circulation

1376. A 25-year-old victim of a road accient complains of chest pain, dyspnea. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition, Ps- 120/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg.There is pathological mobility of fragments of III-V ribs on the right. Percussion reveals a box sound over the right lung, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated on the right. What examination should be administered in the first place?
*a. X-ray of chest organs
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Thoracoscopy
d. Pleural puncture
e. USI of chest organs

1377. A 19-year-old student has been hospitalized on an emergency basis because of severe dyspnea, pain in the left side of chest. The patient got sick 3 days ago. Objectively: body temperature - 38,8°C. BH - 42/min., hypopnoe. There is dullness of percussion sound on the right of the scapula middle, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated. The left border of heart is displaced outwards by 3 cm. Embryocardia is present, HR - 110/min. The right hypochondrium is painful on palpation. What are the immediate treatment measures in this situation?
a. Transfer of the patient to the thoracic surgery department
*b. Urgent puncture of pleural cavity
c. Injection of cardiac glycosides
d. Administartion of antibiotics of penicillin group
e. Injection of lasix

1378. A 30-year-old man was injured in a fire and got thermic burns of III-A and III-B degree that affected 20% of the total skin. AP - 110/70 mm Hg, heart rate -120/min. What transfusion means should be used for blind infusion before transportation?
a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Polyglycine
c. 10% glucose solution
*d. Saline solutions
e. Albumin

1379. After treating a field with pesticides a machine operator presents with great weakness, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, visual impairment, watery eyes. Objectively: the patient is excited, hypersalivation, hyperhidrosis, muscle fibrillation of tongue and eyelids are oberved. Pupils are narrowed, there is tachycardia, lung auscultation reveals moist small and medium bubbling rales. In blood: changed level of cholinesterase activity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Intoxication with carbamic acid derivatives
b. Intoxication with organochlorine pesticides
*c. Intoxication with organophosphorous pesticides
d. Intoxication with organomercurial pesticides
e. Intoxication with arsenic-containing pesticides

1380. A 3-year-old child has been diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus, hyperosmolar coma. The laboratory confirmed the diagnosis. Which laboratory findings are characteristic for such condition?
a. Hyperglycemia and high indicators of acid-base balance
b. Hyperglycemia and ketonemia
c. Hyperglycemia and glucosuria
d. Hyperglycemia and ketonuria
*e. High hyperglycemia without ketonemia

1381. A 44-year-old patient complains about difficult urination, sensation of incomplete urinary bladder emptying. Sonographic examination of the urinary bladder near the urethra entrance revealed an oval well-defined hyperechogenic formation 2x3 cm large that was changing its position during the examination. What conclusion can be made?
a. Malignant tumour of the urinary bladder
*b. Concrement
c. Urinary bladder polyp
d. Primary ureter tumour
e. Prostate adenoma

1382. A 54-year-old female patient consulted a doctor about bloody discharges from the genital tracts after 2 years of amenorrhea. USI and bimanual examination revealed no genital pathology. What is the tactics of choice?
*a. Fractional biopsy of lining of uterus and uterine mucous membranes
b. Hysterectomy
c. Estrogenic haemostasia
d. Styptic drugs
e. Contracting drugs

1383. A department chief of an in-patient hospital is going to inspect resident doctors as to observation of medical-technological standards of patient service. What documentation should be checked for this purpose?
a. Treatment sheets
b. Statistic cards of discharged patients
*c. Health cards of in-patients
d. Annual report of a patient care institution
e. Registry of operative interventions

1384. A 5-year-old child developed an acute disease starting from body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, running nose, cough and conjunctivitis. On the 4th day the child presented with maculo-papular rash on face. Body temparature rose again up to 39,2°C. Over the next few days the rash spread over the whole body and extremities. Mucous membrane of palate was hyperemic, there was whitish deposition on cheek mucous membrane next to molars. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Enterovirus diseases
b. Rubella
*c. Measles
d. Acute viral respiratory infection
e. Yersinia

1385. A 56-year-old scientist experiences constricting retrosternal pain several times a day while walking for 100-150 m. The pain lasts for up to 10 minutes and can be relieved by nitroglycerine. Objectively: the patient is overweight, heart borders exhibit no abnormalities, heart sounds are rhythmic, Ps- 78 bpm, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. ECG contains low amplitude of T wave in V4-5. What disease might be suspected?
a. Stable FC I stenocardia
b. Stable FC IV stenocardia
c. Stable FC II stenocardia
*d. Stable FC III stenocardia
e. Instable stenocardia

1386. In the current year general practitioners of the municipal polyclinic have referred 11 patients with coronary artery disease to the in-patient hospital. In 3 cases the diagnosis wasnt confirmed. What managerial decision shoud be made in such case?
*a. Analysis of each case of diagnostic divergence
b. Analysis of medical check-up quality
c. Analysis of diagnostic examination quality
d. Analysis of doctors skill level
e. Analysis of material and technical basisof the polyclinic

1387. A 35-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital for pain in the left sternoclavicular and knee joints, lumbar area. The disease has an acute character and is accompanied by fever up to 38°C. Objectively: the left sternoclavicular and knee joints are swollen and painful. In blood: WBCs - 9,5*10^9/l, ESR - 40 mm/h, CRP - 1,5 millimole/l, fibrinogen - 4,8 g/l, uric acid - 0,28 millimole/l. Examination of the urethra scrapings reveals chlamydia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
b. Bechterews disease
c. Gout
*d. Reiters syndrome
e. Rheumatic arthritis

1388. A 32-year-old patient lives in an area endemic for echinococcosis. In the last 6 months he reports of pain in the right subcostal area, fever. He is suspected to have liver echinococcosis. What study would be the most informative in this case?
a. Angiography
b. Biochemical laboratory examination
c. Survey radiography of abdominal cavity
d. Liver scanning
*e. USI

1389. A 48-year-old patient got a job-related injury of a hypodermic varicose vein on his shin that was accompanied by the intensive phleborrhagia. Choose the optimal variant of first aid:
*a. Pressure bandage and limb strapping
b. Occlusion of femoral artery in a typical place
c. Application of Esmarchs tourniquet above the injury
d. Application of Esmarchs tourniquet beneath the injury
e. Maximal limb flexion in knee joint

1390. As a result of prolonged exposure to the sun a 20-year-old patient has developed low-grade fever, pain and swelling in the knee and ankle joints, erythema on her face and nose bridge, leukopenia and accelerated ESR. She has been provisionally diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus. What pathognomonic laboratory data may confirm this diagnosis?
a. C-reactive protein
b. Anaemia
*c. Antinuclear factor
d. Accelerated ESR
e. Lymphocytosis

1391. A full-term infant is 3 days old. On the different parts of skin there are erythemas, erosive spots, cracks, areas of epidermis peeling. The infant has scalded skin syndrome. Nikolskys symptom is positive. General condition of the infant is grave. Anxiety, hyperesthesia, febrile temperature are evident. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Impetigo neonatorum
b. Mycotic erythema
*c. Exfoliative dermatitis
d. Phlegmon of newborn
e. Fingers pseudofurunculosis

1392. A 40-year-old female patient has a history of rheumatism. She complains about acute pain in her left eye, especially at night, vision impairment, photophobia, lacrimation. The patient cannot suggest any reasons for the disease. Objectively: weak pericorneal injection, flattening of iris relief, iris discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Iritis
b. Choroiditis
c. Acute attack of glaucoma
*d. Iridocyclitis
e. Keratitis

1393. A patient with bilateral hydrothorax has repeatedly undergone pleural puncture on both sides. After a regular puncture the patients condition has become worse: he presents with fever, chest pain. The next day, the attending physician performing pleural puncture revealed some pus on the right. What is the mechanism of acute right-sided empyema development?
a. Aerial
b. Hematogenous
*c. Contact-and-aspiration
d. Implantation
e. Lymphogenous

1394. A patient is on the sick leave for 4 months continuously from the date of injury. The treatment is going to last for 1-2 months. Who has the right to extend the duration of medical certificate for this patient?
a. District doctor by agreement with a department chief
b. Medical advisory commission after inpatient treatment
*c. Medical advisory commission after medico-social expert commission examination
d. Medical superintendent
e. Medico-social expert commission

1395. A 10-year-old boy underwent treatment in cardiological department for rheumatism, I acute attack of rheumatic fever, active phase, II degree. The patient was discharged in satisfactory condition. Which drug should be chosen for prevention of rheumatism recurrence?
*a. Bicillinum-5
b. Bicillinum-1
c. Ampicillin
d. Oxacillin
e. Erythromycin

1396. Educational rooms are illuminated with various lighting fittings. What type of lighting fittings is the most appropriate in respect of hygienic norms?
a. Semi-reflected light fittings
b. Ambient light fittings
*c. Indirect light fittings
d. Direct light fittings
e. Combined light fittings

1397. A 54-year-old patient has an over 20-year history of femoral osteomyelitis. Over the last month she has developed progressing edemata of the lower extremities. Urine test reveals: proteinuria at the rate of 6,6 g/l; in blood: dysproteinemia in form of hypoalbuminemia, increase in ?2- and ?-globulin rate, ESR - 50 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Chronic glomerulonephritis
c. Myelomatosis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*e. Secondary renal amyloidosis

1398. A 36-year-old patient complains of skin rash that appeared a week ago and doesnt cause any subjective problems. Objectively: palm and sole skin is covered with multiple lenticular disseminated papules not raised above the skin level. The papules are reddish, dense on palpation and covered with keratinous squamae. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Palmoplanar rubrophytosis
b. Verrucosis
c. Palmoplanar psoriasis
*d. Secondary syphilis
e. Palm and sole callosity

1399. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6oC. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5?2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cystous liver cancer
*b. Alveolar echinococcus of liver
c. Liver abscess
d. Paravesical liver abscesses
e. Liver cancer

1400. A 28-year-old patient complains of discomfort, acute pain in the lower third of the left labia majora. The disease began suddenly after menstruation. Objectively: body temperature is 38oC. The left labia majora has a formation to 3 cm diameter, with hyperemic surface, extremely painful to the touch, with symptoms of fluctuation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vulvar fibroid
b. Bartholin gland cyst
*c. Acute bartholinitis
d. Hypertrophy of the labia
e. Vulvar cancer

1401. A 19-year-old woman complains of pain in the abdomen and joints, asks for more analgetics and somnifacient injections. The patient was examined. Gynecological and urological pathologies are absent. There are signs of previous punctures along superficial veins of the extremities. The patient does not explain the origin of punctures. Tendon reflexes of upper and lower extremities are the same, quick. Photoreaction of the pupil of the eye is weak. The tongue is grey coated. During communication the patient in affectively not even-tempered. There is diarrhea without pathologic inclusions. What tactics is necessary to improve the condition of this patient?
a. Additional consultation of surgeon
b. Treatment with antibiotics
c. Consultation of infectious diseases doctor
d. Prescription of medications the patient asks for
*e. Consultation of an expert in narcology

1402. A 1,5-year-old child fell ill acutely with high temperature 38oC, headache, fatigue. The temperature declined on the fifth day, muscular pain in the right leg occured in the morning, there were no movements and tendon reflexes, sensitivity was reserved. What is the initial diagnosis?
a. Viral encephilitis
b. Osteomyelitis
*c. Polyomyelitis
d. Hip joint arthritis
e. Polyartropathy

1403. A 20-year-old patient complains of pain in the left lumbar region, arterial pressure rise up to 160/110 mm Hg. USI revealed that the structure and size of the right kidney were within age norms, there were signs of 3 degree hydronephrotic transformation of the left kidney. Doppler examination revealed an additional artery running to the lower pole of the kidney. Excretory urogram shows a narrowing in the region of ureteropelvic junction. Specify the therapeutic tactics:
a. Administration of beta-blockers
b. Administration of spasmolytics
c. Kidney catheterization
*d. Surgical intervention
e. Administration of ACE inhibitors

1404. An 8-month-old baby has had problems with nasal breathing and muco-purulent discharge from the nose for a week. Examination reveals a rhinedema, muco-purulent discharges from the middle nasal meatus as well as on the back of pharynx. What disease are these symptoms most typical for?
*a. Ethmoiditis
b. Maxillary sinusitis
c. Frontitis
d. Sphenoiditis
e. Hemisinusitis

1405. A 22-year-old vegetarian patient with signs of malnutrition consulted a doctor about smell and taste distortion, angular stomatitis. Objectively: marked blue sclerae. The patient was diagnosed with iron deficiency anemia. What is the dominating clinical syndrome?
a. Haemolytic
b. Myelodysplastic
c. Haemologic
*d. Sideropenic
e. Anaemic

1406. A patients condition is getting worse towards evening: she becomes excited, complains of "internal anxiety", "a weight on her heart", foreboding of evil - "something evil will happen to me or my family". The patient is sad, melancholic, has poor appetite and sleep disorders. Specify the kind of mental disorder:
a. Somatized depression
b. Hypochondriac depression
c. Agitated depression
d. Endogenous depression
*e. Anxious depression

1407. On the 2 nd day of illness a 27-year-old patient complains of the unbearable headache, repeated vomiting. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition. He is conscious but adynamic. Lies in a forced position with his head thrown back. There is no skin rash. Occipital muscles are evidently rigid, there are Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs. to- 39,5oC, Ps- 120/min., AP- 130/80 mm Hg. What is the reason for the leading syndrome of this disease?
a. Haemorrhages into the adrenal glands
b. Liquor hypotension
c. Hyperthermy
*d. Liquor hypertension
e. Affection of the cranial nerve nuclei

1408. A 29-year-old patient complains of absent menstruation for a year, milk discharge from the nipples when pressed, loss of lateral visual fields. X-ray shows an expansion of the sella turcica. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Functional disorder of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian system
b. Mammary tumour
c. Pregnancy
d. Ovarian tumor
*e. Pituitary tumour

1409. A 32-year-old male patient has been suffering from pain in the sacrum and coxofemoral joints, painfulness and stiffness in the lumbar spine for a year. ESR- 56 mm/h. Roentgenography revealed symptoms of bilateral sacroileitis. The patient is the carrier of HLA B27 antigen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Spondylosis
b. Reiters disease
c. Coxarthrosis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
*e. Ankylosing spondylitis

1410. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
a. Depositing of blood in venous channel
b. Shunting
c. Increase of bleeding speed
d. Presence of hypervolemia
*e. Developing of cardiac insufficiency

1411. A 1-month-old child became restless and presented with an increase in head sweating. Its known from the history that the child has been fed with cows milk since birth (September 5). Examination revealed craniotabes. A doctor administered a course of UV radiation. Decide, if the child needs ergocalciferol:
a. A month after the UVR withdrowal
b. Immediately after the UVR withdrowal
c. Does not need
d. In combination with UVR
*e. 2-2,5 months after the UVR withdrowal

1412. A 44-year-old patient complains about difficult urination, sensation of incomplete urinary bladder emptying. Sonographic examination of the urinary bladder near the urethra entrance revealed an oval well-defined hyperechogenic formation 2x3 cm large that was changing its position during the examination. What conclusion can be made?
a. Primary ureter tumour
*b. Concrement
c. Urinary bladder polyp
d. Malignant tumour of the urinary bladder
e. Prostate adenoma

1413. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
a. Citrate shock
b. Allergic reaction
c. Anaphylactic shock
*d. Citrate intoxication
e. Pyrogenous reaction

1414. 4 hours after having meals a patient with signs of malnutrition and steatorrhea experiences stomach pain, especially above navel and to the left of it. Diarrheas take turns with constipation lasting up to 3-5 days. Palpation reveals moderate painfulness in the choledochopancreatic region. The amylase rate in blood is stable. X-ray reveals some calcifications located above navel. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic gastroduodenitis
*b. Chronic pancreatitis
c. Chronic calculous cholecystitis
d. Duodenal ulcer
e. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome

1415. A patient complains of impaired far vision. Previously his eyes often turned red and hurt. Objectively: the eyes are not irritated, the cornea is transparent, anterior chambers are median deep, their moisture is transparent. The iris of the right eye has not changed in colour, its pattern is unchanged. The pupil is of irregular shape, scalloped. Biomicroscopy of the crystalline lens reveals the areas of opacity and vacuoles. Make a diagnosis:
a. Diabetic cataract of the right eye
b. Tetanic cataract of the right eye
c. Senile cataract of the right eye
*d. Complicated cataract of the right eye
e. Radiation cataract of the right eye

1416. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in an inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for drinking water in the field conditions:
a. Melt snow water
b. River water
c. Spring water
*d. Artesian well water
e. Rain water

1417. A neonate is 5 days old. What vaccination dose of BCG vaccine (in mg) is necessary for vaccination of this child?
a. 0,025 mg
b. 0,2 mg
c. 0,075 mg
*d. 0,05 mg
e. 0,1 mg

1418. A 58-year-old patient complains of a headache in the occipital region, nausea, choking, opplotentes. The presentations appeared after a physical exertion. Objectively: the patient is excited. Face is hyperemic. Skin is pale. Heart sounds are regular, the 2nd aortic sound is accentuated. AP- 240/120 mm Hg, HR- 92/min. Auscultation reveals some fine moisr rales in the lower parts of the lungs. Liver is not enlarged. ECG shows signs of hypertrophy and left ventricular overload. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bronchial asthma exacerbation
b. Community-acquired pneumonia
c. Acute myocardial infarction, pulmonary edema
d. Uncomplicated hypertensic crisis
*e. Complicated hypertensic crisis

1419. A 43-year-old male patient undergoing treatment for peptic ulcer complains of weakness, dizziness, coffee-ground vomiting, melena. After administration of haemostatics the patients condition has not improved, fresh blood has shown up in the vomit, skin bruises of different sizes have appeared. In blood: thrombocytes – 50109/l, Lee-White clotting time - 35 minutes, APTT - 80 seconds. In this case it is most rational to administer the following preparation:
a. Heparin
b. Fibrinogen
c. Vikasol
*d. Fresh frozen plasma
e. Rheopolyglucinum

1420. A 27-year-old patient with a knife stomach wound has been delivered to a hospital 4 hours after injury. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition. Ps- 120 bpm, weak. AP- 70/40 mm Hg. Laparotomy revealed a lot of liquid blood in the abdominal cavity. The patient has been found to have bleeding from the mesenteric vessels of the small intestine. Damage to hollow organs has not been revealed. What is the best way to restore the blood loss?
a. Erythromass transfusion
*b. Autoblood reinfusiont
c. Transfusion of fresh frozen plasma
d. Rheopolyglucinum transfusion
e. Transfusion of washed erythrocytes

1421. A 30-year-old patient had deep burn covering 30% of body 30 days ago. Now he presents with continued fever, loss of appetite, night sweats. Burned surface weakly granulates. What is the stage of burn disease?
*a. Septicotoxemia
b. Acute burn toxemia
c. Convalescence
d. Secondary burn shock
e. Primary burn shock

1422. In morgue there are dead bodies with the following causes of death: electrotrauma; rupture of the spleen with acute anemia. There is one unknown person; one ethyl alcohol poisoned person and one drowned man. What dead body should the blood group be determined for?
*a. All dead bodies of the unknown persons
b. Body of drowned man
c. Body of person with a sudden death
d. Body of poisoned person
e. Body of person with internal hemorrhage

1423. A 54-year-old female patient has been admitted to a hospital 12 days after the beginning of acute pancreatitis. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition. The body temperature is hectic. Ps - 112 bpm. The abdomen is swollen. Epigastrium palpation reveals a very painful infiltration falling in the localization of pancreas. Abdominal cavity contains fluid. There is an edema of the left lumbar region. In blood: WBCs – 18109/l. What is the required tactics of the patients treatment?
*a. Surgical treatment
b. Massive antibacterial therapy
c. Peritoneal dialysis
d. Increase in antienzymes
e. Further conservative treatment

1424. A 42-year-old patient with acute haemorrhage and class III blood loss underwent blood transfusion and got 1,8 l of preserved blood and erythromass of the same group and Rh. After the transfusion the patient complained of unpleasant retrosternal sensations, his arterial pressure dropped to 100/60 mm Hg, there appeared convulsions. Blood serum calcium was at the rate of 1,7 millimole/liter. What is the mechanism of this complication development?
a. Citrate is cardiotoxic and nephrotoxic
b. The increased citrate rate causes convulsions
*c. Citrate binds calcium ions, hypocalcemia impairs myocardial function
d. Citrate binds potassium causing severe hypokalemia
e. Citrate causes the development of metabolic acidosis

1425. A 42-year-old woman has had hyperpolymenorrhea and progressing algodismenorrhea for the last 10 years. Gynaecological examination revealed no changes of uterine cervix; discharges are moderate, of chocolate colour, uterus is slightly enlarged and painful, appendages are not palpable, the fornices are deep and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Subserous uterine fibromyoma
b. Adnexal endmetriosis
*c. Uterine endometriosis
d. Uterine carcinoma
e. Endomyometritis

1426. A 47-year-old patient came to see a doctor on the 7th day of disease. The disease developed very fast: after the chill body temperature rose to 40oC and lasted up to 7 hours, then dropped abruptly, which caused profuse sweat. There were three such attacks occuringonce in two days. Two days ago the patient arrived from Africa. Objectively: pale skin, subicteric sclera, significantly enlarged liver and spleen. What is the cause of fever attacks in this disease?
a. Endotoxin of a causative agent
b. Tissue schizogony
*c. Erythrocytic schizogony
d. Exotoxin of a causative agent
e. Gametocytes

1427. Several hours before, a 28-year-old patient suddenly developed acute headache and repeated vomiting, then lost consciousness. Objectively: focal neurological symptoms were not found. Pronounced meningeal symptoms were revealed. AP - 120/80 mm Hg. According to clinical and liquorological findings the patient was diagnosed with subarachnoid haemorrhage. After administration of dehydrants the patients condition somewhat improved. What is the main component of further emergency care?
a. Anticoagulants
*b. Coagulants
c. Antiaggregants
d. Corticosteroids
e. Fibrinolytics

1428. A 38-year-old male works within the range of ionizing radiation. At a routine medical examination he presents no problems. In blood: RBCs - 4,51012/l, Hb- 80 g/l, WBCs - 2,8109/l, thrombocytes – 30109/l. Decide if this person can work with sources of ionizing radiation:
*a. Working with radioactive substances and other sources of ionizing radiation is contraindicated
b. The patient can only work with radioactive substances of low activity
c. The patient is allowed to work with radioactive substances
d. The patient is allowed to work with radioactive substances for the limited period of time
e. The patient can be allowed to work after an extended medical examination

1429. Purulent mediastinitis is diagnosed at a 63-year-old patient. What diseases from the stated below CANNOT cause the purulent mediastinitis?
a. Perforation of the thoracic part of the easophagus
b. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
c. Deep neck phlegmon
*d. Cervical lymphadenitis
e. Perforation of the cervical part of the easophagus

1430. A 53-year-old woman complained of cardiac pain and rhythm intermissions. She had experienced these presentations since childhood. The patients father had a history of cardiac arrhythmias. Objectively: the patient was in grave condition, Ps- 220 bpm, AP- 80/60 mm Hg. ECG: heart rate - 215/min, widening and deformation of QRS complex accompanied by atrioventricular dissociation; positive P wave. Some time later heart rate reduced down to 45/min, there was a complete dissociation of P wave and QRST complex. Which of the following will be the most effective treatment?
a. Calcium antagonists
b. Cholinolytics
*c. Implantation of the artificial pacemaker
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. ?-adrenoreceptor blocking agents

1431. The objective of a statistical study was to find out the extent of seeking medical care by the population. For this purpose 300 residents of the area were interviewed. Information was collected by means of a special questionnaire. What method of collecting information was used by researchers?
a. -
b. Immediate examination
c. Doing extracts
d. Immediate registration
*e. Anamnestic

1432. In a rural health district a child died in the first month of life. In order to analyze this situation it was necessary to complete expert evaluation of medical records. Which medical document was analyzed in the first place?
*a. Child developmental history record
b. Childs medical record
c. Neonatal record
d. Record of vaccinations
e. Medical record of an outpatient

1433. A 43-year-old female patiet complains of eruption on her right leg skin, pain, weakness, body temperature rise up to 38oC. The disease is acute. Objectively: there is an edema on the right leg skin in the region of foot, a well-defined bright red spot in form of flame tips which feels hot. There are isolated vesicles in focus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Contact dermatitis
b. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
c. Toxicoderma
*d. Erysipelas
e. Microbial eczema

1434. A patient with chronic suppurative otitis has developed severe headache, vomiting, body temperature rise. The meningeal symptoms are present. There are no focal neurological symptoms. The further tactics of a doctor should be:
a. Referral for a consultation with otolaryngologist
b. Regular medical check-up
*c. Urgent hospitalization and diagnostic lumbar puncture
d. Administration of anti-inflammatory drugs
e. Skull radiography

1435. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, to- 35,0oC. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. -
b. Apparent death
c. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
*d. Hypothermia
e. Frostbite of trunk and extremities

1436. Examination of placenta revealed a defect. An obstetrician performed manual investigation of uterine cavity, uterine massage. Prophylaxis of endometritis in the postpartum period should involve following actions:
*a. Antibacterial therapy
b. Haemostatic therapy
c. Instrumental revision of uterine cavity
d. Intrauterine instillation of dioxine
e. Contracting agents

1437. During the medical examination at school the schoolchildren had to undergo plantography. After the analysis of footprints platypodia was found in 30% of pupils. What is the percentage of the flatfoot isthmus?
*a. 65%
b. 55%
c. 50%
d. 30%
e. 45%

1438. A 75-year-old male patient complains of slight pain in the right iliac region. The abdominal pain arose 6 days ago and was accompanied by nausea. Surgical examination revealed moist tongue, Ps- 76 bpm. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Abdomen was soft, slightly painful in the right iliac region on deep palpation, the symptoms of the peritoneum irritation were doubtful. In blood: RBCs - 4,01012/l, Hb- 135 g/l, WBCs - 9,5109/l, stab neutrophils - 5%, segmentonuclear - 52%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 5%, ESR - 20 mm/h. Specify the doctors further tactics:
a. Send the patient home
b. Hospitalization, dynamic surveillance
*c. Emergency operation for acute appendicitis
d. Refer the patient to a district therapist
e. Administration of additional examination: abdominal ultrasound, x-ray contrast study of the gastrointestinal tract

1439. A 16-year-old patient who has a history of intense bleedings from minor cuts and sores needs to have the roots of teeth extracted. Examination reveals an increase in volume of the right knee joint, limitation of its mobility. There are no other changes. Blood analysis shows an inclination to anaemia (Hb- 120 g/l). Before the dental intervention it is required to prevent the bleeding by means of:
a. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
b. Calcium chloride
*c. Cryoprecipitate
d. Dried blood plasma
e. Fibrinogen

1440. A 5-year-old child had an attack of palpitation with nausea, dizziness, generalized fatigue. On ECG: tachycardia with heartbeat rate of 220/min. Ventricle complexes are deformed and widened. P wave is absent. What medication is to be prescribed to provide first aid?
*a. Lydocain
b. Seduxen
c. Strophantin
d. Novocainamides
e. Isoptin

1441. To study physical development of children and adolescents, anthropometric studies are widely used. Choose a physiometric method of study from the below given
a. Measurement of growth
*b. Determination of vital capacity of lungs
c. Determination of vertebra form
d. Determination of body weight
e. Determination of thorax form

1442. A 20-year-old adolescent lives in the nidus of tuberculous infection. The tuberculine Mantoux test with 2 TU was determined as hyperergic. What signs determine the hyperergic test of this adolescent?
a. 20 mm papula
b. 12 mm hyperemia
c. 24 mm hyperemia
d. 4 mm papula
*e. 6 mm papula, necrosis

1443. On the second day after preventive vaccination a 2-year-old boy presented with abdominal pain without clear localization, body temperature rose up to 38oC. On the third day the child got red papular haemorrhagic eruption on the extensor surfaces of limbs and around the joints. Knee joints were edematic and slightly painful. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meningococcemia
b. Urticaria
c. Thrombocytopenic purpura
*d. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
e. DIC syndrome

1444. A 2-year-old child in a satisfactory condition periodically presents with moderate proteinuria, microhematuria. USI results: the left kidney is undetectable, the right one is enlarged, there are signs of double pyelocaliceal system. What study is required to specify the diagnosis?
a. Doppler study of renal vessels
b. Radioisotope renal scan
c. Micturating cystography
d. Retrograde urography
*e. Excretory urography

1445. A 56-year-old patient complains of having persistent chest pain on the right for the last 2 months. The pain is not associated with respiration. He also complains of cough with blood-streaked sputum, weakness, decreased performance, fatigue. Chest radiograph shows a globular shade of 4x6 cm connected to the root of the lung in the lower part of the right lung. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pneumonia
*b. Peripheral lung cancer
c. Metastasis
d. Tuberculoma
e. Lung abscess

1446. A 24-year-old female teacher complains of dizziness and heart pain irradiating to the left nipple. Pain is not associated with physical activity and cannot be relieved by nitroglycerin, it abates after taking Valocordin and lasts an hour or more. The patient has a nearly 2-year history of this disease. Objectively: Ps- 76 bpm. AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Heart borders are norma, heart sounds are clear. The ECG shows respiratory arrhythmia. Radiograph of the cervicothoracic spine shows no pathology. Lungs, abdomen are unremarkable. What changes in blood formula can be expected?
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Leukemic hiatus
c. Increased ESR
d. Leukocytosis
*e. No changes

1447. A 30-year-old patient has been admitted to the intensive care unit for multiple bee stings. The skin is covered with cold sweat. The pulse is felt just on the carotid arteries, 110 bpm, respiration is 24/min, rhythmic, weakened. Which drug should be given in the first place?
a. Prednisolone intravenously
b. Adrenalin hydrochloride intramuscularly
c. Tavegil intravenously
*d. Adrenalin hydrochloride intravenously
e. Dopamine intravenously

1448. A 52-year-old patient works as a secretary and has 30 year record of service. She complains of spasms in her right hand during working and inability to type and write. Up to 80% of her work involves hand load. The patient has been presenting with these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: the right hand is tense, there is an increase in muscle tone, attempts to write cause spasms. Examination revealed no pathological changes of CNS. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Spastic form of coordination neurosis
b. Paretic form of coordination neurosis
c. Hysteric neurosis
d. Chronic manganese intoxication
e. Neuralgic form of coordination neurosis

1449. A 36-year-old female patient complains of bruises on the body, gingival haemorrhage, general weakness. A month ago she had a severe domestic poisoning with some pesticide (the patient can not remember the name). She has a 7-year record of working in contact with petroleum products, particularly benzene. In blood: RBCs - 3,21012/l, WBCs - 2,7109/l, thrombocytes – 70109/l. What is the most likely pathology?
a. Chronic fatigue Syndrome
b. Organophosphorus pesticide intoxication
c. Organochlorine pesticide Intoxication
d. Mercury-containing pesticide intoxication
*e. Benzene intoxication

1450. Educational rooms are illuminated with various lighting fittings. What type of lighting fittings is the most appropriate in respect of hygienic norms?
a. Semi-reflected light fittings
b. Combined light fittings
*c. Indirect light fittings
d. Direct light fittings
e. Ambient light fittings

1451. A 35-year-old patient complains of heartburn, sour eructation, burning, compressing retrosternal pain and pain along the esophagus rising during forward bending of body. The patient hasnt been examined, takes Almagel on his own initiative, claims to feel better after its taking. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Functional dyspepsia
b. Cardiospasm
*c. Gastroesophageal reflux disease
d. Gastric ulcer
e. Duodenal ulcer

1452. Deputy of chief medical officer carried out a study of morbidity rate for population which had been served at the polyclinics within the last 5 years. What statistical values can help in calculation of morbidity rates?
a. Average values
b. Dynamic series
c. Standard values
d. Absolute values
*e. Relative values

1453. A farmer hurt his right foot during working in a field and came to the emergency station. He doesnt remember when he got last vaccination and he has never served in the army. Examination of his right foot revealed a contaminated wound up to 5-6 cm long with uneven edges. The further treatment tactics will be:
*a. To make an injection of tetanus anatoxin and antitetanus serum
b. To make an injection of tetanus anatoxin
c. To make an injection of antitetanus serum
d. Surgical d-bridement only
e. To administer an antibiotic

1454. A secundipara has regular birth activity. Three years ago she had cesarean section for the reason of acute intrauterine hypoxia. During parodynia she complains of extended pain in the area of postsurgical scar. Objectively: fetus pulse is rhythmic - 140 bpm. Vaginal examination shows 5 cm cervical dilatation. Fetal bladder is intact. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Augmentation of labour
b. Obstetrical forceps
c. Waiting tactics of labor management
*d. Cesarean section
e. Vaginal delivery

1455. A patient who undergoes treatment at a tuberculosis clinic has complained of having progressing headache for the last 3 weeks. Neurological examination reveals rigidity of occipital muscles, no focal symptoms. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chorea minor
*b. Tuberculous meningitis
c. Brain tumour
d. Myelitis
e. Convexital arachnoiditis

1456. A 7-year-old child was brought to a doctor for a check. The child has a 4-year history of bronchial asthma, asthma attacks occur mainly in spring and summer. Allergy tests revealed hypersensitivity to poplar seed tufts, field herbs. What recommendation should be given?
a. Treatment at a health resort
b. Needle reflexotherapy
*c. Specific hyposensitization
d. Physiotherapy
e. Phytotherapy

1457. A 28-year-old female patient complains of having haemorrhage from the genital tracts for 1 month. 6 months ago she had natural delivery and gave birth to a girl weighing 3100 g. Objectively: the uterus is enlarged to 9-10 weeks, mobile, painless, of heterogenous consistency. Examination reveals vaginal cyanosis, anaemia and body temperature rise up to 37,8oC. There is a significant increase in hCG concentration in the urine. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Pregnancy
b. Endometritis
c. Uterine fibromyoma
*d. Uterine chorionepithelioma
e. Hydatidiform mole

1458. Among the inhabitants of a workmens settlement located near an industrial plant the cases of nervous and endocrine system diseases as well as renal diseases became more frequent. Blood analyses revealed a decrease in sulfhydryl groups. These pathologies might have been caused by the following substance released into the environment:
*a. Mercury
b. Lead
c. Cadmium
d. Boron
e. Chromium

1459. A 27-year-old patient complains of irritability, tearfulness, depression, and sometimes aggressiveness, headache, nausea, vomiting, swelling of the mammary glands. The mentioned problems arise 5-6 days before menstruation and gradually progress until menstruation, 3 days after it the problems disappear. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Premature pathological climacterium
b. Secondary psychogenic amenorrhea
c. Algomenorrhea
d. Preclimacterium syndrome
*e. Premenstrual syndrome

1460. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Perforated Meckels diverticulum
*b. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum
c. Acute ileitis
d. Ileocecal tuberculosis
e. Ulcerative colitis

1461. A patient developed acute retrosternal pain getting worse when throwing the head back and swallowing after the pneumatic dilatation of oesophageal stricture  Objectively: dilatation of the neck veins, dropped beat pulse, signs of purulent intoxication, oliguria, emphysema of the upper portion of chest. What disease can be suspected?
a. Thrombosis of the superior vena cava
*b. Purulent mediastinitis
c. Pleural empyema
d. Spontaneous pneumothorax
e. Acute myocardial infarction

1462. A 51-year-old patient complains of having intensive bloody discharges from vagina for 15 days after delay of menstruation for 2,5 months. In anamnesis: disorders of menstrual function during a year, at the same time she felt extreme irritability and had sleep disorders. US examination results: uterus corresponds with age norms, appendages have no pecularities, endometrium is 14 mm thick. What is the doctors tactics?
*a. Diagnostic curettage of uterine cavity
b. Conservative treatment of bleeding
c. TORCH-infection test
d. Supravaginal amputation of uterus without appendages
e. Hysterectomy

1463. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patients condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min, Ps- 96 bpm, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are moist rales of different types above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pyopneumothorax
*b. Acute pulmonary abscess
c. Pleural empyema
d. Exudative pleuritis
e. Acute focal pneumonia

1464. A patient, aged 16, complains of headache, mainly in the frontal and temporal areas, superciliary arch, appearing of vomiting at the peak of headache, pain during the eyeballs movement, joints pain. On examination: excited, to- 39oC, Ps- 110/min. Tonic and clonus cramps. Uncertain meningeal signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Respiratory syncytial virus
*b. Influenza with cerebral edema manifestations
c. Influenza, typical disease duration
d. Adenovirus infection
e. Parainfluenza

1465. A 14-year-old patient with signs of internal haemorrhage has been taken to a hospital after a fight. He has had haemophilia A since childhood. He has been diagnosed with retroperitoneal hematoma. What should be administered in the first place?
*a. Cryoprecipitate
b. Fresh blood
c. Platelet concentrate
d. Dried plasma
e. Aminocapronic acid

1466. A 60-year-old female patient had been admitted to a hospital for acute transmural infarction. An hour later the patients contition got worse. She developed progressing dyspnea, dry cough. Respiratory rate - 30/min, heart rate - 130/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds were muffled, there was also diastolic shock on the pulmonary artery. The patient presented with medium moist rales in the lower parts of lungs on the right and on the left. Body temperature - 36,4oC. What drug should be given in the first place?
a. Heparin
b. Digoxin
c. Dopamine
d. Aminophylline
*e. Promedol

1467. A 54-year-old drowned man was rescued from the water and delivered to the shore. Objectively: the man is unconscious, pale, breathing cannot be auscultated, pulse is thready. Resuscitation measures allowed to save the patient. What complications may develop in the near future?
a. Encephalopathy
b. Bronchospasm
c. Respiratory arrest
*d. Pulmonary edema
e. Cardiac arrest

1468. A 24-year-old emotionally-labile woman presents with irritation, depressed mood, palpitation, shooting pain in the heart area, generalized fatigue following the divorce. On examination: palm hyperhydrosis, pulse rate- 72-78 bpm, labile, heart without changes. ECG is normal. What is the most probable pathology in this case?
a. Depressive neurosis
b. Schizophrenia
c. Ipochondric neurosis
*d. Neurasthenia
e. Compulsive neurosis

1469. A 30-year-old woman with a long history of chronic pyelonephritis complains about considerable weakness, sleepiness, decrease in diuresis down to 100 ml per day. AP- 200/120 mm Hg. In blood: creatinine - 0,62 millimole/l, hypoproteinemia, albumines - 32 g/l, potassium - 6,8 millimole/l, hypochromic anemia, increased ESR. What is the first step in the patient treatment tactics?
a. Blood transfusion
b. Enterosorption
c. Haemosorption
*d. Haemodialysis
e. Antibacterial therapy

1470. A 5-grade pupil complains about extensive skin rash accompanied by intensive itch, especially at night. Objectively: there are small red papules set mostly in pairs in the region of interdigital folds on both hands, on the flexor surface of radicarpal articulations, abdomen and buttock skin as well as internal surface of thighs. In the centre of some papules vesicles or serohaemorrhagic crusts can be seen. There are multiple excoriations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatitis
b. Eczema
*c. Scabies
d. Ringworm of body
e. Toxicoderma

1471. A 35-year-old patient complains about pain and morning stiffness of hand joints and temporomandibular joints that lasts over 30 minutes. She has had these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: edema of proximal interphalangeal digital joints and limited motions of joints. What examination should be administered?
a. Rose-Waaler reaction
b. Proteinogram
c. Complete blood count
*d. Roentgenography of hands
e. Immunogram

1472. A 60-year-old woman, mother of 6 children, developed a sudden onset of upper abdominal pain radiating to the back, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, fever and chills. Subsequently, she noticed yellow discoloration of her sclera and skin. On physical examination the patient was found to be febrile with temp of 38,9oC, along with right upper quadrant tenderness. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
b. Choledochal cyst
c. Benign biliary stricture
d. Malignant biliary stricture
*e. Choledocholithiasis

1473. A 35-year-old victim of a road accident has got an injury of the right side of his chest. Objectively: respiration rate - 28-30/min, respiration is shallow, restricted respiratory excursion and acrocyanosis are present. Ps- 110 bpm, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Respiratory sounds over the right lung cannot be auscultated. Chest radiograph shows fractures of the VI-VII ribs on the right, the right pleural cavity contains both air and fluid, with the fluid at about the level of the V rib, the shadow of the mediastinum is displaced to the left. What first aid should be provided to the victim?
*a. Puncture of the pleural cavity
b. Urgent thoracotomy
c. Antibiotic administration
d. Artificial ventilation of lungs
e. Vagosympathetic blockade

1474. A 32-year-old patient consulted a doctor about being inable to get pregnant for 5-6 years. 5 ago the primipregnancy ended in artificial abortion. After the vaginal examination and USI the patient was diagnosed with endometrioid cyst of the right ovary. What is the optimal treatment method?
a. Anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Hormonal therapy with androgenic hormones
c. Conservative therapy with estrogen-gestagenic drugs
d. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
*e. Surgical laparoscopy

1475. A 22-year-old girl has been complaining of having itching rash on her face for 2 days. She associates this disease with application of cosmetic face cream. Objectively: apparent reddening and edema of skin in the region of cheeks, chin and forehead; fine papulovesicular rash. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
*b. Allergic dermatitis
c. Neurodermatitis
d. Eczema
e. Dermatitis simplex

1476. An unconscious 35-year-old patient has been delivered by an ambulance to the intensive care unit. Objectively: the patient is in semicoma. Moderate mydriasis is present. The reaction of pupils to light is reduced. The reaction to verbal instructions is missing. AP is150/100 mm Hg, there is tachycardia. Blood contains methanol. What antidote should be administered?
a. Tavegil
b. Unithiol
c. Naloxone
*d. Ethanol
e. Thiamine chloride

1477. A 20-year-old patient complains of breath shortness, continuous dull heart pain, irritability. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory, the pulse is labile, AP- 130/60 mm Hg. ECG shows repolarization disorder. The patient has been diagnosed with cardiac-type neurocirculatory dystonia. The patient should receive treatment under the following conditions:
*a. Outpatient treatment
b. Inpatient treatment at the psychiatric department
c. Inpatient treatment at the cardiology department
d. Inpatient treatment at the therapeutic department
e. Inpatient treatment at the cardiac surgery department

1478. The correlation between the service record and eosinophil concentration in blood was studied in workers at dyeing shops of textile factories. What index will be the most informative for the analysis of this data?
a. Sign index
b. Standardized index
*c. Correlation factor
d. Fitting criterion
e. Students criterion

1479. A 25-year-old woman complains of profuse foamy vaginal discharges, foul, burning and itching in genitalia region. She has been ill for a week. Extramarital sexual life. On examination: hyperemia of vaginal mucous, bleeding on touching, foamy leucorrhea in the urethral area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bacterial vaginosis
b. Gonorrhea
*c. Trichomonas colpitic
d. Chlamydiosis
e. Vagina candidomicosis

1480. A neonate was born from the 1st gestation on term. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it became more acute. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were observed. Indirect bilirubin level was 275mu mol/L, direct bilirubin level - 5mu mol/L, Hb- 150 g/l. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (Rh - incompatibility)
b. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder
*c. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (??0 incompatibility), icteric type
d. Hepatitis
e. Physiological jaundice

1481. Sanitary-veterinary examination of a cow carcass revealed measle contamination (2-3 measles per 10 cm2). What tactics should be chosen in respect of this meat consumption?
a. Meat should be disinfected by freezing
b. Meat can be sold without any restrictions
c. Meat should be disinfected by boiling
*d. The whole carcass should be technically disposed
e. The carcass should be used for the production of canned meat

1482. A 45-year-old man has been exhibiting high activity for the last 2 weeks, he became talkative, euphoric, had little sleep, claimed being able "to save the humanity" and solve the problem of cancer and AIDS, gave money the starangers. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Catatonic excitation
b. Schizo-affective disorder
c. Panic disorder
*d. Maniacal onset
e. Agitated depression

1483. A 6-year-old child complains of frequent liquid stool and vomiting. On the 2nd day of desease the child presented with inertness, temperature rise up to 38,2oC, Ps- 150 bpm, scaphoid abdomen, palpatory painful sigmoid colon, defecation 10 times a day with liquid, scarce stool with mucus and streaks of green. What is a provisional diagnosis?
*a. Shigellosis
b. Escherichiosis
c. Intestinal amebiasis
d. Yersiniosis
e. Salmonellosis

1484. A 78-year-old patient complains of severe pain in the lower abdomen, perineum and rectum; intense urge to urinate and inability to urinate without assistance. Abdomen palpation reveals a moderately painful globular formation above the pubis, there is percussion dullness over the formation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Paradoxical ischuria
*b. Acute urinary retention
c. Chronic urinary retention
d. Chronic incomplete urinary retention
e. Cystitis

1485. A 47-year-old female patient complains of leg heaviness, fatigue when standing and walking. This feeling disappears when she takes a horizontal position. Objectively: dilatation of the superficial veins of the left shin and thigh with pigmentation and trophic skin disorders. What functional test should the examination be started with?
a. Pratt test 2
b. Perthes test
c. Pratt test 1
d. Sheinis test
*e. Trendelenburgs test

1486. A 58-year-old female patient complains about periodical headache, dizziness and ear noise. She has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. Objectively: heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 76/min, there is diastolic shock above aorta, AP is 180/110 mm Hg. In urine: OD- 1,014. Daily loss of protein with urine is 1,5 g. What drug should be chosen for treatment of arterial hypertension?
*a. Ihibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme
b. Calcium channel antagonist
c. Thiazide diuretic
d. ?-blocker
e. ?-blocker

1487. A 65-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). The rate of prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Bone scintigraphy
b. Excretory urography
c. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
d. Roentgenography of chest
*e. Computer tomography of pelvis

1488. A citys population is 400000 inhabitants in 2005 there were registered 5600 deaths, including 3300 cases caused by cardiovascular diseases, 730 - by tumours. Which of the following indicators allows to characterize the share of the circulatory system diseases as the cause of death in the city?
a. Demonstrativeness index
*b. Extensive index
c. Ratio
d. Intensive index
e. Index of relative intensity

1489. A 54-year-old patient complains of weakness, weight loss despite the unchanged appetite, frequent urination, skin itch for six months. Some time ago the patient underwent treatment for furunculosis. She hasnt been examined recently. Objectively: malnutrition, dry skin with signs of scratching. Small lymph nodes can be palpated in the axillary regions. Changes in the internal organs are absenr. What testing must be administered in the first place?
a. Complete blood count
b. Blood sterility testing
c. Endoscopy of stomach
d. Lymph node biopsy
*e. Blood sugar test on an empty stomach

1490. A 51-year-old female patient complains of frequent defecation and liquid blood-streaked stools with mucus admixtures, diffuse pain in the inferolateral abdomen, 6 kg weight loss over the previous month. Objectively: body temperature - 37,4°C, malnutrition, skin is pale and dry. Abdomen is soft, sigmoid is painful and spasmodic, makes a rumbling sound. Liver is dense, painful, extends 3 cm below the costal margin. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Non-specific ulcerative colitis
b. Helminthic invasion
c. Sprue
d. Bacillary dysentery
e. Intestinal enzymopathy

1491. A 40 week pregnant secundipara is 28 years old. Contractions are very active. Retraction ring is at the level of navel, the uterus is hypertonic, in form of hourglass. On auscultation the fetal heart sounds are dull, heart rate is 100/min. AP of the parturient woman is 130/80 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. RIisk of hysterorrhexis
b. Mazolysis
c. Attack of eclampsia
d. Disturbed labour
e. Complete hysterorrhexis

1492. A 3-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
a. Wound abscess
b. Posttraumatic phlegmon
c. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
d. Suture sinus
*e. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis

1493. A patient with uterine fibromyoma sized up to 8-9 weeks of pregnancy consulted a gynaecologist about acute pain in the lower abdomen. Examination revealed pronounced positive symptoms of peritoneal irritation, high leukocytosis. Vaginal examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged up to 9 weeks of pregnancy due to the fibromatous nodes, one of which was mobile and extremely painful. Appendages were not palpable. Discharges were mucous, coming in moderate amounts. What is the treatment tactics?
a. Fractional diagnostic curettage of the uterine cavity
b. Surveillance and spasmolytic therapy
*c. Urgent surgery (laparotomy)
d. Surgical laparoscopy
e. Surveillance and antibacterial therapy

1494. A 6-year-old child has duodenal ulcer. What antibacterial drug should be co-administered together with metronidazole and De-Nol in order to eradicate Helicobacter pylori infection?
a. Tetracycline
b. Biseptol
c. Oleandomycin
d. Sulfadimethoxinum
*e. Amoxicillin

1495. Head of a department and a trade-union group have appealed to the head of a hospital about dismissal of the senior nurse who has 17 year record of service. The facts of charge were confirmed and recognized by the nurse herself. This nurse lives with a daughter (who is divorced and unemployed) and a 9-month-old grandson. Make an administrative decision:
a. To discharge the worker i.e. to satisfy demands of the collective
b. To shift the solution of this problem on other officials or public organizations
c. To issue the sick list
d. -
*e. To continue the worker in office with a warning of dismissal in case of repeated violation of labor discipline

1496. A 58-year-old patient complains about sensation of numbness, sudden paleness of II-IV fingers, muscle rigidness, intermittent pulse. The patient presents also with polyarthralgia, dysphagia, constipations. The patients face is masklike, solid edema of hands is present. The heart is enlarged; auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. In blood: ESR- 20 mm/h, crude protein - 85/l, gamma-globulines - 25%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
b. Dermatomyositis
*c. Systemic scleroderma
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Raynauds disease

1497. During self-examination a 22-year-old patient revealed a mammary tumour. Palpation revealed a firm, painless, freely mobile formation up to 2 cm, peripheral lymph nodes were not changed. USI results: in the superior external quadrant of the right mammary gland there was a big formation of increased echogenicity, sized 18x17 mm. The patient was provisionally diagnosed with fibroadenoma. What is a doctors further tactics?
a. Radical mastectomy
b. Dynamic follow-up
c. Nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs, oral contraceptives
*d. Surgical removal of the tumour prior to pregnancy
e. Surgical treatment after pregnancy

1498. A 3-year-old child with ARVI had been administered biseptol, paracetamol, nazoferon. On the third day of treatment the babys condition deteriorated: he developed sore throat, stomatitis, conjunctivitis, hypersalivation, painful dark red spots on the neck, face, chest and legs, then the spots were replaced with vesicles. Examination revealed lesions of mucous membranes around the mouth and anus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Bullous dermatitis
b. Serum sickness
*c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Atopic dermatitis
e. Chickenpox

1499. A 68-year-old patient consulted a doctor about a tumour in her left mammary gland. Objectively: in the upper internal quadrant of the left mammary gland there is a neoplasm up to 2,5 cm in diameter, dense, uneven, painless on palpation. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cancer
b. Lipoma
c. Mastopathy
d. Cyst
e. Fibroadenoma

1500. Half an hour ago a 67-year-old patient with a hernia picked up a heavy object, which caused acute pain in the region of hernia protrusion, the hernia couldnt be reduced. Objectively: the hernia in the right inguinal region is roundish, tight, moderately painful; during palpation it was reduced back to the cavity, the pain was gone. Specify the further medical tactics:
a. Immediate hernioplasty
b. Planned hernioplasty a month later
c. Immediate laparotomy
*d. Inpatient surveillance
e. Planned hernioplasty a year later

1501. A 10-year-old girl was admitted to a hospital with carditis presentations. It is known from the anamnesis that two weeks ago she had exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. What is the most likely etiological factor in this case?
a. Staphylococcus
*b. Streptococcus
c. Pneumococcus
d. Proteus
e. Klebsiella

1502. A hospital admitted an 11-year-old boy diagnosed with medium-severe asthma, exacerbation period. In order to arrest the attacks the boy was administered broncholytic nebulizer therapy. During the day the childs condition stabilized. What is the most appropriate method for further monitoring of respiratory function in this patient?
a. Pneumotachometry
b. Bronchodilatation tests
c. Spirometry
*d. Peak flowmetry
e. Veloergometry

1503. A 46-year-old patient once took part in elimination of breakdown at an atomic power plant. Currently he is being treated at an in-patient hospital. He was diagnosed with progressing vegetative insufficiency. This disease relates to the following group of ionizing radiation effects:
a. Heterosis
b. Hormesis
*c. Somato-stochastic
d. Genetic
e. Somatic

1504. A 56-year-old patient was undergoing a surgery for suture repair of perforated ulcer. During the operation the cardiomonitor registered ventricular fibrillation. The first-priority measure should be:
a. Injection of calcium chloride
b. Injection of lidocaine
c. Injection of adrenalin
d. Injection of atropine
*e. Electrical defibrillation

1505. It is planned to organize a rural outpatient clinic. The patients will be able to visit the doctors of the following specialities:
a. Therapeutist, pediatrician, neurologist
*b. Therapeutist, dentist, pediatrician, obstetrician-gynecologist
c. Pediatrician, obstetrician-gynaecologist, ophthalmologist
d. Obstetrician-gynaecologist, therapeutist
e. Pediatrician, therapeutist, ophthalmologist

1506. A patient has chronic heart failure of the II stage. He takes furosemide regularly three times a week. He had developed bronchopneumonia and had been administered combined pharmacotherapy. On the fifth day of therapy the patient complained of hearing impairment. What drug coadministered with furosemide might have caused the hearing loss?
a. Linex
b. Mucaltin
c. Nystatin
*d. Gentamicin
e. Tavegil

1507. Routine examination of a child with a history of bronchial asthma reveals AP of 140/90 mm Hg. The most likely cause of the hypertension is:
*a. Renal disease
b. Obesity
c. Chronic lung disease
d. Coarctation of the aorta
e. Theophylline overdose

1508. Forensic medical expertise of corpse of a newborn revealed: body weight 3500 g, body length 50 cm, the umbilical cord was smooth, moist, glossy, without any signs of drying. Hydrostatic tests were positive. The test results are the evidence of:
a. Stillbirth
b. Hyaline membrane disease
c. Secondary atelectasis
*d. Live birth
e. Primary atelectasis

1509. A 24-year-old man on the 5th day of acute respiratory disease with high grade temperature started having strong headaches, systemic dizziness, sensation of double vision, paresis of mimic muscles to the right, tickling by swallowing. Diagnosis: Acute viral encephalitis. Determine the basic direction of the emergent therapy
*a. Zovirax
b. Glucocorticoids
c. Hemodesis
d. Lasix
e. Cephtriaxon

1510. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
a. Impetigo neonatorum
b. Impetigo
c. Miliaria
*d. Vesiculopustulosis
e. Epidermolysis bullosa

1511. A 12-year-old child had three attacks of acute rheumatic fever accompanied by carditis. Examination revealed the symptoms of chronic tonsillitis, mitral insufficiency, carious teeth. What is the optimal method of secondary prophylaxis?
a. Oral cavity sanitation
b. Course of cardiotrophic drugs twice a year
c. Tonsillectomy
d. Year-round bicillin prophylaxis for 3 years
*e. Year-round bicillin prophylaxis till the age of 25

1512. A multigravida with Rh-isosensitization was found to have a decrease in anti-Rh titer from 1:32 to 1:8 at 33-34 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound revealed double contour of head, ebnlargement of fetal liver, placental thickness of 50 mm. The patient has indication for:
a. Course of desensitizing therapy
b. Plasmapheresis
c. Administration of anti-Rh gamma globulin
d. Repeated (after 2 weeks) USI
*e. Premature delivery

1513. A girl is 12-year-old. Yesterday she was overcooled. Now she is complaining on pain in suprapubic area, frequent painful urination by small portions, temperature is 37,8oC. Pasternatsky symptom is negative. Urine analysis: protein - 0,033 g/L, WBC- 20-25 in f/vis, RBC- 1-2 in f/vis. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Urolithiasis
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
d. Acute pyelonephritis
*e. Acute cystitis

1514. A full-term newborn was born with body weight of 4000 g, body length of 57 cm. Reaction to the postnatal check was absent. There was diffuse cyanosis, heart rate of 80/min. What resuscitation measures should be taken?
a. Give 100% oxygen
b. Intubate the child and start ALV
*c. Start ALV with a mask
d. Start tactile stimulation
e. Give an injection of naloxone

1515. Preventive examination of a 50-year-old woman revealed a dense tumour of the right mammary gland up to 5 cm in diameter without distinct outlines. The skin over the tumour looked like lemon peel. Palpation revealed a lymph node in the axillary region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mastitis
b. Diffuse mastopathy
*c. Breast cancer
d. Lactocele
e. Breast lipoma

1516. The condition of a 3-year-old child with acute non-rheumatic myocarditis has suddenly deteriorated: he presents with anxiety, acrocyanosis, peripheral edemata, dyspnea. Auscultation of lungs reveals fine moist rales on both sides mainly in the lower parts. AP- 65/40 mm Hg. HR- 150/min, heart sounds are muffled, arrhythmic (extrasystole). Liver is +4 cm. Oliguria is present. The child has been diagnosed with acute heart failure. Which method of examination is most informative for assessing the childs status dynamics?
a. ECG
b. Diuresis monitoring
c. Monitoring of K+, Na+ concentration in blood
d. 24-hour monitoring of heart rhythm
*e. Echocardiography

1517. A 40-year-old female patient complains of having a bulge on the anterior surface of neck for 5 years. Objectively: Ps- 72 bpm, arterial pressure - 110/70 mm Hg, in the right lobe of thyroid gland palpation reveals a mobile 4x2 cm node, the left lobe is not palpable, the basal metabolic rate is 6%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Riedels thyroiditis
*b. Nodular euthyroid goiter
c. The median cervical cyst
d. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter
e. Mixed euthyroid goiter

1518. A woman consulted a doctor on the 14th day after labour about sudden pain, hyperemy and induration of the left mammary gland, body temperature rise up to 39oC, headache, indisposition. Objectively: fissure of nipple, enlargement of the left mammary gland, pain on palpation. What pathology would you think about in this case?
a. Breast cancer
b. Fibrous adenoma of the left mammary gland
c. Lacteal cyst with suppuration
*d. Lactational mastitis
e. Phlegmon of mammary gland

1519. Two hours ago a 38-year-old patient got pain in his right shin. He was diagnosed with popliteal artery embolism, acute arterial insufficiency of grade I. What is the most appropriate therapeutic tactics?
a. Amputation at the middle of shin
b. Resection of the popliteal artery
c. Bypass grafting
*d. Embolectomy
e. Destruction of the embolus by the catheter

1520. A 59-year-old male patient with essential hypertension of stage II is registered with the dispensary department of a polyclinic. The patient regularly takes ACE inhibitors and calcium antagonists. How often should a therapeutist examine this patient (except for exacerbation periods)?
a. Every 9 months
b. Every 4 months
*c. Every 3 months
d. Once a year
e. Every 6 months

1521. A 10 week pregnant woman was admitted to a hospital for recurrent pain in the lower abdomen, bloody discharges from the genital tracts. The problems turned up after ARVI. The woman was registered for antenatal care. Speculum examination revealed cyanosis of vaginal mucosa, clean cervix, open cervical canal discharging blood and blood clots; the lower pole of the gestational sac was visible. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Pregnancy maintenance therapy
b. Antiviral therapy
c. Hysterectomy
d. Expectant management, surveillance
*e. Curettage of the uterus

1522. A 49-year-old patient complains of dyspnea, cough. There are no sputum discharges. He has repeatedly used salbutamol and intal but with no effect. Objectively: he is only able to sit while leaning on the table. Cyanosis of face, acrocyanosis are present. Breathing is shallow, laboured, in some parts it cannot be auscultated; there are diffuse rales, expiration is significantly prolonged. Heart sounds are muffled, tachycardia is present. Ps - 112/min., AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Liver is located near the costal arch. There are no peripheral edemata. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Foreign object aspiration
b. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
c. Bronchiale asthma, moderate gravity
d. Cardiac asthma
*e. Status asthmaticus

1523. At the radiological unit of a hospital gamma-devices of radiotherapy of "Agat" type and other closed sources of ionizing radiation are used for treatment of malignant neoplasms. What measures are to be taken to protect personnel during working with radioactive sources of such type?
a. Screening of the source and the use of means of individual protection of respiration organs
*b. Reduction of working time and screening of the source
c. Systematical cleansing of surfaces from the radioactive contamination and shortening of working time
d. The increase of distance to the source and individual hygiene compliance
e. Capsulation of devices and organization of room ventilation

1524. The results of 5 year monitoring allowed to estimate the level of environmental influence upon health indices of popultaion. What statistic method should be chosen?
a. Calculation of coefficient of difference validity
b. Calculation of conformity coefficient
c. Calculation of dynamic indices
d. Calculation of regression coefficient
*e. Calculation of correlation coefficient

1525. A 27-year-old patient complains of nasal haemorrhages, multiple bruises on the anterior surface of the trunk and extremities, sudden weakness. In blood: Hb- 74 g/l, reticulocytes - 16%, RBCs - 2,51012/l, platelets – 30109/l, ESR- 25 mm/h. What is the most effective measure for the treatment of thrombocytopenia?
a. Cytostatics
b. Vitamin B12
*c. Splenectomy
d. Iron preparations
e. Hemotransfusion

1526. Hygienic expertise of a sample taken from the batch of grain revealed 2% of grains infected with microscopic Fusarium fungi. On the ground of laboratory analyses this batch of grain should be:
a. Used for forage production
*b. Sold without restrictions
c. Destroyed
d. Tested for toxicity
e. Used for ethanol production

1527. A 3-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital because of ostealgia and body temperature rise up to 39oC. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, unable to stand for ostealgia, there is apparent intoxication, lymph nodesare enlarged up to 1,5 cm. Liver can be palpated 3 cm below the costal margin, spleen - 2 cm below the costal margin. In blood: RBCs - 3,01012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, colour index - 0,9, thrombocytes – 190109/l, WBCs - 3,2109/l, eosinophils - 1, stab neutrophils - 1, segmented neutrophils - 0, lymphocytes - 87, monocytes - 2, ESR - 36 mm/h. What examination should be conducted in order to specify the diagnosis?
a. Lymph node puncture
b. Computer tomography
c. Ultrasound
d. Lymph node biopsy
*e. Sternal puncture

1528. A girl of 3 months presents with rhinitis, dyspnea, dry cough. These manifestations has been observed for two days. Objectively: the child has pale skin, acrocyanosis, shallow respiration at the rate of 80/min. Percussion reveals handbox resonance over the whole surface of lungs, there are a lot of fine rales. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Foreign body of the airway
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Mucoviscidosis
*d. Acute bronchiolitis
e. Pneumonia

1529. A 29-year-old female patient complains of dyspnea, heaviness and chest pain on the right, body temperature rise up to 37,2oC. The disease is associated with a chest trauma received 4 days ago. Objectively: skin is pale and moist. Ps- 90 bpm, regular. Palpation reveals a dull sound on the right, auscultation reveals significantly weakened vesicular breathing. In blood: RBCs - 2,81012/l, colour index - 0,9, Hb- 100 g/l, WBCs - 8,0109/l, ESR - 17 mm/h. What results of diagnostic puncture of the pleural cavity can be expected?
a. Transudate
b. Chylous liquid
*c. Haemorrhagic punctate
d. Exudate
e. Purulent punctate

1530. A 25-year-old patient complains of general weakness, dry cough, sweating, subfebrile temperature. Objectively: lung auscultation reveals vesicular resiration with no wheezing. Fluorogram shows focal shadows of high intensity in the 1-2 segments of the right lung. Mantoux test gave a reaction of 16 mm of induration. What clinical form of tuberculosis is most likely?
a. Tuberculoma
b. Miliary
c. Disseminated
*d. Focal
e. Infiltrative

1531. Production areas of a greenhouse complex have the following microclimate parameters: air temperature - 42oC, humidity - 98%, air velocity - 0,05 mps, temperature of enclosing surfaces - 15oC. Characterize the microclimate of production areas:
a. Uncomfortable
b. Cooling
c. Comfortable
d. Satisfactory
*e. Overheated

1532. A child is 2 days old. He was born with a weight of 2900 kg, body length of 50 cm. On examination the skin is intensely red, elastic, with preserved turgor. Puerile respiration is present. Respiration rate - 40/min, cardiac sounds are rhythmic, sonorous. HR- 138/min. The abdomen is soft. The liver extends 2 cm below the costal margin. Diuresis is sufficient. Stool is in form of meconium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Neonatal phlegmon
c. Toxic erythema of the newborn
*d. Physiological erythema of the newborn
e. Exfoliative Ritters dermatitis

1533. All the joints on the left elbow of a newborn are extended, the whole arm hangs vertically along the trunk with the forearm pronated. Active movements in the elbow joint are absent but present in the shoulder joint. The hand is flattened, atrophied, cold to the touch, hangs passively. Grasp reflex and hand-mouth reflex on the affected side are missing. Haemogram values are normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
b. Osteomyelitis
c. Complete obstetrical paralysis
*d. Inferior distal obstetrical paralysis
e. Proximal obstetrical paralysis

1534. A 25-year-old female patient complains about having amenorrhea for 3 years. She associates it with difficult labour complicated by massive hemorrhage. She also complains of loss of weight, hair fragility and loss, lack of appetite and depression. Objective examination reveals no pathological changes of uterus and its appendages. What is the desease pathogenesis?
a. Hyperproduction of androgens
b. Hyperproduction of prolactin
c. Hyperproduction of estrogens
d. Hypoproduction of progesterone
*e. Hypoproduction of gonadotropin

1535. While staying in a stuffy room a 19-year-old emotionally labile girl developed severe weakness, dizziness, blackout, nausea and loss of consciousness without convulsions. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, the skin is pale, extremities are cold. AP - 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 96/min, deficient, breathing is shallow. Pupillary and tendon reflexes are present. There are no pathological signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hysterical neurosis
*b. Syncope
c. Vegetovascular paroxysm
d. Transient ischemic attack
e. Epileptic attack

1536. A 67-year-old male complains of dyspnea on exertion, attacks of retrosternal pain, dizziness. He has no history of rheumatism. Objectively: pale skin, acrocyanosis. There are rales in the lower parts of lungs. There is systolic thrill in the II intercostal space on the right, coarse systolic murmur conducted to the vessels of neck. AP- 130/90 mm Hg, heart rate - 90/min, regular rhythm. The liver extends 5 cm under the edge of costal arch, shin edemata are present. Specify the assumed valvular defect:
a. Ventricular septal defect
b. Mitral insufficiency
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
d. Tricuspid regurgitation
*e. Aortic stenosis

1537. An infant was born with body mass 3 kg and body length 50 cm. Now he is 3 years old. His brother is 7 years old, suffers from rheumatic fever. Mother asked the doctor for a cardiac check up of the 3-year-old son. Where is the left relative heart border located?
*a. 1 cm left from the left medioclavicular line
b. 1 cm right from the left parasternal line
c. 1 cm left from he left parasternal line
d. Along the left medioclavicular line
e. 1 cm right from the left medioclavicular line

1538. A 30-year-old patient was delivered to the admission ward of the infectious disease department. The disease had started acutely on the background of normal temperature with the appearance of frequent, liquid, profuse stool without pathological impurities. Diarrhea was not accompanied by abdominal pain. 12 hours later there appeared recurrent profuse vomiting. The patient rapidly developed dehydration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cholera
b. Staphylococcal food toxicoinfection
c. Salmonellosis
d. Shigellosis
e. Campylobacteriosis

1539. Routine examination of a 16-year-old boy revealed the presence of three heart sounds on auscultation. The third sound is low and occurs in early diastole, there is no additional murmur. In history: pneumonia six months ago. The patient presents no problems. Examination revealed hyposthenia, underdevelopment of muscles. Laboratory and instrumental studies reveald no peculiarities. What is the origin of the additional heart sound?
*a. Physiological III sound
b. Pericardial diastolic sound
c. The sound of the mitral valve opening
d. The sound of the tricuspid valve opening
e. Protodiastolic gallop rhythm

1540. On the 10th day postpartum a puerperant woman complains of pain and heaviness in the left mammary gland. Body temperature is 38,8oC, Ps- 94 bpm. The left mammary gland is edematic, the supero-external quadrant of skin is hyperemic. Fluctuation symptom is absent. The nipples discharge drops of milk when pressed. What is a doctors further tactics?
a. Inhibition of lactation
b. Physiotherapy
*c. Antibiotic therapy, immobilization and expression of breast milk
d. Opening of the abscess and drainage of the mammary gland
e. Compress to both mammary glands

1541. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in respect of its volume and composition. Muscle tonus is within norm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Microcephaly
b. Pylorostenosis
c. Meningitis
*d. Pylorospasm
e. Craniostenosis

1542. A 37-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine that is getting stronger during walking; restricted mobility, edema of the right side of abdomen. He has a history of focal tuberculosis. X-ray picture shows the destruction of the adjacent surfaces of the 1-2 vertebral bodies of the lumbar spine, vertebral body height is decreased, intervertebral foramen is undetectable. Abdominal ultrasound reveals a 15x20 cm formation in the retroperitoneal space, there are echo signals of fluid presence. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Spondylolisthesis of the lumbar spine
b. Osteochondrosis
*c. Tuberculous spondylitis of the lumbar spine
d. Fracture of the 1-2 vertebral bodies of the lumbar spine
e. Spinal metastases

1543. A 65-year-old patient complains of gradual worsening of the left eye vision during 10 months. On physical examination: acuty of vision of the left eye is 0,01, not correctable. The eye is quiet, pupil of the eye is grayish, reflex from the eye-ground is absent. Intraocular pressure is 18 mm/Hg. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Exfoliation of the retina
b. Leukoma of the cornea
*c. Senile cataract
d. Open-angle glaucoma
e. Disorder of blood circulation in retina vessels

1544. A neonatologist examining a full-term mature baby revealed the shortening and external rotation of the newborns lower extremity. Clinical examination revealed positive Ortolani sign, symptom of non-vanishing pulse, additional skin folds on the internal surface of thigh. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dysplasia of the hip joint
*b. Congenital hip dislocation
c. Femoral neck fracture
d. Fracture of the femoral shaft
e. Varus deformity of the femoral neck

1545. A survey radiograph of a miner (24 years of service record, the dust concentration in the workplace is at the rate of 260-280 mg/m3 with 15% of free silica) shows lung changes that are typical for pneumoconiosis. What type of pneumoconiosis is it?
a. Carboconiosis
*b. Anthracosilicosis
c. Silicosis
d. Anthracosilicatosis
e. Silicatosis

1546. A 42-year-old builder consulted a doctor about a foot injury with a nail that he got in the morning of the same day. The wound was washed with water. Three years ago he was vaccinated against tetanus. Examination established satisfactory condition of the patient. The left foot was slightly edematic, there was a stab wound on the sole. In order to prevent tetanus it is primarily required to:
a. Treat the wound with suds
*b. Give an intravenous injection of 0,5 ml of tetanus anatoxin
c. Give an intravenous injection of 3000 IU of antitetanus serum
d. Administer a course of antibiotic therapy
e. Give an intravenous injection of 1 ml of tetanus anatoxin, 3000 IU of antitetanus serum

1547. A 22-year-old patient is a clerk. His working day runs in a conditioned room. In summer he was taken by an acute disease with the following symptoms: fever, dyspnea, dry cough, pleural pain, myalgia, arthralgia. Objectively: moist rales on the right, pleural friction rub. X-ray picture showed infiltration of the inferior lobe. In blood: WBC – 11109/l, stab neutrophils - 6%, segmented neutrophils - 70%, lymphocytes - 8%, ESR - 42 mm/h. What is the ethiological factor of pneumonia?
a. Pneumococcus
*b. Legionella
c. Streptococcus
d. Mycoplasm
e. Staphylococcus

1548. A 36-year-old patient complains of skin rash that appeared a week ago and doesnt cause any subjective problems. Objectively: palm and sole skin is covered with multiple lenticular disseminated papules not raised above the skin level. The papules are reddish, dense on palpation and covered with keratinous squamae. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Palm and sole callosity
b. Verrucosis
c. Palmoplanar psoriasis
d. Palmoplanar rubrophytosis
*e. Secondary syphilis

1549. A woman while working in vegetable garden developed severe pain in the loin. Lasagues and Nery tension signs are obviously marked on the right. Lumbar lordosis is smoothed, movements are harshly restrained in lumbar part of the spine. Right ankle (Achilles) reflex is absent. What kind of disease can it be?
a. Hepatic colic
b. Neuritis of femoral nerve
*c. Lumbar-sacral radiculitis
d. Renal colic
e. Lumbalgia

1550. A 42-year-old female lives in the basement, is unemployed, undernourished. She complains of having general weakness, hair loss, brittle nails for six months, likes to eat chalk. Objectively: the patient is emaciated, pale, has dry skin. Peripheral lymph nodes are not enlarged. Liver is +1,5 cm. In blood: RBCs - 1,81012/l, Hb- 62 g/l, colour index - 0,78, reticulocytes - 0,5o/oo, ESR- 18 mm/h. Leukogram exhibits no pathology. What is a provisional diagnosis?
*a. Nutritional iron deficiency anaemia
b. B12-deficiency anaemia
c. Congenital haemolytic anaemia
d. Acquired haemolytic anaemia
e. Chronic hepatitis

1551. A patient is 60-year-old, retired, worked as deputy director of a research institute. Behavioural changes appeared 2 years ago after the death of her husband: she stopped looking after herself and leaving the house; then she stopped to clean the apartment and cook. Mental status: temporal disorientation. The patient does not understand many of the questions, is confused; does not know how to cook soup or fasten a button. Her speech is characterized by stumbling and logoclonia. She does not recognize doctors, fellow patients. She cries a lot but can not explain the reason for tears. What is the mechanism of this pathology?
*a. Atrophy of the cerebral cortex
b. Atherosclerotic changes in cerebral vessels
c. Disorder of melatonin metabolism
d. Serotonin deficiency
e. Impaired conversion of dopamine to noradrenaline

1552. After lifting a load a patient felt undurable pain in the loin. He was diagnosed with acute lumbosacral radiculitis. Which of the following is contraindicated for this patient?
a. Intravenous injection of aminophylline
b. Analgetics
*c. Warming procedures
d. Dehydrating drugs
e. Vitamins of B group

1553. A 54-year-old female patient consulted a gynaecologist about bloody discharges from the vagina for 1 month. Last menstruation was 5 years ago. Gynaecological examination revealed no pathological changes. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Colposcopy
b. USI
c. Symptomatic therapy
d. Cytosmear
*e. Diagnostic fractional curettage of uterine cavity

1554. A 50-year-old patient complains about having pain attacks in the right subcostal area for about a year. He pain arises mainly after taking fattening food. Over the last week the attacks occurred daily and became more painful. On the 3rd day of hospitalization the patient presented with icteritiousness of skin and scleras, light-colored feces and dark urine. In blood: neutrophilic leukocytosis - 13,1109/l, ESR- 28 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic calculous cholecystitis
b. Chronic cholangitis, exacerbation stage
c. Chronic recurrent pancreatitis
d. Fatty degeneration of liver
e. Hypertensive dyskinesia of gallbladder

1555. A 26-year-old male patient complains of piercing pain during breathing, cough, dyspnea. Objectively: to- 37,3oC, respiration rate - 19/min, heart rate = Ps- 92/min; AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Vesicular respiration. In the inferolateral parts of chest auscultation in both inspiration and expiration phase revealed noise that was getting stronger at phonendoscope pressing and can be still heard after cough. ECG showed no pathological changes. What is the most likely giagnosis?
*a. Acute pleuritis
b. Intercostal neuralgia
c. Spontaneous pneumothorax
d. Subcutaneous emphysema
e. Pericarditis sicca

1556. The head of prenatal care department intends to complete expert evaluation of compliance with medical and technological standards of pregnancy follow-up. What documents must be verified for this purpose?
a. Labour and delivery record
b. Medical records of outpatients
*c. Individual records of pregnant and postpartum women
d. Prenatal records
e. Neonatal record

1557. A patient undergoing treatment for the left-sided destructive pneumonia presents with deterioration of his general condition, progressing dyspnea, cyanosis. Objectively: the left side of chest is not involved in respiration, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated. Radiograph shows a shadow reaching the 5 rib with a horizontal fluid level and a radiolucency above it, the mediastinum is displaced to the right. What is the medical tactics?
a. Emergency bronchoscopy
b. Endotracheal intubation
c. Infusion and antibacterial therapy
d. Open thoracotomy
*e. Thoracostomy

1558. An emergency situation at a chemical plant caused acute occupational intoxication. A doctor who revealed the case of "acute occupational disease (intoxication)" must notify the following authority:
a. Ministry of Health of Ukraine
b. Medical unit of the plant
*c. Sanitary and epidemiological station
d. Trade union committee of the plant
e. Plant administration

1559. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. To perform conicotomy immediately
b. To send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him
c. To make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone
*d. To perform the Heimlich manoever
e. To use an inhalation of beta_2-adrenoceptor agonist

1560. A 40-year-old female patient complain of headache, dizziness, muscle weakness, sometimes - cramps in the extremities. She has been taking antihypertensive medications for 10 years. AP- 180/100 mm Hg. Blood potassium - 1,8 millimole/l, sodium - 4,8 millimole/l. In urine: alkaline reaction, the relative density - 1012, protein and sugar are not found, WBCs - 3-4 in the field of vision, RBCs - 1-2 in the field of vision. Conns syndrome is suspected. Which drug should be chosen for the treatment of arterial hypertension?
a. Propanolol
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Enalapril
*d. Spironolactone
e. Clonidine

1561. 4 days ago a 32-year-old patient caught a cold: he presented with sore throat, fatigue. The next morning he felt worse, developed dry cough, body temperature rose up to 38,2oC, there appeared muco-purulent expectoration. Percussion revealed vesicular resonance over lungs, vesicular breathing weakened below the angle of the right scapula, fine sonorous and sibilant wheezes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary carcinoma
b. Pulmonary gangrene
c. Bronchial asthma
*d. Focal right-sided pneumonia
e. Acute bronchitis

1562. A factorys sectorial doctor selects a group of persons who often fall ill for thorough monitoring. At the same time he takes into consideration the number of etiologically related cases with temporary disability in each of the employees over the last year. An employee falls into this group if the number of sickness cases is:
a. 1 or more
b. 3 or more
c. 6 or more
*d. 4 or more
e. 2 or more

1563. A 26-year-old patient has abused alcohol since the age of 16, needs a morning-after drink to cure hangover. He takes alcohol nearly every day, "a little at a time". Twice a week he gets severely drunk. The patient works as a motor mechanic, over the last 2 years work conflicts have become more frequent. What medical and tactical actions should be taken in this case?
a. Compulsory treatment
*b. Voluntary consultation and treatment at an addiction clinic
c. Consultation with a psychologist
d. Referral to medical-social expert commission for assessment of his working ability
e. Referral to treatment at an activity therapy centre

1564. A 40-year-old female patient has been hospitalized for attacks of asphyxia, cough with phlegm. She has a 4-year history of the disease. The first attack of asphyxia occurred during her stay in the countryside. Further attacks occurred while cleaning the room. After 3 days of inpatient treatment the patients condition has significantly improved. What is the most likely etiological factor?
a. Chemicals
b. Infectious
c. Pollen
*d. Household allergens
e. Psychogenic

1565. Against the background of angina a patient has developed pain in tubular bones. Examination revealed generalized enlargement of lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome, sternalgia. In blood: RBCs - 3,61012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, thrombocytes – 45109/l, WBCs – 13109/l, blasts - 87%, stab neutrophils - 1%, segmented neutrophils - 7%, lymphocytes - 5%, ESR - 55 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
b. Multiple myeloma
c. Chronic myeloid leukemia
d. Erythremia
*e. Acute leukemia

1566. A 56-year-old scientist experiences constricting retrosternal pain several times a day while walking for 100-150 m. The pain lasts for up to 10 minutes and can be relieved by nitroglycerine. Objectively: the patient is overweight, heart borders exhibit no abnormalities, heart sounds are rhythmic, Ps- 78 bpm, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. ECG contains low amplitude of T wave in V4-5. What disease might be suspected?
a. Instable stenocardia
b. Stable FC I stenocardia
*c. Stable FC III stenocardia
d. Stable FC IV stenocardia
e. Stable FC II stenocardia

1567. An ambulance had been called to a 48-year-old man. According to his relatives, the patient had had three attacks of unconsciousness accompanied by convulsions within 24 hours. On examination the doctor witnessed the following attack: the patient lost consciousness and fell to the floor, developed tonic, then clonic convulsions of trunk and extremities. The attack lasted 1 minute and ended with involuntary urination. Specify the kind of attack:
a. Vegetative crisis
b. Syncope
c. Attack of hysteria
d. Coma
*e. Epileptic seizure

1568. A 36-year-old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
a. Subcutaneous emphysema
b. Mediastinitis
c. Open pneumothorax
*d. Valvular pneumothorax
e. Closed pneumothorax

1569. A 60-year-old patient complains of nearly permanent sensation of heaviness and fullness in the epigastrium, that increases after eating, foul-smelling eructation, occasional vomiting with food consumed 1-2 days ago, weight loss. 12 years ago he was found to have an ulcer of pyloric channel. The patient has taken ranitidine for periodic hunger pain. The patients condition has been deteriorating over the last 3 months. Objectively: splashing sound in the epigastrium is present. What kind of complication is it?
*a. Pyloric stenosis
b. Penetration of gastric ulcer
c. Foreign body in the stomach (bezoar)
d. Malignization of gastric ulcer
e. Functional pyloric spasm

1570. An 18-year-old patient presents no problems. Percussion reveals that heart borders are displaced to the right and left by 1 cm, there is a coarse systolic murmur with its epicenter within the 4th intercostal space on the left. What is the most informative examination to confirm the clinical diagnosis?
a. ECG
b. Echocardiography
c. PCG
d. Polycardiography
*e. Ventriculography

1571. A 30-year-old female patient complains of milk discharge from the mammary glands, 5-month absence of menstruation. She had one physiological labour four years ago. Objectively: mammary glands are normally developed. Bimanual examination reveals that the uterus is decreased in size, the ovaries are of normal size. MRI-scan shows no cerebral pathologies. Concentration of thyroid-stimulating hormone is normal. The serum prolactin level is increased. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pituitary adenoma
b. Sheehan syndrome
*c. Hyperprolactinemia
d. Hypothyroidism
e. Polycystic ovary syndrome

1572. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
*a. Strict following of feeding regimen
b. Hardening of the child
c. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention
d. Feces observation
e. Common cold prophilaxis

1573. A female patient consulted a dermatologist about the rash on the trunk and extremities. Objectively: interdigital folds, flexor surfaces of wrists and navel region are affected with pairs of nodulo-cystic eruptions and crusts. The rash is accompanied by skin itch that is getting stronger at night. What external treatment should be administered?
a. 5% naphthalan ointment
b. 5% sulfuric ointment
c. 2% sulfuric paste
d. 5% tetracycline ointment
*e. 20% benzyl benzoate emulsion

1574. A woman, primagravida, consults a gynecologist on 05.03.2012. A week ago she felt the fetus movements for the first time. Last menstruation was on 10.01.2012. When should she be given maternity leave?
a. 11 July
b. 25 July
c. 22 August
d. 5 September
*e. 8 August

1575. It is required to analyze the level of daylight illumination in a ward of therapeutics unit. What device should be applied to estimate the level of daylight illumination?
a. Katathermometer
*b. Illuminometer
c. Psychrometer
d. Actinometer
e. Anemometer

1576. A 10-year-old girl consulted a doctor about thirst, frequent urination, weight loss. She has been observing these symptoms for about a month. Objectively: no pathology of internal organs was revealed. What laboratory analysis should be carried out in the first place?
a. Glucosuric profile
*b. Blood glucose analysis on an empty stomach
c. Glucose in urine test on the base of daily diuresis
d. Glucose tolerance test
e. Acetone in urine test

1577. A child from the first non-complicated pregnancy but complicated labor had cephalhematoma. On the second day there developed jaundice. On the 3th day appeared changes of neurologic status: nystagmus, Graefes sign. Urea is yellow, feces- golden-yellow. Mothers blood group is A(II)Rh-, child- A(II)Rh+. On the third day childs Hb- 200 g/L, RBC- 6,1*10^12/L, bilirubin in blood - 58 mk mol/L due to unconjugated bilirubin, Ht- 0,57. What is the childs jaundice explanation?
a. Physiologic jaundice
b. Fetal hepatitis
c. Bile ducts atresia
*d. Brain delivery trauma
e. Hemolytic disease of newborn

1578. A 16-year-old adolescent was vaccinated with DTP. In eight days there was stiffness and pain in the joints, subfebrile temperature, urticarial skin eruption, enlargement of inguinal, cervical lymph nodes and spleen. What kind of allergic reaction is observed?
a. Hypersensitivity of immediate type
*b. Immunocomplex
c. Hypersensitivity of delayed type
d. -
e. Cytoxic

1579. An electro-gas welding operator working at a machine workshop performs welding and cutting of metal, which is accompanied by intense UV-radiation. His welding station is equipped with effective mechanical ventilation. What occupational disease is most likely to develop in an electro-gas welding operator?
a. Vegetative-vascular dystonia
*b. Photoelectric ophthalmia
c. Chronic overheating
d. Pneumoconiosis
e. Heatstroke

1580. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38oC, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Allergic reaction
b. Erysipeloid
c. Erysipelas
*d. Sepsis
e. Putrid phlegmon

1581. A 26-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the right hand for 4 days. The pain arose at the site of corns on the palmar surface at the base of the II and III fingers. Some time later the dorsum of hand became edematic. I and III fingers are half-bent in the interphalangeal joints, the hand looks like "rake". What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Phlegmon of the second interdigital space of the right hand
b. Corn abscess of the right hand
c. Adenophlegmon of the right hand
d. Tendovaginitis
e. U-shaped phlegmon of the right hand

1582. An 8-year-old girl periodically has sudden short-term heart pain, sensation of chest compression, epigastric pain, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: the patient is pale, respiratory rate - 40/min, jugular pulse is present. Ps- 185 bpm, of poor volume. AP- 75/40 mm Hg. ECG taken during an attack shows ectopic P waves, QRS wave is not deformed. At the end of an attack a compensatory pause is observed. The most likely cause of the attack is:
*a. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
b. Sinus tachycardia
c. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
d. Atrial fibrillation
e. Complete AV-block

1583. A 27-year-old woman presents at the maternity welfare centre because of infertility. She has had sexual life in marriage for 4 years, doesnt use contraceptives. She hasnt get pregnant. On examination: genital development is without pathology, uterine tubes are passable, basal (rectal) temperature is one-phase during last 3 menstrual cycles. What is the infertility cause?
a. Abnormalities in genital development
b. Chronic adnexitis
c. Immunologic infertility
*d. Anovular menstrual cycle
e. Genital endometriosis

1584. A 55-year-old male had been treated at the surgical department for acute lower-extremity thrombophlebitis. On the 7th day of treatment he suddenly developed pain in the left part of chest, dyspnea and cough. Body temperature was 36,1oC, respiratory rate - 36/min. The patient was also found to have diminished breath sounds without wheezing. Ps- 140/min, thready. AP- 70/50 mm Hg. The ECG shows Q???-S1 syndrome. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cardiac asthma
b. Myocardial infarction
*c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Pneumothorax
e. Bronchial asthma

1585. A 32-year-old female complains of dizziness, headache, palpitation, tremor. For the last several months she has been under outpatient monitoring for the increased arterial pressure. Since recently such attacks have become more frequent and severe. Objectively: skin is covered with clammy sweat, tremor of the extremities is present. HR- 110/min, AP- 220/140 mm Hg. Heart sounds are weakened. In blood: WBCs - 9,8109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h. Blood glucose - 9,8 millimole/l. What disease is the most likely cause of this crisis?
a. Primary hyperaldosteronism
b. Diabetic glomerulosclerosis
c. Preeclampsia
d. Essential hypertension
*e. Pheochromocytoma

1586. On the tenth day after discharge from the maternity house a 2-year-old patient consulted a doctor about body temperature rise up to 39oC, pain in the right breast. Objectively: the mammary gland is enlarged, there is a hyperemized area in the upper external quadrant, in the same place there is an ill-defined induration, lactostasis, fluctuation is absent. Lymph nodes of the right axillary region are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Dermatitis
c. Abscess
*d. Lactational mastitis
e. Tumour

1587. Development of chronic venous insufficiency of lower extremities depends on the functional condition of so-called musculovenous pump. This term refers to the following group of muscles:
a. Thigh muscles
b. Foot muscles
c. Buttock region muscles
*d. Shin muscles
e. Abdominal wall muscles

1588. During the dynamic observation over a parturient woman in the second stage of labor it was registered that the fetal heart rate fell down to 90-100/min and didnt come to normal after contractions. Vaginal examination revealed the complete cervical dilatation, the fetal head filling the entire posterior surface of the pubic symphysis and sacral hollow; the sagittal suture lied in the anteroposterior diameter of the pelvic outlet, the posterior fontanelle was in front under the pubic arch. What plan for further labour management should be recommended?
a. Caesarean section
b. Stimulation of labour activity by intravenous injection of oxytocin
c. Application of cavity forceps
*d. Application of forceps minor
e. Episiotomy

1589. A 45-year-old woman, mother of four children, comes to the emergency room complaining of a sudden onset of the epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, radiating to the back, accompanied by vomiting. On examination, tenderness is elicited in the right upper quadrant, bowel sounds are decreased, and laboratory data shows leukocytosis, normal serum levels of amylase, lipase, and bilirubin. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Sigmoid diverticulitis
b. Acute pancreatitis
c. Perforated peptic ulcer disease
d. Myocardial infarction
*e. Acute cholecystitis

1590. A 57-year-old man complains of shortness of breath, swelling on shanks, irregularity in cardiac work, pain in the left chest half with irradiation to the left scapula.Treatment is uineffective. On physical exam: hearts sounds are diminished, soft systolic murmur on the apex. Ps - 100/min, arrhythmical, BP - 115/75 mm Hg. The liver is +2 cm, painful. Roentgenoscopy: enlargement of heart shadow to all sides, pulsation is weak. Electrocardiogram (ECG): leftventricled extrasystolia, decreased voltage. What method of investigation is necessary to do to determine the diagnosis?
a. X-ray kymography
b. Coronarography
c. ECG in the dynamics
*d. Echocardiography
e. Veloergometria

1591. A patient complains of retrosternal pain, difficult swallowing, over 10 kg weight loss within three months, general weakness. In blood: hypochromic anaemia, neutrophilic leukocytosis. In feces: weakly positive Gregersens reaction. On esophagram a filling defect with ill-defined serrated edges shows up along a large portion of the esophagus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Esophageal carcinoma
b. Sideropenic dysphagia
c. Esophageal achalasia
d. Peptic ulcer
e. Benign tumour

1592. An emergency doctor has diagnosed a 32-year-old woman with generalized convulsive status epilepticus. The deterioration in the patients condition is caused by a sudden gap in the epilepsy treatment. Specify the doctors further tactics:
a. Hospitalization in the department of neurosurgery
b. Hospitalization in the department of neurology
c. Outpatient monitoring by a neurosurgeon
d. Outpatient monitoring by a neuropathologist
*e. Hospitalization in the intensive care unit

1593. A 50-year-old locksmith has a long-term record of work under the effect of mercury vapors with concentration exceeding MPC by 5-10 times. Clinical examination revealed the lability of vasomotors of skin, pulse and arterial pressure; total hyperhydrosis; asymmetric innervation of facial and lingual muscles, positive subcortical reflexes, intention tremor. Against the background of increased emotional excitability the patient presents with lack of self-confidence, shyness. A dentist found him to have parodontosis, chronic stomatitis. What disease can be suspected?
a. Residual effects of neuroinfection
*b. Chronic mercury intoxication
c. Vascular encephalopathy
d. Parkinsons syndrome
e. Acute mercury intoxication

1594. For the persons who live in a hot area after an accident at a nuclear object, the greatest risk within the first decade is represented by cancer of:
a. Skin
b. Breast
c. Reproduction system organs
d. Lungs
*e. Thyroid gland

1595. A 28-year-old parturient complains about headache, vision impairment, psychic inhibition. Objectively: AP- 200/110 mm Hg, evident edemata of legs and anterior abdominal wall. Fetus head is in the area of small pelvis. Fetal heartbeats is clear, rhythmic, 190/min. Internal examination revealed complete cervical dilatation, fetus head was in the area of small pelvis. What tactics of labor management should be chosen?
a. Conservative labor management with episiotomy
b. Embryotomy
c. Cesarean
*d. Forceps operation
e. Stimulation of labor activity

1596. A patient is 14 years old. Cytochemical study of punctate revealed 40% of blasts, there was negative reaction to peroxidase and with Sudan black, positive reaction to glycogen. Specify the form of acute leukemia:
a. Monoblastic
b. Promyelocytic
c. Myeloblastic
d. Undifferentiated
*e. Lymphoblastic

1597. A child undergoes in-patient treatment for acute staphylococcal destruction of the right lung. Unexpectedly he develped acute chest pain on the right, dyspnea, cyanosis. The right side of chest lags behind in the respiratory act. Percussion reveals dullness in the lower parts on the right, bandbox resonance in the upper parts. Borders of the relative cardiac dullness are shifted to the left. What complication has most likely developed?
*a. Right-sided pyopneumothorax
b. Exudative pleuritis
c. Pleural empyema
d. Spontaneous pneumothorax
e. Right lung abscess

1598. A 24-year-old patient had been delivered to the thoracic department with a chest injury, a fracture of the IV, V, VI ribs on the right. Plan radiography shows the fluid level in the pleural cavity reaching the III rib on the right. Puncture blood contained clots. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Medical thoracoscopy
b. Pleural puncture
*c. Emergency thoracotomy
d. Hemostatic therapy
e. Thoracentesis and thoracostomy

1599. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about arrhythmic cardiac activity, dyspnea. Objectively: AP- 150/90 mm Hg, extrasystole arrhythmia (10-12 beats per minute), left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction at the rate of 42%). Which of antiarrhythmic drugs should be administered as initial therapy in this case?
a. Encainide
b. Moracizine
c. Flecainide
*d. Amiodarone
e. Digoxin

1600. An emergency physician arrived to provide medical care for a hangman taken out of the loop by his relatives. The doctor revealed no pulse in the carotid arteries, absence of consciousness, spontaneous breathing and corneal reflexes; cadaver spots on the back and posterior parts of extremities. A person can be declared dead if the following sign is present:
*a. Cadaver spots
b. Absence of spontaneous breathing
c. Unconsciousness
d. Pulselessness
e. Absence of corneal reflexes

1601. A 48-year-old male patient complains of constant pain in the upper abdomen, mostly on the left, that is getting worse after taking meals; diarrhea, weight loss. The patient is an alcohol abuser. 2 years ago he had acute pancreatitis. Blood amylase is 4 g/hl. Coprogram shows steatorrhea, creatorrhea. Blood glucose is 6,0 mmol/l. What treatment is indicated for this patient?
a. Insulin
*b. Panzinorm forte
c. No-spa
d. Contrycal
e. Gastrozepin

1602. A 23-year-old female patient has a mental disease since the age of 18, the course of disease has no remission periods. At a hospital the patient mostly presents with non-purposeful foolish excitation: she makes stereotypic grimaces, exposed, masturbating in front of a loud laugh, repeating the stereotypical abusive shouts. The patient should be assigned:
a. Tranquilizers
b. Nootropics
*c. Neuroleptics
d. Antidepressants
e. Mood stabilizers

1603. A family consists of 5 persons. The husband is a stope miner. His spouse is a housewife. Their 20-year-old daughter works as a kindergarten teacher. Their 18-year-old son is a student. The grandmother is a pensioner, she has diabetes. Which member of this family can be primarily classed among the group of persons with a high risk of tuberculosis in the planning of preventive examinations for tuberculosis?
a. Wife
*b. Grandmother
c. Son
d. Daughter
e. Husband

1604. A 47-year-old patient came to see a doctor on the 7th day of disease. The disease developed very fast: after the chill body temperature rose up to 40°C and lasted up to 7 hours, then it dropped abruptly, which caused profuse sweat. There were three such attacks occuring once in two days. Two days ago the patient arrived from Africa. Objectively: pale skin, subicteric sclera, significantly enlarged liver and spleen. What is the cause of fever attacks in this disease?
a. Exotoxin of a causative agent
*b. Erythrocytic schizogony
c. Gametocytes
d. Tissue schizogony
e. Endotoxin of a causative agent

1605. A child is 12 years old. He complains of a dull aching pain in the epigastrium and right hypochondrium, that is getting worse after taking fatty or fried food, headache, weakness, nausea, low-grade fever. Abdominal palpation reveals a marked resistance of muscles in the right hypochondrium, positive Kerrs, Ortners, Murphys symptoms. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute gastritis
b. Acute pancreatitis
c. Viral hepatitis
*d. Chronic cholecystitis
e. Acute appendicitis

1606. Examination of a Rh-negative pregnant woman at 32 weeks of gestation revealed a four-time rise of Rh-antibody titer within 2 weeks, the titer was 1:64. In the first two pregnancies the patient had experienced antenatal fetal death due to hemolytic disease. What is the optimal tactics of pregnancy management?
*a. Early delivery
b. Screening for Rh-antibodies 2 weeks later and early delivery in case of further titer rise
c. Ultrasound for signs of hemolytic disease of the fetus
d. Introduction of anti-Rh (D) immunoglobulin
e. Delivery at 37 weeks of gestation

1607. A selective population research study was aimed at exploring the effect of air emissions from a metallurgical plant on the obstructive bronchitis morbidity in a city. The calculated correlation coefficient was +0,79. Evaluate the strength and direction of the relationship:
*a. Direct, strong
b. Direct, average
c. Inverse, average
d. -
e. Inverse, strong

1608. 20 minutes after a normal delivery at 39 weeks a puerpera had a single temperature rise up to 38°C. Objectively: the uterus is dense, located between the navel and the pubis, painless. Lochia are bloody, of small amount. Breasts are moderately soft and painless. What is the optimal tactics?
a. Appointment antipyretic
b. Manual examination of the uterine cavity
*c. Further follow-up
d. Antibiotic therapy
e. Expression of breast

1609. A 55-year-old male has a 1,5-year history of viral cirrhosis with symptoms of portal hypertension. Over the last month the weakness has progrssed, there appeared coffee ground vomit. Fibrogastroduodenoscopy revealed variceal esophageal haemorrhage. What drug should be used to reduce the pressure in the portal vein?
a. Calcium gluconate
*b. Vasopressin
c. Dicynone
d. Furosemide
e. Reserpine

1610. A 30-year-old patient got in a car accident. He is unconscious, pale, has thready pulse. In the middle third of the right thigh there is an extensive laceration with ongoing profuse external arterial bleeding. What urgent actions must be taken to save the life of the patient?
*a. Tourniquet above the wound of the right thigh
b. Tourniquet below the wound of the right thigh
c. Artificial lung ventilation
d. Precordial thump
e. Plaster bar

1611. A patient underwent stomach resection. During the operation, the left upper limb of the patient was abducted and fixed to the operating table for anesthetic management. Postoperatively, the patient developed dysfunction of the upper extremity in form of "drop hand." This symptom results from the damage of the following nerve:
a. Axillary nerve
*b. Radial nerve
c. Ulnar nerve
d. Median nerve
e. Musculocutaneous nerve

1612. A 56-year-old female patient complains of recurrent attacks of intensive pain irradiating along the ureters. Urine test results: protein - 0,37 g/l, RBCs- 20-25 in the field of vision, WBCs - 12-14 in the field of vision. What method of instrumental diagnostics is the most informative for the diagnosis?
a. Computer tomography
b. Radioisotope renography
c. Cystoscopy
d. USI of kidneys
*e. Intravenous urography

1613. A 26-year-old patient consulted a doctor abut sore throat, fever up to 38,2°C. A week ago, the patient had angina, didnt follow medical recommendations. On examination, the patient had forced position of his head, trismus of chewing muscles. Left peritonsillar region is markedly hyperemic, swollen. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Meningitis
b. Phlegmonous angina
c. Tonsil tumour
*d. Left-sided peritonsillar abscess
e. Diphtheria of the pharynx

1614. A 48-year-old patient was found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland, exophthalmia, weight loss of 4 kg in 2 months, sweating. Objectively: HR- 105/min, AP- 140/70 mm Hg. Defecation act is normal. What kind of therapy is recommended in this case?
a. Thyroxine
b. Radioiodine
*c. Mercazolil
d. Propranolol
e. Lugols solution

1615. A painter working at a motorcar plant has been diagnosed with moderately severe intoxication with amide compounds of benzene. The in-patient treatment resulted in a considerable health improvement. What expert decision should be made in this case?
a. The patient should be referred to the medio-social expert commission for evaluation of percentage of work capicty loss
b. The patient should be referred to the medio-social expert commission for attributing the disability group because of an occupational disease
*c. The patient should be issued a sick list for out-patient treatment
d. The patient may get back to work providing he will keep to hygiene and sanitary regulations
e. -

1616. An 8-year-old girl periodically has sudden short-term heart pain, sensation of chest compression, epigastric pain, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: the patient is pale, respiratory rate - 40/min, jugular pulse is present. Ps- 185 bpm, of poor volume. AP- 75/40 mm Hg. ECG taken during an attack shows ectopic P waves, QRS wave is not deformed. At the end of an attack a compensatory pause is observed. The most likely cause of the attack is:
a. Sinus tachycardia
b. Complete AV-block
*c. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
d. Atrial fibrillation
e. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia

1617. A 40-year-old woman with a history of combined mitral valve disease with predominant stenosis complains of dyspnea, asthma attacks at night, heart problems. At present, she is unable to do easy housework. What is the optimal tactics of the patient treatment?
*a. Mitral commissurotomy
b. Antirheumatic therapy
c. Treatment of heart failure
d. Implantation of an artificial valve
e. Antiarrhythmia therapy

1618. A 10-year-old patient complains of skin itch that occurs at night. Objectively: multiple paired papules, burrow tracks in the interdigital skin folds, on the anterolateral surfaces of abdomen and buttocks. Specify the period of regular medical check-up for pupils of the class where the patient learns:
a. 5 days
b. 6 months
c. 1 year
*d. 2 months
e. 2 weeks

1619. Examination of a 38-year-old patient who had been hit with a blunt object on the left side of chest revealed a fracture of the X rib with fragments displacement, parietal pneumothorax. The patient complains of pain in the left subcostal area. Objectively: the patient is pale, AP- 80/40 mm Hg, Ps- 138/min, of poor volume. USI reveals fluid in the left abdomen. Splenic rupture is present. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Immediate upper median laparotomy followed by drainage of the left pleural cavity
b. Left-sided thoracotomy immediately followed by laparotomy
c. Immediate laparotomy and alcohol-novocaine block of the X rib
d. Anti-schock actions followed by laparotomy after the arterial pressure rise
*e. Drainage of the left pleural cavity followed by laparotomy

1620. On the 2nd day of illness a 27-year-old patient complains of unbearable headache, repeated vomiting. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition. He is conscious but adynamic. Lies in a forced position with his head thrown back. There is no skin rash. Nuchal muscles are evidently rigid, there are Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs. to- 39,5°C, Ps- 120/min, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. The leading syndrome of this disease is caused by
*a. Liquor hypertension
b. Liquor hypotension
c. Haemorrhages into the adrenal glands
d. Hyperthermy
e. Affection of the cranial nerve nuclei

1621. A young woman with seborrhea adiposa has numerous non-itchy light brown and white spots with clear outlines and defurfuration on the torso and shoulder skin. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Pityriasis versicolor (scaly skin disease)
b. Tinea corporis
c. Seborrheic dermatitis
d. Pityriasis rosea
e. Vitiligo

1622. A 25-year-old patient has been admitted to the hospital with the following problems: weakness, sweating, itching, weight loss, enlarged submandibular, cervical, axillary, inguinal lymph nodes. Objectively: hepatomegaly. Lymph node biopsy revealed giant Berezovsky-Reed-Sternberg- cells, polymorphocellular granuloma made by lymphocytes, reticular cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, fibrous tissue, plasma cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Cancer metastases to lymph nodes
c. Macofollicular reticulosis
d. Lymphoreticulosarcoma
e. Lymph node tuberculosis

1623. A patient complains of being unable to get pregnant for 5 years. A complete clinical examination gave the following results: hormonal function is not impaired, urogenital infection hasnt been found, on hysterosalpingography both tubes were filled with the contrast medium up to the isthmic segment, abdominal contrast was not visualized. The patients husband is healthy. What tactics will be most effective?
a. ICSI within in-vitro fertilization program
*b. In-vitro fertilization
c. Insemination with husbands sperm
d. Laparoscopic tubal plasty
e. Hydrotubation

1624. A 62-year-old male patient complains of intense pain in the left leg that suddenly arose three hours before, leg numbness and coldness. During the year there has been pain in the leg while walking, hypersensitivity to cooling. Objectively: the left foot and shin have marbled skin, subcutaneous veins are collapsed. The foot is cold, active movements of the foot and toes are preserved. Pulse is present only on the femoral artery. There is rough systolic murmur above the artery. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Stenosis of the left popliteal artery
b. Occlusive disease
*c. Acute occlusion of the left femoral artery
d. Acute arterial thrombosis ileofemoralny
e. Acute thrombophlebitis

1625. A 30-year-old multigravida has been in labour for 18 hours. 2 hours ago the pushing stage began. Fetal heart rate is clear, rhythmic, 136/min. Vaginal examination reveals the completecervical dilatation, the fetal head in the pelvic outlet plane. Sagittal suture in line with obstetric conjugate, the occipital fontanel is near the pubis. The patient has been diagnosed with primary uterine inertia. What is the further tactics of labour management?
*a. Outlet forceps
b. Labour stimulation
c. Skin-head Ivanovs forceps
d. Cesarean section
e. Vacuum extraction of the fetus

1626. A patient operated for acute paraproctitis undergoes antibacterial and detoxification therapy, the local course of the disease has the positive dynamics. Since the operation the patient has had chills, pyrexia, tachycardia, euphoria for five days. The doctor suspected sepsis. What study will confirm the diagnosis?
a. Liver ultrasound
*b. Blood culture for a pathogen
c. X-ray of lungs
d. Determining the rate of average-weight molecules
e. Determining the rate of microbial contamination of wound

1627. A 26-year-old patient with left lower lobe pneumonia experiences an acute chest pain on the left during coughing. Objectively: diffuse cyanosis, extension of the left side of chest. Percussion reveals high tympanitis. Auscultation reveals no respiratory murmurs above the left side of chest. There is a deviation of the right cardiac border towards the midclavicular line. What examination will be the most informative?
a. Pneumotachometry
b. Bronchography
*c. X-Ray
d. Spirography
e. Bronchoscopy

1628. A baby born after fast labour has palsy of hand muscles. Grasp reflex is absent, as well as hand-to-mouth reflex. Hand sensitivity is absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bernard-Horner syndrome
b. Total lesion of the brachial plexus
*c. Dejerine-Klumpke palsy
d. Duchenne-Erbs palsy
e. Muscle paresis

1629. A 25-year-old patient complains of having dull heart pain for the last 10 days, dyspnea on mild exertion, palpitations. The diasease developed 2 weeks ago after a respiratory infection. Objectively: acrocyanosis, AP- 90/75 mm Hg, Ps- 96/min. Cardiac borders appear to be shifted to the left and right. Heart sounds are weak and have triple rhythm, there is systolic murmur at the apex. ECG showed sinus rhythm, complete left bundle branch block. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infective endocarditis
b. Myocarditic cardiosclerosis
*c. Infectious-allergic myocarditis
d. Exudative pericarditis
e. Vegetative-vascular dystonia

1630. Medical examination of a 19-year-old worker revealed generalized lymphadenopathy mainly affecting the posterior cervical, axillary and ulnar lymph nodes. There are multiple injection marks on the elbow bend skin. The man denies taking drugs, the presence of injection marks ascribes to influenza treatment. Blood count: RBCs- 3,21012/l, Hb- 100 g/l, WBCs- 3,1109/l, moderate lymphopeni. What study is required in the first place?
a. Lymph node biopsy
b. X-ray of lungs
c. Immunogram
*d. ELISA for HIV
e. Sternal puncture

1631. Full-term pregnancy. Body weight of the pregnant woman is 62 kg. The fetus has the longitudinal position, the fetal head is pressed against the pelvic inlet. Abdominal circumference is 100 cm. Fundal height is 35 cm. What is the approximate weight of the fetus?
*a. 3 kg 500 g
b. 4 kg
c. 4 kg 500 g
d. 3 kg
e. 2 kg 500 g

1632. An emergency doctor has diagnosed a 32-year-old woman with generalized convulsive status epilepticus. The deterioration in the patients condition is caused by a sudden gap in the epilepsy treatment. Specify the doctors further tactics:
a. Hospitalization in the department of neurology
b. Outpatient monitoring by a neurosurgeon
*c. Hospitalization in the intensive care unit
d. Hospitalization in the department of neurosurgery
e. Outpatient monitoring by a neuropathologist

1633. Doctors of a polyclinic conduct a statistical research of the disease outcomes in two groups of patients (those registered with dispensary departments and unregistered ones), depending on age and level of hygiene. What type of statistical tables would be most suitable for profound analysis of the interrelation between the above-mentioned variables?
a. Simple
b. Group
c. Analytical
d. Developing
*e. Cross tabulation

1634. A patient with suspected pheochromocytoma has normal blood pressure in the periods between the atacks and a tendency to tachycardia. Urine test revealed no pathology. It was decided to use a provocative test with histamine. What medication should be prepared to provide emergency care in case of a positive test result?
a. Prednisolone
b. Pipolphen
c. Mesatonum
*d. Phentolamine
e. Nifedipine

1635. A patient is on the sick leave for 4 months continuously from the date of injury. The treatment is going to last for 1-2 months more. Who has the right to extend the duration of medical certificate for this patient?
*a. Medical advisory commission after medico-social expert commission examination
b. District doctor by agreement with a department chief
c. Medico-social expert commission
d. Medical superintendent
e. Medical advisory commission after inpatient treatment

1636. A 24-year-old female teacher complains of dizziness and heart pain irradiating to the left nipple. Pain is not associated with physical activity and cannot be relieved by nitroglycerin, it abates after taking Valocordin and lasts an hour or more. The patient has a nearly 2-year history of this disease. Objectively: Ps- 76 bpm. AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Heart borders are normal, heart sounds are clear. The ECG shows respiratory arrhythmia. Radiograph of the cervicothoracic spine shows no pathology. Lungs, abdomen are unremarkable. What changes in blood formula can be expected?
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Leukocytosis
c. Leukemic hiatus
d. Increased ESR
*e. No changes

1637. A 2-year-old child in a satisfactory condition periodically presents with moderate proteinuria, microhematuria. USI results: the left kidney is undetectable, the right one is enlarged, there are signs of double pyelocaliceal system. What study is required to specify the diagnosis?
a. Doppler study of renal vessels
b. Retrograde urography
*c. Excretory urography
d. Radioisotope renal scan
e. Micturating cystography

1638. In the morning a patient had nausea, abdominal discomfort, single vomiting, dry mouth. In the evening, the patient presented with the increasing general weakness, double vision, difficult swallowing of solid food. Objectively: ptosis, mydriasis, anisocoria, absence of gag and pharyngeal reflex, dry mucous membranes. The previous evening the patient had dinner with canned food and alcohol. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Food toxicoinfection
b. Intoxication with unknown poison
c. Acute ischemic stroke
d. Poliomyelitis
*e. Botulism

1639. A 28-year-old patient consulted a surgeon about pain, edema and hyperemia of the left side of his face, weakness, fever up to 39°C. These manifestations has been present for three days. Objectively: there is an inflammatory infiltrate of the left nasolabial fold 4x4 cm large with a necrotic core in the center, the pronounced edema of the left side of face, moderate nuchal rigidity. What treatment is needed?
a. Antibiotics, surgery under general anesthesia
b. Wet-to-dry dressings with antiseptics, aspirin
c. Physiotherapy, immunomodulators
d. Antibiotics, angioprotectors, daily dressings
*e. Hospitalization, antibiotics, anticoagulants, rest

1640. A 27-year-old sexually active female complains of numerous vesicles on the right sex lip, itch and burning. Eruptions regularly turn up before menstruation and disappear 8-10 days later. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Herpes simplex virus
b. Genital condylomata
c. Cytomegalovirus infection
d. Primary syphilis
e. Bartholinitis

1641. A 45-year-old patient, a sailor, was hospitalized on the 2nd day of the disease. A week ago he returned from India. Complains of body temperature of 41°C, severe headache, dyspnea, cough with frothy rusty sputum. Objectively: the patient is pale, mucous membranes are cyanotic, breathing rate is 24/min, tachycardia is present. In lungs: diminished breath sounds, moist rales over both lungs, crepitation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Influenza
b. Miliary tuberculosis
c. Sepsis
*d. Pneumonic plaque
e. Ornithosis

1642. A patient is 60 years old, retired, worked as deputy director of a research institute. Behavioural changes appeared 2 years ago after the death of her husband: she stopped looking after herself and leaving the house; then she refused to clean the apartment and cook. Mental status: temporal disorientation. The patient does not understand many of the questions, is confused; does not know how to cook soup or fasten a button. Her speech is characterized by stumbling and logoclonia. She does not recognize doctors, fellow patients. She cries a lot but can not explain the reason for tears. What is the mechanism of this pathology?
a. Serotonin deficiency
*b. Atrophy of the cerebral cortex
c. Atherosclerotic changes in cerebral vessels
d. Impaired conversion of dopamine to noradrenaline
e. Disorder of melatonin metabolism

1643. A 7-year-old boy had complained of headache, nausea, fatigue for 3 weeks. His condition gradually deteriorated, headache and general weakness progressed. The boy had bronchitis at the age of 3. His father has a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. Objectively: body temperature 37,5°C, conscious, lies supine, with the hip and knee flexed to 90 degrees, nuchal rigidity +6 cm, partial ptosis of the right eyelid, the dilated right pupil. General hyperalgesia is present. Liquor: transparent, pressure - 400 mm of water column, protein - 1,5%, cytosis - 610/3 with predominant lymphocytes, sugar - 1,22 mmol/l, chlorides - 500 mmol/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis
*b. Tuberculous meningitis
c. Secondary purulent meningitis
d. Pneumococcal meningitis
e. Serous meningitis

1644. Factorys sectorial doctor chooses a group of chronically ill people. He takes into account the duration of etiologically related cases with a temporary disability over the last year in each of the workers. The employees will fall into this group if the duration is:
a. 10 days or more
*b. 40 days or more
c. 30 days or more
d. 20 days or more
e. 60 days or more

1645. A 37-year-old patient complains of acute pain in the region of genitals, swelling of the labia, pain when walking. Objectively: body temperature is 38,7°C, Ps- 98/min. In the interior of the right labia there is a dense, painful tumour-like formation 5,0x4,5 cm large, the skin and mucous membrane of genitals is hyperemic, there are profuse foul-smelling discharges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bartholin gland cyst
b. Carcinoma of vulva
c. Labial furuncle
d. Acute vulvovaginitis
*e. Acute bartholinitis

1646. A 50-year-old patient complains of bursting pain in the left lower limb that is getting worse on exertion, swelling in the region of shin and foot. Objectively: left shin and foot are doughy, skin of the lower shin is indurated and has a bronze tint, subcutaneous veins are dilated, there is an ulcer with necrotic masses. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic arterial insufficiency
*b. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome
c. Deep vein thrombosis of the lower limbs
d. Acute arterial thrombosis
e. Gangrene of the lower extremity

1647. On the 2nd day of life a full-term boy developed mild jaundice of skin and mucous membranes, the general condition of the child is normal. Blood test results: indirect hyperbilirubinemia - 120 mmol/l. The childs blood group is A(II) Rh(+), his mothers blood group - B(III) Rh(+). What is the doctors tactics of choice?
a. Treatment with cholekinetics
b. Treatment with enterosorbents
c. Blood transfusion
*d. No drug therapy
e. Treatment with prednisolone

1648. A patient is 31 years old. Double-contrast barium swallow revealed a filling defect on the posterior wall in the middle segment of esophagus. The defect looked like a well-defined oval 1,8x1,3 cm large. Mucosal folds adjacent to the defect were intact, peristalsis and elasticity of the walls remained unchanged. Digestive tract problems were absent. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Esophageal tumour
b. Diverticulum
c. Esophageal burn
d. Achalasia cardia
e. Barretts esophagus

1649. A 16-year-old girl had had polyuria, polydipsia for 2 months. She had lost 8 kg with a good appetite. The patient was urgently hospitalized for abdominal pain and nausea. Examination revealed glycemia at the rate of 18 mmol/l, glycosuria at the rate of 24 g/l. Insulin and infusion of isotonic solutions of sodium chloride and glucose eliminated these problems, including thirst. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diabetes mellitus type 2
b. Secondary (symptomatic) diabetes
c. Renal glycosuria
d. Diabetes insipidus
*e. Diabetes mellitus type 1

1650. While lifting a heavy load a 39-year-old patient suddenly felt a severe headache, pain in the interscapular region, and started vomiting. Objectively: the pulse is rhythmic, 60/min, AP- 180/100 mm Hg. The patient is agitated. He presents with photophobia, hyperacusis. There are positive Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs on both sides. In blood: WBCs – 10109/l. CSF is bloody, cytosis is 240/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meningococcal meningitis
b. Ischemic stroke
*c. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
d. Acute hypertonic encephalopathy
e. Sympathoadrenal crisis

1651. A rural hospital serves 6200 people. Preventive examinations were planned for 560 farm workers with different risk factors. 400 workers underwent preventive examination. 120 individuals were found to have cardiovascular problems, 90 of them were registered with a dispensary department for health care maintenance. Which indicator should be used to assess the organization of health care maintenance at the hospital?
a. Share of diseased persons
b. Share of newly diagnosed patients
c. Incidence of cardiovascular diseases
d. Share of persons subject to preventive examinations
*e. Share of workers who actually underwent preventive examinations

1652. A newborns head is of dolichocephalic shape, that is front-to-back elongated. Examination of the occipital region revealed a labour tumour located in the middle between the prefontanel and posterior fontanel. Specify the type of fetal presentation:
a. Anterior vertex presentation
b. Presentation of the bregma
*c. Posterior vertex presentation
d. Brow presentation
e. Face presentation

1653. A 42-year-old female patient suffers from micronodular cryptogenic cirrhosis. Over the last week her condition has deteriorated: she developed convulsions, mental confusion, progressing jaundic. What study may give reasons for such aggravation?
a. Determination of alkaline phosphatase
b. Determination of alpha-phetoprotein
c. Determination of cholesterol ethers
d. Determination of ALAT and ASAT
*e. Determination of serum ammonia

1654. Analysis of organization of medical care in a regional centre has shown that every year about 12% of patients receive inpatient care for diseases that dont require round-the-clock monitoring and intensive care. What are the most appropriate organizational changes required to address this problem?
*a. Development of medical care forms replacing the in-patient care
b. Restructuring of specialized care
c. Development of primary care
d. Changes to the statute of outpatient clinics
e. Upgrading of hospital facilities

1655. The institutions which take part in medical examinations can be prevention and treatment facilities, medical board of Ministry of Defense, medical board of Ministry of Home Affairs, medico-social expert commissions, forensic medical boards etc. What institutions are responsible for temporary disability examination?
*a. Prevention and treatment facilities
b. Medical boards of Ministry of Defense
c. Sanitary-and-prophylactic institutions
d. Medico-social expert commissions
e. Medical boards of Ministry of Home Affairs

1656. An 18-year-old patient since childhood suffers from bleeding disorder after minor injuries. His younger brother also has bleeding disorders with occasional haemarthrosis. Which laboratory test will be informative for diagnosis verification?
*a. Clotting time
b. Thrombocyte count
c. Fibrinogen rate
d. Determination of prothrombin time
e. Blood clot retraction

1657. A 13-year-old girl complains of periodic prickly pain in the heart region. Percussion revealed no changes of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed arrhythmic enhanced heart sounds, extrasystole at the 20-25 cardiac impulse. ECG showed the sinus rhythm, impaired repolarization, single supraventricular extrasystoles at rest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocardial degeneration
b. Nonrheumatic carditis
c. Intoxication syndrome
d. Rheumatism
*e. Vegetative-vascular dysfunction

1658. A man abused alcohol, drank away the property and wages thus getting himself, his wife and two underage children into deep financial problems. He was registered in a local drug abuse clinic. His wife asked a family doctor, what kind of petition she could file in court:
a. On recognition of her husbands partial incapacity
*b. On restriction of her husbands civil capacity
c. On recognition of her husbands incapacity
d. On recognition of her husbands incompetence
e. On recognition of her husbands disability

1659. 6 people live in a modern flat with the total area of 60 m2. There are TV-video equipment, radios, microwave ovens, computer. The residents of the flat complain of bad health, occasional headaches, arrhythmia, conjunctivitis. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Tetrachlor plumbum
*b. Electromagnetic fields
c. Anthropotoxins
d. Formaldehyde
e. Carbon dioxide

1660. In an urban settlement situated on the riverbank an outbreak of hepatitis A was registered. The disease might have water origin. This assumption can be confirmed by growth of the following indicators of water quality:
a. Presence of benign leptospirosis pathogen
*b. Number of coli-phages
c. Index of fecal coli-forms
d. Escherichia coli index
e. Oxidability

1661. While staying in a stuffy room a 19-year-old emotionally labile girl developed severe weakness, dizziness, blackout, nausea and loss of consciousness without convulsions. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, the skin is pale, extremities are cold. AP- 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 96/min, deficient, breathing is shallow. Pupillary and tendon reflexes are present. There are no pathological signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Syncope
b. Vegetovascular paroxysm
c. Epileptic attack
d. Transient ischemic attack
e. Hysterical neurosis

1662. During a regular medical examination at a metallurgical plant 20% of workers were found overweight (body weight was 5-14% higher than normal), and had early signs of obesity (grade I-II) with Quetelet index from 26 to 30. What products share must be reduced in the diet of this group of people in the first place in order to normalize their body weight?
*a. Bakery products
b. Vegetables
c. Fruit
d. Milk and dairy products
e. Meat and fish products

1663. A 60-year-old patient complains of recurrent pain in the proximal interphalangeal and wrist joints, their periodic swelling and reddening that have been observed for 4 years. X-ray picture represents changes in form of osteoporosis, joint space narrowing and single usuras. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteoarthritis
b. Gout
c. Pseudogout
*d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Multiple myeloma

1664. A 38-year-old female patient complains about hot flashes and feeling of intense heat arising up to 5 times a day, headaches in the occipital region along with high blood pressure, palpitations, dizziness, fatigue, irritability, memory impairment. 6 months ago the patient underwent extirpation of the uterus with its appendages. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Physiological premenopause
b. Early pathological menopause
c. Premenstrual syndrome
d. Secondary psychogenic amenorrhea
*e. Post-castration syndrome

1665. A 19-year-old patient complains of dyspnea on exertion. He often has bronchitis and pneumonia. Since childhood, the patient presents with cardiac murmur. Auscultation revealed splitting of the II sound above the pulmonary artery, systolic murmur in 3 intercostal space at the left sternal border. ECG showed right bundle branch block. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Mitral insufficiency
b. Aortic stenosis
c. Aortarctia
*d. Atrial septal defect
e. Open ductus arteriosus

1666. A patient had 4 generalized convulsive seizures within a day. Between the seizures the patient did not maintain clear consciousness (was in a coma or stupor). Specify his state:
a. Frequent generalized seizures
*b. Status epilepticus
c. Hysterical attacks
d. Frequent jacksonian seizures
e. Frequent complex partial seizures

1667. A 55-year-old patient whose menstruation stopped 5 years ago complains of vaginal dryness, frequent and painful urination. Gynecologist revealed signs of atrophic colpitis. Urine analysis revealed no peculiarities. Which locally acting product will provide the proper therapeutic effect?
a. Vaginal cream "Dalacin"
*b. Vaginal suppositories "Ovestin"
c. Vaginal cream "Meratin Combi"
d. Vaginal tablets "Tergynan"
e. Vaginal gel "Metronidazole"

1668. On the first day after a surgery for diffuse toxic goiter a patient developed difficulty breathing, cold sweats, weakness. Objectively: pale skin, body temperature - 38,5°C, RR - 25/min, Ps- 110/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. What early postoperative complication occurred in the patient?
a. Postoperative tetany
b. Compression of the trachea by the hematoma
c. Acute thyroiditis
*d. Thyrotoxic crisis
e. Hypothyroid crisis

1669. A 3-month-old girl presents with rhinitis, dyspnea, dry cough. These manifestations has been observed for two days. Objectively: the child has pale skin, acrocyanosis, shallow respiration at the rate of 80/min. Percussion reveals handbox resonance over the whole surface of lungs, massive fine rales. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pneumonia
b. Acute bronchitis
*c. Acute bronchiolitis
d. Mucoviscidosis
e. Foreign body of the airway

1670. Blood typing resulted in positive isohemagglutination reaction with standard sera of А(ІІ) and В(ІІІ) groups and negative reaction with sera of 0(І) and АВ(IV) groups. What is this result indicative of?
a. The fourth blood group
*b. Faulty standard sera
c. The second blood group
d. The third blood group
e. The first blood group

1671. A multigravida at 39 weeks of gestation has been delivered to a hospital having a regular labour activity for 8 hours, the waters burst an hour ago. She complains of headache, seeing spots. AP is of 180/100 mm Hg. Urine test results: protein - 3,3 g/l, hyaline cylinders. Fetal heart rate is 140/min, rhythmical. Vaginal examination reveals complete crevical dilatation, the fetal head is on the pelvic floor, sagittal suture is in line with obstetric conjugate, the occipital fontanel is under the pubis. What is the optimal tactics of labour management?
*a. Outlet forceps
b. Cavity forceps
c. Vacuum extraction of the fetus
d. Conservative labour management
e. Cesarean section

1672. A 12-year-old boy has a 6-year history of insulin-dependent diabetes. The disease is labile. Since recently there have been periodical rises in blood pressure. Microalbuminuria test gave positive results. The patients condition corresponds with the following stage of diabetic nephropathy:
a. Stage IV - advanced clinical nephropathy
b. Stage I - renal hypertrophy and hyperfunction
*c. Stage III - early-stage nephropathy
d. Stage II - histological changes in the kidneys
e. V stage - chronic renal failure

1673. A 60 year-old female has been suffering weakness, dizziness, fatigue over the last year. Recently she has also developed dyspnea, paresthesia. Objectively: skin and mucous membranes are pale and slightly icteric. The tongue is smooth due to the loss of lingual papillae. Liver and spleen are located at the costal margin. Blood count: Hb- 70 g/l, RBCs - 1,71012/l, colour index - 1,2, macrocytes. Administer the patient a pathogenetically justified drug:
a. Iron preparations
b. Ascorbic acid
c. Vitamin B6
*d. Vitamin B12
e. Vitamin B1

1674. Survey radiograph of a 52-year-old worker of an agglomeration plant (28 years of experience, the concentration of metal dust is 22-37 mg/m3) shows mildly pronounced interstitial fibrosis with diffused contrast well-defined small nodular shadows. The patient has no complaints. Pulmonary function is not compromised. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Anthracosis
b. Anthraco-silicatosis
c. Silicatosis
d. Silicosis
*e. Siderosis

1675. A 70-year-old patient with a strangulated inguinal hernia called a therapist in. The strangulation took place 10 hours ago. There are signs of intestinal obstruction. The skin over the herniation is hyperemic. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Cold to the hernia, analgesics, antibiotics
b. Reduction of hernia after a narcotic injection
c. Reduction of hernia
*d. Emergency hospitalization to a surgical hospital
e. Referral to a surgeon

1676. An 8-month-old baby has decreased appetite, pale skin, enlarged right side of abdomen. Palpation the right side of abdomen reveals a dense elastic tumour-like formation 10x7 cm large. There is a positive ballotement sign. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Nephroblastoma (Wilms tumour)
b. Intestinal tumour
c. Colon pathology
d. Liver tumour
e. Congenital hydronephrosis

1677. A 64-year-old patient has been referred to planned hospitalization for general weakness, poor appetite, progressive jaundice which appeared over 3 weeks ago and wasnt accompanied by pain syndrome. Objectively: body temperature is at the rate of 36,8°C, Ps- 78/min, abdomen is soft and painless, the symptoms of peritoneal irritation are present, palpation reveals a dramatically enlarged, tense gallbladder. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Cancer of the pancreatic head
b. Chronic cholecystitis
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Lamblia-induced cholecystitis
e. Duodenal ulcer

1678. 4 weeks after myocardial infarction a 56-year-old patient developed acute heart pain, pronounced dyspnea. Objectively: the patients condition is extremely grave, there is marked cyanosis of face, swelling and throbbing of neck veins, peripheral pulse is absent, the carotid artery pulse is rhythmic, 130 bpm, AP is 60/20 mm Hg. Auscultation of heart reveals extremely muffled sounds, percussion reveals heart border extension in both directions. What is the optimal treatment tactis for this patient?
*a. Pericardiocentesis and immediate thoracotomy
b. Pleural cavity drainage
c. Puncture of the pleural cavity on the left
d. Oxygen inhalation
e. Conservative treatment, infusion of adrenomimetics

1679. A 20-year-old patient complains of severe headache, double vision, weakness, fever, irritability. Objectively: body temperature is at the rate of 38,1°C, the patient is reluctant to contact, sensitive to stimuli. There is ptosis of the left eyelid, exotropia, anisocoria S>D, pronounced meningeal syndrome. On lumbar puncture the cerebrospinal fluid flowed out under a pressure of 300 mm Hg, the fluid is clear, slightly opalescent. 24 hours later there appeared the fibrinous film. Protein - 1,4 g/l, lymphocytes - 600/3 per mm3, sugar - 0,3 mmol/l. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Meningococcal meningitis
b. Mumps meningitis
c. Lymphocytic Armstrongs meningitis
d. Syphilitic meningitis
*e. Tuberculous meningitis

1680. On the 10th day postpartum a puerperant woman complains of pain and heaviness in the left mammary gland. Body temperature is 38,8°C, Ps- 94 bpm. The left mammary gland is edematic, the supero-external quadrant of skin is hyperemic. Fluctuation symptom is absent. The nipples discharge drops of milk when pressed. What is a doctors further tactics?
a. Opening of the abscess and drainage of the mammary gland
b. Compress to both mammary glands
*c. Antibiotic therapy, immobilization and expression of breast milk
d. Inhibition of lactation
e. Physiotherapy

1681. A 49-year-old patient complains of itching, burning in the external genitals, frequent urination. The symptoms has been present for the last 7 months. The patient has irregular menstruation, once every 3-4 months. Over the last 2 years she presents with hot flashes, sweating, sleep disturbance. Examination revealed no pathological changes of the internal reproductive organs. Complete blood count and urinalysis showed no pathological changes. Vaginal smear contained 20-25 leukocytes in the field of vision, mixed flora. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Menopausal syndrome
b. Cystitis
c. Trichomonas colpitis
d. Bacterial vaginosis
e. Vulvitis

1682. A 49-year-old patient consulted a doctor about difficult swallowing, voice hoarseness, weight loss. These symptoms have been gradually progressing for the last 3 months. Objectively: the patient is exhausted, there are enlarged supraclavicular lymph nodes. Esophagoscopy revealed no oesophageal pathology. Which of the following studies is most appropriate in this case?
a. Multiplanar imaging of esophagus
*b. Computed tomography of chest, mediastinum
c. Ultrasound investigation of mediastinum
d. Radioisotope investigation of chest
e. X-ray of lungs

1683. A 40-year-old patient complains of fever up to 39 degrees C, cough with sputum and blood admixtures, dyspnea, weakness, herpetic rash on the lips. Objectively: respiration rate - 32/min. Under the shoulder blade on the right the increased vocal fremitus and dullness of percussion sound were revealed. Auscultation revealed bronchial respiration. Blood count: WBCs – 14*10*9/l, ESR - 35 mm/h. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Focal right-sided pneumonia
b. Exudative pleuritis
*c. Right-sided croupous pneumonia
d. Cavernous tuberculosis of the right lung
e. Lung cancer

1684. Chief physician of a polyclinic encharged a district doctor with a task to determine the pathological prevalence of disease N in his district. What document allows to estimate the disease prevalence in the population of a medical district?
*a. Prophylactic examinations register
b. Statistic coupons (+) and (-)
c. Statistic coupons (-)
d. Statistic coupons (+)
e. Vouchers for medical appointments

1685. A week ago a 65-year-old patient suffered an acute myocardial infarction, his general condition deteriorated: he complains of dyspnea at rest, pronounced weakness. Objectively: edema of the lower extremities, ascites is present. Heart borders are extended, paradoxical pulse is 2 cm displaced from the apex beat to the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary embolism
b. Recurrent myocardial infarction
*c. Acute cardiac aneurysm
d. Cardiosclerotic aneurysm
e. Acute pericarditis

1686. A 10 week pregnant woman was admitted to a hospital for recurrent pain in the lower abdomen, bloody discharges from the genital tracts. The problems turned up after ARVI. The woman was registered for antenatal care. Speculum examination revealed cyanosis of vaginal mucosa, clean cervix, open cervical canal discharging blood and blood clots; the lower pole of the gestational sac was visible. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Pregnancy maintenance therapy
b. Hysterectomy
*c. Curettage of the uterus
d. Antiviral therapy
e. Expectant management, surveillance

1687. A 13-year-old girl was admitted to the gynecological department with heavy bleeding, which appeared after a long delay of menstruation. Shortly before, the girl suffered a serious psychotrauma. Her menarche occurred at the age of 11, she has a 30-day cycle with 5 to 6 days of moderate, painless bleeding. The patient is somatically healthy, of normosthenic constitution with height of 160 cm, weight of 42 kg. The patient is pale. Rectoabdominal examination revealed that the uterus was of normal size and consistency, anteflexio-versio, the appendages were not changed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ovarian cyst
*b. Juvenile bleeding
c. Hysteromyoma
d. Amenorrhea
e. Girl is healthy

1688. A baby was born by a young smoker. The labour was complicated by uterine inertia, difficult delivery of the babys head and shoulders. The babys Apgar score was 4. Which of the following is a risk factor for a spinal cord injury?
a. Young age of the mother
*b. Difficult delivery of the head and shoulders
c. Chronic hypoxia
d. Uterine inertia
e. Pernicious habits

1689. A patient complains of frequent, bulky, frothy stools with greenish mucus, cramping pain in the umbilical region, abdominal murmur, body temperature at the rate of 39°C. The patient associates the disease with consumption of soft-boiled eggs. What is the most likely pathogen?
a. Shigella
b. Vibrio cholerae El Tor
c. Enteropathogenic E.Coli
*d. Salmonella
e. Yersinia

1690. An employee was on a business trip to another city, where he fell ill and was hospitalized. The sick leave certificate can be issued:
a. With the permission of the deputy head doctor after the disability examination
b. By doctor in charge
*c. With the permission of the head doctor of the city hospital
d. By doctor in charge and chief of department
e. With the permission of the deputy chief doctor in charge of medical work

1691. A patient got flame burns of both hands. On the dorsal and palmar surface of hands the blisters are filled with serous fluid. The wrist joint region is hyperemic. The forearms were not injured. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. III degree flame burn of hands with an area of 4% of body surface
b. IIb degree flame burn of hands with an area of 2% of body surface
c. II degree flame burn of hands with an area of 2% of body surface
d. IIIa degree flame burn of hands with an area of 4% of body surface
*e. II degree flame burn of hands with an area of 4% of body surface

1692. 2 weeks after labour a parturient woman developed breast pain being observed for 3 days. Examination revealed body temperature at the rate of 39°C, chills, weakness, hyperaemia, enlargement, pain and deformity of the mammary gland. On palpation the infiltrate was found to have an area of softening and fluctuation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmonous mastitis
b. Mastopathy
c. Lactostasis
*d. Infiltrative-purulent mastitis
e. Serous mastitis

1693. A 32-year-old patient has developed an acute condition after hypothermia: temperature - 40°C, cough with 200 ml of sputum per day. The sputum is purulent, foul-smelling. To the right of the lower lobe the mixed moist rales can be auscultated. Blood tst results: WBCs - 18,0109/l, ESR - 45 mm/h. Radiographically: in the lower lobe of the right lung there is a thick-walled cavity up to 6 cm in diameter with a high horizontal level. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lung cyst
b. Decomposing lung carcinoma
c. Infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis
*d. Lung abscess
e. Fibro-cavernous pulmonary tuberculosis

1694. A 45-year-old female patient complaining of general weakness, nausea and vomiting hass been delivered to a hospital by the ambulance. Recently there has been a lack of appetite, weight loss. Objectively: hyperpigmentation of skin, blood pressure at the rate of 70/45 mm Hg, bradycardia. Additional studies revealed the reduced concentration of aldosterone and cortisol in blood, decreased excretion of 17-ketosteroids and 17-oxyketosteroids in the urine, hyponatremia, chloropenia, hypokalemia. What therapeutic measures are required?
a. To administer aldosterone
b. To prescribe a diet with a high content of cooking salt
c. To administer prednisolone
d. To administer insulin
*e. To administer glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and a diet with a high content of cooking salt

1695. A newborn (mothers I pregnancy) weighing 3500 g presents with jaundice, lethargy, reduced reflexes. Objectively: second grade jaundice of skin with saffron tint, liver - +2cm, spleen - +1 cm. Urine and feces are yellow. Blood count: Hb- 100 g/l, RBCs - 3,21012/l, WBCs - 18,7109/l, mothers blood type - 0(I) Rh(+), babys blood type - А(II) Rh(-), bilirubin - 170 mmol/l, indirect fraction. ALT, AST rates are normal. What disease is the child most likely to have?
a. Hemolytic disease of newborn, Rh-conflict
b. Biliary atresia
c. Physiologic jaundice
d. Perinatal hepatitis
*e. Hemolytic disease of newborn, AB0-conflict

1696. During medical monitoring of labor and professional training of 6th grade schoolchildren the school doctor found that lessons in carpentry workshop are held on Friday as the fourth and fifth lesson of a total of 90 minutes, the motor density at the first lesson is 69%, and 65% at the second. Does the lesson organization meet the hygienic requirements?
a. Does not meet the requirements in terms of motor density at the 1st lesson
b. Does not meet the requirements in terms of training duration
*c. Meets the requirements
d. Does not meet the requirements in terms of motor density at the 2nd lesson
e. Does not meet the requirements as there are two consecutive lessons

1697. A 40-year-old female patient complains of headache, dizziness, muscle weakness, occasional cramps in the extremities. She has been taking antihypertensive medications for 10 years. AP- 180/100 mm Hg. Blood potassium - 1,8 millimole/l, sodium - 4,8 millimole/l. In urine: alkaline reaction, the relative density - 1012, protein and sugar are not found, WBCs - 3-4 in the field of vision, RBCs - 1-2 in the field of vision. Conns syndrome is suspected. Which drug should be chosen for the treatment of arterial hypertension?
a. Propanolol
b. Clonidine
c. Enalapril
d. Hydrochlorothiazide
*e. Spironolactone

1698. A 48-year-old patient complains of having dull pain in the right lumbar region for over three years. USI shows that kidneys are of normal size, at the upper pole of the right kidney there is a fluid-containing formation up to 12 cm in diameter. Excretory urograms show normal condition on the left, and the deformation of the superior renal calyces with satisfactory function on the right. What kind of disease can you think of?
a. Right hydronephrosis
b. Multicystic kidney disease
c. Multiple cysts of the right kidney
*d. Simple cyst of the right kidney
e. Tumour of the right kidney

1699. Against the background of angina a patient has developed pain in tubular bones. Examination revealed generalized enlargement of lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome, sternalgia. In blood: RBCs - 3,61012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, thrombocytes – 45109/l, WBCs – 13109/l, blasts - 87%, stab neutrophils - 1%, segmented neutrophils - 7%, lymphocytes - 5%, ESR - 55 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Multiple myeloma
b. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
c. Erythremia
d. Chronic myeloid leukemia
*e. Acute leukemia

1700. A 45-year-old female patient complains of frequent liquid stools with a lot of mucus, pus and blood; pain across the abdomen, loss of 7 kg within 6 months. She has a 1-year history of non-specific ulcerative colitis. What group of drugs should be preferred for this patient?
*a. Corticosteroids
b. Sulfonamides
c. Polyenzymes
d. Antibacterial
e. Nitrofurans

1701. A 13-year-old boy complains of pain in the upper third of his left thigh, body temperature rise up to 39°C. There is a swelling in the upper third of thigh and inguinal fold smoothness. The extremity is in a half-bent position. Active and passive movements are not possible because of the sharp pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
b. Osteosarcoma
c. Intermuscular phlegmon
d. Brodies disease
e. Acute coxitis

1702. Explosion of a tank with benzene at a chemical plant has killed and wounded a large number of people. There are over 50 victims with burns, mechanical traumas and intoxication. Specify the main elements of medical care and evacuation of population in this situation:
a. Sorting, recovery, rescue activity
*b. Sorting, medical assistance, evacuation
c. Medical assistance, evacuation, isolation
d. Isolation, rescue activity, recovery
e. Sorting, evacuation, treatment

1703. A 50-year-old patient has worked at a chemical plant for 15 years. His work involved using xylene solvent. The patient was hospitalized with suspected chronic intoxication. He was found to have anemic syndrome. What is the first-priority measure of secondary anemia prevention?
a. Including seafood into the diet
b. Administration of iron supplements
c. Including meat into the diet
*d. Job change
e. Administration of glucocorticosteroids

1704. A boy was born at 32 weeks gestation. 2 hours after birth he developed respiratory distress. The RD severity assessed by Silverman score was 5. The respiratory disorders progressed, respiratory failure couldnt be eliminated by Martin-Bouyer CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure). Ro-gram of lungs shows reticular and nodular pattern, air bronhogram. What is the most likely cause of respiratory distress syndrome?
a. Congenital pulmonary emphysema
*b. Hyaline membrane disease
c. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
d. Segmental atelectasis
e. Edematous hemorrhagic syndrome

1705. A 64-year-old patient complains of severe pain in the right side of chest, dyspnea, dry cough which appeared suddenly on exertion. Objectively: the right side of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing. Percussion reveals tympanic sound. Auscultation reveals pronouncedly diminished breath sounds on the right. Ps- 100/min, weak, arrhythmic. AP- 100/50 mm Hg. Cardiac sounds are decreased. What disease can be suspected in this patient?
a. Right-sided pleuropneumonia
b. PATE
c. Right-sided hydrothorax
*d. Right-sided pneumothorax
e. Right-sided dry pleurisy

1706. A 32-year-old female complains of dizziness, headache, palpitation, tremor. For the last several months she has been under outpatient observation for the increased arterial pressure. Since recently such attacks have become more frequent and severe. Objectively: skin is covered with clammy sweat, tremor of the extremities is present. HR- 110/min, AP- 220/140 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled. Blood test results: WBCs - 9,8109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h. Blood glucose - 9,8 millimole/l. What disease is the most likely cause of this crisis?
a. Preeclampsia
b. Diabetic glomerulosclerosis
c. Essential hypertension
d. Primary hyperaldosteronism
*e. Pheochromocytoma

1707. Hygienic expertise of a sample taken from the batch of grain revealed that 2% of grains were infected with microscopic Fusarium fungi. On the ground of laboratory analyses this batch of grain should be:
a. Used for ethanol production
b. Tested for toxicity
c. Used for forage production
*d. Sold without restrictions
e. Destroyed

1708. A 28-year-old female patient with a six-year history of Raynauds syndrome has recently developed pain in the small joints of hands, difficult movement of food down the esophagus. What kind of disease can you think of in this case?
*a. Systemic scleroderma
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Periarteritis nodosa
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Pseudotrichiniasis

1709. A 60-year-old male patient, who works as a construction worker, complains of pain in the right hip and knee joints, that is getting worse on exertion. These presentations have been observed for the last 5 years. Objectively: the patient is overnourished. Right knee joint is moderately deformed. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathology. Blood test results: WBCs - 8,2*10*9/l, ESR - 15 mm/h. Uric acid - 0,35 mmol/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Deforming osteoarthritis
b. Gout
c. Reactive arthritis
d. Reiters disease
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

1710. A city somatic hospital with 300 beds consists of the main building which houses the therapeutic and surgical departments. Several separate buildings house the maternity, pediatric and radiologic departments that are connected to the main building by underground walkways and above-ground covered skybridges. Specify the building system of the hospital:
a. Free
*b. Central-unit
c. Combined
d. Decentralized
e. Centralized

1711. From urine of a 14-year-old boy with the exacerbation of secondary obstructive pyelonephritis Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated with a titer of 1000000 microbes per 1 ml. Which antibiotic is most advisable to be administered in this case?
a. Ampicillin
*b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Azithromycin
d. Chloramphenicol
e. Cefazolinum

1712. A 22-year-old vegetarian patient with signs of malnutrition consulted a doctor about smell and taste distortion, angular stomatitis. Objectively: expressively blue sclerae. The patient was diagnosed with iron deficiency anemia. What is the dominating clinical syndrome?
*a. Sideropenic
b. Anaemic
c. Haemologic
d. Myelodysplastic
e. Haemolytic

1713. A 10-year-old patient has a history of mild bronchial asthma. During a regular check-up the patient should be recommended:
a. Not to go in for sports
b. Not to go to the seaside
c. To avoid spa treatment
d. To avoid body tempering procedures
*e. To avoid allergenic food

1714. A 38-year-old patient has suddenly developed pain in the left side of his chest, suffocation. Objectively: moderately grave condition, Ps- 100/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg, breath sounds on the left cannot be auscultated. Chest radiography shows the collapse of the left lung up to 1/2. What kind of treatment should be administered?
a. Active thoracostomy
b. Pleural puncture
*c. Passive thoracostomy
d. Rest, resolution therapy
e. Operative therapy

1715. A 58-year-old female patient came to the antenatal clinic complaining of bloody light-red discharges from the genital tracts. Menopause is 12 years. Gynaecological examination revealed age involution of externalia and vagina; uterine cervix was unchanged, there were scant bloody discharges from uterine cervix, uterus was of normal size; uterine appendages were not palpable; parametria were free. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Granulosa cell tumor of ovary
*b. Uterine carcinoma
c. Atrophic colpitis
d. Cervical carcinoma
e. Abnormalities of menstrual cycle of climacteric nature

1716. A 24-year-old patient consulted a doctor about enlarged submandibular lymph nodes. Objectively: submandibular, axillary and inguinal lymph nodes are enlarged. Chest radiograph shows enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. In blood: RBCs - 3,4*10*12/l, Hb- 100 g/l, colour index - 0,88, thrombocytes – 190*10*9/l, WBCs - 7,5*10*9/l, eosinophils - 8%, stab neutrophiles - 2%, segmented neutrophiles - 67%, lymphocytes - 23%, ESR - 22 mm/h. What study is required to verify the cause of lymphadenopathy?
a. Puncture biopsy of lymph nodes
b. Sternal puncture
c. Mediastinal tomography
d. Ultrasound examination of the abdomen
*e. Open biopsy of lymph nodes

1717. A 49-year-old patient complains of dyspnea, cough. There are no sputum discharges. He has repeatedly used salbutamol and intal but with no effect. Objectively: he is only able to sit while leaning on the table. Cyanosis of face, acrocyanosis are present. Breathing is shallow, laboured, in some parts it cannot be auscultated; there are diffuse rales, expiration is significantly prolonged. Heart sounds are muffled, tachycardia is present. Ps - 112/min, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Liver is located near the costal arch. There are no peripheral edemata. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
b. Bronchiale asthma, moderate gravity
c. Foreign object aspiration
d. Cardiac asthma
*e. Status asthmaticus

1718. A 10-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital with a closed craniocerebral injury with suspected cerebral edema. The patient is in grave condition, unconscious. The dyspnea, tachycardia, hypertension are present. Muscle tone is increased, there is nystagmus, pupillary and oculomotor reactions are disturbed. The mandatory component of intensive care is dehydration. What diuretic is adequate in this case?
a. Moduretic
b. Spironolactone
*c. Furosemide
d. Mannitol
e. Hydrochlorthiazide

1719. A patient complains about sudden onsets of paroxysmal pain in the right lumbar region. 2 hours after the onset the patient had hematuria. Plain radiograph of the lumbar region shows no pathological shadows. USI reveals pyelocaliectasis on the right, the left kidney is normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Renal colic
b. Torsion of the right ovary cyst
c. Right renal pelvis tumour
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Bowel volvulus

1720. 5 weeks after hypothermia a 22-year-old patient developed fever, weakness, muscle pain, inability to move independently. Objectively: tenderness, induration of shoulder and shin muscles, restricted active movements, erythema on the anterior surface of chest. There is a periorbital edema with heliotropic erythema. Gottrons sign is present. What study is required to verify the diagnosis?
a. Aminotransferase activity
b. Pneumoarthrography
*c. Muscle biopsy
d. ASO titre
e. Rheumatoid factor

1721. The share of circulatory diseases was 15% in the total of registered diseases among city population. What statistic indicator is it?
a. Average
b. Ratio
c. Demonstrative
d. Intensive
*e. Extensive

1722. A 26-year-old patient with affective bipolar disorder has developed a condition manifested by mood improvement, behavioural and sexual hyperactivity, verbosity, active body language, reduced need for sleep. Which of the following drugs are most effective in this case?
a. Antidepressants with a sedative effect
b. Neuroleptics with an activating effect
*c. Neuroleptics with a sedative effect
d. Tranquilizers
e. Antidepressants with an activating effect

1723. A 58-year-old patient complains of a headache in the occipital region, nausea, choking, opplotentes. The presentations appeared after a physical exertion. Objectively: the patient is excited. Face is hyperemic. Skin is pale. Heart sounds are regular, the 2nd aortic sound is accentuated. AP- 240/120 mm Hg, HR- 92/min. Auscultation reveals some fine moist rales in the lower parts of the lungs. Liver is not enlarged. ECG shows signs of hypertrophy and left ventricular overload. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Community-acquired pneumonia
b. Bronchial asthma exacerbation
c. Acute myocardial infarction, pulmonary edema
d. Uncomplicated hypertensic crisis
*e. Complicated hypertensic crisis, pulmonary edema

1724. A 28-year-old patient complains of profuse, painful and prolonged menstruation. Before and after the menstrual period there is spotting lasting for 4-6 days. Vaginal examination reveals that the uterus is enlarged corresponding to 5-6 weeks of pregnancy, has limited mobility, is painful. Appendages are not palpable. On the 15th day of the menstrual cycle, the uterus was of normal size, painless. On account of stated problems and objective examination the patient has been diagnosed with internal endometriosis. Which drug should be used for the efective treatment of this patient?
a. -
b. Synoestrolum
*c. Duphaston
d. Parlodel
e. Ovidon

1725. A 40 week pregnant secundipara is 28 years old. Contractions are very active. Retraction ring is at the level of navel, the uterus is hypertonic, in form of hourglass. On auscultation the fetal heart sounds are dull, heart rate is 100/min. AP of the parturient woman is 130/80 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Attack of eclampsia
b. Disturbed labour
c. Mazolysis
d. Complete hysterorrhexis
*e. Risk of hysterorrhexis

1726. A 9-month-old child presents with fever, cough, dyspnea. The symptoms appeared 5 days ago after a contact with a person having ARVI. Objectively: the child is in grave condition. Temperature is 38 degree C, cyanosis of nasolabial triangle is present. RR- 54/min, nasal flaring while breathing. There was percussion dullness on the right below the scapula angle, and tympanic sound over the rest of lungs. Auscultation revealed bilateral fine moist rales predominating on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. ARVI
b. Acute bronchiolitis
c. Acute laryngotracheitis
d. Acute bronchitis
*e. Acute pneumonia

1727. In order to reduce weed growth on agricultural land, some herbicides have been used for a long time. In terms of environmental stability these herbicides are rated as stable. Specify the most likely route of their entry into the human body:
a. Soil-animals-humans
b. Soil-microorganisms-humans
c. Soil-protozoa-humans
d. Soil-insects-humans
*e. Soil-plants-humans

1728. An 8-year-old child complains of fever up to 38,8 degree C, throat pain when swallowing, skin rash. Objectively: lacunar tonsillitis, circumscribed hyperaemia and enanthema of soft palate, point-sized skin rash, mostly in the folds and on the flexor surfaces of the extremities, pale nasolabial triangle. Which antibiotic should be administered in the first place?
*a. Penicillin
b. Lincomycin
c. Ampicillin
d. Gentamicin
e. Tetracycline

1729. Gastric juice analysis of a 42-year-old male patient revealed absence of free hydrochloric acid at all stages. Endoscopy revealed pallor, thinning of gastric mucosa, smoothed folds. Microscopically the atrophy of glands with intestinal metaplasia was found. What disease is this situation typical for?
a. Chronic type B gastritis
b. Chronic type C gastritis
c. Stomach cancer
*d. Chronic type A gastritis
e. Menetrier disease

1730. Examination of a 13-year-old girl revealed acute glomerulonephritis, nephritic syndrome at the initial stage without renal dysfunction. What is the main drug of choice for the basic therapy of this patient?
a. Saluretic
b. Curantyl
c. Heparin
*d. Antibiotic
e. Prednisolone

1731. A 28-year-old male patient complains of regurgitation, cough and heartburn that occurs every day after a meal, when bending forward or lying down. These problems have been observed for 4 years. Objective status and laboratory values are normal. FEGDS revealed endoesophagitis. What is the leading factor in the development of this disease?
a. Hypergastrinemia
b. Helicobacter pylori infection
c. Duodeno-gastric reflux
d. Hypersecretion of hydrochloric acid
*e. Failure of the inferior esophageal sphincter

1732. During coal extraction in a mine the concentration of coal dust in the working area is 450 mg/m3 (MPC is 10 mg/m3). What occupational respiratory disease may develop in miners?
a. Siderosis
b. Byssinosis
c. Allergic nasopharyngitis
d. Talcosis
*e. Anthracosis

1733. A patient presented to a hospital with a carbuncle of the upper lip. The body temperature is 39°C. There is a pronounced edema of the upper lip and eyelids. What is the surgeons tactics of choice?
a. Administer physiotherapy
b. Disclose the carbuncle and administer antibiotics
*c. Hospitalize in the surgical unit
d. Disclose the carbuncle and administer out-patient treatment
e. Administer out-patient course of antibiotics

1734. X-ray picture of chest shows a density and an abrupt decrease in the upper lobe of the right lung. The middle and lower lobe of the right lung exhibit significant pneumatization. The right pulmonary hilum comes up to the dense lobe. In the upper and middle parts of the left pulmonary field there are multiple focal shadows. In the basal region of the left pulmonary field there are clear outlines of two annular shadows with quite thick and irregular walls. What disease is this X-ray pattern typical for?
a. Atelectasis of the right upper lobe
b. Abscessing pneumonia
*c. Fibro-cavernous pulmonary tuberculosis
d. Pancoast tumour
e. Peripheral cancer

1735. A patient with fibromyoma of uterus sized up to 8-9 weeks of pregnancy consulted a gynaecologist about acute pain in the lower abdomen. Examination revealed pronounced positive symptoms of peritoneal irritation, high leukocytosis. Vaginal examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged corresponding to 9 weeks of pregnancy due to the fibromatous nodes, one of which was mobile and extremely painful. Appendages were not palpable. There were moderate mucous discharges. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Surgical laparoscopy
*b. Urgent surgery (laparotomy)
c. Fractional diagnostic curettage of the uterine cavity
d. Surveillance and antibacterial therapy
e. Surveillance and spasmolytic therapy

1736. A 75-year-old male patient complains of slight pain in the right iliac region. The abdominal pain arose 6 days ago and was accompanied by nausea. Surgical examination revealed moist tongue, Ps- 76 bpm. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Abdomen was soft, slightly painful in the right iliac region on deep palpation, the symptoms of the peritoneum irritation were doubtful. In blood: RBCs - 4,0*10^12/l, Hb- 135 g/l, WBCs - 9,5*10^9/l, stab neutrophils - 5%, segmentonuclear - 52%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 5%, ESR - 20 mm/h. Specify the doctors further tactics:
a. Refer the patient to a district therapist
b. Hospitalization, dynamic surveillance
c. Administration of additional examination: abdominal ultrasound, x-ray contrast study of the gastrointestinal tract
d. Send the patient home
*e. Emergency operation for acute appendicitis

1737. After a contact with chemicals a plant worker has suddenly developed stridor, voice hoarseness, barking cough, progressing dyspnea. Objective examination reveals acrocyanosis. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Laryngeal edema
b. PATE
c. Pneumothorax
d. Laryngeal carcinoma
e. Pulmonary atelectasis

1738. A 6-year-old child complains of frequent liquid stool and vomiting. On the 2nd day of desease the child presented with inertness, temperature rise up to 38,2°C, Ps- 150 bpm, scaphoid abdomen, palpatory painful sigmoid colon, defecation 10 times a day with liquid, scarce stool with mucus and streaks of green. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Intestinal amebiasis
*b. Shigellosis
c. Escherichiosis
d. Yersiniosis
e. Salmonellosis

1739. A 12-year-old girl undergoes regular gastroenterological check-ups for duodenal ulcer, biliary dyskinesia. What is the recommended frequency of anti-relapse treatment?
*a. Twice a year
b. Three times a year
c. Every 2 months
d. Every 3 months
e. Once a year

1740. A 28-year-old patient has been hospitalized for the pain in the epigastric region. He has a 10-year history of duodenal ulcer (DU). Recently, the pain character has changed: it became permanent, persistent, irradiating to the back. There are general weakness, dizziness, fatigue. The patient has put off weight. Objectively: HR- 68/min, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. What is most likely cause of deterioration?
a. Haemorrhage
*b. Penetration
c. Exacerbation of duodenal ulcer
d. Perforation of duodenal wall
e. Stenosis development

1741. A 28-year-old patient has been taken to a hospital for acute pain in the lower abdomen. There was a brief syncope. The delay ofmenstruation is 2 months. Objectively: the patient has pale skin, AP- 90/50 mm Hg, Ps- 110/min. Lower abdomen is extremely painful. Vaginal examination reveals uterus enlargement. There is positive Promtovs sign. Right appendages are enlarged and very painful. Posterior vault hangs over. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Right-sided tubal pregnancy
b. Pelvioperitonitis
c. Incipient abortion
d. Acute right-sided salpingoophoritis
e. Right ovary apoplexy

1742. A 24-year-old patient got a puncture injury below the Pouparts ligament accompanied by intense arterial bleeding. The best method to temporarily stop the bleeding in the patient would be:
a. Wound suturing
b. Maximum limb bending
*c. Compression band
d. Esmarchs tourniquet
e. Compressing a blood vessel with a clamp

1743. An infant is 3 weeks old. Since birth there has been observed periodical vomiting within a few minutes after feeding. The amount of vomitive masses does not exceed that of previous feeding. The infant has age-appropriate body weight. What is the most likely cause of this symptom?
a. Esophageal achalasia
b. Adrenogenital syndrome
*c. Pylorospasm
d. Pyloristenosis
e. Esophageal chalasia

1744. Examination of a 43-year-old man objectively revealed pallor of skin and mucous membranes, loss of tongue papillae, transverse striation of fingernails, cracks in the mouth corners, tachycardia. Blood test results: Hb- 90 g/l, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis. The most likely causative agent of this state is inadequate intake of:
a. Copper
*b. Iron
c. Magnesium
d. Selene
e. Zinc

1745. A 57-year-old male patient complains of dyspnea on exertion, heaviness in the right hypochondrium and shin edemata towards evening. Objectively: temperature - 38,1°C, HR- 20/min, HR=Ps=92/min, AP- 140/90 mm Hg. There is apparent kyphoscoliosis. In the lungs single dry rales can be auscultated. Heart sounds are muffled, rhythmic. ECG: Rv1+Sv5=15 mm. X-ray picture shows the bulging of pulmonary artery cone, right ventricle enlargement. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis
b. Primary pulmonary hypertension
c. Mitral stenosis
d. Dilatation cardiomyopathy
*e. Pulmonary heart

1746. Examination of a group of persons living on the same territory revealed the following common symptoms: dark-yellow pigmentation of the tooth enamel, diffuse osteoporosis of bone apparatus, ossification of ligaments and joints, functional disorders of the central nervous system. This condition may be caused by the excessive concentration of the following microelement in food or drinking water:
a. Cesium
b. Iodine
*c. Fluorine
d. Nickel
e. Copper

1747. Sanitary examination of the burns unit for adults revealed that 4-bed wards had an area of 28 m2. What is the minimally required ward area for this department?
*a. 40 m2
b. 24 m2
c. 28 m2
d. 52 m2
e. 30 m2

1748. A 57-year-old female complains of having a sensation of esophageal compresion, palpitation, difficult breathing during eating solid food, occasional vomiting with a full mouth, "wet pillow" sign at night for the last 6 months. Objectively: body tempearture - 39°C, height - 168 cm, weight - 72 kg, Ps- 76/min, АP- 120/80 mm Hg. X-ray revealed a considerable dilation of esophagus and its constriction in the cardial part. What pathology is most likely to have caused dysphagia in this patient?
a. Hiatal hernia
b. Esophageal carcinoma
c. Primary esophagism
d. Reflux esophagitis
*e. Achalasia cardiae

1749. A 57-year-old patient had an attack of retrosternal pain that lasted more than 1,5 hours. Objectively: the patient is inert, adynamic, has pale skin, cold extremities, poor volume pulse, heart rate - 120/min, AP- 70/40 mm Hg. ECG shows ST elevation in leads II, III, aVWhat condition are these changes typical for?
*a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Acute pericarditis
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Perforated gastric ulcer
e. Arrhythmogenic shock

1750. A 45-year-old patient with acute abscess of the left lung has suddenly developed acute chest pain and dyspnea while coughing, tachycardia has increased. The control Ro-gram shows collapsed left lung, the air in the left pleural cavity and a horizontal fluid level. What is the mechanism of this complication?
*a. Abscess burst into the pleural cavity
b. Inflammation spread to the visceral pleura
c. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
d. Atelectasis of the left lung
e. Bullae rupture of the left lung

1751. A 45-year-old patient complains of fever up to 40°C, general weakness, headache and spasmodic contraction of muscles in the region of a shinwound. The patient got injured five days ago when tilling soil and didnt seek medical attention. What kind of wound infection can be suspected?
a. Anthrax
b. Gram-positive
c. Erysipelas
*d. Tetanus
e. Gram-negative

1752. Six months ago, a 5-year-old child was operated for CHd. For the last 3 weeks he has complained of fever, heart pain, aching muscles and bones. Examination results: "white-coffee" skin colour, auscultation revealed systolic murmur in the region of heart along with a noise in the III-IV intercostal space. Examination of fingertips revealed Janeway lesions. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Infectious endocarditis
b. Sepsis
c. Acute rheumatic fever
d. Typhoid fever
e. Nonrheumatic carditis

1753. A general practitioner visited a 2-year-old child and diagnosed him with measles. The child attends a nursery, has a 5-year-old sister. What document must be filled in for the effective antiepidemic measures in the given health locality?
*a. Emergency notification on infectious disease (form № 058/o)
b. Sick child care certificate
c. Infants record (report form № 112/o)
d. House call record (form № 031/o)
e. Child care sick leave

1754. A 22-year-old patient complains of amenorrhea for 8 months. Menarche occured at the age of 12,5. Since the age of 18 the patient has a history of irregular menstruation. The patient is nulligravida. The mammary glands are developed properly, nipples discharge drops of milk when pressed. Gynecological study results: prolactin level is 2 times higher than normal. CT reveals a bulky formation with a diameter of 4 mm in the region of sella. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lactational amenorrhea
b. Pituitary basophilia
c. Sheehans syndrome
d. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
*e. Pituitary tumour

1755. A 24-year-old female patient complains of pain in the right hypochondrium that is getting worse after taking meals; nausea, fever up to 37,7°C, icteric skin, pain in the large joints. These presentations have been observed for 8 months. Objectively: hepatosplenomegaly. Blood test results: ESR- 47 mm/h, total bilirubin - 86,1 mmol/l, direct bilirubin - 42,3 mmol/l. Total protein - 62 g/l, albumins - 40%, globulins - 60%, gamma globulins - 38%. Viral hepatitis markers were not detected. The antibodies to smooth muscle cells are present. On ultrasound the portal vein diameter was of 1 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Autoimmune hepatitis
b. Cholangiogenic hepatitis
c. Gilberts syndrome
d. Hemachromatosis
e. Primary biliary cirrhosis

1756. A 12-year-old cild has been hit on the stomach. The patient is in moderately grave condition, has a forced position in bed. The skin is pale, Ps- 122/min. The stress on the left costal arch causes a slight pain. There are positive Weinert, Kulenkampff symptoms. Macroscopically the urine is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Liver rupture, abdominal bleeding
b. Rupture of a hollow organ, peritonitis
c. Left kidney rupture, retroperitoneal hematoma
d. Rupture of the pancreas
*e. Spleen rupture, abdominal bleeding

1757. Several hours before, a 28-year-old patient suddenly developed acute headache and repeated vomiting, then lost consciousness. Objectively: focal neurological symptoms were not found. Pronounced meningeal symptoms were revealed. AP - 120/80 mm Hg. According to clinical and liquorological findings the patient was diagnosed with subarachnoid haemorrhage. After administration of dehydrants the patients condition somewhat improved. What is the main component of further emergency care?
a. Fibrinolytics
b. Corticosteroids
c. Antiaggregants
d. Anticoagulants
*e. Coagulants

1758. A 54-year-old patient complains of frequent painful urination, chills, fever up to 38°C. Urine test results: protein - 0,33 g/L, WBCs - up to 50-60 in the field of vision, RBCs - 5-8 in the field of vision, gram-negative bacilli. Which of the listed antibiotics should be preferred in this case?
a. Tseporin
b. Erythromycin
c. Tetracycline
*d. Ciprofloxacin
e. Oxacillin

1759. A 28-year-old female patient has been admitted to a hospital. She states to be ill for 12 years. On examination she has been diagnosed with bronchiectasis with affection of the left lower lobe of lung. What is the optimal treatment tactics for this patient?
a. Active drainage of the left pleural cavity
b. Antibiotic therapy
c. Bronchopulmonary lavage
d. Left-sided pneumoectomy
*e. Left lower lobectomy

1760. A 27-year-old patient complains of nasal haemorrhages, multiple bruises on the anterior surface of the trunk and extremities, sudden weakness. In blood: Hb- 74 g/l, reticulocytes - 16%, RBCs - 2,51012/l, platelets – 30109/l, ESR- 25 mm/h. What is the most effective measure for the treatment of thrombocytopenia?
a. Iron preparations
b. Vitamin B12
c. Cytostatics
d. Hemotransfusion
*e. Splenectomy

1761. A 40-year-old patient is registered in a narcological dispensary. Somatically: skin is dramatically hyperemic, sclera are injected, hyperhidrosis is present. AP- 140/100 mm Hg, heart rate - 100/min. Mental state: autopsychic orientation is intact, allopsychic orientation is distorted. The patient presents with motor anxiety. There is a look of fear on his face. He refuses to talk about his problems and asks to release him immediately, because he "may be killed." This state developed a day after a regular drinking bout. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Organic delirium
b. Alcoholic paranoid
*c. Delirium tremens
d. Paranoia
e. Alcoholic hallucinosis

1762. A 38-year-old male works within the range of ionizing radiation. At a routine medical examination he presents no problems. In blood: RBCs - 4,51012/l, Hb- 80 g/l, WBCs - 2,8109/l, thrombocytes – 30109/l. Decide if this person can work with sources of ionizing radiation:
a. The patient is allowed to work with radioactive substances for the limited period of time
*b. Working with radioactive substances and other sources of ionizing radiation is contraindicated
c. The patient can be allowed to work after an extended medical examination
d. The patient is allowed to work with radioactive substances
e. The patient can only work with radioactive substances of low activity

1763. A 77-year-old patient complains of inability to urinate, bursting pain above the pubis. The patient developed acute condition 12 hours ago. Objectively: full urinary bladder is palpable above the pubis. Rectal prostate is enlarged, dense and elastic, well-defined, with no nodes. Interlobular sulcus is distinct. Ultrasonography results: prostate volume is 120 cm3, it projects into the bladder cavity, has homogeneous parenchyma. Prostate-specific antigen rate is of 5 ng/ml. What is the most likely disease that caused acute urinary retention?
*a. Prostatic hyperplasia
b. Acute prostatitis
c. Sclerosis of the prostate
d. Prostate carcinoma
e. Tuberculosis of the prostate

1764. A 13-year-old girl complains of fever up to 37,4°C during the last 2 months after recovering from ARVI. Objectively: malnutrition, diffuse grade II enlargement of the thyroid gland feeling dense on palpation, exophthalmos, tachycardia. What kind of pathological syndrome is it?
a. Hypothyroidism
b. Hypoparathyroidism
*c. Thyrotoxicosis
d. Thymomegaly
e. Hyperparathyroidism

1765. During her first visit to the prenatal clinic a pregnant woman was referred to other doctors for mandatory consultation. The patient was refered to:
a. Surgeon, oculist
b. Therapist, oculist
c. Internist, surgeon
d. Dentist, surgeon
*e. Internist, dentist

1766. An 8-year-old child with a 3-year history of diabetes was hospitalized in hyperglycemic coma. Specify the initial dose of insulin to be administered:
*a. 0,1-0,2 U/kg of body weight per hour
b. 0,2-0,3 U/kg of body weight per hour
c. 0,05 U/kg of body weight per hour
d. 0,4-0,5 U/kg of body weight per hour
e. 0,3-0,4U/kg of body weight per hour

1767. A 48-year-old patient complains of weakness, subfebrile temperature, aching pain in the kidney region. These presentations turned up three months ago after hypothermia. Objectively: kidneys are painful on palpation, there is bilaterally positive Pasternatskys symptom. Urine test res: acid reaction, pronounced leukocyturia, microhematuria, minor proteinuria - 0,165-0,33 g/l. After the urine sample had been inoculated on conventional media, bacteriuria were not found. What research is most required in this case?
*a. Urine test for Mycobacterium tuberculosis
b. Zimnitsky urine test
c. Nechiporenko urine test
d. Daily proteinuria
e. Isotope renography

1768. A patient complains of impaired far vision. Previously his eyes often turned red and hurt. Objectively: the eyes are not irritated, the cornea is transparent, anterior chambers are median deep, their liquid is transparent. The iris of the right eye has not changed in colour, its pattern is unchanged. The pupil is of irregular shape, scalloped. Biomicroscopy of the crystalline lens reveals the areas of opacity and vacuoles. Make a diagnosis:
a. Tetanic cataract of the right eye
*b. Complicated cataract of the right eye
c. Radiation cataract of the right eye
d. Diabetic cataract of the right eye
e. Senile cataract of the right eye

1769. A 40-year-old female patient has been hospitalized for attacks of asphyxia, cough with phlegm. She has a 4-year history of the disease. The first attack of asphyxia occurred during her stay in the countryside. Further attacks occurred while cleaning the room. After 3 days of inpatient treatment the patients condition has significantly improved. What is the most likely etiological factor?
a. Pollen
b. Psychogenic
c. Chemicals
*d. Household allergens
e. Infectious

1770. A 57-year-old patient taken to the surgical department by ambulance has been provisionally diagnosed with acute intestinal obstruction. Acute pancreatitis is suspected. What is the most informative method of study to verify the diagnosis?
a. Ultrasound
*b. Plan radiography of stomach
c. Fibrogastroduodenoscopy
d. Biochemical blood analysis
e. Complete blood count and clinical urinalysis

1771. After myocardial infarction, a 50-year-old patient had an attack of asthma. Objectively: bubbling breathing with frequency of 32/min, cough with a lot of pink frothy sputum, acrocyanosis, swelling of the neck veins. Ps- 108/min, AP- 150/100 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled. Mixed moist rales can be auscultated above the entire lung surface. What drug would be most effective in this situation?
a. Dopamine intravenously
b. Aminophylline intravenously
c. Strophanthin intravenously
*d. Nitroglycerin intravenously
e. Pentamin intravenously

1772. An 8-year-old boy has a 2-year history of blotchy itchy rash appearing after eating citrus fruit. The first eruption occurred at the age of 6 months after the introduction of juices to the babys diet. Father has a history of bronchial asthma, mother - that of allergic rhinitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Quinckes edema
b. Pityriasis Rosea
*c. Atopic dermatitis
d. Psoriasis
e. Urticaria

1773. A 13-year-old girl has a 5-year histrory of pain in the right hypochondrium irradiating to the right shoulder blade. The pain attacks are usually associated with diet violations, they are short and can be easily relieved by antispasmodic drugs. During a pain attack, palpation of the abdomen is painful, the pain is most intensive in the projection of the gallbladder. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Duodenal ulcer
b. Chronic gastroduodenitis
c. Chronic cholecystitis
*d. Biliary dyskinesia
e. Chronic pancreatitis

1774. A patient complains of jerking, throbbing pain in the III finger on the right hand. The patient associates these pain onsets with an injury by a nail. The finger skin is hyperemic and tense, palpation with a bulbous-end probe reveals the most painful area. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pandactylitis
b. Paronychia
c. Articular felon
d. Bone felon
*e. Subcutaneous felon

1775. After lifting a load a patient felt undurable pain in the loin. He was diagnosed with acute lumbosacral radiculitis. Which of the following is contraindicated for this patient?
a. Vitamins of B group
b. Analgetics
c. Dehydrating drugs
*d. Warming procedures
e. Intravenous injection of aminophylline

1776. A 45-year-old female patient has worked as a painter for 14 years. Contacts with synthetic paint result in face skin redness, swelling, intense itching, oozing lesions. The symptoms disappear after the exposure to chemical agents, but recur even at the smell of paint. The symptom intensity progresses with relapses. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Occupational eczema
b. Toksikodermiya
c. Urticaria
d. Contact-type allergy
e. Simple contact dermatitis

1777. A 53-year-old female patient complains of cardiac pain and rhythm intermissions. She has experienced these presentations since childhood. The patients father had a history of cardiac arrhythmias. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, Ps- 220 bpm, AP- 80/60 mm Hg. ECG results: heart rate - 215/min, extension and deformation of QRS complex accompanied by atrioventricular dissociation; positive P wave. Some time later heart rate reduced down to 45/min, there was a complete dissociation of P wave and QRST complex. Which of the following will be the most effective treatment?
a. Calcium antagonists
b. β-adrenoreceptor blocking agents
c. Cholinolytics
d. Cardiac glycosides
*e. Implantation of the artificial pacemaker

1778. A 40-year-old female patient complains of having a bulge on the anterior surface of neck for 5 years. Objectively: Ps- 72 bpm, arterial pressure - 110/70 mm Hg, in the right lobe of thyroid gland palpation reveals a mobile 4x2 cm node, the left lobe is not palpable, the basal metabolic rate is 6%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mixed euthyroid goiter
b. Riedels thyroiditis
c. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter
d. The median cervical cyst
*e. Nodular euthyroid goiter

1779. A puerpera breastfeeding for 1,5 weeks consulted a doctor about uniform breast engorgement. Breasts are painful. The body temperature is of 36,6°C. Milk expressing is difficult. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infiltrative mastitis
*b. Lactostasis
c. Fibrocystic mastopathy
d. Purulent mastitis
e. Gangrenous mastitis

1780. Examination of a newborn revealed skin redness that appeared immediately after birth and reached the maximum intensity on the second day of life. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Simple erythema
b. Toxic erythema
c. Transient erythema
d. Erythema nodosum
e. Annular erythema

1781. A 14-year-old boy with a history of chronic tonsillitis and sinusitis has developed a feeling of heart irregularities and additional pulse. HR- 83/min. ECG results: regular impulses with no visible P wave that occur every two sinus contractions, QRS complex is dramatically deformed and prolonged to over 0,11 s, T wave is discordant followed by a complete compensatory pause. Specify the arrhythmia type:
*a. Trigeminal extrasystole
b. Bigeminal extrasystole
c. Left bundle branch block
d. Complete AV-block
e. Partial AV-blockade

1782. A 15-year-old boy feels pain in the region of the left knee joint. Objectively: the soft tissues in the affected region are infiltrated, the joint function is limited. Radiography reveals a focus of bone destruction in the distal metaepiphysial segment of the left femur. The destruction is accompanied by periosteal detachment and a defect formed within cortex of Codman triangle bone. X-ray of chest shows multiple microfocal metastases. What is the most likely pathology?
a. Ewings sarcoma
b. Fibrosarcoma
c. Juxtacortical sarcoma
d. Chondrosarcoma
*e. Osteogenic sarcoma

1783. A baby is 3 months old. The mother consulted a pediatrician about lack of breast milk. After several test weighings it was found that the child had to receive supplementary feeding. What is the optimal milk formula for this child?
a. Whole cows milk
b. Malutka
*c. Malysh
d. Milk formula № 2
e. Milk formula № 3

1784. A 63-year-old patient with persistent atrial fibrillation complains of moderate dyspnea. Objectively: peripheral edemata are absent, vesicular respiration is present, heart rate - 72/min, AP- 140/90 mm Hg. What combination of drugs will be most useful in the secondary prevention of heart failure?
a. Beta-blockers, cardiac glycosides
b. Diuretics, beta-blockers
c. Cardiac glycosides, diuretics
d. Cardiac glycosides, ACE inhibitors
*e. Beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors

1785. During the periodic medical examination an assembly fitter (works on soldering details) didnt report any health problems. Closer examination revealed signs of asthenic-vegetative syndrome. Blood included red blood cells with basophilic aggregations and a somewhat higher number of reticulocytes, urine had a high concentration of delta-aminolevulinic acid. The complex of symptoms indicates the initial stage of chronic intoxication with:
a. Manganese
b. Mercury
c. Ethanol
*d. Lead
e. Tin

1786. It is planned to build a multi-disciplinary hospital with 500 beds in a town. Specify the location of a polyclinic within the medical centre:
*a. At the main entrance
b. In the centre of the territory near medical buildings
c. It is not allowed to place the polyclinic within the centre territory
d. In the garden and park area
e. In the service zone

1787. A 22-day-old infant had developed red subcutaneous nodules from 1,0 to 1,5 cm large on the scalp. Later the nodules suppurated, body temperature rose up to 37,7°C, there appeared symptoms of intoxication, the regional lymph nodes grew bigger. Blood test results: anemia, leukocytosis, neutrophilia, accelerated ESR. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. -
*b. Pseudofurunculosis
c. Pemphigus
d. Vesiculopustulosis
e. Scalp phlegmon

1788. 10 days after birth a newborn developed a sudden fever up to 38,1°C. Objectively: the skin in the region of navel, abdomen and chest is erythematous; there are multiple pea-sized blisters with no infiltration at the base; single bright red moist erosions with epidermal fragments on the periphery. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
*b. Epidemic pemphigus of newborn
c. Vulgar impetigo
d. Syphilitic pemphigus
e. Atopic dermatitis

1789. A 28-year-old patient complains of infertility. The patient has been married for 4 years, has regular sexual life and does not use contraceptives but has never got pregnant. Examination revealed normal state of the genitals, tubal patency. Basal body temperature recorded over the course of 3 consecutive menstrual cycles appeared to have a single phase. What is the most likely cause of infertility?
a. Ovulatory menstrual cycle
b. Genital endometriosis
c. Immunological infertility
*d. Anovulatory menstrual cycle
e. Chronic salpingoophoritis

1790. During self-examination a 22-year-old patient revealed a mammary tumour. Palpation revealed a firm, painless, mobile formation up to 2 cm, peripheral lymph nodes were not changed. USI results: in the superior external quadrant of the right mammary gland there was a big formation of increased echogenicity, sized 18x17 mm. The patient was provisionally diagnosed with fibroadenoma. What is a doctors further tactics?
a. Nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs, oral contraceptives
b. Dynamic follow-up
c. Surgical treatment after pregnancy
d. Radical mastectomy
*e. Surgical removal of the tumour prior to pregnancy

1791. A 35-year-old female patient has gained 20 kg weight within a year with the normal diet. She complains of chill, sleepiness, shortness of breath. The patients mother and sister are corpulent. Objectively: height - 160 cm, weight - 92 kg, BMI - 35,9. Obesity is uniform, there are no striae. The face is amimic. The skin is dry. The tongue is thickened. Heart sounds are muffled. HR- 56/min, AP- 140/100 mm Hg. The patient has constipations, amenorrhea for 5 months. TSH- 28 mkME/l (normal rate - 0,32-5). Craniogram shows no pathology. What is the etiology of obesity?
*a. Hypothyroid
b. Alimentary and constitutive
c. Hypo-ovarian
d. Hypothalamic-pituitary
e. Hypercorticoid

1792. A 58-year-old patient complains of general weakness, loss of 10 kg of weight within 1,5 months, progressive pain in the lumbar region, increased blood pressure up to 220/160 mm Hg, subfebrile temperature. Objectively: in the right hypochondrium palpation reveals a formation with uneven surface and low mobility; veins of the spermatic cord and scrotum are dilated. Blood test results: Hb- 86 g/l, ESR- 44 mm/h. Urine test results: specific gravity - 1020, protein - 0,99 g/l, RBCs - cover the whole field of vision, WBCs - 4-6 in the field of vision. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Nephroptosis
*b. Renal tumour
c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

1793. In a cold weather, the emergency room admitted a patient pulled out of the open water. There was no respiratory contact with the water. The patient is excited, pale, complains of pain, numbness of hands and feet, cold shiver. Breathing rate is 22/min, AP- 120/90 mm Hg, Ps- 110/min, rectal temperature is 34,5°C. What kind of warming is indicated for this patient?
a. Hemodialysis with blood warming
b. Warm bath
*c. Passive warming
d. Infusion of 37°C solutions
e. Hot compresses

1794. A 59-year-old male complains of heart pain, cough, fever up to 38°C. Three weeks ago he suffered a heart attack. Objectively: Ps- 86/min, rhythmic, blood pressure - 110/70 mm Hg. Auscultation reveals pericardial rub, rales beneath the shoulder blade. Radiography reveals no pathology. Blood count: WBCs – 10*10^9/l, ESR - 35 mm/h. ECG shows no dynamics. It would be most reasonable to administer the drugs of the following pharmaceutical group:
a. Nitrates and nitrites
b. Direct anticoagulants
c. Antibiotics
*d. Glucocorticoids
e. Fibrinolytics

1795. A 7-year-old female child has developed an acute condition. She complains of a headache, two onsets of vomiting. Objectively: deferred reactions, body temperature - 39,3°C, pronounced hyperesthesia, nuchal rigidity, positive superior and inferior Brudzinskis signs, symmetric Kernigs sign. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Craniocerebral trauma
b. Toxic encephalopathy
*c. Meningitis
d. Encephalitis
e. Food toxicoinfection

1796. A patient complains of fatigue, lack of appetite, pain and burning sensation in the tongue, numbness of the distal limbs, diarrhea. Objectively: pale skin with lemon-yellow tint, face puffiness, brown pigmentation in the form of a "butterfly", bright red areas on the tongue. The liver is 3 cm below the costal margin, soft. Blood count: RBCs - 1,51012/l, colour index - 1,2, WBCs - 3,8109/l, thrombocytes – 180109/l, eosinophils - 0%, stab neutrophils - 1%, segmented neutrophils - 58%, lymphocytes - 38% monocytes - 3%, RBC macrocytosis. ESR - 28 mm/h. What diagnosis are these presentation typical for?
*a. B12-deficiency anemia
b. Acute erythromyelosis
c. Iron deficiency anemia
d. Aplastic anemia
e. Chronic adrenal failure

1797. Head of a department and a trade-union group have appealed to the head of a hospital about dismissal of the senior nurse who has 17-year record of service. The facts of charge were confirmed and recognized by the nurse herself. The nurse lives with a daughter (who is divorced and unemployed) and a 9-month-old grandson. Make an administrative decision:
a. To discharge the worker, i.e. to satisfy demands of the collective
b. To embark other officials or public organizations with this problem
c. -
*d. To continue the worker in office with a warning of dismissal in case of repeated violation of labor discipline
e. To issue the sick leave

1798. A 50-year-old female patient complains of aching pain in the lower abdomen. She has a history of normal menstrual cycle. At the age of 40,the patient underwent a surgery for gastric ulcer. Examination findings: abdomen is soft, in the hypogastrium there is a welldefined nodular tumor of limited mobility. Vaginal examination findings: the cervix is clean, of cylindrical shape. Body of the uterus cannot be palpated separately. On both sides of the uterus palpation reveals tight tumors with an uneven surface. The tumors are immobile andl fill the whole pelvic cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ovarian granulosa cell tumor
b. Ovarian fibroid
*c. Krukenberg tumor
d. Bilateral pioovarium
e. Subserous metrofibroma

1799. A 38-year-old male patient complains of marked dyspnea that escalates with physical exertion. The problems, namely acute chest pain on the left and cough, arose unexpectedly 2 hours before at work. The pain abated, but there were progressing dyspnea, dizziness, pallor, cold sweat, cyanosis. Auscultation reveals the absence of vesicular breath sounds, radiograph shows a shadow on the left. What pathology can be suspected?
a. Pleurisy
b. Pulmonary infarction
*c. Left-sided spontaneous pneumothorax
d. Left-sided pneumonia
e. Lung abscess

1800. A 2-year-old boy has been admitted to the casualty department for the pain and deformity of his right thigh. Radiograph shows a femoral fracture with longitudinal displacement. What method of treatment is indicated for the patient?
a. Periosteal osteosynthesis
*b. Schede-type vertical suspension
c. Intramedullary osteosynthesis
d. Closed reduction
e. Use of Ilizarov apparatus

1801. What juice should be included in a complex drug and dietary therapy for patients with gastric ulcer or duodenal ulcer and increased gastric juice acidity in order to accelerate the ulcer healing?
a. Pumpkin
b. Apple, birch and apple
*c. Potato, potato and carrot
d. Cabbage, cabbage and carrot
e. Celery, parsley

1802. A 7-year-old child complains of itching, papular erythematous rash, dry skin. Objectively: there is lichenification in the popliteal fossae and antecubital spaces. What immunologic indicator if found in the blood serum will verify the diagnosis (atopic dermatitis)?
a. IgG
b. IgD
c. Secretory IgA
d. IgM
*e. Total IgE

1803. A 7-year-old patient presents with body temperature rise up to 39°C, dry cough, pain in the lateral abdomen. Objectively: there is cyanosis of the nasolabial triangle, inspiratory dyspnea with accessory muscle recruitment. Percussion reveals pulmonary dullness; among auscultation findings there are diminished breath sounds, crepitant rales. Respiratory rate is of 50/min, HR- 120/min. Evaluate the grade of respiratory failure in the patient:
a. III
b. I
*c. II
d. IV
e. 0 (None)

1804. A 43-year-old alcohol abuser had not consumed alcohol for the last two days. In the evening he claimed to see rats and feel like they bite his feet. The patient is disoriented, agitated, all the time attempts to run somewhere. Specify the psychopathological syndrome:
a. Ganser’s syndrome
*b. Delirious
c. Oneiroid
d. Amential
e. Choreatic

1805. A 67-year-old male patient complains of rash, severe pain in the subscapular region on the right. Objectively: skin in the right subscapular region is covered with linearly arranged pink-red edematous lesions that are somewhat infiltrated, and have clear 2 boundaries. On the lesion surface there are vesicles with transparent exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Impetigo
*b. Herpes zoster
c. Erysipelas
d. Duhring dermatitis
e. Atopic dermatitis

1806. An 8-year-old boy was brought to the admission department by his parents. Parents report that he has had pain in the right knee for the last 9months, recently mother has noticed some limitation of motion in his right leg, and morning stiffness that doesn’t last till the evening. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatism
b. Reactive arthritis
c. Traumatic arthritis
*d. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
e. Osteomyelitis of the knee joint

1807. A 13-year-old girl was admitted to the gynecology department for having a significant bleeding from the genital tract for 10 days. The patient has a history of irregular menstrual cycle since menarche. Menarche occurred at the age of 11. Recto-abdominal examination revealed no pathology. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Endometrial polyp
*b. Juvenile uterine bleeding
c. Injury of the external genitalia
d. Adenomyosis
e. Werlhof’s disease

1808. A 64-year-old male patient has a 35year history of chronic pancreatitis. In the last 5 years, he claims to observe the pain abatement, bloating, frequent bowel movements up to 3-4 times a day, grayish, glossy stool with undigested food rests, the progressive loss of body weight. Change of symptoms in the patient is due to overlay of:
a. Lactase deficiency syndrome
b. Endocrine pancreatic insufficiency
*c. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
d. Irritable bowel syndrome
e. Chronic enterocolitis

1809. During the doctor’s round, a 56-year-old male patient with decompensated cirrhosis complains of dizziness, palpitations, moving black specks seen before the eyes, general weakness. The patient is pale, Ps-110/min, AP- 90/50 mm Hg. What complication is most likely to have occurred in the patient?
a. Paroxysmal tachycardia
*b. Bleeding from esophageal varices
c. Hepatic encephalopathy
d. Hepatocellular insufficiency
e. Acute coronary syndrome

1810. A 57-year-old female patient complains of intense pain in the right hypochondrium irradiating to the right supraclavicular region. Skin and sclerae are icteric. There is tension and tenderness in the right hypochondrium on palpation. Body temperature is 38,8°C. Blood test results: WBC- 11,2×109/l, total bilirubin - 112 mmol/l (conjugated - 86 mmol/l, unconjugated - 26 mmol/l). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Acute pancreatitis
*c. Cholangitis
d. Pancreatic tumor
e. Perforated duodenal ulcer

1811. A 3-year-old girl has had an increase in body temperature up to 38,5°C for four days. The child refuses to eat. Over the last two days, nose and mouth breathing has become difficult. Mesopharyngoscopy reveals hyperthermia and enlargement of tonsils, as well as hyperemia and bulging of the posterior wall of the oropharynx, which significantly narrows the oropharyngeal lumen. What complication of quinsy occurred in the patient?
a. Paratonsillar abscess
b. Phlegmon of the mouth floor
c. Laryngostenosis
*d. Retropharyngeal abscess
e. Parapharyngeal abscess

1812. Within a year, in a maternity hospital there were 616 livebirths, one stillbirth, one infant died on the 5th day of life. What index can most accurately describe this situation?
a. Natural increase
*b. Perinatal mortality
c. Birthrate
d. Total mortality
e. Infant mortality

1813. In one of the surgical departments the quality assurance testing of sterilization of surgical instruments was performed. After an instrument had been treated with 1% phenolphthalein, the solution turned pink. This indicates that the instrument has:
a. Disinfectant residues
*b. Synthetic detergent residues
c. Drugs residues
d. Residual blood
e. Residual tissue

1814. A 21-year-old female patient consulted a gynecologist about itching, burning, watery vaginal discharges with a fish-like smell. Speculum examination revealed that the cervical and vaginal mucosa was of a normal pink color. Vaginal examination revealed no alterations of the uterus and appendages. Gram-stained smears included clue cells. What is the most likely pathology?
a. Gonorrhea
b. Chlamydiosis
*c. Bacterial vaginosis (gardnerellosis)
d. Trichomoniasis
e. Candidiasis

1815. A 9-year-old patient has measles. On the 6th day after the rash appeared, the boy developed a condition manifested by dyspnea, barking cough, stenotic respiration. Objectively: the rash on the face, neck and torso turned brown. There is a branny desquamation. Respiratory rate is 22/min. What complication should be diagnosed?
*a. Laryngotracheitis
b. Pneumonia
c. Quinsy
d. Pharyngitis
e. Bronchitis

1816. A 26-year-old secundipara at 40 weeks of gestation arrived at the maternity ward after the beginning of labor activity. 2 hours before, bursting of waters occurred. The fetus was in a longitudinal lie with cephalic presentation. Abdominal circumference was 100 cm, fundal height - 42 cm. Contractions occurred every 4-5 minutes and lasted 25 seconds each. Internal obstetric examination revealed cervical effacement, opening by 4 cm. Fetal bladder was absent. Fetal head was pressed against the pelvic inlet. What complication arose in childbirth?
*a. Early amniorrhea
b. Secondary uterine inertia
c. Clinically narrow pelvis
d. Discoordinated labor
e. Primary uterine inertia

1817. Examination of a 35-year-old patient with rheumatism revealed that the right heart border was 1 cm displaced outwards from the right parasternal line, the upper border was on the level with inferior margin of the 1st rib, the left border was 1 cm in from the left midclavicular line. Auscultation revealed atrial fibrillation, loud apical first sound, diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery. Echocardiocopy revealed abnormal pattern of the mitral valvemotion.What heart disease is characterized by these symptoms?
a. Aortic stenosis
b. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
c. Mitral valve prolapse
d. Mitral valve insufficiency
*e. Mitral stenosis

1818. A 54-year-old male patient works as an engineer. At the age of 35,he got infected with syphilis and treated it with "traditional remedies" . About 5 years ago, he became forgetful, unable to cope with work, told cynical jokes, bought useless things, collected cigarette butts in the street. Objectively: the patient is indifferent, has slow speech, dysarthria, can make only primitive judgments, is unabe to perform simple arithmetic operations or explain simple metaphors. The patient is untidy, takes no interest in anything, passive. Considers himself to be completely healthy. Qualify mental condition of the patient:
a. Lacunar (dysmnestic) dementia
b. Korsakoff’s (amnesic) syndrome
c. Hysterical pseudodementia
*d. Total dementia
e. Somnolentia

1819. A 13-year-old boy with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy complains of dyspnea on minimal exertion. Eh°CG reveals asymmetric left ventricular hypertrophy, signs of pulmonary hypertension, dilatation of the left atrium. EF is 64%. The revealed alterations are indicative of:
a. Symptomatic arterial hypertension
*b. Diastolic heart failure
c. Primary pulmonary hypertension
d. Systolic heart failure
e. Primary arterial hypertension

1820. Study of natural illumination for a workplace in a secondary school classroom revealed that the angle of sunlight incidence was 25°, window opening angle - 3°, windowtofloor area ratio - 1:4,daylight ratio - 0,5%, depth ratio - 2. What indicators do not meet hygienic standards?
a. Window opening angle
b. Depth ratio
c. Angle of incidence
*d. Daylight ratio
e. Window-to-floor area ratio

1821. Bakers at bread production work in conditions of high temperature and high heat radiation. What is used to increase the body’s resistance to the unfavorable effects of these harmful work environment factors?
a. Therapeutic and preventive diet number №3
*b. Vitamin preparations
c. Pectin
d. Milk
e. Therapeutic and preventive diet №1

1822. A 24-year-old male patient got a puncture injury below the Poupart’s ligament, which was accompanied by intense arterial bleeding. The best method to temporarily stop the bleeding in the patient would be:
a. Esmarch’s tourniquet
b. Compressing a blood vessel with a clamp
c. Wound suturing
*d. Compression band
e. Maximum limb bending

1823. days before, a 26-year-old female patient developed an acute condition. Objectively: marked headache, vomiting, weakness, poor appetite, temperature up to 39°C. Objectively: the patient is in a moderately grave condition, excited. The face is hyperemic, sclerae are injected. The tongue is coated with brown fur. The trunk and limbs are covered with plentiful roseolous and petechial rash. Hepatosplenomegaly is present. Complement binding reaction with Rickettsia prowazekii is positive with the titer of 1:640. What drug should be administered?
a. Metronidazole
*b. Doxycycline
c. Penicillin
d. Chloramphenicol
e. Streptomycin

1824. A 39-year-old female patient complains of dyspnea when walking, palpitation, edemata in the evening. The patient’s height is 164 cm, weight - 104 kg. Objectively: overnutrition. Heart sounds are weak, and tachycardia is present. The menstrual cycle is not broken. Blood sugar is 5,6 mmol/l, ACTH-response tests revealed no alterations. X-ray of the Turkish saddle revealed no pathology. What disease is it?
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Cushing’s syndrome (primary hypercortisolism)
c. Climax
d. Pituitary obesity
*e. Alimentary obesity

1825. A 26-year-old male patient complains of a rash on the upper lip skin, which arose on a background of influenza with high-grade fever and is accompanied by pain and burning. The rash has been present for 3 days. Objectively: the skin of the upper lip is edematic and erythematous, grouped vesicles are filled with serous fluid and have a rough surface. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Eczema
b. Dermatitis herpetiformis
c. Erythema multiforme
*d. Herpetic vesicular dermatitis
e. Contact dermatitis

1826. A 6-year-old boy complains of paroxysmal pain that occurs after a mental stress, consuming cold drinks or ice cream. After clinical and instrumental examination the boy has been diagnosed with hypertensive biliary dyskinesia. The drugs of the following groups should be administered in the first place:
*a. Antispasmodics and choleretics
b. Sedatives and cholekinetics
c. Antibiotics
d. Antioxidants
e. Choleretics and cholekinetics

1827. A 15-year-old patient consulted a dermatologist about a painful lump in the armpit. Objectively: there is a walnutsized node, lymphadenitis, infiltration of the surrounding tissues. The patient has been diagnosed with hidradenitis. What is the most likely causative agent of this disease?
a. Mixed infection
*b. Staphylococci
c. Proteus vulgaris
d. Streptococci
e. Pseudomonas aeruginosa

1828. A 36-year-old female has a 7-year history of pollen allergy. Over the last 2 years in August and September (during ragweed flowering), the patient has had 2-3 asthma attacks that could be treated with one dose of salbutamol. Objectively: body temperature - 36,5°C, respiratory rate - 18/min, Ps-78/min, AP115/70 mm Hg. There is vesicular breathing above the lungs. Cardiac sounds are sonorous, of regular rhythm. What drug would be most effective to prevent asthma attacks during the critical season for the patient?
a. Theopecum administration
*b. Intalum inhalation
c. Atrovent inhalation
d. Berotec inhalation
e. Suprastin administration

1829. A study of the structure of death causes in the urban population revealed that cardiovascular diseases accounted for 55,0% of all deaths. What statistic value represents these data?
*a. Extensive index
b. Index of evidence
c. Correspondence index
d. Index of correlation
e. Intensive index

1830. A 25-year-old female patient complains of marked weakness, sleepiness, blackouts, dizziness, taste disorder. The patient has a history of menorrhagia. Objectively: the patient has marked weakness, pale skin, cracks in the corners of mouth, peeling nails, systolic apical murmur. Blood test results: RBC 3,4×1012/l, Hb- 70 g/l, color index - 0,75,platelets - 140×109/l, WBC- 6,2×109/l.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. B12-deficiency anemia
b. Werlhof’s disease
c. Acute leukemia
d. Acute posthemorrhagic anemia
*e. Chronic posthemorrhagic anemia

1831. A 51-year-old female is a weaving factory worker with 15 years of service record. During a regular preventive examination she complained of frequent headaches, poor sleep, tingling in the heart, irritability, rapid fatigability, hearing impairment. For years, the noise level has exceeded the maximum allowable concentration by 10-15 dB. A year ago, the patient underwent a course of treatment for essential hypertension. Specify the most likely diagnosis: 5
a. Neurasthenia
b. Essential hypertension
*c. Noise disease
d. Asthenic-vegetative syndrome
e. Arteriosclerotic encephalopathy

1832. A 49-year-old male patient who had been scheduled for a surgery for gastric cancer underwent preoperative infusion therapy. Up to 3,0 liters of liquid was introduced into the right cubital vein. The following day, he felt a dragging pain in the right shoulder. Objectively: on the inner surface of the shoulder there is a longitudinal hyperemic zone, edema of skin, a tender cord. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Paravenous tissue necrosis
b. Venepuncture and edema of paravenous tissue
*c. Acute thrombophlebitis
d. Acute lymphangitis
e. Paravenous tissue phlegmon

1833. Some of the population of a city district have uneven teeth color. The individuals have white spots, transverse brown stripes on the incisors. Occurrence of these symptoms is associated with the quality of drinking water from a deep well. Which of the following components of water can be the cause of the disease?
a. J
b. Fe
c. Ca
d. Mg
*e. F

1834. A 22-year-old female patient has been delivered by an ambulance team to a surgical clinic with symptoms of acute intestinal obstruction. It is known from the past history that 2 years ago she was operated for acute destructive appendicitis. For two years, she has repeatedly complained of bloating and abdominal pain. Which of the following etiological factors has led to the intestinal obstruction in the patient?
a. Dolichosigma
b. Ileal diverticulum
*c. Abdominal adhesions
d. Diet violation
e. Helminthiasis

1835. Mother of a 10-month-old baby reports significant pallor, poor appetite, enlarged abdomen in the baby. As a neonate, the child underwent treatment in the in-patient hospital for jaundice and anemia. Objectively: the skin is pale and jaundiced, teeth are absent, abdomen is enlarged, spleen is palpable. Blood test results: Hb- 90 g/l, RBC- 3,0×1012/l, color index - 0,9,microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis up to 20%, serum bilirubin - 37 mmol/l, unconjugated bilirubin - 28 mmol/l. What type of anemia has occurred in the patient?
a. Protein-deficiency anemia
b. Iron-deficiency anemia
*c. Hemolytic anemia
d. B12-deficiency anemia
e. Hereditary elliptocytosis

1836. A lumbar puncture was performed for a newborn suspected of having an intracranial birth injury. Bloody cerebrospinal fluid was obtained. What hemorrhage occurred in this case?
a. Cephalohematoma
b. Supratentorial
c. Subtentorial
*d. Subarachnoid
e. Epidural

1837. A 36-year-old female patient complains of intense pain in the knee joints and neck. In the morning she experiences pain in the interscapular region and leg joints; pain subsides after warm-up gymnastics. The patient is overnourished, there is a clicking sound in the knees when squatting, the knees are somewhat disfigured, painful on palpation. Blood test results: ESR- 18 mm/h, WBC- 8,0×109/l. Radiography reveals subchondral sclerosis in the left knee. What is the basis of this pathology?
a. Hemarthrosis
*b. Degenerative processes in cartilage
c. Deposition of urates (tophi) in the articular tissues
d. Autoimmune process in the synovium
e. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus

1838. A 35-year-old female reports heart pain (aching and drilling) occurring mainly in the morning in autumn and spring and irradiating to the neck, back and abdomen; rapid heartbeat; low vitality. Occurrence of this condition is not associated with physical activity. In the evening, the patient’s condition improves. Study of somatic and neurological status, and ECG reveal no pathology. What pathology is most likely to have caused these clinical presentations?
a. Neurocirculatory asthenia
b. Hypochondriacal depression
c. Resting stenocardia
d. Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia
*e. Somatization depression

1839. An hour before an elective surgery, a 56year-old patient of the surgical department got a dramatic increase in blood pressure, tachycardia, hand tremor. The patient is confused, anxious, depressed, fearful, is pessimistic about the operation outcome, refuses the surgery. What tactics should be chosen by a surgeon?
*a. Start the surgery after correction of blood pressure
b. Predict the psychological state of the patient
c. Organize monitoring of the patient by his family members
d. Organize monitoring of the patient by medical personnel and mental health counselor
e. Isolate the patient

1840. A 33-year-old female complains of escalating spastic pain in the abdomen after the psycho-emotional stress. The patient has intermittent bowel movements, that is 2-3 bowel movements after waking up alternate with constipation lasting for 1-2 days. Objectively: body weight is unchanged, there is moderate pain on palpation of the sigmoid colon. Hb- 130 g/l, WBC- 5,2×109/l, ESR- 9 mm/h. Proctosigmoidoscopy causes pain due to spastic bowel condition, intestinal mucosa is not changed. In the lumen there is a lot of mucus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute bowel ischemia
b. Malabsorption syndrome
c. Crohn’s disease
d. Non-specific ulcerative colitis
*e. Irritable bowel syndrome

1841. An infant is 2 days old. He was born full-term with signs of intrauterine infection, and therefore receives antibiotics. Neonates should be given antibiotics at longer intervals and lower doses compared to older children and adults because:
a. Neonates have higher hematocrit
*b. Neonates have lower glomerular filtration
c. Neonates have a reduced activity of glucuronyl transferase
d. Neonates have lower concentration of protein and albumin in blood
e. Neonates have a decreased blood pH

1842. After a holiday in the Crimea, a 36-yearold female patient presents with severe pain in the elbow joints, dyspnea and weakness. The body temperature is of 37,6°C, the skin is pale, there is erythema of cheeks and nose, lower lip ulceration. Visual inspection reveals no changes in the joints, the right elbow movement is limited. There is murmur and pleural friction in the lungs below the right angle of the scapula. Cardiac sounds are muffled, there is tachycardia, gallop rhythm, Ps-114/min. AP- 100/60. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. SLE
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Dry pleurisy
d. Infectious allergic myocarditis
e. Rheumatic heart disease

1843. A 63-year-old male patient complains of cough with expectoration of mucous bloodstreaked sputum, asthma, low-grade fever, general weakness. These presentations have been observed for 3 months. The patient has been a smoker since childhood. Objectively: to- 37,4°C, respiratory rate is 26/min, Ps-82/min, rhythmic. AP- 130/85 mm Hg. There is limited breathing movement in the right side of chest cavity, as well as percussive dullness and diminished breath sounds. Radiograph shows a homogeneous opacity of the pulmonary field on the right with the mediastinum displacement to the affected side. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bronchiectasis
*b. Central lung cancer
c. Pleuropneumonia
d. Pleural effusion
e. Pulmonary tuberculosis

1844. A 33-year-old male patient developed a condition that had a stormy clinical course: chills, fever up to 39°C, vomiting, epigastric pain, diarrhea with watery smelly feces. 6 hours before, he ate a raw egg, fried potatoes with stewed meat, drank some juice. What pathogen is likely to have caused this condition?
a. Vibrio cholerae
*b. Salmonella
c. Campylobacter
d. Colibacillus
e. Shigella

1845. Chief physician of a polyclinic encharged a district doctor with a task to determine the pathological prevalence of disease N in his district. What document allows to estimate the disease prevalence in the population of a medical district?
a. Vouchers for medical appointments
*b. Prophylactic examinations register
c. Statistic coupons (-)
d. Statistic coupons (+)
e. Statistic coupons (+) and (-)

1846. A 76-year-old male consulted a therapist about slow discharge of urine with a small jet. The patient reported no cardiac problems. Examination revealed atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 72/min and without pulse deficit. There are no signs of heart failure. ECG confirms the presence of atrial fibrillation. From history we know that the arrhythmia was detected three years ago. What tactics for the treatment of atrial fibrillation in the patient should be chosen?
a. Ajmaline
*b. Does not require treatment
c. Verapamil
d. Digoxin
e. Obzidan

1847. A 53-year-old male has been admitted to a hospital for an attack of renal colic which has repeatedly occurred throughout the year. Objectively: in the region of auricles and the right elbow some nodules can be seen that are covered with thin shiny skin. 7 Ps-88/min, AP- 170/100 mm Hg. There is bilateral costovertebral angle tenderness (positive Pasternatsky’s symptom). The patient has been scheduled for examination. What laboratory value would be most helpful for making a diagnosis?
*a. Uric acid
b. ESR
c. Lactic acid
d. Urine sediment
e. Rheumatoid factor

1848. A 58-year-old female patient complains of spontaneous bruises, weakness, bleeding gums, dizziness. Objectively: the mucous membranes and skin are pale with numerous hemorrhages of various time of origin. Lymph nodes are not enlarged. Ps-100/min, AP110/70 mm Hg. There are no changes of internal organs. Blood test results: RBC 3,0×1012/l, Нb - 92 g/l, colour index - 0,9,anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, WBC - 10×109/l, eosinophils - 2%, stab neutrophils - 12%, segmented neutrophils - 68%, lymphocytes - 11%, monocytes - 7%, ESR - 12 mm/h.What laboratory test is to be determined next for making a diagnosis?
a. Fibrinogen
*b. Platelets
c. Clotting time
d. Reticulocytes
e. Osmotic resistance of erythrocytes

1849. A 48-year-old male in-patient undergoes treatment for essential hypertension of IIB stage. It is known from history that he works in a design engineering office. His job involves neuro-emotional stress. Which of these foodstuffs do not stimulate the central nervous system and can be recommended for the patient?
a. Meat broths
b. Vegetable broths
c. Carbonated beverages
*d. Whole milk
e. Mushroom broths

1850. In an urban settlement situated on the riverbank, an outbreak of hepatitis A was registered. The disease might have water origin. This assumption can be confirmed by growth of the following values of water quality:
a. Presence of benign leptospirosis pathogen
b. Index of fecal coli-forms
c. Escherichia coli index
d. Oxidability
*e. Number of coli-phages

1851. A 48-year-old male patient complains of pain in the lower extremities, especially when walking, intermittent claudication, numbness in the fingers, cold extremities, inability to walk more than 100 meters. Sleeps with his leg lowered. The patient has been a smoker since he was 16,abuses alcohol, has a history of CHD. The left lower extremity is colder than the right one, the skin of extremities is dry, pedal pulse cannot be palpated, femoral pulse is preserved. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leriche syndrome
b. Diabetic angiopathy
*c. Obliterating endarteritis
d. Raynaud’s disease
e. Deep thrombophlebitis

1852. A 38-year-old male complains of tonic tension of the masticatory muscles, so that he cannot open his mouth. 12 days before, he was bitten by an unknown dog. Objectively: there is pronounced tension and twitching of the masticatory muscles. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rabies
b. Trigeminal neuralgia
c. Apyretic tetanus
*d. Tetanus
e. Hysteria

1853. A 72-year-old male had had a moderate headache. Two days later, he developed the progressing speech disorders and weakness in the right extremities. The patient has a history of myocardial infarction, arrhythmia. Study of the neurologic status revealed elements of motor aphasia, central paresis of the VII and XII cranial nerves on the right, central hemiparesis on the same side and hyperaesthesia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic stroke
b. Epidural hematoma
c. Brain tumor
*d. Ischemic stroke
e. Transient ischemic attack

1854. A 28-year-old female patient has been admitted to the gynecology department for abdominal pain, spotting before and after menstruation for 5 days. The disease is associated with the abortion which she had 2 years ago. Anti-inflammatory treatment had no effect. Bimanual examination findings: the uterus is enlarged, tight, painful, smooth. Hysteroscopy reveals dark red holes in the fundus with dark blood coming out of them. What diagnosis can be made on the grounds of these clinical presentations?
a. Hypermenorrhea
b. Polymenorrhea
*c. Inner endometriosis
d. Submucous fibromatous node
e. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding

1855. weeks after having quinsy, a 26year-old male patient got facial edemata, moderate pain in the sacrum. Objectively: body temperature is 37,5°C, AP- 100/80 mm Hg. Urinalysis results: RBC- up to 100 fresh cells in per HPF, protein - 2,2 g/l, hyaline cylinders - up to 10 per HPF, relative density 1002. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Nephroma
e. Urolithiasis

1856. Examination of a full-term 6-day-old infant revealed that different areas of skin had erythemas, flaccid bubbles, eroded surface, cracks, peeling of the epidermis looking like being scalded with boiling water. There was positive Nikolsky’s symptom. General condition of the child was serious. The child was restless, hypersensitive, febrile. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Epidermolysis
*b. Ritter’s exfoliative dermatitis
c. Finger’s pseudofurunculosis
d. Neonatal phlegmon
e. Neonatal pemphigus

1857. A 39-year-old female patient complains of rapid fatigability, drowsiness, dry skin, hair loss, swelling of the face. A month ago, she underwent a surgery for thyrotoxicosis. The patient has the following gland dysfunction:
a. Ovarian, due to a tumor
*b. Thyroid (hypothyroidism), due to inadequate operative technique
c. Adrenal
d. Pituitary, due to a tumor
e. Parathyroid, due to the gland removal during surgery

1858. A 27-year-old patient has a severe headache, nausea and vomiting. Objectively: body temperature is 38,9°C, there is a haemorrhagic stellate rash on the legs. The patient takes meningeal pose in bed. Meningeal symptoms are strongly positive. Deep reflexes are brisk, uniform. Pathological reflexes are absent. It has been suspected that the patient has epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis. Which of additional tests should be performed in the first place to verify the diagnosis?
a. Survey craniogram
*b. Lumbar puncture
c. Rheoencephalography
d. Echoencephalography
e. Electroencephalography

1859. hours before, a 68-year-old male patient got a searing chest pain radiating to the neck and left forearm, escalating dyspnea. Nitroglycerin failed to relieve pain but somewhat reduced dyspnea. Objectively: there is crimson cyanosis of face. Respiratory rate is 28/min. The patient has vesicular breathing with isolated sibilant rales. Heart sounds are muffled, with a gallop rhythm. Ps-100/min, AP- 100/65 mm Hg. ECG shows negative Twave in V 2 ? V 6 leads. What drug can reduce the heart’s need for oxygen without aggravating the disease?
a. Atenolol
b. Corinfar
*c. Isosorbide dinitrate
d. Streptokinase
e. Aminophylline

1860. A 5-year-old girl has had thirst, polyuria, increased appetite for two months. At the same time, there is a 3 kg decrease in body weight. During the last week, these presentations got accompanied by nocturnal enuresis. Examination revealed hyperglycemia at the rate of 14 mmol/l. The child has been diagnosed with type I diabetes.What is the most likely genesis of this disease?
a. Neurogenic
b. Viral and bacterial
c. Viral
d. Bacterial
*e. Autoimmune

1861. An 8-year-old child with a 3-year history of diabetes was hospitalized in hyperglycemic coma. Specify the initial dose of insulin to be administered:
a. 0,05 U/kg of body weight per hour
b. 0,3-0,4 U/kg of body weight per hour
c. 0,4-0,5 U/kg of body weight per hour
*d. 0,1-0,2 U/kg of body weight per hour
e. 0,2-0,3 U/kg of body weight per hour

1862. A 12-year-old girl undergoes regular gastroenterological check-ups for duodenal ulcer, biliary dyskinesia. What is the recommended frequency of anti-relapse treatment?
a. Every two months
b. Once a year
c. Three times a year
*d. Twice a year
e. Every 3 months

1863. On the 2nd day of disease a 27-year-old patient complains of unbearable headache, repeated vomiting. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition. He is conscious but adynamic. Lies in a forced position with his head thrown back. There is no skin rash. Nuchal muscles are evidently rigid, there are Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs. to- 39,5°C, Ps-120/min, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. The leading syndrome of this disease is caused by:
a. Haemorrhages in the adrenal glands
b. Hyperthermy
c. Liquor hypotension
d. Affection of the cranial nerve nuclei
*e. Liquor hypertension

1864. Two years ago, a 46-year-old patient was diagnosed with stage I silicosis. Currently the patient complains of escalating dyspnea, pain in the infrascapular regions. Radiograph 9 shows a diffuse enhancement and distortion of lung markings, as well as multiple nodular shadows 2-4 mm in diameter. There is interlobar pleural density on the right. Dense shadows are found in the hilar regions. Specify the form of radiographic pulmonary fibrosis in this case:
*a. Nodular
b. Interstitial nodular
c. Tumor-like
d. Nodal
e. Interstitial

1865. A 63-year-old female complains of general weakness, a feeling of heaviness, compression in the epigastrium, postprandial fullness, nausea, belching after meals. These symptoms have been observed for about 15 years. Objectively: body temperature is 36,4°C, respiratory rate - 20/min, Ps - 88/min, blood pressure - 115/75 mm Hg. Skin and mucous membranes are pale. Blood test results: RBC 2,0×1012/l, Hb - 100 g/l. Tests revealed parietalcell antibodies. What is the most likely reason for the development of anemia in this patient?
a. Disruption of erythropoietin synthesis
b. Disruption of hemoglobin synthesis
*c. Production of antibodies to intrinsic factor
d. Impaired iron absorption
e. Increased loss of iron

1866. During dressing of a poorly-granulating wound Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection was revealed. What medication would be optimal for the wound d-bridement?
a. Sulfonamides
b. Biogenic stimulators
*c. Boric acid solution
d. Salicylic acid
e. Antibiotics

1867. A 39-year-old male patient complains of moderate pain and weakness in the shoulder, back and pelvic girdle muscles, that has been progressing for the last 3 weeks; great difficulty in getting out of bed, going up and down the stairs, shaving. Dermatomyositis has been suspected. Blood test results: Hb- 114 g/l, WBC- 10,8×109/l, eosinophils - 9%, ESR -22 mm/h, C-reactive protein - (++). The alteration in the following laboratory value wil be of decisive diagnostic significance:
a. Gamma-globulins
*b. Creatine phosphokinase
c. Sialic acids
d. Ceruloplasmin
e. dsDNA antibodies

1868. A 60-year-old female patient complains of recurrent pain in the proximal interphalangeal and wrist joints, their periodic swelling and reddening that have been observed for 4 years. X-ray picture represents changes in form of osteoporosis, joint space narrowing and single usuras. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Rheumatoid arthritis
b. Gout
c. Multiple myeloma
d. Pseudogout
e. Osteoarthritis

1869. A 30-year-old female patient has been delivered to a hospital for sudden dyspnea progessing to asthma, sensation of having a "lump in the throat" , hand tremor, fear of death. The attack has developed for the first time and is associated with a strong emotion. There is no previous history. Objectvely: respiratory rate - 28/min, Ps-104/min, rhythmic, AP- 150/85 mm Hg. The patient has rapid superficial vesicular breathing with extended expiration. Percussion findings: heart borders are not changed. Cardiac sounds are loud, rhythmic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Cardiac asthma
c. Thyrotoxic crisis
*d. Neurocirculatory asthenia
e. Hypertensive crisis

1870. A 42-year-old male patient wth essential hypertension presents with headache, palpitations, unexplained fear. Objectively: Ps100/min, AP- 200/100 mm Hg, the left border of cardiac dullness is displaced by 1,5 cm to the left, vesicular breathing is present. ECG shows sinus tachycardia, signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. What drug should be administered as an emergency?
a. Reserpine
b. Dibazol
*c. Obzidan
d. Magnesium sulfate
e. Furosemide

1871. A 37-year-old male patient has a histrory of diabetes of moderate severity. On the left side of face the patient has a carbuncle. What severe complication might have occurred in the patient?
a. Lymphangitis
b. Thrombophlebitis
c. Thromboembolism
*d. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
e. Endarteritis

1872. A 42-year-old female patient complains of a dull pain in her left side, low-grade fever, accelerated painful urination in small portions. These presentations have been observed for three years. For a long time, the patient has had cystitis with frequent exacerbations, there is pulmonary tuberculosis in the past history. Urinalysis results: microscopic hematuria, leukocyturia. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis? 10
a. Urolithiasis
b. Renal tumor
c. Chronic cystitis
*d. Renal tuberculosis
e. Chronic pyelonephritis

1873. A woman at 30 weeks pregnant has had an attack of eclampsia at home. On admission to the maternity ward AP- 150/100 mm Hg. Predicted fetal weight is 1500 g. There is face and shin pastosity. Urine potein is 0,66o/oo. Parturient canal is not ready for delivery. An intensive complex therapy has been started. What is the correct tactics of this case management?
a. Treat preeclampsia and achieve the delivery by way of conservative management
*b. Delivery by cesarean section
c. Continue therapy and prolong pregnancy for 3-4 weeks
d. Continue therapy and prolong pregnancy for 1-2 weeks
e. Labor induction by intravenous oxytocin or prostaglandins

1874. Examination of a dead man who died from hanging revealed that cadaver spots disappeared when pressed upon and restored after 50 seconds, rigor mortis was moderately expressed only in the masticatory muscles and the muscles of neck and fingers. Body temperature was 31°C. Specify the time of death:
a. 8-10 hours
b. 10-18 hours
c. 1-2 hours
d. 16-24 hours
*e. 6-7 hours

1875. A 65-year-old male patient complains of dyspnea that is getting worse with exertion, morning cough with expectoration of mucous sputum. For about 15 years, he has been subject to regular medical check-up for chronic bronchitis. The patient takes berodual (16 inhaled doses per day). Objectively: body temperature is 36,8°C, RR- 24/min, Ps-110/min, AP- 145/90 mm Hg. Auscultation reveals a lot of dry rales above the lungs. FEV1- 65%. What is the optimal tactics of further management of the patient?
a. To administer antibiotics
b. To increase the daily dose of berodual
c. To include short-acting ?2-agonists in the therapy
*d. To administer inhalation corticosteroids
e. To administer theophylline

1876. A 49-year-old countryman got an itching papule on the dorsum of his right hand. In the centre there is a vesicle with serosanginous exudate. Within the next 2 days the patient developed a painless edema of hand and forearm. On the 4th day the temperature rose to 38,5°C, in the right axillary region a large painful lymph node was found. One day before the onset of the disease the patient had examined a dead calf. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Carbuncle
b. Bubonic plague
*c. Cutaneous anthrax
d. Lymphocutaneous tularemia
e. Erysipelas

1877. An employee of a petrol station with 15 years of service record having contact with ethylated gasoline presents with memory impairment, bradycardia, sensation of having a hair in the mouth, skin paresthesia. In this case, one can assume intoxication with the following substance:
*a. Tetraethyl lead
b. Organophosphates
c. Nitrobenzene
d. Benzene
e. Lead chloride

1878. A 38-year-old female suddenly developed acute inflammatory rash in form of roseolas, papules, vesicles that are scattered on the skin of trunk in irregular and predominantly focal manner. The rash appeared a few hours after visiting a restaurant. The patient complains of itching skin. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Toxicodermatosis
b. Contact dermatitis
c. -
d. Eczema
e. Atopic dermatitis

1879. The institutions which take part in medical examinations can be prevention and treatment facilities, medical board of Ministry of Defense, medical board of Ministry of Home Affairs, medico-social expert commissions, forensic medical boards etc.What institutions are responsible for temporary disability examination?
*a. Prevention and treatment facilities
b. Medico-social expert commissions
c. Medical boards of the Ministry of Home Affairs
d. Medical boards of the Ministry of Defense
e. Sanitary-and-prophylactic institutions

1880. After lifting a load, a 36-year-old male patient has experienced a severe pain in the lumbar region, which spread to the right leg and was getting worse when he moved his foot or coughed. Objectively: the long back muscles on the right are strained. Achilles jerk is reduced on the right. There is a pronounced tenderness of paravertebral points in the lumbar region. The straight leg raise (Lasegue’s sign) is positive on the right. What additional tests should be performed in the first place? 11
a. Electromyography
b. Lumbar puncture
c. Computed tomography
d. Magnetic resonance tomography
*e. Radiography of the spinal column

1881. A 17-year-old male patient consulted a therapist about malaise, chills, runny nose, aching muscles and joints, nausea and diarrhea. The patient asks to prescribe him a lot of painkillers and sedatives (tramadol or solpadein that help the best, and diazepam). Pharyngeal mucosa is pale pink, clean. Auscultation reveals vesicular breathing. Tachycardia is present. The pupils are dilated, there is sluggish response to light. There are injection marks on the forearm skin. During examination, the patient’s manner is vulgar, irritable, rude and untruthful. Make a diagnosis:
a. Food-born toxic infection
*b. Opioid addiction
c. Sedative drug addiction
d. Painkillers addiction
e. Acute respiratory disease

1882. A 4-year-old boy had untimely vaccination. He complains of painful swallowing, headache, inertness, fever. Objectively: the child is pale, has enlarged anterior cervical lymph nodes, swollen tonsils with cyanotic hyperemia, tonsils are covered with gray-white pellicles which cannot be easily removed. When the pellicles are forcibly removed, the tonsils bleed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pseudomembranous tonsillitis
b. Lacunar tonsillitis
*c. Oropharyngeal diphtheria
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Follicular tonsillitis

1883. Public nurseries are designed as a single or several one- or two-storey buildings linked by covered walkways. Planning the structure of preschool instiutions is based upon the following principle:
a. Principle of sex distribution
b. Principle of age-sex distribution
c. Principle of autonomy
d. Principle of age distribution
*e. Principle of group isolation

1884. A city somatic hospital with 300 beds has a main building which houses the therapeutic and surgical departments. Several separate buildings house the maternity, pediatric and radiologic departments that are connected to the main building by underground walkways and above-ground covered skybridges. Specify the building system of the hospital:
a. Free
b. Combined
c. Centralized
d. Decentralized
*e. Central-unit

1885. A 43-year-old female patient complains of dyspnea, swelling of legs, abdomen enlargement, pricking heart pain. She has a history of tuberculous bronchadenitis, quinsies. The patient’s condition deteriorated 6 months ago. Objectively: cyanosis, bulging neck veins, vesicular breathing. Heart borders are not displaced. Heart sounds are muffled, Ps-106/min, liver is +4 cm, ascites is present. Low voltage on the ECG has been revealed. Radiograph shows a thin layer of calcium deposits along the left contour of heart. What treatment should be recommended to the patient?
a. Anti-TB drugs
b. Digitalis preparations
*c. Treatment by a cardiac surgeon
d. Diuretics
e. Vasodilators, nitrates

1886. A 26-year-old female patient has an 11year history of rheumatism. Four years ago she suffered 2 rheumatic attacks. Over the last 6 months there have been paroxysms of atrial fibrillation every 2-3 months. What option of antiarrhythmic therapy or tactics should be proposed?
a. Heparin administration
*b. Prophylactic administration of cordarone
c. Defibrillation
d. Immediate hospitalization
e. Lidocaine administration

1887. Blood typing resulted in positive isohemagglutination reaction with standard sera of A(II) and B(III) groups and negative reaction with sera of 0(I) and AB(IV) groups. What is this result indicative of?
a. The second blood group
b. The first blood group
*c. Faulty standard sera
d. The third blood group
e. The fourth blood group

1888. A 9-year-old girl has been admitted to a hospital for an elevated body temperature (39,8°C), painful dry cough, abdominal pain on the right. Examination reveals dullness on percussion on the right, diminished breath sounds, crepitus. What study is required to make a diagnosis?
a. Pleural puncture
b. USI of the chest cavity
*c. Radiography of the chest cavity
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Bronhography

1889. A newborn has purulent discharges from the umbilical wound, the skin around the navel 12 is swollen. The baby’s skin is pale, with a yellow-gray tint, generalized hemorrhagic rash is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Thrombocytopathy
b. Omphalitis
c. Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn
d. Hemolytic disease of the newborn
*e. Sepsis

1890. A pregnant 26-year-old woman was admitted to a hospital for abdominal pain and bleeding from the genital tract. Bimanual examination revealed that uterus was the size of 9 weeks of pregnancy, the cervical canal let a finger through. Fetal tissues could be palpated in the orifice. There was moderate vaginal bleeding.What is the tactics of choice?
a. Administration of hormones
b. Surveillance
*c. Instrumental extraction of fetal tissue
d. Hemostatic and antianemic therapy
e. Therapy for the maintenance of pregnancy

1891. On the second day of the disease a 22year-old male patient complains of high-grade fever, headache in the region of forehead and superciliary arches, and during eye movement; aching muscles and joints. Objectively: body temperature is 39°C. Face is hyperemic, sclerae are injected. The mucous membrane of the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall is bright hyperemic and has petechial hemorrhages. What changes in the hemogram are typical for this disease?
a. Neutrocytosis
b. Leukocytosis
*c. Leukopenia
d. Anemia
e. Accelerated ESR

1892. A 44-year-old male patient complains of severe non-localized abdominal pain, pain in the right shoulder girdle, repeated vomiting, red urine. The onset of the disease is associated with alcohol consumption. The face is hyperemic. AP- 70/40 mm Hg. Abdominal radiography reveals no pathological shadows. Hemodiastase is 54 mg/h/l. Prothrombin is 46%. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
c. Aneurysm of the abdominal aorta
*d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Perforated gastric ulcer

1893. A 41-year-old male patient was delivered to a hospital unconscious. During the previous 7 days he had been taking large doses of biseptolum for a cold. The night before, he began complaining of dyspnea, especially when lying down, swollen legs, 2-day urinary retention. In the morning he had seizures and lost consciousness. Objctively: noisy breathing at the rate of 30/min, edematous legs and lumbar region, Ps-50/min. Plasma creatinine is 0,586 mmol/l, plasma potassium - 7,2 mmol/l. What treatment is necessary for this patient?
a. Plasma volume expanders
b. Large doses of verospiron
*c. Hemodialysis
d. Glucocorticosteroids
e. Heparin

1894. A 10-year-old child with a history of nonrheumatic carditis has periodic attacks manifested by heart pain, dyspnea, pallor, high blood pressure, a dramatic increase in heart rate up to 180/min. What drug would be most effective to treat this patient?
a. Lidocaine
b. Procainamide
*c. Obsidan
d. Verapamil
e. Ajmaline

1895. A 45-year-old male patient with acute abscess of the left lung has suddenly developed acute chest pain and dyspnea while coughing, tachycardia has increased. The control Ro-gram shows left lung collapse, the air in the left pleural cavity and a horizontal fluid level. What is the mechanism of this complication?
a. Bullae rupture of the left lung
b. Atelectasis of the left lung
c. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
*d. Abscess burst into the pleural cavity
e. Inflammation spread to the visceral pleura

1896. A 24-year-old male patient had been diagnosed with class III diffuse toxic goiter. There is moderate hyperthyroidism. A surgery was suggested, and the patient agreed to it. What preoperative measures should be taken for prevention of thyrotoxic crisis in the postoperative period?
a. Administration of corticosteroids
*b. Administration of antithyroid drugs
c. Bed rest
d. Minimally invasive surgical techniques
e. Detoxification therapy

1897. A 26-year-old male patient complains of pain in the right knee, which is getting worse in the morning. Two weeks before, he consulted an urologist about prostatitis. Objectively: conjunctivitis is present. There is also periarticular edema of the knee joint, redness of the overlying skin. Rheumatoid factor was not detected. Until further diagnosis is specified, it would be reasonable to start treatment with the following antibiotic:
a. Cephalosporins
b. Aminoglycosides
c. Lincosamides
*d. Tetracyclines
e. Penicillins

1898. A 66-year-old female patient has been 13 admitted to a hospital for massive gross hematuria with release of shapeless blood clots, frequent painful urination. The patient also reports a moderate weight loss within 3-4 months. Gross hematuria that was not accompanied by pain and dysuria first occurred three months ago for no apparent reason, and after a few days the bleeding subsided independently. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Bladder tumor
b. Renal tumor
c. Acute cystitis
d. Chronic cystitis
e. Urolithiasis

1899. A 36-year-old female pesented to a gynecological hospital with a significant bleeding from the genital tract and a 1-month delay of menstruation. Bimanual examination revealed soft barrel-shaped cervix. Uterus was of normal size, somewhat softened. Appendages were unremarkable on both sides. Speculum examination revealed that the cervix was cyanotic, enlarged, with the the external orifice disclosed up to 0,5 cm. Urine hCG test was positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Uterogestation
b. Threatened miscarriage
c. Ectopic pregnancy
*d. Cervical pregnancy
e. Abortion in progress

1900. A 47-year-old female patient has an 8year history of ulcerative colitis, has been treated with glucocorticoids. She complains of cramping pain in the umbilical region and left iliac region which has significantly increased during the past 2 weeks, diarrhea with mucus and blood 4-6 times a day, elevated body temperature up to 38 - 39°C, headache and pain in the knee joints. Objectively: the patient is in moderate condition, Ps-108/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg; heart and lungs are unremarkable; the tongue is moist; abdominal muscle tone is significantly decreased; peristaltic noises are absent. What complication developed in the patient?
*a. Toxic dilatation of the colon
b. Enterorrhagia
c. Colon carcinoma
d. Stricture of the colon
e. Perforation of the colon

1901. A 10-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital with a closed craniocerebral injury with a suspected cerebral edema. The patient is in grave condition, unconscious. The dyspnea, tachycardia, hypertension are present. Muscle tone is increased, there is nystagmus, pupillary and oculomotor reactions are impaired. The mandatory component of intensive care is dehydration. What diuretic is adequate in this case?
a. Moduretic
*b. Furosemide
c. Hydrochlorthiazide
d. Mannitol
e. Spironolactone

1902. For 3 days, a 28-year-old emale patient had had the body temperature increase up to 38°C, weakness, poor appetite, nausea, a single vomiting. On the 4th day the temperature was normal, the condition improved, but the jaundice developed. Objectively: moderate ictericity of skin, +3 cm enlarged liver of elastic consistency. Ortner’s, Kehr’s and Voznesensky’s symptoms are negative. What test will verify the diagnosis?
a. Total bilirubin
b. AST activity
c. Complete blood count
d. Ultrasound of the abdomen
*e. IgM Anti-HAV detection

1903. An 11-year-old girl has been immunized according to her age and in compliance with the calendar dates. What vaccinations should the children receive at this age?
a. Hepatitis
b. Pertussis
c. TB
d. Polio
*e. Diphtheria and tetanus

1904. A 40-year-old male patient has had heaviness in the epigastric region for the last 6 months. He has not undergone any examinations. The night before, he abused vodka. In the morning there was vomiting, and 30 minutes after physical activity the patient experienced dizziness and profuse hematemesis. What pathology should be suspected in the first place?
a. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
*b. Mallory-Weis’s syndrome
c. Gastric ulcer
d. Menetrier’s disease
e. Perforated ulcer

1905. A 55-year-old patient complains of severe itching, burning and pain in the eyes, skin redness in the outer corners of the palpebral fissure. Objectively: skin around the outer corners of the palpebral fissure is macerated, eczematous, there are single moist cracks. Palpebral conjunctiva is hyperemic, quaggy. There are minor discharges in form of stringing mucus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic eyelid dermatitis
*b. Chronic conjunctivitis
c. Sty
d. Acute conjunctivitis
e. Blepharitis

1906. A 3-month-old infant has occipital alopecia, restless sleep, excessive sweating. What disease can you think of? 14
a. Spasmophilic diathesis
b. Phosphate diabetes
c. Chondrodystrophy
*d. Rickets
e. Anemia

1907. A 50-year-old male in a grave condition has been admitted to the intensive care unit. It is known from life history that the patient works in agriculture, and 3 hours ago was engaged into insecticide treatment of crops for control of colorado potato beetle. Condition on admission: acrocyanosis, bronchorrhea, tachypnea, AP- 100/60 mm Hg, Ps-44/min. What method of efferent therapy would be most appropriate at this stage?
a. Plasmapheresis
b. Hemodialysis
*c. Hemosorbtion
d. Lymphosorption
e. Plasma dialysis

1908. An 80-year-old patient complains of constantly urinating small amounts, a feeling of pressure in the lower abdomen. Objectively: there is a suprapubic spherical bulging with percussion dullness over it. What syndrome occurred in the patient?
a. Pollakisuria
*b. Paradoxical ischuria
c. Dysuria
d. Urinary incontinence
e. Enuresis

1909. Carpathian region is characterized by permanently high (over 80%) air humidity. In the cold season the population of this region feels very cold at moderately low temperatures. This is due to an increase in the heat transfer by:
a. Conduction
b. Radiation
c. Emission
d. Evaporation
*e. Convection

1910. An 18-year-old girl complains of breast pain and engorgement, headaches, irritability, swelling of the lower extremities. These symptoms have been observed since menarche and occur 3-4 days before the regular menstruation. Gynecological examination revealed no pathology. Make a diagnosis:
a. Mastopathy
b. Cardiovascular disorder
c. Neurasthenia
d. Renal disease
*e. Premenstrual syndrome

1911. A 56-year-old male patient has been delivered to the emergency department with frostbite on both feet. What aid should be rendered to the victim?
a. Apply an alcohol compress
*b. Apply a bandage, give an injection of vasodilators
c. Put the feet into hot water
d. Administer heart medications
e. Rub the feet with snow

1912. A 21-year-old male patient got a deep cut wound in his right thigh. In the emergency room a surgeon on duty performed primary debridement of the wound and primary wound closure with a suture. After 4 days, there appeared pain, redness, edema, purulent discharge from the wound gap, body temperature rose up to 39°C. What kind of wound complication can you think of and what actions should be taken?
a. Tetanus, active-passive immunization against tetanus
b. Lymphangitis, apply a hot compress
c. Infiltration, apply a hot compress
d. Erysipelas, prescribe antibiotics
*e. Wound abscess, remove the sutures and drain the wound

1913. A general practitioner visited a 2-year-old child and diagnosed him with measles. The child attends a nursery, has a 5-year-old sister. What document must be filled in for the effective antiepidemic measures in the given health locality?
a. Sick leave
*b. Emergency notification on infectious disease (form №058/o)
c. Infant’s record (report form №112/o)
d. Carer’s leave certificate
e. House call record (form №031/o)

1914. An employee has been diseased for 4 months, further treatment is necessary, the patient is incapacitated. Who is authorized to provide further disability examination of this patient?
a. Deputy chief responsible for disability examination
*b. Medical and social expert board
c. Physician in charge and chief of department
d. Medical consultative board
e. Chief physician of a medical facility

1915. It has been suspected that a newborn has congenital diaphragmatic hernia (asphyctic incarceration). What study will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Irrigography
b. Plan abdominal radiography
*c. Plan radiography of the chest cavity
d. Pneumoirrigoscopy
e. Fibroesophagogastroduodenoscopy

1916. A 25-year-old female presented to a women’s welfare clinic and reported the inability to get pregnant within 3 years of regular sexual activity. Examination revealed 15 increased body weight, male pattern of pubic hair growth, excessive pilosis of thighs, dense enlarged ovaries, monophasic basal temperature. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gonadal dysgenesis
*b. Polycystic ovarian syndrome
c. Adrenogenital syndrome
d. Adnexitis
e. Premenstrual syndrome

1917. A factory’s sectorial doctor selects a group of persons who often fall ill for thorough monitoring. At the same time he takes into consideration the number of etiologically related cases with temporary disability in each of the employees over the last year. An employee falls into this group if the number of sickness cases is:
*a. 4 or more
b. 2 or more
c. 6 or more
d. 3 or more
e. 1 or more

1918. A 23-year-old female consulted a gynecologist on the 20th day postpartum period about pain in the left breast, purulent discharge from the nipple. Objectively: Ps120/min, t- 39C. The left breast is painful, larger than the right one, hyperemic. In the upper quadrant there is an infiltrate sized 10x15 cm with a softening inside. Blood test results: ESR- 50 mm/h, WBC- 15,0×109/l. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Lance the breast abscess in the women’s health clinic
*b. Refer to the surgical department for operative treatment
c. Refer to the postpartum department
d. Refer to the gynecology department
e. Refer to a polyclinic surgeon for conservative treatment

1919. A family lives in the town situated within the zone of radiation pollution. A 6-year-old child had been ill with ARVI for 19 days. The child was undergoing outpatient treatment and was nursed by his mother, a cafe worker. Specify the order of disability examination:
a. Sick leave is not granted, only a carer’s leave certificate is issued
b. Sick leave is granted for a total of 14 days, and after that period is over, a carer’s leave certificate is issued
*c. Sick leave is granted for the entire period of the child’s illness
d. Sick leave is granted for 14 days, after this period is over, no document is issued
e. Sick leave is granted for 7 days, after this period is over, a carer’s leave certificate is issued

1920. A 49-year-old female patient with schizophrenia is all the time listening to something, insists that "there is a phone in her head" as she hears the voice of her brother who tells her to go home. The patient is anxious, suspicious, looks around all the time. Specify the psychopathological syndrome:
*a. Hallucinatory
b. Paranoiac
c. Depressive
d. Paraphrenic
e. Generalized anxiety disorder

1921. During the first home visit to a full-term boy after his discharge from the maternity hospital a pediatrician revealed a symmetrical swelling of mammae without skin changes over them, swelling of the scrotum. The body temperature was of 36,5°C. The baby was calm, sucked the mother’s breast actively. What condition should you think of?
a. Sclerema
b. Neonatal mastitis
*c. Hormonal crisis of the newborn
d. Necrotic neonatal phlegmon
e. Congenital adrenal dysfunction

1922. A 30-year-old male patient complains of inertness, low-grade fever, bleeding gums, frequent quinsies, aching bones. Objectively: the patient has pale skin and mucous membranes, sternalgia, +2 cm liver, +5 cm painless spleen. Blood test results: RBC2,7×1012/l, Нb-80 g/l, WBC- 3×109/l, eosinophils - 4%, basophils - 5%, blasts 4segmented neutrophils - 17%, lymphocytes 29%, myelocytes - 25%, promyelocytes - 12%, monocytes - 2%, platelets - 80×109/l, ESR 57 mm/h. What test should be performed to verify the diagnosis?
*a. Sternal puncture
b. Lymph node biopsy
c. Chest X-ray
d. Lumbar puncture
e. Trephine biopsy

1923. A 46-year-old male patient complains of periodic epigastric pain that occurs at night. Objectively: HR- 70/min, AP- 125/75 mm Hg, tenderness in the epigastric region is present. EGD confirms duodenal ulcer of 0,6 cm in diameter. Test for H. Pylori is positive. Which of the given antisecretory drugs will be a compulsory element of the treatment regimen?
a. Famotidine
b. Atropine
c. Maalox
*d. Omeprazole
e. Pirenzepine

1924. A 47-year-old male patient has been lately complaining of compressing chest pain that occurs when he walks a distane of 700-800 m. Once a week, he drinks 2 liters of beer. Rise in arterial pressure has been observed for the last 7 years. Objectively: Ps-74/min, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. The bicycle ergometry performed at 16 workload of 75 watts shows 2 mm ST-segment depression in V 4-V 6 leads.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vegetative-vascular dystonia of hypertensive type
b. Alcoholic cardiomyopathy
c. Exertional stenocardia, III functional class
d. Exertional stenocardia, IV functional class
*e. Exertional stenocardia, II functional class

1925. A puerperant is 28 years old. It’s the 3rd day post-partum after a second, normal, term delivery. The body temperature is of 36,8°C, Ps-72/min, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are moderately engorged, the nipples are clean. Abdomen is soft, painless. The fundus is 3 fingers’ breadth below the navel. Moderate bloody lochia are present. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Subinvolution of uterus
b. Remains of placental tissue after childbirth
c. Lactostasis
*d. Physiological course of the postpartum period
e. Postpartum metroendometritis

1926. A 29-year-old unconscious patient has been delivered to a hospital. Objectively: skin and mucous membranes are pale, cyanotic, breath sounds are dramatically diminished on the right and cannot be auscultated in the lower parts, at the level of the 6 rib along the anterior axillary line there is a wound hole with moderate bleeding and passage of air during inspiration. Radiography reveals a bullet in the pleural cavity. What is the medical tactics of choice?
a. Tight bandage on a wound
*b. Emergency thoracotomy
c. Converting a tension pneumothorax into a simple (open) pneumothorax
d. Thoracoscopy with removal of bullet
e. Thoracostomy

1927. A patient had four generalized convulsive seizures within a day. Between the seizures the patient did not come to waking consciousness (was in a coma or stupor). Specify his state:
*a. Status epilepticus
b. Frequent jacksonian seizures
c. Frequent complex partial seizures
d. Hysterical attacks
e. Frequent generalized seizures

1928. A 12-year-old boy presents with nausea, frequent repeated vomiting that first occurred after eating canned vegetables. Objectively: the patient has dry mucous membranes, muscular hypotonia, anisocoria, mydriasis, dysphagia and dysarthria. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Botulism
b. Salmonellosis
c. Yersiniosis
d. Cholera
e. Shigellosis

1929. A full-term neonate weighing 4500 g was born asphyxiated with Apgar score of 4-6 points. During the delivery shoulder dystocia occurred. Neurologic assessment revealed non-focal neurologic symptoms, total flaccid paresis of the upper extremities since the arm was atonic and pronated. Grasping, Babkin’s and Moro’s reflexes were absent. What segments of spinal cord had been affected?
a. ThVI - ThVII
*b. V - ThI
c. III - IV
d. I - II
e. ThI - ThV

1930. A newborn (mother’s I pregnancy) weighing 3500 g has been found to have jaundice, lethargy, reduced reflexes. Objectively: second grade jaundice of skin with saffron tint, liver - +2 cm, spleen - +1 cm. Urine and feces are yellow. Blood count: Hb- 100 g/l, RBC3,2×1012/l, WBC- 18,7×109/l, mother’s blood type - 0(I) Rh(+), baby’s blood type - A(II) Rh(-), bilirubin - 170 mmol/l, indirect fraction. ALT, AST rates are normal. What is the most likely disease in the child?
a. Physiologic jaundice
*b. Hemolytic disease of newborn, AB0-conflict
c. Hemolytic disease of newborn, Rh-conflict
d. Perinatal hepatitis
e. Biliary atresia

1931. As a result of a road accident a 45year-old male patient got multiple injuries, namely closed fractures of the right humerus and the left antebrachial bones with a displacement of bone fragments, a closed blunt abdominal injury. The patient was delivered to the emergency department 30 minutes after the injury. Objectively: the skin is pale. AP90/20 mm Hg, there is pain and deformation at the fracture sites. Abdomen is tense, palpation causes severe pain, there is rebound tenderness (positive Blumberg’s sign).What is the treatment tactics of choice?
a. Additional tests to specify the diagnosis
*b. Urgent diagostic laparotomy
c. Fracture immobilization, analgesia
d. Infusion therapy to stabilize blood pressure
e. Local anesthetic blockade of fractures

1932. A 34-year-old male visited Tajikistan. After return, he complains of fever up to 40°C which occurs every second day and is accompanied by chills, sweating. Hepatosplenomegaly is present. Blood test results: RBC- 3×1012/l, Нb-80 g/l, WBC- 4×109/l, eosinophils - 1%, stab neutrophils - 5%, segmented neutrophils - 60%, lymphocytes 17 24%, monocytes - 10%, ESR - 25 mm/h. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Malaria
b. Sepsis
c. Leptospirosis
d. Typhoid fever
e. Infectious mononucleosis

1933. A 23-year-old male patient consulted a doctor about pain occurring in the lower third of the thigh with weight bearing activities and unloaded. The patient denies any injuries to the region. Objectively: the skin is of normal color, deep palpation reveals pastosity and tenderness, movements of the knee joint are limited. Radiograph of the distal femoral metaepiphyseal region shows a zone of degradation and spicules. In blood: immature cells are present, there are no signs of inflammation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis
b. Hyperparathyroid dystrophy
*c. Osteosarcoma
d. Multiple myeloma
e. Marble bone disease

1934. It is planned to organize a rural outpatient clinic. The patients will be able to visit the doctors of the following specialities:
a. Obstetrician-gynaecologist, therapeutist
*b. Therapeutist, dentist, pediatrician, obstetrician-gynecologist
c. Pediatrician, obstetrician-gynaecologist, ophthalmologist
d. Therapeutist, pediatrician, neurologist
e. Pediatrician, therapeutist, ophthalmologist

1935. A 12-year-old girls has minor functional and morphological abnormalities: 1,0 D myopia, reduced body resistance. The patient has no history of chronic diseases. Over the last year, there were 4 cases of respiratory diseases. The girl belongs to the following health group:
a. I
b. IV
c. V
*d. II
e. III

1936. weeks after a myocardial infarction, a 56-year-old male patient developed acute heart pain, pronounced dyspnea. Objectively: the patient’s condition is extremely grave, there is marked cyanosis of face, swelling and throbbing of neck veins, peripheral pulse is absent, the carotid artery pulse is rhythmic, 130 bpm, AP- 60/20 mm Hg. Auscultation of heart reveals extremely muffled sounds, percussion reveals heart border extension in both directions. What is the optimal treatment tactis for this patient?
*a. Pericardiocentesis and immediate thoracotomy
b. Puncture of the pleural cavity on the left
c. Pleural cavity drainage
d. Conservative treatment, infusion of adrenomimetics
e. Oxygen inhalation

1937. A puerperant is 32 years old, it’s her first childbirth, term precipitate labor, the III period is unremarkable, the uterus is contracted, tight. Examination of the birth canal revealed a rupture in the left posterior vaginal wall that was closed with catgut. Two hours later, the patient complained of a feeling of pressure on the anus, pain in the perineum, minor vaginal discharges, edema of the vulva. These clinical presentations are indicative most likely of:
a. Hysterorrhesis
b. Hypotonic bleeding
c. Hysterocervicorrhexis
d. Hemorrhoids
*e. Vaginal hematoma

1938. A hospital nutrition unit received a batch of beef. Sanitation physician examined the meat and revealed the presence of 5 bladder worms per 40 cm2 of meat. Give the hygienic assessment of meat:
*a. Liable to technical utilization
b. Adulterated
c. Poor-quality
d. Good-quality
e. Conditionally admissible

1939. A 47-year-old female patient complains of having pain on swallowing and difficult passing of solid food for two months. The patient has taken to the liquid and semi-liquid food. During the last week the liquid food has barely passed through. General condition is satisfactory, the patient is undernourished, the appetite is preserved, there is a fear of eating. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Esophageal stricture
b. Esophageal varices
c. Esophageal achalasia
*d. Esophageal carcinoma
e. Esophageal foreign body

1940. A 31-year-old female patient complains of infertility, amenorrhea for 2 years after the artificial abortion that was complicated by endometritis. Objectively: examination of the external genitalia reveals no pathology, there is female pattern of hair distribution. According to the functional tests, the patient has biphasic ovulatory cycle. What form of infertility is the case?
a. Ovarian
b. Hypothalamic
c. Immunological
*d. Uterine
e. Pituitary

1941. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a doctor about difficult swallowing, voice hoarseness, weight loss. These symptoms have been gradually progressing for the last 3 months. Objectively: the patient is exhausted, supraclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged. Esophagoscopy revealed no esophageal pathology. Which of the following studies is most appropriate in this case?
a. Ultrasound investigation of mediastinum
*b. Computed tomography of chest and mediastinum
c. Multiplanar imaging of esophagus
d. X-ray of lungs
e. Radioisotope investigation of chest

1942. A 36-year-old male patient complains of having headache, obstructed nasal breathing, purulent nasal discharge for 2 weeks. A month before, he had his right maxillary premolar filled. Radiolography revealed an intense opacity of the right maxillary sinus. Diagnostic puncture revealed a large amount of thick malodorous crumbly pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic purulent sinusitis
b. Acute purulent sinusitis
*c. Chronic suppurative odontogenic sinusitis
d. Chronic atrophic sinusitis
e. Tumor of the maxillary sinus

1943. A 5-year-old boy has a history of repeated pneumonia, frequent acute respiratory viral diseases. Objectively: exertional dyspnea, minor fatigabilty. There is a systolic murmur having its epicenter in the IV intercostal space on the left. Left relative dullness is found along the midclavicular line. According to the findings of instrumental methods of examination (electrocardiography, echocardiography), the patient has been diagnosed with ventricular septal defect, subcompensation stage. What is the main method of treatment?
a. Indomethacin
*b. Operative therapy
c. Does not require treatment
d. Phytotherapy
e. Conservative treatment

1944. A patient with autoimmune thyroiditis accompanied by multinodular goiter underwent the right lobe ectomy and subtotal resection of the left lobe. What drug should be administered to prevent postoperative hypothyroidism?
*a. L-thyroxine
b. Iodomarin
c. Insulin
d. Lithium drugs
e. Merkazolil

1945. A 49-year-old female patient has type 1 diabetes of moderate severity. The disease is complicated by retinopathy and polyneuropathy. Besides that, repeated analyses of the daily urinary excretion of albumin revealed microalbuminuria (200300 mg/day). Glomerular filtration rate is 105 ml/min. Blood pressure is within normal range. Normalization of the following indicator should be the first-priority task in the secondary prevention of diabetic nephropathy:
*a. Glycosylated hemoglobin
b. Blood insulin
c. Glycemia 2 hours after a meal
d. Fasting glucose
e. C-peptide

1946. days after birth, a newborn developed a sudden fever up to 38,1°C. Objectively: the skin in the region of navel, abdomen and chest is erythematous; there are multiple pea-sized blisters with no infiltration at the base; single bright red moist erosions with epidermal fragments on the periphery. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Vulgar impetigo
b. Atopic dermatitis
c. Syphilitic pemphigus
d. Streptococcal impetigo
*e. Epidemic pemphigus of newborn

1947. An emergency physician arrived to provide medical care for a hangman taken out of the loop by his relatives. The doctor revealed no pulse in the carotid arteries, lack of consciousness, spontaneous breathing and corneal reflexes; cadaver spots on the back and posterior parts of extremities. A person can be declared dead if the following sign is present:
a. Lack of spontaneous breathing
b. Pulselessness
c. Unconsciousness
*d. Cadaver spots
e. Lack of corneal reflexes

1948. A 69-year-old male patient has been hospitalized with hypothermia. Objectively: the patient is pale, has shallow breathing. AP100/60 mm Hg, Ps-60/min. Palpation of the abdomen and chest reveals no pathological signs. The body temperature is of 34,8°C. The patient’s breath smells of alcohol. Give treatment recommendations:
a. Rubbing with alcohol and snow
b. Antishock therapy
c. Body warming with hot-water bags
d. Forced diuresis
*e. Warm bath + intravenous administration of warm solutions

1949. A 26-year-old male patient consulted a doctor abut sore throat, fever up to 38,2°C. A week before, the patient had quinsy, didn’t follow medical recommendations. On examination, the patient had forced position of his head, trismus of chewing muscles. Left peritonsillar region is markedly hyperemic, 19 swollen. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
b. Meningitis
*c. Left-sided peritonsillar abscess
d. Pharyngeal diphtheria
e. Tonsil tumour

1950. A 21-year-old female patient has been hospitalized on an emergency basis because of severe dyspnea, pain in the left side of chest. Body temperature is 38,8°C. The condition developed three days ago. Respiratory rate is 42/min, auscultation reveals shallow breathing. There is percussive dullness on the right starting from the middle of the blade, breath sounds cannot be heard. The left border of heart is 3 cm displaced outwards. Embryocardia is present, HR is 110/min. The right hypochondrium is painful on palpation. What urgent therapeutic measures should be taken in this situation?
a. Administration of penicillin antibiotics
b. Injection of cardiac glycosides
c. Transferring the patient to the thoracic surgery department
*d. Emergency puncture of the pleural cavity
e. Injection of Lasix

1951. A 77-year-old male patient complains of inability to urinate, bursting pain above the pubis. The patient developed acute condition 12 hours before. Objectively: full urinary bladder is palpable above the pubis. Rectal prostate is enlarged, dense and elastic, well-defined, with no nodes. Interlobular sulcus is distinct. Ultrasonography results: prostate volume is 120 cm3,it projects into the bladder cavity, has homogeneous parenchyma. Prostate-specific antigen rate is of 5 ng/ml. What is the most likely disease that caused acute urinary retention?
a. Prostate carcinoma
b. Tuberculosis of the prostate
c. Acute prostatitis
*d. Prostatic hyperplasia
e. Sclerosis of the prostate

1952. At the first minute of life a full-term infant born with umbilical cord entangled around his neck has total cyanosis, apnea, HR- 80/min, hypotonia and areflexia. There are no signs of meconium aspiration. After the airway suctioning the newborn did not start breathing. What is the next action of the doctor?
a. Tracheal intubation and ALV
b. Stimulation of the skin along the spine
c. Intravenous administration of adrenaline
d. Intravenous administration of etamsylate
*e. ALV with a 100% O2 mask

1953. Examination of an 11-year-old boy revealed frequent nosebleeds, fatigue when walking, underdevelopment of the lower half of the body, increased blood pressure in the upper extremities and decreased pressure in the lower ones, extension of the left heart border, blowing systolic murmur in the interscapular region. ECG shows the horizontal axis of heart. Radiography reveals left cardiomegaly, costal usuration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atrial septal defect
*b. Aortarctia
c. Patent ductus arteriosus
d. Aortic stenosis
e. Ventricular septal defect

1954. During the preventive examination a 17-year-old young man reports no health problems. Objectively: the patient is undernourished, asthenic; blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg, Ps-80/min. Heart borders are within normal range. Auscultation reveals three apical heart sounds, murmurs are absent. ECG shows no pathological changes, PCG registers the S3 occurring 0,15 seconds after the S2. How can you interpret these changes?
*a. Physiologic S3
b. Protodiastolic gallop rhythm
c. Physiologic S4
d. Presystolic gallop rhythm
e. Fout-ta-ta-rou (three-component rhythm)

1955. After having the flu, a 39-year-old male patient with a history of Addison’s disease developed a condition manifested by weakness, depression, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hypoglycemia. AP- 75/50 mm Hg. Blood test results: low corticosterone and cortisol, 13-oxycorticosteroids, 17-oxycorticosteroids levels. What condition developed in the patient?
a. Diabetes mellitus
*b. Acute adrenal insufficiency
c. Acute enterocolitis
d. Acute gastritis
e. Collapse

1956. A female patient complains of being unable to get pregnant for 5 years. A complete clinical examination brought the following results: hormonal function is not impaired, urogenital infection hasn’t been found, on hysterosalpingography both tubes were filled with the contrast medium up to the isthmic segment, abdominal contrast was not visualized. The patient’s husband is healthy. What tactics will be most effective?
a. Hydrotubation
b. Laparoscopic tubal plasty
c. Insemination with husband’s sperm
d. ICSI within in-vitro fertilization program
*e. In-vitro fertilization

1957. A 19-year-old primiparous woman with a body weight of 54,5 kg gave birth at 38 weeks gestation to a full-term live girl after a normal vaginal delivery. The girl’s weight was 2180,0 g, body length - 48 cm. It is 20 known from history that the woman has been a smoker for 8 years, and kept smoking during pregnancy. Pregnancy was complicated by moderate vomiting of pregnancy from 9 to 12 weeks pregnant, edemata of pregnancy from 32 to 38 weeks. What is the most likely cause of low birth weight?
a. Woman’s age
b. Low weight of the woman
*c. Fetoplacental insufficiency
d. First trimester preeclampsia
e. Third trimester preeclampsia

1958. In a cold weather, the emergency room admitted a patient pulled out of the open water. There was no respiratory contact with the water. The patient is excited, pale, complains of pain, numbness of hands and feet, cold shiver. Respiratory rate is 22/min, AP- 120/90 mm Hg, Ps-110/min, rectal temperature is 34,5°C.What kind of warming is indicated for this patient?
a. Warm bath
b. Hemodialysis with blood warming
c. Infusion of 38°C solutions
d. Hot compresses
*e. Passive warming

1959. A week before, a 65-year-old male patient suffered an acute myocardial infarction. His general condition has deteriorated: he complains of dyspnea at rest, pronounced weakness. Objectively: edema of the lower extremities, ascites is present. Heart borders are extended, paradoxical pulse is 2 cm displaced from the apex beat to the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute cardiac aneurysm
b. Acute pericarditis
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Cardiosclerotic aneurysm
e. Recurrent myocardial infarction

1960. A 41-year-old patient cosulted a dermatologist about discoloration, thickening, brittleness of toenails. These symptoms have been present for about five years. Objectively: nail plates in all toes are thickened, of dirty yellow color, lustreless, crumble over the edge. Microscopy of the nail plate material treated with alkali revealed mycelial filaments. Material inoculation onto Sabouraud medium resulted in growth of the Trichophyton rubrum colony. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Candidal onychia
b. Nail dystrophy
c. Epidermophytosis of nails
*d. Rubromycosis of toenails
e. Psoriasis of the nails

1961. Examination of an electric welder with 15 years of service record revealed dry rales in the lower lung fields. Radiograph shows diffuse nodules sized 3-4 mm in the middle and lower lung fields. What disease can be suspected?
a. Bronchitis
*b. Heavy-metal coniosis
c. Silicatosis
d. Silicosis
e. Carbon pneumo coniosis

1962. A 12-year-old boy periodically has short episodes (10-15 seconds) of a brief loss of awareness with a dazed look and eyes stare in an upright position, blank expression of face, absence of motions and subsequent amnesia. Specify the described state:
*a. Absence seizure
b. Trance
c. Sperrung
d. Fugue
e. Obnubilation

1963. Evaluation results of sanitary and hygiene conditions in a 4-bed ward were as follows: ward area - 30 m2,height - 3,2 m, temperature - 20°C, humidity - 55%, air velocity - 0,1 m/s, window-to-floor area ratio - 1:5,daylight ratio - 0,6%, concentration of carbon dioxide in the air - 0,1%. Which of the given indicators does not meet hygienic requirements?
a. Concentration of carbon dioxide in the air
b. Ward area
c. Air velocity
d. Window-to-floor area ratio
*e. Daylight ratio

1964. A 25-year-old patient works as a tractor driver. Four days ago, he got pain in the left axillary region, general weakness, fever up to 38°C. He hadn’t sought medical help until a painful solid lump appeared in this region. Objectively: in the left axilla there is a very painful cone-shaped mass sized 3x2,5 cm, with a destruction in the center of the pointed vertex. The surrounding skin is hyperemic, there are purulent discharges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Carbuncle
b. Lymphadenitis
c. Abscess
*d. Hydradenitis
e. Furuncle

1965. A 19-year-old male patient complains of intense pain in the left knee joint. Objectively: the left knee joint is enlarged, the overlying skin is hyperemic, the joint is painful on palpation. Blood test results: RBC- 3,8×1012/l, Hb- 122 g/l, lymphocytes - 7,4×109/l, platelets - 183×109/l. ESR- 10 mm/h. Duke bleeding time is 4 minutes, Lee-White clotting time - 24 minutes. A-PTT is 89 sec. Rheumatoid factor is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis? 21
a. Hemorrhagic vasculitis, articular form
*b. Hemophilia, hemarthrosis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Werlhof’s disease
e. Thrombocytopathy

1966. A 29-year-old female patient complains of dyspnea and palpitations on exertion. According to her mother, as a child she had heart murmur, did not undergo any examinations. Objectively: the patient has pale skin, Ps-94/min, rhythmic. AP- 120/60 mm Hg. In the II intercostal space on the left auscultation reveals a continuous rasping systolodiastolic murmur, diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery. Blood and urine are unremarkable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aortarctia
b. Tetralogy of Fallot
c. Atrial septal defect
d. Ventricular septal defect
*e. Patent ductus arteriosus

1967. A 6-year-old boy had had a quinsy. 9 days later, there appeared edemata of the face, extremities and trunk, general health condition deteriorated. Urine became turbid. Objectively: expressive edemata, ascites. AP -100/55 mm Hg, diuresis - 0,2 l of urine per day. Results of the biochemical blood analysis: total protein - 50 g/l, cholesterol - 11,28 mmol/l, urea - 7,15 mmol/l, creatinine - 0,08 mmol/l. Urinalysis results: leukocytes - 3-5 per HPF, red blood cells are absent. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute pyelonephritis
b. Acute renal failure
c. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

1968. A 13-year-old boy has had abdominal pain, bloating, nausea, liquid fatty gray stool with putrid smell for the last 3 years. Palpation reveals epigastric tenderness, as well as tenderness in the Desjardins’ pancreatic point, Chauffard’s triangle; there is positive MayoRobson’s sign. Failure of exocrine pancreatic function has been suspected. What is the most informative method for evaluating the state of exocrine pancreatic function?
a. Blood serum trypsin determination
b. Blood and urine amylase determination
c. Scatological study
*d. Fecal elastase-1 determination
e. Sonography of the pancreas

1969. Explosion of a tank with benzene at a chemical plant has killed and wounded a large number of people. There are over 50 victims with burns, mechanical injuries and intoxication. Specify the main elements of medical care and evacuation of population in this situation:
a. Isolation, rescue activity, recovery
b. Sorting, recovery, rescue activity
c. Sorting, evacuation, treatment
d. Medical assistance, evacuation, isolation
*e. Sorting, medical assistance, evacuation

1970. A 36-year-old injured has been taken to the emergency station with open tibial fractures. Examination reveals bleeding: pulsating blood spurts out of the wound.What medical manipulations are required at this stage of medical care?
a. Transport the patient to the operating room
*b. Apply a tourniquet on the thigh proximal to the source of bleeding and transport the patient to the operating room
c. Apply a tourniquet on the thigh distal to the source of bleeding and transport the patient to the operating room
d. Immobilize the fracture and transport the patient to the operating room
e. Stop the bleeding by a compressive bandage and transport the patient to the operating room

1971. The outpatient department of a city hospital works also as a 60-bed day hospital for somatic patients. The department operates in a single-shift mode. What specialist selects patients for admission to the day hospital?
a. Resident doctor
b. Deputy chief of the hospital
c. Chief physician of the hospital
*d. District doctor
e. Chief of the outpatient department

1972. A 67-year-old female patient with hypertensive crisis has asthma, cough with expectoration of frothy pink sputum, moist rales in the lungs. The patient stays in sitting position, respiratory rate is 40/min, AP-214/136 mm Hg, heart rate - 102/min. What is the most rational tactics of this patient management?
a. Urgent pneumography
b. Intravenous administration of a beta-blocker
c. Tactics can be determined after ECG and chest radiography
*d. Intravenous administration of furosemide
e. Bed rest, lying position

1973. A 23-year-old primigravida at 39 weeks gestation has been admitted to the maternity ward with irregular contractions. The intensity of uterine contractions is not changing, the intervals between them stay long. Bimanual examination reveals that the cervix is centered, soft, up to 1,5 cm long. There is no cervical dilatation. What diagnosis should be made?
a. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, birth I, 1 period, the acceleration phase
b. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, pathological preliminary period
c. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, labor I, 1 period, the latent phase
d. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, labor I, period 1,the active phase
*e. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, preliminary period

1974. A 49-year-old male patient complains of retrosternal pain, heartburn, weight loss of 8 kg over the last year, constipation, weakness. The patient has been a smoker for 20 years, and has a 10-year history of gastroesophageal reflux disease. The patient is asthenic, has dry skin. EGD revealed an ulcer in the lower third of the esophagus and esophageal stricture accompanied by edema, hyperemia and multiple erosions of the mucosa. What study is required for more accurate diagnosis?
a. Fecal occult blood test
*b. Biopsy of the esophageal mucosa
c. Respiratory test for Helicobacter pylori
d. X-ray examination of the esophagus
e. pH-metry of the esophagus and the stomach

1975. A 63-year-old male patient with persistent atrial fibrillation complains of moderate dyspnea. Objectively: peripheral edemata are absent, vesicular breathing is present, heart rate - 72/min, AP- 140/90mmHg.What combination of drugs will be most effective for the secondary prevention of heart failure?
a. Beta-blockers, cardiac glycosides
b. Cardiac glycosides, ACE inhibitors
c. Diuretics, beta-blockers
*d. Beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors
e. Cardiac glycosides, diuretics

1976. A 57-year-old male patient had an attack of retrosternal pain that lasted more than 1,5 hours. Objectively: the patient is inert, adynamic, has pale skin, cold extremities, poor volume pulse, heart rate - 120/min, AP- 70/40 mm Hg. ECG shows ST elevation in II, III, aVF leads. What condition are these changes typical for?
a. Perforated gastric ulcer
b. Arrhythmogenic shock
*c. Cardiogenic shock
d. Acute pericarditis
e. Acute pancreatitis

1977. During an exam, a 22-year-old female student fainted. She grew up in a family with many children, has a history of frequent acute respiratory infections. Objectively: the patient has pale skin and mucous membranes, splitend hair, brittle nails. Blood test results: RBC2,7×1012/l, Hb- 75 g/l, color index - 0,7,WBC3,2×109/l, platelets - 210×109/l, ESR- 30 mm/h. Blood serum iron is 6 mmol/l.What is themost likely diagnosis?
a. B12-deficiency anemia
b. Acute leukemia
*c. Iron-deficiency anemia
d. Vegetative-vascular dystonia
e. Aplastic anemia

1978. During the ultrasound study of carotid and vertebral arteries a 74-year-old patient developed a condition manifested by dizziness, weakness, nausea, transient loss of consciousness. Objectively: pale skin, AP80/60 mm Hg, Ps-96/min of poor volume. ECG shows sinus tachycardia, left ventricular hypertrophy. Focal neurological symptoms were not found. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute cerebrovascular accident
*b. Carotid sinus syncope
c. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes attack
d. Orthostatic syncope
e. Complete atrioventricular block

1979. On the 10th day postpartum a puerperant woman complains of pain and heaviness in the left breast. Body temperature is 38,8°C, Ps-94 bpm. The left breast is edematic, the supero-external quadrant of skin is hyperemic. Fluctuation symptom is absent. The nipples discharge drops of milk when pressed. What is a doctor’s further tactics?
a. Opening of the abscess and drainage of the breast
*b. Antibiotic therapy, immobilization and expression of breast milk
c. Inhibition of lactation
d. Compress to both breasts
e. Physiotherapy

1980. During the breast self-exam a 37-year-old female patient revealed a lump in the lower inner quadrant of her left breast. Palpation confirms presence of a mobile well-defined neoplasm up to 2 cm large. Peripheral lymph nodes are not changed. What is the way of further management?
*a. Ultrasound examination of breasts, mammography, fine-needle aspiration biopsy
b. Radical mastectomy
c. Case follow-up
d. Ultrasound monitoring of genitals during the entire course of antiestrogens therapy, systemic enzyme therapy, phytotherapy
e. Anti-inflammatory therapy, physiotherapy

1981. An 8-year-old child was hospitalized for fever up to 39,8°C, inertness, moderate headache, vomiting. Examination revealed meningeal symptoms. Lumbar puncture was performed. The obtained fluid had raised opening pressure, it was transparent, with the cell count of 450 cells per 1 mcL (mainly lymphocytes - 90%), glucose level of 2,6 mmol/l. What causative agent might have caused the disease in the child?
a. Pneumococcus
*b. Enterovirus
c. Koch’s bacillus
d. Meningococcus
e. Staphylococcus

1982. A 25-year-old female has a self-detected tumor in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast. On palpation there is a painless, firm, mobile lump up to 2 cm in diameter, peripheral lymph nodes are not changed. In the upper outer quadrant of the right breast ultrasound revealed a massive neoplasm with increased echogenicity sized 21x18 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mammary cancer
b. Mastitis
c. Lactocele
d. Diffuse mastopathy
*e. Fibroadenoma

1983. A 49-year-old female patient complains of itching, burning in the external genitals, frequent urination. The symptoms have been present for the last 7 months. The patient has irregular menstruation, once every 3-4 months. Over the last two years she has had hot flashes, sweating, sleep disturbance. Examination revealed no pathological changes of the internal reproductive organs. Complete blood count and urinalysis showed no pathological changes. Vaginal smear contained 20-25 leukocytes per HPF, mixed flora. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Menopausal syndrome
b. Trichomonas colpitis
c. Bacterial vaginosis
d. Vulvitis
e. Cystitis

1984. A 45-year-old male patient complains of acute pain in his right side irradiating to the right thigh and crotch. The patient claims also to have frequent urination with urine which resembles a meat slops. The patient has no previous history of this condition. There is costovertebral angle tenderness on the right (positive Pasternatsky’s symptom). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Acute cholecystitis. Renal colic
c. Acute pancreatitis
*d. Urolithiasis
e. Acute pyelonephritis

1985. After a holiday in the Crimea, a 49year-old male patient with a history of lung tuberculosis felt increased weakness, periodic dizziness, easing bowel movements with abdominal pain, the need for additional salting his meals. The patient has noted that his condition improves after some sweet tea and validol taken sublingually. Objectively: there is an intense darkening of skin, AP- 70/50 mm Hg, glycemia is 3,0 mmol/l. What is the possible cause of health deterioration:
a. Coronary artery disease
b. Diabetes mellitus
*c. Chronic adrenal insufficiency
d. Chronic pancreatitis
e. Pulmonary tuberculosis

1986. A 42-year-old male patient has been delivered to a hospital in a grave condition with dyspnea, cough with expectoration of purulent sputum, fever up to 39,5°C. The first symptoms appeared 3 weeks ago. Two weeks ago, a local therapist diagnosed him with acute right-sided pneumonia. Over the last 3 days, the patient’s condition deteriorated: there was a progress of dyspnea, weakness, lack of appetite. Chest radiography confirms a rounded shadow in the lower lobe of the right lung with a horizontal fluid level, the right sinus is not clearly visualized. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atelectasis of the right lung
b. Pleural effusion
c. Acute pleuropneumonia
d. Right pulmonary empyema
*e. Abscess of the right lung

1987. An 11-year-old boy complains of general weakness, fever up to 38,2°C, pain and swelling of the knee joints, feeling of irregular heartbeat. 3 weeks ago, the child had quinsy. Knee joints are swollen, the overlying skin and skin of the knee region is reddened, local temperature is increased, movements are limited. Heart sounds are muffled, extrasystole is present, auscultation reveals apical systolic murmur that is not conducted to the left inguinal region. ESR is 38 mm/h. CRP is 2+, antistreptolysin O titre - 400. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
b. Reactive arthritis
c. Vegetative dysfunction
d. Non-rheumatic carditis
*e. Acute rheumatic fever

1988. A 28-year-old male patient complains of sour regurgitation, cough and heartburn that occurs every day after having meals, when bending forward or lying down. These problems have been observed for 4 years. Objective status and laboratory values are normal. FEGDS revealed endoesophagitis. What is the leading factor in the development of this disease?
a. Duodeno-gastric reflux
b. Hypersecretion of hydrochloric acid
*c. Failure of the lower esophageal sphincter
d. Hypergastrinemia
e. Helicobacter pylori infection

1989. On admission a 35-year-old female reports acute abdominal pain, fever up to 38,8°C, mucopurulent discharges. The patient is nulliparous, has a history of 2 artificial abortions. The patient is unmarried, has sexual 24 contacts. Gynecological examination reveals no uterus changes. Appendages are enlarged, bilaterally painful. There is profuse purulent vaginal discharge. What study is required to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Hysteroscopy
b. Vaginoscopy
c. Laparoscopy
*d. Bacteriologic and bacteriascopic studies
e. Curettage of uterine cavity

1990. A 20-year-old female consulted a gynecologist about not having menstrual period for 7 months. History abstracts: early childhood infections and frequent tonsillitis, menarche since 13 years, regular monthly menstrual cycle of 28 days, painless menstruation lasts 5-6 days. 7 months ago the patient had an emotional stress. Gynecological examination revealed no alterations in the uterus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cryptomenorrhea
*b. Secondary amenorrhea
c. Algomenorrhea
d. Primary amenorrhea
e. Spanomenorrhea

1991. A 48-year-old female has been admitted to the gynecology department for pain in the lower right abdomen and low back pain, constipations. Bimanual examination findings: the uterus is immobile, the size of a 10-week pregnancy, has uneven surface. Aspirate from the uterine cavity contains atypical cells.What diagnosis can be made?
a. Cervical cancer
b. Colon cancer
c. Chorionepithelioma
*d. Hysterocarcinoma
e. Metrofibroma

1992. A 27-year-old male patient consulted a doctor about pain in the lower third of the thigh with weight bearing activities and unloaded. Two years ago, the patient underwent treatment in the casualty depatment for the open fracture of the lower third of femur. The fracture healed slowly, the healing process was accompanied by prulent inflammation. Objectively: edema of the lower third of the thigh, elevated local temperature. Radiograph shows signs of destruction and sequestration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis of femur
b. Osteosarcoma
*c. Chronic post-traumatic osteomyelitis
d. Hematogenous osteomyelitis
e. Multiple myeloma

1993. A 30-year-old male patient had been admitted to the TB hospital because of the following changes detected by fluorography: an ill-defined shadow of low intensity up to 1 cm in diameter in the S1 of the right lung. CT scan showed a destruction area in the center of the shadow. Sputum analysis revealed MTB. The patient was diagnosed with focal tuberculosis. What phases of tuberculosis are the identified changes typical for?
*a. Infiltration and disintegration
b. Resorption and scarring
c. Calcification and resorption
d. Disintegration and dissemination
e. Infiltration and dissemination

1994. A 43-year-old female complains of significant weakness, sore throat, occurrence of multiple unexplained bruises on her skin. These symptoms have been present for a week, the disease is associated with quinsy which she had some time before. Objectively: body temperature - 38,9°C, respiratory rate 24/min, Ps-110/min, AP- 100/65 mm Hg. The patient has pale skin, petechial rash on the extremities, enlarged lymph nodes. Blood test results: Hb- 80 g/l, RBC- 2,2×1012/l; WBC3,5×109/l; blasts - 52%; eosinophils - 2%; stab neutrophils - 3%; segmented neutrophils - 19%; lymphocytes - 13%; monocytes - 1%; platelets - 35×109/l. ESR - 47 mm/h. What test is required to specify the diagnosis?
a. Lymph node biopsy
b. Protein electrophoresis
*c. Immunophenotyping
d. Determination of anti-platelet antibody titer
e. Cytogenetic study

1995. A 47-year-old male patient complains of compressive chest pain that occurs both at rest and during light physical activity; irregular heartbeat. These problems arose 3 months ago. The patient’s brother died suddenly at the age of 30. Objectively: Ps-84/min, arrhythmic, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. ECG confirms signs of left ventricular hypertrophy, abnormal Qwaves in V 4 ? V 6 leads. Ech°CG reveals that interventricular septum is 1,7 cm, left ventricular wall thickness is 1,2 cm.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pericarditis
*b. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
c. Exertional angina
d. Neurocirculatory asthenia
e. Myocarditis

1996. Within the structure of the region’s population the share of persons aged 0 to 14 years is 25%, the share of persons aged 50 years and older is 30%. What concept most accurately describes this demographic situation?
a. Cohort reproduction
b. Progressive type of population age structure
*c. Regressive type of population age structure
d. Stationary type of population age structure
e. Immigration of population

1997. ?Thirteen months after the first labor a 24- year-old patient complained of amenorrhea. Pregnancy ended in Caesarian section because of premature detachment of normally positioned placenta which resulted in blood loss at the rate of 2000 ml due to disturbance of blood clotting. Choose the most suitable investigation:
a. Computer tomography of head
b. Estimation of testosteron rate in blood serum
c. US of small pelvis
d. Progesteron assay
*e. Estimation of gonadotropin rate

1998. A 24-year-old primipara was hospitalised with complaints of discharge of the amniotic waters. The uterus is tonic on palpation. The position of the fetus is longitudinal, it is pressed with the head to pelvic outlet. Palpitation of the fetus is rhythmical, 140 bpm, auscultated on the left below the navel. Internal examination: cervix of the uterus is 2,5 cm long, dense, the external opening is closed, light amniotic waters are discharged. Point out the correct component of the diagnosis:
a. The end of the 1st stage of labour
b. Pathological preterm labour
c. Early discharge of the amniotic waters
d. The beginning of the 1st stage of labour
*e. Antenatal discharge of the amniotic waters

1999. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax; it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made:
a. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
b. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line
*c. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
d. In the projection of pleural sinus
e. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion

2000. A primagravida with pregnancy of 37-38 weeks complains of headache, nausea, pain in epigastrium. Objectively: the skin is acyanotic. Face is hydropic, there is short fibrillar twitching of blepharons, muscles of the face and the inferior extremities. The stare is fixed. BP - 200/110 mm Hg; sphygmus is of 92 bpm, intense. Respiration rate is 32/min. Heart activity is rhythmical. Appreciable edemas of the inferior extremities are present. Urine is cloudy. What medication should be administered?
a. Hexenalum of 1% - 2,0 ml
b. Pentaminum of 5% - 4,0 ml
c. Dibazolum (Bendazole hydrochloride) of 1% - 6,0 ml
d. Papaverine hydrochloride of 2% - 4,0 ml
*e. Droperidolum of 0,25% - 2,0 ml

2001. A patient with high temperature came to a first-aid post in the evening. The fact of temporary disability was established. Indicate the measure to be taken in this case:
a. The sick list for 1 day should be issued
b. The sick list for 3 days should be issued
c. No document should be issued
*d. The night duty doctor should issue a medical certificate, which will be subsequently used for issuing a sick list from the date of the previous day
e. The sick list for up to 3 days should be issued

2002. A 10-year-old boy complains of pain in his left eye and strong photophobia after he has injured his left eye with a pencil at school. Left eye examination revealed: blepharospasm, ciliary and conjunctival congestion, cornea is transparent, other parts of eyeball have no changes. Visus 0,9. Right eye is healthy, Visus 1,0.What additional method would you choose first of all?
a. X-ray examination of orbit
b. Gonioscopia
c. Cornea sensation-test
*d. Staining test with 1% fluorescein
e. Tonometria

2003. An infant was born with body mass 3 kg and body length 50 cm. Now he is 3 years old. His brother is 7 years old, suffers from rheumatic fever. Mother asked a doctor for a cardiac check up of the 3-year-old son. Where is the left relative heart border located?
*a. 1 cm left from the left medioclavicular line
b. Along the left medioclavicular line
c. 1 cm right from the left parasternal line
d. 1 cm left from the left parasternal line
e. 1 cm right from the left medioclavicular line

2004. A baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation. Delivery was normal, by natural way. The baby has a large cephalohematoma. The results of blood count are: Hb- 120g/l, Er- 3, 5 *10^12/l, total serum bilirubin - 123 mmol/l, direct bilirubin - 11 mmol/l, indirect - 112 mmol/l. What are the causes of hyperbilirubinemia in this case?
a. Intravascular hemolysis
b. Bile condensing
c. Mechanical obstruction of the bile outflow
*d. Erythrocyte hemolysis
e. Disturbance of the conjugative function of liver

2005. A patient has been hospitalised. The onset of the disease was gradual: nausea, vomiting, dark urine, аcholic stool, yellowness of the skin and scleras. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm. Jaundice developed on the 14th day of the disease. The liver diminished in size. What complication of viral hepatitis caused deterioration of the patient’s condition?
a. Meningitis
b. Cholangitis
c. Infectious-toxic shock
*d. Hepatic encephlopathy
e. Relapse of viral hepatitis

2006. An 18-year-old patient was admitted to a hospital with complaints of headache, weakness, high fever, sore throat. Objectively: enlargement of all groups of lymph nodes was revealed. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm, spleen - by 1 cm. In blood: leukocytosis, atypical lymphocytes - 15%. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphoid leukosis
b. Angina
c. Adenoviral infection
*d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Diphtheria

2007. A 60-year-old woman, mother of 6 children, developed a sudden onset of upper abdominal pain radiating to the back, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, fever and chills. Subsequently, she noticed yellow discoloration of her sclera and skin. On physical examination the patient was found to be febrile with temperature of 38, 9oC, along with right upper quadrant tenderness. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Choledocholithiasis
b. Malignant biliary stricture
c. Choledochal cyst
d. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
e. Benign biliary stricture

2008. What juice is recommended to be included in a complex drug and diet therapy for patients suffering from gastric or duodenal ulcer and high acidity of gastric juice to speed up ulcer healing?
a. Cabbage, cabbage-carrot
b. Celery, parsley
c. Apple, apple-birch
d. Pumpkin
*e. Potato, potato-carrot

2009. A 40-year-old woman has been hospitalized for attacks of asphyxia, cough with phlegm. She has a 4-year history of the disease. The first attack of asphyxia occurred during her stay in the countryside. Further attacks occurred while cleaning the room. After 3 days of inpatient treatment the patient’s condition has significantly improved. What is the most likely etiological factor?
a. Chemicals
b. Psychogenic
c. Pollen
d. Infectious
*e. Household allergens

2010. A 13-year-old girl complains of periodic prickly pain in the heart region. Percussion revealed no changes of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed arrhythmic enhanced heart sounds, extrasystole at the 20-25 cardiac impulse. ECG showed the sinus rhythm, impaired repolarization, single supraventricular extrasystoles at rest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nonrheumatic carditis
b. Rheumatism
*c. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
d. Myocardial degeneration
e. Intoxication syndrome

2011. A 24-year-old patient visited a doctor complaining of enlargement of his submaxillary lymph nodes. Objectively: submaxillary, axillary and inguinal lymph nodes are enlarged. Chest X-ray shows: enlarged lymph nodes of mediastinum. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3, 4x1012/l, Hb- 100 g/l, blood colour index - 0,88, platelets - 190x109/l, leucocytes - 7, 5x109/l, eosinophiles - 8%, band neutrophiles - 2%, segmented neutrophiles - 67%, lymphocytes - 23%, ESR - 22 mm/h. What test must be prescribed to verify the cause of lymphadenopathy?
a. Sternal puncture
*b. Open biopsy of lymph nodes
c. Mediastinum tomography
d. Ultrasonography of abdominal cavity
e. Puncture biopsy of lymph nodes

2012. A 60-year-old woman has been suffering from arterial hypertension for 15 years. After recurrent stroke she started complaining about unmotivated bad mood, problems with attention concentration; she forgets to close the entrance door, cannot recall events of the past day. Computer tomography shows areas of postinfarction changes in the cortical postfrontal areas. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Vascular dementia
b. Huntington’s disease
c. Dissociative amnesia
d. Pick’s disease
e. Alzheimer’s disease

2013. Clinic of a research instutute for occupational diseases examined a worker who works at a concentration plant and diagnosed him with chronic dust bronchitis. The case is investigated by a commission including the representatives of: the plant, medical unit, territorial sanitation center, department of Social Insurance Fund, trade union. According to the "regulation on investigation of. . . ", the commission should be headed by the representative of the following authority:
a. Trade union
b. Medical unit
c. Plant
d. Social Insurance Fund
*e. Territorial sanitation center

2014. 4 days after a patient received a gunshot wound of the middle third of the thigh soft tissues his condition suddenly began deteriorating. There are complaints of bursting pain in the wound; pain increases during the last 12 hours. Edema of skin and hypodermic tissue quickly grows. Body temperature is 38, 2°C, heart rate is 102/min. The wound edges gape, are dull in color; the muscles, viable as of day before, now protrude into the wound, look boiled, are dull in colour, have dirty-grey coating and fall apart when being held with forceps. What infection has developed in the wound?
a. Aerobic gram-positive
b. Diphtheria of wound
c. Aerobic gram-negative
d. Putrid
*e. Anaerobic

2015. Bacterial analysis of air in a living space in winter period by means of Krotov’s apparatus revealed that total number of microorganisms in 1m3 of air was 7200. What is the allowed number of microorganisms for the air to be characterized as "pure"?
*a. Up to 4500
b. Up to 3500
c. Up to 7500
d. Up to 5500
e. Up to 2500

2016. Maximum permissible concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is considered to be a sanitary index of air purity in a classroom. What concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is accepted as a permissible maximum?
a. 0,05%
b. 0,2%
c. 0,3%
*d. 0,1%
e. 0,15%

2017. When examining the parameters of desk natural lighting in a school class it was determined that: light angle is 25°, window angle is 3°, window-to-floor area ratio is 1:4, daylight factor is 0,5%, and window-head-to-roomdepth ratio is 2. What parameter does not correspond to hygienic norms?
a. Window angle
b. Window-head-to-room-depth ratio
c. Light angle
*d. Daylight factor
e. Window-to-floor area ratio

2018. A 29-year-old patient works as a motor mechanic. Anamnesis shows frequent exposure to cold, exacerbation of chronic bronchitis attended by cough with relativly small amount of mucopurulent sputum, subfebrility, sometimes joined by hemoptysis and pain in the right side of chest. Breathing is vesicular. X-ray shows darkening and sharp decrease in size of the lower lobe distinctly visible on the X-ray image as a streak 2-3 cm wide situated at the angle from lung root to the frontal costodiaphragmatic recess. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Peripheral lung cancer
b. Pneumonia
c. Interlobular pleurisy
d. Middle lobe syndrome
e. Bronchiectasis

2019. A52-year-old patient, who has been suffering from angina pectoris for 2 weeks, has more and more frequent pain attacks in the area behind his sternum and his need for nitroglycerine increased. Objectively: the condition is of moderate severity. Skin is pale. Heart sounds are weakened, rhythmic. Heart rate is 84 per minute. ECG shows no signs of focal myocardial damage. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Variant angina pectoris
b. Acute cardiac infarction
c. First-time angina pectoris
d. Stable FC II angina pectoris
*e. Progressive angina pectoris

2020. An 8-year-old boy during preventive examination was determined to have changes in his spine curvature in frontal plane: the right shoulder is lowered and flat, scapulae angles are of different height due to the right scapula being shifted down. Waist triangles are pronounced on the both sides; longitudinal muscles of the back form muscle cushion on the left.What type of posture is detected in the child?
a. Kyphotic
b. Stooping
c. Corrected
*d. Scoliotic
e. Lordotic

2021. A patient with cardiac infarction is on sick leave with his medical certificate being continuously extended for 4 months according to a standard procedure. The disease is progressing. The issue is put forward to refer the patient to the industrial injury assessment board. Who among the medical staff of medical and preventive treatment facility is authorized to do this?
a. Head doctor
*b. Medical expert committee
c. Head doctor of hospital department
d. Attending medical doctor
e. Deputy head doctor for assessment of temporary disability

2022. A 9-year-old boy has been suffering from bronchoectasis since he was 3. Exacerbations occur quite often, 3-4 times a year. Conservative therapy results in short periods of remiКрок 2 Medicine (англомовний варiант, iноземнi студенти) 2015 рiк 4 ssion. The disease is progressing, the child has physical retardation. The child’s skin is pale, acrocyanotic, he has "watch glass"nail deformation. Bronchography revealed saccular bronchiectases of the lower lobe of his right lung. What is the further treatment tactics?
*a. Surgical treatment
b. Physiotherapeutic treatment
c. Tempering of the child’s organism
d. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
e. Further conservative therapy

2023. A 29-year-old female patient complains of dyspnea, heaviness and chest pain on the right, body temperature rise up to 37, 2oC. The disease is associated with a chest trauma received 4 days ago. Objectively: skin is pale and moist. Heart rate is 90 bpm, regular. Palpation reveals a dull sound on the right, auscultation reveals significantly weakened vesicular breathing. In blood: RBCs - 2, 8 · 1012/l, colour index - 0,9, Hb- 100 g/l,WBCs - 8, 0·109/l, ESR - 17 mm/h. What results of diagnostic puncture of the pleural cavity can be expected?
a. Purulent punctate
*b. Haemorrhagic punctate
c. Exudate
d. Chylous liquid
e. Transudate

2024. A 54-year-old man had been drowning at sea, when he was found and evacuated to the shore. Objectively: unconscious, pale face, no breathing can be auscultated, thready pulse. Resuscitation measures allowed to save the man. What complication can develop in him in the nearest future?
a. Encephalopathy
b. Respiratory arrest
*c. Pulmonary edema
d. Cardiac arrest
e. Bronchial spasm

2025. A 7-year-old child complains of cramping pain occuring after mental exertion, cold drinks and eating ice-cream. Instrumental examination allowed to diagnose biliary dyskinesia of hypertensive type. What group of drugs should be prescribed for treatment?
a. Sedatives and cholekinetics
b. Choleretics and cholekinetics
*c. Antispasmodics and choleretics
d. Antioxydants
e. Antibiotics

2026. Caries morbidity rate is 89% among residents of a community. It is determined that fluorine content in water is 0,1 mg/l. What preventive measures should be taken?
a. Sealant application
b. Introduce more vegetables to the diet
c. Tooth brushing
d. Fluorine inhalations
*e. Water fluorination

2027. A 46-year-old patient once took part in elimination of breakdown at an atomic power plant. Currently he is being treated at an inpatient hospital unit. He was diagnosed with progressing somatoform autonomic dysfunction. This disease relates to the following group of ionizing radiation effects:
a. Heterosis
*b. Somato-stochastic
c. Genetic
d. Somatic
e. Hormesis

2028. A patient complains of fatigue, lack of appetite, pain and burning sensation in the tongue, numbness of the distal limbs, diarrhea. Objectively: pale skin with lemon-yellow tint, face puffiness, brown pigmentation in the form of a "butterfly", bright red areas on the tongue. The liver is 3 cm below the costal margin, soft. Blood count: RBCs - 1, 5 · 1012/l, colour index - 1,2,WBCs - 3, 8·109/l, thrombocytes - 180·109/l, eosinophiles - 0%, stab neutrophiles - 1%, segmented neutrophiles - 58%, lymphocytes - 38% monocytes - 3%, RBC macrocytosis. ESR - 28 mm/h.What diagnosis are these presentations typical for?
a. Iron deficiency anemia
b. Acute erythromyelosis
c. Chronic adrenal failure
*d. B12-deficiency anemia
e. Aplastic anemia

2029. A 25-year-old female patient complains of marked weakness, sleepiness, blackouts, dizziness, taste disorder. The patient has a history of menorrhagia. Objectively: the patient has marked weakness, pale skin, cracks in the corners of her mouth, peeling nails, systolic apical murmur. Blood test results: RBC - 3, 4x1012/l, Hb- 70 g/l, colour index - 0,75, platelets - 140x109/l, WBC- 6, 2x109/l.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. B12-deficiency anemia
b. Werlhof’s disease
c. Acute leukemia
d. Acute posthemorrhagic anemia
*e. Chronic posthemorrhagic anemia

2030. A39-year-old patient complains of morning headache, appetite loss, nausea, morning vomiting, periodic nasal haemorrhages. The patient had acute glomerulonephritis at the age of 15. Examination revealed rise of arterial pressure up to 220/130 mm Hg, skin haemorrhages on his arms and legs, pallor of skin and mucous membranes. What biochemical parameter is the most important for making diagnosis in this case?
*a. Blood creatinine
b. Blood sodium
c. Fibrinogen
d. Uric acid
e. Blood bilirubin

2031. A child was taken to a hospital with focal changes in the skin folds. The child was anxious during examination, examination revealed dry skin with solitary papulous elements and ill-defined lichenification zones. Skin eruption was accompanied by strong itch. The child usually feels better in summer, his condition is getting worse in winter. The child has been on bottle feeding since he was 2 months old. He has a history of exudative diathesis. His grandmother on his mother’s side has bronchial asthma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Urticaria
*b. Atopic dermatitis
c. Seborrheal eczema
d. Contact dermatitis
e. Strophulus

2032. An electro-gas welding operator working at a machine workshop performs welding and cutting of metal, which is accompanied by intense UV-radiation. His welding station is equipped with effective mechanical ventilation. What occupational disease is most likely to develop in the electro-gas welding operator?
a. Heatstroke
b. Chronic overheating
c. Pneumoconiosis
*d. Photoelectric ophthalmia
e. Vegetative-vascular dystonia

2033. 2 weeks after recovering from tonsillitis an 8-year-old boy developed edemas of face and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, BP - 120/80 mm Hg. Urine is of dark brown colour. Oliguria is present. On urine analysis: specific gravity - 1,015, protein - 1,2 g/l, RBCs are leached and cover the whole vision field, granular casts - 1-2 in the vision field, salts are represented by urates (large quantity). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome, hematuria and hypertension
b. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome
*c. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephritic syndrome
d. Acute glomerulonephritis with isolated urinary syndrome
e. Nephrolithiasis

2034. A 48-year-old patient has the following symptoms: diffuse enlargement of thyroid gland, exophthalmus, weight loss up to 4 kg within 2 months, excessive sweating. Objectively: heart rate 105/min, BP - 180/70 mm Hg. Stool is normal. What therapy is advisable in the given case?
a. Propranolol
b. Potassium iodide
*c. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)
d. Iodomarin
e. Thyroxin

2035. A patient is on sick leave for 4 months continuously from the date of injury. The treatment is going to last for another 1-2 months. Who is authorised to extend the duration of medical certificate for this patient?
*a. Medical advisory commission after medicosocial expert commission examination
b. Medical advisory commission after inpatient treatment
c. Medico-social expert commission
d. District doctor by agreement with a department chief
e. Medical superintendent

2036. A 30-year-old woman complains of pain in the heart area ("aching, piercing pain") that arises primarily in the morning hours in autumn and spring. Pain irradiates into the neck, back, abdomen and is attended by rapid heart rate and low vital tonus. This condition occurs independently from physical exertion. In the evening her condition improves. Somatic and neurologic state and ECG have no pathologies. What pathology is likely to result in such clinical presentation?
a. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
b. Hypochondriacal depression
c. Rest angina pectoris
d. Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia
*e. Somatized depression

2037. A 59-year-old female patient attended a maternity welfare clinic with complains of bloody discharge from the genital tracts. Postmenopause is 12 years. Vaginal examination revealed that external genital organs had signs of age involution, uterus cervix was not erosive, small amount of bloody discharge came from the cervical canal. Uterus is of normal size, uterine appendages are unpalpable. Fornices were deep and painless. What method should be applied for the diagnosis specification?
a. Culdoscopy
*b. Separated diagnosic curretage
c. Puncture of abdominal cavity through posterior vaginal fornix
d. Laparoscopy
e. Extensive colposcopy

2038. A 41-year-old patient, a hunter, complains of heaviness in the right subcostal area. No other complaints recorded. Anamnesis states causeless urticaria and skin itching that occurred 1 year ago. Objectively: liver margin is rounded, painless, and can be palpated 3 cm below the costal arch. No other pathology was detected during physical examination of the patient. Body temperature is normal. X-ray reveals a hemispherical protrusion in the right cupula of the diaphragm. What disease can be suspected in the given case?
a. Hepatocellular carcinoma
b. Liver abscess
*c. Hydatid disease of liver
d. Metastatic tumor
e. Subdiaphragmatic abscess

2039. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl did not undergo any treatment. The girl’s irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl got puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin got a waxen hue. What disease may be assumed?
a. Thyroid carcinoma
b. Diffuse toxic goiter
*c. Autoimmune thyroiditis
d. Subacute thyroiditis
e. Juvenile basophilism

2040. A26-year-old woman, who delivered a child 7 months ago, has been suffering from nausea, morning vomiting, sleepiness for the last 2 weeks. She breastfeeds the child, menstruation is absent. She has not applied any contraceptives. What method should be applied in order to specify her diagnosis?
a. Speculum examination
*b. Ultrasonic examination
c. Palpation of mammary glands and pressingout of colostrum
d. X-ray of small pelvis
e. Bimanual vaginal examination

2041. Over a current year among workers of an institution 10% have not been ill a single time, 30% have been ill once, 15% - twice, 5% - 4 times, the rest - 5 and more times. What is the percentage of workers belonging to the I health group?
a. 40%
b. 10%
*c. 55%
d. 60%
e. 22%

2042. A 34-year-old patient after vacation in Crimea has developed severe pain in her elbow joints, dyspnea and weakness. Body temperature is 37, 6oC, skin pallor and erythema on the cheeks and bridge of nose are observed, lip mucosa is ulcerated. The joints are not visibly deformed, movement of the right elbow joint is restricted. Pleura friction sound is detected in the lungs on the right side below the angle of scapula. Heart sounds are dull, tachycardia, gallop rhythm, heart rate - 114/min, BP - 100/60 mm Hg. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Infectious allergic myocarditis
b. Dry pleurisy
c. Rheumatic carditis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
*e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

2043. Several hours before, a 28-year-old patient suddenly developed acute headache and repeated vomiting, then lost consciousness. Objectively: focal neurological symptoms were not found. Pronounced meningeal symptoms were revealed. BP - 120/80 mm Hg. According to clinical and liquorological findings the patient was diagnosed with subarachnoid haemorrhage. After administration of dehydrants the patient’s condition somewhat improved. What is the main component of further emergency care?
a. Anticoagulants
b. Fibrinolytics
c. Corticosteroids
*d. Coagulants
e. Antiaggregants

2044. A 42-year-old man has undergone gastric analysis. Free hydrochloric acid is absent at all phases. On endoscopy: pallor, gastric mucosa loss, gastric folds are smoothed out. On microscopy: glands atrophy with intestinal metaplasia. What disease can be characterized by such presentation?
a. Stomach cancer
*b. Chronic gastritis type A
c. Chronic gastritis type C
d. Chronic gastritis type B
e. Menetrier’s disease

2045. A 24-year-old woman, teacher by profession, complains of dizziness and heart pain irradiating to the left nipple. Pain is not associated with physical activity and cannot be relieved by nitroglycerin, it abates after taking Valocordin and lasts for an hour or more. The patient has a nearly 2-year history of this disease. Objectively: Heart rate - 76 bpm. BP - 110/70 mm Hg. Heart borders are normal, heart sounds are clear. The ECG shows respiratory arrhythmia. X-ray of the cervicothoracic spine shows no pathology. Lungs, abdomen are unremarkable. What changes in blood formula can be expected?
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Leukocytosis
*c. No changes
d. Leukemic hiatus
e. Increased ESR

2046. Chief physician of a polyclinic tasked a district doctor with determining the pathological prevalence of disease N in his district. What document allows to estimate the disease prevalence in the population of a medical district?
a. Statistic coupons (-)
b. Statistic coupons (+)
*c. Prophylactic examinations register
d. Statistic coupons (+) and (-)
e. Vouchers for medical appointments

2047. A 32-year-old woman complains of dizziness, headache, palpitation, tremor. For the last several months she has been under outpatient monitoring for increased arterial pressure. Recently such attacks have become more frequent and severe. Objectively: skin is covered with clammy sweat, tremor of the extremities is present. Heart rate - 110/min, BP - 220/140 mm Hg. Heart sounds are weakened. In blood: WBCs - 9, 8x109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h. Blood glucose - 9,8 millimole/l.What disease is the most likely cause of this crisis?
*a. Pheochromocytoma
b. Preeclampsia
c. Diabetic glomerulosclerosis
d. Primary hyperaldosteronism
e. Essential hypertension

2048. A 45-year-old patient complains of pain in the epigastric region, left subcostal area, abdominal distension, diarrhea, loss of weight. He has been suffering from this condition for 5 years. Objectively: tongue is moist with white coating near the root; deep palpation of abdomen reveals slight pain in the epigastric region and Мауо-Robson’s point. Liver is painless and protrudes 1 cm from the costal arch. Spleen cannot be palpated. What disease can be primarily suspected?
a. Chronic cholecystitis
b. Chronic enteritis
c. Atrophic gastritis
d. Peptic stomach ulcer
*e. Chronic pancreatitis

2049. A 58-year-old woman complains of spontaneous bruises, weakness, bleeding gums, dizziness. Objectively: the mucous membranes and skin are pale with numerous hemorrhages of various time of origin. Lymph nodes are not enlarged. Heart rate - 100/min, BP- 110/70 mm Hg. There are no changes of internal organs. Blood test results: RBC - 3,0x1012/l, Нb - 92 g/l, colour index - 0,9, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, WBC - 10x109/l, eosinophiles - 2%, stab neutrophiles - 12%, segmented neutrophiles - 68%, lymphocytes - 11%, monocytes - 7%, ESR - 12 mm/h.What laboratory test should be determined additionally to make a diagnosis?
a. Fibrinogen
*b. Platelets
c. Clotting time
d. Reticulocytes
e. Osmotic resistance of erythrocytes

2050. .After examination a 46-year-old patient was diagnosed with left breast cancer T2N2M0, clinical group II-a. What will be the treatment plan for this patient?
*a. Radiation therapy + operation + chemotherapy
b. Operation + radiation therapy
c. Chemotherapy only
d. Radiation therapy only
e. Operation only

2051. In river-side urban community there was an outbreak of hepatitis type A possibly spread by water. What indexes of river water quality can confirm this theory?
a. Fecal coliform bacteria index
*b. Coliphage number
c. Oxidability
d. Colibacillus index
e. Non-icteric leptospirosis agent

2052. A 25-year-old patient was delivered to an infectious diseases unit on the 3rd day of illness with complaints of headache, pain in lumbar spine and gastrocnemius muscles, high fever, chill. Objectively: condition of moderate severity. Scleras are icteric. Pharynx is hyperemic. Tongue is dry with dry brown coating. Abdomen is distended. Liver is enlarged by 2 cm. Spleen is not enlarged. Palpation of muscles, especially gastrocnemius muscles, is painful. Urine is dark in colour. Stool is normal in colour. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Viral hepatitis type A
d. Malaria
*e. Leptospirosis

2053. A patient suffering from acute posttraumatic pain received an injection of morphine that brought him a significant relief. Which of the following mechanisms of action provided for antishock effect of morphine in this patient?
a. Intensification of GABA-ergic reactions
*b. Stimulation of opiate receptors
c. Stimulation of benzodiazepine receptors
d. Block of central cholinergic receptors
e. Inhibition of dopamine mediation

2054. A 9-month-old child presents with fever, cough, dyspnea. The symptoms appeared 5 days ago after a contact with a person having URTI. Objectively: the child is in grave condition. Temperature of 38oC, cyanosis of nasolabial triangle is present. Respiration rate - 54/min, nasal flaring while breathing. There was percussion dullness on the right below the scapula angle, and tympanic sound over the rest of lungs. Auscultation revealed bilateral fine moist rales (crackles) predominating on the right.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute laryngotracheitis
b. URTI
*c. Acute pneumonia
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Acute bronchiolitis

2055. A 50-year-old patient complains about having pain attacks in the right subcostal area for about a year. The pain arises mainly after taking fatty food. Over the last week the attacks occurred daily and became more painful. On the 3rd day of hospitalization the patient presented with icteritiousness of skin and scleras, light-coloured feces and dark urine. In blood: neutrophilic leukocytosis - 13,1x109/l, ESR - 28 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic cholangitis, exacerbation stage
b. Hypertensive dyskinesia of gallbladder
c. Chronic recurrent pancreatitis
d. Fatty degeneration of liver
*e. Chronic calculous cholecystitis

2056. A 52-year-old woman complains of face distortion. It appeared 2 days ago after exposure to cold. Objectively: body temperature is 38, 2oC. Face asymmetry is present. Frontal folds are flattened. Left eye is wider than the right one and cannot close. Left nasolabial fold is flattened, mouth corner is lowered. Examination revealed no other pathology. Blood count: leukocytes - 10 · 109/l, ESR - 20 mm/h. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Facial neuritis
b. Hemicrania (migraine)
c. Brain tumour
d. Ischemic stroke
e. Trigeminus neuralgia

2057. A 28-year-old female patient with a six-year history of Raynaud’s syndrome has recently developed pain in the small joints of hands, difficult movement of food down the esophagus. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Periarteritis nodosa
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Pseudotrichiniasis
*d. Systemic scleroderma
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

2058. An 8-year-old boy, who has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 3 years, was delivered to a hospital in a condition of hyperglycemic coma. Primary dose of insulin should be prescribed basing on the following calculation:
a. 0,4-0,5 units/kg of body mass per hour
*b. 0,1-0,2 units/kg of body mass per hour
c. 0,2-0,3 units/kg of body mass per hour
d. 0,05 units/kg of body mass per hour
e. 0,3-0,4 units/kg of body mass per hour

2059. A 43-year-old female patient complains of rash on the skin of her right leg, pain, weakness, body temperature rise up to 38°C. The disease is acute. Objectively: there is an edema on the skin of her right leg in the foot area, a welldefined bright red spot in the irregular shape of flame tips, which is hot to touch. There are isolated vesicles in the focus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Contact dermatitis
b. Microbial eczema
*c. Erysipelas
d. Toxicoderma
e. Haemorrhagic vasculitis

2060. A 47-year-old patient came to see a doctor on the 7th day of disease. The disease is acute: after the chill body temperature rose to 40oC and lasted up to 7 hours, then dropped abruptly, which caused profuse sweat. There were three such attacks occurring once every other day. Two days ago the patient arrived from Africa. Objectively: pale skin, subicteric sclera, significantly enlarged liver and spleen. What is the cause of fever attacks in this disease?
a. Gametocytes
*b. Erythrocytic schizogony
c. Exotoxin of a causative agent
d. Tissue schizogony
e. Endotoxin of a causative agent

2061. A 49-year-old patient 2 years ago was diagnosed with stage 1 silicosis. He complains of increased dyspnea and pain in the infrascapular regions. X-ray shows diffuse intensification and distortion of lung pattern with numerous nodular shadows 2-4 mm in diameter. Hardening of right interlobar pleura is detected. Lung roots are hardened and expanded. What X-ray type of pneumosclerosis does the patient have?
a. Interstitial-nodular
b. Interstitial
*c. Nodular
d. Nodal
e. Tumor-like

2062. A 24-year-old patient complains of general weakness, dizziness, body temperature rise up to 37, 5°C, sore throat, neck edema, enlargement of submaxillary lymph nodes. Objectively: mucous membrane of oropharynx is edematic and cyanotic, tonsils are enlarged and covered with films that spread beyond the tonsils and cannot be easily removed. What is the leading mechanism of this illness development?
a. Accumulation of suboxidated products
b. Bacteriemia
c. Action of bacterial endotoxin
d. Allergic
*e. Action of bacterial exotoxin

2063. A 40-year-old woman with a history of combined mitral valve disease with predominant stenosis complains of dyspnea, asthma attacks at night, heart problems. At present, she is unable to do even easy housework. What is the optimal tactics of the patient treatment?
a. Antirheumatic therapy
*b. Mitral commissurotomy
c. Antiarrhythmia therapy
d. Implantation of an artificial valve
e. Treatment of heart failure

2064. A 30-year-old woman with a long history of chronic pyelonephritis complains of considerable weakness, sleepiness, decrease in diuresis down to 100 ml per day. BP is 200/120 mm Hg. In blood: creatinine - 0,62 millimole/l, hypoproteinemia, albumines - 32 g/l, potassium - 6,8 millimole/l, hypochromic anemia, increased ESR. What is the first step in the patient treatment tactics?
a. Antibacterial therapy
b. Haemosorption
c. Blood transfusion
*d. Haemodialysis
e. Enterosorption

2065. A 43-year-old patient had right-sided deep vein thrombosis of iliofemoral segment 3 years ago. Now he is suffering from the sense of heaviness, edema of the lower right extremity. Objectively: moderate edema of shin, brown induration of skin in the lower third of shin, varix dilatation of superficial shin veins are present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymphedema of lower right extremity
b. Acute thrombosis of right veins
*c. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome, varicose form
d. Parkes-Weber syndrome
e. Acute thrombophlebitis of superficial veins

2066. A 28-year-old woman has bursting pain in the lower abdomen during menstruation; chocolate-like discharges from vagina are observed. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient suffers from chronic adnexitis. Bimanual examination revealed a tumour-like formation of heterogenous consistency 7х7 cm large to the left from the uterus. The formation is restrictedly movable, painful when moved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tumour of sigmoid colon
*b. Endometrioid cyst of the left ovary
c. Fibromatous node
d. Follicular cyst of the left ovary
e. Exacerbation of chronic adnexitis

2067. A 6-year-old child complains of frequent liquid stool and vomiting. On the 2nd day of desease the child presented with inertness, temperature rise up to 38, 2oC, heart rate - 150 bpm, scaphoid abdomen, palpatory painful sigmoid colon, defecation 10 times a day with liquid, scarce stool with mucus and streaks of green. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Escherichiosis
b. Salmonellosis
*c. Shigellosis
d. Intestinal amebiasis
e. Yersiniosis

2068. A 65-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from this condition for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). Prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/ml. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplementary examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Bone scintigraphy
b. Chest X-ray
c. Lumbar spine X-ray
d. Excretory urography
*e. Computer tomography of small pelvis

2069. A 12-year-old cild has been hit on the stomach. The patient is in moderately grave condition, has a forced position in bed. The skin is pale, heart rate - 122/min. Stress on the left costal arch causes a slight pain. Weinert and Kulenkampff symptoms are positive. Macroscopically the urine is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Left kidney rupture, retroperitoneal hematoma
b. Liver rupture, abdominal bleeding
c. Rupture of a hollow organ, peritonitis
*d. Spleen rupture, abdominal bleeding
e. Rupture of the pancreas

2070. Establishments participating in medical examinations include: medical and preventive treatment facility, hygiene and preventive treatment facility, sociomedical expert committees, Ministry of Defence medical committees, Ministry of Domestic Affairs medical committees, forensic medicine agency, etc. Specify what service deals with sociomedical assessment of temporary disability:
a. Ministry of Domestic Affairsmedical committees
*b. Medical and preventive treatment facility
c. Sociomedical expert committees
d. Hygiene and preventive treatment facility
e. Ministry of Defence medical committees

2071. An unconscious 35-year-old patient has been delivered by an ambulance to the intensive care unit. Objectively: the patient is in semicoma. Moderate mydriasis is present. The reaction of pupils to light is reduced. The patient is non-responsive to verbal instructions. BP is150/100 mm Hg, tachycardia is present. Blood contains methanol. What antidote should be administered?
a. Naloxone
*b. Ethanol
c. Thiamine chloride
d. Unithiol
e. Tavegil (Clemastine)

2072. After lifting a load, a 36-year-old male patient has experienced a severe pain in the lumbar region, which spread to the right leg and was getting worse when he moved his foot or coughed. Objectively: the long back muscles on the right are strained. Achilles jerk is reduced on the right. There is a pronounced tenderness of paravertebral points in the lumbar region. The straight leg raise (Lasegue’s sign) is positive on the right. What additional tests should be performed in the first place?
*a. Radiography of the spinal column
b. Magnetic resonance tomography
c. Lumbar puncture
d. Electromyography
e. Computed tomography

2073. A patient is active, lively, fussy. He resists the examination. His speech is fast and loud, his statements are spontaneous and inconsequent. Specify the psychopathological state of this patient:
a. Catatonic agitation
b. Behavioral disorder
c. Paranoid syndrome
*d. Psychomotor agitation
e. Delirium

2074. A 4-year-old boy was vaccinated in violation of his vaccination schedule. There are complaints of pain in the throat during swallowing, headache, inertness, fever. Objectively: the child is pale; anterior cervical lymph nodes are enlarged; tonsils are swollen, with cyanotic hyperemy, and covered with greywhite coating that cannot be removed; if it is forcibly removed, tonsils bleed. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Follicular tonsillitis
c. Lacunar tonsillitis
d. Pseudomembranous (Vincent’s) tonsillitis
*e. Oropharyngeal diphtheria

2075. A 26-year-old male patient complains of piercing pain during breathing, cough, dyspnea. Objectively: to- 37, 3°С, respiration rate is 19/min, heart rate is 92/min; BP is 120/80 mm Hg. Vesicular respiration is observed. In the inferolateral parts of chest auscultation in both inspiration and expiration phase revealed noise that was getting stronger at phonendoscope pressing and could be still heard after cough. ECG showed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute pleuritis
b. Subcutaneous emphysema
c. Pericarditis sicca
d. Spontaneous pneumothorax
e. Intercostal neuralgia

2076. A child is 3-week-old. Since his birth periodical vomiting is observed occuring several minutes after feeding. Vomit mass does not exceed previous feeding volume. Body mass is appropriate to the child’s age.What is the most likely cause for the symptoms described?
a. Adrenogenital syndrome
b. Esophageal chalasia
*c. Pylorospasm
d. Pylorostenosis
e. Esophageal achalasia

2077. A 30-year-old parturient woman was delivered to a maternity hospital with full-term pregnancy. She complains of severe lancinating pain in the uterus that started 1 hour ago, nausea, vomiting, cold sweat. Anamnesis states cesarean section 2 years ago. Uterine contractions stopped. Skin and mucous membranes are pale. Heart rate is 100/min, BP is 90/60 mm Hg. Uterus has no clear margins, is sharply painful. No heartbeat can be auscultated in the fetus. Moderate bloody discharge from the uterus can be observed. Uterus cervix is 4 cm open. Presenting part is not visible. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Uterine rupture
b. Threatened uterine rupture
c. Compression of inferior pudendal vein
d. Premature detachment of normally positioned placenta
e. Initial uterine rupture

2078. A 26-year-old female patient has an 11- year history of rheumatism. Four years ago she suffered 2 rheumatic attacks. Over the last 6 months there have been paroxysms of atrial fibrillation every 2-3 months. What option of antiarrhythmic therapy or tactics should be proposed?
a. Lidocaine administration
b. Heparin administration
c. Immediate hospitalization
d. Defibrillation
*e. Prophylactic administration of cordarone

2079. A 47-year-old female patient complains of cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from this condition for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
a. Bronchoscopy
b. Pleural puncture
c. Bacteriological analysis of sputum
*d. Bronchography
e. Survey radiograph of lungs

2080. A patient is 60-year-old, retired, worked as deputy director of a research institute. Behavioural changes appeared 2 years ago after the death of her husband: she stopped looking after herself and leaving the house; then she stopped to clean the apartment and cook. Mental status: temporal disorientation. The patient does not understand many of the questions, is confused; does not know how to cook soup or fasten a button. Her speech is characterized by stumbling and logoclonia. She does not recognize doctors, fellow patients. She cries a lot but can not explain the reason for tears. What is the mechanism of this pathology?
a. Impaired conversion of dopamine to noradrenaline
b. Disorder of melatonin metabolism
c. Atherosclerotic changes in cerebral vessels
d. Serotonin deficiency
*e. Atrophy of the cerebral cortex

2081. An 8-year-old girl periodically has sudden short-term heart pain, sensation of chest compression, epigastric pain, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: the patient is pale, respiratory rate - 40/min, jugular pulse is present. Heart rate - 185 bpm, of poor volume. BP - 75/40 mm Hg. ECG taken during an attack shows ectopic P waves, QRS wave is not deformed. At the end of an attack a compensatory pause is observed. The most likely cause of the attack is:
a. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
b. Sinus tachycardia
*c. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
d. Complete AV-block
e. Atrial fibrillation

2082. During examination a patient is unconscious, his skin is dry and hot, face hyperemia is present. The patient has Kussmaul’s respiration, there is also smell of acetone in the air. Symptoms of peritoneum irritation are positive. Blood sugar is 33 millimole/l. What emergency actions should be taken?
a. Intravenous infusion of sodium chloride saline
*b. Intravenous infusion of short-acting insulin
c. Introduction of long-acting insulin
d. Intravenous infusion of glucose along with insulin
e. Intravenous infusion of neohaemodesum along with glutamic acid

2083. A patient complains of evaginations in the region of anus that appear during defecation and need resetting. Examination with anoscope revealed 1x1 cm large evaginations of mucosa above the pectineal line. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Internal hemorrhoids
b. External hemorrhoids
c. -
d. Anal fissure
e. Acute paraproctitis

2084. During the newborn infant’s examination redness of the skin was detected, which occurred immediately after birth and became the most pronounced on the second day of the infant’s life. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Erythema anulare centrifugum
*b. Simple erythema
c. Transient erythema
d. Toxic erythema
e. Erythema nodosum

2085. A baby was born by a young smoker. The labour was complicated by uterine inertia, difficult delivery of the baby’s head and shoulders. The baby’s Apgar score was 4. Which of the following is a risk factor for a spinal cord injury?
a. Uterine inertia
b. Chronic hypoxia
c. Young age of the mother
d. Pernicious habits
*e. Difficult delivery of the head and shoulders

2086. In order to study impact of microclimate on the human organism it is necessary to make systematic observation of air temperature during the period of 3 days. Choose a device that will allow to make the most precise temperature records:
*a. Thermograph
b. Mercury thermometer
c. Assmann psychrometer
d. August’s psychrometer
e. Alcohol thermometer

2087. Against the background of angina a patient has developed pain in tubular bones. Examination revealed generalized enlargement of lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome, sternalgia. In blood: RBCs - 3, 6x1012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, thrombocytes - 45x109/l, WBCs - 13x109/l, blasts - 87%, stab neutrophiles - 1%, segmented neutrophiles - 7%, lymphocytes - 5%, ESR - 55 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Multiple myeloma
*b. Acute leukemia
c. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
d. Erythremia
e. Chronic myeloid leukemia

2088. For a long time to eradicate weeds on agricultural lands herbicides retaining in environment have been used. Point out the most probable way of herbicides reaching human organism from soil:
a. Soil-microorganisms-human
b. Soil-protozoa-human
c. Soil-insects-human
*d. Soil-plants-human
e. Soil-animals-human

2089. A 52-year-old patient complains of pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with a lot of albuminoid sputum emitting foul smell of "meat slops". Objectively: the patient’s condition is grave, cyanosis is observed, breathing rate is 31/min, percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed various moist rales (crackles).What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic pneumonia
*b. Lung gangrene
c. Pleura empyema
d. Lung abscess
e. Multiple bronchiectasis

2090. A 15-year-old patient suffers from headache, nasal haemorrhages, sense of lower extremity coldness. Objectively: muscles of shoulder girdle are developed, lower extremities are hypotrophied. Pulsation on the pedal and femoral arteries is sharply dampened. BP is 150/90 mm Hg, 90/60 in the legs. Systolic murmur can be auscultated above carotid arteries.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Aortal insufficiency
b. Coarctation of pulmonary artery
c. Aorta aneurism
d. Aortal stenosis
*e. Aorta coarctation

2091. A patient with frostbite of both feet was delivered to an admission ward. What actions should be taken?
a. To rub feet with snow
b. To apply an alcohol compress
c. To administer cardiac medications
d. To put feet into hot water
*e. To apply a bandage, to introduce vasodilating medications

2092. Apatient in a clinical death condition is being resuscitated through mouth-to-mouth artificial pulmonary ventilation and external cardiac massage. A doctor noticed that air does not flow into the patient’s airways and his head and torso are positioned at the same level. Why is artificial respiration not effective in the given case?
a. Probe is absent from stomach
b. The patient’s mouth is too small
c. Low breathing volume
d. External cardiac massage
*e. Tongue retraction

2093. Hygienic assessment of a sample taken from the batch of grain revealed 2% of grains infected with microscopic Fusarium fungi. On the grounds of laboratory analyses this batch of grain should be:
a. Used for ethanol production
b. Destroyed
c. Tested for toxicity
d. Used for forage production
*e. Sold without restrictions

2094. Residents of an industrial community situated near a plant suffer from increased morbidity rate caused by nervous and endocrine system conditions and kidney diseases. Blood test: decrease of sulfhydric groups content in blood. The pathologies developed can be caused by environment being polluted by the following:
a. Chromium
b. Lead
c. Cadmium
d. Boron
*e. Mercury

2095. Various population groups mortality has been studied for a long time; territorial distribution of population and resulting changes in mortality trends are considered.What statistical method can be applied?
a. Standartized ratio analysis
b. Assessment of parameter difference reliability
c. Analysis of relative values
*d. Time series analysis
e. Correlation and regression analysis

2096. A 45-year-old patient with urolithiasis had an attack of renal colic.What is the mechanism of the attack development?
*a. Disturbed urine outflow from the kidney
b. Ureteric twists
c. Renal artery spasm
d. Destruction of renal glomerules
e. Increase in urine specific gravity

2097. A 26-year-old woman has attended maternity center complaining of her inability to become pregnant despite 3 years of regular sex life. Examination revealed the following: increased body weight; male-type pubic hair; excessive pilosis of thighs; ovaries are dense and enlarged; basal body temperature is monophasic. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Gonadal dysgenesis
*b. Ovaries sclerocystosis
c. Adrenogenital syndrome
d. Inflammation of uterine appendages
e. Premenstrual syndrome

2098. A workshop resident doctor makes a list of workers, who are often ill, for special supervision. He takes into account the number of etiologically connected cases resulting in temporary disability that occurred in the span of a year for each worker. Howmany such cases should a worker have to be included in this group?
a. 2 andmore
b. 1 andmore
*c. 4 andmore
d. 3 andmore
e. 6 andmore

2099. A 28-year-old woman complains of increased intermenstrual periods up to 2 months, hirsutism. Gynaecological examination revealed that the ovaries were enlarged, painless, compact, uterus had no pecularities. Pelvic ultrasound revealed that the ovaries were 4-5 cm in diameter and had multiple enlarged follicles on periphery. X-ray of skull base showed that sellar region was dilated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Algodismenorrhea
b. Premenstrual syndrome
c. Morgagni-Stewart syndrome
*d. Stein-Leventhal syndrome (Polycystic ovary syndrome)
e. Sheehan’s syndrome

2100. A woman consulted a therapeutist about fatigability, significant weight loss, weakness, loss of appetite. She has been having amenorrhea for 8 months. A year ago she born a full-term child. Haemorrhage during labour made up 2 l. She got blood and blood substitute transfusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Sheehan’s syndrome
b. Shereshevsky-Turner’s syndrome
c. Vegetovascular dystonia
d. Homological blood syndrome
e. Stein-Leventhal syndrome

2101. The correlation between service record and eosinophiles concentration in blood was studied in workers at dyeing shops of textile factories. What index will be the most informative for the analysis of this data?
a. Fitting criterion
b. Sign index
c. Student’s criterion
d. Standardized index
*e. Correlation factor

2102. A 39-year-old woman suffering from schizophrenia constantly strains to hear something insisting that "there is a phone connection in her brain and she hears her brother’s voice demanding that she come back home". The patient is anxious, suspicious, constantly looking around. Specify the psychopathologic syndrome.
a. Paranoid
b. Anxiety
*c. Hallucinatory
d. Paraphrenic
e. Depressive

2103. A 3-month-old girl has rhinitis, dyspnea, dry cough. She has been sick for 2 days. Objectively: pale skin, acrocyanosis, hypopnoe; breathing rate is 80/min; over the whole pulmonary surface there is vesiculotympanitic (bandbox) resonance observed with numerous bubbling rales (crackles). The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Pneumonia
b. Foreign body in airways
c. Acute bronchitis
*d. Acute bronchiolitis
e. Mucoviscidosis

2104. A 30-year-old patient was hospitalised in an intensive care unit with a diagnosis of multiple bee stings. Skin is pale and covered with cold sweat. Pulse can be palpated only at the carotid arteries and is 110/min; breating rate is 24/min, rhytmical, weakened. What drug must be administered immediately?
a. Adrenaline hydrochloride intramuscularly
b. Prednisolone intravenously
*c. Adrenaline hydrochloride intravenously
d. Dopamine intravenously
e. Tavegyl (Clemastine) intravenously

2105. A24-year-old patient complains of gaining body mass and increased appetite. Objectively: built of hypersthenic type, body mass index is 33,2 kg/m2, waist circumference is 100 cm. Waist to hips circumference ratio is 0,95. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Alimentary constitutive obesity, III stage, gynoid type
b. Itsenko-Cushing hypothalamic obesity, II stage, gynoid type
*c. Alimentary constitutive obesity, I stage, android type
d. Alimentary constitutive obesity, II stage, android type
e. Itsenko-Cushing hypothalamic obesity, I stage, android type

2106. A parturient woman is 27 year old, it was her second labour, delivery was at full-term, normal course. On the 3rd day of postpartum period body temperature is 36, 8oC, heart rate - 72/min, BP - 120/80 mm Hg.Mammary glands are moderately swollen, nipples are clean. Abdomen is soft and painless. Fundus of uterus is 3 fingers below the umbilicus. Lochia are bloody, moderate. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Physiological course of postpartum period
b. Postpartum metroendometritis
c. Lactostasis
d. Remnants of placental tissue after labour
e. Subinvolution of uterus

2107. A 40-year-old patient suffers from influenza. On the 5th day of illness there are pain behind sternum, cough with sputum, inertness. Temperature is 39, 5oC. Face is pale. Mucosa of conjunctivas and pharynx is hyperemic. Heart rate is 120/min, breathing rate is 38/min. In the lower lung segments shortening of percussion sound and moist rales (crackles) can be detected. What additional investigation should be performed first of all to specify the diagnosis?
a. Heart US
b. ECG
*c. Lung X-ray
d. Mantoux test
e. Spirography

2108. A 45-year-old patient complains of body temperature rise up to 40oC, general weakness, headache, painfulness and spastic muscle contractions around the wound in the shin. He received this wound 5 days ago when working in his garden. He requested no medical care back then. What wound infection can be suspected?
a. Erysipelas
b. Anthrax
*c. Tetanus
d. Gram-positive
e. Gram-negative

2109. A 60-year-old woman started feeling weakness, vertigo, rapid fatigability during the last year. Recently there have been dyspnea and paresthesia observed. Objectively: skin and mucous membranes are pale and icteric. Lingual papillae are smoothed out. Liver and spleen are situated at the edge of costal arch. Blood test:Hb- 70 g/l, erythrocytes - 1, 7·1012/l, blood color index - 1,2, macrocytes. What drug can be prescribed on pathogenetic grounds?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Vitamin B6
*c. Vitamin B12
d. Iron preparations
e. Vitamin B1

2110. A34-year-old patient complains of profuse sweating at night, skin itching, weight loss (9 kg within the last 3 months). Examination revealed malnutrition, skin pallor. Palpation of neck and inguinal areas revealed dense elastic lymph nodes of about 1 cm in diameter, nonmobile, non-adhering to skin. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Lymphosarcoma
c. Cancer metastases
d. Burkitt’s lymphoma
e. Chronic lymphadenitis

2111. A 57-year-old woman complains of having a sensation of esophageal compresion, palpitation, breathing difficulties when eating solid food, occasional vomiting with a full mouth, "wet pillow"sign at night for the last 6 months. Objectively: body tempearture - 39oC, height - 168 cm, weight - 72 kg, heart rate - 76/min, BP- 120/80 mm Hg. X-ray revealed considerable dilation of esophagus and its constriction in the cardial part. What pathology is most likely to have caused dysphagia in this patient?
a. Primary esophagism
b. Esophageal carcinoma
c. Reflux esophagitis
*d. Achalasia cardiae
e. Hiatal hernia

2112. A 25-year-old man complains of pain in the lower third of his left thigh, which occurs both with and without physical exertion. Possibility of trauma is denied by the patient. Objectively: skin colour is normal; pastosity and pain can be detected with deep palpation; knee joint mobility is reduced. X-ray of distal femoral metaphysis shows an area of destruction and spicule. Blood test: immature cells, no signs of inflammation. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Marble-bone disease
*b. Osteogenic sarcoma
c. Chronic osteomyelitis
d. Osteitis fibrosa cystica
e. Multiple myeloma

2113. A 37-year-old woman complains of sharp pains in her external genitalia, edema of the vulvar lips, pain when walking. Objectively: body temperature is 38, 7°C, heart rate is 98/min. Inside the right vulvar lip there is a dense, painful, tumor-like growth 5,0х4,5 cm in size; skin and mucosa of the external genitalia are hyperemic, copious foul-smelling discharge is observed. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Acute bartholinitis
b. Acute vulvovaginitis
c. Carcinoma of vulva
d. Bartholin’s cyst
e. Furuncle of outer labia

2114. In a rural health care area there is a case of child dying during the first month of his life. To analyse this situation, among other measures, an expert assessment of medical records is performed. What medical document should be considered first?
a. Outpatient medical record
b. Child’s medical record
c. Infant development history
d. Vaccination card
*e. Child development history

2115. Examination of placenta revealed a defect. An obstetrician performed manual investigation of uterine cavity, uterine massage. Prophylaxis of endometritis in the postpartum period should involve the following actions:
*a. Antibacterial therapy
b. Haemostatic therapy
c. Intrauterine instillation of dioxine
d. Contracting agents
e. Instrumental revision of uterine cavity

2116. A 15-year-old boy has developed pain in the area of his left knee joint. Objectively: thigh soft tissues in the painful area are infiltrated, joint function is reduced. X-ray: there is a focus of destruction in the left distal femoral metaphysis, with periosteum detachment and formation of Codman triangle in the bone cortical layer at the margin of the defect. Chest X-ray reveals numerous microfocal metastases. What pathology is the most likely to cause such presentation?
a. Ewing’s sarcoma
b. Juxtacortical sarcoma
c. Fibrosarcoma
d. Chondrosarcoma
*e. Osteogenic sarcoma

2117. A 74-year-old man complains of pain in the left foot and dark color of the 1st toe. He has been sick for 6 days. Objectively: heart rate is 84/min. Body temperature is 37, 8oC. The left foot resembles "chicken claw"due to soft tissues decreasing in volume, skin is dark red. The 1st toe is black, small amount of dark substance is being discharged from under the nail. Pulse over the peripheral arteries of extremity is absent. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Erysipelas
b. Erysipeloid
c. Phlegmon
d. Panaritium
*e. Gangrene

2118. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in its volume and composition. Muscle tone is within norm.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Craniostenosis
*b. Pylorospasm
c. Pylorostenosis
d. Meningitis
e. Microcephaly

2119. A 49-year-old patient complains of difficulties when swallowing food, hoarse voice, weight loss. The patient has been suffering from these symptoms for the last 3 months. The symptoms are gradually progressing. Objectively: the patient is emaciated, supraclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged. Esophagoscopy revealed no pathologies of esophagus. What investigation would be the most advisable in the given case?
a. Multiplanar fluoroscopy of esophagus
b. Lungs X-ray
*c. Computed tomogram of chest and mediastinum
d. Radioisotopic examination of chest and mediastinum
e. US of mediastinum

2120. A 36-year-old male patient complains of having headache, obstructed nasal breathing, purulent nasal discharge for 2 weeks. A month before, he had his right maxillary premolar filled. X-ray revealed an intense opacity of the right maxillary sinus. Diagnostic puncture revealed a large amount of thick malodorous crumbly pus.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic purulent sinusitis
b. Acute purulent sinusitis
*c. Chronic suppurative odontogenic sinusitis
d. Chronic atrophic sinusitis
e. Tumor of the maxillary sinus

2121. During a surgical operation necessitated by the patient’s suffering from autoimmune thyroiditis with concomitant multinodular goiter the right lobe was removed and subtotal resection of the left lobe was performed. What should be prescribed to the patient for postoperative hypothyroidism prevention?
*a. L-thyroxin
b. Iodomarin (Potassium iodide)
c. Insulin
d. Lithium preparations
e. Mercazolil (Thiamazole)

2122. A 54-year-old patient has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 5 years, with diet being his only treatment. Within the last half a year he lost 7 kg of body weight, complains of thirst, vertigo when raising from bed, decrease of erectile function, frequent stool, especially at night. Objectively: malnutrition, dry skin. BP in lying position is 160/90 mm Hg; BP in standing position is 170/85 mm Hg. No edemas. Fasting plasma glucose level is 12 mmol/l. Glycated hemoglobin accounts for 11%. Albumin excreted with urine is 20 mg per day. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Diabetes mellitus type 2 with polyneuropathy
*b. Diabetes mellitus type 2 with visceral neuropathy
c. Diabetes mellitus type 1 with encephalomyelopathy
d. Diabetes mellitus type 1 with ketoacidosis
e. Diabetes mellitus type 2 with nephropathy

2123. A young woman suffering from seborrhea oleosa has numerous light-brown and white spots on the skin of her torso and shoulders. The spots have clear margins, branny desquamation, no itching. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Vitiligo
*b. Pityriasis versicolor
c. Seborrheic dermatitis
d. Torso dermatophytosis
e. Pityriasis rosea

2124. 10 days after birth an infant developed a sudden fever up to 38, 1oC. Objectively: the skin of navel, abdomen and chest is erythematous; there are multiple pea-sized blisters with no infiltration at the base; single bright red moist erosions with epidermal fragments on the periphery.What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Vulgar impetigo
b. Atopic dermatitis
c. Syphilitic pemphigus
d. Streptococcal impetigo
*e. Epidemic pemphigus of newborn

2125. In a traffic accident two persons died. An appointed forensic medical expert was called on duty to another accident location; therefore, according to the crininal law in force in Ukraine, an investigator called in the following specialist for examination of the location and bodies:
a. Nearest available dental mechanic
*b. Nearest available medical doctor
c. Surgical nurse
d. Medical assistant
e. Nearest available dispensing chemist

2126. A 35-year-old female patient has gained 20 kg weight within a year with the normal diet. She complains of chill, sleepiness, dyspnea. The patient’s mother and sister are corpulent. Objectively: height - 160 cm, weight - 92 kg, BMI - 35,9. Obesity is uniform, there are no striae. The face is amimic. The skin is dry. The tongue is thickened. Heart sounds are muffled. Heart rate - 56/min, BP - 140/100 mm Hg. The patient has constipations, amenorrhea for 5 months. TSH - 28 mkME/l (normal rate - 0,32- 5). Craniogram shows no pathology. What is the etiology of obesity?
a. Hypo-ovarian
b. Alimentary and constitutive
c. Hypercorticoid
*d. Hypothyroid
e. Hypothalamic-pituitary

2127. A 45-year-old patient has been suffering from essential hypertension for 10 years. After hot bath he suddenly developed sharp headache and recurrent vomiting. Objectively: pronounced meningeal symptoms; BP is 180/110 mm Hg. He was hospitalised in a neurology unit. What additional tests should be primarily prescribed?
a. Rheoencephalography
b. Electroencephalography
c. Ventriculopuncture
d. Echoencephalography
*e. Lumbar puncture, cerebrospinal fluid test

2128. A 77-years-old patient complains of inability to urinate and bursting pain above his pubis. Acute onset of his condition occurred 12 hours ago. Objectively: overfilled urinary bladder can be palpated above the pubis. On rectal examination: prostate is enlarged, dense-elastic, with clear margins and no nodules. Interlobar sulcus is pronounced. US examination: prostate volume is 120 cm3, it protrudes into urinary bladder cavity, parenchyma is homogeneous. Prostate specific antigen is 5 ng/ml. What disease is the most likely to cause acute urinary retention?
a. Prostate sclerosis
b. Prostate cancer
*c. Prostatic hyperplasia
d. Prostate tuberculosis
e. Acute prostatitis

2129. A patient with uterine fibromyoma sized up to 8-9 weeks of pregnancy consulted a gynaecologist about acute pain in the lower abdomen. Examination revealed pronounced positive symptoms of peritoneal irritation, high leukocytosis. Vaginal examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged up to 9 weeks of pregnancy due to the fibromatous nodes, one of which was mobile and extremely painful. Appendages were not palpable. Discharges were mucous, coming in moderate amounts. What is the treatment tactics?
a. Surgical laparoscopy
b. Surveillance and antibacterial therapy
c. Surveillance and spasmolytic therapy
d. Fractional diagnostic curettage of the uterine cavity
*e. Urgent surgery (laparotomy)

2130. A 4-month-old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, vomiting occurred once. Objectively: the child’s condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctor’s finger was stained with blood.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Wilm’s tumour
b. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
*c. Ileocecal invagination
d. Helminthic invasion
e. Pylorostenosis

2131. A 68-year-old patient complains of pain, slight swelling and creaking in the distal joints of her fingers and knee joints. She has been suffering from this condition for 4 years. Objectively: thickening of knee and interphalangeal joints, restricted mobility of these joints. Blood test: leukocytes - 
5, 4x109/l, ESR - 12 mm/h, fibrinogen - 3,5 g/l; Rheumatoid factor - 1:32; anti-streptolysin O - 160 units; seromucoid - 0,20 units.; CRP+. What mechanism of development is likely for this condition?
a. Native DNA antibodies hyperproduction
b. Rheumatoid factor development
*c. Glycosaminoglycanes synthesis disruption
d. Increased uric acid sunthesis
e. Immune reaction to streptococcosis

2132. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patient’s condition is satisfactory; in the area of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray image shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
a. Wound abscess
b. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
*c. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
d. Posttraumatic phlegmon
e. Suture sinus

2133. A 40-year-old female patient complains of having a bulge on the anterior surface of neck for 5 years. Objectively: Heart rate - 72 bpm, arterial pressure - 110/70 mm Hg, in the right lobe of thyroid gland palpation reveals a mobile 4x2 cm node, the left lobe is not palpable, the basal metabolic rate is 6%.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Nodular euthyroid goiter
b. Riedel’s thyroiditis
c. The median cervical cyst
d. Mixed euthyroid goiter
e. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter

2134. Estimation of community health level involved analysis of a report on diseases registered among the population of catchment area (reporting form 12). What index is calculated basing on this report?
a. Index of pathological affection
b. Index of hospitalized morbidity
c. Index of basic non-epidemic morbidity
*d. Common morbidity rate
e. Index of morbidity with temporary disability

2135. A tractor driver with the record of serviКрок 2 Medicine (англомовний варiант, iноземнi студенти) 2015 рiк 17 ce of 24 years has undergone palestesiometry test (Vibration Sensitivity Measurement). Test revealed increased vibration sensitivity threshold at the frequencies of 63-125-259 Hz to 25 dB. Dynamometry is 20 kg on the right and 16 kg on the left. Cold stimulus test is positive, time of hand temeperature restoration is 52 minutes. Blanching at pressure symptom is positive and equals 21. Hypesthesia of upper and lower limbs is observed and can be classified as "gloves"and "socks"polyneuritic pattern. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Vibration disease, I stage, caused by general vibration
*b. Vibration disease, I stage, caused by combined vibration
c. Vibration disease, II stage, caused by combined vibration
d. Vibration disease, I stage, caused by local vibration
e. Vibration disease, II stage, caused by local vibration

2136. A patient’s X-ray image (anteroposterior projection) shows deformation of lung pattern, pneumofibrosis, reticular (honeycomb) lung pattern of lower pulmonary segments, cylindric and fusiform lumps. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Non-hospital-acquired pneumonia
b. Right lung abscess
*c. Multiple bronchiectasis
d. Lungs maldevelopment
e. Diffuse pulmonary fibrosis

2137. A 41-year-old patient with Addison’s disease had influenza. After that he developed adynamia, depression, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and hypoglycemia. BP is 75/50 mm Hg. Blood test: decreased content of corticosterone, hydrocortisone, 13-oxycorticosteroids, 17-oxycorticosteroids. What condition has developed in the patient?
a. Acute gastritis
b. Collapse
c. Diabetes mellitus
*d. Acute adrenal gland insufficiency
e. Acute enterocolitis

2138. After a contact with chemicals a plant worker has suddenly developed stridor, voice hoarseness, barking cough, progressing dyspnea. Objective examination reveals acrocyanosis. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary atelectasis
b. Pneumothorax
c. Laryngeal carcinoma
d. PATE
*e. Laryngeal edema

2139. A 58-year-old patient complains of general weakness, weight loss up to 10 kg within the last 1,5 months, progressive pain in the small of the back, raise of blood pressure to 220/160 mm Hg, subfebrile body temperature. Objectively: tuberous slightly movable lump can be palpated in the right subcostal area; veins of spermatic cord and scrotum are dilated. Blood test: Hb - 86 g/l, ESR - 44 mm/h. Urine test: specific gravity - 1020, proteine - 0,99 g/l, erythrocytes - all field of vision, leukocytes - 4-6 in the field of vision. The provisional diagnosis is:
a. Nephroptosis
*b. Kidney tumor
c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Urolithiasis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

2140. A 58-year-old patient complains of headache in the occipital region, nausea, choking, opplotentes. The presentations appeared after a physical exertion. Objectively: the patient is excited. Face is hyperemic. Skin is pale. Heart sounds are regular, the 2nd aortic sound is accentuated. BP - 240/120 mm Hg, heart rate - 92/min. Auscultation reveals some fine moist rales (crackles) in the lower parts of the lungs. Liver is not enlarged. ECG shows signs of hypertrophy and left ventricular overload. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Complicated hypertensic crisis
b. Bronchial asthma exacerbation
c. Community-acquired pneumonia
d. Uncomplicated hypertensic crisis
e. Acute myocardial infarction, pulmonary edema

2141. A 37-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine, which increases during walking, limited mobility, edema of the right side of abdomen. Focal tuberculosis is recorded in the anamnesis. X-ray shows destruction of adjacent surfaces of the bodies of the 1- 2 lumbar vertebrae, vertebral bodies height is decreased, intervertebral fissure cannot be detected. Abdominal US reveals a growth 15x20 cm in size in the retroperitoneal space and echo signs of liquid.What diagnosis can be suspected?
a. Metastatic damage of vertebral column
b. Fracture of the 1-2 lumbar vertebrae body
*c. Lumbar tuberculous spondylitis
d. Lumbar spondylolisthesis
e. Osteochondrosis

2142. A 45-year-old patient (14-year-long work record as a house painter) upon the contact with synthetic paint develops skin reddening, edema, severe itching and oozing lesions on her face. Symptoms disappear after the contact with this chemical substance stops but even the smell of paint alone is enough to make them reappear each time. Each recurrence is characterised by increased severity of symptoms. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Simple contact dermatitis
b. Urticaria
c. Toxicodermia
*d. Professional eczema
e. Allergic contact dermatitis

2143. In cold season a patient was delivered to a hospital. He was rescued from drowning in a body of water. There was no contact of his airways with water. The patient is anxious, pale, complains of pain and numbness of limbs, has cold shivering. Breathing rate is 22/min, BP is 120/90 mm Hg, heart rate is 110/min, rectal temperature is 34, 5oC.What kind of warming should be prescribed to the patient?
*a. Passive warming
b. Hot compresses
c. Hemodialysis with blood warming
d. Heat bath
e. Infusion of 37Oc solutions

2144. Survey radiograph of a 52-year-old worker of an agglomeration plant (28 years of experience, the concentration of metal dust is 22-37 mg/m3) shows mildly pronounced interstitial fibrosis with diffused contrast well-defined small nodular shadows. The patient has no complaints. Pulmonary function is not compromised. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Silicatosis
b. Anthracosis
c. Silicosis
d. Anthraco-silicatosis
*e. Siderosis

2145. A week before, a 65-year-old male patient suffered an acute myocardial infarction. His general condition has deteriorated: he complains of dyspnea at rest, pronounced weakness. Objectively: edema of the lower extremities, ascites is present. Heart borders are extended, paradoxical pulse is 2 cm displaced from the apex beat to the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute pericarditis
b. Recurrent myocardial infarction
*c. Acute cardiac aneurysm
d. Cardiosclerotic aneurysm
e. Pulmonary embolism

2146. A 60-year-old patient complains of nearly permanent sensation of heaviness and fullness in the epigastrium, that increases after eating, foul-smelling eructation, occasional vomiting with food consumed 1-2 days ago, weight loss. 12 years ago he was first found to have an ulcer of pyloric channel. The patient has taken ranitidine for periodic hunger pain. The patient’s condition has been deteriorating over the last 3 months. Objectively: splashing sound in the epigastrium is present. What kind of complication is it?
a. Penetration of gastric ulcer
b. Foreign body in the stomach (bezoar)
c. Malignization of gastric ulcer
*d. Pyloric stenosis
e. Functional pyloric spasm

2147. A 5-year-old child has body temperature risen up to febrile numbers, suffers from inertness, weakness. Examination revealed hemorrhage on the skin of limbs and torso. Enlargement of cervical and axillary lymph nodes can be detected. The liver is 4 cm below the costal arch; the spleen is 6 cm below the costal arch. Blood test: erythrocytes - 2, 3x1012/l, Hb- 60 g/l, platelets - 40x109/l, leukocytes - 32, 8x109/l, eosinophiles - 1%, band neutrophiles - 1%, segmented neutrophiles - 12%, lymphocytes - 46%, monocytes - 1%, blasts - 40%, Duke’s bleeding time test result is 9 min. What examination is necessary to make the diagnosis?
a. Detection of hepatitis markers
b. Investigation of platelets dynamic functions
c. Lymph nodes biopsy
d. US of abdominal cavity
*e. Myelogram

2148. A child from primipregnancy was born in a term labor and has body weight of 4000 g and body length of 57 cm. When born, he was nonresponsive to examination. Diagniosis is diffuse. Heart rate is 80/min. What resuscitation measures should be prescribed?
a. Introduce 100% oxygen
b. Tactile stimulation
c. Administer naloxone
*d. Begin ALV with mask
e. Intubate and begin ALV

2149. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to a surgical unit complaining of an incised wound on his right forearm that has been bleeding for 1,5 days. Suffers from general weakness, vertigo, cold sweat, opplotentes. Skin and visible mucous membranes are pale. Heart rate is 110/min, BP is 100/70 mm Hg. Blood test: Hb is 100 g/l, erythrocytes 2, 5 · 1012/l. What is the cause for the paient’s general condition?
*a. Posthemorrhagic anemia
b. Wound infection
c. Acute trombophlebitis
d. Concomitant disease
e. Aplastic anemia

2150. A 20-year-old parturient woman has the I labor stage. The pregnancy is full-term. Labors occur every 3 minutes and last for 55 seconds. Fetus presentation is polar, the head is pressed to the small pelvis entrance. Heart rate of the fetus is 150/min, distinct and rhythmic. Vagina examination: uterus cervix is smoothed out; mouth of the womb is 2 cm open; fetal bladder is intact; the head is presented over the I plane of small pelvis; moderate mucous-bloody discharge is observed. What phase of the I labor stage is it?
a. Slowing-down
b. Active
*c. Latent
d. Physiological preliminary period
e. Primary uterine inertia

2151. A 23-year-old woman after stress has developed thirst, polydipsia, polyuria, weight loss, increasing fatigue. Later she developed nausea and somnolence, lost consciousness and was hospitalised. Glycemia is 27 mmol/l, acetone in urine is sharply positive. Treatment for ketoacidotic coma was initiated. When would it be advisable to start preventive treatment of hypoglycemia by introduction of 5% glucose solution?
*a. After glycemia rate drops to 13-14 mmol/l
b. When patient becomes conscious
c. If glycemia decreases with the rate over 5 mmol/l per hour
d. After glycemia rate becomes normal
e. 2 hours after beginning of insulinotherapy

2152. A 53-year-old woman complains of weight loss up to 10 kg within the last 2 years, liquid foul-smelling stool two times a day that poorly washes off the toilet, periodic bouts of nausea, girdle pain in the upper abdomen. Objectively: pain in Gubergrits zone (on the right from navel) and Mayo-Robson’s point. Biochemical blood analysis: glucose - 3,2 mmol/l, bilirubin - 16,5 micromole/l, crude protein - 56,4 g/l. Urine diastase - 426 g/h/l. D-xylose test (oral administration of 25 g of d-xylose) after 5 hours reveals 3 g of xylose in urine. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Pseudomembranous colitis
b. Irritable bowel syndrome
c. Chronic gastritis
*d. Pancreatitis. Malabsorption syndrome
e. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis

2153. A 23-year-old patient after intake of brake fluid has developed anuria that has been lasting for 5 days already. Creatinine level increased up to 0,769 mmol/l. What treatment tactics should be chosen in the given case?
a. Diuretics
b. Plasmapheresis
c. Detoxification therapy
d. Antidotal therapy
*e. Hemodialysis

2154. A 15-year-old teenager has undergone medical examination in military recruitment center. The following was revealed: interval systolic murmur at the cardiac apex, accent of the II heart sound over the pulmonary artery, tachycardia.What additional examination method will be the most informative for determining diagnosis?
a. Phonocardiography
b. Rheography
c. Electrocardiography
d. X-ray
*e. Echocardiography

2155. A 64-year-old patient has been hospitalised with complaints of progressive jaundice that developed over 3 weeks ago without pain syndrome, general weakness, loss of appetite. Objectively: temperature is 36, 8°C, heart rate is 78/min, abdomen is soft and painless, peritoneum irritation symptoms are not detected, palpation reveals sharply enlarged tense gallbladder. What disease can be characterised with these symptoms?
*a. Cancer of pancreas head
b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Cholecystitis caused by lambliasis
d. Chronic cholecystitis
e. Duodenal ulcer

2156. A 22-year-old woman on a reduced diet, vegetarian, attended a hospital with complaints of distorted smell and taste perception and lesions in the angles of her mouth. Objectively: sclera is distinctly blue. Diagnosis: irondeficiency anemia. What clinical syndrome is expressed primarily?
*a. Sideropenic
b. Hemorrhagic
c. Myelodysplasic
d. Hemolytic
e. Anemic

2157. A 15-year-old patient complains of excessive body weight, headache, irritability, rapid fatigability. Significant increase of body weight occurred at the age of 14. Objectively: weight is 90 kg; height is 160 sm, proportional body built. Fatty tissue is distributed evenly. There are thin pink striae (stretch marks) on the thighs, abdomen and mammary glands. BP - 145/90 mm Hg. Provisional diagnosis is:
a. Cushings syndrome
*b. Pubertate dyspituitarism
c. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
d. Alimentary constitutive obesity
e. Itsenko-Cushings disease

2158. A6-year-old girl attended a general practitioner with her mother. The child complains of burning pain and itching in her external genitalia. The girl was taking antibiotics the day before due to her suffering from acute bronchitis. On examination: external genitalia are swollen, hyperemic, there is white deposit accumulated in the folds. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Candidal vulvovaginitis
b. Nonspecific vulvitis
c. Herpes vulvitis
d. Helminthic invasion
e. Trichomoniasis

2159. A 44-year-old man complains of dyspnea with sensation of lack of air on inhale, palpitations occurring during slight physical exertion, and skin edemas that appear in evening and resolve in morning. His condition has been lasting for 5 months already, deterioration is gradual. What method of instrumental diagnostics allows to verify decrease of systolic function in this patient?
a. Phonocardiography
b. Holter blood pressure monitoring
c. Electrocardiography
d. Computer tomogram
*e. Echocardiography

2160. When playing in a kindergarten a 3- year-old child sudenly developed dyspnea, paroxysmal compulsive dry cough. The face is cyanotic, the eyes are tearful. Vomiting occurred several times. Breathing is weakened over the whole right side of the chest. The provisional diagnosis is:
a. Obstructive bronchitis
b. Hysteria fit
c. Stenosing laryngotracheitis
*d. Foreign body
e. Bronchial asthma

2161. A patient with otopyosis is in sharply deteriorating condition: he developed headache, vomiting, febrile temperature, general hyperesthesia. Meningeal symptoms and stagnant optic disks are observed. There is no focal symptoms. Liquor is turbid, blood pressure is high, albuminocytological dissociation occurs with neutrophils. What disease can be suspected?
*a. Secondary purulent meningitis
b. Serous meningitis
c. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
d. Primary purulent meningitis
e. Meningoencephalitis

2162. A 25-year-old patient is not married and has sexual relations with several partners.During the last 3 months he noticed small amount of mucoserous secretions produced from urethra. Subjectively: periodical itching or burning pain in urethra. Two months ago pain in knee join developed. Possibility of trauma or exposure to cold is denied by the patient. During the last week eye discomfort is noted - lacrimation and itching. What provisional diagnosis can be suggested?
*a. Reactive arthritis
b. Seasonal pollinosis
c. URTI with conjunctiva and joints affected
d. Bacterial nonspecific urethral conjunctivitis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

2163. A 19-year-old patient complains of severe pain in axillary crease. Condition onset was a week ago after her swimming in cold river and epilation. The next day painful "boil" appeared that was becoming larger every day and became a plum-sized tumor. Upon examination nodular conical growths joined together are detected, the skin covering them is bluishred in colour. Some nodules have fistulous openings producing thick purulent mass. Body temperature is 38, 5°C, general malaise. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Carbuncle
b. Necrotizing ulcerative trichophytosis
c. Pyoderma chancriformis
*d. Hydradenitis
e. Cutaneous tuberculosis

2164. A patient complains of weight gain, chill, edemas, xeroderma, somnolence, difficulties with focusing. Objectively: height is 165 cm; weight is 90 kg; body proportions are of female type, t-- 35, 8°C, heart rate - 58/min, BP - 105/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds are weakened, bradycardia is observed. Other internal organs have no changes. Thyroid gland cannot be palpated. Milk secretion from mammary glands is observed. Hormone investigation revealed increased levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and prolactin, and decreased level of thyroxine (T4). Which one is the cause for obesity?
a. Prolactinoma
b. Secondary hypothyroidism
*c. Primary hypothyroidism
d. Hypopituitarism
e. Adiposogenital dystrophy

2165. A 54-year-old patient complains of weakness, jaundice, itching skin. Disease onset was 1,5 months ago: fever up to 39°C appeared at first, with progressive jaundice developed 2 weeks later. On hospitalisation jaundice was severely progressed. Liver cannot be palpated. Gallbladder is enlarged and painless. Blood bilirubin is 190 micromole/l (accounting for direct bilirubin). Stool is acholic. What is the most likely jaundice genesis in this patient?
a. Caroli syndrome
b. Gilbert’s syndrome
c. Hepatocellular jaundice
d. Hemolytic jaundice
*e. Mechanical jaundice

2166. A 22-year-old patient complains of 8-months-long delay of menstruation. Anamnesis: menarche since the age of 12,5. Since the age of 18 menstruations are irregular. No pregnancies.Mammary glands have normal development; when the nipples are pressed, milk drops are discharged. On gynecological examination: moderate uterus hypoplasia. On hormonal examination: prolactin level exceeds the norm two times. On computed tomogram of the sellar region: a space-occupying lesion 4 mm in diameter is detected. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Pituitary tumor
b. Stein–Leventhal syndrome (Polycystic ovary syndrome)
c. Cushings disease
d. Sheehans syndrome
e. Lactation amenorrhea

2167. A 2-year-old child in a satisfactory condition periodically presents with moderate proteinuria, microhematuria. US results: the left kidney is undetectable, the right one is enlarged, there are signs of double pyelocaliceal system. What investigation is required to specify the diagnosis?
*a. Excretory urography
b. Retrograde urography
c. Radioisotope renal scan
d. Doppler study of renal vessels
e. Micturating cystography

2168. For the last 3 years a 12-year-old boy has been suffering from stomachache, abdominal distension, nausea, periodical liquid fatty stool, grey in color, with rotten smell. On palpation: pain in the epigastrium, Desjardins’ pancreatic point and Chauffard’s triangle; positive Mayo- Robson’s sign. Insufficiency of pancreas exocrine function is suspected. What method is the most informative for pancreas exocrine function assessment?
a. Determining tripsin content in blood serum
b. Determining amylase content in blood and urine
c. Scatological test
*d. Detection of elastase-1 in feces
e. Pancreas echography

2169. A 34-year-old patient was delivered to a first-aid center with open fracture of the lower leg bones. Upon examination bleeding is stated: blood flows in pulsating bursts. What actions should be taken at this stage of medical aid?
a. Provide immobilization and deliver the patient to a hospital
b. Apply pressure dressing to stop hemorrhage and deliver the patient to operating room
c. Deliver the patient to operating room
*d. Apply tourniquet to the thigh proximally to the place of hemorrhage and deliver the patient to operating room
e. Apply tourniquet to the thigh distally to the place of hemorrhage and deliver the patient to operating room

2170. A 26-year-old patient with affective bipolar disorder has developed a condition manifested by mood improvement, behavioural and sexual hyperactivity, verbosity, active body language, reduced need for sleep. Which of the following drugs are most effective in this case?
a. Antidepressants with an activating effect
b. Tranquilizers
c. Antidepressants with a sedative effect
*d. Neuroleptics with a sedative effect
e. Neuroleptics with an activating effect

2171. An emergency doctor has diagnosed a 32- year-old woman with generalized convulsive status epilepticus. The deterioration in the patient’s condition is caused by a sudden gap in the epilepsy treatment. Specify the doctor’s further tactics:
a. Outpatient monitoring by a neuropathologist
b. Outpatient monitoring by a neurosurgeon
c. Hospitalization in the department of neurology
d. Hospitalization in the department of neurosurgery
*e. Hospitalization in the intensive care unit

2172. A 19-year-old patient complains of dyspnea during physical exertion. He often has bronchitis and pneumonia. Cardiac murmur has been observed since his childhood. On auscultation: there is splitting of II heart sound over pulmonary arteria, systolic murmur in the third intercostal space near the left sternum margin. ECG test shows right bundle-branch block. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Open arterial duct
b. Aortic stenosis
c. Mitral valve insufficiency
*d. Interatrial septum defect
e. Coarctation of aorta

2173. A30-year-old patient was in a car accident. He is unconscious, pale, has thready pulse. In the middle third of the right thigh there is an extensive laceration with ongoing profuse external arterial bleeding. What urgent actions must be taken to save the life of the patient?
a. Tourniquet below the wound of the right thigh
b. Precordial thump
c. Plaster bar
*d. Tourniquet above the wound of the right thigh
e. Artificial lung ventilation

2174. A 75-year-old male patient complains of slight pain in the right iliac region. The abdominal pain arose 6 days ago and was accompanied by nausea. Surgical examination revealed moist tongue, heart rate - 76 bpm. BP - 130/80 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, slightly painful in the right iliac region on deep palpation, the symptoms of the peritoneum irritation are doubtful. In blood: RBCs - 4, 0 · 1012/l, Hb- 135 g/l, WBCs - 9, 5 · 109/l, stab neutrophiles - 5%, segmentonuclear - 52%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 5%, ESR - 20 mm/h. Specify the doctor’s further tactics:
a. Refer the patient to a district therapist
b. Administration of additional examination: abdominal ultrasound, x-ray contrast study of the gastrointestinal tract
c. Hospitalization, dynamic surveillance
d. Send the patient home
*e. Emergency operation for acute appendicitis

2175. On the 10th day postpartum a puerperant woman complains of pain and heaviness in the left mammary gland. Body temperature is 38,8°C, Ps- 94 bpm. The left mammary gland is edematic, the supero-external quadrant of skin is hyperemic. Fluctuation symptom is absent. The nipples discharge drops of milk when pressed. What is a doctor’s further tactics?
*a. Antibiotic therapy, immobilization and expression of breast milk
b. Inhibition of lactation
c. Opening of the abscess and drainage of the mammary gland
d. Physiotherapy
e. Compress to both mammary glands

2176. An 8-year-old child was hospitalized for fever up to 39, 8oC, inertness, moderate headache, vomiting. Examination revealed meningeal symptoms. Lumbar puncture was performed. The obtained fluid had raised opening pressure, it was transparent, with the cell count of 450 cells per 1 mcL (mainly lymphocytes - 90%), glucose level of 2,6 mmol/l. What causative agent might have caused the disease in the child?
a. Koch’s bacillus
b. Meningococcus
*c. Enterovirus
d. Staphylococcus
e. Pneumococcus

2177. A 25-year-old patient during selfexamination detected a tumor in the upper external quadrant of the right mammary gland. On palpation: painless, dense, mobile growth 2 cm in diameter is detected in the mammary gland; no changes in the peripheral lymph nodes are observed. On mammary glands US: in the upper external quadrant of the right mammary gland there is a space-occupying lesion of increased echogenicity 21х18 mm in size. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Mastitis
*b. Fibrous adenoma
c. Diffuse mastopathy
d. Lacteal cyst
e. Breast cancer

2178. A 20-year-old woman complains of feeling of air shortage, lingering dull pain in the heart area, irritability. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory, heart rate lability, BP is 130/60 mm Hg. ECG reveals disruption of repolarization proceses. The patient is diagnosed with somatoform autonomic dysfunction of cardial type. Specify the conditions of the patient treatment:
a. In-patient treatment in therapeutics department
b. In-patient treatment in cardiac surgery department
c. In-patient treatment in psychiatric department
*d. Out-patient treatment
e. In-patient treatment in cardiology department

2179. A 70-year-old patient consulted a doctor about arrhythmic cardiac activity, dyspnea. Objectively: BP - 150/90 mm Hg, extrasystole arrhythmia (10-12 beats per minute), left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction at the rate of 42%). Which of antiarrhythmic drugs should be administered as initial therapy in this case?
a. Moracizine
b. Digoxin
c. Flecainide
d. Encainide
*e. Amiodarone

2180. A 45-year-old male patient complains of acute pain in his right side irradiating to the right thigh and crotch. The patient claims also to have frequent urination with urine which resembles a "meat slops"in color. The patient has no previous history of this condition. There is costovertebral angle tenderness on the right (positive Pasternatsky’s symptom). What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Urolithiasis
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Acute cholecystitis.
e. Acute appendicitis

2181. A 38-year-old man works within the range of ionizing radiation. At a routine medical examination he presents no problems. In blood: RBCs - 4, 5 · 1012/l, Hb- 80 g/l, WBCs - 2, 8 · 109/l, thrombocytes - 30 · 109/l. Decide if this person can work with sources of ionizing radiation:
a. The patient can be allowed to work after an extended medical examination
b. The patient is allowed to work with radioactive substances for the limited period of time
c. The patient is allowed to work with radioactive substances
d. The patient can only work with radioactive substances of low activity
*e. Working with radioactive substances and other sources of ionizing radiation is contraindicated

2182. A maternity patient breastfeeding for 1,5 weeks has attended a doctor. She considers the onset of her disease to be when proportional breast engorgement occurred. Mammary glands are painful. Body temperature is 36, 6oC. Expression of breast milk is hindered. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Lactostasis
b. Suppurative mastitis
c. Gangrenous mastitis
d. Chronic cystic mastitis
e. Infiltrative mastitis

2183. A 12-year-old girl complains of general weakness, rise of body temperature up to 38,2 degree C, pain and swelling of knee joints, feeling of cardiac rhythm disruption. The child had tonsillitis 3 weeks ago. The knee joints are swollen, local raise of temperature is observed, mobility is reduced. Heart sounds are weakened, extrasystole is present; at the cardiac apex systolic noise can be auscultated, which is not conducted to the left axillary region. ESR is 38 mm/h. CRP 2+. Antistreptolysin- O titers are 400. The most likely disease is:
*a. Acute rheumatic fever
b. Non-rheumatic carditis
c. Reactive arthritis
d. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
e. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction

2184. A 60-year-old man has a diet consisting of unvaried food staples: mostly cereals, potato, pasta; few vegetables and little fats (especially animal fats). During medical examination he complains of deterioration of his twilight vision. This condition can be caused by lack of:
a. Amino acids
b. Calcium
c. Carbohydrates
*d. Retinol
e. Fats

2185. A 45-year-old patient was hospitalised in surgical in-patient unit with intermuscular phlegmon of the right thigh on the 6th day from the onset of disease. Abscess formed under the fascia lata was diagnosed, lanced and widely drained, necrotic tissues were removed. Antibiotic therapy with cephalosporines and the III generation fluoroquinolones was prescribed, as well as immune corrective and detoxification infusion therapy (2,5 liters per day), diuresis stimulation, UV irradiation of blood and plasmapheresis. What is the main component of sepsis prevention?
a. Detoxification therapy
*b. Surgical invasion
c. Topical antibiotic therapy
d. General antibiotic therapy
e. Immune correction therapy

2186. An Rh-negative woman with 32-weeklong term of pregnancy has been examined. It was observed that Rh-antibodies titer had increased four times within the last 2 weeks and was 1:64. First two pregnancies ended in antenatal death of fetus caused by hemolytic disease. What tactics of pregnancy management should be chosen?
*a. Preterm delivery
b. Rh-antibody test in 2 weeks; if Rh-antibodies increase in number conduct delivery
c. US examination to determine signs of fetal erythroblastosis
d. Introduction of anti-Rh immunoglobulin
e. Delivery at 37 weeks term

2187. A 2-year-old child has been suffering since birth from recurring inflammatory diseases of lungs, purulent pansinusites, hearing deterioration, multiple cylindrical bronchiectases. Dextrocardia is observed. On biopsy: ultrastructural change of ciliated epithelium. What is the basis of the given syndrome?
a. Proteoglycans insufficiency
b. Muscle cells atony
c. Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency
*d. Primary ciliary diskinesia
e. Surfactant deficit

2188. A newborn infant (the first labor, lasted for 26 hours) is 1-day-old, postmature; body weight is 3850 g; body length is 52 cm. Delivery was performed by applying obstetrical forceps in sincipital presentation, Apgar score is 1/3. The face is bluish-pale. The head is thrown back; severe birth trauma is present; the infant is excitable, shrill "cerebral scream"is present; the eyes are half-open; facial expression is attentive; hyperesthesia, hypersthenia and readiness for convulsions are present. Liquor has high content of erythrocytes, lymphocytic cytosis occurs. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
b. Subdural hemorrhage
c. Intracerebral hemorrhage
d. Intraventricular hemorrhage
e. Epidural hemorrhage

2189. A 74-year-old patient visited a urologist with complaints of pain above the pubis and inability to urinate for 8 hours. At home he had taken antispasmodics and had a warm bath but no improvement occurred. Objectively: abdomen is soft and painful above the pubis; dullness of percussion sound is observed above the pubis.Murphy’s (Pasternatski’s) punch sign is negative on the both sides. What condition does the patient have?
a. Anuria
b. Oliguria
c. Paradoxal ischuria
d. Chronic urinary retention
*e. Acute urinary retention

2190. A 37-year-old patient has been undergoing treatment of diskogenic lumbosacral radiculitis for a month. There is skin numbness observed at the lateral surface of the right lower extremity, Achilles jerk is absent. MRI of lumbar spine revealed intervertebral disk L5-S1 prolapse up to 8 mm. Choose the further tactics for patient treatment:
a. Corset
b. Manual therapy
c. Conservative treatment
d. Stabilizing spinal surgery
*e. Surgical extraction of intervertebral disk

2191. A 40-year-old patient complains of constant moderate pain in the lumbar spine and significantly reduced mobility. The patient has been suffering from this condition for the last 7 years since pain appeared first in the sacrum area. X-ray: ankylosis of sacroiliac articulation, significant narrowing of intervertebral joint fissures of lumbar vertebrae and calcification of spinal ligaments. What pathology is most likely to cause such X-ray image?
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
*b. Ankylosing spondylitis
c. Spinal osteochondrosis
d. Spinal tuberculosis
e. Vertebral osteochondropathy

2192. A 7-year-old child became ill again 2 weeks after he had tonsillitis. There are the following complaints: temperature rise up to 38°C, hemorrhagic rash on the extremities, enlargement of the ankle joints. Blood test: hemoglobin is 120 g/l, platelets are 170x109/l, ESR is 30 mm/h. Urine test: proteinuria up to 0,7 g/l, cylinders - 5-6 in the field of vision, erythrocytes - 8-10 in the field of vision. What mechanism of hemorrhagic syndrome is present in the given case?
a. Suppression of hematopoietic stem cells
b. Platelet dysfunction
*c. Vessel wall damage caused by immune complexes
d. Decrease of adhesive-aggregative function of platelets
e. Vessel wall damage caused by bacteria

2193. A 48-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital in-patient unit with uterine bleeding that occurred after the 2-week-long delay of menstruation. Anamnesis states single birth. Examination of the uterine cervix with mirrors revealed no pathologies. On bimanual examination: uterus is of normal size, painless, mobile; uterine appendages have no changes. Discharge is bloody and copious. What primary hemostatic measure should be taken in the given case?
a. Hemostatics
b. Hormonal hemostasis
*c. Fractional curettage of uterine cavity
d. Uterine tamponade
e. Uterotonics

2194. A 30-year-old woman complains of irregular copious painful menstruations, pain irradiates to the rectum. Anamnesis states 10- year-long infertility. On bimanual examination: uterus is of normal size; uterine appendages on the both sides are corded, with rectricted mobility, painful; there are dense nodular painful growths detected in the posterior fornix. A doctor suspects endometriosis. What method allows to verify this diagnosis?
a. Paracentesis of posterior fornix
b. Diagnostic curettage of uterine cavity
*c. Laparoscopy
d. Uterine probing
e. Hysteroscopy

2195. A 14-year-old girl complains of tooth caries; the tooth should be filled. Anamnesis states that artificial mitral valve was installed 2 years ago due to mitral insifficiency.What antibacterial drug should be prescribed to prevent infective endocarditis?
a. Midecamycin
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Ceftriaxone
d. Lincomycin
e. Erythromycin

2196. A30-year-old woman complains of infertility during her 10-year-long married life. Menstruations occur since she was 14 and are irregular, with delays up to a month and longer. Body mass is excessive. Hirsutism is observed. On bimanual examination: uterine body is decreased in size; ovaries are increased in size, dense, painless, and mobile. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Stein–Leventhal syndrome (Polycystic ovary syndrome)
b. Genital endometriosis
c. Inflammatory tumor of ovaries
d. Genital tuberculosis
e. Follicular cyst of ovaries

2197. You are a doctor on duty. A patient after a successful resuscitation (drowning)was delivered to an admission room. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart rate is 120/min., respiration rate is 26/min. The patient is unconscious, pupils are moderately dilated, general clonic and tonic convulsions are observed.Make the diagnosis:
a. Vegetative state
*b. Postresuscitation disease
c. Coma of unknown origin
d. Apparent death
e. Unconsciousness

2198. A 32-year-old welder complains of weakness and fever. His illness initially presented as tonsillitis one month earlier. On examination: BT- 38, 9°C, RR- 24/min., HR- 100/min., BP- 100/70 mm Hg, hemorrhages on the legs, enlargement of the lymph nodes. CBC shows Hb- 70 g/l, RBC- 2, 2 × 1012/l, WBC- 3, 0 × 109/l with 32% of blasts, 1% of eosinophiles, 3% of bands, 36% of segments, 20% of lymphocytes, and 8% of monocytes, ESR- 47 mm/hour. What is the cause of anemia?
a. Chronic hemolytic anemia
*b. Acute leukemia
c. Aplastic anema
d. Chronic lympholeukemia
e. B12-deficient anemia

2199. A regional cardiologist is tasked with the development of a plan for medioprophylactic measures aimed at decrease of cardiovascular mortality. What measures should be planned for secondary prevention?
*a. Prevention of recurrences and complications
b. Prevention of diseases
c. Optimization of life style and living conditions
d. Referring patients for in-patient treatment
e. Referring patients for sanatorium-and-spa treatment

2200. An 8-year-old boy developed a temperature of 37, 5°C two days after his recovery from the case of URTI. He complains of suffocation, heart pain. Objectively: the skin is pale, tachycardia, the I heart sound is weakened, short systolyc murmur in the 4th intercostal area near the left edge of the breastbone. What heart disorder such clincal presentation is characteristic of?
a. Fallot’s tetrad
b. Cardiomyopathy
c. Primary rheumatic carditis
d. Myocardiodystrophy
*e. Nonrheumatic myocarditis

2201. A woman complains of muscle weakness and general fatigue, dyspnea, vertigo, brittleness of her hair and nails, an urge to eat chalk. Anamnesis states uterine fibroid. Common blood analysis: erythrocytes - 2,8 Т/l, Hb- 80 g/l, color index - 0,78, anisocytosis, poikilocythemia, serum iron - 10 mcmol/l. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
b. B12-deficient anemia
*c. Iron-deficiency anemia
d. Aplastic anemia
e. Hypoplastic anemia

2202. A 24-year-old patient visited a doctor complaining of enlargement of his submaxillary lymph nodes. Objectively: submaxillary, axillary and inguinal lymph nodes are enlarged. Chest X-ray shows: enlarged lymph nodes of mediastinum. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3, 4 × 1012/l, Hb- 100 g/l, blood colour index - 0,88, platelets - 190 × 109/l, leucocytes - 7, 5×109/l, eosinophiles - 8%, band neutrophiles - 2%, segmented neutrophiles - 67%, lymphocytes - 23%, ESR- 22 mm/hour. What test must be prescribed to verify the cause of lymphadenopathy?
*a. Open biopsy of lymph nodes
b. Mediastinum tomography
c. Sternal puncture
d. Puncture biopsy of lymph nodes
e. Ultrasonography of abdominal cavity

2203. A 32 year old patient complains of cardiac irregularities, dizziness, dyspnea at physical exertion. He has never suffered from such condition before. Objectively: Ps- 74/min., rhythmic. BP- 130/80 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolic murmur above aorta, the first heart sound was normal. ECG showed hypertrophy of the left ventricle, signs of repolarization disturbance in the I, V5 and V6 leads. Echocardiogram revealed that interventricular septum was 2 cm.What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
b. Essential hypertension
c. Coarctation of aorta
d. Myocardium infarction
e. Aortic stenosis

2204. A 35-year-old patient’s wound with suppurative focus was surgically cleaned. On the 8th day after the surgery the wound cleared from its purulo-necrotic content and granulations appeared. However, against the bacground of antibacterial therapy the body temperature keeps at 38,5-39,5°C. There are chills, excessive sweating, euphoria, heart rate is 120/min. What complication of local pyoinflammatory process can it be?
a. Purulent absorption fever
b. Meningitis
c. Pneumonia
*d. Sepsis
e. Trombophlebitis

2205. A 60-year-old woman has been suffering from arterial hypertension for 15 years. After recurrent stroke she started complaining of unmotivated bad mood, problems with attention concentration; she forgets to close the entrance door, cannot recall events of the past day. Computer tomography shows areas of postinfarction changes in the cortical postfrontal areas. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pick’s disease
b. Dissociative amnesia
c. Alzheimer’s disease
d. Huntington’s disease
*e. Vascular dementia

2206. Clinic of a research instutute for occupational diseases examined a worker who works at a concentration plant and diagnosed him with chronic dust bronchitis. The case is investigated by a commission including the representatives of: the plant, clinic, local SES, department of Social Insurance Fund, trade union. According to the ”regulation on investigation of. . . ”, the commission should be headed by the representative of the following authority:
a. Social Insurance Fund
b. Plant
*c. Local SES
d. Trade union
e. Clinic

2207. A 37-year-old woman complains of headaches, nausea, vomiting, spasms. The onset of the disease occurred the day before due to her overexposure to cold. Objectively: fever up to 40°C; somnolence; rigid neck; Kernig’s symptom is positive on the both sides; general hyperesthesia. Blood test: leucocytosis, increased ESR. Cerebrospinal fluid is turbid, yellow-tinted. What changes of the cerebrospinal fluid are most likely?
a. Xanthochromia in the cerebrospinal fluid
b. Albuminocytological dissociation
c. Lymphocytic pleocytosis
d. Blood in the cerebrospinal fluid
*e. Neutrophilic pleocytosis

2208. A 48-year-old woman complains of pain in the thoracic spine, sensitivity disorder in the lower body, disrupted motor function of the lower limbs, body temperature rise up to 37, 5°C. She has been suffering from this condition for 3 years. Treatment by various specialists was ineffective. X-ray reveals destruction of adjacent surfaces of the VIII and IX vertebral bodies. In the right paravertebral area at the level of lesion there is an additional soft tissue shadow. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Multiple sclerosis
b. Spinal tumor
*c. Tuberculous spondylitis of the thoracic spine
d. Metastases into the spine
e. Osteochondrosis

2209. A pregnant woman is 28 years old. Anamnesis: accelerated labor complicated by the II degree cervical rupture. The following two pregnancies resulted in spontaneous abortions at the terms of 12 and 14 weeks. On mirror examination: the uterine cervix is scarred from previous ruptures at 9 and 3 hours, the cervical canal is gaping. On vaginal examination: the cervix is 2 cm long, the external orifice is open 1 cm wide, the internal orifice is half-open; the uterus is enlarged to the 12th week of pregnancy, soft, mobile, painless, the appendages are without changes. What diagnosis would you make?
a. Cervical pregnancy, 12 weeks
*b. Isthmico-cervical insufficiency, habitual noncarrying of pregnancy
c. Incipient abortion, habitual noncarrying of pregnancy
d. Threatened spontaneous abortion
e. Cervical hysteromyoma, habitual noncarrying of pregnancy

2210. A 56-year-old patient complains of pain in the epigastrium after eating, eructation, loss of appetite, slight loss of weight, fatigability. The patient smokes; no excessive alcohol consumption. Objectively: pale mucosa, BP- 110/70 mm Hg. The tongue is ”lacquered”. The abdomen is soft, sensitive in the epigastric area. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3,0 T/l, Hb- 110 g/l, color index - 1,1; macrocytosis; leukocytes - 5,5 g/l, ESR- 13 mm/hour. On fibrogastroduodenoscopy: atrophy of fundic mucosa.What pathogenesis does this disorder have?
a. Alimentary factor
b. Н.pylori persistence
*c. Producing antibodies to parietal cells
d. Chemical factor
e. Gastropathic effect

2211. A 26-year-old secundipara at 40 weeks of gestation arrived at a maternity ward after the beginning of labor activity. The bursting of waters occurred 2 hours prior. The fetus was in a longitudinal lie with cephalic presentation. Abdominal circumference was 100 cm, fundal height - 42 cm. Contractions occurred every 4-5 minutes and lasted 25 seconds each. Internal obstetric examination revealed cervical effacement, opening by 4 cm. Fetal bladder was absent. Fetal head was pressed against the pelvic inlet. What complication arose in the childbirth?
a. Primary uterine inertia
b. Discoordinated labor
c. Clinically narrow pelvis
*d. Early amniorrhea
e. Secondary uterine inertia

2212. Bacterial analysis of air in a living space in winter period by means of Krotov’s apparatus revealed that total number of microorganisms in 1 m3 of air was 7200. What is the allowed number of microorganisms for the air to be characterized as ”pure”?
a. Up to 3500
b. Up to 2500
*c. Up to 4500
d. Up to 5500
e. Up to 7500

2213. A 24-year-old patient received a puncture injury below the Poupart’s ligament accompanied by intense arterial bleeding. The best method to temporarily stop the bleeding in the patient would be:
a. Esmarch’s tourniquet
b. Compressing a blood vessel with a clamp
c. Wound suturing
*d. Compression band
e. Maximum limb bending

2214. A 42-year-old woman has been hospitalized with complaints of intense pain attacks in the lumbar and right iliac areas, which irradiate to the vulvar lips, frequent urination, nausea. The pain onset was acute. Objectively: the abdomen is soft, moderately painful in the right subcostal area, costovertebral angle tenderness on the right. Common urine analysis: specific gravity - 1016, traces of protein, leukocytes - 6-8 in the vision field, erythrocytes - 12-16 in the vision field, fresh. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Acute appendicitis
c. Acute right-sided pyelonephritis
d. Acute right-sided adnexitis
*e. Right-sided renal colic

2215. A 29-year-old patient works as a motor mechanic. Anamnesis shows frequent exposure to cold, exacerbation of chronic bronchitis attended by cough with relativly small amount of mucopurulent sputum, subfebrility, sometimes joined by hemoptysis and pain in the right side of chest. Breathing is vesicular. X-ray shows shadows and sharp decrease in size of the lower lobe distinctly visible on the X-ray image as a streak 2-3 cmwide situated at the angle from lung root to the frontal costodiaphragmatic recess. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Peripheral lung cancer
b. Pneumonia
c. Interlobular pleurisy
d. Middle lobe syndrome
e. Bronchiectasis

2216. A 62-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of pain in the thorax on the right during breathing, dyspnea, dry cough. Ten days ago he slipped and fell hitting his right side. On examintaion: the patient lies on the left side. The right side of the thorax lags during breathing. On the right there are crepitation and pain in the III-IV ribs. Dullness of percussion sound and sharply diminished breath sounds can be observed. On X-ray: signs of exudate, fracture of the IIIIV ribs. On pleurocentesis: blood is detected. Choose the further tactics:
*a. Transfer to a thoracic surgery department
b. Recurrent pleurocentesis
c. Refer to a traumatologist
d. Fixed bandage of the rib cage
e. Prescribe conservative therapy

2217. A 29-year-old female patient complains of dyspnea, heaviness and chest pain on the right, body temperature rise up to 37, 2°C. The disease is associated with a chest trauma received 4 days ago. Objectively: skin is pale and moist. Ps- 90/min., regular. Palpation reveals a dull sound on the right, auscultation reveals significantly weakened vesicular breathing. In blood: RBCs- 2, 8 × 1012/l, colour index - 0,9, Hb- 100 g/l, WBCs- 8, 0 × 109/l, ESR- 17 mm/hour.What results of diagnostic puncture of the pleural cavity can be expected?
a. Chylous liquid
b. Transudate
c. Purulent punctate
*d. Haemorrhagic punctate
e. Exudate

2218. Examination of a group of persons living on the same territory revealed the following common symptoms: dark-yellow pigmentation of the tooth enamel, diffuse osteoporosis of bone apparatus, ossification of ligaments and joints, functional disorders of the central nervous system. This condition may be caused by the excessive concentration of the following microelement in food or drinking water:
a. Cesium
*b. Fluorine
c. Nickel
d. Copper
e. Iodine

2219. In a pre-school educational establishment themenu consists of the following dishes:milk porridge from buckwheat, pasta with minced meat, cucumber salad, kissel (thin berry jelly), rye bread.What dish should be excluded from the menu?
a. Kissel (thin berry jelly)
b. Milk porridge from buckwheat
*c. Pasta with minced meat
d. Rye bread
e. Cucumber salad

2220. An infant has been born at the 41st week of gestation. The pregnancy was complicated with severe gestosis of the second semester. The weight of the baby is 2400 g, the height is 50 cm. Objectively: the skin is flabby, the layer of subcutaneous fat is thin, hypomyotonia, neonatal reflexes are weak. The internal organs are without pathologic changes. This newborn can be estimated as a:
a. Full-term infant with normal body weight
*b. Full-term infant with prenatal growth retardation
c. Immature infant
d. Premature infant
e. Postmature infant

2221. A patient suffering from infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis was prescribed streptomycin, rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, vitamin C. One month after the beginning of the treatment the patient started complaining of reduced hearing and tinnitus. What drug has such a side effect?
a. Isoniazid
b. Pyrazinamide
c. Vitamin C
*d. Streptomycin
e. Rifampicin

2222. A woman has developed sudden thoracic pain on the right with expectoration of pink sputum and body temperature rise up to 37, 7°C on the 4th day after the surgery for cystoma of the right ovary.On lung examination: dullness of the lung sound on the lower right is observed. Isolated moist crackles can be auscultated in the same area.What complication is the most likely?
a. Pneumothorax
*b. Pulmonary infarction
c. Pulmonary abscess
d. Pneumonia
e. Exudative pleurisy

2223. A 58-year-old patient was delivered to an admission room with complaints of pain in the thorax on the left. On clinical examination: aside from tachycardia (102/min.) no other changes. On ECG: pathologic wave Q in I, аVL, QS in V1, V2, V3 leads and ’domed’ ST elevation with negative T. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Variant angina pectoris
b. Acute left ventricular posterior myocardial infarction
c. Exudative pericarditis
*d. Acute left ventricular anterior myocardial infarction
e. Aortic dissection

2224. A 48-year-old woman has thermal burns of both hands. The epidermis of the palms and backs of her hands is exfoliating, and blisters filled with serous liquid are forming. The forearms are intact. What diagnosis is most likely?
*a. 2-3A degree thermal burn
b. 1 degree thermal burn
c. 1-2 degree thermal burn
d. 3B degree thermal burn
e. 4 degree thermal burn

2225. A 39-year-old patient complains of morning headache, appetite loss, nausea, morning vomiting, periodic nasal haemorrhages. The patient had a case of acute glomerulonephritis at the age of 15. Examination revealed rise of arterial pressure up to 220/130 mm Hg, skin haemorrhages on his arms and legs, pallor of skin andmucous membranes.What biochemical parameter is most important for making diagnosis in this case?
a. Blood sodium
b. Blood bilirubin
*c. Blood creatinine
d. Uric acid
e. Fibrinogen

2226. A 30-year-old patient, who has been suffering from headaches, suddenly developed extreme headache after lifting a heavy load, as if he had been hit over the head. Nausea, vomiting, and slight dizziness are observed. In a day he developed pronounced meningeal syndrome and body temperature up to 37, 6°C. A doctor suspects subarachnoid hemorrhage. What additional examination is necessary to confirm this diagnosis?
*a. Lumbar puncture with investigation of the spinal fluid
b. Computed tomography of the brain
c. Angiography of the brain vessels
d. Rheoencephalography
e. Skull X-ray

2227. A worker of a blowing shop complains of headache, irritability, sight impairment - he sees everything as if through a ”net”. Objectively: hyperemic sclera, thickened cornea, decreased opacity of pupils, visual acuity is 0,8 in the left eye, 0,7 in the right eye. The worker uses no means of personal protection. What diagnosis is most likely?
*a. Cataract
b. Keratitis
c. Progressive myopia
d. Blepharospasm
e. Conjunctivitis

2228. A 45-year-old woman is undergoing treatment for active rheumatism, combined mitral valve failure. During her morning procedures she suddenly sensed pain in the left hand, which was followed by numbness. Pain and numbness continued to aggravate. Objectively: the skin of the left hand is pale and comparatively cold. Pulse in the hand arteries is absent along the whole length. What treatment tactics is most efficient?
*a. Urgent embolectomy
b. Prescription of antibiotics and antiinflammatory agents
c. Urgent thrombintimectomy
d. Cardiac catheterization
e. Prescription of fibrinolytics and anticoagulants

2229. A 10-year-old boy had a case of viral hepatitis type B four years ago. Currently the assumption was made about the formation of hepatic cirrhosis in the patient. What additional investigation can clarify the diagnosis?
a. Proteinogram
b. Markers of viral hepatitis type B
c. Transaminase level measurement
*d. Renal needle biopsy
e. Echocholecystography

2230. A 40-year-old patient has acute onset of disease caused by overexposure to cold. Temperature has increased up to 39°C. Foul-smelling sputum is expectorated during coughig. Various moist crackles can be auscultated above the 3rd segment on the right. Blood test: leukocytes - 15, 0 × 109/l, stab neutrophils - 12%, ESR- 52 mm/hour. On Xray: in the 3rd segment on the right there is a focus of shadow 3 cm in diameter, low density, with fuzzy smooth margins and a clearing in its center. What disease is most likely in the given case?
a. Pulmonary cyst
*b. Pneumonia complicated by an abscess
c. Peripheral pulmonary cancer
d. Infiltrative tuberculosis
e. Cystic echinococcosis

2231. An electro-gas welding operator working at a machine workshop performs welding and cutting of metal, which is accompanied by intense UV-radiation. His welding station is equipped with efficient mechanical ventilation. What occupational disease is most likely to develop in an electro-gas welding operator?
a. Heatstroke
b. Chronic overheating
c. Pneumoconiosis
*d. Photoelectric ophthalmia
e. Vegetative-vascular dystonia

2232. A 48-year-old patient was found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland, exophthalmia, weight loss of 4 kg in 2 months, sweating. Objectively: HR- 105/min., BP- 140/70 mm Hg. Defecation act is normal. What kind of therapy is recommended in this case?
a. Radioiodine
b. Lugol’s solution
c. Thyroxine
*d. Mercazolil
e. Propranolol

2233. A woman addressed a doctor with complaints of increased body temperature up to 37, 8°C and moderately sore throat for the last 3 days. Objectively: mandibular lymph nodes are enlarged up to 3 cm. Palatine tonsils are hypertrophied, covered with grey coating that spreads to the uvula and anterior pillars of the fauces.What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Oropharyngeal candidiasis
*b. Oropharyngeal diphtheria
c. Pseudomembranous (Vincent’s) tonsillitis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Agranulocytosis

2234. A 48-year-old man complains of constant pain in the upper abdomen, predominantly on the left, which aggravates after eating, diarrhea, loss of weight. The patient has alcohol use disorder. Two years ago he had a case of acute pancreatitis. Blood amylase is 4 g/hour×l. Feces analysis: steatorrhea, creatorrhea. Blood sugar is 6,0 mmol/l. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. No-Spa (Drotaverine)
*b. Panzinorm forte (Pancreatin)
c. Gastrozepin (Pirenzepine)
d. Insulin
e. Contrykal (Aprotinin)

2235. In 10 hours after eating canned mushrooms a 27-year-old patient has developed diplopia, bilateral ptosis, disrupted swallowing, shallow breathing with respiratory rate 40/min., muscle weakness, enteroparesis.What measure should be taken first?
*a. Intubation of the trachea for artificial respiration
b. Introduction of antibotulinic serum
c. Intravenous detoxication therapy
d. Introduction of glucocorticosteroids
e. Gastrointestinal lavage

2236. A 32-year-old patient complains of reddening, burning, and sensation of a foreign body in the right eye. The disease is acute. On examination: visual acuity of the both eyes is 1,0. In the right eye there are hyperemy and swelling of the conjunctiva, superficial injection. There is purulent discharge in the conjunctival sac. The cornea is clear. The color and pattern of the iris are uncanged, the pupil is mobile.What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Acute attack of glaucoma
b. Acute iridocyclitis
*c. Acute conjunctivitis
d. Foreign body of the cornea
e. Acute dacryocystitis

2237. A patient is on the sick leave for 4 months continuously from the date of injury. The treatment is going to last for another 1-2 months. Who has the right to extend the duration of medical certificate for this patient?
a. Medical superintendent
b. District doctor upon agreement with a department chief
c. Medico-social expert commission
*d. Medical advisory commission after medicosocial expert commission examination
e. Medical advisory commission after inpatient treatment

2238. Monthly dysentery morbidity in the region given in absolute figures is as follows: January - 6; February - 9; March - 11; April - 10; May - 16; June - 23; July - 19;August - 33; September - 58; October - 19; November - 11; December - 5. Annual total is 220 cases. What graphic presentation would provide the best visual for monthly deviations of dysentery morbidity from the average?
a. Cartogram
b. Map
*c. Radar chart
d. Pie chart
e. Bar chart

2239. A 30-year-old woman complains of pain in the heart area (”aching, piercing pain”) that arises primarily in the morning hours in autumn and spring. Pain irradiates into the neck, back, abdomen and is attended by rapid heart rate and low vital tonus. This condition occurs independently from physical exertion. In the evening her condition improves. Somatic and neurologic state and ECG have no pathologies. What pathology is likely to result in such clinical presentation?
a. Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia
b. Rest angina pectoris
*c. Somatized depression
d. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
e. Hypochondriacal depression

2240. A full term baby born from the 1st noncomplicated pregnancy with complicated labor was diagnosed with cephalohematoma. On the 2nd day of life the child developed jaundice; on the 3rd day of life there appeared neurological changes: nystagmus, Graefe syndrome. Urine is yellow, feces are goldenyellow. The mother’s blood group is А (II) Rh?, the child’s - А (II) Rh+. On the 3rd day the results of the child’s blood test are as follows: Hb- 200 g/l, erythrocytes - 6, 1 × 1012/l, blood bilirubin - 58 mcmol/l due to the presence of its unconjugated fraction, Ht- 0,57. In this case the jaundice is caused by:
a. Physiologic jaundice
b. Atresia of bile passages
c. Fetal hepatitis
*d. Craniocerebral birth injury
e. Hemolytic disease of newborn

2241. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patient’s condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min., Ps- 96/min., BP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are various moist crackles above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Pleural empyema
c. Pyopneumothorax
*d. Acute pulmonary abscess
e. Acute focal pneumonia

2242. A 46-year-old patient with temporarily undetermined diagnosis was prescribed pleurocentesis based on the results of the X-ray. The puncture yielded 1000 ml of a liquid with the following properties: clear, specific gravity - 1,010, protein content - 1%, Rivaltas test is negative, erythrocytes - 2-3 in the field of vision. What disorder are these pathology changes characteristic of?
a. Pulmonary cancer
*b. Cardiac failure
c. Pleural mesothelioma
d. Pleuropneumonia
e. Pulmonary tuberculosis

2243. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl did not undergo any treatment. The girl’s irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl developed puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin developed a waxen hue. What disease can be suspected?
a. Thyroid carcinoma
b. Diffuse toxic goiter
*c. Autoimmune thyroiditis
d. Subacute thyroiditis
e. Juvenile basophilism

2244. In a maternity hospital a newborn had been presenting with cough attacks after eating. The child was discharged from the hospital on the 18th day due to a case of pneumonia. During the further 1,5 months the child had 2 cases of pneumonia. Periodically there are cough attacks after eating, especially if the child lies on the left side. Objectively: the II degree hypotrophy, isolated moist crackles, dyspnea. Stool and diuresis are not disrupted. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Mucoviscidosis
b. Hernia of the esophageal opening
c. Tracheobronchomalacia
*d. Tracheoesophageal fistula
e. Posthypoxic encephalopathy

2245. A 26-year-old woman, who gave birth 7 months ago, has been suffering from nausea, morning sickness, somnolence for the last 2 weeks. The patient breasfeeds; no menstruation. She has been using nomeans of contraception. What method would be most efficient in clarification of the diagnosis?
*a. Ultrasound
b. Palpation of mammary glands and squeezing out colostrum
c. Mirror examination
d. Bimanual abdominovaginal examination
e. Small pelvis radiography

2246. A 2-year-old girl has a medical history of recurrent obstructive pneumonia. In the lungs various moist and dry crackles can be auscultated, breath sounds are diminished. Sputum is thick, viscous and difficult to expectorate. Drumstick fingers and physical developmental retardation are observed. What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
*a. Pulmonary mucoviscidosis
b. Bronchial asthma
c. Pulmonary tuberculosis
d. Congenital polycystic lungs
e. Recurrent bronchitis

2247. After a case of purulent otitis a 1-year-old boy has developed pains in the upper third of the left thigh, body temperature up to 39°C. Objectively: swelling of the thigh in its upper third and smoothed out inguinal fold. The limb is in semiflexed position. Active and passive movements are impossible due to severe pain.What diagnosis is most likely?
*a. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
b. Intermuscular phlegmon
c. Brodie’s abscess
d. Osteosarcoma
e. Acute coxitis

2248. A 56-year-old patient with diffuse toxic goiter has ciliary arrhythmia, heart rate is 110-120/min., arterial hypertension, BP is 165/90 mm Hg. What drug besides Mercazolil (Thiamazole) should be prescribed in this case?
a. Corinfar
*b. Propranolol
c. Novocainamide (procainamide)
d. Radioactive iodine
e. Verapamil

2249. A patient has been provisionally diagnosed with pheochromocytoma at the stage of intermission. BP is within norm, there is a tendency towards tachycardia. No urine pathologies. The decision has been made to perform a provocative test with histamine. What drug should be kept close at hand for emergency aid in case of positive test result?
*a. Phentolamine
b. Nifedipine
c. Prednisolone
d. Mesaton (Phenylephrine)
e. Pipolphen

2250. A 54-year-old patient complains of weakness, weight loss despite the unchanged appetite, frequent urination, skin itch for six months. Some time ago the patient underwent treatment for furunculosis. She has not been examined recently. Objectively: malnutrition, dry skin with scratch marks. Small lymph nodes can be palpated in the axillary regions. Changes in the internal organs are absenr. What test must be performed in the first place?
a. Lymph node biopsy
b. Blood sterility testing
c. Complete blood count
d. Endoscopy of stomach
*e. Fasting blood sugar

2251. A child is 1 month 10 days old. ”Gushing” vomiting has been observed since the age of 3 weeks. The vomit volume exceeds the volume of the previous feeding. Objectively: the child is inert. Skin elasticity and tissue turgor are decreased. Hour-glass deformity sign is positive. The preliminary diagnosis is pyloric stenosis. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Internal administration of Novocaine
b. Prescription of Pipolphen
c. Prescription of Cerucal (Metoclopramide)
d. Atropinization
*e. Surgery

2252. A 46-year-old woman complains of pain attacks in the right lumbar area, which irradiate to the lower abdomen, and nausea. This kind of pain attacks has never been detected in the patient before. Survey Xray of the abdominal cavity reveals no pathologic shadows. Ultrasonic scan detects a hyperechogenic growth 1,5 cm in diameter, which reflects sound wave, in the enlarged right renal pelvis.What diagnosis is most likely?
*a. Renal calculus
b. Renal cyst
c. Malignant renal tumor
d. Renal tuberculosis
e. Benign renal tumor

2253. Several hours before, a 28-year-old patient suddenly developed acute headache and repeated vomiting, then lost consciousness. Objectively: focal neurological symptoms were not found. Pronounced meningeal symptoms were revealed. BP- 120/80 mm Hg. According to clinical and liquorological findings the patient was diagnosed with subarachnoid haemorrhage. After administration of dehydrants the patient’s condition somewhat improved. What is the main component of further emergency care?
a. Corticosteroids
*b. Coagulants
c. Antiaggregants
d. Anticoagulants
e. Fibrinolytics

2254. A 24-year-old man has developed increasing headaches, vertigo, diplopia, paresis of the facial muscles on the right, choking during swallowing. The signs appeared on the 5th day of respiratory disorder. He was diagnosed with acute viral encephalitis. Determine the main direction of emergency therapy:
*a. Zovirax (Aciclovir)
b. Ceftriaxone
c. Neohaemodes
d. Lasix (Furosemide)
e. Glucocorticoids

2255. A 23-year-old woman, who works as a milk and dairy inspector, after the miscarriage suffers from high fever up to 38, 6°C, recurring chills, excessive sweating. Objectively: polyadenitis, pain in the lumbosacral spine, swollen left knee joint, enlarged liver and spleen.What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Yersiniosis
*b. Brucellosis
c. Toxoplasmosis
d. Sepsis
e. Polyarticular rheumatoid arthritis

2256. A 16-year-old adolescent has been hospitalized with complaints of unceasing nasal hemorrhage and unbearable pain in his right elbow joint. Objectively: the large joint is enlarged and defigurated, the skin over the joint is hyperemic. Arthropathy signs can be observed in the other joints. Ps- 90/min. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3, 9 × 1012/l, Нb- 130 g/l, color index - 1,0, leukocytes - 5, 6 × 109/l, platelets - 220 × 109/l, ESR- 6 mm/hour. Lee-White coagulation time: start- 24, end- 2710. What drug would be most efficient in the treatment of this patient?
*a. Cryoprecipitate
b. Concentrated red cells
c. Vicasol (Menadione)
d. Aminocapronic acid
e. Calcium chloride

2257. A 67-year-old man complains of dyspnea on exertion, attacks of retrosternal pain, dizziness. He has no history of rheumatism. Objectively: pale skin, acrocyanosis.There are crackles in the lower lungs. There is systolic thrill in the II intercostal space on the right, coarse systolic murmur conducted to the vessels of neck. BP- 130/90 mm Hg, heart rate - 90/min., regular rhythm. The liver extends 5 cm from under the edge of costal arch, shin edemas are present. Specify the suspected valvular defect:
a. Tricuspid regurgitation
*b. Aortic stenosis
c. Mitral insufficiency
d. Pulmonary artery stenosis
e. Ventricular septal defect

2258. A 24-year-old female teacher complains of dizziness and heart pain irradiating to the left nipple. Pain is not associated with physical activity and cannot be relieved by nitroglycerin, it abates after taking Valocordin and lasts an hour or more. The patient has a nearly 2-year history of this disease. Objectively: Ps- 76/min., BP- 110/70 mm Hg. Heart borders are normal, heart sounds are clear. The ECG shows respiratory arrhythmia. Radiograph of the cervicothoracic spine reveals no pathology. Lungs, abdomen are unremarkable.What changes in blood formula can be expected?
a. Leukemic hiatus
b. Increased ESR
c. Leukocytosis
d. Thrombocytopenia
*e. No changes

2259. A 51-year-old female patient complains of frequent defecation and liquid blood-streaked stools with mucus admixtures, diffuse pain in the inferolateral abdomen, 6 kg weight loss within the previous month. Objectively: body temperature - 37, 4°C, malnutrition, skin is pale and dry. Abdomen is soft, sigmoid is painful and spasmodic, makes a rumbling sound. Liver is dense, painful, extends 3 cm below the costal margin. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Non-specific ulcerative colitis
b. Sprue
c. Helminthic invasion
d. Intestinal enzymopathy
e. Bacillary dysentery

2260. Chief physician of a polyclinic charged a district doctor with a task to determine the pathological prevalence of disease N in his district. What document allows to estimate the disease prevalence in the population of a medical district?
a. Statistic coupons (-)
b. Statistic coupons (+)
*c. Prophylactic examinations register
d. Statistic coupons (+) and (-)
e. Vouchers for medical appointments

2261. A 32-year-old woman complains of dizziness, headache, palpitation, tremor. For the last several months she has been under outpatient observation for increased arterial pressure. Since recently such attacks have become more frequent and severe. Objectively: the skin is covered with clammy sweat, tremor of the extremities is present. HR- 110/min., BP- 220/140 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled. Blood test results: WBCs- 9, 8 × 109/l, ESR- 22 mm/hour. Blood glucose - 9,8 millimole/l. What disease is the most likely cause of this crisis?
a. Essential hypertension
b. Primary hyperaldosteronism
c. Diabetic glomerulosclerosis
*d. Pheochromocytoma
e. Preeclampsia

2262. A 45-year-old patient complains of pain in the epigastric region, left subcostal area, abdominal distension, diarrhea, loss of weight. He has been suffering from this condition for 5 years. Objectively: tongue is moist with white coating near the root; deep palpation of abdomen reveals slight pain in the epigastric region andМауо-Robson’s point. Liver is painless and protrudes 1 cm from the costal arch. Spleen cannot be palpated. What disease can be primarily suspected?
a. Chronic cholecystitis
b. Chronic enteritis
c. Atrophic gastritis
d. Peptic stomach ulcer
*e. Chronic pancreatitis

2263. A 58-year-old woman complains of spontaneous bruises, weakness, bleeding gums, dizziness. Objectively: the mucous membranes and skin are pale with numerous hemorrhages of various time of origin. Lymph nodes are not enlarged. Heart rate - 100/min., BP- 110/70 mm Hg. There are no changes of internal organs. Blood test results: RBC- 3, 0 × 1012/l, Нb- 92 g/l, colour index - 0,9, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, WBC - 10 × 109/l, eosinophiles - 2%, stab neutrophiles - 12%, segmented neutrophiles - 68%, lymphocytes - 11%, monocytes - 7%, ESR- 12 mm/hour. What index should be determined additionally by a laboratory to make a diagnosis?
*a. Platelets
b. Clotting time
c. Fibrinogen
d. Osmotic resistance of erythrocytes
e. Reticulocytes

2264. A 49-year-old patient complains of swallowing disorder that intensifies during eating solid food, hiccups, hoarse voice, nausea, regurgitation, significant weight loss (15 kg within 2,5 months). Objectively: body weight is reduced; the skin is pale and dry; vesicular respiration; heart sounds are sufficiently sonorous; heart rate is rhythmic. The abdomen is soft, no pain on palpation. The liver is not enlarged. What investigation is most necessary for making the diagnosis in this case?
a. Investigation of gastric secretion
*b. Esophagoduodenoscopy with biopsy
c. X-ray of the gastrointestinal tract
d. Clinical blood analysis
e. X-ray in the Trendelenburg position

2265. A 9-month-old child presents with fever, cough, dyspnea. The symptoms appeared 5 days ago after a contact with a person suffering from URTI. Objectively: the child is in grave condition. Temperature of 38°C, cyanosis of nasolabial triangle is present. Respiration rate - 54/min., nasal flaring during breathing. There was percussion dullness on the right below the scapula angle, and tympanic sound over the rest of lungs. Auscultation revealed bilateral fine moist crackles predominating on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute pneumonia
b. Acute laryngotracheitis
c. Acute bronchiolitis
d. Acute bronchitis
e. URTI

2266. A 50-year-old man, who works as a polisher at a combine-building factory, addressed the factory’s sectorial doctor with complaints of general fatigue, sensations of numbness and pain in his fingers. Objectively: the skin of his fingers is pale. Reaction to pain, tactile and thermal stimuli was revealed to be slightly disrupted. No disruptions can be observed within the other organs and systems. What disorder is most likely?
*a. Pneumatic hammer disease
b. Raynaud’s disease
c. Deforming arthrosis
d. Syringomyelia
e. Multiple neuritis

2267. A 27-year-old woman complains of bleeding gums, nasal hemorrhages, multiple hematomas on the skin of her limbs and on the front of her torso, extreme general fatigue. Blood test: Hb- 64 g/l, erythrocytes - 2, 5 × 1012/l, reticulocytes - 16%, platelets - 30 × 109/l, ESR- 22 mm/hour. What approach would be most efficient for treatment of this pathology?
a. Cytostatics
b. Group B vitamins
c. Dicynone (Etamsylate)
d. Platelet concentrate transfusion
*e. Splenectomy

2268. A 23-year-old patient had taken 1 g of aspirin to treat acute respiratory infection. After that he developed an asthmatic fit with labored expiration that was arrested by introduction of aminophylline. The patient’s medical history is not burdened with allergies. The patient has undergone two surgeries for nasal polyposis in the past. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Exercise-induced asthma
b. Symptomatic bronchospasm
c. Atopic bronchial asthma
d. Infectious allergic bronchial asthma
*e. Aspirin-induced asthma

2269. A 58-year-old woman undergoing chemotherapy for her oncologic disorder has developed sore throat. Examination revealed necrotic areas on the mucosa of the pharynx and tonsils.Many of her teeth are afflicted with caries. In blood: neutrophilic granulocytes are practically absent against the background of leukopenia. Leukocytes are represented mainly by lymphocytes and monocytes. What disease can be suspected in the given case?
a. Lacunar tonsillitis
b. Syphilitic tonsillitis
c. Diphtheria
*d. Agranulocitar tonsillitis
e. Pseudomembranous (Vincents) tonsillitis

2270. A patient complains of constant dull pain in the perineum and suprapubic area, weak flow of urine, frequent difficult painful urination, nocturia. The patient has been suffering from this condition for several months, during which urination was becoming increasingly difficult, and pain in the perineum has developed. On rectal examination: the prostate is enlarged (mainly its right lobe), dense, asymmetrical, central fissure is smoothed out, the right lobe is of stony density, painless, tuberous.What disease is it?
*a. Prostate cancer
b. Urolithiasis, prostatolith of the right lobe
c. Chronic congestion prostatitis
d. Prostate tuberculosis
e. Prostate sclerosis

2271. A child is 10 years old. The weight is 46 kg. Since birth the child has been gaining excessive weight. The parents are fullbodied. The child has undergone the following tests: carbohydrate tolerance, level of 17-ketosteroids, blood electrolytes, US of adrenal glands, cranium X-ray. The tests revealed no pathologies.The diagnosis of exogenic constitutive obesity has been made. What direction of therapy should be prioritized?
*a. Reducing diet and exercise
b. Anorectic drugs
c. ”Fat-burning” methods
d. Dehydration therapy
e. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment

2272. An 8-year-old child with a 3-year history of diabetes was hospitalized in hyperglycemic coma. Specify the initial dose of insulin to be administered:
*a. 0,1-0,2 U/kg of body weight per hour
b. 0,2-0,3 U/kg of body weight per hour
c. 0,4-0,5 U/kg of body weight per hour
d. 0,3-0,4 U/kg of body weight per hour
e. 0,05 U/kg of body weight per hour

2273. A worker, who was involved in fire fighting inside the building that stored 2 kg of mercury, has been delivered to a hospital with complaints of emotional expansiveness, palpitations, excessive sweating, body tremor, heart pain. Within one day his condition aggravated. Objectively: the skin is pale and moist. The patient is depressed. Permanent red dermographism, erethism, unstable BP are observed. What drug is the serum in this case?
a. Atropine sulfate
b. Amyl nitrite
c. Dipyroxime
*d. Unithiol
e. Calcium tetacine

2274. During meat testing Trichinella was detected in diaphragm crura in one of the two muscular tissue samples. What tactics should a doctor choose regarding this meat?
a. Preservation in 10% salt solution
b. Freezing under -12°C
c. Incineration
d. Boiling under 1,5 atmosphere
*e. Technolgical disposal

2275. A 40-year-old patient was bitten by a stray dog an hour ago. On the left shin there is a bite mark - the wound is 4x2x0,5 cm in size. What surgical aid would be most efficient in this case?
a. Blind suture
b. Retension sutures
c. Aseptic dressing
d. Salve dressing
*e. Lavage with soapy water, retension sutures

2276. A 30-year-old patient has been hospitalized with diagnosis of intestinal obstruction. The surgery revealed the obstruction of the small intestine to be caused by a helminth ball. What kind of helminth is it?
a. Guinea worm
b. Cysticercus
c. Pinworm
*d. Ascaris
e. Filariidae

2277. Mother of a newborn suffers from chronic pyelonephritis; she had a case of URTI before the delivery. The delivery is at term, for a long period waters were not breaking. On the 2nd day of life the child developed an erythematic rash, later the rash developed into blisters approximately 1 cm in diameter filled with serous purulent substance. Nikolskys symptom is positive. After the blisters had been lanced, erosions developed in their place. The child is inert. The childs body temperature is subfebrile. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Sepsis
b. Ritters disease
c. Vesiculopustulosis
d. Pseudofurunculosis
*e. Impetigo neonatorum

2278. Three weeks after a case of acute tonsillitis the patient is still weak, inert, subfebrile, his retromaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged. Tonsils are flabby, stick together with arches, there are purulent plugs in lacunae. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic pharyngitis
b. Paratonsillitis
c. Tonsillar tumour
*d. Chronic tonsillitis
e. Acute lacunar tonsillitis

2279. The following indicators were calculated to analyse population health and treatment quality in a cardiological hospital: primary cardiovascular morbidity - 62%; total cardiovascular morbidity - 483,55%; cardiovascular mortality - 10,9%; proportion of cardiovascular mortality within total mortality - 67,0%; primary disablement caused by cardiovascular diseases - 16,2 per 10.000 population. What indicator is an extensive value?
*a. Proportion of cardiovascular mortality within total mortality
b. Total cardiovascular morbidity
c. Cardiovascular mortality
d. Primary disablement caused by cardiovascular diseases
e. Primary cardiovascular morbidity

2280. A 6-year-old child complains of frequent liquid stool and vomiting. On the 2nd day of disease the child presented with inertness, temperature rise up to 38, 2°C, Ps- 150/min., scaphoid abdomen, palpatory painful sigmoid colon, defecation 10 times a day with liquid, scarce stool with mucus and streaks of green. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Intestinal amebiasis
c. Yersiniosis
*d. Shigellosis
e. Escherichiosis

2281. The institutions that take part in medical examinations include prevention and treatment facilities, medical board of Ministry of Defense, medical board of Ministry of Home Affairs, medico-social expert commissions, forensicmedical boards etc.What institutions are responsible for temporary disability examination?
*a. Prevention and treatment facilities
b. Medico-social expert commissions
c. Medical boards ofMinistry of Home Affairs
d. Medical boards of Ministry of Defense
e. Sanitary-and-prophylactic institutions

2282. After a lengthy march an army regiment has set camp for 3 days near a settlement. Sanitary-hygienic investigation detected several water sources. Choose the source that would satisfy the demands for potable water the most under the given field conditions:
*a. Artesian well
b. River
c. Melt water
d. Rain water
e. Brook

2283. Clinical statistical investigation was performed to determine efficiency of a new pharmacological preparation for patients with ischemic heart disease. What parametric test (coefficient) can be used to estimate reliability of the results?
*a. Student’s t-distribution
b. Matching factor
c. Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
d. Wilcoxon signed-rank test
e. Sign test

2284. A 30-year-old parturient woman was delivered to a maternity hospital with full-term pregnancy. She complains of severe lancinating pain in the uterus that started 1 hour ago, nausea, vomiting, cold sweat. Anamnesis states cesarean section 2 years ago. Uterine contractions stopped. Skin and mucous membranes are pale. Heart rate is 100/min., BP is 90/60mmHg.Uterus has no clear margins, is sharply painful. No heartbeat can be auscultated in the fetus. Moderate bloody discharge from the uterus can be observed. Uterus cervix is 4 cm open. Presenting part is not visible. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Threatened uterine rupture
b. Initial uterine rupture
*c. Uterine rupture
d. Premature detachment of normally positioned placenta
e. Compression of inferior pudendal vein

2285. A parturient woman is 23 years old. Internal obstetric examination shows the uterine cervix to be completely open. Fetal bladder is absent. Cephalic presentation is observed in the plane of the small pelvic outlet. Sagittal suture is at the longitudinal section of the small pelvic outlet, small fontanel is situated closer to the uterus. What cephalic position will the newborn have during birth in this case?
a. Major oblique lie
*b. Minor oblique lie
c. Transverse lie
d. Longitudinal lie
e. Medium oblique lie

2286. During the dynamic observation of a parturient woman in the second stage of labor it was registered that the fetal heart rate decreased to 90-100/min. and did not normalize after contractions. Vaginal examination revealed the complete cervical dilatation, the fetal head filling the entire posterior surface of the pubic symphysis and sacral hollow; the sagittal suture was in the anteroposterior diameter of the pelvic outlet, the posterior fontanelle was in front under the pubic arch. What plan for further labour management should be recommended?
a. Caesarean section
b. Application of cavity forceps
c. Stimulation of labour activity through intravenous injection of oxytocin
*d. Application of forceps minor
e. Episiotomy

2287. An 8-year-old girl periodically has sudden short-term heart pains, sensation of chest compression, epigastric pain, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: the patient is pale, respiratory rate - 40/min., jugular pulse is present. Ps- 185/min., of poor volume. BP- 75/40 mm Hg. ECG taken during an attack shows ectopic P waves, QRS wave is not deformed. At the end of an attack a compensatory pause is observed. The most likely cause of the attack is:
*a. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
b. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
c. Atrial fibrillation
d. Complete AV-block
e. Sinus tachycardia

2288. A 16-year-old girl has primary amenorrhea, no pubic hair growth, normally developed mammary glands; her genotype is 46 ХY; uterus and vagina are absent. What is your diagnosis?
a. Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome
b. Sheehan syndrome
c. Cushing’s disease
*d. Testicular feminization syndrome
e. Cushing’s syndrome

2289. A planner designs a heating system for a pre-school educational establishment. The highest air temperature should be in the following room:
a. Gymnasium
*b. Game room of a nursery group
c. Bedroom of a nursery group
d. Common room of a preschool group
e. Bedroom of a preschool group

2290. A 27-year-old sexually active woman complains of numerous vesicles on the right sex lip, itch and burning. Eruptions regularly appear before menstruation and disappear 8-10 days later. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Primary syphilis
b. Bartholinitis
*c. Herpes simplex virus
d. Cytomegalovirus infection
e. Genital condylomata

2291. A 35-year-old woman addressed a gynecological in-patient department with complaints of regular pains in her lower abdomen, which increase during menstruation, and dark-brown sticky discharge from the genital tracts. On bimanual examination: the uterine body is slightly enlarged, the appendages are not palpated. Mirror examination of the uterine cervix reveals bluish spots.What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Cervical erosion
b. Cervical cancer
c. Cervical fibroid
*d. Cervical endometriosis
e. Cervical polyp

2292. A 10-year-old patient has a history of mild bronchial asthma. During a regular check-up the patient should be recommended:
a. To avoid spa treatment
b. To avoid going to the seaside
c. To avoid body tempering procedures
d. To avoid sports
*e. To avoid allergenic food

2293. A baby was born by a young smoker. The labour was complicated by uterine inertia, difficult delivery of the baby’s head and shoulders. The baby’s Apgar score was 4. Which of the following is a risk factor for a spinal cord injury?
a. Chronic hypoxia
*b. Difficult delivery of the head and shoulders
c. Pernicious habits
d. Young age of the mother
e. Uterine inertia

2294. An emergency situation at a chemical plant caused acute occupational intoxication. A doctor who revealed the case of ”acute occupational disease (intoxication)” must notify the following authority:
a. Plant administration
b. Medical unit of the plant
c. Ministry of Public Health of Ukraine
*d. Sanitary and epidemiological station
e. Trade union committee of the plant

2295. A 27-year-old woman has been treated in a surgical department for pleural empyema for 6 months. Multiple paracenteses of the pleural cavity were performed along with antibacterial treatment. The patients condition is slowly aggravating; attempts to fully stretch the lung were unsuccessful. Choose the tactics:
*a. Decortication of the lung
b. Set constant active suction drain
c. Include hyperbaric oxygenation in the treatment
d. Pulmonectomy
e. Change antibiotics

2296. A prematurely born girl is now 8 months old. She has dyspnea, tachycardia, hepatosplenomegaly, physical developmental lag, limb cyanosis. There is parasternal cardiac hump, auscultation revealed systolodiastolic murmur in the II intercostal space on the left. BP is 90/0 mm Hg. What disease can be suspected?
*a. Patent ductus arteriosus
b. Stenosis of aortal valve
c. Nonclosure of interventricular septum
d. Stenosis of pulmonary artery
e. Coarctation of aorta

2297. Three days ago a boy underwent removal of a foreign body from under a nail plate. 2 days later he deeloped acute pulsating pain at the end of the nail bone which aggravated at pressing. Nail fold became hyperemic, body temperature rose up to 37, 5°C, there was a change in nail plate colour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess
*b. Subungual panaritium
c. Paronychia
d. Erysipelas
e. Erysipeloid

2298. A 25-year-old woman complains of menstruation retention lasting for 3 years. The patient explains it by a difficult childbirth complicated with profuse hemorrhage, weight loss, brittleness and loss of hair, loss of appetite, depression. Objective examination reveals no pathologic changes of uterus and uterine appendages.What pathogenesis is characteristic of this disorder?
*a. Decreased production of gonadotropin
b. Hyperproduction of androgen
c. Hyperproduction of prolactin
d. Decreased production of progesterone
e. Hyperproduction of estrogen

2299. A patient in a clinical death condition is being resuscitated through mouth-to-mouth artificial pulmonary ventilation and external cardiac massage. A doctor noticed that air does not flow into the patient’s airways and his head and torso are positioned at the same level.Why is artificial respiration not effective in the given case?
*a. Tongue retraction
b. External cardiac massage
c. The patient’s mouth is too small
d. Probe is absent from stomach
e. Low breathing volume

2300. A 45-year-old patient with urolithiasis had an attack of renal colic. What is the mechanism of the attack development?
a. Renal artery spasm
*b. Disturbed urine outflow from the kidney
c. Ureteric twists
d. Increase in urine specific gravity
e. Destruction of glomerules

2301. A 26-year-old woman has attended maternity center complaining of her inability to become pregnant despite 3 years of regular sex life. Examination revealed the following: increased body weight; male-type pubic hair; excessive pilosis of thighs; ovaries are dense and enlarged; basal body temperature is monophasic. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Adrenogenital syndrome
b. Inflammation of uterine appendages
*c. Ovaries sclerocystosis
d. Premenstrual syndrome
e. Gonadal dysgenesis

2302. The process of open-cut mining requires drilling and blasting operations, rock and ore excavation, transportation of ore to fragmentation and sorting factories and transportation of barren rock to slag-heaps, road building and maintenance, repair works. What factor of production is most important for miner’s health?
*a. High content of dust in the air
b. Vibration
c. Adverse microclimate
d. Noise
e. High content of explosion gas

2303. A woman addressed a gynecologist on the 20th day of puerperal period with complaints of pain in the left mammary gland, puruent discharge from the nipple. Objectively: Ps- 120/min., body temperature is 39°C. The leftmammary gland is painful, larger than the right one, the skin there is hyperemic; in the upper quadrant there is an infiltrate 10x15 cm in size with soft center. Blood test: ESR- 50 mm/hour, leukocytes - 15, 0 × 109/l. What would be the treatment tactics?
a. Refer to a gynecology department
b. Refer to a surgeon for conservative treatment
c. Lance the mammary gland abscess in a maternity department
*d. Transfer to a surgical department for surgical treatment
e. Refer to a postnatal department

2304. The correlation between the service record and eosinophil concentration in blood was studied in workers at dyeing shops of textile factories. What index will be most informative for the analysis of this data?
a. Sign index
*b. Correlation factor
c. Standardized index
d. Student’s criterion
e. Fitting criterion

2305. A 3-month-old girl has rhinitis, dyspnea, dry cough. She has been sick for 2 days. Objectively: pale skin, acrocyanosis, hypopnoe; breathing rate is 80/min.; over the whole pulmonary surface there is vesiculotympanitic (bandbox) resonance observed with numerous bubbling crackles. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Foreign body in airways
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Pneumonia
d. Mucoviscidosis
*e. Acute bronchiolitis

2306. A 24-year-old patient complains of gaining body mass and increased appetite. Objectively: built of hypersthenic type, body mass index is 33,2 kg/m2, waist circumference is 100 cm. Waist to hips circumference ratio is 0,95.What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Itsenko-Cushing hypothalamic obesity, II stage, gynoid type
b. Alimentary constitutive obesity, II stage, android type
c. Itsenko-Cushing hypothalamic obesity, I stage, android type
*d. Alimentary constitutive obesity, I stage, android type
e. Alimentary constitutive obesity, III stage, gynoid type

2307. A 36 year old female patient complains ofgeneral weakness, edemas of her face and hands, rapid fatigability during walking, difficult diglutition, cardiac irregularities. These symptoms developed 11 days after holiday at the seaside. Objectively: face erythema, edema of shin muscles. Heart sounds are muffled, BP is 100/70 mm Hg. In blood: ASAT activity is 0,95 millimole/h×l, ALAT- 1,3 micromole/h×l, aldolase - 9,2 IU/l, creatine phosphokinase - 2,5 micromole Р/g×l.What method of study would be most specific?
a. Echocardiogram
b. ECG
*c. Muscle biopsy
d. Electromyography
e. Determination of cortisol concentration in blood and urine

2308. A 14-year-old girl has fainted during a meeting. The day before she complained of a headache. The skin is pale, the limbs are cold, shallow breathing, heart sounds are muffled; heart rate is 51/min.; BP is 90/50 mm Hg. The abdomen is soft. Meningeal symptoms are negative.Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute right ventricular failure
b. Respiratory failure
c. Unconsciousness
d. Acute left ventricular failure
*e. Collapse

2309. For the last 15 years a 48-year-old patient has been working at the factory producing synthetic resins. Lately he has been complaining of significant general fatigue, headaches, frequent urination (predominantly during the day), red color of urine. What complication of benzene nitrocompounds poisoning can be suspected?
a. Chronic pyelonephritis
*b. Malignant tumor of the urinary bladder
c. Chronic prostatitis
d. Chronic cystitis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

2310. A 60-year-old woman developed weakness, vertigo, rapid fatigability during the last year. Recently there have been dyspnea and paresthesia observed. Objectively: skin and mucous membranes are pale and icteric. Lingual papillae are smoothed out. Liver and spleen are situated at the edge of costal arch. Blood test: Hb- 70 g/l, erythrocytes - 1, 7×1012/l, blood color index - 1,2, macrocytes. What drug can be prescribed on pathogenetic grounds?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Vitamin B6
*c. Vitamin B12
d. Iron preparations
e. Vitamin B1

2311. In the morning upon waking a 65-yearold patient developed weakness in the rightside limbs, speech disorder, decreased sensitivity of the left side of the body. On examination: conscious, BP- 100/60 mm Hg, motor aphasia, right-sided central hemiparesis and hemihypalgesia. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Hemorrhagic stroke
b. Brain tumor
c. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
*d. Ishemic stroke
e. Encephalitis

2312. The objective of a statistical study was to find out the extent of seeking medical care by the population. For this purpose 300 residents of the area were interviewed. Information was collected by means of a special questionnaire. What method of collecting information was used by researchers?
a. Immediate registration
b. Doing extracts
c. -
*d. Anamnestic
e. Immediate examination

2313. A 57-year-old woman complains of having a sensation of esophageal compresion, palpitation, difficult breathing during eating solid food, occasional vomiting with a full mouth, ”wet pillow” sign at night for the last 6 months. Objectively: body tempearture - 39°C, height - 168 cm, weight - 72 kg, Ps-76/min., BP- 120/80 mm Hg. X-ray revealed a considerable dilation of the esophagus and its constriction in the cardial part. What pathology is most likely to have caused dysphagia in this patient?
*a. Achalasia cardiae
b. Hiatal hernia
c. Reflux esophagitis
d. Esophageal carcinoma
e. Primary esophagism

2314. A 25-year-old man complains of pain in the lower third of his left thigh, which occurs both with and without physical exertion. Possibility of trauma is denied by the patient. Objectively: skin colour is normal; pastosity and pain can be detected with deep palpation; knee joint mobility is reduced. Xray of distal femoral metaphysis shows an area of destruction and spicule. Blood test: immature cells, no signs of inflammation. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Marble-bone disease
*b. Osteogenic sarcoma
c. Chronic osteomyelitis
d. Osteitis fibrosa cystica
e. Multiple myeloma

2315. A 30-year-old woman suffers from polycystic renal disease. She has been admitted with signs of fatigue, thirst and nocturia. Diuresis is up to 1800 ml per day. BP is 200/100 mm Hg. Blood test: erythrocytes - 1, 8 × 109/l, Hb- 68 g/l. Urine analysis: specific gravity - 1005, leukocytes - 50-60, erythrocytes - 3-5 in the vision field, creatinine - 0,82 mmol/l, potassium - 6,5 mmol/l, glomerular filtration rate - 10 ml/min. What tactics would be leading in the patient’s treatment?
a. Hypotensive therapy
*b. Hemodialysis
c. Sorbent agents
d. Antibacterial therapy
e. Blood transfusion

2316. In a rural health care area there is a case of child dying during the first month of life. To analyse this situation, among other measures, an expert assessment of medical records is performed. What medical document should be considered first?
a. Vaccination card
b. Infant development history
*c. Child development history
d. Outpatient medical record
e. Child’s medical record

2317. A region attended by a central regional hospital demonstrates increased hemorrhagic stroke morbidity. Essential hypertension morbidity, however, remains at the same level and is below the average level registered within the larger area.What managerial decision should be made in this case?
*a. To design and implement measures for early diagnostics of arterial hypertension
b. To design and implement measures for secondary prevention of hypertension complications
c. To design and implement improved dispensary system for hypertensive patients
d. To design and implement measures for professional development of medical workers
e. To design and implement measures for primary prevention of essential hypertension

2318. A 42-year-old man was delivered to a surgical in-patient department with complaints of icteric skin, pain in the right subcostal area. Biochemical blood analysis: total bilirubin - 140 mcmol/l, direct bilirubin - 112 mcmol/l. On US: choledoch duct - 1,4 cm, a concrement is detected in the distal area. Gallbladder is 40 cm, no concrements. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Laparotomy with choledoch duct drain
b. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
*c. Endoscopic papillosphincterotomy
d. Laparotomy with cholecystectomy
e. Threatment in an infectious diseases hospital

2319. 4 weeks after myocardial infarction a 56- year-old patient developed acute heart pain, pronounced dyspnea. Objectively: the patient’s condition is extremely grave, there is marked cyanosis of the face, swelling and throbbing of the neck veins, peripheral pulse is absent, carotid artery pulse is rhythmic, 130/min., BP is 60/20 mm Hg. Auscultation of the heart reveals extremely muffled sounds, percussion reveals heart border extension in both directions.What is the optimal treatment tactis for this patient?
a. Oxygen inhalation
b. Conservative treatment, infusion of adrenomimetics
c. Pleural cavity drainage
*d. Pericardiocentesis and immediate thoracotomy
e. Puncture of the pleural cavity on the left

2320. A 45-year-old man was delivered to a hospital with complaints of vomiting with streaks of blood, loss of weight. On esophagofiberscopy a cauliflower-shaped mucosal growth was detected in the abdominal esophagus. The mucosa there bleeds on contact. What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
a. Barrett esophagus
b. Esophageal diverticulum
c. Esophageal achalasia
*d. Esophageal tumor
e. Abdominal esophagitis

2321. A 35-year-old man complains of intense lumbar pain irradiating to the inguinal area, external genitalia, thigh; frequent urination, chill, nausea, vomiting. Objectively: positive Pasternatsky’s symptom(costovertebral angle tenderness). Urine analysis revealed that RBCs and WBCs covered the total field of microscope; the urine exhibited high protein concentration. These clinical presentations were most likely caused by the following pathology:
a. Intestinal obstruction
b. Osteochondrosis, acute radicular syndrome
c. Cholelithiasis, biliary colic
d. Renal infarct
*e. Urolithiasis, renal colic

2322. A 20-year-old patient complains of pain in the left lumbar region, arterial pressure rise up to 160/110 mm Hg. US revealed that the structure and size of the right kidney were within age norms, there were signs of 3 degree hydronephrotic transformation of the left kidney. Doppler examination revealed an additional artery running to the lower pole of the kidney. Excretory urogram shows a narrowing in the region of ureteropelvic junction. Specify the treatment tactics:
a. Administration of spasmolytics
b. Kidney catheterization
c. Administration of β-blockers
*d. Surgical intervention
e. Administration of ACE inhibitors

2323. As a result of load lifting a 68-year-old woman developed acute pain in the lumbar region, in a buttock, posterolateral surface of her right thigh, external surface of the right shin and dorsal surface of foot. Objectively: weakness of the anterior tibial muscle, long extensor muscle of the right toes, short extensor muscle of the right toes. Low Achilles reflex on the right. Positive Lasegue’s sign. What examination method would be most effective for specification of the diagnosis of L5 root discogenic compression?
a. Angiography
b. Lumbar puncture
c. Spinal column X-ray
d. Electromyography
*e. Magnetic resonance scan

2324. A 23-year-old female patient has been suffering from mental disorder since the age of 18, the course of disorder has no remission periods. At hospital the patient mostly presents with non-purposeful foolish excitation: she makes stereotypic grimaces, exposes herself, publically masturbating, loudly laughs, repeating stereotypical obscene shouts. The patient should be prescribed:
a. Tranquilizers
b. Antidepressants
*c. Neuroleptics
d. Nootropics
e. Mood stabilizers

2325. During preventive ultrasound scan of abdomen performed during regular checkup in a school the following was revealed in an 11-year-old student of the 5th grade: the left kidney is 3 cm below the normal position, its shape, size and structure are within the norm, the contralateral kidney cannot be observed at its proper place. The preliminary diagnosis is as follows: congenital anomaly of renal development, dystopic left kidney, right kidney is absent or pelvic dystopic. What Xray method would be required for making the final diagnosis and determining the functional capacity of both kidneys?
*a. Renal dynamic scintigraphy
b. Radionuclide renography
c. Excretory urography
d. Thermography
e. Radioimmunoassay

2326. A young woman suffering from seborrhea oleosa has numerous light-brown and white spots on the skin of her torso and shoulders. The spots have clear margins, branny desquamation, no itching. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Seborrheic dermatitis
b. Torso dermatophytosis
*c. Pityriasis versicolor
d. Pityriasis rosea
e. Vitiligo

2327. A patient is 28 years old. He has been suffering from mental disorder since he was 22. His current condition has changed acutely: for 3 days the patient has been refusing to leave his home. He claims that there is a ”telepathy” occurring between him and other people, through which he receives ”thoughts of strangers” and transmits his own thoughts for everyone to hear. He thinks his thoughts and actions are manipulated through this ”telepathy”. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Acute reaction to stress
*b. Paranoid schizophrenia
c. Manic episode
d. Depressive episode
e. Organic delirium

2328. A 40-year-old patient is registered in a narcological dispensary. Somatically: skin is dramatically hyperemic, sclera are injected, hyperhidrosis is present. BP- 140/100 mm Hg, heart rate - 100/min. Mental state: autopsychic orientation is intact, allopsychic orientation is distorted. The patient presents with motor anxiety. There is an expression of fear on his face. He refuses to talk about his problems and asks to release him immediately, because he ”may be killed”. This state developed in a day after one of his regular drinking bouts. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Paranoia
b. Organic delirium
*c. Delirium tremens
d. Alcoholic hallucinosis
e. Alcoholic paranoid

2329. A 35-year-old female patient has gained 20 kg weight within a year with the normal diet. She complains of chill, sleepiness, dyspnea. The patient’s mother and sister are corpulent. Objectively: height - 160 cm, weight - 92 kg, BMI- 35,9. Obesity is uniform, there are no striae. The face is amimic. The skin is dry. The tongue is thickened. Heart sounds are muffled. Heart rate - 56/min., BP- 140/100 mm Hg. The patient has constipations, amenorrhea for 5 months. TSH- 28 mkME/l (normal rate - 0,32-5). Craniogram shows no pathology. What is the etiology of obesity in this case?
a. Hypo-ovarian
b. Alimentary and constitutive
c. Hypercorticoid
*d. Hypothyroid
e. Hypothalamic-pituitary

2330. A 10 week pregnant woman was admitted to a hospital for recurrent pain in the lower abdomen, bloody discharges from the genital tracts. The problems developed after a case of URTI. The woman was registered for antenatal care. Speculum examination revealed cyanosis of vaginal mucosa, clean cervix, open cervical canal discharging blood and blood clots; the lower pole of the gestational sac was visible. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Pregnancy maintenance therapy
b. Hysterectomy
c. Antiviral therapy
*d. Curettage of the uterus
e. Expectant management, surveillance

2331. A patient with fibromyoma of uterus sized up to 8-9 weeks of pregnancy consulted a gynaecologist about acute pain in the lower abdomen. Examination revealed pronounced positive symptoms of peritoneal irritation, high leukocytosis.Vaginal examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged corresponding to 9 weeks of pregnancy due to the fibromatous nodes, one of which was mobile and extremely painful. Appendages were not palpable. There were moderate mucous discharges. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Fractional diagnostic curettage of the uterine cavity
b. Surveillance and spasmolytic therapy
*c. Urgent surgery (laparotomy)
d. Surgical laparoscopy
e. Surveillance and antibacterial therapy

2332. A 4-month-old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, vomiting occurred once. Objectively: the child’s condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumor-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctor’s finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pylorostenosis
*b. Ileocecal invagination
c. Wilm’s tumour
d. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
e. Helminthic invasion

2333. A woman has focal encephalitis in the anamnesis. Her spatial orientation is not disrupted. She has a sensation, as if ”everything seems surreal: buildings are small, round or distorted; trees are upside down; people are very tall with thin limbs”. Determine the psychopathologic syndrome:
a. Hallucinatory
b. Depersonalization
*c. Derealization
d. Oneiric
e. Cenestopathic

2334. A 56-year-old woman complains of itching skin of her torso, constant nausea, constipation, sensation of heaviness and pain in the right subcostal area, extreme general fatigue. The patient suffers from biliary cirrhosis. The skin is pale icteric. The abdomen is soft, the liver protrudes 2,0 cm from under the margin of the right costal arch, sensitive on palpation. Biochemical investigation: total bilirubin - 142,0 mcmol/l, conjugated bilirubin - 139,0 mcmol/l, alanine aminotransferase - 0,98 mmol/hour×l, aspartate aminotransferase - 0,82 mmol/hour×l, alkaline phosphatase - 8,7 mmol/hour×l. What drug should be prescribed in the first place?
a. Essentiale forte (Phospholipides)
b. Livolin forte
c. Sirepar
d. Allochol
*e. Ursodeoxycholic acid

2335. A 40-year-old female patient complains of having a bulge on the anterior surface of neck for 5 years. Objectively: Ps- 72/min., arterial pressure - 110/70 mm Hg, in the right lobe of thyroid gland palpation reveals a mobile node 4x2 cm in size, the left lobe is not palpable, the basal metabolic rate is 6%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter
b. Mixed euthyroid goiter
c. Median cervical cyst
*d. Nodular euthyroid goiter
e. Riedel’s thyroiditis

2336. Estimation of community health level involved analysis of a report on diseases registered among the population of district under charge (reporting form 12). What index is calculated based on this report?
a. Index of pathological affection
b. Index of hospitalized morbidity
c. Index of basic non-epidemic morbidity
*d. Common morbidity rate
e. Index of morbidity with temporary disability

2337. A 32-year-old woman addressed a dermatologist with complaints of slightly itching rashes in the mouth angles. She has been suffering from this condition for 3 days. Objectively: there are isolated small phlyctenas and superficial erosions covered in honey-yellow scabs against the background of slight hyperemia. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Streptoderma
b. Atopic cheilitis
c. Eczema
d. Dermatitis
e. Herpes

2338. After a contact with chemicals a plant worker has suddenly developed stridor, voice hoarseness, barking cough, progressing dyspnea. Objective examination reveals acrocyanosis. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Laryngeal edema
b. PATE
c. Pneumothorax
d. Pulmonary atelectasis
e. Laryngeal carcinoma

2339. An 18-year-old woman complains of pains in her lower abdomen, purulent discharge from the vagina, temperature rise up to 37, 8°C. Anamnesis states that she had random sexual contact the day before the signs appeared. She was diagnosed with acute bilateral adnexitis. On additional examination: leukocytes in the all field of vision, bacteria, diplococci with intracellular and extracellular position. What agent is most likely in the given case?
a. Colibacillus
b. Trichomonad
c. Staphylococcus
*d. Gonococcus
e. Chlamydia

2340. A 45-year-old man has been suffering from duodenal ulcer disease for 5 years. He complains of weakness, dizziness, dryness of the skin. Objectively: the skin and visible mucosa are pale, chapped lips; heart rate is 100/min., BP- 100/70 mm Hg, systolic murmur at all points on heart auscultation. All other internal organs are unchanged. Fecal occult blood test is positive. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3, 1 × 1012/l, Hb- 88 g/l, color index - 0,7, leukocytes - 4, 6 × 109/l, platelets - 350×109/l, ESR- 21 mm/hour, anisocytosis, poikilocythemia, serum iron - 9,5 mcmol/l. What treatment tactics would you choose?
a. Concentrated red cells transfusion
b. Corticosteroids, cytostatics
c. Ascorbic acid, calcium chloride
*d. Iron preparations, balanced diet
e. Intramuscular introduction of 500 mkg of cyanocobalamin

2341. A 58-year-old patient complains of a headache in the occipital region, nausea, choking, opplotentes. The presentations appeared after a physical exertion. Objectively: the patient is excited. Face is hyperemic. Skin is pale. Heart sounds are regular, the 2nd aortic sound is accentuated. BP- 240/120 mm Hg, HR- 92/min. Auscultation reveals some fine moist crackles in the lower lungs. Liver is not enlarged. ECG shows signs of hypertrophy and left ventricular overload. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute myocardial infarction, pulmonary edema
b. Uncomplicated hypertensic crisis
c. Community-acquired pneumonia
*d. Complicated hypertensic crisis
e. Bronchial asthma exacerbation

2342. A 45-year-old patient (14-year-long work record as a house painter) upon the contact with synthetic paint develops skin reddening, edema, severe itching and oozing lesions on her face. Symptoms disappear after the contact with this chemical substance stops but even the smell of paint alone is enough to make them reappear each time. Each recurrence is characterised by increased severity of symptoms. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Toxicodermia
*b. Professional eczema
c. Allergic contact dermatitis
d. Simple contact dermatitis
e. Urticaria

2343. A 32-year-old woman addressed a maternity clinic with complaints of infertility that has been lasting for 7 years. Her menstrual cycle occurs in two phases. Hysterosalpingography reveals obstruction of the uterine tubes in the ampullar areas, an adhesive process in the small pelvis can be observed. What treatment is most advisable in this case?
a. Adnexectomy
b. Hydrotubation
c. Laparotomy
d. Tubectomy
*e. Laparoscopy

2344. Survey radiograph of a 52-year-old worker of an agglomeration plant (28 years of experience, the concentration of metal dust is 22-37 mg/m3) shows mildly pronounced interstitial fibrosis with diffused contrast welldefined small nodular shadows. The patient has no complaints. Pulmonary function is not compromised. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Anthracosis
*b. Siderosis
c. Anthraco-silicatosis
d. Silicosis
e. Silicatosis

2345. A week ago a 65-year-old patient suffered an acute myocardial infarction, his general condition deteriorated: he complains of dyspnea at rest, pronounced weakness. Objectively: edema of the lower extremities, ascites is present.Heart borders are extended, paradoxical pulse is observed 2 cm from the apex beat to the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Recurrent myocardial infarction
b. Cardiosclerotic aneurysm
c. Pulmonary embolism
*d. Acute cardiac aneurysm
e. Acute pericarditis

2346. A 60-year-old patient complains of nearly permanent sensation of heaviness and fullness in the epigastrium, which increases after eating, foul-smelling eructation, occasional vomiting with food consumed 1-2 days ago, weight loss. 12 years ago he was first found to have an ulcer of pyloric channel. The patient has taken ranitidine for periodic hunger pains. The patient’s condition has been deteriorating over the last 3 months. Objectively: splashing sound in the epigastrium is present. What kind of complication is it?
a. Foreign body in the stomach (bezoar)
b. Malignization of gastric ulcer
c. Penetration of gastric ulcer
d. Functional pyloric spasm
*e. Pyloric stenosis

2347. A 5-year-old child has body temperature increased up to febrile numbers, suffers from inertness, weakness. Examination revealed hemorrhage on the skin of limbs and torso. Enlargement of cervical and axillary lymph nodes can be detected. The liver is 4 cm below the costal arch; the spleen is 6 cm below the costal arch. Blood test: erythrocytes - 2, 3 × 1012/l, Hb- 60 g/l, platelets - 40 × 109/l, leukocytes - 32, 8 × 109/l, eosinophiles - 1%, band neutrophiles - 1%, segmented neutrophiles - 12%, lymphocytes - 46%, monocytes - 1%, blasts - 40%, Duke’s bleeding time is 9 min. What examination is necessary to make the diagnosis?
a. Lymph nodes biopsy
b. Detection of hepatitis markers
c. Investigation of platelets dynamic functions
*d. Myelogram
e. US of abdominal cavity

2348. A child from primipregnancy was born in a term labor and has body weight of 4000 g and body length of 57 cm. When born, he was nonresponsive to examination. Diagniosis is diffuse. Heart rate is 80/min.What resuscitation measures should be taken?
a. Administer naloxone
*b. Begin ALV with mask
c. Intubate and begin ALV
d. Introduce 100%oxygen
e. Tactile stimulation

2349. A 15-year-old teenager has undergone medical examination in military recruitment center. The following was revealed: interval systolic murmur at the cardiac apex, accent of the II heart sound over the pulmonary artery, tachycardia. What additional examination method will be most informative for determining a diagnosis?
a. X-ray
b. Electrocardiography
*c. Echocardiography
d. Phonocardiography
e. Rheography

2350. A 64-year-old patient has been hospitalised with complaints of progressive jaundice that developed over 3 weeks ago without pain syndrome, along with general weakness, loss of appetite. Objectively: temperature is 36, 8°C, heart rate is 78/min., abdomen is soft and painless, peritoneum irritation symptoms are not detected, palpation reveals sharply enlarged tense gallbladder. What disease can be characterised with these symptoms?
a. Chronic cholecystitis
b. Cholecystitis caused by lambliasis
c. Duodenal ulcer
d. Acute cholecystitis
*e. Cancer of pancreas head

2351. A 6-year-old girl attended a general practitioner with her mother. The child complains of burning pain and itching in her external genitalia. The girl was taking antibiotics the day before due to her suffering from acute bronchitis. On examination: external genitalia are swollen, hyperemic, there is white deposit accumulated in the folds. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Helminthic invasion
b. Herpes vulvitis
c. Trichomoniasis
d. Nonspecific vulvitis
*e. Candidal vulvovaginitis

2352. A patient with otopyosis is in sharply deteriorating condition: he developed headache, vomiting, febrile temperature, general hyperesthesia. Meningeal symptoms and stagnant optic disks are observed. There are no focal symptoms. Liquor is turbid, blood pressure is high, albuminocytological dissociation occurs with neutrophils. What disease can be suspected?
a. Serous meningitis
b. Meningoencephalitis
*c. Secondary purulent meningitis
d. Primary purulent meningitis
e. Subarachnoid hemorrhage

2353. A 25-year-old patient is not married and has sexual relations with several partners. During the last 3 months he noticed small amount of mucoserous secretions produced from urethra. Subjectively: periodical itching or burning pain in urethra. Two months ago pain in the knee join developed. Possibility of trauma or exposure to cold is denied by the patient. During the last week eye discomfort is noted - lacrimation and itching.What provisional diagnosis can be suggested?
a. URTI with conjunctiva and joints affected
*b. Reactive arthritis
c. Seasonal pollinosis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Bacterial nonspecific urethral conjunctivitis

2354. A 19-year-old patient complains of severe pain in axillary crease. Condition onset was a week ago after her swimming in a cold river and epilation. The next day painful ”boil” appeared that was becoming larger every day and became a plum-sized tumor. Upon examination nodular conical growths joined together are detected, the skin covering them is bluish-red in color. Some nodules have fistulous openings producing thick purulent mass. Body temperature is 38, 5°C, general malaise. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Pyoderma chancriformis
*b. Hydradenitis
c. Cutaneous tuberculosis
d. Carbuncle
e. Necrotizing ulcerative trichophytosis

2355. Annual report of an in-patient ward presents data about the number of patient days and the number of patients, who have undergone treatment within a year. What work indicator of the in-patient ward can be calculated based on these data?
a. Efficient use of the hospital bed capacity
*b. Average duration of in-patient treatment of a patient
c. Hospital bed turnover rate
d. Bed occupancy rate
e. Mortality

2356. ECG revealed the following in a 10- year-old child: sharp acceleration of the heart rate - 240/min., P wave overlaps with T wave and deforms it, moderate lengthening of PQ interval, QRS complex is without changes. What pathology does this child have?
a. Extrasystole
*b. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
c. Ventricular hypertrophy
d. Atrial hypertrophy
e. WPW syndrome

2357. A 54-year-old patient complains of weakness, jaundice, itching skin. Disease onset was 1,5 months ago: fever up to 39°C appeared at first, with progressive jaundice developed 2 weeks later. On hospitalisation jaundice was severely progressed. Liver cannot be palpated. Gallbladder is enlarged and painless. Blood bilirubin is 190 micromole/ l (accounting for direct bilirubin). Stool is acholic.What is the most likely jaundice genesis in this patient?
a. Hemolytic jaundice
b. Hepatocellular jaundice
*c. Mechanical jaundice
d. Caroli syndrome
e. Gilbert’s syndrome

2358. A 22-year-old patient complains of 8- month delay of menstruation. Anamnesis: menarche since the age of 12,5. Since the age of 18 menstruations are irregular. No pregnancies. Mammary glands have normal development; when the nipples are pressed, milk drops are discharged. On gynecological examination: moderate uterus hypoplasia. On hormonal examination: prolactin level exceeds the norm two times. On computed tomogram of the sellar region: a spaceoccupying lesion 4 mm in diameter is detected. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
b. Lactation amenorrhea
*c. Pituitary tumor
d. Sheehan’s syndrome
e. Cushing’s disease

2359. A 2-year-old child in a satisfactory condition periodically presents with moderate proteinuria, microhematuria. US results: the left kidney is undetectable, the right one is enlarged, there are signs of double pyelocaliceal system.What study is required to specify the diagnosis?
a. Retrograde urography
b. Micturating cystography
*c. Excretory urography
d. Doppler study of renal vessels
e. Radioisotope renal scan

2360. A 13-year-old girl complains of fatigability, frequent headaches, cardialgia. Eight years ago she had a case of pyelonephritis. Urine analyses periodically revealed leukocyturia. The child has undergone no further treatment. On examination: increased BP up to 150/100 mm Hg. Ultrasound investigation revealed significant reduction of the right kidney. What process is leading in arterial hypertension pathogenesis in this case?
a. Disruption of renal circulation
b. Disruption of water-electrolytic balance
*c. Hyperactivity of renin-angiotensin system
d. Hypersympathicotonia
e. Increased cortisol level

2361. A 26-year-old patient with affective bipolar disorder has developed a condition manifested by mood improvement, behavioural and sexual hyperactivity, verbosity, active body language, reduced need for sleep. Which of the following drugs are most efficient in this case?
a. Tranquilizers
b. Antidepressants with a sedative effect
c. Antidepressants with an activating effect
d. Neuroleptics with an activating effect
*e. Neuroleptics with a sedative effect

2362. A 32-year-old man complains of pain in the chest on the left, dyspnea, temperature rise up to 38, 0°C, slight cough. The disease onset was 2 weeks ago after overexposure to cold. He had suffered from bronchoadenitis in his childhood. The affected side lags during breating; percussion reveals dull sound with oblique margin in the lower left lung, where breathing is absent. The right heart border is displaced outwards. Mantoux test with 2 TU resulted in a papule 16 mm in size.What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Thromboembolism of the pulmonary artery branches
b. Community-acquired pneumonia
c. Central carcinoma of the left lung
d. Congestion pneumonia
*e. Tuberculous pleurisy

2363. An emergency doctor has diagnosed a 32-year-old woman with generalized convulsive status epilepticus. The deterioration in the patient’s condition is caused by a sudden gap in the epilepsy treatment. Specify the doctor’s further tactics:
a. Outpatient monitoring by a neuropathologist
b. Outpatient monitoring by a neurosurgeon
c. Hospitalization in the department of neurology
d. Hospitalization in the department of neurosurgery
*e. Hospitalization in the intensive care unit

2364. A 19-year-old patient complains of dyspnea during physical exertion. He often has bronchitis and pneumonia. Cardiac murmur has been observed since his childhood. On auscultation: there is splitting of the II heart sound over pulmonary arteria, systolic murmur in the third intercostal space near the left sternum margin. ECG test shows right bundle-branch block. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Coarctation of aorta
b. Open arterial duct
*c. Interatrial septum defect
d. Aortic stenosis
e. Mitral valve insufficiency

2365. A 75-year-old male patient complains of slight pain in the right iliac region. The abdominal pain arose 6 days ago and was accompanied by nausea. Surgical examination revealed moist tongue, Ps- 76/min., BP- 130/80 mm Hg. Abdomen was soft, slightly painful in the right iliac region on deep palpation, the symptoms of the peritoneum irritation were doubtful. In blood: RBCs- 4, 0×1012/l, Hb- 135 g/l, WBCs- 9, 5 × 109/l, stab neutrophils - 5%, segmentonuclear - 52%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 5%, ESR- 20 mm/hour. Specify the doctor’s further tactics:
a. Administration of additional examination: abdominal ultrasound, x-ray contrast study of the gastrointestinal tract
*b. Emergency operation for acute appendicitis
c. Send the patient home
d. Hospitalization, dynamic surveillance
e. Refer the patient to a district therapist

2366. An 8-year-old boy has a 2-year history of blotchy itchy rash appearing after eating citrus fruit. The first eruption occurred at the age of 6 months after the introduction of juices to the baby’s diet. Father has a history of bronchial asthma,mother - that of allergic rhinitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Psoriasis
b. Urticaria
c. Quincke’s edema
*d. Atopic dermatitis
e. Pityriasis Rosea

2367. A 25-year-old patient has been admitted to the hospital with the following problems: weakness, sweating, itching, weight loss, enlarged submandibular, cervical, axillary, inguinal lymph nodes. Objectively: hepatomegaly. Lymph node biopsy revealed giant Berezovsky-Reed-Sternberg cells, polymorphocellular granuloma composed of lymphocytes, reticular cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, fibrous tissue, plasma cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cancer metastases to lymph nodes
b. Macofollicular reticulosis
c. Lymph node tuberculosis
d. Lymphoreticulosarcoma
*e. Lymphogranulomatosis

2368. An 8-year-old child was hospitalized for fever up to 39, 8°C, inertness, moderate headache, vomiting. Examination revealed meningeal symptoms. Lumbar puncture was performed. The obtained fluid had raised opening pressure, it was transparent, with the cell count of 450 cells per 1 mcl (mainly lymphocytes - 90%), glucose level of 2,6 mmol/l. What causative agent might have caused the disease in the child?
*a. Enterovirus
b. Koch’s bacillus
c. Pneumococcus
d. Staphylococcus
e. Meningococcus

2369. A 25-year-old patient during selfexamination detected a tumor in the upper external quadrant of the right mammary gland. On palpation: painless, dense, mobile growth 2 cm in diameter is detected in the mammary gland; no changes in the peripheral lymph nodes are observed. On mammary glands US: in the upper external quadrant of the right mammary gland there is a spaceoccupying lesion of increased echogenicity 21х18 mm in size. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Diffuse mastopathy
b. Lacteal cyst
*c. Fibrous adenoma
d. Breast cancer
e. Mastitis

2370. 2 weeks after labour a parturient woman developed breast pain being observed for 3 days. Examination revealed body temperature at the rate of 39°C, chills, weakness, hyperaemia, enlargement, pain and deformity of the mammary gland. On palpation the infiltrate was found to have an area of softening and fluctuation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Serous mastitis
b. Mastopathy
c. Phlegmonous mastitis
d. Lactostasis
*e. Infiltrative-purulent mastitis

2371. A 48-year-old woman has been suffering from chronic pancreatitis for the last 7 years. Lately she has been noticing an increase in daily feces with foul smell, abdominal distention, gurgling. The patient complains of diarrhea, weakness, fatigability, loss of appetite, loss of weight. What syndrome can be suspected in this case?
*a. Malabsorption
b. Maldigestion
c. Endocrine gland failure
d. Exudative enteropathy
e. Irritable colon

2372. A 37-year-old man suffers from attacks of unconsciousness, dyspnea during physical exertion, periodical sensations of heart rate disorder. Father of the patient died suddenly at the age of 45. Objectively: heart rate is 90/min., BP is 140/90 mm Hg. On heart US: ejection fraction - 49%, significant myocardium thickening of the left ventricle and interventricular septum. What drug should be prescribed for the treatment?
*a. Bisoprolol
b. Phenyhydinum (Nifedipine)
c. Furosemide
d. Hydrochlorothiazide
e. Enalapril

2373. During a regular check-up of a 50-yearold woman a tumor was detected in her right mammary gland. The tumor is 5 cm in diameter, dense, without clear margins. The skin over the tumor resembles lemon rind, the nipple is inverted. The lymph node can be palpated in the axillary region. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Lacteal cyst
b. Mastitis
c. Breast lipoma
*d. Breast cancer
e. Diffuse mastopathy

2374. A 20-year-old woman complains of sensation of air shortage, lingering dull pain in the heart area, irritability. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory, heart rate lability, BP is 130/60 mm Hg. ECG reveals disruption of repolarization proceses. The patient is diagnosed with somatoform autonomic dysfunction of cardial type. Specify the conditions of the patient treatment:
*a. Out-patient treatment
b. In-patient treatment in cardiology department
c. In-patient treatment in psychiatric department
d. In-patient treatment in cardiac surgery department
e. In-patient treatment in therapeutics department

2375. A 38-year-old man’s workplace is within the area of effect of ionizing radiation. During regular medical check-up he expresses no complaints. Blood test: erythrocytes - 4, 5 × 1012/l, Нb- 80 g/l, leukocytes - 2, 8 × 109/l, platelets - 30 × 109/l. Can this person continue to work with sources of ionizing radiation?
*a. Work with radioactive substances and other sources of radiation is contraindicated
b. Only work with low-level radioactive substances is allowed
c. Work with radioactive substances is allowed only for limited periods of time
d. Work with radioactive substances can be allowed after detailed medical examination
e. Work with radioactive substances is allowed

2376. A maternity patient breastfeeding for 1,5 weeks has attended a doctor. She considers the onset of her disease to be when proportional breast engorgement occurred.Mammary glands are painful. Body temperature is 36, 6°C. Expression of breastmilk is hindered. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Infiltrative mastitis
b. Chronic cystic mastitis
c. Gangrenous mastitis
*d. Lactostasis
e. Suppurative mastitis

2377. An 11-year-old boy complains of general weakness, fever up to 38, 2°C, pain and swelling of the knee joints, sensation of irregular heartbeat. 3 weeks ago, the child had a case of tonsillitis. Knee joints are swollen, the overlying skin and skin of the knee region is reddened, local temperature is increased, movements are limited. Heart sounds are muffled, extrasystole is present, auscultation reveals apical systolic murmur that is not conducted to the left inguinal region. ESR is 38 mm/hour. CRP is 2+, antistreptolysin O titre - 400.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Reactive arthritis
*b. Acute rheumatic fever
c. Non-rheumatic carditis
d. Vegetative dysfunction
e. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis

2378. An 18-year-old woman complains of mammary glands swelling, headaches, tearfulness, abdominal distension occurring the day before menstruation. The symptoms disappear with the beginning of menstruation. Menstruations are regular, last for 5-6 days with interval of 28 days in between. Gynecological examination revealed no changes of internal genitals.What is your diagnosis?
a. Sheehan syndrome
b. Asherman’s syndrome
c. Adrenogenital syndrome
*d. Premenstrual syndrome
e. Stein-Leventhal syndrome

2379. A 24-year-old patient had been delivered to a thoracic department with a chest injury, a fracture of the IV, V, VI ribs on the right. Plan radiography shows the fluid level in the pleural cavity reaching the III rib on the right. Puncture blood contained clots. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Thoracentesis and thoracostomy
b. Pleural puncture
*c. Emergency thoracotomy
d. Hemostatic therapy
e. Medical thoracoscopy

2380. A 30-year-old man was delivered to a neurosurgical department with complaints of constant headaches, nausea, vomiting, fever, weakness of the right-side limbs. Anamnesis states that one month ago the patient had a surgery for left-sided suppurative otitis and mastoiditis. He has been undergoing treatment in an ENT department. Approximately 2 weeks ago the temperature increased, and the patient developed headaches. Objectively: heart rate - 98/min., BP- 140/90 mm Hg, temperature - 38, 3°C.Neurologically pronounced stiff neck: bilateral Kernig’s symptom, unsteadiness during the Romberg’s maneuver. Computer tomography of the brain revealed a threedimensional growth with a capsule in the left hemisphere.Make the diagnosis:
*a. Cerebral abscess
b. Hemorrhage
c. Arnold-Chiari malformation
d. Hydrocephalus
e. Echinococcus

2381. A 74-year-old patient visited a urologist with complaints of pain above the pubis and inability to urinate for 8 hours. At home he had taken antispasmodics and had a warm bath but no improvement occurred. Objectively: the abdomen is soft and painful above the pubis; dullness of percussion sound is observed above the pubis. Murphy’s (Pasternatski’s) punch sign is negative on the both sides. What condition does the patient have?
a. Paradoxal ischuria
b. Anuria
c. Oliguria
*d. Acute urinary retention
e. Chronic urinary retention

2382. A 7-year-old child became ill again 2 weeks after a case of tonsillitis. There are the following complaints: temperature rise up to 38°C, hemorrhagic rash on the extremities, enlargement of the ankle joints. Blood test: hemoglobin is 120 g/l, platelets are 170 × 109/l, ESR is 30 mm/hour. Urine test: proteinuria up to 0,7 g/l, cylinders - 5-6 in the field of vision, erythrocytes - 8-10 in the field of vision. What mechanism of hemorrhagic syndrome is present in the given case?
a. Suppression of hematopoietic stem cells
b. Platelet dysfunction
*c. Vessel wall damage caused by immune complexes
d. Decrease of adhesive-aggregative function of platelets
e. Vessel wall damage caused by bacteria

2383. A 33-year-old patient has developed dyspnea during physical exertion, palpitations, disruptions of heart rate, swollen legs. In the childhood the patient had a case of acute rheumatic fever that required in-patient treatment. There were no further requests for medical care. Objectively: heart rate is 92/min., rhythmic; BP is 110/70 mm Hg. At the apex the I heart sound is increased, triple rhythm, diastolic murmur.What heart disease is most likely?
a. Aortic valve failure
b. Tricuspid valve stenosis
c. Mitral valve failure
d. Aortic outflow stenosis
*e. Mitral valve stenosis

2384. A 64-year-old woman has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for the last 14 years. Approximately 3 days ago the skin on the distal phalanx of the I toe on the left foot became cold and bluish-black in colour. Mild pain is observed in the affected area. Pulse on the pedal arteries can not be detected, pulse on the popliteal artery is retained. Glycemia is 12,4 mmol/l. US scan: stenosis of the shin arteries, collateral compensated blood flow. Ankle-brachial pressure index is 0,7. Foot X-ray: destruction of the distal phalanx of the I toe. Determine the grade of diabetic foot according to Wagner:
*a. IV
b. II
c. V
d. III
e. I

2385. A 4-month-old boy has been undergoing in-patient treatment for pneumocystic pneumonia for 4 weeks. The diagnosis has been made based on clinical signs, typical X-ray presentation, presence of severe hypoxemia, positive dynamics caused by intravenous introduction of Biseptol (Cotrimoxazole). Anamnesis states that enzymelinked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA) detected antibodies to HIV in the umbilical blood. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed on the child at the ages of 1 month and 3 months, and proviralDNAwas detected in the child’s blood. Viral load and number of CD4+-lymphocytes was not measured. Make the diagnosis:
a. Adenovirus infection
*b. HIV/AIDS
c. Pneumonia
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Tuberculosis

2386. A 35-year-old patient undergoing treatment for heart disorder in cardiological department has developed complaints of acute sudden pain in the epigastrium, temperature rise up to 38, 3°C. Blumberg’s and Razdolsky’s (abduction of femur) signs are positive. What necessitates surgical aid in the given case?
a. Extent of congenital and acquired development disorders
b. Urgent aid is required to save the patient’s life
c. Activity of the heart disorder
*d. Progress as a surgical disease
e. Severity of the concomitant pathology

2387. A 5-year-old girl was hospitalized with complaints of pain and swelling in the right knee joint, temperature rise up to 38,4 degree and a rash diagnosed as erythema annulare centrifugum. The signs developed 3 days after the recovery from a case of acute respiratory disease. Name the ethiotropic drug to be prescribed:
a. Captopril
*b. Augmentin
c. Metypred (Methylprednisolone)
d. Methotrexate
e. Diclofenac sodium

2388. During medical examination of a group of children under 4 years carried out by a pediatric team in one of the African countries a set of similar pathological signs was detected in some of the children. The signs are as follows: growth inhibition, mental changes, muscle atrophy, swellings, changes in hair and skin pigmentation. These children were diagnosed with kwashiorkor. What food products should be added to the diet to treat this disorder?
a. Cereals, fruit, berries
b. Poultry, fruit, berries
c. Milk, meat, vegetables
d. Vegetables, fruit
*e. Fish, vegetables, cereals

2389. An 8-year-old girl was diagnosed with signs of Morgagni-Adams-Stokes disease that developed against the background of the III degree atrioventricular heart block. What drug should be introduced intravenously for emergency aid?
a. Dobutamine
b. Prednisolone
*c. Atropine
d. Digoxin
e. Potassium chloride

2390. A 62-year-old man addresed a urologist with complaints of frequent urination at night (5-6 times per night), sensation of incomplete voiding of the urinary bladder, pain in the lower abdomen, slow urination. Anamnesis: the II degree essential hypertension (peak BP is 160/100 mm Hg). Current case: the II degree enlargement of the prostate gland, PSA is 2,2 ng/ml. Select the drug suitable for long-term therapy of the patient’s combined pathology:
a. Captopril
*b. Doxazosin
c. Indapamide
d. Propranolol
e. Amlodipine

2391. On the 9th day after childbirth the obstetric patient developed high fever up to 38°C. She complains of pain in the right mammary gland. The examination revealed the following: a sharply painful infiltrate can be palpated in the right mammary gland, the skin over the infiltrate is red, subareolar area and nipple are swollen and painful. What is your diagnosis?
*a. Abscess of the right mammary gland
b. Cancer of the right mammary gland
c. Fibrous cystic degeneration of the right mammary gland
d. Serous mastitis
e. Mastopathy

2392. A 16-year-old girl addressed a doctor with complaints of fatigability and dizziness. On heart auscultation: systolic murmur in the II intercostal area along the breastbone edge on the left. ECG revealed signs of the right ventricular hypertrophy. X-ray revealed dilatation of the the pulmonary artery trunk, enlargement of the right heart.What heart disorder is it?
a. Pulmonary artery valve failure
*b. Pulmonary artery outflow stenosis
c. Defect of the interatrial septum
d. Fallot’s tetrad
e. Coarctation of aorta

2393. A 32-year-old patient complains of excessive appetite, excess weight, dyspnea during physical exertion. There are fat deposits in the area of abdomen and shoulder girdle. The skin is pale-pink, adult male pattern of hair distribution is observed on the torso, no stretch marks. Heart rate is 90/min., BP is 120/80 mm Hg, body build index equals 35. Blood sugar is 4,9 mmol/l, cholesterol is 6,2 mmol/l. On ophthalmoscopy: fundus of the eye without changes.What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Secondary endocrine hypo-ovarian obesity
*b. Primary alimentary constitutive obesity, android type
c. Secondary hypothalamic obesity
d. Primary alimentary constitutive obesity, gynoid type
e. Secondary neuroendocrine obesity

2394. A 32-year-old welder complains of weakness and fever. His illness initially presented as tonsillitis one month earlier. On examination: body temperature – 38,9°C, RR-24/min., HR-100/min., BP-100/70 mm Hg, hemorrhages on the legs, enlargement of the lymph nodes. Complete blood count: Hb-70 g/l, RBC-2, 2×1012/l, WBC-3, 0×109/l with 32% of blasts, 1% of eosinophils, 3% of band neutrophils, 36% of segments, 20% of lymphocytes, and 8% of monocytes, ESR-47 mm/hour.What is the cause of anemia?
*a. Acute leukemia
b. Aplastic anema
c. Chronic hemolytic anemia
d. B12-deficient anemia
e. Chronic lympholeukemia

2395. After a 5-day-long celebration of his daughter’s wedding a 65-year-old patient ”saw” in his yard many cats, chickens, and rats. He tried to chase them away, but was scared off when the animals started to scold him and tried to harm him. Make the diagnosis:
a. Schizophrenia
b. Senile psychosis
*c. Delirium tremens
d. Organic brain syndrome
e. Reactive hallucinosis

2396. A 28-year-old woman has been delivered to a hospital with acute pain in the lower abdomen. There was a brief syncope. The delay of menstruation is 2 months. Objectively: the patient has pale skin, BP-90/50 mm Hg, Ps-110/min. Lower abdomen is extremely painful. Vaginal examination reveals uterus enlargement. Promtov’s sign (pain during bimanual gynecological examination) is positive. Right uterine appendages are enlarged and very painful. Posterior vault hangs over. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Right-sided tubal pregnancy
b. Acute right-sided salpingoophoritis
c. Incipient abortion
d. Pelvioperitonitis
e. Right ovary apoplexy

2397. 5 weeks after hypothermia a 22-yearold patient developed fever, weakness, muscle pain, inability to move independently. Objectively: tenderness, induration of shoulder and shin muscles, restricted active movements, erythema on the anterior surface of the chest. There is a periorbital edema with heliotropic erythema. Gottron’s sign is present.What investigation is required for the diagnosis verification?
a. Aminotransferase activity
b. ASO titer
c. Rheumatoid factor
*d. Muscle biopsy
e. Pneumoarthrography

2398. A 37-year-old woman complains of headaches, nausea, vomiting, spasms. The onset of the disease occurred the day before due to her overexposure to cold. Objectively: fever up to 40°C; somnolence; rigid neck; Kernig’s symptom is positive on the both sides; general hyperesthesia. Blood test: leucocytosis, increased ESR. Cerebrospinal fluid is turbid, yellow-tinted. What changes of the cerebrospinal fluid are most likely?
*a. Neutrophilic pleocytosis
b. Blood in the cerebrospinal fluid
c. Albuminocytological dissociation
d. Xanthochromia in the cerebrospinal fluid
e. Lymphocytic pleocytosis

2399. A 44-year-old patient complains of difficult urination, sensation of incomplete urinary bladder emptying. Sonographic examination of the urinary bladder near the urethra entrance revealed an oval welldefined hyperechogenic formation 2x3 cm large that was changing its position during the examination.What conclusion can be made?
a. Primary ureter tumour
*b. Stone
c. Urinary bladder polyp
d. Malignant tumour of the urinary bladder
e. Prostate adenoma

2400. 4 days after a patient received a gunshot wound to the soft tissues of middle third of the thigh, his condition suddenly began deteriorating. There are complaints of bursting pain in the wound; pain has been increasing during the last 12 hours. Edema of skin and hypodermic tissue quickly grows. Body temperature is 38,2°C, heart rate is 102/min. The wound edges gape, are dull in color; the muscles, viable as of day before, now protrude into the wound, look boiled, are dull in color, have dirty-gray coating, and fall apart when held with forceps. What infection has developed in the wound?
a. Aerobic gram-positive
b. Diphtheria of the wound
c. Aerobic gram-negative
d. Putrid
*e. Anaerobic

2401. A 35-year-old patient has been suffering from an illness for 3 days. 5 days ago he returned from a trip to Africa. The onset of disease was accompanied by fever up to 40°C, chills, acute headache, myalgia. In the axillary region the lymph node enlarged up to 3x6 cm can be palpated. The lymph node is dense, intensely painful, slightly mobile, without clear margins; the skin over the node is hyperenic and tight. Tachycardia is present. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
*a. Plague
b. Tularemia
c. Anthrax
d. Lymphadenitis
e. Sepsis

2402. A parturient woman complains of pain in her mammary gland. In the painful area there is an infiltration 3x4 cm in size with softened center. Body temperature is 38,5°C. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Birth trauma
*b. Acute suppurative mastitis
c. Pleurisy
d. Pneumonia
e. Milk retention

2403. A 52-year-old patient, who has been suffering from angina pectoris, for 2 weeks has increasingly frequent pain attacks in the area behind his sternum and his need for nitroglycerine has increased. Objectively: the condition is of moderate severity. The skin is pale. Heart sounds are weakened, rhythmic. Heart rate is 84/min. ECG shows no signs of focal myocardial injury. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Progressive angina pectoris
b. Stable NYHA functional class II angina pectoris
c. Acute cardiac infarction
d. Variant angina pectoris
e. First-time angina pectoris

2404. A 9-year-old boy has been suffering from multiple bronchiectasis since he was 3 years old. Exacerbations occur frequently (3-4 times a year), after conservative therapy there are short remission periods. The disease progresses, the child is physically underdeveloped, presents with pale skin, acrocyanosis, deformed nail plates in the shape of ”clock-face”. Bronchography reveals saccular bronchiectases in the lower lobe of the right lung. What further treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Physiotherapy
b. Continuation of conservative therapy
*c. Surgical intervention
d. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
e. Physical training

2405. Caries morbidity rate is 89% among residents of a community. It is determined that fluorine content in water is 0,1 mg/l. What preventive measures should be taken?
a. Fluorine inhalations
b. Tooth brushing
*c. Water fluorination
d. Sealant application
e. Introduction of more vegetables to the diet

2406. A patient received flame burns of both hands. On the dorsal and palmar surface of the hands there are blisters filled with serous fluid. The wrist joint region is hyperemic. The forearms were not injured. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. II degree flame burn of the hands, 4% of body surface area
b. IIIa degree flame burn of the hands, 4% of body surface area
c. IIb degree flame burn of the hands, 2% of body surface area
d. III degree flame burn of the hands, 4% of body surface area
e. II degree flame burn of the hands, 2% of body surface area

2407. During the periodic medical examination an assembly fitter (works on soldering details) didn’t report any health problems. Closer examination revealed signs of asthenicvegetative syndrome. Blood included red blood cells with basophilic aggregations and a somewhat higher number of reticulocytes, urine had a high concentration of delta-aminolevulinic acid. The complex of symptoms indicates the initial stage of chronic intoxication with:
a. Tin
b. Ethanol
c. Manganese
d. Mercury
*e. Lead

2408. A 29-year-old woman came to a gynecologist with complaints of irritability, tearfulness, headache, nausea, occasional vomiting, pain in the heart area, tachycardia attacks, memory impairment, meteorism. These signs appear 6 days before menstruation and disappear the day before menstruation or during its first 2 days. On vaginal examination: the uterus and uterine appendages are without alterations. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Genital endometriosis
b. Neurosis
c. Algodismenorrhea
d. Ovarian apoplexy
*e. Premenstrual syndrome

2409. Examination of a group of persons living on the same territory revealed the following common symptoms: dark-yellow pigmentation of the tooth enamel, diffuse osteoporosis of bone apparatus, ossification of ligaments and joints, functional disorders of the central nervous system. This condition may be caused by the excessive concentration of the following microelement in food or drinking water:
a. Nickel
b. Copper
*c. Fluorine
d. Iodine
e. Cesium

2410. An infant has been born at the 41st week of gestation. The pregnancy was complicated with severe gestosis of the second semester. The weight of the baby is 2400 g, the height is 50 cm. Objectively: the skin is flabby, the layer of subcutaneous fat is thin, hypomyotonia is observed, neonatal reflexes are weak. The internal organs are without pathologic alterations. This newborn can be assessed as a:
a. Premature infant
b. Postmature infant
c. Full-term infant with normal body weight
*d. Full-term infant with prenatal growth retardation
e. Immature infant

2411. A patient suffering from infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis was prescribed streptomycin, rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, vitamin C. One month after the beginning of the treatment the patient started complaining of reduced hearing and tinnitus. What drug has such a side effect?
a. Vitamin C
*b. Streptomycin
c. Rifampicin
d. Isoniazid
e. Pyrazinamide

2412. A 39-year-old man complains of morning headaches, appetite loss, nausea, morning vomiting, periodic nasal hemorrhages. The patient had a case of acute glomerulonephritis at the age of 15. Examination revealed rise of arterial pressure up to 220/130 mm Hg, skin hemorrhages on his arms and legs, pallor of skin andmucous membranes.What biochemical parameter is the most important for making diagnosis in this case?
a. Blood sodium
b. Blood bilirubin
*c. Blood creatinine
d. Uric acid
e. Fibrinogen

2413. A worker of a glass-blowing workshop complains of headache, irritability, visual impairment – he sees everything as if through a ”net”. Objectively: hyperemic sclera, thickened cornea, decreased opacity of pupils, visual acuity is 0,8 in the left eye, 0,7 in the right eye. The worker uses no means of personal protection. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Blepharospasm
b. Progressive myopia
c. Conjunctivitis
d. Keratitis
*e. Cataract

2414. For a week a 42-year-old patient has been suffering from fever attacks followed by high temperature, which occur each 48 hours. Body temperature raises up to 40°C and decreases in 3-4 hours with excessive sweating. The patient presents with loss of appetite and general fatigue. The skin is pale and sallow. The liver and spleen are enlarged and dense on palpation. What method of diagnosis verification would be most efficient?
a. Complete blood count
b. Immune-enzyme assay
c. Microscopy of hanging blood drop
*d. Microscopy of blood smear and thick blood film
e. Bacteriological analysis

2415. A 28-year-old patient is a drug addict. He has been sick for a year, when noticed general weakness, increased sweating, and weight loss. He often had cases of respiratory diseases. Within the last 2 days he demonstrates intermittent fever with profuse night sweating, increased general weakness, developed diarrhea with mucus and blood admixtures. On examination: polylymphadenopathy, herpetic rashes in the oral cavity; on abdominal palpation: the liver and spleen are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetic stomatitis
b. Colon cancer
c. Chronic sepsis
*d. HIV-infection
e. Chronic lymphatic leukemia

2416. A 40-year-old patient has acute onset of disease caused by overexposure to cold. Temperature has increased up to 39°C. Foul-smelling sputum is expectorated during coughig. Various moist crackles can be auscultated above the 3rd segment on the right. Blood test: leukocytes – 15, 0×109/l, stab neutrophils – 12%, ESR-52 mm/hour. On Xray: in the 3rd segment on the right there is a focus of shadow 3 cm in diameter, low density, with fuzzy smooth margins and a clearing in its center. What disease is most likely in the given case?
a. Peripheral pulmonary cancer
b. Infiltrative tuberculosis
*c. Pneumonia complicated by an abscess
d. Cystic echinococcosis
e. Pulmonary cyst

2417. A 48-year-old patient was found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland, exophthalmia, weight loss of 4 kg in 2 months, sweating. Objectively: HR-105/min, BP- 140/70 mm Hg. Defecation act is normal. What kind of therapy is recommended in this case?
a. Thyroxine
*b. Mercazolil
c. Propranolol
d. Radioactive iodine
e. Lugol’s solution

2418. A 26-year-old woman is suspected to suffer from systemic lupus erythematosus due to systemic lesions of skin, vessels, joints, serous tunics, and heart that developed after photosensitization. The following is detected: LE cells, antibodies to native DNA, isolated anti-centromere antibodies, rheumatoid factor is 1:100, Wassermann reaction is positive, circulating immune complex is 120 units. What immunological indicators are considered to be specific to this disease?
a. Immunoglobulin A
b. Increased circulating immune complex
c. Rheumatoid factor
d. Anti-centromere antibodies
*e. DNA antibodies

2419. A woman came to a doctor with complaints of increased body temperature up to 37,8°C and moderately sore throat for the last 3 days. Objectively: mandibular lymph nodes are enlarged up to 3 cm. Palatine tonsils are hypertrophied, with gray coating that spreads to the uvula and anterior pillars of the fauces. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Agranulocytosis
b. Oropharyngeal candidiasis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Pseudomembranous (Vincent’s) tonsillitis
*e. Oropharyngeal diphtheria

2420. A primigravida at the term of 20 weeks complains of pain in her lower abdomen, smearing blood-streaked discharge from the genital tracts. Uterine tone is increased, fetus is mobile. On vaginal examination: the uterus is enlarged according to the term, uterine cervix is shortened to 0,5 cm, external cervical orifice is open by 2 cm.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Attempted late abortion
*b. Risk of late abortion with hemorrhage
c. The process of late abortion
d. Risk of late abortion without hemorrhage
e. Incomplete late abortion

2421. A 65-year-old man was diagnosed with B12-deficient anemia and the treatment was prescribed. A week later control blood test was performed.What would be the early indicator of the therapy effectiveness?
a. Increased erythrocyte number
*b. Increased number of reticulocytes
c. Megaloblastic hematopoiesis
d. Increased hemoglobin level
e. Normoblastic hematopoiesis

2422. A 35-year-old woman complains of heart pain (”aching and drilling”) occurring mainly in the morning in autumn and spring and irradiating to the neck, back and abdomen; rapid heartbeat; low vitality. Occurrence of this condition is not associated with physical activity. In the evening, the patient’s condition improves. Study of somatic and neurological status and ECG reveal no pathology. What pathology is most likely to have caused these clinical presentations?
a. Resting stenocardia
b. Neurocirculatory asthenia
c. Hypochondriacal depression
*d. Somatization depression
e. Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia

2423. On the 4th day after recovery from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patient’s condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min., Ps-96/min., BP-110/70 mm Hg. Respiration over the left lung is vesicular, over the right lung – weakened. There are various moist crackles over the lower lobe and amphoric breath sounds near the angle of scapula.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Pleural empyema
c. Pyopneumothorax
*d. Acute pulmonary abscess
e. Acute focal pneumonia

2424. A 65-year-old woman on abdominal palpation presents with a tumor in the umbilical region and above it; the tumor is 13x8 cm in size, moderately painful, non-mobile, pulsing. On auscultation systolic murmur can be observed.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gastric tumor
b. Tricuspid insufficiency
c. Bicuspid insufficiency
*d. Abdominal aneurysm
e. Arteriovenous aneurysm

2425. A 45-year-old man complains of cough fits and tickling in his nasopharynx. He had been staying for 10 days in the polluted area created by the Chornobyl nuclear power plant accident. Rhinoscopy shows signs of severe nasopharynx irritation. What radionuclide is the cause of this irritation?
a. Radioactive cesium
b. Radioactive plutonium
c. Radioactive cobalt
*d. Radioactive iodine
e. Radioactive strontium

2426. A 20-year-old patient complains of severe headache, double vision, weakness, fever, irritability. Objectively: body temperature is 38,1°C, the patient is reluctant to contact, sensitive to stimuli. There are ptosis of the left eyelid, exotropia, anisocoria S>D, pronounced meningeal syndrome. On lumbar puncture the cerebrospinal fluid flowed out under a pressure of 300 mm Hg, the fluid is clear, slightly opalescent. 24 hours later there appeared fibrin film. Protein – 1,4 g/l, lymphocytes – 600/3 per mm3, sugar – 0,3 mmol/l. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Mumps meningitis
*b. Tuberculous meningitis
c. Lymphocytic (Armstrong’s) meningitis
d. Meningococcal meningitis
e. Syphilitic meningitis

2427. A 37-year-old worker during a fire ended up in the area of high CO concentration. He was delivered to a hospital in unconscious state. Objectively: the skin of his face and hands is crimson. Respiration rate is 20/min. ECG: alterations specific for hypoxic myocardium. Hourly diuresis is 40 ml. Blood test: erythrocytes – 4, 5×1012/l, Нb-136 g/l, color index – 0,89, ESR-3 mm/hour, carboxyhemoglobin – 5%. What criterion allows determining the severity of the patient’s condition?
*a. Carboxyhemoglobin concentration
b. ECG results
c. Development of chronic renal failure
d. Extent of trophic disorders
e. Respiratory disorders

2428. After a case of purulent otitis a 1-year-old boy has developed pain in the upper third of the left thigh, body temperature up to 39°C. Objectively: swelling of the thigh in its upper third and smoothed out inguinal fold. The limb is in semiflexed position. Active and passive movements are impossible due to severe pain.What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Brodie’s abscess
*b. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
c. Intermuscular phlegmon
d. Acute coxitis
e. Osteosarcoma

2429. A patient with suspected pheochromocytoma has normal blood pressure in the periods between the atacks and a tendency towards tachycardia. Urine test revealed no pathologies. It was decided to use a provocative test with histamine. What medication should be prepared to provide emergency care in case of positive test result?
a. Prednisolone
*b. Phentolamine
c. Nifedipine
d. Pipolphen
e. Mesatonum

2430. A 42-year-old woman complains of severe pulsing headache in the frontoparietal area, vertigo, palpitations. She has been suffering from hypertension for 3 years. Significant increase of BP occurs 2-3 times per month and lasts for 3-8 hours. The left ventricle is enlarged, heart sounds are clear, heart rate -105/min., BP-225/115 mm Hg. ECG: signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. What drug would be the most effective for termination of cerebral crisis attack?
a. Captopril
b. Hydrochlorothiazide (Hypothiazide)
*c. Labetalol
d. Losartan
e. Clonidine (Clophelin)

2431. A 45-year-old patient complains of pain in the epigastric region, left subcostal area, abdominal distension, diarrhea, loss of weight. He has been suffering from this condition for 5 years. Objectively: the tongue is moist with white coating near the root; deep palpation of abdomen reveals slight pain in the epigastric region and Мауо-Robson’s point. Liver is painless and protrudes by 1 cm from the costal arch. Spleen cannot be palpated. What disease can be primarily suspected?
*a. Chronic pancreatitis
b. Peptic stomach ulcer
c. Chronic enteritis
d. Chronic cholecystitis
e. Atrophic gastritis

2432. For three years a 31-year-old woman has been complaining of pain and swelling of her radiocarpal and metacarpophalangeal articulations, their reduced mobility in the morning, which persisted up to 1,5 hours. Two weeks ago she developed pain, swelling, and reddening of her knee joints, her body temperature increased up to 37,5°C. The treatment was belated. Examination of the internal organs revealed no pathologic alterations. Diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis was made. What alterations are the most likely to be visible on the arthrogram?
a. Numerous marginal osteophytes
b. Epiphyseal osteolysis
c. Joint space narrowing, subchondral osteosclerosis
d. Cysts in the subchondral bone
*e. Joint space narrowing, usuration

2433. A 58-year-old woman complains of spontaneous bruises, weakness, bleeding gums, dizziness. Objectively: the mucous membranes and skin are pale with numerous hemorrhages of various time of origin. Lymph nodes are not enlarged. Ps-100/min, BP- 110/70 mm Hg. There are no alterations of internal organs. Blood test results: RBC-3, 0×1012/l, Нb-92 g/l, color index – 0,9, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, WBC-10×109/l, eosinophils – 2%, stab neutrophils – 12%, segmented neutrophils – 68%, lymphocytes -11%, monocytes – 7%, ESR-12 mm/h.What laboratory test should be performed additionally to make the diagnosis?
*a. Platelets
b. Clotting time
c. Fibrinogen
d. Osmotic resistance of erythrocytes
e. Reticulocytes

2434. After tonsillectomy a woman with systemic lupus erythematosus, who has been taking prednisolone for a year, developed acute weakness, nausea, vomiting, pain in the right iliac area, watery stool up to 5 times per day. Ps-96/min., BP-80/50 mm Hg. What preventive therapy should have been administered prior to the surgery?
a. Prescription of antibiotics
b. Prescription of desoxycorticosterone acetate
*c. Increase of prednisolone dosage
d. Administration of Ringer’s solution
e. Administration of 10% NaCl solution

2435. A 45-year-old woman complains of paroxysmal intolerable facial pain on the left with attacks that last for 1-2 minutes. Attacks are provoked by chewing. The disease onset was two month ago after overexposure to cold. Objectively: pain at the exit points of the trigeminal nerve on the left. Touching near the wing of nose on the left induces new pain attack with tonic spasm of the facial muscles. What is the most likely diagnosis among those listed?
a. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
b. Facial migraine
c. Maxillary sinusitis
*d. Trigeminal neuralgia
e. Temporomandibular joint arthritis

2436. A 28-year-old man complains of skin rash and itching on the both of his hands. The condition persists for 1,5 years. The exacerbation of his condition he ascribes to the occupational contact with formaldehyde resins. Objectively: lesion foci are symmetrically localized on both hands. Against the background of erythema with blurred margins there are papulae, vesicles, erosions, crusts, and scales.What is the most likely pathology?
a. Simple contact dermatitis
b. Erythema multiforme
c. Idiopathic eczema
d. Allergic dermatitis
*e. Occupational eczema

2437. A 10-year-old boy with symptoms of arthritis and myocarditis was delivered into a hospital. Based on clinical examination the preliminary diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis was made.What symptom is the most contributive for the diagnostics of this disease?
a. Regional hyperemia of the joints
b. Enlarged heart
c. Increased heart rate
*d. Reduced mobility of the joints in the morning
e. Affection of the large joints

2438. A 25-year-old patient was delivered to an infectious diseases unit on the 3rd day of illness with complaints of headache, pain in the lumbar spine and gastrocnemius muscles, high fever, chills. Objectively: condition is of moderate severity. Scleras are icteric. Pharynx is hyperemic. Tongue is dry with dry brown coating. Abdomen is distended. Liver is enlarged by 2 cm. Spleen is not enlarged. Palpation of muscles, especially gastrocnemius muscles, is painful. Urine is dark in color. Feces are normal in color. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Viral hepatitis type A
d. Malaria
*e. Leptospirosis

2439. A 28-year-old woman complains of skin hemorrhages after minor traumas and spontaneous appearance of hemorrhages on the front of her torso and extremities. On examination: the skin is variegated (old and new hemorrhages), bleeding gums. Blood platelets – 20×109/l; in the bone marrow there is increased number of megakaryocytes and no platelet production. Treatment with steroid hormones was effective.What disease is it?
a. Acute vascular purpura
*b. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Rendu-Osler-Weber disease (Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia)
d. Hemophilia
e. Disseminated intravascular coagulation

2440. A 74-year-old patient was delivered into admission room with clinical presentations of acute deep vein thrombosis of the shin. What symptomis the most typical of this pathology?
a. Rovsing’s sign
b. Mayo-Robson’s sign
c. Grey Turner’s sign
*d. Homans’ sign
e. Courvoisier’s sign

2441. A 9-month-old child presents with fever, cough, dyspnea. The symptoms appeared 5 days ago after a contact with a person with URTI. Objectively: the child is in grave condition. Temperature is 38°C, cyanosis of nasolabial triangle is present. RR-54/min, nasal flaring during breathing is observed. There was percussion dullness on the right below the scapula angle and tympanic sound over the other areas of lungs. Auscultation revealed bilateral fine moist crackles predominating on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute bronchitis
b. Acute bronchiolitis
c. URTI
d. Acute laryngotracheitis
*e. Pneumonia

2442. The mother of a 3-month-old child came to a family doctor with complaints of her child being physically underdeveloped and suffering from cough attacks and dyspnea. Anamnesis: the child is the result of the second full-term pregnancy with the risk of miscarriage (the first child died of pulmonary pathology at the age of 4 months, according to the mother). Body mass at birth is 2500 g. Cough attacks were observed from the first days of life, twice the child was treated for bronchitis. Considering the severity of the child’s condition the doctor made the referral for hospitalization. What diagnosis was most likely stated in the referral?
*a. Mucoviscidosis (Cystic fibrosis)
b. Recurrent obstructive bronchitis
c. Acute obstructive pneumonia
d. Pertussis
e. Acute obstructive bronchitis

2443. A 46-year-old man notes swollen legs, weakness, sensation of fullness and heaviness in the right subcostal area; it is the first occurrence of these signs in the patient. The patient has 20-year-long history of rheumatoid arthritis. The liver and spleen are enlarged and dense. Blood creatinine 0,23 mmol/l, proteinemia – 68 g/l, cholesterol -4,2 mmol/l, urine specific gravity – 1012, proteinuria – 3,3 g/l, isolated wax-like cylinders, leached erythrocytes in the vision field, leukocytes – 5-6 in the vision field.What is the most likely complication?
a. Heart failure
b. Chronic pyelonephritis
c. Chronic glomerulonephritis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
*e. Renal amyloidosis

2444. A 23-year-old man had taken 1 g of aspirin to treat acute respiratory infection. After that he developed an asthmatic fit with labored expiration that was arrested by introduction of aminophylline. The patient has no medical history of allergies. The patient has undergone two surgeries for nasal polyposis in the past. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exercise-induced asthma
b. Symptomatic bronchospasm
c. Atopic bronchial asthma
d. Infectious allergic bronchial asthma
*e. Aspirin-induced asthma

2445. A 50-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital with complaints of blood traces in urine. Urination is painless and undisturbed. Macrohematuria had been observed for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys cannot be palpated, suprapubic area is without alterations, external genitalia are non-pathologic. On rectal investigation: prostate is not enlarged, painless, has normal structure. Cystoscopy revealed no alterations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Renal carcinoma
b. Varicocele
c. Necrotic papillitis
d. Dystopic kidney
e. Bladder tuberculosis

2446. A man complains of constant dull pain in the perineum and suprapubic area, weak flow of urine, frequent difficult painful urination, nocturia. The patient has been suffering from this condition for several months, during which urination was becoming increasingly difficult, and pain in the perineum has developed. On rectal examination: the prostate is enlarged (mainly its right lobe), dense, asymmetrical, central fissure is smoothed out, the right lobe is of stony density, painless, tuberous.What disease is it?
*a. Prostate cancer
b. Urolithiasis, prostatolith of the right lobe
c. Chronic congestion prostatitis
d. Prostate tuberculosis
e. Prostate sclerosis

2447. A boy was born at 32 weeks of gestation. 2 hours after the birth he developed respiratory distress (RD). The RD severity assessed by Silverman score was 5. The respiratory disorders progressed, respiratory failure could not be eliminated by Martin-Bouyer CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure). X-ray of lungs shows reticular and nodular pattern, air bronchogram. What is the most likely cause of respiratory distress syndrome?
a. Edematous hemorrhagic syndrome
*b. Hyaline membrane disease
c. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
d. Segmental atelectasis
e. Congenital pulmonary emphysema

2448. An 8-year-old child with a 3-year-long history of diabetes was hospitalized in hyperglycemic coma. Specify the initial dose of insulin to be administered:
*a. 0,1-0,2 U/kg of body weight per hour
b. 0,2-0,3 U/kg of body weight per hour
c. 0,4-0,5 U/kg of body weight per hour
d. 0,3-0,4 U/kg of body weight per hour
e. 0,05 U/kg of body weight per hour

2449. A 17-year-old young man complains of general weakness, trismus, twitching of the muscles in his left shin. 7 days ago he pierced his foot with a nail. Objectively: at the sole of the foot there is a wound, 0,3х0,2 mm in size, with small amount of serous-purulent discharge, the skin around the wound is hyperemic.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Tetanus
b. Osteomyelitis
c. Erysipelas
d. Infected wound
e. Phlegmon

2450. A patient with trauma of the lower third of the forearm volar surface caused by a glass shard came to a first-aid center. Objectively: flexion of the IV and V fingers is impaired, sensitivity of the inner dorsal and palmar surfaces of the hand and IV finger is decreased.What nerve is damaged?
a. Musculocutaneous
b. Axillary
c. Radial
d. Median
*e. Ulnar

2451. A 58-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower left extremity, which aggravates during walking, sensation of cold and numbness in the both feet. The patient has been suffering from this condition for 6 years. Objectively: the skin is pale and dry, with hyperkeratosis. On the left shin hair is scarce, ”furrow” symptom of inflamed inguinal lymph nodes is positive. Pulse cannot be detected over the pedal and popliteal arteries and is weakened over the femoral artery. In the right limb popliteal artery pulsation is retained.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Femoral artery thrombosis
b. Obliterating endarteritis
*c. Arteriosclerosis obliterans of the lower extremities
d. Raynaud’s disease
e. Buerger’s disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)

2452. An infant is 2,5 months old. The onset of the disease was gradual, the child had normal body temperature but presented with slight cough. Within a week the cough intensified, especially at night; on the 12th day the child developed cough fits occurring up to 20 times per day and followed by vomiting. There was one instance of respiratory arrest. Make the diagnosis:
a. Parainfluenza
b. Respiratory syncytial infection
c. Adenovirus infection
*d. Pertussis
e. Congenital stridor

2453. Vaginal examination reveals the head of the fetus, which fills the posterior surface of symphysis pubis and hollow of the sacrum. The lower edge of symphysis pubis, ischiadic spines, and sacrococcygeal joint can be palpated.Where in the lesser pelvis is the fetal head situated?
a. In the wide plane of lesser pelvis
b. In the area of brim
c. In the area of pelvic outlet
*d. In the narrow plane of lesser pelvis
e. Above pelvic inlet

2454. A man works in casting of nonferrous metals and alloys for 12 years. In the air of working area there was registered high content of heavy metals, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen. During periodic health examination the patient presents with asthenovegetative syndrome, sharp pains in the stomach, constipations, pain in the hepatic area. In urine: aminolevulinic acid and coproporphyrin are detected. In blood: reticulocytosis, low hemoglobin level. Such intoxication is caused by:
*a. Lead and lead salts
b. Carbon monoxide
c. Zinc
d. Nitric oxide
e. Tin

2455. A 30-year-old multigravida has been in labour for 18 hours. 2 hours ago the pushing stage began. Fetal heart rate is clear, rhythmic, 136/min. Vaginal examination reveals complete cervical dilatation, the fetal head in the pelvic outlet plane. Sagittal suture is in line with obstetric conjugate, the occipital fontanel is near the pubis. The patient has been diagnosed with primary uterine inertia. What is the further tactics of labour management?
a. Vacuum extraction of the fetus
*b. Outlet forceps
c. Cesarean section
d. Labour stimulation
e. Skin-head Ivanov’s forceps

2456. A patient, who had eaten canned mushrooms (honey agaric) three days ago, developed vision impairment (diplopia, mydriasis), speech disorder, disturbed swallowing. What type of food poisoning occurred in the patient?
a. Food toxicoinfection
b. Honey agaric poisonong
c. Lead salts poisoning
*d. Botulism
e. Fusariotoxicosis

2457. An infant is 3 weeks old. Since birth there has been observed periodical vomiting within a few minutes after feeding. The amount of vomitive masses does not exceed the volume of previous feeding. The infant has age-appropriate body weight. What is the most likely cause of this symptom?
a. Esophageal achalasia
*b. Pylorospasm
c. Adrenogenital syndrome
d. Esophageal chalasia
e. Pyloristenosis

2458. A newborn with gestational age of 31 weeks presents with hypotonia and depressed consciousness. Hematocrit is 35%, general cerebrospinal fluid analysis shows increased content of erythrocytes and protein, and low glucose. These data correspond with the clinical presentation of:
a. Anemia
b. Prenatal infection
c. Meningitis
d. Sepsis
*e. Intracranial hemorrhage

2459. From urine of a 14-year-old boy with the exacerbation of secondary obstructive pyelonephritis Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated with a titer of 1000000 microbes per1 ml. What antibiotic is the most advisable in this case?
*a. Ciprofloxacin
b. Cefazolinum
c. Chloramphenicol
d. Azithromycin
e. Ampicillin

2460. A 20-year-old woman on the 10th day after her discharge from the maternity ward developed fever up to 39°C and pain in her left mammary gland. On examination the mammary gland is enlarged, in its upper outer quadrant there is a hyperemic area. In this area a dense spot with blurred margins can be palpated. The patient presents with lactostasis and no fluctuation. Lymph nodes in the right axillary crease are enlarged and painful. Specify the correct diagnosis:
a. Erysipelas
b. Abscess
*c. Lactational mastitis
d. Dermatitis
e. Tumor

2461. A 3-year-old girl is being treated at a resuscitation unit with diagnosis ”acute kidney failure, oligoanuric stage”. ECG: high T wave, extended QRS complex, displacement of S-T interval downwards below the isoline. What electrolyte imbalance is it?
a. Hypercalcemia
b. Hyperphosphatemia
c. Hypokalemia
d. Hypocalcemia
*e. Hyperkalemia

2462. Mother of an 8-year-old girl complains that the child is too short and has excessive body weight. Objectively: obesity with fat deposits on the torso and face (round moonlike face), acne, striae on the thighs and lower abdomen, hirsutism.What hormone can cause such symptoms, when in excess?
a. Glucagon
*b. Cortisol
c. Testosterone
d. Thyroxin
e. Insulin

2463. A 9-year-old girl complains of fever up to 37,5°C, headache, inertness, weakness, loss of appetite, stomachache, and frequent painful urination. Provisional diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis is made.Clinical urine analysis: specific gravity – 1018, no protein, leukocytes -10-15 in the vision field. What investigation method can verify the diagnosis of urinary system infection?
a. Zymnytsky test (measurement of daily diuresis)
b. Rehberg test (creatinine clearance test)
*c. Bacteriological inoculation of urine
d. Complete blood count
e. Clinical urine analyses, dynamic testing

2464. During assessment of work conditions at the mercury thermometer manufacture, content of mercury vapors in the air of working area is revealed to exceed maximum concentration limit. Specify the main way of mercury penetration into the body:
*a. Respiratory organs
b. Damaged skin
c. Mucous tunics
d. Gastrointestinal tract
e. Intact skin

2465. During health assessment of car drivers and police officers on point duty, the physicians detected carboxyhemoglobin in the blood of the patients, weakened reflex responses, disturbed activity of a number of enzymes. Revealed professional health disorders are most likely to be associated with the effect of:
a. Sulfurous anhydride
b. Aromatic hydrocarbons
c. Nitric oxide
*d. Carbon monoxide
e. Mental stress

2466. On the 3rd day of life a newborn, who had suffered birth asphyxia, developed hemorrhage from the umbilical wound. Laboratory analysis reveals hypocoagulation, thrombocytopenia, and hypothrombinemia. What is the cause of such clinical developments?
a. Congenital angiopathy
b. Hemorrhagic disease of newborn
*c. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
d. Thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Umbilical vessel trauma

2467. A 46-year-old woman came to a maternity clinic with complaints of moderate blood discharge from the vagina, which developed after the menstruation delay of 1,5 months. On vaginal examination: the cervix is clean; the uterus is not enlarged, mobile, painless; appendages without changes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Adenomyosis
b. Submucous uterine myoma
c. Cancer of the uterine body
*d. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding
e. Ectopic pregnancy

2468. A patient has the second and third degree burns of the 15% of the body surface. On the 20th day after the trauma the patient presents with sharp increase of body temperature, general weakness, rapid vesicular respiration; facial features are sharpened, BP is 90/50 mm Hg, heart rate is 112/min. What complication is it?
a. Purulent bronchitis
b. Anaerobic infection
c. Pneumonia
d. Acute intoxication
*e. Sepsis

2469. A 30-year-old woman complains of amenorrhea that lasts for 2 years after she has given birth, loss of hair and body weight. The labor was complicated with hemorrhage caused by uterine hypotonia. Objectively the patient is of asthenic type, her external genitalia are hypoplastic, the uterine body is small in size and painless. No uterine appendages can be detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ovarian exhaustion syndrome
b. Galactorrhea-amenorrhea syndrome
c. Ovarian amenorrhea
d. Turner’s syndrome
*e. Sheehan’s syndrome (postpartum hypopituitarism)

2470. On laboratory investigation of a pork sample there is 1 dead trichinella detected in 24 sections. This meat should be:
*a. Handed over for technical disposal
b. Processed and sold through public catering network
c. Frozen until the temperature of – 10°C is reached in the deep layers, with subsequent exposure to cold for 15 days
d. Processed for boiled sausage production
e. Allowed for sale with no restrictions

2471. Examination of a 43-year-old man objectively revealed pallor of skin and mucous membranes, loss of tongue papillae, transverse striation of fingernails, cracks in the mouth corners, tachycardia. Blood test results:Hb-90 g/l, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis. The most likely causative factor of this condition is the inadequate intake of:
a. Zinc
b. Copper
*c. Iron
d. Magnesium
e. Selene

2472. A 52-year-old woman presents with affected mucosa in the mouth angles where fissures, erosions, and ulcers develop; vertical fissures appear on the lips during their closing (cheilosis); there are tongue alterations (glossitis), angular stomatitis, seborrheic dermatitis around the mouth and wings of the nose, and pericorneal injection. The listed symptoms are characteristic of:
a. B1-hypovitaminosis
b. PP-hypovitaminosis
c. A-hypovitaminosis
*d. B2-hypovitaminosis
e. C-hypovitaminosis

2473. Two days ago a woman fell from the height of 1,5 m. She complains of severe thoracic pain on the left and dyspnea. Chest X-ray reveals hydropneumothorax on the left with fluid level at the 7th rib and the lung collapsed by 1/3. The 6th-7th ribs are fractured along the scapular line. Serohemorrhagic fluid was obtained during thoracic puncture. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Thoracocentesis at the 2nd intercostal space
b. Intubation of trachea with artificial pulmonary ventilation
c. Alcohol-novocaine block of the fracture area
*d. Thoracocentesis on the left at the 7th intercostal space
e. Repeated puncture of the pleural cavity

2474. A patient complains of suppuration from the ear and impaired hearing of the left ear, which have been observed for the past 6 years. The patient had periodical headaches, general indisposition, fever. Objectively: otoscopy of the external auditory meatus revealed mucopurulent odorless substance. The eardrum is of normal color, with central perforation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic sensorineural hearing loss
*b. Chronic mesotympanitis
c. Acute otitis media
d. Otosclerosis
e. Chronic epitympanitis

2475. In 2 hours after a traffic accident a 28-yearold man in grave condition was delivered to a hospital. The patient complains of abdominal pain. He received a blow to the abdomen with the steering wheel. Objective examination revealed the following: the abdomen does not participate in respiration, is tense and acutely painful on palpation; the abdominal muscles are defensively tense, peritoneal irritation signs are positive, hepatic dullness is absent. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart rate is 120/min. What further treatment tactics should be chosen?
*a. Laparotomy
b. Cold to the abdomen
c. Laparocentesis
d. Ultrasound investigation
e. Laparoscopy

2476. A 28-year-old woman complains of increased intervals between menstruations, up to 2 months, and hirsutism. Gynecological examination revealed the following: ovaries are enlarged, painless, and dense; no alterations of the uterus. US of the lesser pelvis: ovaries are 4-5 cm in diameter, with numerous enlarged follicles on the periphery. X-ray of the skull base: sellar region is widened. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome (metabolic craniopathy)
*b. Stein-Leventhal syndrome (polycystic ovarian syndrome)
c. Sheehan syndrome (postpartum hypopituitarism)
d. Algodismenorrhea
e. Premenstrual syndrome

2477. Posture of an 11-year-old boy was determined during preventive examination. The child presents with curled forward rounded shoulders, the head is bowed forward, the thorax is flattened, the stomach is bulging. In the vertebral column there are deepened cervical and lumbar flexures. What posture does the child have?
a. Stooping
b. Lordosis
*c. Kyphosis
d. Corrected
e. Normal

2478. A 46-year-old woman has been hospitalized with open fracture of the left thigh in its middle third. She underwent the surgery -fixation with extraosseous osteosynthesis plates. On the 4th day after the surgery she developed pain in the wound, body temperature rose over 39°C. What measures should be taken in this case?
*a. Undo the sutures, drain the wound, and prescribe antibiotics
b. Administer antibiotics intraosseously and hypothermia locally
c. Remove the fixation, prescribe sulfanilamides
d. Inject antibiotics into the area surrounding the wound, prescribe spasmolytics and analgesics
e. Prescribe broad spectrum antibiotics and hormonal agents

2479. A multigravida on the 38th week of her pregnancy complains of increased BP up to 140/90mmHg, edema of the shins for 2 weeks. In the last month she gained 3,5 kg of weight. Urine analysis: protein – 0,033 g/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Severe preeclampsia
b. Pregnancy edema
c. Moderate preeclampsia
d. Pregnancy hypertension
*e. Mild preeclampsia

2480. A 44-year-old patient with postinfarction cardiosclerosis presents with frequent heart rate disorders and lower extremity edema. Objectively: Ps-95/min., irregular, 10-12 extrasystoles per minute. BP-135/90 mm Hg. The 1st heart sound at the apex is weakened. Pulmonary respiration is rough. The liver is enlarged +2 cm. ECG: irregular sinus rhythm, heart rate – 95/min, frequent polytopic ventricular extrasystoles.What antiarrhythmic drug is advisable in this case for treatment and prevention of extrasystole?
a. Mexiletine
b. Lidocaine
*c. Amiodarone
d. Quinidine
e. Novocainamide (Procainamide)

2481. A 60 year-old woman has been suffering from weakness, dizziness, and fatigue over the last year. Recently she has also developed dyspnea, paresthesia. Objectively: the skin and mucous membranes are pale and slightly icteric. The tongue is smooth due to the loss of lingual papillae. Liver and spleen are located at the costal margin. Blood count: Hb-70 g/l, RBC-1, 7×1012/l, color index – 1,2, macrocytes. Administer the patient a pathogenetically justified drug:
a. Iron preparations
b. Vitamin B1
c. Vitamin B6
d. Ascorbic acid
*e. Vitamin B12

2482. After excessive consumption of fatty food a 60-year-old woman suddenly developed pain in her right subcostal area, nausea, bile vomiting, sharp bitter taste in her mouth. In 2 days she developed jaundice, her urine darkened. Objectively: sclera and skin are icteric, the abdomen is distended, the liver is enlarged by 3 cm, soft and painful on palpation, Ortner’s, Murphy’s, Kehr’s, Zakharyin’s, Mayo-Robson’s signs are positive. What diagnostic technique should be used in the first place?
a. Laparoscopy
*b. US of the gallbladder and bile duct
c. X-ray of the abdomen
d. Fibrogastroduodenoscopy
e. Radionuclide scanning of the liver and gallbladder

2483. .A 42-year-old woman working at a poultry farm complains of dyspnea, thoracic pain on the left, increased body temperature up to 38- 39°C in the evening, and cough. The patient suffers from essential hypertension. Objectively: vesicular respiration in the lungs, vesicular resonance without alterations. X-ray of both lungs reveals numerous small lowintensity foci, 2-3 mm in size, located in a row along the blood vessels. ESR-32 mm/hour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Community-acquired pneumonia
*b. Acute disseminated tuberculosis
c. Pulmonary carcinomatosis
d. Infiltrative tuberculosis
e. Focal tuberculosis

2484. A 65-year-old patient has been suffering from liver cirrhosis associated with hepatitis C virus for 7 years. During the last 3 weeks the patient developed severe edema of the lower extremities, the abdomen is significantly distended with fluid. Ultrasound: signs of liver cirrhosis, portal hypertension, lymph nodes are in the area of hepatic portal. Concentration of ?-fetoprotein in blood serum is 285 ng/ml. What complication could have developed in this case?
a. Hepatocellular insufficiency
b. Cholestasis
c. Congestive heart failure
*d. Hepatocellular carcinoma of the liver
e. Hypersplenism

2485. A 43-year-old man has undergone a surgery for osteomyelitis of the left thigh. On the 6th day the patient’s condition was complicated with sepsis. Despite complex therapy of sepsis on the 9th day the patient persistently presents with temperature up to 40°C, heart rate is 110/min., respiration rate is 23/min., BP is 100/60 mm Hg. Blood test: leukocytes – 16×109/l, band neutrophils – 16%. What phase of clinical course is it?
a. Tension
*b. Catabolic
c. Rehabilitation
d. Anabolic
e. Functional

2486. A 23-year-old woman presents with diabetes mellitus type 1. She complains of weakness, headache, nausea, and vomiting. Objectively: temperature is 37,6°C, heart rate is 98/min., BP is 95/65 mmHg, respiration rate is 32/min., loud. Smell of acetone is detected, heart sounds are muffled, pulse is rhythmic. The stomach is sensitive in the epigastrium. Costovertebral angle tenderness (Murphy’s punch sign) is present. Blood glucose is 28,5 mmol/l; blood leukocytes – 16, 5×109/l. In urine: acetone ++, leukocytes – 25-40 in the vision field. Blood pHis 7,1.What correctionmethod would be the most advisable?
*a. Infusion of normal saline + insulinotherapy in small portions
b. Infusion of 2,5% sodium bicarbonate + insulinotherapy
c. Infusion of dextran solutions + insulinotherapy
d. Intravenous administration of antibiotics + insulinotherapy
e. Infusion of 5% glucose + insulinotherapy in large portions

2487. A 57-year-old woman complains of a sensation of esophageal compression, palpitations, difficult breathing when eating solid food, occasional vomiting with a full mouth, ”wet pillow” sign at night for the last 6 months. Objectively: body tempearture - 39°C, height – 168 cm, weight – 72 kg, Ps- 76/min, BP-120/80 mm Hg. X-ray study revealed considerable dilation of esophagus and its constriction in the cardial part. What pathology is the most likely to have caused dysphagia in this patient?
*a. Achalasia cardiae
b. Hiatal hernia
c. Reflux esophagitis
d. Esophageal carcinoma
e. Primary esophageal spasm

2488. A 47-year-old man is employed at the weaving workshop, has 15-year-long record of service at this factory; his work conditions are associated with high-frequency and high-intensity noise. During periodical examination he was diagnosed with occupational deafness. What are the grounds for making such a diagnosis?
a. Inner ear examination results
*b. Audiometry data and hygienic assessment of working environment
c. Noise characteristic at this factory
d. Record of service at this factory
e. Central nervous system examination results

2489. A 37-year-old woman complains of acute pain in the genital area, swelling of the labia, pain when walking. Objectively: body temperature is 38,7°C, Ps-98/min. In the interior of the right labia there is a dense, painful tumor-like formation 5,0x4,5 cm in size, the skin and mucous membrane of genitals are hyperemic, there is profuse foul-smelling discharge.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute vulvovaginitis
b. Labial furuncle
*c. Acute bartholinitis
d. Bartholin gland cyst
e. Carcinoma of vulva

2490. A woman undergoing in-patient treatment for viral hepatitis type B developed headache, nausea, recurrent vomiting, memory lapses, flapping tremor of her hands, rapid pulse. Sweet smell from the mouth is detected. Body temperature is 37,6°C, heart rate is 89/min. What complication developed in the patient?
*a. Acute liver failure
b. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Hypoglycemic shock
e. Ischemic stroke

2491. A 42-year-old man was delivered to a surgical in-patient department with complaints of icteric skin, pain in the right subcostal area. Biochemical blood analysis: total bilirubin -140 mcmol/l, direct bilirubin – 112 mcmol/l. On US: choledoch duct – 1,4 cm, a concrement is detected in the distal area. Gallbladder is 40 cm, no concrements. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Laparotomy with cholecystectomy
b. Threatment in an infectious diseases hospital
c. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
d. Laparotomy with choledoch duct drain
*e. Endoscopic papillosphincterotomy

2492. 4 weeks after myocardial infarction a 56year-old patient developed acute heart pain, marked dyspnea. Objectively: the patient’s condition is extremely grave, there is marked cyanosis of face, swelling and throbbing of neck veins, peripheral pulse is absent, the carotid artery pulse is rhythmic, 130/min., BP is 60/20 mm Hg. Auscultation of the heart reveals extremely muffled sounds, percussion reveals heart border extension in both directions. What is the optimal treatment tactics for this patient?
a. Conservative treatment, infusion of adrenomimetics
b. Pleural cavity drainage
c. Oxygen inhalation
d. Puncture of the pleural cavity on the left
*e. Pericardiocentesis and immediate thoracotomy

2493. A patient with chronic pancreatitis complains of diarrhea occurring up to 5 times per day (no blood traces), loss of body weight, abdominal distention, dryness of skin, loss of hair, thirst, bleeding gums, convulsions. Complete blood count: leukocytes -5, 8×109/l; Hb-86 g/l; ESR-15 mm/g; Blood protein test: protein – 48 g/l; albumins – 28 g/l. What indicators of coprological analysis would accompany this syndrom?
a. Large numbers of iodinophilous microbes
*b. Steatorrhea, creatorrhea
c. Large amount of starch grains and cellulose
d. Large amount of mucus, amylorrhea
e. Gas bubbles, acid reaction

2494. A 35-year-old patient complains of heartburn, gasseous and sour eructation, burning constricting pain behind the sternum and along the esophagus, developing when bowing the torso to the front. No previous examination; the patient takes almagel at his own discretion, after which he notes improvement of his general state. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Ulcer disease of the stomach
b. Ulcer disease of the duodenum
c. Functional dyspepsia
d. Cardiospasm
*e. Gastroesophageal reflux disease

2495. The left hand of a newborn is extended in all its joints, stretched along the torso, and pronated in the forearm. Active movements of the shoulder joint are retained. The hand is flattened, atrophied, cold to touch, hangs passively. Grasping and Babkin’s reflexes are absent at the affected side. Hemogram indicators are normal. Make the most likely diagnosis:
a. Complete obstetrical paralysis
b. Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
c. Osteomyelitis
d. Proximal obstetrical paralysis
*e. Inferior distal obstetrical paralysis

2496. A 34-year-old man is being treated for schizophrenia exacerbation in a psychiatric unit. Objectively: the patient remains in bed, is sluggishly mobile, unresponsive, does not react to questions. His position is unvaried, hypomimic, snout reflex and Dupre’s symptom are present, muscles exhibit waxy flexibility. He has been remaining in this state for approximately a week. Feeding is parenteral. Determine the neuromotor disturbance:
a. Psychogenic stupor
b. Depressive stupor
*c. Catatonic stupor
d. Anergic stupor
e. Exogenic stupor

2497. A 14-year-old girl has been delivered to a gynecological department with complaints of profuse blood discharge from her genital tract for 2 weeks. Anamnesis: menstruation since13, irregular, painful, profuse; the last one was 2 months ago. Objectively: pale skin and mucosa, BP-100/60 mm Hg, Hb-108 g/l. The abdomen is soft and painless on palpation. Rectal examination revealed no pathologies of reproductive organs.What condition is it?
*a. Juvenile uterine hemorrhage (Dysfunctional)
b. Inflammation of uterine appendages (Pelvic inflammatory disease)
c. Endometritis
d. Pelviperitonitis
e. Hypomenstrual syndrome

2498. An infant cries during urination, the foreskin swells and urine is excreted in drops. What approach to treatment should be chosen?
*a. Create an opening into the foreskin cavity
b. Prescription of antispasmodic agents
c. Epicystostomy
d. Urinary bladder catheterization
e. Prescription of ?-adrenergic blocking agents

2499. A 20-year-old patient complains of pain in the left lumbar region, arterial pressure rise up to 160/110 mm Hg. US revealed that the structure and size of the right kidney were within age norms, there were signs of the 3rd degree hydronephrotic transformation of the left kidney. Doppler examination revealed an additional artery running to the lower pole of the kidney. Excretory urogram shows a narrowing in the region of ureteropelvic junction. Specify the treatment tactics:
a. Kidney catheterization
b. Administration of ?-blockers
c. Administration of spasmolytics
d. Administration of ACE inhibitors
*e. Surgical intervention

2500. A 49-year-old patient consulted a doctor about difficult swallowing, voice hoarseness, weight loss. These symptoms have been gradually progressing for the last 3 months. Objectively: the patient is exhausted, there are enlarged supraclavicular lymph nodes. Esophagoscopy revealed no esophageal pathology. Which of the following investigations is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Ultrasound investigation of mediastinum
*b. Computed tomography of chest and mediastinum
c. Multiplanar imaging of esophagus
d. X-ray of lungs
e. Radioisotope investigation of chest

2501. A 15-year-old girl complains of dizziness and sensation of lack of air that she develops in emotionally straining situations. Relief occurs after she takes corvalol. Objectively: hyperhidrosis and marble-like pattern of the skin of her palms and feet. Clinical and instrumental examination revealed no organic alterations of the central nervous, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems.What provisional diagnosis can be made?
*a. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
b. Bronchial asthma
c. Acute epiglottitis
d. Stenosing laryngotracheitis
e. Obstructive bronchitis

2502. A 14-year-old patient complains of alopecia foci on his scalp. The patient has been presenting with this condition for 2 weeks. Objectively: on the scalp there are several small oval foci with blurred margins. The skin in the foci is pink-red, the hairs are broken off at 4-5 mm length or at skin level. UnderWood’s lamp there are no foci of green luminescence detected.What disease is it?
a. Syphilitic alopecia
b. Scleroderma
c. Psoriasis
*d. Trichophytosis capitis
e. Alopecia areata

2503. A 38-year-old patient has been delivered by an ambulance to a surgical department with complaints of general weakness, indisposition, black stool. On examination the patient is pale, there are dotted hemorrhages on the skin of his torso and extremities. On digital investigation there are black feces on the glove. Blood test: Hb-108 g/l, thrombocytopenia. Anamnesis states that similar condition was observed 1 year ago. Make the diagnosis:
a. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
*b. Thrombocytopenic purpura
c. Ulcerative bleeding
d. Hemophilia
e. Rectal tumor

2504. A 35-year-old patient developed an epileptic attack with tonoclonic spasms that lasted for 3 minutes. After the attack the patient fell asleep but in 5 minutes the second attack occurred. The first step of emergency aid would be to:
a. Prescribe antiepileptic drugs
b. Administer chloral hydrate via an enema
c. Take blood from the vein for analysis
d. Introduce diazepam intravenously
*e. Ensure patency of airways

2505. A 23-year-old woman has been suffering from a mental disease since the age of 18, the course of disease has no remission periods. At a hospital the patient mostly presents with non-purposeful foolish excitation: she makes stereotypic grimaces, exposes herself, publicly masturbates with a loud laughter, repeates stereotypical abusive shouts. The patient should be prescribed:
a. Tranquilizers
b. Antidepressants
*c. Neuroleptics
d. Nootropics
e. Mood stabilizers

2506. 10 days after birth a newborn developed sudden fever up to 38,1°C. Objectively: the skin in the region of navel, abdomen and chest is erythematous; there are multiple peasized blisters with no infiltration at the base; isolated bright red moist erosions with epidermal fragments are observed on the periphery. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Syphilitic pemphigus
b. Vulgar impetigo
c. Atopic dermatitis
*d. Epidemic pemphigus of newborn
e. Streptococcal impetigo

2507. A man came to an urologist with complains of painful urination, discharge from urethra. The patient has been suffering from this condition for a week. Objectively: hyperemic urinary meatus, edema, purulent discharge. Microscopy of smears detected gram-negative bacteria. Specify the diagnosis:
a. Trichomonas urethritis
b. Chlamydial urethritis
c. Chronic gonorrhea
*d. Acute gonorrheal urethritis
e. Candidal urethritis

2508. A patient is 28 years old. He has been suffering from mental disorder since he was 22 His current condition has changed acutely: for 3 days the patient has been refusing to leave his home. He claims that there is a ”telepathy” occurring between him and the other people, through which he receives ”thoughts of strangers” and transmits his own thoughts for everyone to hear. He is convinced that his thoughts and actions are being manipulated through this ”telepathy”. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
*a. Paranoid schizophrenia
b. Manic episode
c. Acute reaction to stress
d. Organic delirium
e. Depressive episode

2509. A 35-year-old woman has gained 20 kg weight within a year with the normal diet. She complains of chills, sleepiness, shortness of breath. The patient’s mother and sister are corpulent. Objectively: height – 160 cm, weight -92 kg, BMI-35,9. Obesity is uniform, there are no striae. The face is amimic. The skin is dry. The tongue is thickened. Heart sounds are muffled. HR-56/min, BP-140/100 mm Hg. The patient has been suffering from amenorrhea for 5 months, has constipations. TSH-28 mcIU/l (norm is 0,32-5). Craniogram shows no pathology. What is the etiology of obesity?
a. Hypo-ovarian
b. Alimentary and constitutive
c. Hypercorticoid
*d. Hypothyroid
e. Hypothalamic-pituitary

2510. A patient complains of painless ”sores” on his penis and inguinal lymph nodes enlargement. Synthomycin emulsion that the patient have been applying to the ”sores” was ineffective. Objectively: on the inner leaf of the foreskin there are three closely situated rounded erosions, 0,5 cm in diameter, with dense infiltration that can be palpated at their bases. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Herpes simplex (Herpes pro genitalis)
b. Shingles
c. Erythema multiforme
*d. Primary syphilis
e. Candidiasis of the inner leaf of the foreskin

2511. A 1,5-month-old child on breasfeeding presents from birth with daily vomiting, irregular liquid foamy feces, and meteorism, which are resistant to antibacterial and probiotic therapy; no increase of body mass is observed. The child’s condition improved, when breastmilk was substituted with ”NAN low lactose” formula. What pathology is it?
a. Infectious enteritis
b. Intestinal lambliasis (Giardiasis)
*c. Lactase deficiency
d. Drug-induced enteritis
e. Functional dyspepsia

2512. A 12-year-old girl after a case of respiratory infection developed dyspnea at rest, paleness of skin. Heart rate is 110/min., BP is 90/55 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled. Borders of relative heart dullness: right – the parasternal line, upper – the III rib, left - 1,0 cm outwards from the midclavicular line. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
b. Functional cardiopathy
*c. Infectious myocarditis
d. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
e. Exudative pericarditis

2513. A 48-year-old man complains of fatigue, excessive sweating, severe skin itching, undulant fever, enlarged cervical and supraclavicular lymph nodes. Objectively: paleness of skin and mucosa, cervical lymph nodes are mobile, dense, elastic, walnut-sized, painless, not attached to the skin. Complete blood count: erythrocytes – 3, 0×1012/l, Hb- 100 g/l, leukocytes – 14×109/l, eosinophils - 6%, basophils – 3%, band neutrophils – 11%, segmented neutrophils – 69%, lymphocytes - 7, monocytes – 4%, platelets – 280×109/l, ESR- 37 mm/hour. What method should be applied to verify the diagnosis?
*a. Lymph node biopsy
b. Muscle biopsy
c. Lumbar puncture
d. Chest X-ray
e. Sternal puncture

2514. A patient after a blow to the head developed general symptoms of cerebral disturbance, nausea, vomiting, focal signs hemi-hyperreflexia S>D, hemihyperesthesia on the left, marked meningeal syndrome. Neither cranial X-ray nor computer tomography revealed any pathologies. What examination method would allow making and clarification of the diagnosis?
a. Echoencephalography
b. Angiography
c. Pneumoencephalography
*d. Lumbar puncture
e. Electroencephalography

2515. A 72-year-old man complains of lower extremity edema, sensation of heaviness in the right subcostal area, dyspnea of rest. For over 25 years he has been suffering from COPD. Objectively: orthopnea, jugular venous distention, diffuse cyanosis, acrocyanosis. Barrel chest is observed, on percussion there is vesiculotympanitic (bandbox) resonance, sharply weakened vesicular respiration on both sides,moist crepitant crackles in the lower segments of the lungs. Heart sounds are weakened, the II heart sound is accentuated over the pulmonary artery. The liver is +3 cm. What complicated the clinical course of COPD in this patient?
a. Acute left ventricular failure
b. Pulmonary embolism
*c. Chronic pulmonary heart
d. Diffuse pneumosclerosis
e. Community-acquired pneumonia

2516. A multigravida at 39 weeks of gestation presenting with regular labour activity for 8 hours has been delivered to a hospital; the waters broke an hour ago. She complains of headache, seeing spots. BP is 180/100 mm Hg. Urine test results: protein – 3,3 g/l, hyaline cylinders. Fetal heart rate is 140/min, rhythmical. Vaginal examination reveals complete cervical dilatation, the fetal head is on the pelvic floor, sagittal suture is in line with obstetric conjugate, the occipital fontanel is under the pubis.What is the optimal tactics of labour management?
*a. Outlet forceps
b. Cesarean section
c. Conservative labour management
d. Vacuum extraction of the fetus
e. Cavity forceps

2517. After the contact with chemicals a plant worker has suddenly developed stridor, voice hoarseness, barking cough, progressing dyspnea. Objective examination reveals acrocyanosis. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Laryngeal edema
b. PATE
c. Pneumothorax
d. Pulmonary atelectasis
e. Laryngeal carcinoma

2518. An 18-year-old woman complains of pain in her lower abdomen, profuse purulent discharge from the vagina, temperature rise up to 37,8°C. Anamnesis states that she had a random sexual contact the day before the signs appeared. She was diagnosed with acute bilateral adnexitis. On additional examination: leukocytes are present throughout all vision field, bacteria, diplococci with intracellular and extracellular position. What is the most likely agent in the given case?
a. Escherichia coli
b. Trichomona vaginalis
c. Staphylococcus aureus
*d. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
e. Chlamydia trachomatis

2519. A 58-year-old man complains of general weakness, loss of 10 kg of weight within 1,5 months, progressive pain in the lumbar region, increased blood pressure up to 220/160 mm Hg, low grade fever. Objectively: in the right hypochondriumdeep palpation reveals a formation with uneven surface and low mobility; veins of the spermatic cord and scrotum are dilated. Blood test results: Hb-86 g/l, ESR-44 mm/h. Urine test results: specific gravity – 1020, protein – 0,99 g/l, RBC cover the whole field of vision,WBC-4-6 in the field of vision.What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Renal tumour
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Nephroptosis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

2520. Anamnesis of a 30-year-old patient includes closed thoracic injury. Lately the patient has been suffering from increasing dyspnea, sensation of heaviness in the right subcostal area, and heart rate disturbances. Objectively: acrocyanosis, bulging cervical veins, ascites, edema of the lower extremities. Heart auscultation reveals muffled heart sounds, additional III heart sound is detected. Provisional diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis was made. What diagnostic technique would NOT confirm the diagnosis?
a. Chest X-ray
*b. US of abdomen
c. Echocardiography
d. Computer tomography
e. Magnetic resonance imaging

2521. A 72-year-old woman suffers from diabetes mellitus type 2, concomitant diseases are stage 2 hypertension and stage 2B heart failure. She takes metformin. Hypertensic crisis had occurred the day before, after which the patient developed extreme weakness, myalgias, thirst, dry mouth, polyuria. BP is 140/95 mm Hg, heart rate is 98/min., no edemas or smell of acetone detected. What measures should be taken to prevent development of comatose state in the patient?
*a. Stop metformin, prescribe short-acting insulin
b. Apply hypotonic solution of sodium chloride
c. Prescribe glibenclamide
d. Additionally prescribe long-acting insulin
e. Double the dosage of metformin

2522. The body of a 24-year-old woman with probable signs of poisoning has been found on the street. Forensic medical examination was requested by an investigator during examination of the site and the body. According to the Criminal Procedure Code currently in force in Ukraine, forensic medical examination is required when it is necessary to determine the:
a. Mode of death
b. Mechanism of death
c. Manner of death
d. Time of death
*e. Cause of death

2523. It is the 3rd day after the normal term labor; the infant is rooming-in with the mother and is on breastfeeding. Objectively: the mother’s general condition is satisfactory. Temperature is 36,4°C, heart rate is 80/min., BP is 120/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are soft and painless; lactation is moderate, unrestricted milk flow. The uterus is dense, the uterine fundus is located by 3 fingerswidth below the navel. Lochia are sanguino-serous, moderate in volume. Assess the dynamics of uterine involution:
a. Subinvolution
b. Pathologic involution
c. Hematometra
*d. Physiological involution
e. Lochiometra

2524. Survey radiograph of a 52-year-old worker of an agglomeration plant (28-yearlong record of service, the concentration of metal dust is 22-37 mg/m3) shows mildly pronounced interstitial fibrosis with diffused contrasting well-defined small nodular shadows. The patient has no complaints. Pulmonary function is not compromised. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Anthracosis
*b. Siderosis
c. Anthraco-silicatosis
d. Silicosis
e. Silicatosis

2525. A 53-year-old woman complains of weight loss up to 10 kg within the last 2 years, liquid foul-smelling stool two times a day that poorly washes off the toilet, periodic bouts of nausea, girdle pain in the upper abdomen. Objectively: pain in Gubergrits zone (on the right from navel) and at Mayo-Robson’s point. Biochemical blood analysis: glucose – 3,2 mmol/l, bilirubin – 16,5 mcmol/l, crude protein -56,4 g/l. Urine diastase/amylase – 426 g/h/l. D-xylose test (oral administration of 25 g of d-xylose) after 5 hours reveals 3 g of xylose in urine. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Pseudomembranous colitis
b. Irritable bowel syndrome
c. Chronic gastritis
*d. Pancreatitis.Malabsorption syndrome
e. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis

2526. A 15-year-old teenager has undergone medical examination in military recruitment center. The following was revealed: interval systolic murmur at the cardiac apex, accent of the II heart sound over the pulmonary artery, tachycardia. What additional examination method will be the most informative for determining diagnosis?
a. Phonocardiography
b. Rheography
c. Electrocardiography
d. X-ray
*e. Echocardiography

2527. A 64-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of progressive jaundice that developed over 3 weeks without pain syndrome and is accompanied by general weakness and loss of appetite. Objectively: temperature is 36,8°C, heart rate is 78/min, abdomen is soft and painless, peritoneum irritation symptoms are not detected, palpation reveals sharply enlarged tense gallbladder. What disease can be characterised by these symptoms?
a. Duodenal ulcer
b. Chronic cholecystitis
c. Cholecystitis caused by lambliasis
*d. Cancer of pancreas head
e. Acute cholecystitis

2528. .A 6-year-old girl came to a general practitioner with her mother. The child complains of burning pain and itching in her external genitalia. The girl was taking antibiotics the day before due to her suffering from acute bronchitis. On examination: external genitalia are swollen, hyperemic, there is white deposit accumulated in the folds. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Candidal vulvovaginitis
b. Nonspecific vulvitis
c. Herpes vulvitis
d. Helminthic invasion
e. Trichomoniasis

2529. A 37-year-old patient complains of pain in the spinal column, reduced mobility. The condition persists for 7 years. ”Sway back” is observed, there is no movement in all spinal regions. On X-ray: ”bamboo spine” is detected.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Spondylolisthesis
*b. Ankylosing spondylitis
c. Spondylitis deformans
d. Osteochondrosis
e. Tuberculous spondylitis

2530. A 25-year-old patient is not married and has sexual relations with several partners. During the last 3 months he noticed a small amount of mucoserous discharge from the urethra. Subjectively: periodical itching or burning pain in the urethra. Two months ago pain in the knee joint developed. Possibility of trauma or exposure to cold is denied by the patient. During the last week eye discomfort is noted – lacrimation and itching.What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Bacterial nonspecific urethral conjunctivitis
b. Upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) that affects conjunctiva and joints
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Seasonal pollinosis
*e. Reactive arthritis

2531. A 19-year-old woman complains of severe pain in the axillary crease. Condition onset occurred a week ago after her swimming in a cold river and epilation. The next day a painful ”boil” appeared. The ”boil” was increasing in size every day and became a plum-sized tumor. Upon examination there are nodular conical growths joined together detected, the skin covering them is bluish-red in color. Some nodules have fistulous openings producing thick purulent mass. Body temperature is 38, 5°C, general malaise.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pyoderma chancriformis
*b. Hydradenitis
c. Cutaneous tuberculosis
d. Carbuncle
e. Necrotizing ulcerative trichophytosis

2532. A woman complains of weight gain, chills, edema, xeroderma, somnolence, difficulties with focusing. Objectively: height is 165 cm; weight is 90 kg; body proportions are of female type, to-35,8°C, heart rate - 58/min, BP-105/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds are weakened, bradycardia is observed.Other internal organs have no alterations. Thyroid gland cannot be palpated. Milk secretion from mammary glands is observed. Hormone test revealed increased levels of thyroidstimulating hormone (TSH) and prolactin, and decreased level of thyroxine (4). What is the cause of obesity?
a. Secondary hypothyroidism
b. Hypopituitarism
c. Adiposogenital dystrophy
*d. Primary hypothyroidism
e. Prolactinoma

2533. ECG revealed the following in a 10year-old child: sharp acceleration of the heart rate – 240/min., P wave overlaps with T wave and deforms it, moderate lengthening of PQ interval, QRS complex is without alterations. What pathology does this child have?
*a. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
b. Ventricular hypertrophy
c. Extrasystole
d. WPW syndrome
e. Atrial hypertrophy

2534. A 54-year-old patient complains of weakness, jaundice, itching skin. Disease onset was 1,5 months ago: fever up to 39°C appeared at first, with progressive jaundice developed 2 weeks later. On hospitalization jaundice was severely progressed. Liver cannot be palpated. Gallbladder is enlarged and painless. Blood bilirubin is 190 mcmol/l (accounting for direct bilirubin). Stool is acholic. What is the most likely jaundice genesis in this patient?
a. Hemolytic jaundice
b. Hepatocellular jaundice
*c. Mechanical jaundice
d. Caroli syndrome
e. Gilbert’s syndrome

2535. During hemotransfusion the patient developed nausea, tremor, lumbar and retrosternal pain. On examination the skin is hyperemic, later developed pallor; the patient presentswith hyperhidrosis, labored respiration, pulse is 110/min., BP is 70/40 mm Hg. Urine is black colored. What complication developed in the patient?
*a. Posttransfusion shock
b. Pulmonary embolism
c. Hypotonic crisis
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Acute renal failure

2536. A 22-year-old man suddenly developed extreme weakness, nausea, vomiting with traces of blood. The patient is known to suffer from peptiv ulcer disease of duodenum and hemophilia A. Objectively: heart rate - 102/min., BP-100/60mm Hg. Complete blood count: erythrocytes – 3, 2×1012/l, Hb-98 g/l, color index – 0,92, leukocytes – 7, 4×109/l, platelets – 240×109/l, ESR-11 mm/hour.What measure would most effectively decrease hemorrhaging in this case?
*a. Cryoprecipitate
b. Native plasma
c. Platelet concentrate transfusion
d. Direct transfusion of donor blood
e. Aminocapronic acid

2537. A 22-year-old woman complains of amenorrhea for 8 months. Anamnesis states that menarche occured at the age of 12,5. Since the age of 18 the patient has a history of irregular menstruation. The patient is nulligravida. The mammary glands are developed properly, nipples discharge drops of milk when pressed. Hormone test: prolactin level is 2 times higher than normal. CT reveals a bulky formation with diameter of 4 mm in the region of sella. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sheehan’s syndrome (postpartum hypopituitarism)
b. Cushing’s disease
c. Lactational amenorrhea
d. Stein-Leventhal syndrome (polycystic ovary syndrome)
*e. Pituitary tumour

2538. A 13-year-old girl complains of fatigability, frequent headaches, cardialgia. Eight years ago she had a case of pyelonephritis. Urine analyses periodically revealed leukocyturia. The child has undergone no further treatment. On examination: increased BP up to 150/100 mm Hg. Ultrasound investigation revealed significant reduction of the right kidney. What process is leading in arterial hypertension pathogenesis in this case?
*a. Hyperactivity of renin-angiotensin system
b. Disturbance of renal circulation
c. Increased cortisol level
d. Hypersympathicotonia
e. Disturbance of water-electrolytic balance

2539. A 3-month-old child presents with saffron-yellow coloring of the skin, sclera, and mucous membranes. The abdomen is enlarged, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly are observed. In blood there is conjugated bilirubin-induced hyperbilirubinemia. On intravenous cholangiocholecystography: opacified bile is discharged into the intestine. Transaminase activity is normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Congenital hepatitis
*b. Biliary atresia
c. Hemolytic disease of newborn
d. Physiologic jaundice
e. Crigler-Najjar syndrome

2540. A 51-year-old woman complains of headache, trembling, paresthesiae, palpitations, increased blood pressure up to 280/160 mm Hg. The day before she experienced exhausting headache, vascular pulsation, palpitations, asphyxia, stomachache, unbearable fear of coming death. The patient paled and broke out in cold sweat. In urine there is increased content of vanillylmandelic acid. What disease causes such clinical presentation in the patient?
a. Cushing’s syndrome
b. Conn’s syndrome (primary hyperaldosteronism)
*c. Pheochromocytoma
d. Primary hypertension
e. Cushing’s disease

2541. A 52-year-old patient suffers from marked dyspnea during physical exertion, non-productive cough. The patient’s condition has been persisting for 8 months. The patient has been a smoker for 30 years. In the lungs there are cellophane-type crackles auscultated on both sides. Respiration rate is 26/min., oxygen saturation of blood is 92%. On spirometry: moderate restrictive-type disturbance of external respiration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
b. Community-acquired pneumonia
c. Sarcoidosis
*d. Idiopathic fibrosing alveolitis
e. Chronic bronchitis

2542. A 26-year-old patient with affective bipolar disorder has developed a condition manifested by mood improvement, behavioural and sexual hyperactivity, verbosity, active body language, reduced need for sleep. Which of the following drugs would be most effective in this case?
*a. Neuroleptics with sedative effect
b. Neuroleptics with activating effect
c. Antidepressants with sedative effect
d. Tranquilizers
e. Antidepressants with activating effect

2543. A 19-year-old patient complains of dyspnea on exertion. He often has bronchitis and pneumonia. Since childhood the patient presents with cardiac murmur. Auscultation revealed splitting of the II sound above the pulmonary artery, systolic murmur in the 3rd intercostal space at the left sternal border. ECG detected right bundle branch block. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Atrial septal defect
b. Aortarctia
c. Mitral insufficiency
d. Aortic stenosis
e. Open ductus arteriosus

2544. A 30-year-old patient was in a car accident. He is unconscious, pale, has thready pulse. In the middle third of the right thigh there is an extensive laceration with ongoing profuse external arterial bleeding. What urgent actions must be taken to save the life of the patient?
a. Tourniquet below the wound of the right thigh
b. Precordial thump
c. Application of plaster bar
*d. Tourniquet above the wound of the right thigh
e. Artificial lung ventilation

2545. A 25-year-old patient has been admitted to the hospital with the following problems: weakness, sweating, itching, weight loss, enlarged submandibular, cervical, axillary, inguinal lymph nodes. Objectively: hepatomegaly. Lymph node biopsy revealed giant Berezovsky-Reed-Sternberg cells, polymorphocellular granuloma composed of lymphocytes, reticular cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, fibrous tissue, and plasma cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Macofollicular reticulosis
*b. Lymphogranulomatosis (Hodgkin’s lymphoma)
c. Lymphoreticulosarcoma
d. Lymph node tuberculosis
e. Cancer metastases to the lymph nodes

2546. An 9-year-old child was hospitalized for fever up to 39,8°C, inertness, moderate headache, vomiting. Examination revealed meningeal symptoms. Lumbar puncture was performed. The obtained fluid was characterised by increased opening pressure, was transparent, with the cell count of 450 cells per 1 mcL (mainly lymphocytes – 90%), glucose level of 3,6 mmol/l. What agent could have caused the disease in the child?
*a. Enterovirus
b. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
c. Streptococcus pneumoniae
d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Neisseria meningitidis

2547. A 25-year-old woman has a self-detected tumor in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast. On palpation there is a painless firmmobile lump up to 2 cm in diameter, peripheral lymph nodes are without alterations. In the upper outer quadrant of the right breast ultrasound revealed a massive neoplasm with increased echogenicity sized 21x18 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mammary cancer
b. Mastitis
c. Lactocele
d. Diffuse mastopathy
*e. Fibroadenoma

2548. A 68-year-old man complains of inability to urinate for a day. On attempt of urinary bladder catheterization there was detected a rough stricture in the membranous portion of the urethra. What first aid tactics should be applied in this case?
a. Adenomectomy
b. ?-adrenoblockers
c. Urinary bladder catheterization
*d. Troacar cystostomy
e. Optical internal urethrotomy

2549. Heart X-ray of a 31-year-old man has revealed the following: with tightly filled opacified esophagus there is a marginal filling defect in its middle third on the posterior wall; the defect is 1,8x1,3 cm in size with clear oval border. Mucosal folds are retained and envelop the defect; wall peristalsis and elasticity are not affected. There are no complaints regarding the condition of the patient’s alimentary canal. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Achalasia cardiae
b. Diverticulum
c. Barrett esophagus
*d. Esophageal tumor
e. Esophageal burns

2550. A patient with signs of general overexposure to cold presenting with local frostbites of fingers has been delivered into an admission room. Objectively: conscious, inert, speech is slow, the skin of the face is cold, body temperature is 34°C, heart rate is 68/min.What would be the actions of a doctor on call?
*a. Hospitalize the patient to the surgical department
b. Hospitalize the patient to the traumatology department
c. Refer to a family doctor on the next day
d. Let the patient go home
e. Hospitalize the patient to the therapeutics department

2551. A 22-day-old infant developed subcutaneous red nodes from 1,0 to 1,5 cm in size on the scalp; later the nodes suppurated. Temperature increased up to 37,7°C, intoxication symptoms appeared, regional lymph nodes enlarged. Complete blood count: anemia, leukocytosis, neutrocytosis, increased ESR. What diagnosis will you make?
a. -
*b. Pseudofurunculosis
c. Vesiculopustulosis
d. Pemphigus
e. Scalp phlegmon

2552. During examination of a healthy infant, the child takes a toy into his hands, turns from the back to the side; when lying on the stomach he can firmly prop himself up on his forearms; the child laughs and makes joyful exclamations. The age of the child is:
*a. 4 months
b. 5 months
c. 6 months
d. 1 month
e. 2 months

2553. After significant physical exertion a 66year-old man with deep vein thrombosis of the extremities developed shortness of breath, intense pain in the chest on the left, marked palpitations. The patient’s condition is grave, his face is cyanotic, the cervical veins are swollen, BP is 60/40 mm Hg. What investigation method would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Fiber-optic bronchoscopy
*b. Selective angiopneumography
c. Echocardiography
d. Chest X-ray
e. Magnetic resonance imaging of the chest

2554. A 32-year-old woman complains of general fatigue, low-grade fever persisting for 4 months, lumbar pain, and dysuria. Anamnesis includes frequent acute respiratory diseases, overexposure to cold, lowcalorie diet, a case of pulmonary tuberculosis in childhood. Clinical urine analysis: pH- 4,8, leukocyturia, hematuria. Complete blood count: leukocytosis, lymphocytosis, increased ESR. Urography concludes: dilatation of renal pelvis and calyceal system of both kidneys, foci of calcification in the projection of right kidney parenchyma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic pyelonephritis
*b. Nephrotuberculosis
c. Right renal carcinoma
d. Right renal cyst
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

2555. A full-term newborn (born with the body weight of 3900 g at gestational age of 39 weeks) on the first day of his life developed respiratory disturbances: dyspnea, arrhythmic respiration, cyanosis attacks. On examination there is paradoxical respiration observed and left side of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing. On auscultation the respiration is weakened in the lungs on the left. Neurologist diagnosed the patient with left-sided ErbDuchenne palsy. Complete blood count shows no changes.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Left-sided pneumothorax
b. Congenital pneumonia
*c. Left-sided diaphragm paresis
d. Respiratory distress syndrome
e. Transient tachypnea of the newborn

2556. A 12-year-old child had three attacks of acute rheumatic fever accompanied by carditis. Examination revealed the symptoms of chronic tonsillitis, mitral insufficiency, and carious teeth. What is the optimal method of secondary prophylaxis?
*a. Year-round bicillin prophylaxis until the age of 25
b. Year-round bicillin prophylaxis for 3 years
c. Oral cavity sanitation
d. Tonsillectomy
e. Course of cardiotrophic drugs twice a year

2557. A 24-year-old patient had been delivered to a thoracic department with a chest injury, fracture of the IV, V, VI ribs on the right. Plan radiography showed the fluid level in the pleural cavity to be reaching the III rib on the right. Puncture contained blood clots. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
*a. Emergency thoracotomy
b. Thoracentesis and thoracostomy
c. Medical thoracoscopy
d. Hemostatic therapy
e. Pleural puncture

2558. A 3-year-old child has been delivered to a hospital with complaints of pain in the legs, fever, loss of appetite. Objectively: pale skin and mucosa, hemorrhagic rash. Lymph nodes are enlarged, painless, dense and elastic, not matted together. Bones, joints, and abdomen are painful. The liver and spleen are enlarged. Hemogram: Hb-88 g/l, color index – 1,3, platelets – 80×109/l, leukocytes – 25, 8×109/l, lymphoblasts – 70%, ESR-52 mm/hour.Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Hemorrhagic vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein purpura)
*d. Acute leukemia
e. Acute rheumatic fever

2559. A 60-year-old man has a diet consisting of unvaried food staples: mostly cereals, potato, pasta; few vegetables and little fats (especially animal fats). During medical examination he complains of deterioration of his twilight vision. This condition can be caused by lack of:
a. Calcium
b. Carbohydrates
c. Amino acids
d. Fats
*e. Retinol

2560. A 14-year-old girl came to a general practitioner with complaints of weakness, loss of appetite, headache, rapid fatigability. Her last menstruation was profuse and lasted for 14 days after previous delay of 2 months. Objectively: the skin is pale, heart rate is 90/min., BP is 110/70 mm Hg, Hb is 88 g/l. Rectal examination: the uterus and its appendages are without changes, no discharge from the genital tracts. What complication occurred in the patient?
*a. Posthemorrhagic anemia
b. Migraine
c. Dysmenorrhea
d. Gastritis
e. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction of hypotonic type

2561. A postpartum woman on the 12th day after the normal delivery complains of pain localized in her left gastrocnemius muscle. Body temperature is 37,2°C; pulse is 85/min, rhythmic; blood pressure is 128/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are soft and painless. The uterus is behind the pubis. The left leg in the area of gastrocnemius muscle is by 3 cmlarger than the right leg in the diameter. Internal organs present no pathologies. What complication can be suspected?
*a. Deep vein thrombosis of the shin
b. Varicose veins of lower extremities
c. Myositis
d. Endometritis
e. Iliofemoral thrombosis

2562. Examination of a Rh-negative pregnant woman at 32 weeks of gestation revealed a four-time rise of Rh-antibody titer within 2 last weeks; the titer is 1:64. The first two pregnancies resulted in antenatal fetal death due to hemolytic disease.What is the optimal tactics of pregnancy management?
a. Delivery at 37 weeks of gestation
b. Introduction of anti-Rh (D) immunoglobulin
c. Ultrasound for signs of hemolytic disease of the fetus
*d. Early delivery
e. Screening for Rh-antibodies in 2 weeks and urgent delivery in case of further increase of antibody titer

2563. During last several weeks an 11-yearold girl has been complaining of dyspnea and edema of shins and feet after physical exercise. After a long rest or sleep through the night her edemas diminish significantly. On clinical examination there are enlarged liver and rasping systolic murmur over the cardiac area. Blood and urine analyses arewithout changes. What is the most likely cause of the child’s edema?
a. Acute pyelonephritis
b. Angioneurotic edema
*c. Heart failure
d. Hepatocirrhosis
e. Nephrotic syndrome

2564. A 74-year-old man visited an urologist with complaints of pain above the pubis and inability to urinate for 8 hours. At home he had taken antispasmodics and had a warm bath but no improvement occurred. Objectively: the abdomen is soft and painful above the pubis; dullness of percussion sound is observed above the pubis. Murphy’s punch sign (costovertebral angle tenderness) is negative on both sides. What condition does the patient have?
a. Oliguria
*b. Acute urinary retention
c. Chronic urinary retention
d. Paradoxal ischuria
e. Anuria

2565. .During preventive examination a 58-yearold man on chest X-ray presents with multiple globular pale shadows 3 cm in diameter within parenchyma of the both lungs. Examination in the oncologic hospital: the primary focus is not found; transbronchial biopsy with cytologic investigation detected cells of glandular neoplasm. What tactics should the physician choose?
a. Exploratory thoracotomy
b. Exploratory laparotomy
*c. Polychemotherapy courses
d. Laparoscopy
e. Symptomatic treatment at home

2566. A 36-year-old man developed a disease with acute onset 6 hours ago. The patient presents with pain in the epigastric, ileocecal, and paraumbilical areas, vomiting, weakness, nausea, and body temperature of 38,5°C. Stool is liquid, profuse, frequent, retains fecal nature, foul-smelling, frothy, colored dark green. The stomach is moderately distended and painful on palpation. The patient attributes his disease to eating raw chicken eggs one day before the clinical signs of the disease appeared.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Shigellosis
b. Cholera
c. Food toxicoinfection
*d. Salmonellosis
e. Typhoid fever

2567. A 55-year-old woman came to a gynecologist with complaints of leukorrhea and bloody discharge from the vagina after 5 years of menopause. Anamnesis states no pregnancies. Bimanual examination: the uterus and uterine appendages are without changes. During diagnostic curettage of the uterine cavity the physician scraped off enchephaloid matter. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ovarian carcinoma
*b. Endometrial carcinoma
c. Subserous uterine myoma
d. Adenomyosis
e. Cervical carcinoma

2568. A 10-year-old boy is delivered into a polytrauma unit after he received a blunt trauma of the thorax, having fallen from the bicycle. Upon hospitalization his blood pressure is 110/80mmHg, heart rate is 96/min. Chest X-ray is noncontributive to the diagnosis. Echocardiogram shows free liquid in the pericardial cavity, in the amount of up to 100 ml. In an hour after the hospitalization the patient started to develop increasing signs of heart failure: jugular venous distention, decreased blood pressure down to 90/70 mm Hg, tachycardia up to 120/min. On auscultation muffled heart sounds. What would be the primary tactics of a physician?
a. Cardiac glycosides intravenously
b. Diuretics intravenously
c. Antibiotics intravenously
*d. Pericardiocentesis
e. Constant oxygenotherapy

2569. After the celebratory feast that took place the day before, a 35-year-old man was hospitalized with complaints of marked pain within the I metatarsophalangeal articulation on the right, which developed late in the night, and impaired walking. Objectively: the metatarsophalangeal articulation is swollen, hyperemic, hot to touch, painful on movement. In blood: erythrocytes - 5, 1×1012/l, Нb-155 g/l, leukocytes-13, 0×109/l, ESR-50 mm/hour, CRP-46 mg/dl, uric acid – 720 mcmol/l. X-ray of feet articulations: osteoporosis, narrowing of interarticular spaces, numerous punched-out erosions. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Osteoarthritis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Psoriatic arthritis
*d. Gout
e. Reactive arthritis

2570. A woman in her early-to mid-thirties has lost her consciousness 3-5 minutes ago. On examination: the skin is pale, no pulse over the carotid arteries, no spontaneous respiration, pupils are dilated; the patient is nonresponsive, presents with atony. The patient’s condition can be determined as:
a. Syncope
b. Natural death
*c. Apparent death
d. Brain death
e. Coma

2571. A 32-year-old woman complains of body weight loss despite her increased appetite, nervousness, and tremor of the extremities. Objectively: the skin is moist; the thyroid gland is diffusely enlarged, painless, soft, and mobile. Blood test: increased level of T3, T4, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (THS). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Thyroid carcinoma
b. Thyroid adenoma
c. Diffuse nontoxic goiter
*d. Diffuse toxic goiter
e. Autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis

2572. A 57-year-old patient complains of sensation of dryness and pain during swallowing, frequent unbearable cough, the voice is hoarse. Disease onset was abrupt. On laryngoscopy: laryngeal mucosa is hyperemic, vocal folds are swollen, laryngeal lumen contains viscous secretion. What diagnosis is it?
a. Acute stenosing laryngotracheitis
b. Flegmonous laryngitis
c. Laryngeal diphtheria
*d. Acute laryngitis
e. Bronchial asthma

2573. A 24-year-old pregnant woman on her 37th week of pregnancy has been delivered to a maternity obstetric service with complaints of weak fetal movements. Fetal heartbeats are 95/min. On vaginal examination the uterine cervix is tilted backwards, 2 cm long, external orifice allows inserting a fingertip. Biophysical profile of the fetus equals 4 points. What tactics of pregnancy management should be chosen?
*a. Urgent delivery via a cesarean section
b. Doppler measurement of blood velocity in the umbilical artery
c. Treatment of fetal distress, if ineffective, then elective cesarean section on the next day
d. Urgent preparation of the uterine cervix for delivery
e. Treatment of placental dysfunction and repeated analysis of the fetal biophysical profile on the next day

2574. During regular preventive gynecological examination a 30-year-old woman was detected to have dark blue punctulated ”perforations” on the vaginal portion of the uterine cervix. The doctor suspects endometriosis of the vaginal portion of the uterine cervix. What investigation method would be most informative for diagnosis confirmation?
*a. Colposcopy, target biopsy of the cervix
b. Hysteroscopy
c. Hormone testing
d. Curettage of the uterine cavity
e. US of small pelvis

2575. A 26-year-old woman came to a gynecologist for a regular check-up. She has no complaints. Per vaginum: the uterus lies in anteflexion, not enlarged, dense, mobile, painless. On the left fromthe uterus in the area of uterine appendages there is a mobile painless outgrowth that can be moved independently from the uterus. On the right the appendages cannot be detected. What additional investigation would be informative for diagnosis clarification?
a. Colonoscopy
*b. US of lesser pelvis
c. Examination for urogenital infection
d. Metrosalpingography
e. Colposcopy

2576. A 57-year-old patient complains of dyspnea at rest. The patient presents with orthopnea, acrocyanosis, bulging cervical veins. On percussion: dull sound over the lower lung segments; on auscultation: no respiratory murmurs. Heart rate is 92/min. Right-sided cardiac dilatation is observed. The liver is enlarged by 7 cm. Shins are swollen. Pleural effusion is suspected. What indicator would confirm the presence of transudate in this case?
a. Total protein content in the pleural fluid above 30 g/l
b. Presence of atypical cells
*c. Total protein content in the pleural fluid below 25 g/l
d. Specific gravity exceeding 1015
e. Positive Rivalta’s test

2577. A 28-year-old woman complains of girdle pain in her epigastric and left subcostal areas with irradiation to the back, nausea, and vomiting without relief. On examination a surgeon observes stomach distension and meteorism. There are positive Mondor’s, Mayo-Robson’s, and Cullen’s symptoms. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Splenic infarction
*b. Acute pancreatitis
c. Acute intestinal obstruction
d. Acute cholecystitis
e. Aortic dissecting aneurysm

2578. A 36-year-old woman complains of pain in her lumbar area, which irradiates to her lower right limb and increases during movements, and sensation of numbness in her limb. Objectively: palpation of the shin and thigh muscles is painful, positive stretch symptom on the right. MRI scan: herniation of intervertebral disk L5-S1 4 mm in size. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Vertebrogenic lumbago
b. Endarteritis of lower extremities
c. Acute myelitis
d. Spinal stroke
e. Vertebrogenic radicular syndrome of L5-S1 on the right

2579. During routine medical examination a 35-year-old woman presents with enlarged cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes. Her overall health is satisfactory. ESR is 30 mm/hour. Cervical node biopsy was performed. In the specimen there are granulomas composed of epithelial and giant cells, no caseous necrosis detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Lymphogranulomatosis
*c. Sarcoidosis
d. Nonspecific lymphadenitis
e. Lymph node tuberculosis

2580. A 39-year-old woman complains of violent pain in her left lumbar area with irradiation to the right iliac area. Several years ago she was diagnosed with cholelithiasis and urolithiasis. The patient’s condition is moderately severe, the skin is dry. Ortner’s symptom is negative; costovertebral angle tenderness is observed on the right. The most reasonable treatment tactics would be:
a. Antibiotics
*b. Spasmolytics and analgesics
c. Peritoneal dialysis
d. Urgent hemodialysis
e. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy

2581. An 18-year-old patient complains of skin rash. The patient has been suffering from this condition for 5 years. The first instance of this disease occurred after a car accident. Objectively: the patient presents with papular rash covered in silvery scales, ”thimble” symptom (small pits on the nails), affected joints. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Onychomycosis
b. Panaritium
*c. Psoriasis
d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Rheumatism

2582. A woman complains of frequent, liquid stool (up to 9-10 times per day) with mucus and blood admixtures, dull pain in the hypogastrium, weight loss of 4 kg within the last year. Objectively: malnutrition, dry skin, low turgor, aphthous stomatitis. The stomach is soft, the sigmoid colon is spastic and painful on palpation. Occult blood test is positive. Fibrocolonoscopy: edema, hyperemia, mucosal granulation, pseudopolyps, small ulcers with irregular edges.Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic enterocolitis
b. Irritable bowel syndrome
c. Crohn’s disease (regional enteritis)
*d. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
e. Colon cancer

2583. A 48-year-old woman has been hospitalized due to development of tachysystolic atrial fibrillation. She has lost 5 kg of body weight within 2 months. On palpation there is a node in the left lobe of the thyroid gland. What pathology resulted in the development of this condition?
a. Nontoxic nodular goiter
b. Autoimmune thyroiditis
c. Aterosclerotic cardiosclerosis
d. Chronic thyroiditis
*e. Toxic nodular goiter

2584. On the 9th day after childbirth the obstetric patient developed high fever up to 38°C. She complains of pain in the right mammary gland. On examination a sharply painful infiltrate can be palpated in the right mammary gland, the skin over the infiltrate is red, subareolar area and nipple are swollen and painful. What is your diagnosis?
a. Fibrous cystic degeneration of the right mammary gland
*b. Abscess of the right mammary gland
c. Cancer of the right mammary gland
d. Mastopathy
e. Serous mastitis

2585. A 32-year-old woman complains of episodes of intense fear that occurwithout visible cause and last for 10-20 minutes; the episodes are characterized by rapid pulse, sweating, labored breathing, and vertigo. Specify the likely diagnosis:
*a. Panic disorder
b. Manic syndrome
c. Claustrophobia
d. Simple schizophrenia
e. Paranoid syndrome

2586. A resuscitation unit received a 46-yearold woman, who has been suffering from diabetes mellitus type 1 for approximately 30 years. Objectively: the skin is pale, heart sounds are weakened, BP is 170/100 mm Hg, lower limbs are markedly swollen. Blood creatinine – 1125 mcmol/l, urea – 49,6 mmol/l, potassium – 6.3 mmol/l, glucose – 7,6 mmol/l, glomerular filtration rate – 5 ml/min. What treatment is indicated for the patient in the first place?
a. Enterosorption
b. Conservative detoxification therapy
c. Kidney transplantation
d. Hemofiltration
*e. Hemodialysis

2587. A woman is on the 32nd week of her second pregnancy. She complains of fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, lumbar pain, and dysuria. Costovertebral angle tenderness is present on both sides. Urine analysis: pyuria, bacteriuria. Blood test: leukocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cystitis
b. Glomerulonephritis
c. Latent bacteriuria
*d. Gestational pyelonephritis
e. Pyelitis

2588. A 19-year-old young man complains of cough with expectoration of purulent sputum in amount of 100 ml per day, hemoptysis, dyspnea, increased body temperature up to 37,8°C, general weakness, weight loss. The patient’s condition lasts for 4 years. Exacerbations occur 2-3 times a year. The patient presents with malnutrition, pale skin, cyanosis of the lips, drumstick (clubbed) fingers. Tympanic percussion sound in the lungs, weakened respiration, various numerous moist crackles in the lower pulmonary segments on the left can be observed. In blood: erythrocytes – 3, 2×1012/l, leukocytes – 8, 4×109/l, ESR-56 mm/hour. On X-ray: lung fields are emphysematous, the left pulmonary root is deformed and dilated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic abscess of the left lung
b. Chronic left-sided pneumonia
*c. Multiple bronchiectasis of the left lung
d. Left-sided pulmonary cystic dysplasia
e. Suppuration of the cyst in the left lung

2589. A 37-year-old man working as a typesetter in a print shop complains of rapid fatigability, paroxysmal attacks of stomachache, weak drooping hands. Examination of neurological status revealed hypotrophy of the forearm muscles. Carporadial reflexes are sharply weakened. Sensitivity is not disturbed. Gums present with dark blue border. What neurological pathology is it?
*a. Lead polyneuropathy
b. Shingles
c. Brachial plexitis
d. Ulnar neuropathy
e. Guillain-Barre syndrome (postinfectious polyneuritis)

2590. A 54-year-old woman takes antihypertensive drugs for hypertension. Having discovered that her son was arrested and is under investigation, became agitated and extremely anxious. She lost her orientation in place, stopped recognizing her relatives, started hearing ”voices” threatening her and her son with violence. She had opened her window (on the 8th floor) and tried to jump out, resisted the people, who were holding her back. What drugs should be administered to terminate such condition of the patient?
*a. Antipsychotics
b. Tranquilizers
c. Antihypertensive drugs
d. Nootropic agents
e. Antidepressants

2591. A 43-year-old man, who has been abusing alcohol and suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis, in the course of two weeks gradually developed general weakness, headache, diplopia, vomiting. Objectively: ptosis on the left, anisocoria S>D, exotropia of the left eye, neck stiffness; Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs are positive. In cerebrospinal fluid: lymphocytic pleocytosis, low glucose, precipitation of cerebrospinal fluid resulted in production of fibrin film. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Tuberculous meningitis
b. Brainstem encephalitis
c. Basal arachnoiditis
d. Acute myelitis
e. Subarachnoid hemorrhage

2592. ?1. A patient with Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome has fainted when walking up the stairs. The skin is pale, the pupils are dilated, tonoclonic spasms are observed, rib cage is immobile. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Clinical death
b. Preagony
c. Biological death
d. Agony
e. Social death

2593. A 32-year-old welder complains of weakness and fever. His illness initially presented as tonsillitis one month earlier. On examination: temperature - 38.9°C, respirations - 24/min., pulse - 100/min., blood pressure - 100/70 mm Hg, hemorrhages on the legs, enlargement of the lymph nodes. Complete blood count shows Hb- 70 g/L, RBC- 2.2×1012/L, WBC- 3.0×109/L with 32% of blasts, 1% of eosinophiles, 3% of bands, 36% of segments, 20% of lymphocytes, and 8% of monocytes, ESR- 47 mm/hour. What is the cause of anemia in this case?
a. B12-de?cient anemia
b. Chronic hemolytic anemia
c. Chronic lympholeukemia
d. Aplastic anema
*e. Acute leukemia

2594. After a 5-day-long celebration of his daughter’s wedding a 65-year-old patient ”saw” in his yard many cats, chickens, and rats. He tried to chase them away, but was scared off when the animals started scolding him and tried to harm him. What is the likely diagnosis?
*a. Delirium tremens
b. Schizophrenia
c. Reactive hallucinosis
d. Organic brain syndrome
e. Senile psychosis

2595. A regional cardiologist is given a task to develop a plan for preventive measures aimed at decreasing cardiovascular mortality rates. What measures should be planned for secondary prevention?
a. Referring patients for sanatorium-and-spa treatment
b. Referring patients for inpatient treatment
c. Optimization of lifestyle and living conditions
*d. Prevention of recurrences and complications
e. Prevention of diseases

2596. During physical exertion a man suddenly developed acute chest pain on the right and dyspnea. Objectively he assumes forced halfsitting position in the bed, presents with diffuse cyanosis, resting tachypnea of 38/min., the right side of the thorax is enlarged and does not participate in the respiratory process; percussion on the right reveals tympanic resonance and absence of respiration.What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Spontaneous pneumothorax
b. Lobar pneumonia
c. Acute pleurisy
d. Pulmonary embolism
e. Hemothorax

2597. A 34-year-old man on the 3rd day of ceftriaxone treatment for acute otitis (daily dosage - 2 grams) developed diarrhea occurring 5-6 times per day. Feces are without mucus or blood admixtures. Temperature is 36.6°C. Gregersen reaction (occult blood in feces) is negative. Stool culture detected no pathogenic germs. What is the most likely cause of diarrhea in this case?
a. Intestinal dysbiosis
b. Ulcerative colitis
c. Crohn’s disease (regional enteritis)
*d. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea
e. Bacterial overgrowth syndrome

2598. A 24-year-old patient visited a doctor complaining of enlargement of his submaxillary lymph nodes. Objectively: submaxillary, axillary and inguinal lymph nodes are enlarged. Chest X-ray shows: enlarged lymph nodes of mediastinum. Blood test: erythrocytes 3.4 × 1012/L, Hb- 100 g/L, blood colour index - 0.88, platelets - 190 × 109/L, leucocytes 7.5 × 109/L, eosinophiles - 8%, band neutrophiles - 2%, segmented neutrophiles - 67%, lymphocytes - 23%, ESR - 22 mm/hour. What test must be prescribed to verify the cause of lymphadenopathy?
a. Sternal puncture
*b. Open biopsy of the lymph nodes
c. Mediastinum tomography
d. Abdominal US
e. Puncture biopsy of the lymph nodes

2599. During medical examination a cadet in the naval college was detected to have a painless dense ulcer 1.5x0.5 in size in his perianal area at the 2 o’clock position. The ulcer ?oor resembles ”old fat”. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Anal crypt suppuration
*b. Hard syphilitic chancre of the rectum
c. Rectal ?stula
d. Rectal ?ssure
e. Anal cancer

2600. A 7-year-old boy has severe pulmonary mucoviscidosis (cystic ?brosis). He complains of dyspnea and blood expectoration. Objectively he presents with lagging physical development, acrocyanosis, hepatomegaly, drumstick ?ngers, and nail plates resembling a”clockface.”Provisional diagnosis of chronic pulmonary heart disease is made. What examination would be the most informative for diagnosis con?rmation?
a. Electrocardiography
b. Rheography of the pulmonary artery
c. Ultrasound of the liver
*d. Doppler echocardiography
e. Chest X-ray

2601. A 10-year-old boy, who was outdoors in windy and cold weather, developed moderate pain and tingling in his ?ngers and toes. When he had returned home, his parents noticed that the tips of his ?ngers and toes were white and their sensitivity was lost. The affected areas are warming up, the ?ngers are tingling and in pain. Skin pallor changed into redness, tingling stopped, slight itching and swelling of the ?ngers appeared. Determine the frostbite degree in this child:
a. Frostbite of the IV degree
*b. Frostbite of the I degree
c. Frostbite of the II degree
d. Perniosis
e. Frostbite of the III degree

2602. A 25-year-old woman complains of fatigue, dizziness, hemorrhagic rashes on the skin. She has been presenting with these signs for a month. Blood test: erythrocytes - 1.0 × 1012/L, Hb- 37 g/L, colour index - 1.1, leukocytes 1.2 × 109/L, platelets - 42 × 109/L. What analysis would be the most advisable for diagnosismaking in this case?
a. Liver biopsy
b. Splenic biopsy
*c. Sternal puncture (bone marrow biopsy)
d. Coagulation studies
e. US of the gastrointestinal tract

2603. A 12-year-old boy with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy complains of dyspnea caused by the slightest physical exertion. Echocardiography detected asymmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy, signs of pulmonary hypertension, and left ventricular dilatation, its ejection fraction is 59%. These developments are indicative of:
a. Symptomatic arterial hypertension
*b. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
c. Primary pulmonary hypertension
d. Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
e. Essential hypertension

2604. A 35-year-old man complains of rapidly incresing fatigue, palpitations, ”visual snow”, dizziness. He has a history of peptic ulcer of the stomach. Objectively the skin is pale. Vesicular respiration is observed in the lungs. Systolic murmur is detected over the cardiac apex, heart rate is 100/min., BP is 100/70 mm Hg. The epigastrium is slightly tender on palpation. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3.2 × 1012/L, Нb- 100 g/L, color index - 0.94. What type of anemia is the most likely present in this case?
a. Hemolytic anemia
b. Hypoplastic anemia
c. Sideroblastic anemia
d. Iron-de?ciency anemia
*e. Posthemorrhagic anemia

2605. A 35-year-old patient has been suffering from an illness for 3 days. 5 days ago he returned from a trip to Africa. The onset of disease was accompanied by fever up to 40°C, chills, acute headache, myalgia. In the axillary region the lymph node enlarged up to 3x6 cm can be palpated. The lymph node is dense, intensely painful, slightly mobile, without clear margins; the skin over the node is hyperemic and tight. Tachycardia is present. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Anthrax
*b. Plague
c. Tu l a r e m i a
d. Sepsis
e. Lymphadenitis

2606. Caries morbidity rate is 89% among residents of a community. It is determined that ?uorine content in water is 0.1 mg/L. What preventive measures should be taken?
a. Introduce more vegetables to the diet
*b. Water ?uorination
c. Fluorine inhalations
d. Tooth brushing
e. Sealant application

2607. During appointment with the doctor a man complains of painful itching rashes that appeared on his skin under the beard and moustache one year ago, with frequent exacerbations occurring throughout the year. Objectively the skin of the facial hair growth areas is bluish-purple, thickened, with pustules, erosions, and scabs covering its moist surface. The ?stulous tracts are surrounded by the area of loose pink-red granulation and discharge pus. The skin resembles mulberry in appearance. Make the diagnosis:
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Acne rosacea
*c. Sycosis
d. Deep trichophytosis
e. Tuberculous lupus

2608. A 60-year-old man presents with ischemic heart disease and heart failure of the IV class according to NYHA (New York Heart Association) that manifests as dyspnea at rest. There are moist crackles in the patient’s lungs. Liver +4 cm, lower limbs are swollen. Ejection fraction is 25%. What sign is the most indicative when determining functional class of heart failure according to NYHA?
*a. Degree of dyspnea
b. Swollen lower limbs
c. Extent of liver enlargement
d. Decrease of ejection fraction
e. Moist crackles in the lungs

2609. A 39-year-old man, a battery attendant, suddenly developed weakness, loss of appetite, nonlocalized colicky abdominal pains, and nausea. Objectively his skin is gray; there is pink-gray stripe on his gums; the stomach is soft and sharply painful. Blood test detected erythrocytes with basophilic stippling and anemia. The patient has a history of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. There is tendency to constipation. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Chronic alcoholism
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Perforation of gastric ulcer
*e. Saturnism (lead poisosning)

2610. A 9-month-old infant presents with delayed tooth eruption and fontanel closure, weakness, and excessive sweating. What type of hypovitaminosis is the most likely in this child?
a. Hypovitaminosis B6
b. Hypovitaminosis A
c. Hypovitaminosis C
d. Hypovitaminosis B1
*e. Hypovitaminosis D

2611. A 10-year-old girl exhibits high level of physical development (? +3σ), her body length increased by 10 cm within a year (which is double the norm for her age group), the number of permanent teeth corresponds with the age norm (20), the development of her secondary sex characteristics is three years ahead of her age (Ма, Р, Ах, Menarche). Development rate ahead of her biological age can occur due to:
a. Acceleration
b. Sports training
c. De?cient hygienic education
*d. Endocrine disorders
e. Certain components of her diet

2612. An infant has been born at the 41st week of gestation. The pregnancy was complicated with severe gestosis of the second semester. The weight of the baby is 2400 g, the height is 50 cm. Objectively: the skin is ?abby, the layer of subcutaneous fat is thin, hypomyotonia, neonatal re?exes are weak. The internal organs are without pathologic changes. This newborn can be assessed as a:
a. Premature infant
b. Postmature infant
c. Full-term infant with normal body weight
*d. Full-term infant with intrauterine growth retardation
e. Immature infant

2613. A patient suffering from in?ltrative pulmonary tuberculosis was prescribed streptomycin, rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, vitamin C. One month after the beginning of the treatment the patient started complaining of reduced hearing and tinnitus. What drug has such a side effect?
a. Isoniazid
b. Pyrazinamide
c. Vitamin C
*d. Streptomycin
e. Rifampicin

2614. The doctor has an appointment with a patient, who 2 days ago developed severe chest pain on the left, general weakness, high temperature, and headache. Objectively along the 4th and 5th intercostal nerves on the left the skin is hyperemic and there are tight clusters of small vesicles ?lled with clear serous content. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpes simplex
b. Pemphigus
c. Dermatitis herpetiformis (Duhring’s disease)
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Streptococcal impetigo

2615. A worker of a blowing shop complains of headache, irritability, sight impairment - he sees everything as if through a ”net”. Objectively: hyperemic sclera, thickened cornea, decreased opacity of pupils, visual acuity is 0.8 in the left eye, 0.7 in the right eye. The worker uses no means of personal protection. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Keratitis
b. Conjunctivitis
*c. Cataract
d. Blepharospasm
e. Progressive myopia

2616. For a week a 42-year-old patient has been suffering from fever attacks followed by high temperature, which occur every 48 hours. Body temperature raises up to 40°C and decreases in 3-4 hours with excessive sweating. The patient presents with loss of appetite and general fatigue. The skin is pale and sallow. The liver and spleen are enlarged and dense on palpation. What method of diagnosis veri?cation would be most ef?cient?
a. Complete blood count
b. Immune-enzyme assay
c. Microscopy of hanging blood drop
*d. Microscopy of blood smear and thick blood ?lm
e. Bacteriological analysis

2617. A 16-year-old adolescent living in a rural area has been bitten in the shin by a stray dog. The wound is super?cial. Regular vaccination against tetanus was received 3 months ago. What treatment tactics would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Antitetanus serum
b. Antitetanus immunoglobulin
c. Antirabies immunoglobulin
d. Tetanus toxoid adsorbed
*e. Antirabies vaccination

2618. A 26-year-old woman is suspected to suffer from systemic lupus erythematosus with systemic lesions of skin, vessels, joints, serous tunics, and heart tissue that developed after photosensitization. The following is detected in blood analysis: LE cells, antibodies to native ds-DNA, isolated anti-centromere antibodies, rheumatoid factor is 1:100, Wassermann reaction is positive, circulating immune complex is 120 units. What immunological indicators are considered to be speci?c to this disease?
*a. ds-DNA antibodies
b. Anti-centromere antibodies
c. Increased circulating immune complex
d. Immunoglobulin A
e. Rheumatoid factor

2619. A group of 5 had been resting in a forest, they were drinking alcohol and eating canned mushrooms and cured ?sh. The next day two of them were hospitalized with disturbed vision, swallowing and respiration; the third one presented with acute general weakness and dry mouth. The remaining two were healthy. A tick was detected on the skin of one of the healthy group members. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Alcohol poisoning
b. Tick-borne encephalitis
*c. Botulism
d. Mushroom poisoning
e. Lyme borreliosis

2620. A 23-year-old man complains of facial edema, headache, dizziness, low urinary output, urine discoloration (dark red). These complaints arose after the patient had had a case of acute tonsillitis. On examination there are facial edema, the skin is pale, temperature is 37.4°C; heart rate is 86/min., blood pressure is 170/110 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muf?ed, the II heart sound is accentuated over the aorta. What etiological factor is the most likely in this case?
a. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
*b. Beta-hemolytic streptococcus
c. Streptococcus viridans
d. Staphylococcus aureus
e. Streptococcus pyogenes

2621. During examination a 4-month-old child with meningococcemia presents with acrocyanosis, cold extremities, tachypnea, and thready pulse, blood pressure of 30/0 mm Hg, anuria, and sopor. What clinical syndrome is it?
a. Acute renal failure
*b. Septic shock
c. Exicosis
d. Neurotoxicosis
e. Encephalic syndrome

2622. The pregnancy is full term. The body weight of the parturient woman is 62 kg. Fetus is in a longitudinal lie, the head is engaged to the pelvic inlet. Belly circumference is 100 cm. Uterine fundus height is 35 cm. What body weight of the fetus can be expected?
a. 3kg
b. 4.5 kg
c. 4kg
d. 2.5 kg
*e. 3.5 kg

2623. An 18-year-old young man complains of pain in his knee and elbow joints and body temperature up to 39.5°C. One week and a half earlier developed sore throat. On examination his body temperature is 38.5°C. Swelling of the knee and elbow joints is observed. Pulse is 106/min., rhythmic. Blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg. Cardiac borders are unchanged, heart sounds are weakened, at the cardiac apex there is soft systolic murmur. What factor would be the most indicative of the likely disease etiology?
a. Creatine kinase
b. C-reactive protein
*c. Anti-streptolysin O
d. Rheumatoid factor
e. Seromucoid

2624. A 20-year-old patient complains of severe headache, double vision, weakness, fever, irritability. Objectively: body temperature is 38.1°C, the patient is reluctant to contact, sensitive to stimuli. There are ptosis of the left eyelid, exotropia, anisocoria S>D, pronounced meningeal syndrome. On lumbar puncture the cerebrospinal ?uid ?owed out under a pressure of 300 mm Hg, the ?uid is clear, slightly opalescent. 24 hours later there appeared ?brin ?lm. Protein - 1.4 g/L, lymphocytes - 600/3 per mm3, sugar - 0.3 mmol/L. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Mumps meningitis
*b. Tuberculous meningitis
c. Lymphocytic (Armstrong’s) meningitis
d. Meningococcal meningitis
e. Syphilitic meningitis

2625. A 32-year-old woman complains of increasing spastic pains in her lower abdomen that occur after emotional stress. Bowel movements are intermittent: 2-3 defecations after waking in the morning alternate with constipations that last for 1-2 days. Objectively body mass is retained, palpation of the sigmoid colon is moderately painful. Hb- 130 g/L, leukocytes 5.2 g/L, ESR- 9 mm/hour. Rectoromanoscopy is painful due to spastic condition of the intestine, intestinal mucosa is without changes. Intestinal lumen contains large amounts of mucus. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Malabsorption syndrome
*b. Irritable bowel syndrome
c. Nonspeci?c ulcerative colitis
d. Crohn’s disease (regional enteritis)
e. Acute mesenteric ischemia

2626. The inpatient surgery unit has introduced the method of laparoscopic cholecystectomy into its practice. As the result the average duration of postoperative care provided to the patients could be reduced to 3.4±0.8 days compared to 7.3±1.1 days that were required after non-laparoscopic cholecystectomy. What method of medical statistics can con?rm the statistical signi?cance of the difference between these two estimates?
a. Calculation of relative values
*b. Calculation of Student’s con?dence interval
c. Calculation of standardized ratio
d. Calculation of correlation coef?cient
e. Calculation of average values (measures of central tendency)

2627. A 37-year-old worker during a ?re ended up in the area of high CO concentration. He was delivered to a hospital in unconscious state. Objectively: the skin of his face and hands is crimson. Respiration rate is 20/min. ECG: alterations speci?c for hypoxic myocardium. Hourly diuresis is 40 ml. Blood test: erythrocytes 4.5×1012/L, Нb- 136 g/L, color index - 0.9, ESR3 mm/hour, carboxyhemoglobin - 5%. What criterion allows determining the severity of the patient’s condition?
a. ECG results
b. Respiratory disorders
*c. Carboxyhemoglobin concentration
d. Extent of trophic disorders
e. Development of chronic renal failure

2628. The right arm of a newborn is stretched along the torso with all its joints extended; the shoulder is rotated inwards, while the forearm is pronated, the hand is in the position of palmar ?exion. Spontaneous movements are absent in the shoulder and elbow joints, passive movements are painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Total obstetric palsy
b. Dejerine-Klumpke palsy, inferior distal type
*c. Duchenne-Erb palsy, superior proximal type
d. Osteomyelitis of the right humerus
e. Poliomyelitis

2629. In April during the medical examination of various population groups, 27% of individuals presented with low working ability and rapid fatigability. The following symptoms were observed in the affected individuals: swollen friable gingiva that bleeds when pressed, hyperkeratosis follicularis not accompanied by skin dryness. These symptoms most likely result from the following pathology:
a. Polyhypovitaminosis
*b. C-hypovitaminosis
c. A-hypovitaminosis
d. Parodontosis
e. ю1-hypovitaminosis

2630. A 1-year-old child with a case of URTI suddenly developed noisy respirations with dif?cult inspiration, intercostal retractions, and barking cough on the 2nd night after the disease onset. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Stenosing laryngotracheobronchitis
b. Bronchial asthma
c. Acute bronchiolitis
d. Acute bronchitis
e. Acute pulmonary in?ammation

2631. A 46-year-old woman complains of severe pain attacks in the right lumbar area, which irradiate to the lower abdomen, and nausea. This kind of pain attacks has never been detected in the patient before. Plain abdominal X-ray reveals no pathologic shadows. Ultrasound detects a hyperechogenic mass 1.5 cm in diameter, which re?ects sound wave, in the enlarged right renal pelvis. What diagnosis is the most likely?
*a. Renal calculus
b. Renal cyst
c. Malignant renal tumor
d. Renal tuberculosis
e. Benign renal tumor

2632. A 60-year-old woman complains of unbearable pain in her right subcostal area. She has a history of acute pancreatitis. Temperature is 38.2°C. Objectively her sclera are icteric. There are no signs of peritoneal irritation. Ortner’s and Gubergrits’ symptoms are positive. Urine diastase is 320 U/L. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute cholangitis
b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Pancreatic cancer
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pancreatitis
e. Chronic cholecystitis

2633. A 64-year-old man complains of cough with expectoration consisting of blood-streaked mucus, dyspnea, low grade fever and general fatigue. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 months. He has been smoking since early adolescence. Objectively to is 37.4°C, respirations are 26/min., pulse is 82/min., rhythmic, blood pressure is 130/85 mm Hg. The right side of the thorax lags behind in the respiratory process, dull percussion sound and acute decrease of breathing activity are observed there. X-ray shows homogeneous shadow of the lung ?eldontherightwithmediastinum displacement towards the affected side. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary tuberculosis
b. Multiple bronchiectasis
c. Exudative pleuritis
d. Pleuropneumonia
*e. Central lung cancer

2634. For 4 days a 35-year-old man has been treated in the resuscitation unit for acute renal failure caused by compartment syndrome. The patient is disoriented. ECG shows high T waves and right ventricular extrasystoles. His central venous pressure is 159 mmH2O; for the last 3 hours auscultation has been detecting isolated moist crackles in the lungs. Respirations are 32/min. Blood test: residual nitrogen 62 mmol/L, K+ - 7.1 mmol/L, Cl? - 78 mmol/L, Na+ - 120 mmol/L, Ht- 0.32 L/L, Hb- 100 g/L, blood creatinine - 0.9 mmol/L. In this case the most advisable would be to perform:
a. Ultra?ltration
*b. Hemodialysis
c. Hemosorption
d. Plasmasorption
e. Plasma?ltration

2635. A 55-year-old woman, a cook, complains of pain in her right knee joint that has been troubling her for a month and intensi?es in the evening. Objectively she is overweight, the knee joint is swollen, creaks during movement, palpation reveals localized pain. The 1st metatarsophalangeal articulation is deformed on the both feet. No changes in blood and urine are detected. What should be visible on the patient’s X-ray?
*a. Joint space narrowing, marginal osteophytes
b. Joint space narrowing, multiple usurations, subluxations
c. Joint space narrowing, round bone defects
d. Epiphyseal erosions, bony ankylosis
e. Osteoporosis, joint space narrowing, singular usurations

2636. A 52-year-old woman has been suffering for 2 years from dull, occasionally exacerbating pain in her right subcostal area, occurring after eating high-fat foods, bitter taste in her mouth in the morning, constipations, and ?atulence. Objectively she has excess weight, her body temperature is 36.9°C; there is a coating on the root of her tongue; the abdomen is moderately distended and painful in the area of gallbladder projection. What examination would be the most helpful for diagnosis-making?
a. Liver scanning
*b. Ultrasound
c. Cholecystography
d. Duodenal intubation
e. Duodenoscopy

2637. A 57-year-old woman complains of weakness, dyspnea, loss of appetite, and liquid feces. She has been suffering from this condition for 2 years. Objectively she presents with pale skin, subicteric sclera, and brightred ?ssured tongue. Lymph nodes are not enlarged. Pulse - 100/min. BP- 105/70 mm Hg. Liver +3 cm, the spleen cannot be palpated. Blood test: erythrocytes - 1.2 × 1012/L, Нb- 56 g/L, color index - 1.4, macrocytes, leukocytes - 2, 5 × 109/L, eosinophils - 1%, juvenile - 1%, metamyelocytes - 1%, band neutrophils - 8%, segmented neutrophils - 47%, lymphocytes 38%, monocytes - 4%, reticulocytes - 0.1%, platelets - 100 × 109/L, ESR- 30 mm/hour, indirect bilirubin - 26 mmol/L. What changes can be expected in the bone marrow puncture material?
a. Increased number of sideroblasts
b. Presence of blast cells
c. Prevalence of lymphoid tissue
*d. Prevalence of megaloblasts
e. Erythroid hyperplasia

2638. A 45-year-old woman complains of paroxysmal intolerable facial pain on the left with attacks that last for 1-2 minutes. Attacks are provoked by chewing. The disease onset was two month ago after overexposure to cold. Objectively: pain at the exit points of the trigeminal nerve on the left. Touching near the wing of nose on the left induces new pain attack with tonic spasm of the facial muscles. What is the most likely diagnosis among those listed?
*a. Trigeminal neuralgia
b. Temporomandibular joint arthritis
c. Maxillary sinusitis
d. Facial migraine
e. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia

2639. A 10-year-old boy with symptoms of arthritis and myocarditis was delivered into a hospital. Based on clinical examination the preliminary diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis was made. What symptom is the most contributive for the diagnostics of this disease?
a. Affection of the large joints
b. Regional hyperemia of the joints
*c. Reduced mobility of the joints in the morning
d. Enlarged heart
e. Increased heart rate

2640. A 25-year-old patient was delivered to an infectious diseases unit on the 3rd day of illness with complaints of headache, pain in lumbar spine and gastrocnemius muscles, high fever, chill. Objectively: condition of moderate severity. Scleras are icteric. Pharynx is hyperemic. Tongue is dry with dry brown coating. Abdomen is distended. Liver is enlarged by 2 cm. Spleen is not enlarged. Palpation of muscles, especially gastrocnemius muscles, is painful. Urine is dark in colour. Stool is normal in colour. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Yersiniosis
*b. Leptospirosis
c. Malaria
d. Viral hepatitis type A
e. Infectious mononucleosis

2641. A 28-year-old woman complains of skin hemorrhages after minor traumas and spontaneous appearance of hemorrhages on the front of her torso and extremities. On examination: the skin is variegated (old and new hemorrhages), bleeding gums. Blood platelets - 20 × 109/L; in the bone marrow there is increased number of megakaryocytes and no platelet production. Treatment with steroid hormones was effective. What is the likely diagnosis?
a. Rendu-Osler-Weber disease (Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia)
b. Hemophilia
*c. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
d. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
e. Acute vascular purpura

2642. A 7-year-old boy has been an inpatient for 1.5 months. He had been delivered to the hospital with complaints of edemas all over his body, low urine output, and headache. Clinical urinalysis: proteins - 7.1 g/L, leukocytes - 1-2 in the vision ?eld, erythrocytes - 3-4 in the vision ?eld. During the course of treatment the edemas gradually dissipated, headache abated, diuresis normalized. Daily urine proteins - 3 g/L. Biochemical blood test: total protein - 43.2 g/L, urea - 5.2 mmol/L, cholesterol - 9.2 mmol/L. What glomerulonephritis syndrome is the most likely to be present in the patient?
a. Isolated urinary
b. Nephritic
*c. Nephrotic
d. Hematuric
e. Mixed

2643. The mother of a 3-month-old child came to a family doctor with complaints of her child being physically underdeveloped and suffering from cough attacks and dyspnea. Anamnesis: the child is the result of the second full-term pregnancy with the risk of miscarriage (the ?rst child died of pulmonary pathology at the age of 4 months, according to the mother). Body mass at birth is 2500 g. Cough attacks were observed from the ?rst days of life, twice the child was treated for bronchitis. Considering the severity of the child’s condition the doctor made the referral for hospitalization. What diagnosis was most likely stated in the referral?
a. Recurrent obstructive bronchitis
b. Acute obstructive bronchitis
*c. Mucoviscidosis (Cystic ?brosis)
d. Pertussis
e. Acute obstructive pneumonia

2644. A 10-year-old girl complains of stomachache that appears and intensi?es after she eats rough or spicy food, sour eructation, heartburn, frequent constipations, headaches, irritability. She has been presenting with these signs for 12 months. Her meals are irregular and consist of dry food. Objectively her diet is suf?cient in calories. The tongue is moist with white coating near the root. The abdomen is soft and painful in the epigastrium. What method would be optimal for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Fractional gastric analysis (Fractional test meals)
b. Intragastric pH-metry
*c. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
d. Phase-contrast X-ray imaging
e. Biochemical blood test

2645. A 23-year-old patient had taken 1 g of aspirin to treat acute respiratory infection. After that he developed an asthmatic ?t with labored expiration that was arrested by introduction of aminophylline. The patient’s medical history is not burdened with allergies. The patient has undergone two surgeries for nasal polyposis in the past. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Symptomatic bronchospasm
*b. Aspirin-induced asthma
c. Infectious allergic bronchial asthma
d. Atopic bronchial asthma
e. Exercise-induced asthma

2646. A 50-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital with complaints of blood traces in urine. Urination is painless and undisturbed. Macrohematuria had been observed for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys cannot be palpated, suprapubic area is without alterations, external genitalia are non-pathologic. On rectal investigation: prostate is not enlarged, painless, has normal structure. Cystoscopy revealed no alterations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Necrotic papillitis
*b. Renal carcinoma
c. Varicocele
d. Bladder tuberculosis
e. Dystopic kidney

2647. A 36-year-old man has been complaining of marked weakness, low appetite, and nausea for the last year, year and a half. Within the last year he has lost 10 kg of body mass. The skin is darkened, especially on his face, neck, and arms. Skin folds and nipples are hyperpigmented, there are pigment spots on the patient’s inner thighs. Pulse is 60/min., blood pressure is 80/50 mm Hg. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Hemochromatosis
b. Cholestatic hepatitis
c. Diabetes mellitus
d. Chronic gastritis
*e. Adrenal insuf?ciency

2648. A 5-year-old child that contacts with viral hepatitis in the kindergarten presents with increased body temperature up to 38°C, weakness, low appetite, single case of vomiting, dull pain in the subcostal area on the right. The child is provisionally diagnosed with viral hepatitis. What examination would be the most informative for diagnosis con?rmation?
a. Feces analysis for stercobilin
b. Urine analysis for bile pigments
*c. ALT activity in blood
d. Blood test for bilirubin
e. Thymol turbidity test

2649. A patient with trauma of the lower third of the forearm volar surface caused by a glass shard came to a ?rst-aid center. Objectively: ?exion of the IV and V ?ngers is impaired, sensitivity of the inner dorsal and palmar surfaces of the hand and IV ?nger is decreased. What nerve is damaged?
a. Median
b. Radial
*c. Ulnar
d. Musculocutaneous
e. Axillary

2650. A man diagnosed with closed-angle glaucoma, grade IIa, of the right eye is registered for regular medical check-ups. In the evening an acute glaucoma attack occurred in his right eye; an ambulance was called. What emergency aid would be optimal in this case?
a. Atropine eye drops
b. Sulfacetamide sodium eye drops
c. Dexamethasone eye drops
*d. Pilocarpine, Diacarb (Acetazolamide), lytic mixture
e. Antibiotic eye drops, broad-spectrum

2651. A 58-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower left extremity, which aggravates during walking, and sensation of cold and numbness in the both feet. The patient has been suffering from this condition for 6 years. Objectively: the skin is pale and dry, with hyperkeratosis. On the left shin hair is scarce. Pulse cannot be detected over the pedal and popliteal arteries and is weakened over the femoral artery. On the right limb pulsation of the popliteal artery is retained. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Obliterating endarteritis
b. Raynaud’s disease
c. Buerger’s disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
*d. Atherosclerosis obliterans of the lower extremities
e. Femoral artery thrombosis

2652. A 22-year-old woman, gravida 1, para 0 arrived with complaints of sharply painful contractions that occur every 4-5 minutes and last for 25-30 seconds. Amniotic ?uid did not burst. The fetus is in transverse lie, fetal heartbeats are not affected. Contraction ring is acutely painful, located obliquely at the umbilicus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Excessive uterine activity during labor
b. Uterine tetany
*c. Impending uterine rupture
d. Discoordinated labor
e. Uterine rupture

2653. During regular check-up the doctor examines a young woman, a student, with height of 162 cm and weight of 59 kg. She complains that in the evening she becomes unable to see clearly the objects around her. Objectively her skin is dry, presents with hyperkeratosis. Her daily ration has the following vitamin content: vitamin A - 0.5 mg, vitamin B1 - 2.0 mg, vitamin B2 - 2.5 mg, vitamin B6 - 2 mg, vitamin C -70 mg. Make the diagnosis:
*a. A-hypovitaminosis
b. B2-hypovitaminosis
c. C-hypovitaminosis
d. B6-hypovitaminosis
e. B1-hypovitaminosis

2654. An infant is 2.5 months old. The onset of the disease was gradual, the child had normal body temperature but presented with slight cough. Within a week the cough intensi?ed, especially at night; on the 12th day the child developed cough ?ts occurring up to 20 times per day and followed by vomiting. There was one instance of respiratory arrest. Make the diagnosis:
a. Respiratory syncytial infection
b. Adenovirus infection
c. Parain?uenza
d. Congenital stridor
*e. Pertussis

2655. Due to introduction of a new treatment method, average duration of therapy in the experimental group was 12.3±0.2 days compared to 15.4±0.4 days in the control group that was treated by the old method. What calculations should be made to estimate the statistical signi?cance of the difference in the results?
a. Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
*b. T-test (Student’s t-distribution)
c. Matching factor (chi-squared test)
d. Sign test (Z-test)
e. Wilcoxon T-test

2656. Establishments participating in medical examinations include: medical and preventive treatment facilities, hygiene and preventive treatment facilities, sociomedical expert committees, Ministry of Defence medical committees, Ministry of Domestic Affairs medical committees, forensic medicine agency, etc. Specify what service deals with sociomedical assessment of temporary disability:
a. Sociomedical expert committees
b. Hygiene and preventive treatment facilities
*c. Medical and preventive treatment facilities
d. Ministry of Defence medical committees
e. Ministry of Domestic Affairs medical committees

2657. A 14-year-old boy presents with moderate bronchial asthma in its exacerbation period. What drug should be prescribed to stop an acute attack of expiratory dyspnea?
a. Cromolyn sodium (Cromoglicic acid)
b. Lasolvan (Ambroxol)
c. Strophanthine (cardiac glycosides)
*d. Salbutamol
e. Dexamethasone

2658. A newborn with gestational age of 31 weeks presents with hypotonia and depressed consciousness. Hematocrit is 35%, general cerebrospinal ?uid analysis shows increased content of erythrocytes and protein, and low glucose. These data correspond with the clinical presentation of:
a. Meningitis
b. Anemia
c. Prenatal infection
*d. Intracranial hemorrhage
e. Sepsis

2659. A 16-year-old girl has primary amenorrhea, no pubic hair growth, normally developed mammary glands; her genotype is 46 ХY; uterus and vagina are absent. What is your diagnosis?
a. Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome
b. Sheehan syndrome
c. Cushing disease
*d. Testicular feminization syndrome
e. Cushing syndrome

2660. 6 hours ago the waters of a 30-year-old gravida 1, para 0, burst; her preliminary period was pathologic and lasted for over 2 days; the term of pregnancy is 39 weeks. No labor activity is observed. Fetal head presents above the pelvic inlet. Fetal heartbeats are 142/min., clear and rhytmic. On vaginal examination the uterine cervix is not dilated. What further tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Stimulate the labor with oxytocin
b. Induce cervical dilation with prostaglandins
*c. Perform cesarean section
d. Wait for the onset of spontaneous labor
e. Prolong the pregnancy, while providing antibacterial treatment

2661. Mother of an 8-year-old girl complains that the child is too short and has excessive body weight. Objectively: obesity with fat deposits on the torso and face (round moon-like face), acne, striae on the thighs and lower abdomen, hirsutism. What hormone can cause such symptoms, when in excess?
a. Testosterone
b. Thyroxin
*c. Cortisol
d. Insulin
e. Glucagon

2662. A 9-year-old girl complains of fever up to 38.5°C, headache, inertness, weakness, loss of appetite, stomachache, and frequent painful urination. Provisional diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis is made. Clinical urine analysis: speci?c gravity - 1016, no protein, leukocytes - 10-15 in the vision ?eld. What investigation method can verify the diagnosis of urinary tract infection?
*a. Bacteriological inoculation of urine
b. Zymnytsky test (density measurement of daily diuresis)
c. Clinical urine analyses, dynamic testing
d. Complete blood count
e. Rehberg test (creatinine clearance test)

2663. A newborn has Apgar score of 9. When should the infant be put to the breast?
a. After 12 hours
b. On the 2nd day
c. On the 3rd day
*d. In the delivery room
e. After 2 hours

2664. During assessment of work conditions at the factory manufacturing mercury thermometers, the content of mercury vapors in the air of the working area is revealed to exceed the maximum concentration limit. Specify the main pathway of human body exposure to mercury:
a. Intact skin
b. Gastrointestinal tract
c. Mucous tunics
*d. Respiratory organs
e. Damaged skin

2665. In the process of hiring, a prospective employee has undergone preventive medical examination and was declared ?ttoworkin this manufacturing environment. What type of preventive medical examination was it?
a. Periodical
b. Scheduled
*c. Preliminary
d. Speci?c
e. Comprehensive

2666. A 47-year-old woman came to the admission room with complaints of general weakness, dizziness, vomiting with blood clots. Condition onset was 3 hours ago. The patient has no preceding illnesses. Blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg, pulse is 106/min., of poor volume. The abdomen is soft, with mild tenderness in the epigastrium. Blood test: erythrocytes 2.1×1012/L, Нb- 70 g/L, hematocrit - 28%. What tactics should the doctor on duty choose?
a. Give spasmolytics
b. Refer the patient to the family doctor
*c. Consult the surgeon
d. Perform gastric lavage
e. Make an appointment for colonoscopy

2667. A 23-year-old woman came the the gynecologist with complaints of blood smears from her genital tracts that have been observed for a long time. Her menstruation has been delayed for 8 weeks. Examination shows the uterine body to be enlarged up to 14 weeks of pregnancy. US detected a vesicular mole. What tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Hormonal treatment
b. Supravaginal uterine amputation
c. Uterectomy
*d. Curettage of the uterine cavity
e. Hemostatic treatment

2668. A 52-year-old patient complains of pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with large amounts of foamy sputum emitting foul smell and resembling ”meat slops”. Objectively: the patient’s condition is grave, cyanosis is observed, breathing rate is 31/min., percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed various moist rales (crackles). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Multiple bronchiectasis
b. Chronic pneumonia
c. Lung abscess
d. Empyema of pleura
*e. Lung gangrene

2669. A man complains of sore throat on the left, pain in his left ear, to up to 39°C, and nasal sound of his voice. Disease onset was 5 days ago. Marked trismus and increased salivation are observed. The head tilts to the left shoulder. Left side of the soft palate presents with swelling, hyperemia, and in?ltration. Retromandibular lymph nodes on the left are acutely painful on palpation. Otoscopy results are normal. Make the diagnosis:
a. Parapharyngeal phlegmon
b. Retropharyngeal abscess
*c. Left-sided peritonsillar abscess
d. Peritonsillitis on the left
e. Cervical phlegmon on the left

2670. A patient has the second and third degree burns of the 15% of the body surface. On the 20th day after the trauma the patient presents with sharp increase of body temperature, general weakness, rapid vesicular respiration; facial features are sharpened, BP is 90/50 mm Hg, heart rate is 112/min. What complication is it?
a. Pneumonia
b. Purulent bronchitis
c. Anaerobic infection
*d. Sepsis
e. Acute intoxication

2671. A patient in the state of clinical death is being resuscitated through mouth-to-mouth arti?cial pulmonary ventilation and external cardiac massage. A doctor noticed that air does not ?ow into the patient’s airways and his head and torso are positioned at the same level. Why is arti?cial respiration ineffective in the given case?
*a. Tongue retraction
b. External cardiac massage
c. The patient’s mouth is too small
d. Probe is absent from the stomach
e. Low breathing volume

2672. An employee has been sick for 4 months, further treatment is necessary, the patient is unable to work. Who is authorized to provide further disability examination of this patient?
a. Medical consultative board
b. Chief physician of a medical facility
c. Deputy chief responsible for disability examination
*d. Sociomedical expert committee
e. Physician in charge and the head of the department

2673. A population of a small town often presents with registered cases of juvenile cardiomyopathy, atherosclerosis, hypertension, endocrinopathy, chronic dermatitis, and arthralgia - signs of Keshan disease. What is the most likely cause of this pathology?
a. Excessive zinc in the environment
b. Excessive manganese in the environment
c. Excessive iron in the environment
d. Strontium de?ciency in the environment
*e. Selenium de?ciency in the environment

2674. In 2 hours after a traf?c accident a 28-yearold man in grave condition was delivered to a hospital. The patient complains of abdominal pain. He received a blow to the abdomen with the steering wheel. Objective examination revealed the following: the abdomen does not participate in respiration, is tense and acutely painful on palpation; abdominal guarding is present, peritoneal irritation signs are positive, hepatic dullness is absent. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart rate is 120/min. What further treatment tactics should be chosen?
*a. Laparotomy
b. Cold to the abdomen
c. Laparocentesis
d. Abdominal X-ray
e. Laparoscopy

2675. A 48-year-old woman was arrived to the surgical unit with wounds in her thigh. On examination the wound surface has dirty-gray coating with unpleasant sweet smell. Wound content resembles raspberry jelly. Skin tissues around the wound are glossy and turgid. Palpation reveals moderate crepitation in the tissues. What micro?ora is the most likely to cause such in?ammation?
a. Blue pus bacillus
*b. Anaerobic clostridial
c. Streptococci
d. Anaerobic non-clostridial
e. Staphylococci

2676. The gynecology unit received a patient with uterine bleeding that started 6 hours after induced abortion at the term of 11-12 weeks. Objectively the skin is pale, pulse is 100/min., blood pressure is 100/70 mm Hg. On vaginal examination the uterus is painless, its enlargement corresponds to the 10th week of pregnancy; uterine cervix is dilated enough to let in one ?nger, there are fragments of the fertilized ovum. What actions should be taken next:
a. Uterotonic drugs
b. Antibacterial agents
c. Prescribe rest and continue to monitor the patient’s condition
*d. Urgent repeated curettage of the uterine cavity
e. Treatment for acute anemia

2677. A woman came to the general practitioner with complaints of fatigability, signi?cant weight loss, weakness, and loss of appetite. She has been presenting with amenorrhea for the last 8 month. One year ago she gave birth to a live full-term child. Blood loss during delivery was 2 liters. The woman received blood transfusion and blood components. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Sheehan’s syndrome (postpartum hypopituitarism)
b. Turner’s syndrome
c. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
d. Homologous blood syndrome
e. Stein-Leventhal syndrome (polycystic ovary)

2678. To assess the effectiveness of medical technologies and determine the power and direction of their effect on the public health indicators, the research was conducted to study the immunization rate of children and measles incidence rate by district. What method of statistical analysis should be applied in this case?
a. Calculation of statistical signi?cance of the difference between two estimates
*b. Calculation of correlation coef?cient
c. Calculation of coef?cient of agreement
d. Calculation of morbidity index among the nonvaccinated
e. Calculation of standardized ratio

2679. A 22-year-old woman complains of itching and profuse discharge from her genital tracts. The condition developed 10 days ago after a sexual contact. Bacterioscopy of a discharge sample detected trichomonads. What drug should be prescribed for treatment in this case?
a. Erythromycin
b. Ampicillin
*c. Metronidazole
d. Zovirax (Acyclovir)
e. Valcyclovir

2680. A 30-year-old patient was hospitalized in an intensive care unit with a diagnosis of multiple bee stings. Skin is pale and covered with cold sweat. Pulse can be palpated only at the carotid arteries and is 110/min.; breathing rate is 24/min., rhytmical, weakened. What drug must be administered immediately?
a. Norepinephrine hydrochloride
b. Prednisolone
*c. Epinephrine hydrochloride
d. Dopamine
e. Tavegyl (Clemastine)

2681. A 46-year-old woman has been hospitalized with open fracture of the left thigh in its middle third. She underwent the surgery - ?xation with extraosseous osteosynthesis plates. On the 4th day after the surgery she developed pain in the wound, body temperature rose over 39°C. What measures should be taken in this case?
a. Prescribe broad spectrum antibiotics and hormonal agents
b. Inject antibiotics into the area surrounding the wound, prescribe spasmolytics and analgesics
c. Remove the ?xation, prescribe sulfanilamides
*d. Undo the sutures, drain the wound, and prescribe antibiotics
e. Administer antibiotics intraosseously and hypothermia locally

2682. A woman with blood group B(III) Rh(+) gave birth to a full-term healthy boy. Examination on the 3rd day of the infant’s life shows him to have icteric tint to his skin. The child has no problems with suckling, sleep is nondisturbed. The abdomen is soft, the liver protrudes by 2 cm from under the costal margin. Complete blood count: hemoglobin 200 g/L, erythrocytes - 5.5 × 1012/L, total bilirubin - 62 mcmol/L, indirect bilirubin - 52 mcmol/L. What condition can be suspected?
*a. Physiologic jaundice
b. Hemolytic disease of the newborn due to Rh incompatibility
c. Hemolytic disease of the newborn due to ABO incompatibility
d. Biliary atresia
e. Congenital hepatitis

2683. A 45-year-old man developed constricting retrosternal pain that occurs during walks at the distance of 200 m. Objectively heart rate is 80/min., BP is 160/90 mm Hg. During cardiopulmonary exercise test at 50 W there is a depression of S-T segment by 3 mm below the isoline in V3-V4. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Alcoholic myocardiodystrophy
*b. Exertional angina pectoris, functional class III
c. Exertional angina pectoris, functional class II
d. Exertional angina pectoris, functional class IV
e. Somatoform autonomic dysfunction, hypertension type

2684. A multigravida on the 38th week of her pregnancy complains of increased BP up to 140/90 mm Hg, edema of the shins for 2 weeks. In the last month she gained 3.5 kg of weight. Urine analysis: protein - 0.033 g/L. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Mild preeclampsia
b. Pregnancy hypertension
c. Pregnancy edema
d. Severe preeclampsia
e. Moderate preeclampsia

2685. For the last 15 years a 48-year-old patient has been working at the factory producing synthetic resins. Lately he has been complaining of signi?cant general fatigue, headaches, frequent urination (predominantly during the day), red color of urine. What complication of benzene nitrocompounds poisoning can be suspected?
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Chronic pyelonephritis
c. Chronic cystitis
d. Chronic prostatitis
*e. Malignant tumor of the urinary bladder

2686. A 44-year-old patient with postinfarction cardiosclerosis presents with frequent heart rate disorders and lower extremity edema. Objectively: Ps- 95/min., irregular, 1012 extrasystoles per minute. BP- 135/90 mm Hg. The 1st heart sound at the apex is weakened. Pulmonary respiration is rough. The liver is enlarged +2 cm. ECG: irregular sinus rhythm, heart rate - 95/min., frequent polytopic ventricular extrasystoles. What antiarrhythmic drug is advisable in this case for treatment and prevention of extrasystole?
a. Quinidine
b. Novocainamide (Procainamide)
c. Lidocaine
d. Mexiletine
*e. Amiodarone

2687. A 60-year-old woman started feeling weakness, vertigo, rapid fatigability during the last year. Recently she has developed dyspnea and paresthesia observed. Objectively: skin and mucous membranes are pale and icteric. Lingual papillae are smoothed out. Liver and spleen are at the edge of costal arch. Blood test: Hb- 70 g/L, erythrocytes - 1.7 × 1012/L, blood color index - 1.2, macrocytes. What drug can be prescribed on pathogenetic grounds?
a. Iron preparations
b. Vitamin B1
c. Vitamin B6
d. Ascorbic acid
*e. Vitamin B12

2688. After excessive consumption of fatty food a 60-year-old woman suddenly developed pain in her right subcostal area, nausea, bile vomiting, sharp bitter taste in her mouth. In 2 days she developed jaundice, her urine darkened. Objectively: sclera and skin are icteric, the abdomen is distended, the liver is enlarged by 3 cm, soft and painful on palpation, Ortner’s, Murphy’s, Kehr’s, Zakharyin’s, Mayo-Robson’s signs are positive. What diagnostic technique should be used in the ?rst place to con?rm the diagnosis?
a. Radionuclide scanning of the liver and gallbladder
b. Laparoscopy
c. Fibrogastroduodenoscopy
d. Abdominal X-ray
*e. Ultrasound of the gallbladder and bile duct

2689. The objective of a statistical research was to ?nd out to what extent the population peruses the available medical services. For this purpose 300 residents of the area were interviewed. Information was collected by means of a special questionnaire. What method of collecting information was used by the researchers?
a. —
*b. Anamnestic (history-taking)
c. Immediate examination
d. Immediate registration
e. Doing extracts

2690. A 30-year-old woman complains of increased body weight and problems with physical exertion. Her parents are of increased body weight as well; typical meals in their family are high in fats and carbohydrates. Objectively her blood pressure is 135/80 mm Hg, pulse is 89/min., weight is 87 kg, height is 165 cm. The patient’s skin is clear, with even distribution of subcutaneous fat; the thyroid gland is not enlarged; there are no menstrual cycle disturbances. What obesity prevention methods would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Anorectic drugs
*b. Dietary treatment, graduated exercise
c. Gastroplasty or gastrojejunal shunt
d. Intensive training regimen
e. Inhibitors of gastrointestinal lipases

2691. A 43-year-old woman complains of pain in the lumbar area, which irradiates to her left leg and aggravates on movement, and sensation of numbness in this leg. Objectively palpation of her shin and thigh is painful, there are painful stretch symptoms of on the left and gastrocnemius cramps. There is no sensory loss or weakening of re?ex responses. Make the diagnosis:
a. Spinal stroke
*b. Vertebrogenous lumbar ischialgia on the left
c. Left-sided coxitis
d. Vertebrogenous radicular syndrome of L5-S1 on the left
e. Endarteritis of the lower extremities

2692. A 3-day-old infant with hyperbilirubinemia (428 mcmol/L) developed disturbances manifesting as periodical excitation and convulsions against the background of inertness, hypotension, hypodynamia, and inhibition of unconditioned re?exes, convergent strabismus, rotational nystagmus, and settingsun eye phenomenon. What is the most likely cause of such symptoms?
a. Brain tumor
b. Craniocerebral injury
*c. Bilirubin encephalopathy
d. Hydrocephalus
e. Infantile cerebral paralysis

2693. A woman undergoing in-patient treatment for viral hepatitis type B developed headache, nausea, recurrent vomiting, memory lapses, ?apping tremor of her hands, rapid pulse. Sweet smell from the mouth is detected. Body temperature is 37.6°C, heart rate is 89/min. What complication developed in the patient?
*a. Acute liver failure
b. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Hypoglycemic shock
e. Ischemic stroke

2694. A patient with chronic pancreatitis complains of diarrhea occurring up to 5 times per day (no blood traces), loss of body weight, abdominal distention, dryness of skin, loss of hair, thirst, bleeding gums, convulsions. Complete blood count: leukocytes - 5.8 × 109/L; Hb- 86 g/L; ESR- 15 mm/g; Blood protein test: total protein - 48 g/L; albumins - 28 g/L. What indicators of coprological analysis would accompany this syndrom?
*a. Steatorrhea, creatorrhea
b. Large amount of starch grains and cellulose
c. Large numbers of iodinophilous microbes
d. Gas bubbles, acid reaction
e. Large amount of mucus, amylorrhea

2695. A 43-year-old woman complains of persistent stomachache with recurrent pain attacks, nausea, repeated vomiting with stagnant bowel content, abdominal distension, and ?atulence. She has been presenting with these signs for 7 hours. Pulse is 116/min. The tongue is dry and brown. The abdomen is symmetrically distemded, soft, painful. Percussion reveals tympanitis. On auscultation there are bowel sounds with metallic overtone, splashing, and dripping. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute erosive gastritis
b. Acute nonspeci?c colitis
c. Acute necrotizing pancreatitis
d. Acute destructive cholecystitis
*e. Acute intestinal obstruction

2696. After overexposure to cold a 45-year-old woman developed acute pain in her suprapubic and lumbar areas during urination, sharp pains at the end of urination, false urges to urinate. Urine is turbid with blood streaks. The doctor suspects urinary tract infection. What results of laboratory analysis would be the most indicative of such infection?
a. Increased blood creatinine and blood urea
b. Gross hematuria
*c. Leukocyturia, gross hematuria
d. Daily proteinuria under 3.0
e. Daily proteinuria over 3.0

2697. A 15-year-old adolescent girl came the the gynecologist with complaints of painful menstruations that are accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. Her menarche was at 12. Menstruations became painful since she was 14, remain regular. What treatment should be prescribed in this case?
a. Antiandrogen therapy
b. Vitamin supplements
c. Antiin?ammatory treatment only
d. Antihemorrhagic agents
*e. Analgesics, antispasmodics, antiprostaglandine therapy

2698. A 38-year-old patient has been delivered by an ambulance to a surgical department with complaints of general weakness, indisposition, black stool. On examination the patient is pale, there are dotted hemorrhages on the skin of his torso and extremities. On digital investigation there are black feces on the glove. Blood test: Hb- 108 g/L, thrombocytopenia. Anamnesis states that similar condition was observed 1 year ago. Make the diagnosis:
a. Rectal tumor
b. Nonspeci?c ulcerative colitis
c. Hemophilia
d. Bleeding from an ulcer
*e. Thrombocytopenic purpura

2699. A 35-year-old patient developed an epileptic attack with tonoclonic spasms that lasted for 3 minutes. After the attack the patient fell asleep but in 5 minutes the second attack occurred. The ?rst step of emergency aid would be to:
*a. Ensure patency of airways
b. Introduce diazepam intravenously
c. Administer chloral hydrate via enema
d. Prescribe antiepileptic drugs
e. Take blood from the vein for analysis

2700. A young woman suffering from seborrhea oleosa has numerous light-brown and white spots on the skin of her torso and shoulders. The spots have clear margins, branny desquamation, no itching. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
*a. Pityriasis versicolor
b. Seborrheic dermatitis
c. Vitiligo
d. Pityriasis rosea
e. Torso dermatophytosis

2701. A patient is 28 years old. He has been suffering from mental disorder since he was 22. His current condition has changed acutely: for 3 days the patient has been refusing to leave his home. He claims that there is a ”telepathy” occurring between him and other people, through which he receives ”thoughts of strangers” and transmits his own thoughts for everyone to hear. He thinks his thoughts and actions are manipulated through this ”telepathy”. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
*a. Paranoid schizophrenia
b. Catatonic episode
c. Acute reaction to stress
d. Organic delirium
e. Depressive episode

2702. A 3-year-old child presents with sharp deterioration of his general condition. He has a history of purulent otitis. His temperature is now 38.5°C. The left leg is pressed to the torso, active movements are absent, the lower third of the thigh and knee joint are thickened, hyperemic, with localized fever. Axial load leads to acute discomfort of the patient. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
b. Left hip fracture
*c. Epiphyseal osteomyelitis on the left
d. Osteogenic sarcoma
e. Hygroma of the knee

2703. A 19-year-old student was urgently hospitalized due to marked dyspnea and chest pain on the left. Her body temperature is 38.8°C. She has been presenting with these signs for 3 days. Respiratory rate is 42/min., shallow. Percussion sound is dull to the left from the center of the scapula, no respiration can be auscultated. The left heart border is displaced outwards by 3 cm. Embryocardia and heart rate of 110/min are observed. Palpation of the right subcostal area is painful. What urgent measures should be taken in this case?
a. Administration of furosemide
b. Prescription of penicillin antibiotics
*c. Urgent thoracocentesis
d. Administration of cardiac glycosides
e. Referral into thoracic surgery unit

2704. A 20-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 1 has been in labor for 4 hours. Her condition is satisfactory. Moderately painful contractions occur every 3 minutes and last for 35-40 seconds. The waters have not burst yet. The fetus is in longitudinal position. Fetal heartbeats are 136/min., clear and rhytmic. Major segment of the fetal head is engaged to the pelvic inlet. Vaginal examination shows smooth cervix of 6cm, amniotic sac is intact, sagittal suture is in the left oblique diameter, occipital fontanel is on the right near the symphysis pubis. What stage of the labor is it?
a. Precursors of childbirth
b. Preliminary stage
c. Latent phase of the ?rst stage of normal labor
d. The second stage of normal labor
*e. Active phase of the ?rst stage of normal labor

2705. A 1.5-month-old child on breastfeeding presents from birth with daily vomiting, irregular liquid foamy feces, and ?atulence, which are resistant to antibacterial and probiotic therapy; no increase of body mass is observed. The child’s condition improved, when breastmilk was substituted. What pathology is it?
a. Drug-induced enteritis
b. Functional dyspepsia
c. Intestinal lambliasis (Giardiasis)
d. Infectious enteritis
*e. Lactase de?ciency

2706. A 72-year-old man complains of lower extremity edema, sensation of heaviness in the right subcostal area, dyspnea in rest. For over 25 years he has been suffering from COPD. Objectively: orthopnea, jugular venous distention, diffuse cyanosis, acrocyanosis. Barrel chest is observed, on percussion there is vesiculotympanitic (bandbox) resonance, sharply weakened vesicular respiration on both sides, moist crepitant crackles in the lower segments of the lungs. Heart sounds are weakened, the II heart sound is accentuated over the pulmonary artery. The liver is +3 cm. What complicated the clinical course of COPD in this patient?
a. Diffuse pneumosclerosis
b. Community-acquired pneumonia
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Acute left ventricular failure
*e. Chronic pulmonary heart

2707. A burn victim with ?ame burns of the IIIA-B and IV degrees on his face, neck, and anterior surface of the thorax was brought into the admission room. The hairs in his nostrils are burnt, his labial and glossal mucosa are gray-white. The voice is hoarse; respirations are frequent and shallow; the patient has trumpetlike cough that produces soot-streaked sputum. The signs of respiratory failure were progressing, while the patient was being transported into the intensive care unit. What emergency care must be provided to this patient?
a. Administration of respiratory analeptics
b. Inhalation of moisturized oxygen
c. Tracheostomy
d. Administration of bronchial spasmolytics
*e. Intubation of the trachea and mechanical ventilation

2708. A 72-year-old man with pnaumonia complains of marked dyspnea, chest pain, severe cough with expectoration, to is 39.540°C, no urination for a whole day. Objectively the patient is conscious. Respiratory rate is 36/min. Over the right lower pulmonary lobe percussion sound is dull; on auscultation there is bronchial respiration and numerous moist crackles. Blood pressure is 80/60 mm Hg. Heart rate is 120/min. Heart sounds are muf?ed, there is tachycardia. What tactics should the family doctor choose in the management of this patient?
a. Outpatient treatment
b. Hospitalization into pulmonology unit
c. Hospitalization into neurology unit
*d. Hospitalization into intensive care unit
e. Treatment in the day patient facility

2709. Estimation of community health level involved analysis of a report on diseases registered among the population of district under charge (reporting form 12). What index is calculated based on this report?
a. Index of hospitalized morbidity
b. Index of basic non-epidemic morbidity
c. Index of pathological affection
d. Index of morbidity with temporary disability
*e. Prevalence

2710. A 72-year-old woman suffers from diabetes mellitus type II, concomitant diseases are stage II hypertension and stage IIB heart failure. She takes metformin. Hypertensic crisis had occurred the day before, after which the patient developed extreme weakness, myalgias, thirst, dry mouth, polyuria. BP is 140/95 mm Hg, heart rate is 98/min., no edemas or smell of acetone detected. What measures should be taken to prevent development of comatose state in the patient?
*a. Stop metformin, prescribe short-acting insulin
b. Apply hypotonic solution of sodium chloride
c. Prescribe glibenclamide
d. Additionally prescribe long-acting insulin
e. Double the dosage of metformin

2711. It is the 3rd day after the normal term labor; the infant is rooming-in with the mother and is on breastfeeding. Objectively: the mother’s general condition is satisfactory. Temperature is 36.4°C, heart rate is 80/min., BP is 120/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are soft and painless; lactation is moderate, unrestricted milk ?ow. The uterus is dense, the uterine fundus is located by 3 ?ngers width below the navel. Lochia are sanguino-serous, moderate in volume. Assess the dynamics of uterine involution:
a. Lochiometra
b. Subinvolution
*c. Physiological involution
d. Pathologic involution
e. Hematometra

2712. A 27-year-old man was hospitalized in severe condition 50 minutes after receiving a penetrating wound to the left side of the chest. Objectively the patient is in a stupor, his skin is pale and acrocyanotic. Pulse is 120/min., of poor volume, weak. Blood pressure is 80/40 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muf?ed, cardiac borders are markedly expanded. In the III intercostal area along the parasternal line on the left there is a stab-incised wound. Plain chest X-ray shows enlarged heart shadow with smoothed out waist of the heart, there is hemothorax on the left to the 5th rib. What contributes the most to the severity of the patient’s condition?
a. Cardiac rhythm disturbance
b. Acute heart failure
*c. Cardiac tamponade
d. Blood loss
e. Hemothorax and acute respiratory failure

2713. A 59-year-old patient suffering from hypertension was delivered to the hospital with complaints of acute headache, nausea, recurrent vomiting. On examination she presents with acute meningeal symptom complex. BP is 185/105 mm Hg. What additional examination would you recommend to the patient in the ?rst place?
a. Ventriculopuncture
b. Rheoencephalography
c. Electroencephalography
*d. Lumbar puncture
e. Echoencephalography

2714. During regular examination of a 2-yearold boy, he presents with enlarged left kidney, painless on palpation. The right kidney was undetectable on palpation. Excretory urography shows no contrast on the right. Cytoscopy detected hemiatrophy of the urinary bladder trigone, the right ureteral ori?ce is not detected. What pathology is it?
a. Ectopic right ureteral ori?ce
*b. Agenesis of the right kidney
c. Hypoplasia of the right kidney
d. Dystopia of the right kidney
e. Agenesis of the right ureter

2715. A 5-year-old child has body temperature risen up to febrile numbers, suffers from inertness, weakness. Examination revealed hemorrhage on the skin of limbs and torso. Enlargement of cervical and axillary lymph nodes can be detected. The liver is 4 cm below the costal arch; the spleen is 6 cm below the costal arch. Blood test: erythrocytes - 2.3 × 1012/L, Hb- 60 g/L, platelets - 40 × 109/L, leukocytes - 32.8 × 109/L, eosinophiles - 1%, band neutrophiles - 1%, segmented neutrophiles - 12%, lymphocytes - 46%, monocytes - 1%, blasts - 40%, Duke’s bleeding time test result is 9 min. What examination is necessary to make the diagnosis?
*a. Myelogram (bone marrow biopsy)
b. Abdominal US
c. Analysis of dynamic platelet function
d. Detection of hepatitis markers
e. Lymph nodes biopsy

2716. A 36-year-old man complains of marked dyspnea and cardiac pain. He ascribes his disease to the case of in?uenza that he had 2 weeks ago. Objectively he leans forward when sitting. The face is swollen, cyanotic, cervical veins are swollen. Heart borders are extended on the both sides, heart sounds are muf?ed, heart rate = Ps = 118/min., BP is 90/60 mm Hg. Blood test: ESR is 16 mm/hour. ECG shows low voltage. X-ray shows trapezoidal cardiac silhouette and signs of pulmonary congestion. Choose the treatment tactics:
*a. Pericardial puncture (pericardiocenthesis)
b. Antibiotics
c. Glucocorticosteroids
d. Pericardectomy
e. Diuretics

2717. A 25-year-old patient is not married and has sexual relations with several partners. During the last 3 months he noticed small amount of mucoserous secretions produced from urethra. Subjectively: periodical itching or burning pain in urethra. Two months ago pain in knee join developed. Possibility of trauma or exposure to cold is denied by the patient. During the last week eye discomfort is noted - lacrimation and itching. What provisional diagnosis can be suggested?
*a. Reactive arthritis
b. Seasonal pollinosis
c. URTI with conjunctiva and joints affected
d. Bacterial nonspeci?c urethral conjunctivitis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

2718. A woman complains of weight gain, chills, edema, xeroderma, somnolence, dif?culties with focusing. Objectively: height is 165 cm; weight is 90 kg; body proportions are of female type, to- 35,8°C, heart rate - 58/min., BP105/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds are weakened, bradycardia is observed. Other internal organs have no alterations. Thyroid gland cannot be palpated. Milk secretion from mammary glands is observed. Hormone test revealed increased levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and prolactin, and decreased level of thyroxine (?4). What is the cause of obesity?
a. Secondary hypothyroidism
b. Hypopituitarism
c. Adiposogenital dystrophy
*d. Primary hypothyroidism
e. Prolactinoma

2719. A 54-year-old patient complains of weakness, jaundice, itching skin. Disease onset was 1.5 months ago: fever up to 39°C appeared at ?rst, with progressive jaundice developed 2 weeks later. On hospitalisation jaundice was severely progressed. Liver cannot be palpated. Gallbladder is enlarged and painless. Blood bilirubin is 190 mcmol/L (accounting mainly for direct bilirubin). Stool is acholic. What is the most likely reason for jaundice in this patient?
a. Hemolytic jaundice
b. Hepatocellular jaundice
*c. Mechanical jaundice
d. Caroli syndrome
e. Gilbert’s syndrome

2720. A 23-year-old man came to the surgeon with complaints of pain, redness of the skin, and swelling in the area of his proximal interphalangeal joint of the III ?nger on the right hand. Six days ago he pricked his ?nger with a wire. Objectively the III ?nger on the right hand is swollen, hyperemic, prominent in the projection of interphalangeal joint, sharply painful on touch and during movements. Finger mobility is reduced. Fluctuation sign is present. What diagnosis corresponds to the given clinical presentation?
a. Bone panaritium
b. Pandactylitis
c. Finger furuncle
*d. Articular panaritium
e. Subcutaneous panaritium

2721. A 28-year-old woman complains of nausea, stomachache, pain in her tongue, and liquid feces. Three days ago she ate poorly salted pike caviar. Objectively her skin is pale, the tongue looks ”lacquered” (bald tongue). Pulse is 100/min., with muf?ed heart sounds and systolic murmur over the cardiac apex. Blood pressure is 95/50 mm Hg. The liver is enlarged by 3 cm. Hemogram shows anemia, eosinophils - 18%. Oval helminth eggs were detected in feces. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Diphyllobothriasis
b. Te n i a s i s
c. Ascaridiasis
d. Taeniarhynchosis
e. Trichinosis

2722. A 30-year-old woman complains of milk discharge from her breasts and no menstruation for the last 5 months. One physiologic childbirth was 4 years ago. There are no maldevelopments of mammary glands. Bimanual examination revealed diminished uterus and normal sized ovaries. MRIscan shows no brain pathologies. Thyroidstimulating hormone is within normal limits. Serum prolactin is high. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hyperprolactinemia
b. Polycystic ovaries
c. Sheehan’s syndrome (postpartum hypopituitarism)
d. Pituitary adenoma
e. Hypothyroidism

2723. A 25-year-old woman during selfexamination detected a tumor in the upper external quadrant of her right mammary gland. On palpation: painless, dense, mobile growth 2 cm in diameter is detected in the mammary gland; no changes in the peripheral lymph nodes are observed. On US of the mammary glands: in the upper external quadrant of the right mammary gland there is a space-occupying lesion of increased echogenicity 21х18 mm in size. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Breast cyst
b. Breast cancer
c. Mastitis
*d. Fibrous adenoma
e. Diffuse mastopathy

2724. A 45-year-old woman underwent one year ago mastectomy followed by chemo- and radiation therapy. She now complains of dyspnea at rest and temperature up to 37.2°C. Her general condition is severe, acrocyanosis is observed. The right side of her chest practically does not participate in respiration. Percussion reveals a dull sound below the 3rd rib; auscultation detects acute weakening of the respiratory sounds. Pleural puncture on the right has yielded a large amount of hemorrhagic exudate. What complication has developed in the patient?
*a. Carcinomatous pleuritis
b. Acute right-sided pleuropneumonia
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Right lung abscess
e. Acute pleural empyema

2725. A 37-year-old man suffers from attacks of unconsciousness, dyspnea during physical exertion, periodical sensations of heart rate disorder. Father of the patient died suddenly at the age of 45. Objectively: heart rate is 90/min., BP is 140/90 mm Hg. On heart US: ejection fraction - 55%, signi?cant myocardium thickening of the left ventricle and interventricular septum. What drug should be prescribed for the treatment?
a. Enalapril
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Furosemide
*d. Bisoprolol
e. Phenyhydinum (Nifedipine)

2726. A 60-year-old man complains of discomfort when swallowing solid food, which he has been observing for a month. He changed his diet to semiliquid food products. At ?rst the discomfort had abated but later it renewed despite the change in the diet. The patient developed gaseous eructation and hoarse voice. What examination should be performed to clarify the diagnosis?
a. Urea breath test for H. pylori
b. Esophageal pH monitoring
c. Abdominal US
*d. Esophagoscopy with biopsy
e. Diurnal variations of ECG parameters

2727. A 22-day-old infant developed subcutaneous red nodes from 1.0 to 1.5 cm in size on the scalp; later the nodes suppurated. Temperature increased up to 37.7°C, intoxication symptoms appeared, regional lymph nodes enlarged. Complete blood count: anemia, leukocytosis, neutrocytosis, increased ESR. What diagnosis will you make?
a. Pemphigus
b. Scalp phlegmon
c. —
*d. Pseudofurunculosis
e. Vesiculopustulosis

2728. A 32-year-old woman complains of general fatigue, low-grade fever persisting for 4 months, lumbar pain, and dysuria. Anamnesis includes frequent acute respiratory diseases, overexposure to cold, lowcalorie diet, a case of pulmonary tuberculosis in childhood. Clinical urine analysis: pH4.8, leukocyturia, hematuria. Complete blood count: leukocytosis, lymphocytosis, increased ESR. Urography concludes: dilatation of renal pelvis and calyceal system of both kidneys, foci of calci?cation in the projection of right kidney parenchyma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Right renal carcinoma
b. Right renal cyst
*c. Nephrotuberculosis
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Chronic pyelonephritis

2729. A 45-year-old woman came to the maternity clinic with complaints of periodical pains in her mammary glands that start 1 day before menstruation and stop after the menstruation begins. Palpation of the mammary glands detects diffuse nodes predominantly in the upper outer quadrants. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mastitis
b. Breast cancer
*c. Fibrocystic mastopathy
d. Hyperprolactinemia
e. Breast cyst

2730. A woman complains of temperature increase up to 39°C, sharp pains in her lower abdomen, and sanguinopurulent discharge from her genital tracts. From her case history it is known that 6 days ago she underwent illegal abortion. Objectively her blood pressure is 100/60 mm Hg, pulse is 110/min. Abdominal rigidity, rebound tenderness (Bloomberg’s sign), and painful palpation of the lower abdomen are observed. On bimanual examination the uterus is enlarged up to 7 weeks of pregnancy, painful, and soft; posterior vaginal fornix overhangs. Make the diagnosis:
a. Metroendometritis
*b. Pelviperitonitis
c. Acute adnexitis
d. Endometritis
e. Pyosalpinx

2731. An 8-year-old girl with complaints of painful urination, frequent low-volume urination, and leukocyturia was diagnosed with acute cystitis. 10 days before the disease onset she was treated by the gynecologist for acute vulvitis. 5 days ago she presented with mild catarrhal symptoms. Her mother ascribes the child’s disease to her overexposure to cold. Specify the most likely infection route:
a. Hematogenic
b. Descending
*c. Ascending
d. Contact
e. Lymphogenic

2732. A 74-year-old patient visited a urologist with complaints of pain above the pubis and inability to urinate for 8 hours. At home he had taken antispasmodics and had a warm bath but no improvement occurred. Objectively: abdomen is soft and painful above the pubis; dullness of percussion sound is observed above the pubis. Murphy’s (Pasternatski’s) punch sign is negative on the both sides. What condition does the patient have?
a. Anuria
b. Oliguria
c. Paradoxal ischuria
d. Chronic urinary retention
*e. Acute urinary retention

2733. An excavator operator with 20 years of work experience at the opencast ore mine undergoes regular medical examination. He presents with signs of pneumoconiosis. What type of pneumoconiosis is the most likely in this case?
*a. Siderosis
b. Anthracosis
c. Silicatosis
d. Asbestosis
e. Silicosis

2734. A 55-year-old woman came to a gynecologist with complaints of leukorrhea and bloody discharge from the vagina after 5 years of menopause. Anamnesis states no pregnancies. Bimanual examination: the uterus and uterine appendages are without changes. During diagnostic curettage of the uterine cavity the physician scraped off enchephaloid matter. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Adenomyosis
b. Cervical carcinoma
c. Ovarian carcinoma
*d. Endometrial carcinoma
e. Subserous uterine myoma

2735. A 5-year-old boy complains of severe dyspnea and sensation of lack of air. Objectively the child assumes orthopneic position, presents with marked peripheral cyanosis, drumstick ?ngers, nail plates resembling a ”clock face”, the borders of cardiac dullness are bilaterally extended; coarse systolic murmur can be detected over the whole surface of the heart and is especially pronounced in the II intercostal area on the left near the sternum. What disease can be characterized by such presentations?
a. Defect of the interventricular septum
b. Dilated cardiomyopathy
*c. Fallot’s tetrad
d. Primary bacterial endocarditis
e. Defect of the interatrial septum

2736. A 10-year-old boy is delivered into a polytrauma unit after he received a blunt trauma of the thorax, having fallen from the bicycle. Upon hospitalization his blood pressure is 110/80 mm Hg, heart rate is 96/min. Chest X-ray is noncontributive to the diagnosis. Echocardiogram shows free liquid in the pericardial cavity, in the amount of up to 100 ml. In an hour after the hospitalization the patient started to develop increasing signs of heart failure: jugular venous distention, decreased blood pressure down to 90/70 mm Hg, tachycardia up to 120/min. On auscultation muf?ed heart sounds. What would be the primary tactics of a physician?
a. Diuretics intravenously
b. Antibiotics intravenously
c. Cardiac glycosides intravenously
d. Constant oxygenotherapy
*e. Pericardiocentesis (pericardial puncture)

2737. A patient has gradually lost consciousness. The skin is pale and dry. There is smell of ammonia from the mouth. Respirations are deep and noisy. Heart sounds are muf?ed, pericardial friction rub is present. Blood pressure is 180/130 mm Hg. Blood test: Нb- 80 g/L, leukocytes - 12 × 109/L, blood glucose - 6.4 mmol/L, urea - 50 mmol/L, creatinine - 1200 mcmol/L, blood osmolality - 350 mOsmol/kg H2O. No urinary excretion. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Uremic coma
b. Acute renal failure
c. Hyperosmolar coma
d. Acute disturbance of cerebral circulation
e. Hyperglycemic coma

2738. A 26-year-old woman has been undergoing treatment for community-acquired pneumonia for 10 days. It is known that her husband had been treated for drug addiction. Sequential intravenous administration of Amoksiklav (Amoxicillin+Clavunate) + Levo?oxacin combination and vancomycin in the prescribed dosage was ineffective. Within the last two days the patient’s dyspnea and intoxication acutely exacerbated, bilateral pulmonary in?ltrates are observed. What is the most likely cause of the medication ineffectiveness?
*a. HIV infection and pneumocystic pneumonia
b. Idiopathic ?brosing alveolitis
c. Cancer metastases in the pulmonary tissues
d. Infection with polyresistant bacterial strains
e. Tuberculosis mycobacterium infection with development of tuberculosis

2739. A 35-year-old man complains of persisting enlargement of his peripheral lymph nodes that cause him no discomfort. The case history states that the ?rst lymph nodes to enlarge were cervical, supraclavicular, and axillary; new groups of lymph nodes emerged. Objectively the lymph nodes are soft and elastic on palpation, enlarged, painless, not ?xed to the surrounding tissue. What examination method would be the most informative for early diagnostics of this disease?
a. Magnetic resonance tomography
b. Ultrasound
c. X-ray
*d. Needle biopsy
e. Radioisotope scanning of the skeleton

2740. A 32-year-old woman complains of body weight loss despite her increased appetite, nervousness, and tremor of the extremities. Objectively: the skin is moist; the thyroid gland is diffusely enlarged, painless, soft, and mobile. Blood test: increased level of T3, T4, and decreased thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Diffuse toxic goiter
b. Autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis
c. Diffuse nontoxic goiter
d. Thyroid adenoma
e. Thyroid carcinoma

2741. A 64-year-old man suddenly sensed pain in his occipital area, dizziness, general weakness. He has a 15-year-long history of hypertension. Objectively the skin and mucosa are of normal color. Auscultation reveals vesicular respiration across the lung surface. At the cardiac apex the I heart sound is weakened, the II heart sound is accentuated over the aorta. Pulse is 84/min., blood pressure is 180/100 mm Hg. Other body organs and systems are unaffected. What drug should be prescribed in the ?rst place?
a. Perindopril
b. Amlodipine
c. Ramipril
d. Urapidil
*e. Captopril

2742. During winter epidemics of in?uenza caused predominantly by virus А/California/04/2009 (H1N1), on the 2nd day after the disease onset a 30-year-old hospitalized man presented with high fever, dry cough, myalgia, headache, and general weakness. What should be prescribed as etiotropic treatment in this case?
a. Interferon inducers
b. Acyclovir
c. Antibiotics
d. Immunoglobulin
*e. Neuraminidase inhibitors (Oseltamivir)

2743. A 24-year-old pregnant woman on her 37th week of pregnancy has been delivered to a maternity obstetric service with complaints of weak fetal movements. Fetal heartbeats are 95/min. On vaginal examination the uterine cervix is tilted backwards, 2 cm long, external ori?ce allows inserting a ?ngertip. Biophysical pro?le of the fetus equals 4 points. What tactics of pregnancy management should be chosen?
a. Treatment of fetal distress, if ineffective, then elective cesarean section on the next day
*b. Urgent delivery via cesarean section
c. Doppler measurement of blood velocity in the umbilical artery
d. Treatment of placental dysfunction and repeated analysis of the fetal biophysical pro?le on the next day
e. Urgent preparation of the uterine cervix for delivery

2744. During regular preventive gynecological examination a 30-year-old woman was detected to have dark blue punctulated ”perforations” on the vaginal portion of the uterine cervix. The doctor suspects endometriosis of the vaginal portion of the uterine cervix. What investigation method would be most informative for diagnosis con?rmation?
a. Curettage of the uterine cavity
b. Hormone testing
c. US of the lesser pelvis
d. Hysteroscopy
*e. Colposcopy, target biopsy of the cervix

2745. A 26-year-old woman came to a gynecologist for a regular check-up. She has no complaints. Per vaginum: the uterus lies in ante?exion, not enlarged, dense, mobile, painless. On the left from the uterus in the area of uterine appendages there is a mobile painless outgrowth that can be moved independently from the uterus. On the right the appendages cannot be detected. What additional investigation would be informative for diagnosis clari?cation?
a. Colposcopy
b. Colonoscopy
c. Metrosalpingography
d. Examination for urogenital infection
*e. Ultrasound of the lesser pelvis

2746. A 38-year-old man underwent surgical treatment of a wound with a suppuration focus. On the 8th day after the procedure the wound cleared of purulo-necrotic discharge and granulations appeared. However, against the background of antibacterial therapy, the patient’s body temperature persists as high as 38.5-39.5°C; chills, excessive sweating, and euphoria are observed in the patient; heart rate is 120/min. What complication of the local suppurative in?ammatory process can be suspected?
a. Trombophlebitis
b. Purulent-resorptive fever
*c. Sepsis
d. Meningitis
e. Pneumonia

2747. A man complains of high fever, pain in the area of his right mastoid bone, and purulent discharge from the right ear. One week ago he had a case of URTI. Objectively the right auricle protrudes, the skin behind the ear is hyperemic and pastose; on palpation of the mastoid bone the pain intensi?es; the auditory meatus is ?lled with thick pus, posterosuperior meatal wall sags; the tympanic membrane is red and perforated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute otitis media
b. Furuncle of the external auditory meatus
*c. Acute mastoiditis
d. Acute otitis externa diffusa
e. Exacerbation of chronic mesotympanitis

2748. A 52 year old man came to see his family physician complaining of pain in the chest. After taking history and performing physical exam the doctor decided to direct the patient to cardiologist for a consultation. What level of medical care is being proposed to the patient?
*a. Secondary healthcare
b. Primary healthcare
c. Palliative care
d. Tertiare healtcare
e. Emergency healthcare

2749. A 30-year-old woman made an appointment with the family doctor for scheduled vaccination of her 2-year-old child. What type of healthcare provides such medical services?
*a. Primary healthcare
b. Secondary healthcare
c. Palliative care
d. Tertiary healthcare
e. Emergency aid

2750. A 28-year-old man after car accident received a wound to the right side of his chest in?icted by a sharp metal object. A foamy liquid ?ows out from the wound, there are tympanitis and acutely weakened respirations in the right. Blood pressure is 70/30 mm Hg, pulse is 120/min., Hb is 28 g/L. X-ray shows collapsed right lung, horizontal ?uid level is at the 3rd rib. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Delayed thoracotomy
b. Apply occlusive dressing to the wound
c. Conservative therapy
*d. Urgent thoracotomy
e. Drain the right pleural cavity

2751. A 38-year-old woman has been working as a milker for 15 years. She made an appointment with the doctor due to development of red rashes on her hands, predominantly in the interdigital space. The rashes are weeping, itching, and expanding on her skin. Examination of her hands shows her nail plates to be yellow and brittle. These presentations aggravate during work. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Occupational eczema
b. Pemphigus
c. Dermatophytosis
d. Pyoderma
e. Scabies

2752. An 18-year-old patient complains of skin rash. The patient has been suffering from this condition for 5 years. The ?rst instance of this disease occurred after a car accident. Objectively: the patient presents with papular rash covered in silvery scales, ”thimble” symptom (small pits on the nails), affected joints. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Rheumatism
c. Panaritium
d. Onychomycosis
*e. Psoriasis

2753. A postparturient woman, who has been breastfeeding for 3 weeks, made an appointment with the doctor. For the last 6 days she has been feeling unwell, complains of body temperature of 38-39°C, general weakness; within the last 2 days she developed pain and redness in the area of her right mammary gland. Examination revealed her mammary gland to be signi?cantly enlarged and deformed; breast tissue ?uctuations and lymphadenitis are observed. What type of mastitis is the most likely?
a. In?ltrative mastitis
b. Serous mastitis
*c. Phlegmonous mastitis
d. Lactostasis
e. Mammary edema

2754. When her car collided with a tree, a 37year-old woman felt sharp pain in her left hip joint. She was unable to get out of the car. Her position is forced, the hip is pressed to the abdomen, ?xed, and rotated inwards; the limb is ?exed in the knee, any attempt to change the position results in sharp pain. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Closed dislocation of the left hip
b. Hemarthrosis of the left hip joint
c. Closed cervical fracture of the left hip
d. Arthritis of the left hip joint
e. Contusion of the left hip joint

2755. On the 9th day after childbirth the obstetric patient developed high fever up to 38°C. She complains of pain in the right mammary gland. The examination revealed the following: a sharply painful in?ltrate can be palpated in the right mammary gland, the skin over the in?ltrate is red, subareolar area and nipple are swollen and painful. What is your diagnosis?
a. Mastopathy
b. Serous mastitis
c. Fibrous cystic degeneration of the right mammary gland
*d. Abscess of the right mammary gland
e. Cancer of the right mammary gland

2756. During reanimation procedures an attempt to intubate trachea was made. Neither glottis nor epiglottis can be visualized via laryngoscopy. What tactics should be chosen in this case?
a. Discontinue the attempts for mechanical ventilation
*b. Insert a laryngeal mask
c. Continue the attempts until the intubation is successful
d. Perform a bag-valve-mask ventilation with Ambu bag
e. Temporarily cease the chest compressions to make intubation easier

2757. A 48-year-old woman developed insomnia, depressive mood, anxiety, fears and suicidal thoughts after the death of her husband that occurred one month ago. During her stay in the hospital she speaks in a low voice, is depressed, anxious, avoids sleeping, refuses to eat. What medications should be prescribed in this case?
*a. Antidepressants
b. Group B vitamins
c. Anticonvulsants
d. Nootropics
e. Antipsychotics

2758. A 39-year-old man suffers from chronic adrenal insuf?ciency and receives replacement glucocorticoid therapy (hydrocortisone - 15 mg/day). He is to undergo elective surgery for calculous cholecystitis. What medication adjustment should be made on the day of the surgery to prevent the development of acute adrenal insuf?ciency?
*a. Increase the dosage by 2-3 times
b. Add mineralocorticoid
c. Prescribe large volume intravenous ?uid infusion
d. Add antibiotic
e. Cancel the drug for the day of the surgery

2759. A 22-year-old man at 18:00 developed persisting dull pain in the epigastrium. Three hours later nausea appeared, he vomited once. By the morning the pain shifted to the right iliac area. Body temperature rose to 38.6°C, developed tachycardia of 110/min. On examination there are muscle rigidity and Bloomberg’s sign (rebound tenderness) in the right iliac area of the anterior abdominal wall. Plain x-ray of the abdomen shows no ?uid levels, free air under the diapragm on the right. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Perforation of a gastric ulcer
b. Acute appendicitis
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Renal colic

2760. 40-50 minutes after the completion of repair works conducted in a closed garage, with car engine running, the repair workers developed severe headache in the temporal area, nausea, tinnitus, vertigo, etc. These symptoms are characteristic of acute poisoning with:
a. Organochlorides
b. Aldehydes
*c. Carbon monoxide
d. Hydrogen sul?de
e. Fluoride

2761. After a long drive with the window open a man developed facial asymmetry; he cannot close his right eye, his right nasolabial fold is smoothed out, movements of expression are absent on the right, there is a disturbance of gustatory sensation in the tongue on the right. No other neurological pathologies were detected. What disease can be provisionally diagnosed in this patient?
a. Ischemic stroke
*b. Neuropathy of the facial nerve
c. Trigeminal ganglionitis
d. Neuropathy of the trigeminal nerve
e. Neuropathy of the oculomotor nerve

2762. On ultrasound of the thyroid gland, a 47year-old woman presents with a hypoechoic node 1.6 cm in diameter with blurred margins and intranodular hypervascularization. The doctor suspects thyroid carcinoma. What method should be used to verify the diagnosis?
*a. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy
b. Case monitoring
c. Positron emission tomography (PET)
d. Determine TSH level in the blood
e. Thyroid scintigraphy

2763. A 19-year-old young man complains of cough with expectoration of purulent sputum in amount of 100 ml per day, hemoptysis, dyspnea, increased body temperature up to 37.8°C, general weakness, weight loss. The patient’s condition has been persisting for 4 years. Exacerbations occur 2-3 times per year. The patient presents with malnutrition, pale skin, cyanosis of the lips, drumstick (clubbed) ?ngers. Tympanic percussion sound in the lungs, weakened respiration, various numerous moist crackles in the lower pulmonary segments on the left can be observed. In blood: erythrocytes - 3.2 × 1012/L, leukocytes - 8.4 × 109/L, ESR- 56 mm/hour. On X-ray: lung ?elds are emphysematous, the left pulmonary root is deformed and dilated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic abscess of the left lung
b. Chronic left-sided pneumonia
*c. Multiple bronchiectasis of the left lung
d. Left-sided pulmonary cystic dysplasia
e. Suppuration of the cyst in the left lung

2764. An 8-year-old child presents with blood pressure up to 180/100 mm Hg in the upper limbs accompanied by headaches, tinnitus, occasional nosebleeds, and high fatigability. On examination there is no pulse over the leg arteries. ECG shows left ventricular hypertrophy. MRI-scan shows aortic narrowing to 5 mm in the typical place. Coarctation of aorta is diagnosed. What kind of treatment should be prescribed in this case?
*a. Surgical
b. Physical therapy
c. Abstain from surgery in favor of complex conservative therapy
d. Case monitoring
e. Conservative

2765. A 6-year-old girl arrived to the in-patient unit with complaints of enlargement of the lower third of her right thigh. According to the case history, she has been stepping carefully on her right leg and limping for 6 months. Blood test detected anemia. X-ray of the right thigh shows a round bone defect with clear margins resembling melting sugar in the distal metaphysis. What provisional diagnosis can be made in this case?
*a. Osteogenic sarcoma of the right femur
b. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis of the distal femoral metaphysis on the right
c. Giant cell tumor of the right femur
d. Tuberculous osteitis of the distal femoral metaphysis on the right
e. Rheumatoid arthritis of the right knee joint

2766. A 37-year-old man working as a typesetter in a print shop complains of rapid fatigability, paroxysmal attacks of stomachache, weak drooping hands. Examination of neurological status revealed hypotrophy of the forearm muscles. Carporadial re?exes are sharply weakened. Sensitivity is not disturbed. Gums present with dark blue border. What neurological pathology is it?
a. Guillain-Barre syndrome (postinfectious polyneuritis)
b. Ulnar neuropathy
c. Brachial plexitis
*d. Lead polyneuropathy
e. Shingles

2767. The mother of an epileptic son complains of her son periodically presenting with irritable depression, when he becomes excited and prone to physical agression and violence. These moods last for 5-10 minutes, after which the patient exhausts himself and falls asleep. Upon waking he is depressed, sad, cannot recall his actions or recalls them only partially. What psychopathologic condition is it?
a. Dysthymia
b. Pathologic affect
c. Ambulatory automatism
*d. Dysphoria
e. Epileptic delirium

2768. A 44-year-old woman has undergone subtotal thyroid resection due to diffuse toxic goiter. On the second day after the surgery the patient’s condition deteriorated; she developed palpitations, dyspnea, sweating, and diarrhea, and became fearful The patient is anxious, her skin is moist and hot to the touch. Her temperature is 39.2°C. Heart sounds are muf?ed, tachycardia is observed, pulse is 160/min., blood pressure is 85/40 mm Hg. The stomach is soft and painless. What should be measured to clarify the patient’s condition?
*a. Thyroid hormones
b. 17-KS and 17-OCS in urine
c. Serum transaminases
d. Blood epinephrine and norepineprine
e. Blood sugar

2769. The dermatologist has an appointment with a 30-year-old man that complains of severely itching rashes that especially disturb him at night. The rashes developed 2 weeks ago, after he had returned from a travel. Objectively on the lateral surfaces of his ?ngers, hands, wrists, elbows, lower abdomen, genitals, and thighs there are paired papulovesicles, single pustules, and scratch marks. What disease can be suspected?
a. Dermatitis
b. Pyoderma
*c. Scabies
d. Eczema
e. Shingles

2770. A 28-year-old man, a teacher, after emotional stress developed painful muscle spasms in his right hand that occur during writing; now he has to hold the pen between the second and third ?ngers. He has no problems with typing or writing on the blackboard; no other motor disturbances or neurological pathologies are detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuropathy of the right radial nerve
*b. Writer’s cramp
c. Parkinsonism
d. Cortical agraphia
e. Neuropathy of the right ulnar nerve

2771. A 32-year-old pregnant woman at the term of 5-6 weeks was vaccinated against in?uenza along with her whole family. At that time she was not aware of her pregnancy. The pregnancy is wanted. The woman needs an advice from the family doctor regarding the maintenance of her pregnancy, namely whether there is a risk of fetal malformations because of received vaccination. What advice should the doctor give in this case?
a. Therapeutic abortion is recommended
b. Test for antibodies against in?uenza virus is necessary
c. An infectious diseases specialist must be consulted
*d. Vaccination against in?uenza is safe during pregnancy
e. Immediate ultrasound of the lesser pelvis is necessary

2772. A 15-year-old girl suffers from systemic lupus erythematosus and has been receiving prednisolone therapy in the daily dosage of 2 mg/kg for the last 6 weeks. The plans are made to gradually lower the dosage of the medicine. No clinical signs of her disease are observed. Previously she has received no immunization against measles. Due to measles outbreak it is necessary to develop the immunity against this infection in the patient. When can she be vaccinated?
*a. At the present time
b. 1 month after the prednisolone therapy is complete
c. Never due to medical contraindications
d. Immediately after the prednisolone therapy is complete
e. After 2 weeks of prednisolone therapy in the dosage lower than 2 mg/kg/24 hours

2773. A 45-year-old veterinary worker has made an appointment with the doctor for regular examination. In his duties he frequently deals with animals, however he denies working with rabies-affected animals. Previously he has received no antirabic vaccination. What should the doctor recommend in this case?
a. Preventive immunization with rabies immunoglobulin
b. Vaccination in case of contact with sick animal
*c. Preventive immunization with antirabic vaccine
d. Administration of antirabic vaccine and rabies immunoglobulin
e. Preventive immunization with anti-rabies serum

2774. A healthy child 1 year and 5 months of age is being vaccinated against hepatitis B. The child did not receive the ?rst dose of the vaccine previously, while in the maternity hospital. The doctor makes an individual vaccination schedule for this child and plans the administration of the next dose of the vaccine. What is the minimum interval between doses of vaccine in this case?
a. 6 months
b. 3 months
c. 12 months
*d. 1 month
e. 2 months

2775. A 46-year-old man came to the surgeon’s of?ce. He complains of twitching sensation in the wound on his left foot, insomnia, and anxiety. According to the patient, he received this wound 5 days ago, when he accidentally stepped on a glass shard, while on the beach. He requested no medical assistance. Objectively the patient’s general condition is satisfactory, pulse is 75/min., blood pressure is 130/80 mm Hg, temperature is 36.9°C. On the plantar surface of his foot there is a wound 1.5 cm long and up to 3 cm deep. The wound edges are moderately hyperemic, no discharge from the wound is observed. What disease can be suspected in this patient?
a. Phlegmon
*b. Tetanus
c. Anthrax
d. Diphtheria
e. Fasciitis

2776. A 45-year-old woman has been suffering from rheumatoid arthritis for 10 years and takes methotrexate twice a week. What statement regarding vaccination against pneumococci (23-valent vaccine) would conform to the recommendations for the management of rheumatoid arthritis issued by the European League Against Rheumatism in 2010?
*a. Vaccination is recommended
b. Vaccination is contraindicated to the patients who take methotrexate
c. Vaccination necessitates increase in the dosage of the long-term medicines
d. Vaccination is contraindicated in cases when in?ammatory process is active
e. Vaccination is not recommended

2777. A 65-year-old woman was diagnosed with the following: chronic rheumatic heart disease, I degree of rheumatic activity; combined mitral heart disease with prevalence of III degree stenosis; heart failure IIA with retained left ventricular ejection fraction, functional class III (NYHA). What tactics of vaccination against respiratory infections should be chosen to provide secondary prevention of exacerbations and to avoid heart failure decompensation in this patient?
a. Any vaccination is contraindicated due to elderly age of the patient
b. Any vaccination is contraindicated due to mitral valve disease
c. Vaccination should be combined with antibiotic administration
d. Vaccination is contraindicated due to severe heart failure
*e. Scheduled yearly vaccination against in?uenza and pneumococci

2778. A 69-year-old woman was diagnosed with the following: ischemic heart disease; stable exertional angina pectoris, FC III; heart failure IIA with retained left ventricular ejection fraction, functional class III (NYHA). What vaccine should be chosen for in?uenza prevention and to avoid destabilization of the patient’s condition?
a. Vaccination is contraindicated due to elderly age of the patient
*b. Type of in?uenza vaccine is not important
c. Recombinant in?uenza vaccine (RIV)
d. Inactivated in?uenza vaccine (IIV)
e. Vaccination is contraindicated due to severe heart failure

2779. A 60-year-old man presents with subcompensated viral liver cirrhosis (HCV), Child-Pugh class B. What tactics should be chosen regarding the vaccination against in?uenza in this case?
a. Contraindicated due to disease progression stage, as shown by Child-Pugh class
b. Contraindicated due to elderly age of the patient
c. In case of in?uenza outbreak
d. Combined with antiviral drugs
*e. Scheduled yearly vaccination

2780. A 20-year-old student was brought to the ?rst-aid center. He has a closed fracture of the left forearm and a contused lacerated wound on his left shin. After the patient received initial wound management, he presented the documents con?rmingthathehasreceived all the necessary preventive vaccination as scheduled. What should the doctor do to prevent tetanus in this patient?
a. Administration of tetanus immunoglobulin
b. Antibiotic therapy
c. Administration of tetanus toxoid
*d. Dynamic case monitoring
e. Administration of anti-tetanus serum

2781. A 17-year-old girl has made an appointment with the doctor. She plans to begin her sex life. No signs of gynecological pathology were detected. In the family history there was a case of cervical cancer that occurred to the patient’s grandmother. The patient was consulted about the maintenance of her reproductive health. What recommendation will be the most helpful for prevention of invasive cervical cancer?
a. Timely treatment of sexually transmitted diseases
*b. Vaccination against human papillomavirus (HPV)
c. Immunomodulators
d. Vitamins, calcium, omega-3
e. Antiviral and antibacterial drugs

2782. A 6-month-old infant is not vaccinated. The physician recommends a DPT (diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus) vaccination but the mother is absolutely against this procedure. Choose the most substantial argument in favor of vaccination:
*a. Risk of lethal consequences
b. Personal professional experience
c. —
d. High quality of vaccines
e. Epidemic risk for the others

2783. In autumn a 45-year-old man was recommended an elective surgery for coronary artery bypass grafting due to multivessel coronary artery disease. The patient has never received anti-in?uenza vaccination. Why would the family doctor offer a scheduled yearly vaccination against in?uenza to this patient?
a. Immunoprophylaxis of postoperative pulmonary complications
b. Secondary prevention of exacerbations of chronic ischemic heart disease
*c. Decrease the risk of mortality due to pneumonia and heart failure
d. Primary prevention of in?uenza during postoperative care
e. Prevention of seasonal in?uenza

2784. A 28-year-old woman has made an appointment with the family doctor to receive vaccination against in?uenza. However, having collected the patient’s medical history, the doctor claimed this procedure to be absolutely contraindicated for this woman. What anamnestic data is the absolute contraindication to vaccination?
a. Blood hemoglobin - 109 g/L
b. Pregnancy at 30 weeks
*c. Egg white intolerance
d. Body temperature - 37.2°C
e. Psoriasis in the remission phase

2785. A 26-year-old man complains of chills, rhinitis, dry cough, and fever up to 38°C. Examination shows him to be in a moderately severe condition; there are small pale pink non-merging spots on the skin of his back, abdomen, and extremities. Palpation reveals enlarged occipital and axillary lymph nodes. No information about vaccination history could be obtained. What is the likely etiology of this disease?
a. Neisseria meningitis
*b. Rubella virus
c. Streptococcus
d. Epstein-Barr virus
e. Mumps virus

2786. During administration of planned DPT vaccination the child suddenly developed acute anxiety, signs of pain response, dyspnea, grunting respirations, cutis marmorata, cold sweat. Objectively the child’s consciousness is disturbed, heart rate is 150/min., blood pressure is 60/40 mm Hg, heart sounds are muf?ed. The child was diagnosed with anaphylactic shock. What drug should be administered ?rst?
a. Lasix (Furosemide)
b. Euphylline (Aminophylline)
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
*d. Epinephrine
e. Suprastin (Chloropyramine)

2787. Among ?rst-year schoolchildren there was a case of measles registered. A 7-year-old boy from the same group was not vaccinated against measles due to refusal of his parents. His clinical history has no cases of measles in the past and is not contraindicatory to immunobiological agents. Choose the most rational tactics of measles prevention in this schoolboy:
a. Isolation for 20 days
b. Antibiotics
c. Immunomodulators
*d. Measles-Mumps-Rubella vaccine
e. Antiviral agents

2788. A 40-year-old man developed fever up to 37.5°C and macular rash 10 days after the ?rst dose of MMR (Measles-Mumps-Rubella) vaccine was administered. The vaccination was considered necessary as there was a measles outbreak in the city and the patient had not received MMR vaccination in his childhood. Is revaccination with MMR vaccine possible?
a. Simultaneously with antihistamines
b. Under supervision in the infectious diseases inpatient ward
c. Forbidden
d. After a course of glucocorticoids treatment
*e. Possible

2789. A 26-year-old man is undergoing a regular check-up. One year ago he had a case of tonsillar diphtheria complicated with myocarditis. Presently his condition is satisfactory, no signs of cardiovascular failure; ECG shows ?rstdegree atrioventricular block. What vaccine was administered to this man according to his age?
a. Oral polio vaccine (OPV)
b. BCG vaccine
c. Acellular DPT vaccine
d. Tetanus anatoxin
*e. Adsorbed diphtheria tetanus vaccine (modi?ed)

