1. A 76 y.o. woman complains of progressing swallowing disorder, mostly she has had problems with solid food for the last 6 weeks. Sometimes she has regurgitation of solid masses. Swallowing is not painful. She lost 6 kg. 10 years ago she had myocardiac infarction, she takes constantly aspirine and prolonged nitrates. She consumes alcochol in moderate proportions, smokes. Objectively: icteric skin, neck has no pecularities, lymph nodes are not enlarged. Thorax has no changes, cardiovascular system has no evident changes. Liver is +3 cm. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Diffuse constriction of esophagus
b. Diaphragmatic hernia
*c. Cancer of esophagus
d. Myasthenia
e. Esophageal achalasia

2. A 65 y.o. man who has problems with urination as a result of benign prostate gland adenoma dveloped fever and chill, hypotension, sinus tachycardia. Skin is warm and dry. Clinical blood analysis revealed absolute granulocytopenia. These hemodynamic changes are most likely to be caused by:
a. Secondary endothelial changes as a result of bacterial lesion
*b. Endotoxemia with activation of complement system
c. Secondary circulation insufficiency with retained systolic function as a result of peripheral vasoconstriction
d. Secondary reflex vasodilatation as a result of lowered cardiac output
e. Reflex vagus stimulation with lowered cardiac output

3. A 60 y.o. man complains of sense of heaviness in the region of scrotum. Objectively: scrotum edema in the left part. Testicle is of normal size, but there is a soft, scrotum limited edema over it that can be pressed and disappears when the patient lies down. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Varicocele
b. Ectopic testicle
c. Varicosity of subcutaneous veins
d. Inguinal hernia
e. Inguinal lymphadenopathy

4. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax, it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made in:
*a. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
b. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
c. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion
d. In the projection of pleural sinus
e. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line

5. A 40 year old woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Painless movable induration
b. Painful movable induration
*c. Skin induration with inverted nipple
d. Bloody discharges from the nipple
e. Pure discharges from the nipple

6. Name a statistical observation unit for determination of influence amount of bloodsugar on the healing of wounds surface in a postoperative period:
a. An amount of bloodsugar
b. The patient who has a wound surface
c. The patient who was discharged on an after-care
*d. The patient in a postoperative period
e. Blood analysis

7. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved application of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
a. 180 minutes
*b. 120 minutes
c. 30 minutes
d. 15 minutes
e. 60 minutes

8. A 9 y.o. child with diagnosis "chronic tonsillitis" stands dispanserization control. Within 1 year of observation there was one exacerbation of disease. Physical condition is satisfactory. The general state is not infringed. Define group of health:
a. I-st
b. II-d
*c. III (a)
d. III (b)
e. III (c)

9. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Leftsided renal colic
b. Sigmoid diverticulitis
c. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
d. Torsion of the left testicle
e. Herpes zoster

10. A 40 year old woman has a self-detected hard breast mass. The procedure of choice for confirming the diagnosis is:
*a. Excision biopsy
b. Thermography
c. Aspiration biopsy with cytology
d. Ultrasonography
e. Mammography

11. During investigation for chronic, severe, epigastric pain, a 40 year old alcoholic man is found to have multiple areas of narrowing alternating with dilatation ("chain of lakes" appearance) of the main pancreatic duct. The operation of choice is:
a. Distal pancreaticojejunostomy
b. Distal pancreatectomy
c. Total pancreatectomy
*d. Lateral pancreaticojejunostomy
e. Sphincterotomy

12. The treatment of choice for duodenal obstruction caused by secondary duodenal hematoma that developed a few days after blunt abdominal injury is:
a. Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy
b. Immediate exploration
c. Tube duodenostomy
*d. Nasogastric decompression and parenteral alimentation
e. Duodenojejunostomy

13. An anestesiologist gives narcosis to the patient, he uses a non-reversive contour. Anesthetic is halothane. Air temperature in the operation room is 210С, humidity 50%, level of noise 30 dB. What occupational hazard is the principal one under these conditions?
a. Improper occupational microclimate
b. Mental overfatigue
c. Compelled working pose
*d. Air pollution with anesthetic
e. High level of noise

14. A 37-year-old patient has come to clinic being wounded in the area of umbilicus an hour ago.On physical exam, there is a prick and cut painful wound of about 0,5x1 cm around umbilicus on the abdominal skin with slight bleeding.How would you help this patient?
*a. Laparotomy, abdominal cavity organs inspection. Primary surgical processing of the wound
b. Inspection of the wound with canal probe
c. Suture on the wound
d. Aseptic bandage
e. Drainage of the wound with rubber strip

15. If a child has adherent fingers on his right hand, then what will be your diagnosis?
a. Polydactyly
b. Ectrodactyly
c. Ectromelia
*d. Syndactyly
e. Macrodactyly

16. A 34-year-old patient was bitten by a dog 3 hours ago.There is a wound by dog teeth without bleeding in the left arm. What surgical help would you provide to this patient?
a. Complete suture of the wound
b. Incomplete suture of the wound
c. Aseptic bandage
d. Cream bandage
*e. Clean wound with detergent water and apply anti-septic

17. A 63 year old patient was diagnosed with purulent mediastinitis. What of the below listed diseases are NOT the cause of purulent mediastinitis?
a. Perforation of the thoracic part of the oesophagus
b. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
c. Deep neck phlegmon
d. Perforation of the cervical part of the oesophagus
*e. Cervical lymphadenitis

18. Purulent mediastinitis is diagnosed at a 63-year-old patient. What diseases from the stated below CANNOT cause the purulent mediastinitis?
a. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
*b. Cervical lymphadenitis
c. Perforation of the cervical part of the easophagus
d. Deep neck phlegmon
e. Perforation of the thoracic part of the easophagus

19. The diagnosis of a right-sided pneumothorax is made to a 36- year-old patient. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Thoracotomy
*b. Drainage of the pleural cavity
c. Symptomatic therapy
d. Antiinflammation therapy
e. Pleural puncture

20. A 36 year old patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Antiinflammation therapy
b. Pleural puncture
c. Thoracotomy
*d. Surgical treatment: drainage of the pleural cavity
e. Symptomatic therapy

21. A 16 year old patient with complaints of frequent pain in the abdomen was diagnosed with melanoma, examination revealed also pigmentation of the mucosa and skin, polyp in the stomach and large intestine. It is know that the patients mother has an analogous pigmentation and has been often treated for anemia. What disease is suspected?
a. Chrons disease
b. Adolescent polyposis
c. Hirschprungs disease
*d. Peytz-Egerss polyposis
e. Tuberculosis of the intestine

22. A 41 year old patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with haemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
a. Hemostatic therapy
b. Intravenous administration of pituitrin
*c. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube
d. Operation
e. Administration of plasma

23. It is suspected that a 34 year old patient has an abscess of Douglas pouches. What diagnostic method is to be chosen?
a. Laparoscopy
b. Rectoromanoscopy
*c. Digital examination of rectum
d. Percussion and auscultation of stomach
e. R-scopy of abdominal cavity

24. A patient has restrained umbilateral hernia complicated by phlegmon hernia, it is necessary to take following actions:
*a. Herniotomy by Mayo-Sapezhko
b. Herniotomy by Sapezhko
c. Herniotomy by Grenov
d. Herniotomy by Lekser
e. Herniotomy by Mayo

25. A 52 year old man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detected murmur. What diagnostic method is to be applied in the first place?
a. Cerebral angiography
b. Electroencephalography
c. CT of the brain
d. MRI of the brain
*e. Ultrasound dopplerography

26. For the persons who live in a hot area after an accident at a nuclear object, the greatest risk within the first decade is represented by cancer of:
*a. Thyroid gland
b. Reproduction system organs
c. Lungs
d. Breast
e. Skin

27. A 10 year old boy complains about pain in his left eye and strong photophobia after he had injured his left eye with a pencil at school. Left eye examination: blepharospasm, ciliary and conjunctival congestion, cornea is transparent, other parts of eyeball have no changes. Visus 0,9. Right eye is healthy, Visus 1,0. What additional method would you choose first of all?
*a. Staining test with 1% fluorescein
b. Tonometria
c. Cornea sensation-test
d. Gonioscopia
e. X-ray examination of orbit

28. A patient had disorder of nasal respiration, mucopurulent discharges from nose, headache for 3 weeks. At anterior rhinoscopy in middle nasal meathus the stria of pus, edema, hyperemia of the mucosa of the nose have been determined. What diagnostic method is necessary to administer first of all?
a. CT of a skull
b. Punction of the maxillar sinus
c. General blood test
*d. An X-ray of paranasal sinuses
e. Bacteriology analysis of the nasal mucous

29. A patient with acute purulent otitis media complicated by mastoiditis was admitted to a hospital. Roentgenogram of mastoid processes showed the shadiowing of the cellular system on the lesion, absence of bone septa was present. What are the necessary therapeutic actions at the second stage of mastoiditis?
a. Cateterization of the Eustachian tube
*b. Mastoidotomy
c. Radical operation on the middle ear
d. Paracentesis of the drum
e. Tympanoplasty

30. A 35-year-old woman was admitted to resuscitation department in asthmatic status. What is the most trustworthy criterion of breath effectiveness?
a. Respiration rate
b. Respiratory volume
*c. РаСО2 and РаО2
d. Minute respiratory volume
e. Determination of “dead” space

31. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
a. Increase of bleeding speed
*b. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
c. Shunting
d. Depositing of blood in venous channel
e. Presence of hypervolemia

32. The most available and informative diagnostic method for closed trauma of the urinary bladder is:
a. Pelvic arteriography
b. Sonography of the urinary bladder
c. Palpation and percussion of abdomen
*d. Retrograde cystography
e. Cystography

33. A 22 year old patient was admitted to trauma center with complaints of pain in the left ankle joint that was getting worse during moving and weight bearing. On the clinical examination it was found that the patient had the closed fracture of medial malleolus without displacement. In which position should the foot be fixed in plaster cast?
a. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
*b. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot
c. In position of pronation
d. In position of planter flexion of foot
e. In position of supination

34. Female 45 year old patient was admitted to the traumatological ward with the closed fracture of the medial malleolus with its displacement up to 3 mm. The foot is to be fixed with a plaster cast in the following position:
a. In position of planter flexion of foot
b. In position of supination
c. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
*d. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot
e. In position of pronation

35. A 74 y.o. patient has been ill with benign prostate hyperplasy for the last 5 years. 4 days ago, after alcochol consumption, there was an acute retention of urination. At the pre-admission stage his urinary bladder was catheterized with metallic catheter. Examination revealed: right epididymis is enlarged, thick and painful, there are purulent discharges from urethra. What way of emergency care must be chosen?
a. Transuretral resection or prostatectomy
b. Microwave thermotherapy of prostate
c. Placing of intraprostatic stent
*d. Trocar or open epicystostomy
e. Introduction of permanent urethral catheter

36. Examination of a 3-month-old child revealed scrotum growth on the right. This formation has elastic consistency, its size decreases during sleep and increases when the child is crying. What examination will be helpful for making a correct diagnosis?
a. Examination of the formation in Trendelenburgs position
*b. Palpation of the thickened cord crossing the pubical tubercule (sign of the silk glove)
c. Palpation of the external inguinal ring
d. Diaphanoscоpy
e. Punction of the scrotum

37. A rounded well-defined shadow was found in the costo-vertebral angle on the chest roentgenogram of an otherwise healthy 9 year old girl. Make a preliminary diagnosis:
a. Sympatoblastoma
b. Sympatogonioma
c. Sarcoma of the vertebra
*d. Ganglioneuroma
e. Ganglioneuroblastoma

38. A 4 y.o. child attends the kindergarten. Complains of poor appetite, fatigue. Objective examination: skin and mucous membrane are pale, child is asthenic. In the hemogram: hypochromatic anemia 1st, leucomoide reaction of the eosinophile type. What pathology must be excluded first of all?
a. Lymphoprolipherative process
b. Duodenal ulcer
c. Atrophic gastritis
*d. Helminthic invasion
e. Hypoplastic anemia

39. A 33 year old male patient was brought to Emergency Department with the signs of cardiovascular collapse: BP - 60/30 mm Hg, Ps - 140 bpm, the skin is pale and moist, diuresis 20 ml/h, Hb - 80 g/l, red blood cell count - 2,51012/l. The reduction of blood volume averages:
*a. 30-40%
b. 15-20%
c. 25-30%
d. 20-25%
e. 10-15%

40. A 19 year old girl was admitted to emergency department: unconsciousness, cyanosis, myotic pupils are present, superficial breathing is 12/min. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action necessary in this clinical situation:
a. Caffeine injection
b. Cordiamine injection
c. Gastric lavage
d. Oxygen inhalation
*e. Controlled respiration

41. What preparations are used for prevention of fungal infection?
a. Captopril, Enalapril
b. Isoniazid, Ftibazid, Pyrazinamid
c. Rubomycin, Bleomycin, Mytomycin C
d. Cytosar, Cormyctin, Lomycitin
*e. Fluconozol, Orungol, Nisoral

42. What developes most often after accidental intake of Hydrochloric acid?
*a. Cardiac insufficiency
b. Kutlings syndrome
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Deyladss syndrome
e. Cushings syndrome

43. 30 y.o. woman, had mild trauma of 5th finger of the left hand 15 days ago. She has treated her self at home. She presents to the hospital due to deterioration of the condition and temperature rise. Objectively: hyperemia and swelling on the ventral surface of finger. Restricted movements of the finger. X-ray of the left hand: an early stage of оsteomyolitis of the fifth finger could not be excluded. The diagnosis: panaris of 5th finger of the left hand. What form of panaris has occurred in the patient?
a. Paronychia
b. Hypodermic
*c. Bony
d. Tendon type
e. Joints type

44. A 36 y.o. patient is diagnosed with right sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
*a. Surgical drainage of the pleural cavity
b. Symptomatic therapy
c. Thoracotomy
d. Pleural puncture
e. Antiinflammation therapy

45. A male patient, 60 years old, tobacco smoker for 30 years, alcoholic, has dysphagia and weight loss since 4 months. Suggested diagnosis?
a. Hanters disease
b. Esophageal achalasia
*c. Cancer of the esophagus
d. Esophagitis
e. Esophageal diverticulum

46. For a patient with a stab injury to the femoral artery, the treatment of choice is:
a. Interposition of Dacron graft
*b. End- to-end anastomosis
c. Ligation of both transected ends
d. Interposition of autogenous vein graft
e. Interposition of homologous arterial graft

47. A 28 year old woman was admitted to the emergency room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot" 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Subcutaneous hematoma
*b. Superficial venous thrombosis
c. Insect bite
d. Early deep vein thrombosis
e. Cellulitis

48. Which of the following best summarizes indications for operation on an abdominal aortic aneurysm?
a. Only ruptured aneurysm
*b. Any aneurysm greater than 5 cm in diameter
c. Only symptomatic aneurysm
d. Any abdominal aortic aneurysm
e. Only symptomatic aneurysm greater than 5 cm in diameter

49. A 25 year old patient complains of pain in the I finger on his right hand. On examination: the finger is homogeneously hydropic, in bent position. On attempt to unbend the finger the pain is getting worse. Acute pain appears during the probe in ligament projection. What decease is the most likely?
a. Bone panaritium
b. Paronychia
c. Subcutaneous panaritium
d. Articular (joint) panaritium
*e. Thecal whitlow (ligament panaritium)

50. Which of the following symptoms is the most typical for the adenoid hypertrophy?
a. Giddiness
b. Headache
c. Deglutition disturbance
d. Olfaction disturbance
*e. Nasal obstruction

51. A 30 year old man complains of acute pain in his right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 mm, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
*a. Acute purulent otitis media
b. Chronic secretory otitis media
c. Eustachian tube disfunction
d. Chronic purulent otitis media
e. Acute mastoiditis

52. A 22 y.o. man complains of acute throat pain, increasing upon swallowing during 3 days. Body temperature 38,30С, neck lymph nodules are slightly enlarged and painful. Pharyngoscopically - tonsilar hyperemia, enlargement and edema, tonsils are covered by round yellow fibrinous patches around crypts openings. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus in swab analysis. What is the diagnosis?
a. Іnfectious mononucleosis
b. Pharyngeal candidosis
c. Acute follicular tonsilitis
d. Pharyngeal diphtheria
*e. Acute membranous tonsilitis

53. A 30-year-old woman complains of nasal blockage, sneezing, watery nasal discharges. The body temperature is normal. Objectively - edema of nasal mucous membrane on both sides, especially of the lower turbinate (with cyanosis). Blood test data - mild leukocytosis and eosinophilia. What is the diagnosis?
a. Foreign body in the nose
b. Atrophic rhinitis
c. Acute sinusitis
*d. Allergic rhinitis
e. Infective rhinitis

54. A patient is staying in the hospital with the diagnosis of abdominal typhus. During the 3-d week from the beginning of the disease the patient stopped keeping diet and confinement to bed. As a result the body temperature and rapid pulse decreased and melena appeared. What kind of complications should we think about first of all?
a. Thrombophlebitis
b. Nephroso-nephritis
c. Hepatite
*d. Intestinal haemorrhage
e. Meningitis

55. A 45-year-old woman, mother of four children, comes to the emergency room complaining of a sudden onset of the epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, radiating to the back, accompanied by vomiting. On examination, tenderness is elicited in the right upper quadrant, bowel sounds are decreased, and laboratory data shows leukocytosis, normal serum levels of amylase, lipase, and bilirubin. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Sigmoid diverticulitis
e. Perforated peptic ulcer disease

56. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Ileocecal tuberculosis
b. Acute ileitis
c. Perforated Meckels diverticulum
d. Ulcerative colitis
*e. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum

57. A 50-year-old man comes to the emergency room with a history of vomiting of 3 days duration. His past history examination reveals that for about 20 years he has been suffering from epigasric pain lasting for 2 to 3 weeks, during early spring and autumn. He remembers getting relief from pain by taking milk and antacids. Physical examination showed a fullness in the epigastric area with visible peristalsis, absence of tenderness, and normal active bowel sounds. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Gastric outlet obstruction
b. Volvulus of the colon
c. Cholecystitis
d. Incarcerated umbilical hernia
e. Small bowel obstruction

58. A 50 year old woman with a 2-year history of mild, diffuse, tender thyroid enlargement complains of 10 pound weight gain and fatigue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Papillary thyroid carcinoma
*b. Hashimotos thyroiditis
c. Subacute thyroiditis
d. Riedels thyroiditis
e. Suppurative thyroiditis

59. A 24-year-old law student is brought to the emergency room complaining of severe abdominal pain of 6-8 hours duration. He had been to a party the night before. The pain is in the epigastrium radiating to the back and is accompanied by nausea. The patient had vomited twice prior to coming to the emergency room. Clinical examination revealed that the young man was anxious, with acute condition, with a regular pulse rate of 100/min, blood pressure of 100/68 mm Hg, and body temperature of 38,1oC. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Acute cholecystitis
*c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Acute diverticulitis
e. Mesenteric adenitis

60. In which of the following disorders does the pathophysiology of portal hypertension involve presinusoidal intrahepatic obstruction?
a. Budd-Chiari syndrome
b. Cavernomatous transformation of the portal vein
c. Alcoholic cirrhosis
d. Hemochromatosis
*e. Congenital hepatic fibrosis

61. A severely traumatized patient who has been receiving prolonged parenteral alimentation develops diarrhea, mental depression, alopecia and perioral and periorbital dermatitis. Administration of which of the following trace elements is most likely to reverse these complications?
a. Iodine
b. Silicon
c. Copper
*d. Zinc
e. Selenium

62. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with vomiting and acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease should be suspected?
a. Renal colic
b. Perforated gastric ulcer
c. Acute appendicitis
*d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Acute enterocolitis

63. The 67 y.o. patient had 5 recurrent fractures of the lower extremities without considerable cause within 5 years. O-shaped deformity of the legs in the knee joints has appeared. The skull, pelvis and lower extremities X-Ray shows the thickening of flat bones. In the long bones there is a hyperostosis along the bone axis.The blood test has not revealed any inflammation activity. Serum calcium is normal. What disease do you consider in this case?
a. Myeloma
b. Mottled disease (marble disease)
c. Hyperparathyoid dystrophy
d. Chronic osteomyelitis
*e. Pagets disease

64. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the reception room of the Central District Hospital. He complains of a severely painful swelling localized on posterior neck, fever up to 38,4°C and general weakness. In anamnesis: diabetes mellitus within 5 years. On physical examination on the posterior neck surface there is an infiltrate elevated above surrounding skin. The tissues affected by swelling are tense and blue reddish discoloration in central area. There are also several purulent necrotic pustules which are connected with each other and form a large skin necrosis. A thinned necrotic skin of this swelling has holes looking like sieve, pus discharges through out. What disease should a doctor consider first of all?
a. Acute skin cellulitis
b. Furuncle
*c. Carbuncle
d. Carbuncle associated with anthrax
e. Skin abscess

65. A 19 y.o. man was admitted to the reception department in 20 minutes after being wounded with the knife to the left chest. The patient is confused. The heart rate is 96 bpm and BP- 80/60 mm Hg. There are the dilated neck veins, sharply diminished apical beat and evident heart enlargement What kind of penetrative chest wound complications has developed in patient?
*a. Pericardium tamponade
b. Open pneumothorax
c. Valve-likes pneumothorax
d. Closed pneumothorax
e. Massive hemothorax

66. A 35 y.o. patient complains of a difficult swallowing, pain behind the breastbone. He can eat only liquid food. While swallowing sometimes he has attacks of cough and dyspnea. Above mentioned complaints are progressing. It is known that the patient has had a chemical burn of esophagus one month ago. What complication does the patient have?
a. Esophageal diverticula
b. Esophagitis
*c. Corrosive esophagitis and stricture
d. Cardiac achalasia
e. Cardiac insufficiency

67. Survey radiograph of chest of a 62 year old smoker who often suffers from "pneumonias" showed a triangle shadow in the right lung, its vertex is pointing towards the lung root. It also showed deviation of heart and mediastinum shadows towards the lesion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Peripheral cancer of lung
b. Atelectasis
c. Lung abscess
d. Lung cyst
*e. Cenral cancer of lung

68. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, t°35,0oC. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypothermia
b. Apparent death
c. -
d. Frostbite of trunk and extremities
e. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency

69. 1,5 hour after start of gullet bougienage a 48 year old patient suffering from corrosive stricture felt acute abdominal pain. Previously he had been suffering from duodenal ulcer. Examination revealed that abdomen was very tense and painful; Ps- 110 bpm, painful sialophagia, skin pallor. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
*b. Perforation of abdominal part of esophagus
c. Strangulation of diaphragmal hernia
d. Acute myocardium infarction
e. Perforation of duodenal ulcer

70. While making a round, a doctor had noticed the edema of the right shoulder of a 26-day-old child with diagnosis of "umbilical sepsis". Active movements in the shoulder joint were absent, right hand was hanging down. Mother stated that her childs condition had worsened for the last 24 hours what resulted in childs refusal to be breast-fed, restlessness, weeping while swaddling, rise in body temperature up to 38,8°C. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Epiphysial osteomyelitis of the humerus
b. Traumatic brachioplexitis
c. Fracture of the clavicle
d. Phlegmon of the shoulder
e. Fracture of the humerus

71. A 65-year-old patient complains of dull pain in the rectum during and after defecation, discharge of mucus and small amount of blood mixed up with mucus and faeces. The discharged blood is of dark red color, sometimes with small amount of clots. The patient is sick for 8 months, has lost some weight. On digital examination, there is a round constriction of the rectum with infiltrate at a height of 4-5 cm from the anus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cicatricial stenosis of the rectum
b. Crohns disease
c. Non-specific ulcer colitis
*d. Cancer of the medium-ampullar section of the rectum
e. Chronic paraproctitis

72. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Multiple kidneys ruptures
b. Subcapsular kidneys rupture
*c. Kidneys contusion
d. Paranephral hematoma
e. Kidneys abruption

73. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6oC. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5х2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cystous liver cancer
b. Paravesical liver abscesses
c. Liver cancer
d. Liver abscess
*e. Alveolar echinococcus of liver

74. A 14 y.o. patient suddenly fell ill when high fever, acute pain in the right shin. In two weeks X-ray showed translucent spaces (destructive focuses) with unevel countours in the middle third of tibia diaphysis. Along the bone edge there was a narrow line of shadow (periostitis) 1-2 mm from the surface. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bone cyst of tibia
b. Right shin trauma
c. Right shin tuberculosis
d. Right shin syphilis
*e. Right shin osteomielitis

75. A 36-year-old woman applied to doctor with complaints of the enlargement of the right mammary gland. On physical exam: the right mammary gland is enlarged, hardened; nipple with areola is pasty and hydropic, looks like "lemon peel". There palpates a lymph node in the right axilla, 1,5 cm in diameter, dense consistence, not mobile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Diffusive mastopathy
*b. Hydropic and infiltrative cancer of the mammary gland
c. Erysipelatouslike cancer of the mammary gland
d. Pagets cancer
e. Acute mastitis

76. A 43 year old patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenosing papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
a. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs
b. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
c. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
*d. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
e. To perform external choledoch drainage

77. A 46-year-old patient is to be prepared to the operation on account of stomach cancer. Preoperative preparation involves infusion therapy. It was injected up to 3,0 l of solutions into his right lunar vein. On the next day he got tensive pain in the region of his right shoulder. Examination of interior brachial surface revealed a stripe of hyperemia, skin edema and a painful cord. What complication is it?
a. Vein puncture and edema of paravenous cellular tissue
b. Acute lymphangitis
c. Phlegmon of paravenous cellular tissue
*d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Necrosis of paravenous cellular tissue

78. A 54-year-old patient applied with complaints of acute pain in the shoulder-joint. 10 minutes earlier he fell in the street with his arms stretched. Doctor of the traumatological unit noticed an acute deformation of the right shoulder-joint, the impossibilty of active movement in the right extremity. Roentgenologically: uncoincidence of articulating surfaces. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dislocation of the scapula
b. Fracture of the humerus
c. Dislocation of the humerus
d. Contusion of the humerus
*e. Dislocation of the clavicle

79. On the 4th day after suturing the perforative stomach ulcer a patient with pulmonary emphysema developed spontaneous pneumothorax. What is the best place for pleural drainage?
*a. The second intercostal space along the medioclavicular line
b. The seventh intercostal space along the anterior axillary furrow
c. The fifth intercostal space along the medioclavicular line
d. The sixth intercostal space along the anterior axillary furrow
e. The eighth intercostal space along the posterior axillary furrow

80. Parents of a 2-year-old boy applied to clinic complaining of right testicle absence in the scrotum of a boy. While examining the boy, hypoplasia of the right half of the scrotum was revealed, absence of the testicle. Testicle is miniaturized, it palpitates along the inguinal canal but it could not be moved down to scrotum. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Right-sided cryptorchism, inguinal form
b. Left-sided monorchism
c. Ectopia of the right testicle, pubic form
d. Right-sided cryptorchism, abdominal form
e. Retraction of the right testicle (pseudocryptorchism)

81. A 62-year-old patient complains of the pain behind the sternum, bad passing of solid and liquid food, bad breath, increased salivation weight, loss of 15 kg during the period of 2 months. Appetite is retained. On physical exam: face features are sharpened. The skin is pale, with sallow tint, its turgor is decreased. The liver is not enlarged. Blood Hb - 86g/L. Gregersen reaction is positive. What kind of pathology caused the given clinical situation?
a. Chronic non-specific esophagitis
*b. Esophagus cancer
c. Cicatricial constriction of esophagus
d. Benign growth of esophagus
e. Achalasia of esophagus

82. A patient suffers from suddenly arising crampy pain in the right loin area. 2 hours after the pain had started, hematuria took place. Loin X-ray: no pathological shadows. Ultrasound: pyelocaliectasis on the right, the left part is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tumour of the right kidney pelvis
*b. Stone of the right kidney, renal colic
c. Intestine invagination
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Twist of the right ovary cyst

83. A patient complains of an extremely intense pain in epigastrium. He has peptic ulcer disease of duodenum for 10 years. The patient is in the forced position being on the right side with legs abducted to stomach. Abdomen has acute tenderness in the epigastrium. Guarding contraction of the abdominal wall muscles is observed. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
*b. Perforation of ulcer
c. Acute condition of peptic ulcer disease
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Penetration of ulcer into pancreas

84. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain, hyperemia along subcutaneous veins, rise in body temperature. While examining the large shin subcutaneous vein, there is hyperemia, pain by pressing. Homanss and Lusess symptoms are negative. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of aorta
*b. Acute thrombophlebitis of subcutaneous veins
c. Lymphostasis
d. Acute ileophemoral phlebothrombosis
e. Embolism of aorta

85. A 30-year-old man has suffered from traffic accident. Consciousness is absent. Pulse on the carotid artery is undeterminable, no respiration. There is a wide leather belt on mans waist. What measures are to be taken?
a. Start immediate artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage
b. Do not touch the victim until the arrival of the police
c. Put the victim with his back on the shield
*d. Conduct an artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage after having released from the belt
e. Turn the victim to the right side

86. A 65-year-old patient complains of gradual worsening of the left eye vision during 10 months. On physical examination: acuty of vision of the left eye is 0,01, not correctable. The eye is quiet, pupil of the eye is grayish, reflex from the eye-ground is absent. Intraocular pressure is 18 mm/Hg. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Exfoliation of the retina
*b. Senile cataract
c. Disorder of blood circulation in retina vessels
d. Open-angle glaucoma
e. Leukoma of the cornea

87. A 36 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with sharp pain in substernal area following occasional swallowing of a fish bone. On esophagoscopy the foreign body wasnt revealed. The pain increased and localized between scapulas. In a day temperature elevated, condition became worse, dysphagia intensified. What complication has developed?
a. Aspirative pneumonia
*b. Perforation of esophagus with mediastinitis
c. Obstruction of esophagus
d. Esophageal hemorrhage
e. Pulmonary atelectasis

88. A 19 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia of B type. What antihemophilic medications should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Fresh frozen blood
b. Cryoprecipitate
*c. Fresh frozen plasma
d. Native plasma
e. Dried plasma

89. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patients condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min, Ps- 96 bpm, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are moist rales of different types above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal pneumonia
b. Exudative pleuritis
*c. Acute pulmonary abscess
d. Pleural empyema
e. Pyopneumothorax

90. A 24 y.o. male patient was transferred to the chest surgery department from general surgical department with acute post-traumatic empyema of pleura. On the X-ray: wide level horizontal of fluid on the right. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. Decortication of pleura
b. Thoracoplasty
c. Lobectomy
*d. Punction and drainage of pleural cavity
e. Pneumoectomy

91. A patient complains of intense pressing pain in the pharynx, mainly to the right, impossibility to swallow even liquid food. The illness started 5 days ago. The patients condition is grave. Body temperature - 38,9°C, speech is difficult, voice is constrained, difficulties in opening the mouth. Submaxillary glands to the right are painful, enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
*b. Peritonsillar abscess
c. Pharyngeal tumour
d. Diphtheria
e. Vincents disease

92. In a 65 y.o. female patient a tumor 13х8 сm in size in the umbilical area and above is palpated, mild tenderness on palpation, unmovable, pulsates. On ausculation: systolic murmur. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Stomach tumor
b. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
c. Mitral insufficiency
*d. Abdominal aortic aneurism
e. Arterio-venous aneurism

93. A patient with suspicion of pelvic bones fraction is under examination conducted by the doctor who presses alae ilii in medial direction with his both hands. What causes painful syndrome of the patient?
*a. Disorder of continuity of the pelvic ring
b. Traumatic injury of the intrapelvic organs
c. Retroperitoneal hematoma
d. Fracture of the sacrum
e. Fracture of sciatic bones

94. A boy is 1 year old. Previously he had purulent otitis. After that he started complaining about pain in the upper third of his left thigh, body temperature rose up to 39oC. Objectively: the thigh is swollen in its upper third, inguinal fold is smoothed. Extremity is in half-bent position. Active and passive movements are impossible because of acute pain. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brodies abscess
*b. Acute haematogenic osteomyelitis
c. Intermuscular phlegmon
d. Acute coxitis
e. Osteosarcoma

95. A 30 y.o. victim of fire has thermal burns of III-A and III-B degree that amount 20% of total skin coverlet. AP is 110/70 mm Hg, HR- 120/min. What transfusion means shoul be used for blind infusion correction during transportation?
a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Albumin
c. Polyglucine
d. 10% glucose solution
*e. Salines

96. A 24 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about continued fever, night sweating. She lost 7 kg within the last 3 months. She had casual sexual contacts. Objectively: enlargement of all lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome. Blood count: leukocytes - 2,2109/L. What disease can be suspected?
*a. HIV-infection
b. Tuberculosis
c. Chroniosepsis
d. Infectionous mononucleosis
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

97. A patient suffering from acute posttraumatic pain received an injection of morphine that brought him a significant relief. Which of the following mechanisms of action provided antishock effect of morphine in this patient?
*a. Stimulation of opiate receptors
b. Stimulation of benzodiazepine receptors
c. Intensification of GABA-ergic reactions
d. Inhibition of dopamine mediation
e. Block of central cholinergic receptors

98. A 27-year-old patient was brought to clinic with a crashed wound of the posterior surface of the right shin in 2 hours after the accident happened. During surgical treatment pieces of dirty clothes and gravel were removed. What actions from the given below are the decisive ones to prevent an anaerobic infection?
a. Rational antibiotic therapy
b. Hyperbaric oxygenation
c. Introduction of the preventive dose of an anti-gangrene serum
d. Introduction of the medical dose of the anti-gangrene serum
*e. Radical surgical treatment

99. In morgue there are dead bodies with the following causes of death: electrotrauma; rupture of the spleen with acute anemia. There is one unknown person; one ethyl alcohol poisoned person and one drowned man. What dead body should the blood group be determined for?
a. Body of poisoned person
b. Body of person with internal hemorrhage
c. Body of person with a sudden death
*d. All dead bodies of the unknown persons
e. Body of drowned man

100. A 50 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of blood in urine. There was no pain or urination disorders, hematuria has lasted for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys are not palpable, suprapubic region has no pecularities, external genitals have no pathology. Rectal examination revealed: prevesical gland is not enlarged. Cytoscopy revealed no changes. What disease would you think about first of all?
a. Varicocele
b. Tuberculosis of urinary bladder
*c. Cancer of kidney
d. Kidney dystopy
e. Necrotic papillitis

101. A patient complains of nycturia, constant boring pain in perineum and suprapubic region, weak urine jet, frequent, obstructed and painful urination. He has been ill for several months, pain in perineum appeared after getting problems with urination. Rectal examination revealed that prostate is enlarged (mostly owing to the right lobe), dense, asymmetric, its central sulcus is flattened, the right lobe is dense, painless, tuberous. What disease can it be?
a. Chronic congestive prostatitis
*b. Cancer of prostate
c. Urolithiasis, stone of the right lobe of prostate
d. Prostate sclerosis
e. Prostate tuberculosis

102. Surgical department admitted a 37-year-old patient with a big crushed wound of his left thigh 4 hours after he got this trauma. What is the main provision for successful prevention of gaseous gangrene?
a. Injection of specific serum 3 000 U
b. Infiltration of soft tissues around the wound with antibiotic solution
c. Wound lavage with 6% solution of hydrogen peroxide
*d. Removal of necrotic tissues and timely surgical processing of the wound
e. Injection of specific serum 30 000 U

103. A 40 year old patient was bitten by a stray dog for about an hour ago. The bite can be seen on the patients left shin in form of a wound 4х2х0,5 cm large. What kind of aid would be recommended in this case?
a. Blind suture
b. Retension sutures
c. Aseptic bandage
d. Salve bandage
*e. Wound lavage with soapsuds, retension sutures

104. A 60 y.o. man complains of significant pain in the right eye, photophobia, lacrimation, reduced vision of this eye, headache of the right part of the head. Pain occured 2 days ago. On examination: Vis OD- 0,03, congested injection of the eye ball, significant cornea edema, front chamber is deep, pupil is narrow, athrophic iris, there is optic nerve excavation on the eye fundus, intraocular pressure- 38 mm Hg. Vis OS- 0,8 unadjustable. The eye is calm, healthy. Intraoccular pressure- 22 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right eyes keratitis
b. Right eyes uveitis
*c. Acute glaucoma attack
d. Eye nerves neuritis
e. Maculodystrophy

105. A patient came to the traumatology centre and complained about a trauma of the lower third of the volar forearm surface caused by cut on a piece of glass. Objectively: flexion of the IV and V fingers is impaired, sensitivity of the interior dorsal and palmar surface of hand as well as of the IV finger is reduced. What nerve is damaged?
a. Median
b. Radial
*c. Ulnar
d. Musculoskeletal
e. Axillary

106. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Pyrogenous reaction
c. Citrate shock
d. Allergic reaction
*e. Citrate intoxication

107. A patient was delivered to the admission ward 40 minutes after a minor trauma with complaints of pain in the thoracic spine. He has a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. Roentgenography results: suspected compression fracture of the VIII and IX thoracic vertebrae. What pathological process in spine might have stimulated pathological fracture of vertebral bodies?
a. Traumatic fracture
*b. Tuberculous spondylitis
c. Malignant tumour metastasis
d. Syphilis
e. Osteomyelitis

108. A 20 y.o. patient suddely felt ill 12 hours ago. There was pain in epigactric area, nausea, sporadic vomiting. He had taken alcohol before. In few hours the pain localized in the right iliac area. On examination: positive rebound tenderness symptoms. WBC- 12,2109/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Rightside kidney colic
c. Acute cholecystitis
*d. Acute appendicitis
e. Perforated ulcer

109. A patient, aged 58, was fishing in the winter. On return home after some time felt some pain in the feet. Consulted a doctor. On examination: feet skin was pale, then after rewarming became red, warm to the touch. Edema is not significant, limited to the toes. All types of sensitivity are preserved. No blisters. What degree of frostbite is observed?
a. III degree
b. II degree
*c. I degree
d. IV degree
e. V degree

110. On the next day after esophagoscopy and biopsy a 44-year-old female patient developed emphysema of both supraclavicular regions, deglutition pain and pain behind the breastbone, cyanosis. Body temperature - 39oC. In blood: WBCs – 16109/l, left shift in the neutrophils. X-ray picture shows a limited shadow of the posterior mediastinum at a level with trachea bifurcation. The patient was diagnosed with esophagus rupture. What treatment tactics would be the most rational?
a. Surgical: gastric fistula establishment
*b. Surgical: mediastinum drainage, gastric fistula establishment
c. Conservative antibacterial treatment
d. Surveillance
e. Radical surgical treatment with esophagus suturing

111. Three weeks after acute angina the patient is still weak, inert, subfebrile, his retromaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged. Tonsils are flabby, stick together with arches, there are purulent plugs in lacunae. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Paratonsillitis
b. Tonsillar tumour
c. Chronic pharyngitis
d. Acute lacunar tonsillitis
*e. Chronic tonsillitis

112. A 43 year old patient had right-sided deep vein thrombosis of iliofemoral segment 3 years ago. Now he is suffering from the sense of heaviness, edema of the lower right extremity. Objectively: moderate edema of shin, brown induration of skin in the lower third of shin, varix dilatation of superficial shin veins are present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome, varicose form
b. Lymphedema of lower right extremity
c. Acute thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
d. Parkes-Weber syndrome
e. Acute thrombosis of right veins

113. A 98 y.o. male patient complains of pain in the left lower limb which intensifies on walking, feeling of cold and numbness in both feet. He has been ill for 6 years. On examination: pale dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Hairy covering is poorly developed on the left shin. "Furrow symptom " is positive on the left. Pulse on foot arteries and popliteal artery isnt palpated, on the femoral artery its weak. On the right limb the artery pulsation is reserved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Obliterating endarteritis
b. Raynaulds disease
c. Buergers disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
*d. Arteriosclerosis obliterans
e. Hemoral arthery thombosis

114. A 65-year-old patient complains about pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). Prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Excretory urography
b. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
*c. Computer tomography of pelvis
d. Bone scintigraphy
e. Roentgenography of chest

115. A 72 year old female patient has been treated for urolithiasis in the urological department. After atropine injection she got acute pain in her left eye and abrupt vision impairment. Objectively: visual acuity of the left eye is 0,01, the eye is dense but painful on palpation, cornea is opaque, there is cyanotic induration of eyeball vessels. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Degeneration of the left eye cornea
*b. Acute attack of primary glaucoma of the left eye
c. Secondary glaucoma of the left eye
d. Acute iridocyclitis of the left eye
e. Acute keratitis of the left eye

116. A 30 y.o. patient had deep burn covering 30% of body 30 days ago. Now he presents with continued fever, loss of appetite, night sweats. Burned surface weakly granulates. What is the stage of burn disease?
a. Secondary burn shock
b. Primary burn shock
*c. Septicotoxemia
d. Acute burn toxemia
e. Convalescence

117. A 27-year-old military servant was delivered to the regimental aid post 1,5 hour after getting an abdominal injury with an aerial bomb splinter. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, pale, Ps- 132/min, AP- 80/60 mm Hg. Subcostal area has a bandage on from the first-aid pack, the bandage is soaked with blood. The abdomen is tense. Percussion revealed dullness in flat parts that changes its location with the change of body position. There are symptoms of peritoneal irritation. What department of the regimental aid post should provide medical care?
a. Isolation ward
b. Admission-and-sorting tent
*c. Dressing ward
d. Evacuation
e. In the manner of self-help

118. A sergeant got injured with a shell splinter in the left subcostal region. He was bandaged by his fellow soldiers with an individual field dressing. Afterwards he was delivered to the regimental medical station. The patient complains of dizziness, weakness, thirst, abdominal pain. His general condition is grave, he is pale, Ps- 120 bpm. The abdomen is painful, soft on palpation. The dressing is well-fixed but slightly soaked with blood. The victim should be evacuated to the collecting battalion with the following type of transport and in the following turn:
a. With a passing vehicle in the 1st turn
b. With a passing vehicle in the 2nd turn
c. With a passing vehicle in the 3rd turn
*d. With ambulance vehicle in the 1st turn
e. With ambulance vehicle in the 2nd turn

119. A 29 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute girdle pain in epigastric area, vomiting in 1 hour after the meal. On examination: pale, acrocyanosis. Breathing is frequent, shallow. Abdominal muscles are tensed, positive Schotkin-Blumbergs symptom. What is the maximal term to make a diagnosis?
*a. In 2 hours
b. In 1 hour
c. In 6 hours
d. In 3 hours
e. In 0,5 hours

120. A surgeon examined a 42-year-old patient and diagnosed him with right forearm furuncle, purulo-necrotic stage. The furuncle was lanced. At the hydration stage the wound dressing should enclose the following medication:
a. Chloramine
b. Dimexide
c. Vishnevsky ointment
d. Ichthyol ointment
*e. Hypertonic solution

121. A 37-year-old patient was delivered to a hospital in unconscious state. He got a closed abdominal injury. He is suspected to have internal haemorrhage, intraabdominal injury. He is being prepared an emergency operation. By means of standard sera a physician determined his blood group and got the following results: 0(І) - no agglutination, А(ІІ) - no agglutination, В(ІІІ) - no agglutination. What is the patients blood group?
a. А(ІІ)
b. АВ(ІV)
c. -
*d. 0(І)
e. В(ІІІ)

122. A 30 year old patient undergoes treatment because of Werlhofs disease. Objectively: the patient is pale, there are petechial haemorrhages on the extension surfaces of forearms. Ps is 92 bpm, AP is 100/60 mm Hg. The lower edge of spleen is at a level with umbilicus. Blood count: erythrocytes: 2,8x1012/l, Hb - 90 g/l, Ht - 0,38, thrombocytes - 30x109/l. The patient is being prepared for splenectomy. What transfusion medium should be chosen in the first place for the preoperational preparation?
a. Native erythrocytic mass
b. Stored blood
*c. Thrombocytic mass
d. Erythrocytic suspension
e. Washed erythrocytes

123. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. A laboratory physician
b. A traumatologist
c. An anaesthesilogist
*d. A doctor of any speciality
e. A surgeon

124. A 36-year-old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
a. Mediastinitis
*b. Valvular pneumothorax
c. Closed pneumothorax
d. Open pneumothorax
e. Subcutaneous emphysema

125. A victim of the car crash was brought to neurosurgery due to craniocerebral trauma. During examination symptoms of focused injury of the cerebrum are found, cerebrum contusion is suspected. What method of examination is to be used?
a. Antiography of vessels of the cerebrum
b. X- ray of cranium bones
*c. Computed tomography of the cerebrum
d. Ultrasound examination of vessels of the cerebrum
e. Eye-ground examination

126. A 35 y.o. female patient was admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of ulcerative gastric hemorrhage. Its been the third hemorrhage for the last 2 years. After conservative treatment vomiting with blood stopped, hemoglobin elevated from 60 till 108 g/L. General condition became better. But profuse vomiting with blood reoccured in 2-3- hours. Hemoglobin decreased to 93,1 g/L then to 58,1 g/L. What is the tactics of treatment?
a. Conservative treatment with following surgery
b. Taylors treatment
c. Deferred surgery
d. Conservative treatment
*e. Urgent surgery

127. An unconscious victim in severe condition is brought to clinic. It is known that the patient touched the bare wire with his hand and during 5 minutes was under the influence of an alternating current with voltage of 220 V. Physical exam: skin is pale, cold by touch. Breath is weakened, BP - 90/50 mm Hg, Ps - 60 bpm, arrhythmical. There are fields of necrosis of the skin on the right hand and on the right foot. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Electroburn of the right foot and right hand
b. Vascular collapse due to electric current lesion
c. Electroburn of the right foot and right hand
d. High voltaged electroburn of the right foot and shank
e. Electrotrauma, acute cardiovascular failure

128. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
*a. Bronchography
b. Survey radiograph of lungs
c. Bacteriological analysis of sputum
d. Pleural puncture
e. Bronchoscopy

129. A victim of a road accident, aged 44, is operated on account of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. In which case can the patients blood from the abdominal cavity be used for autotransfusion?
a. Splenic rupture
b. Small intestines rupture
c. Bladder rupture
d. Liver rupture
*e. Stomach rupture

130. A man with a stab-wound of the right foot applied to doctor. He stepped on the board with nail two hours ago. In the patient medical chart it is stated that 3 years ago he passed the whole course of vaccination against tetanus. What is the tactics of doctor to prevent tetanus in this case?
a. Administer 3000 U of anti-tetanic serum
b. Administer 1 ml tetanus toxoid and 3000 U of anti-tetanic serum
c. Administer 0,5 ml of tetanus toxoid
d. Administer 1,0 ml of tetanus toxoid
*e. Do not conduct specific prophylaxis

131. A 40-year-old woman with acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage was transfused 400 ml of the preserved blood after having conducted all compatibility tests. After hemotransfusion the condition of the patient became worse. She started having headache, muscles pain, her temperature has risen up to 38,8OC. What is the reason for such condition of the patient?
a. Hemotransfusional shock development
b. Bacterial and toxic shock development
c. Air embolism
*d. Pyrogenic reaction of medium severity
e. Allergic reaction

132. An infant is full-term. Delivery was pathological, with breech presentation. Examination of the infant revealed limited abduction of the right leg to 50o, positive "clicking" symptom on the right, asymmetric inguinal folds. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right hip dysplasia
*b. Inborn dislocation of the right hip
c. Varus deformity of both femoral necks
d. Inborn dislocation of both hips
e. Fracture of both femoral necks

133. A patient, aged 25, suffering from stomach ulcer. Had a course of treatment in the gastroenterological unit. 2 weeks later developed constant pain, increasing and resistant to medication. The abdomen is painful in epigastric area, moderate defence in pyloroduodenal area. Which complication development aggravated the patients state?
a. Haemorrhage
b. Stenosis
c. Penetration
d. Perforation
*e. Malignisation

134. A patient complains about pyrosis and permanent pain behind his breastbone. When he bends forward after eating there appears regurgitation. Roentgenological examination revealed extrasaccular cardiofunctional hernia of esophageal opening of diaphragm. Esophagoscopy revealed signs of reflux-esophagitis. What is the necessary tretment tactics?
a. Conservative treatment in the therapeutic hospital
b. Conservative treatment in an outpatients clinic
*c. Operation in a surgical department
d. Conservative treatment in a surgical department
e. Treatment at a health resort

135. A 47-year-old male patient got a flame burn of trunk and upper extremities and was delivered to the hospital. The patient is in grave condition, confused mental state, with fever. AP- 80/50 mm Hg, Ps- 118 bpm. It was locally stated that the patient got III B degree burns with total area of 20%. What medical actions should be taken?
a. Administration of detoxicating blood substitutes
b. Initial surgical d-bridement
*c. Injection of narcotic analgetics and powdered blood substitutes
d. Necrotomy of burn surface, haemotransfusion
e. Antibacterial and detoxicating therapy

136. A patient aged 18 with a cranial injury was in comatose state during several hours. In post-comatose period gets tired quickly, non-productive in dialog - in the beginning answers 2-3 questions, then gets tired and can not understand the point of the question. Which psychotropic should be given to the patient to prevent psychoorganic syndrome?
a. Stimulators
b. Neuroleptics
*c. Nootropics
d. Tranquillisers
e. Antidepressants

137. A 54-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with evident acrocyanosis, swollen cervical veins, enlarged liver, ascites. Cardiac borders are dilated. Heart sounds cannot be auscultated, apical beat is undetectable. AP is 100/50 mm Hg. X-ray picture of chest shows enlarged heart shadow in form of a trapezium. What pathology might have caused these symptoms?
*a. Cardiac tamponade
b. Complex heart defect
c. Hiatal hernia
d. Acute cardiac insufficiency
e. Exudative pleuritis

138. Examination of a 26 year old female patient revealed a node in the right lobe of thyroid gland. The node appeared no earlier than 3 months ago. The patient associates this node with stress. She doesnt complain either about pain or enlargement of the node. Ultrasonic scanning revealed a 2x2,5 cm large node in the inferior part of the right lobe of thyroid gland. What treatment should be administered?
a. Conservative therapy
b. No need for treatment
c. -
*d. Surgical intervention
e. Dynamic observation

139. A 25 y.o. patient was admitted with chest trauma. Clinical and X-ray examination have revealed tense pneumothorax on the left. What emergency treatment should be undertaken?
*a. Pleural cavity drainage
b. Oxigenotherapy
c. Analgetics
d. Intubation
e. Intravenous infusions

140. A 38 y.o. patient complains of pain in lumbar part of spinal column with irradiation to the back surface of the left leg following the lifting of a heavy object. Pain is increasing on change of the body position and in vertical position. positive stretching symptoms were revealed on examination. What is an initial diagnosis?
a. Spinal cord tumor
b. Polyneuritis
c. Myelopathy
*d. Intervertebral ligaments disorder
e. Arachnomielitis

141. A 38 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in pain in the lumbar part of spine irradiating to the posterior surface of his left leg. The pain increases during changing body position and also in the upright position. Examination revealed positive symptoms of tension. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Polyneuritis
b. Myelopathy
c. Spinal cord tumor
d. Arachnomyelitis
*e. Pathology of intercostal disks

142. A patient complains about evaginations in the region of anus that appear during defecation and need to be replaced. Examination with anoscope revealed 1x1 cm large evaginations of mucosa above the pectineal line. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Internal hemorrhoids
b. External hemorrhoids
c. -
d. Anal fissure
e. Acute paraproctitis

143. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
a. Feces observation
b. Common cold prophilaxis
*c. Strict following of feeding regimen
d. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention
e. Hardening of the child

144. 1 day ago a 19-year old male patient got a trauma after a fall from 1,5 m height when he "bestrode" a wooden beam. Urination is extremely difficult, there is macrohematuria, urethrorrhagia. There is a hematoma in the perineum and on the scrotum. Urethrography revealed flowing of contrast medium into the membranous part of urethra. What is the treatment tactics of choice?
*a. Epicystostomy
b. Urethra bougienage
c. Primary suturing of urethra
d. Cold to the perineum, hemostatic therapy
e. Urine bladder catheterization for urine diversion

145. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38oC, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Erysipeloid
*b. Sepsis
c. Erysipelas
d. Putrid phlegmon
e. Allergic reaction

146. A 40-year-old female patient has a history of rheumatism. She complains about acute pain in her left eye, especially at night, vision impairment, photophobia, lacrimation. The patient cannot suggest any reasons for the disease. Objectively: weak pericorneal injection, flattening of iris relief, iris discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Iritis
b. Choroiditis
c. Acute attack of glaucoma
*d. Iridocyclitis
e. Keratitis

147. A patient, aged 81, complains of constant urinary excretion in drops, feeling of fullness in the	lower abdomen. On examination: above pubis there is a spherical protrusion, over which there is a dullness of percussion sound, positive suprapubic punch. What symptom is observed in this patient?
a. Dysuria
b. Urinary incontinence
*c. Paradoxal ischuria
d. Enuresis
e. Pollakiuria

148. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: t°- 37,30С, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lung cancer
b. Bronchoectatic disease
c. Exudative pleuritis
d. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Macrofocal pneumonia

149. A 52 year old patient complains about pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with a lot of foul-smelling albuminoid sputum in form of "meat slops". Objectively: the patients condition is grave, cyanosis is present, breathing rate is 31/min, percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed different rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung abscess
b. Multiple bronchiectasis
c. Chronic pneumonia
*d. Lung gangrene
e. Pleura empyema

150. A 15 year old patient suffers from headache, nasal haemorrhages, sense of lower extremity coldness. Objectively: muscles of shoulder girdle are developed, lower extremities are hypotrophied. Pulsation on the pedal and femoral arteries is sharply dampened. AP is 150/90 mm Hg, 90/60 on the legs. Systolic murmur can be auscultated above carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Aorta aneurism
b. Aortal insufficiency
c. Coarctation of pulmonary artery
*d. Aorta coarctation
e. Aortal stenosis

151. A 15 y.o. patient has developmental lag, periodical skin yellowing. Objectively: spleen is 16х12х10 cm large, holecistolithiasis, skin ulcer on the lower third of his left crus. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,01012/L, Hb- 90 g/L, C.I.- 1,0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Blood bilirubin - 56 mmole/L, indirect bilirubin - 38 mmole/L. Choose the way of treatment:
a. Portocaval anastomosis
b. Spleen transplantation
*c. Splenectomy
d. Omentosplenopexy
e. Omentohepatopexy

152. A prematurely born girl is now 8 months old. She has dyspnea, tachycardia, hepatosplenomegaly, physical developmental lag, limb cyanosis. There is also parasternal cardiac hump, auscultation revealed systolodiastolic murmur in the II intercostal space on the left. AP is 90/0 mm Hg. What disease should be suspected?
a. Stenosis of pulmonary artery
b. Nonclosure of interventricular septum
c. Coarctation of aorta
d. Stenosis of aortal valve
*e. Patent ductus arteriosus

153. Three days ago a boy underwent removal of a foreign body from under a nail plate. 2 days later he felt acute pulsating pain at the end of the nail bone which was getting worse at pressing. Nail fold became hyperemic, body temperature rose up to 37,5°С, there was a change in nail plate colour. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Paronychia
b. Erysipelas
*c. Subungual panaritium
d. Erysipeloid
e. Abscess

154. A 72 year old patient complains about pain and bleeding during defecation. Digital rectal investigation revealed a tumour of anal canal. After verification of the diagnosis the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma. The secondary (metastatic) tumour will be most probably found in:
a. Mediastinum
b. Brain
c. Liver
d. Pelvic bones
*e. Lungs

155. A patient with frostbite of both feet was delivered to the admission ward. What actions should be taken?
a. To put feet into hot water
b. To administer cardiac medications
*c. To apply a bandage, to introduce vasodilating medications
d. To rub feet with snow
e. To apply an alcohol compress

156. 10 years ago a patient had a fracture in the middle one-third of his left femoral bone, and during the last 7 years he has been having acute inflammation in the area of old fracture accompanied by formation of a fistula through which some pus with small fragments of bone tissue is discharged. After a time the fistula closes. What complication of the fracture is it?
*a. Chronic osteomyelitis
b. Soft tissue phlegmon
c. Trophic ulcer
d. False joint
e. Bone tuberculosis

157. A patient has a stab wound on his right foot. On the fourth day after injury the patients body temperature rose up to 38oC, inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and painful, skin over them reddened. What complication might be suspected?
*a. Lymphadenitis
b. Phlegmon
c. Erysipelas
d. Tetanus
e. Lymphangitis

158. A 25-year-old patient complains of burning and pain during urination, purulent discharges from the urethra that turned up 2 days ago. Objectively: the urethral labia are edematic, hyperemic, there are profuse purulent discharges from the urethra. Provisional diagnosis: recent acute gonorrheal urethritis. What supplemental data of clinical examinations will alow to specify the diagnosis?
a. Serological blood analysis
b. Coccal cells detection during discharge microscopy
c. Yeast cells detection during discharge microscopy
*d. Microscopy of the urethral discharges
e. Common urine analysis

159. A boy is 8 year old. His physical development is compliant with his age. The child has had cardiac murmur since birth. Objectively: skin and visible mucous membranes are of normal colour. AP- 100/70 mm Hg. Auscultation revealed systolo-diastolic murmur and diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery. ECG shows overload of the left heart. Roentgenoscopy shows coarsening of the lung pattern, heart shadow of normal form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fallots tetrad
b. Patent ductus arteriosus
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
d. Aorta coarctation
*e. Atrioseptal defect

160. A 52 year old patient complains about headache, weakness of his upper left extremity. Neurological symptoms become more intense during physical stress of the left extremity. Pulsation on the arteries of the left extremity is sharply dampened but it remains unchanged on the carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Takayasus disease
b. Occlusion of brachiocephalic trunk
c. Thoracal outlet syndrome
d. Raynauds syndrome
*e. Occlusion of the left subclavicular artery, steal syndrome

161. A 45-year-old patient with urolithiasis had an attack of renal colic. What is the mechanism of the attack development?
a. Increase in relative density of urine
b. Destruction of glomerules
c. Renal artery spasm
*d. Disturbed urine outflow from the kidney
e. Ureteric twists

162. A 57 year old patient abruptly lost the sight of one eye. Examination revealed that his sight made up 0,02 excentrically, eye fundus has haemorrhages of different forms and sizes ("squashed tomato" symptom). Disc of optic nerve is hyperemic. In anamnesis general vascular pathology is recorded. Direct-acting anticoagulants were administered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive angiopathy
b. Embolism of central artery of retina
c. Diabetic retinopathy
*d. Thrombosis of central vein of retina
e. Hypertensive angioneuropathy

163. A 35 year old female patient suffering from cholelithiasis has broken her diet, and this caused an acute pain attack in the right subcostal are. The pain eased off on the third day, but the patient got progressing jaundice. What non-invasive diagnostic method should be applied?
a. Test for bilirubin
b. Infusive cholecystocholangiography
*c. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
d. Duodenal probing
e. Survey radiography of abdominal organs

164. A 68 year old patient complains about acute pain in his right foot, toe edema and darkening of skin of the IV toe. He has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years, doesnt receive regular treatment. What complication of diabetes mellitus is it?
*a. Gangrene of the IV toe on the right foot
b. Haematoma
c. Fracture of the IV toe on the right foot
d. Erysipelas
e. Panaritium

165. A 55 year old patient felt suddenly sick in a hospital corridor, he was immediately examined by a doctor. Examination revealed that the patients skin was pale, autonomous respiration was absent, pulse on carotid arteries couldnt be felt, pupils were mydriatic. What action should be taken at the beginning of cardiac resuscitation?
a. Restoration of airway patency
b. Defibrillation
c. Mouth-to-mouth ventilation
d. Closed-chest cardiac massage
*e. Precordial thump

166. A 34 year old patient complains of profuse sweating at night, skin itching, weight loss (9 kg within the last 3 months). Examination revealed malnutrition, skin pallor. Palpation of neck and inguinal areas revealed dense elastic lymph nodes for about 1 cm in diameter, nonmobile, non-adhering to skin. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymphosarcoma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
*c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Burkitts lymphoma
e. Cancer metastases

167. A 20-year-old man complains about pain arising in the lower third of femoral bone under stress and at rest. He denies having a trauma. Objectively: the skin is of normal colour, deep palpation reveals pastosity and pain, knee joint motions are limited. X-ray picture of the meta-epyphisis of distal femur shows a destruction zone and spicules. In blood: immature cell forms, no signs of inflammation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hyperparathyroid dystrophy
b. Myelomatosis
c. Marble-bone disease
*d. Osteogenic sarcoma
e. Chronic osteomyelitis

168. Esophagus wall of a 72 year old patient with severe concomitant pathology was injured during urgent fibroesophagogastroscopy. This resulted in progressing of acute respiratory failure and collapse of the left lung. What aid should be rendered?
a. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus wound
b. Endoscopic closure of esophagus wound, drainage
c. Buelaus drainage of pleural cavity, antibacterial therapy
d. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus and mediastinum wound
*e. Drainage of pleural cavity by Bullaux method, mediastinum drainage, antibacterial therapy

169. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. To make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone
*b. To perform the Heimlich manoever
c. To send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him
d. To perform conicotomy immediately
e. To use an inhalation of ?2-adrenoceptor agonist

170. A 4 month old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, there was also one-time vomiting. Objectively: the childs condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctors finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pylorostenosis
*b. Ileocecal invagination
c. Wilms tumour
d. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
e. Helminthic invasion

171. A 3-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
a. Wound abscess
b. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
*c. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
d. Posttraumatic phlegmon
e. Suture sinus

172. Forensic medical expertise of corpse of a newborn revealed: body weight 3500 g, body length 50 cm, the umbilical cord was smooth, moist, glossy, without any signs of drying. Hydrostatic tests were positive. The test results are the evidence of:
a. Stillbirth
b. Secondary atelectasis
c. Hyaline membrane disease
*d. Live birth
e. Primary atelectasis

173. A 76 y.o. woman complains of progressing swallowing disorder, mostly she has had problems with solid food for the last 6 weeks. Sometimes she has regurgitation of solid masses. Swallowing is not painful. She lost 6 kg. 10 years ago she had myocardiac infarction, she takes constantly aspirine and prolonged nitrates. She consumes alcochol in moderate proportions, smokes. Objectively: icteric skin, neck has no pecularities, lymph nodes are not enlarged. Thorax has no changes, cardiovascular system has no evident changes. Liver is +3 cm. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Myasthenia
b. Esophageal achalasia
c. Diaphragmatic hernia
d. Diffuse constriction of esophagus
*e. Cancer of esophagus

174. A 65 y.o. man who has problems with urination as a result of benign prostate gland adenoma dveloped fever and chill, hypotension, sinus tachycardia. Skin is warm and dry. Clinical blood analysis revealed absolute granulocytopenia. These hemodynamic changes are most likely to be caused by:
a. Reflex vagus stimulation with lowered cardiac output
b. Secondary endothelial changes as a result of bacterial lesion
c. Secondary reflex vasodilatation as a result of lowered cardiac output
d. Secondary circulation insufficiency with retained systolic function as a result of peripheral vasoconstriction
*e. Endotoxemia with activation of complement system

175. A 60 y.o. man complains of sense of heaviness in the region of scrotum. Objectively: scrotum edema in the left part. Testicle is of normal size, but there is a soft, scrotum limited edema over it that can be pressed and disappears when the patient lies down. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Ectopic testicle
b. Inguinal lymphadenopathy
*c. Varicocele
d. Inguinal hernia
e. Varicosity of subcutaneous veins

176. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax, it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made in:
a. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion
*b. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
c. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
d. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line
e. In the projection of pleural sinus

177. A 40 year old woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Painful movable induration
b. Bloody discharges from the nipple
c. Pure discharges from the nipple
*d. Skin induration with inverted nipple
e. Painless movable induration

178. Name a statistical observation unit for determination of influence amount of bloodsugar on the healing of wounds surface in a postoperative period:
a. The patient who was discharged on an after-care
*b. The patient in a postoperative period
c. Blood analysis
d. An amount of bloodsugar
e. The patient who has a wound surface

179. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved application of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
*a. 120 minutes
b. 30 minutes
c. 180 minutes
d. 60 minutes
e. 15 minutes

180. A 9 y.o. child with diagnosis "chronic tonsillitis" stands dispanserization control. Within 1 year of observation there was one exacerbation of disease. Physical condition is satisfactory. The general state is not infringed. Define group of health:
a. III (b)
b. III (c)
c. II-d
d. I-st
*e. III (a)

181. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Torsion of the left testicle
b. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
c. Herpes zoster
d. Sigmoid diverticulitis
*e. Leftsided renal colic

182. A 40 year old woman has a self-detected hard breast mass. The procedure of choice for confirming the diagnosis is:
a. Aspiration biopsy with cytology
*b. Excision biopsy
c. Thermography
d. Mammography
e. Ultrasonography

183. During investigation for chronic, severe, epigastric pain, a 40 year old alcoholic man is found to have multiple areas of narrowing alternating with dilatation ("chain of lakes" appearance) of the main pancreatic duct. The operation of choice is:
a. Total pancreatectomy
*b. Lateral pancreaticojejunostomy
c. Sphincterotomy
d. Distal pancreaticojejunostomy
e. Distal pancreatectomy

184. The treatment of choice for duodenal obstruction caused by secondary duodenal hematoma that developed a few days after blunt abdominal injury is:
a. Immediate exploration
b. Tube duodenostomy
c. Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy
d. Duodenojejunostomy
*e. Nasogastric decompression and parenteral alimentation

185. An anestesiologist gives narcosis to the patient, he uses a non-reversive contour. Anesthetic is halothane. Air temperature in the operation room is 210С, humidity 50%, level of noise 30 dB. What occupational hazard is the principal one under these conditions?
*a. Air pollution with anesthetic
b. High level of noise
c. Compelled working pose
d. Mental overfatigue
e. Improper occupational microclimate

186. A patient suddenly felt an acute chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Objectively: the patient is excited, with pale skin. Breathing rate - 38/min, AP - 180/110 mm Hg. Later the patient lost consciousness and fell down. Pulse on the great vessels was absent, the pupils were equally dilated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Clinical death
b. Coma
c. Disorder of the cerebral circulation
d. Heart attack
e. Agonal state

187. A 37-year-old patient has come to clinic being wounded in the area of umbilicus an hour ago.On physical exam, there is a prick and cut painful wound of about 0,5x1 cm around umbilicus on the abdominal skin with slight bleeding.How would you help this patient?
a. Aseptic bandage
b. Suture on the wound
c. Drainage of the wound with rubber strip
d. Inspection of the wound with canal probe
*e. Laparotomy, abdominal cavity organs inspection. Primary surgical processing of the wound

188. If a child has adherent fingers on his right hand, then what will be your diagnosis?
a. Ectromelia
*b. Syndactyly
c. Macrodactyly
d. Polydactyly
e. Ectrodactyly

189. A 34-year-old patient was bitten by a dog 3 hours ago.There is a wound by dog teeth without bleeding in the left arm. What surgical help would you provide to this patient?
*a. Clean wound with detergent water and apply anti-septic
b. Cream bandage
c. Incomplete suture of the wound
d. Complete suture of the wound
e. Aseptic bandage

190. Purulent mediastinitis is diagnosed at a 63-year-old patient. What diseases from the stated below textbfCANNOT cause the purulent mediastinitis?
*a. Cervical lymphadenitis
b. Perforation of the cervical part of the easophagus
c. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
d. Perforation of the thoracic part of the easophagus
e. Deep neck phlegmon

191. Purulent mediastinitis is diagnosed at a 63-year-old patient. What diseases from the stated below CANNOT cause the purulent mediastinitis?
a. Perforation of the cervical part of the easophagus
b. Deep neck phlegmon
*c. Cervical lymphadenitis
d. Perforation of the thoracic part of the easophagus
e. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea

192. The diagnosis of a right-sided pneumothorax is made to a 36- year-old patient. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Symptomatic therapy
b. Antiinflammation therapy
*c. Drainage of the pleural cavity
d. Pleural puncture
e. Thoracotomy

193. A 16 year old patient with complaints of frequent pain in the abdomen was diagnosed with melanoma, examination revealed also pigmentation of the mucosa and skin, polyp in the stomach and large intestine. It is know that the patients mother has an analogous pigmentation and has been often treated for anemia. What disease is suspected?
a. Tuberculosis of the intestine
b. Chrons disease
*c. Peytz-Egerss polyposis
d. Adolescent polyposis
e. Hirschprungs disease

194. A 41 year old patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with haemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
a. Operation
b. Administration of plasma
c. Intravenous administration of pituitrin
d. Hemostatic therapy
*e. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube

195. A 52 year old man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detected murmur. What diagnostic method is to be applied in the first place?
*a. Ultrasound dopplerography
b. MRI of the brain
c. Electroencephalography
d. Cerebral angiography
e. CT of the brain

196. For the persons who live in a hot area after an accident at a nuclear object, the greatest risk within the first decade is represented by cancer of:
a. Skin
b. Breast
c. Lungs
*d. Thyroid gland
e. Reproduction system organs

197. A 10 year old boy complains about pain in his left eye and strong photophobia after he had injured his left eye with a pencil at school. Left eye examination: blepharospasm, ciliary and conjunctival congestion, cornea is transparent, other parts of eyeball have no changes. Visus 0,9. Right eye is healthy, Visus 1,0. What additional method would you choose first of all?
a. Gonioscopia
b. Cornea sensation-test
c. X-ray examination of orbit
d. Tonometria
*e. Staining test with 1% fluorescein

198. A patient had disorder of nasal respiration, mucopurulent discharges from nose, headache for 3 weeks. At anterior rhinoscopy in middle nasal meathus the stria of pus, edema, hyperemia of the mucosa of the nose have been determined. What diagnostic method is necessary to administer first of all?
a. Punction of the maxillar sinus
b. General blood test
c. CT of a skull
d. Bacteriology analysis of the nasal mucous
*e. An X-ray of paranasal sinuses

199. A patient with acute purulent otitis media complicated by mastoiditis was admitted to a hospital. Roentgenogram of mastoid processes showed the shadiowing of the cellular system on the lesion, absence of bone septa was present. What are the necessary therapeutic actions at the second stage of mastoiditis?
a. Tympanoplasty
b. Cateterization of the Eustachian tube
c. Paracentesis of the drum
d. Radical operation on the middle ear
*e. Mastoidotomy

200. A 35-year-old woman was admitted to resuscitation department in asthmatic status. What is the most trustworthy criterion of breath effectiveness?
a. Minute respiratory volume
b. Determination of “dead” space
c. Respiratory volume
d. Respiration rate
*e. РаСО_2 and РаО_2

201. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
*a. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
b. Shunting
c. Increase of bleeding speed
d. Presence of hypervolemia
e. Depositing of blood in venous channel

202. A 22 year old patient was admitted to trauma center with complaints of pain in the left ankle joint that was getting worse during moving and weight bearing. On the clinical examination it was found that the patient had the closed fracture of medial malleolus without displacement. In which position should the foot be fixed in plaster cast?
a. In position of supination
b. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
c. In position of planter flexion of foot
d. In position of pronation
*e. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot

203. A 74 y.o. patient has been ill with benign prostate hyperplasy for the last 5 years. 4 days ago, after alcochol consumption, there was an acute retention of urination. At the pre-admission stage his urinary bladder was catheterized with metallic catheter. Examination revealed: right epididymis is enlarged, thick and painful, there are purulent discharges from urethra. What way of emergency care must be chosen?
*a. Trocar or open epicystostomy
b. Introduction of permanent urethral catheter
c. Placing of intraprostatic stent
d. Microwave thermotherapy of prostate
e. Transuretral resection or prostatectomy

204. A rounded well-defined shadow was found in the costo-vertebral angle on the chest roentgenogram of an otherwise healthy 9 year old girl. Make a preliminary diagnosis:
*a. Ganglioneuroma
b. Ganglioneuroblastoma
c. Sarcoma of the vertebra
d. Sympatogonioma
e. Sympatoblastoma

205. A 4 y.o. child attends the kindergarten. Complains of poor appetite, fatigue. Objective examination: skin and mucous membrane are pale, child is asthenic. In the hemogram: hypochromatic anemia 1st, leucomoide reaction of the eosinophile type. What pathology must be excluded first of all?
a. Duodenal ulcer
b. Atrophic gastritis
c. Lymphoprolipherative process
d. Hypoplastic anemia
*e. Helminthic invasion

206. A 33 year old male patient was brought to Emergency Department with the signs of cardiovascular collapse: BP - 60/30 mm Hg, Ps - 140 bpm, the skin is pale and moist, diuresis 20 ml/h, Hb - 80 g/l, red blood cell count - 2,5*10^12/l. The reduction of blood volume averages:
a. 10-15%
b. 20-25%
c. 25-30%
*d. 30-40%
e. 15-20%

207. A 19 year old girl was admitted to emergency department: unconsciousness, cyanosis, myotic pupils are present, superficial breathing is 12/min. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action necessary in this clinical situation:
a. Gastric lavage
b. Caffeine injection
c. Cordiamine injection
*d. Controlled respiration
e. Oxygen inhalation

208. What preparations are used for prevention of fungal infection?
a. Isoniazid, Ftibazid, Pyrazinamid
*b. Fluconozol, Orungol, Nisoral
c. Cytosar, Cormyctin, Lomycitin
d. Rubomycin, Bleomycin, Mytomycin C
e. Captopril, Enalapril

209. What developes most often after accidental intake of Hydrochloric acid?
a. Kutlings syndrome
b. Cushings syndrome
*c. Cardiac insufficiency
d. Deyladss syndrome
e. Acute pancreatitis

210. A 28 year old woman was admitted to the emergency room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot" 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Insect bite
b. Early deep vein thrombosis
*c. Superficial venous thrombosis
d. Cellulitis
e. Subcutaneous hematoma

211. A 30 year old man complains of acute pain in his right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 mm, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
a. Eustachian tube disfunction
*b. Acute purulent otitis media
c. Chronic secretory otitis media
d. Acute mastoiditis
e. Chronic purulent otitis media

212. A 22 y.o. man complains of acute throat pain, increasing upon swallowing during 3 days. Body temperature 38,30С, neck lymph nodules are slightly enlarged and painful. Pharyngoscopically - tonsilar hyperemia, enlargement and edema, tonsils are covered by round yellow fibrinous patches around crypts openings. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus in swab analysis. What is the diagnosis?
a. Pharyngeal candidosis
*b. Acute membranous tonsilitis
c. Pharyngeal diphtheria
d. Acute follicular tonsilitis
e. Іnfectious mononucleosis

213. A patient is staying in the hospital with the diagnosis of abdominal typhus. During the 3-d week from the beginning of the disease the patient stopped keeping diet and confinement to bed. As a result the body temperature and rapid pulse decreased and melena appeared. What kind of complications should we think about first of all?
a. Meningitis
b. Thrombophlebitis
*c. Intestinal haemorrhage
d. Nephroso-nephritis
e. Hepatite

214. A 45-year-old woman, mother of four children, comes to the emergency room complaining of a sudden onset of the epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, radiating to the back, accompanied by vomiting. On examination, tenderness is elicited in the right upper quadrant, bowel sounds are decreased, and laboratory data shows leukocytosis, normal serum levels of amylase, lipase, and bilirubin. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Perforated peptic ulcer disease
b. Sigmoid diverticulitis
c. Acute pancreatitis
*d. Acute cholecystitis
e. Myocardial infarction

215. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
*a. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum
b. Ulcerative colitis
c. Acute ileitis
d. Ileocecal tuberculosis
e. Perforated Meckels diverticulum

216. A 50 year old woman with a 2-year history of mild, diffuse, tender thyroid enlargement complains of 10 pound weight gain and fatigue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subacute thyroiditis
b. Riedels thyroiditis
*c. Hashimotos thyroiditis
d. Suppurative thyroiditis
e. Papillary thyroid carcinoma

217. A severely traumatized patient who has been receiving prolonged parenteral alimentation develops diarrhea, mental depression, alopecia and perioral and periorbital dermatitis. Administration of which of the following trace elements is most likely to reverse these complications?
a. Selenium
b. Iodine
*c. Zinc
d. Silicon
e. Copper

218. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with vomiting and acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease should be suspected?
*a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Acute enterocolitis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Perforated gastric ulcer
e. Renal colic

219. The 67 y.o. patient had 5 recurrent fractures of the lower extremities without considerable cause within 5 years. O-shaped deformity of the legs in the knee joints has appeared. The skull, pelvis and lower extremities X-Ray shows the thickening of flat bones. In the long bones there is a hyperostosis along the bone axis.The blood test has not revealed any inflammation activity. Serum calcium is normal. What disease do you consider in this case?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis
b. Hyperparathyoid dystrophy
*c. Pagets disease
d. Myeloma
e. Mottled disease (marble disease)

220. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the reception room of the Central District Hospital. He complains of a severely painful swelling localized on posterior neck, fever up to 38,4°C and general weakness. In anamnesis: diabetes mellitus within 5 years. On physical examination on the posterior neck surface there is an infiltrate elevated above surrounding skin. The tissues affected by swelling are tense and blue reddish discoloration in central area. There are also several purulent necrotic pustules which are connected with each other and form a large skin necrosis. A thinned necrotic skin of this swelling has holes looking like sieve, pus discharges through out. What disease should a doctor consider first of all?
*a. Carbuncle
b. Acute skin cellulitis
c. Skin abscess
d. Carbuncle associated with anthrax
e. Furuncle

221. A 19 y.o. man was admitted to the reception department in 20 minutes after being wounded with the knife to the left chest. The patient is confused. The heart rate is 96 bpm and BP- 80/60 mm Hg. There are the dilated neck veins, sharply diminished apical beat and evident heart enlargement. What kind of penetrative chest wound complications has developed in patient?
a. Massive hemothorax
b. Closed pneumothorax
c. Valve-likes pneumothorax
*d. Pericardium tamponade
e. Open pneumothorax

222. Survey radiograph of chest of a 62 year old smoker who often suffers from "pneumonias" showed a triangle shadow in the right lung, its vertex is pointing towards the lung root. It also showed deviation of heart and mediastinum shadows towards the lesion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung cyst
b. Lung abscess
*c. Cenral cancer of lung
d. Peripheral cancer of lung
e. Atelectasis

223. A 44-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital with complaints of dull, aching pain in the left lumbar region, the admixture of pus in the urine. Examination revealed a grade II staghorn calculus on the left. What method of treatment is indicated for this patient?
*a. Surgery
b. Distance lithotripsy
c. Ascending litholysis
d. Conservative therapy
e. Contact lithotripsy

224. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, t°- 35,0°C. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
b. Frostbite of trunk and extremities
c. -
*d. Hypothermia
e. Apparent death

225. A 48-year-old patient got a job-related injury of a hypodermic varicose vein on his shin that was accompanied by the intensive phleborrhagia. Choose the optimal variant of first aid:
a. Maximal limb flexion in knee joint
*b. Pressure bandage and limb strapping
c. Application of Esmarchs tourniquet beneath the injury
d. Application of Esmarchs tourniquet above the injury
e. Occlusion of femoral artery in a typical place

226. While making a round, a doctor had noticed the edema of the right shoulder of a 26-day-old child with diagnosis of "umbilical sepsis". Active movements in the shoulder joint were absent, right hand was hanging down. Mother stated that her childs condition had worsened for the last 24 hours what resulted in childs refusal to be breast-fed, restlessness, weeping while swaddling, rise in body temperature up to 38,8°C. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Traumatic brachioplexitis
b. Fracture of the humerus
*c. Epiphysial osteomyelitis of the humerus
d. Phlegmon of the shoulder
e. Fracture of the clavicle

227. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Paranephral hematoma
b. Kidneys abruption
c. Subcapsular kidneys rupture
d. Multiple kidneys ruptures
*e. Kidneys contusion

228. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6°C. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5х2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Paravesical liver abscesses
*b. Alveolar echinococcus of liver
c. Liver abscess
d. Liver cancer
e. Cystous liver cancer

229. A 14 y.o. patient suddenly fell ill when high fever, acute pain in the right shin. In two weeks X-ray showed translucent spaces (destructive focuses) with unevel countours in the middle third of tibia diaphysis. Along the bone edge there was a narrow line of shadow (periostitis) 1-2 mm from the surface. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Right shin syphilis
b. Right shin tuberculosis
*c. Right shin osteomielitis
d. Bone cyst of tibia
e. Right shin trauma

230. A 43 year old patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenosing papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
a. To perform external choledoch drainage
b. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs
*c. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
d. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
e. To perform choledochoduodenostomy

231. A 54-year-old patient applied with complaints of acute pain in the shoulder-joint. 10 minutes earlier he fell in the street with his arms stretched. Doctor of the traumatological unit noticed an acute deformation of the right shoulder-joint, the impossibilty of active movement in the right extremity. Roentgenologically: uncoincidence of articulating surfaces. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Dislocation of the clavicle
b. Contusion of the humerus
c. Fracture of the humerus
d. Dislocation of the scapula
e. Dislocation of the humerus

232. A 62-year-old patient has been delivered to the surgical department with complaints of sudden pain in the umbilical region irradiating to the back and groin, which was accompanied by a syncope. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, umbilical region is tender on palpation, bowel sounds are diminished. AP drop is present. USI reveals: free fluid in the abdomen, thickening of the wall of the abdominal aorta. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Stomach ulcer perforation
b. Peritonitis
c. Acute appendicitis
*d. Rupture of abdominal aortic aneurism
e. Acute pancreatitis

233. Parents of a 2-year-old boy applied to clinic complaining of right testicle absence in the scrotum of a boy. While examining the boy, hypoplasia of the right half of the scrotum was revealed, absence of the testicle. Testicle is miniaturized, it palpitates along the inguinal canal but it could not be moved down to scrotum. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Retraction of the right testicle (pseudocryptorchism)
b. Right-sided cryptorchism, abdominal form
c. Ectopia of the right testicle, pubic form
*d. Right-sided cryptorchism, inguinal form
e. Left-sided monorchism

234. A 62-year-old patient complains of the pain behind the sternum, bad passing of solid and liquid food, bad breath, increased salivation weight, loss of 15 kg during the period of 2 months. Appetite is retained. On physical exam: face features are sharpened. The skin is pale, with sallow tint, its turgor is decreased. The liver is not enlarged. Blood Hb - 86g/L. Gregersen reaction is positive. What kind of pathology caused the given clinical situation?
a. Cicatricial constriction of esophagus
b. Benign growth of esophagus
*c. Esophagus cancer
d. Achalasia of esophagus
e. Chronic non-specific esophagitis

235. A patient suffers from suddenly arising crampy pain in the right loin area. 2 hours after the pain had started, hematuria took place. Loin X-ray: no pathological shadows. Ultrasound: pyelocaliectasis on the right, the left part is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Twist of the right ovary cyst
b. Tumour of the right kidney pelvis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Intestine invagination
*e. Stone of the right kidney, renal colic

236. A patient complains of an extremely intense pain in epigastrium. He has peptic ulcer disease of duodenum for 10 years. The patient is in the forced position being on the right side with legs abducted to stomach. Abdomen has acute tenderness in the epigastrium. Guarding contraction of the abdominal wall muscles is observed. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Acute condition of peptic ulcer disease
b. Acute pancreatitis
*c. Perforation of ulcer
d. Penetration of ulcer into pancreas
e. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels

237. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain, hyperemia along subcutaneous veins, rise in body temperature. While examining the large shin subcutaneous vein, there is hyperemia, pain by pressing. Homanss and Lusess symptoms are negative. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Embolism of aorta
b. Thrombosis of aorta
c. Acute ileophemoral phlebothrombosis
d. Lymphostasis
*e. Acute thrombophlebitis of subcutaneous veins

238. An emergency team deliverd a 83-year-old patient complaining of inability of her right leg to support the body after falling on her right side. Objectively: the patient lies on a gurney, her right leg is rotated outwards, the outside edge of foot touches the bed. There is positive straight leg raising sign. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Hip joint contusion
b. Cotyloid cavity fracture
c. Femoral diaphysis fracture
d. Hip dislocation
*e. Femoral neck fracture

239. 3 days ago a 29-year-old patient presented with pulsating pain in the region of rectum, fever, general weakness. Objectively: local tenderness in the anal region in the 6 oclock position. Digital investigation of rectum revealed a painful infiltration reaching the pectinate line. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute anal fissure
b. Rectum tumour
c. Acute prostatitis
*d. Acute periproctitis
e. Acute haemorrhoids

240. A 65-year-old patient complains of gradual worsening of the left eye vision during 10 months. On physical examination: acuty of vision of the left eye is 0,01, not correctable. The eye is quiet, pupil of the eye is grayish, reflex from the eye-ground is absent. Intraocular pressure is 18 mm/Hg. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Open-angle glaucoma
b. Leukoma of the cornea
c. Exfoliation of the retina
*d. Senile cataract
e. Disorder of blood circulation in retina vessels

241. A 36 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with sharp pain in substernal area following occasional swallowing of a fish bone. On esophagoscopy the foreign body wasnt revealed. The pain increased and localized between scapulas. In a day temperature elevated, condition became worse, dysphagia intensified. What complication has developed?
a. Obstruction of esophagus
b. Esophageal hemorrhage
*c. Perforation of esophagus with mediastinitis
d. Pulmonary atelectasis
e. Aspirative pneumonia

242. A 19 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia of B type. What antihemophilic medications should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Dried plasma
*b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Fresh frozen blood
d. Cryoprecipitate
e. Native plasma

243. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patients condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min, Ps- 96 bpm, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are moist rales of different types above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pleural empyema
b. Pyopneumothorax
c. Exudative pleuritis
d. Acute focal pneumonia
*e. Acute pulmonary abscess

244. A 24 y.o. male patient was transferred to the chest surgery department from general surgical department with acute post-traumatic empyema of pleura. On the X-ray: wide level horizontal of fluid on the right. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. Pneumoectomy
b. Decortication of pleura
*c. Punction and drainage of pleural cavity
d. Thoracoplasty
e. Lobectomy

245. A patient complains of intense pressing pain in the pharynx, mainly to the right, impossibility to swallow even liquid food. The illness started 5 days ago. The patients condition is grave. Body temperature - 38,9°C, speech is difficult, voice is constrained, difficulties in opening the mouth. Submaxillary glands to the right are painful, enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Peritonsillar abscess
b. Pharyngeal tumour
c. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
d. Vincents disease
e. Diphtheria

246. In a 65 y.o. female patient a tumor 13х8 сm in size in the umbilical area and above is palpated, mild tenderness on palpation, unmovable, pulsates. On ausculation: systolic murmur. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Arterio-venous aneurism
b. Stomach tumor
*c. Abdominal aortic aneurism
d. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
e. Mitral insufficiency

247. A 30-year-old man was injured in a fire and got thermic burns of III-A and III-B degree that affected 20% of the total skin. AP - 110/70 mm Hg, heart rate -120/min. What transfusion means should be used for blind infusion before transportation?
*a. Saline solutions
b. 10% glucose solution
c. Albumin
d. Fresh frozen plasma
e. Polyglycine

248. A 24 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about continued fever, night sweating. She lost 7 kg within the last 3 months. She had casual sexual contacts. Objectively: enlargement of all lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome. Blood count: leukocytes - 2,2109/L. What disease can be suspected?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Infectionous mononucleosis
c. Chroniosepsis
*d. HIV-infection
e. Tuberculosis

249. Development of chronic venous insufficiency of lower extremities depends on the functional condition of so-called musculovenous pump. This term refers to the following group of muscles:
a. Buttock region muscles
b. Abdominal wall muscles
*c. Shin muscles
d. Thigh muscles
e. Foot muscles

250. A 27-year-old patient was brought to clinic with a crashed wound of the posterior surface of the right shin in 2 hours after the accident happened. During surgical treatment pieces of dirty clothes and gravel were removed. What actions from the given below are the decisive ones to prevent an anaerobic infection?
a. Introduction of the preventive dose of an anti-gangrene serum
b. Rational antibiotic therapy
c. Hyperbaric oxygenation
*d. Radical surgical treatment
e. Introduction of the medical dose of the anti-gangrene serum

251. A 32-year-old patient lives in an area endemic for echinococcosis. In the last 6 months he reports of pain in the right subcostal area, fever. He is suspected to have liver echinococcosis. What study would be the most informative in this case?
a. Survey radiography of abdominal cavity
b. Angiography
c. Liver scanning
*d. USI
e. Biochemical laboratory examination

252. In morgue there are dead bodies with the following causes of death: electrotrauma; rupture of the spleen with acute anemia. There is one unknown person; one ethyl alcohol poisoned person and one drowned man. What dead body should the blood group be determined for?
a. Body of person with a sudden death
*b. All dead bodies of the unknown persons
c. Body of drowned man
d. Body of poisoned person
e. Body of person with internal hemorrhage

253. A 50 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of blood in urine. There was no pain or urination disorders, hematuria has lasted for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys are not palpable, suprapubic region has no pecularities, external genitals have no pathology. Rectal examination revealed: prevesical gland is not enlarged. Cytoscopy revealed no changes. What disease would you think about first of all?
a. Tuberculosis of urinary bladder
b. Kidney dystopy
c. Necrotic papillitis
*d. Cancer of kidney
e. Varicocele

254. A patient complains of nycturia, constant boring pain in perineum and suprapubic region, weak urine jet, frequent, obstructed and painful urination. He has been ill for several months, pain in perineum appeared after getting problems with urination. Rectal examination revealed that prostate is enlarged (mostly owing to the right lobe), dense, asymmetric, its central sulcus is flattened, the right lobe is dense, painless, tuberous. What disease can it be?
a. Prostate sclerosis
b. Prostate tuberculosis
c. Chronic congestive prostatitis
*d. Cancer of prostate
e. Urolithiasis, stone of the right lobe of prostate

255. The patient complains of a painful swelling in the chin region, malaise, headache. Examination reveals an acutely inflamed cone-shaped dense node. The skin over it is tense, red. In the center of the node there is an ulcer with overhanging edges and a necrotic core of a dirty-green colour. Submandibular lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Furuncle
b. Carbuncle
c. Parasitic sycosis
d. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous form)
e. Tuberculosis

256. On the 5th day after a surgery for colon injury a patient complains of bursting pain in the postoperative wound, weakness, drowsiness, headache, fever up to 40°C. Objectively: the skin around the wound is swollen, there is gas crepitation. The wound discharges are scarce foul-smelling, of dark-gray colorl. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Phlegmon
c. Abscess
d. Postoperative wound infection
*e. Anaerobic clostridial wound infection

257. A childrens surgical unit admitted a 1-month-old boy who had been prenatally diagnosed with the left-sided pyelectasis. Such studies as drip infusion urography, cystography and USI allowed to reveal initial hydronephrosis. There is no information confirming the secondary pyelonephritis. What tactics of this patient management is most advisable?
a. Anderson-Hynes operation
b. Urgent nephrostomy
*c. 6-month surveillance
d. There is no need in further surveillance and treatment
e. Antibacterial therapy

258. A 60 y.o. man complains of significant pain in the right eye, photophobia, lacrimation, reduced vision of this eye, headache of the right part of the head. Pain occured 2 days ago. On examination: Vis OD- 0,03, congested injection of the eye ball, significant cornea edema, front chamber is deep, pupil is narrow, athrophic iris, there is optic nerve excavation on the eye fundus, intraocular pressure- 38 mm Hg. Vis OS- 0,8 unadjustable. The eye is calm, healthy. Intraoccular pressure- 22 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Eye nerves neuritis
b. Maculodystrophy
c. Right eyes uveitis
d. Right eyes keratitis
*e. Acute glaucoma attack

259. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
a. Citrate shock
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Pyrogenous reaction
*d. Citrate intoxication
e. Allergic reaction

260. A 20 y.o. patient suddely felt ill 12 hours ago. There was pain in epigactric area, nausea, sporadic vomiting. He had taken alcohol before. In few hours the pain localized in the right iliac area. On examination: positive rebound tenderness symptoms. WBC- 12,2109/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute cholecystitis
*b. Acute appendicitis
c. Perforated ulcer
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Rightside kidney colic

261. A patient, aged 58, was fishing in the winter. On return home after some time felt some pain in the feet. Consulted a doctor. On examination: feet skin was pale, then after rewarming became red, warm to the touch. Edema is not significant, limited to the toes. All types of sensitivity are preserved. No blisters. What degree of frostbite is observed?
a. V degree
*b. I degree
c. III degree
d. II degree
e. IV degree

262. After an accident a patient complains of pain in the hip joint. Objectively: the leg is in the position of flexion, adduction and internal rotation, significantly contracted. There is elastic resistance to passive adduction or abduction of the extremity. Major trochanter is located high above the Roser-Nelaton line. A significant lordosis is present. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Pertrochanteric fracture of hip
*b. Iliac dislocation of hip
c. Cotyloid cavity fracture with a central dislocation of hip
d. Femoral neck fracture with a displacement
e. Inferoposterior dislocation of hip

263. A 98 y.o. male patient complains of pain in the left lower limb which intensifies on walking, feeling of cold and numbness in both feet. He has been ill for 6 years. On examination: pale dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Hairy covering is poorly developed on the left shin. "Furrow symptom " is positive on the left. Pulse on foot arteries and popliteal artery isnt palpated, on the femoral artery its weak. On the right limb the artery pulsation is reserved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Raynaulds disease
b. Buergers disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
c. Obliterating endarteritis
d. Hemoral arthery thombosis
*e. Arteriosclerosis obliterans

264. Examination of the corpse of a man who died from hanging reveals: death spots disappear when pressed upon and restore after 50 seconds, rigor mortis is moderately expressed only in the masticatory muscles as well as neck and finger muscles, body temperature is of 31°C. The time of death:
a. 16-24 hours ago
b. 1-2 hours ago
*c. 6-7 hours ago
d. 8-10 hours ago
e. 10-18 hours ago

265. After contusion of the right eye a patient complains of sudden loss of vision with remaining light perception. Objectively: the eye is not irritated. The cornea is transparent. Pupil reacts to light. The pupil area is black. The fundus reflex is absent. What is the most likely cause of vision loss?
a. Acute occlusion of retinal vessels
b. Optic nerve avulsion
c. Retinal detachment
d. Traumatic cataract
*e. Hemophthalmia

266. A 65-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). The rate of prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Roentgenography of chest
*b. Computer tomography of pelvis
c. Excretory urography
d. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
e. Bone scintigraphy

267. A 30-year-old patient had deep burn covering 30% of body 30 days ago. Now he presents with continued fever, loss of appetite, night sweats. Burned surface weakly granulates. What is the stage of burn disease?
a. Convalescence
*b. Septicotoxemia
c. Secondary burn shock
d. Primary burn shock
e. Acute burn toxemia

268. A 29 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute girdle pain in epigastric area, vomiting in 1 hour after the meal. On examination: pale, acrocyanosis. Breathing is frequent, shallow. Abdominal muscles are tensed, positive Schotkin-Blumbergs symptom. What is the maximal term to make a diagnosis?
a. In 0,5 hours
b. In 3 hours
c. In 6 hours
*d. In 2 hours
e. In 1 hour

269. A surgeon examined a 42-year-old patient and diagnosed him with right forearm furuncle at the purulo-necrotic stage. The furuncle was lanced. At the hydration stage the wound dressing should enclose the following medication:
*a. Hypertonic solution
b. Ichthyol ointment
c. Dimexide
d. Chloramine
e. Vishnevsky ointment

270. A 30 year old patient undergoes treatment because of Werlhofs disease. Objectively: the patient is pale, there are petechial haemorrhages on the extension surfaces of forearms. Ps is 92 bpm, AP is 100/60 mm Hg. The lower edge of spleen is at a level with umbilicus. Blood count: erythrocytes: 2,8*10^12/l, Hb - 90 g/l, Ht - 0,38, thrombocytes - 30*10^9/l. The patient is being prepared for splenectomy. What transfusion medium should be chosen in the first place for the preoperational preparation?
a. Erythrocytic suspension
b. Washed erythrocytes
c. Stored blood
d. Native erythrocytic mass
*e. Thrombocytic mass

271. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. A traumatologist
b. An anaesthesilogist
c. A laboratory physician
d. A surgeon
*e. A doctor of any speciality

272. A 36-year-old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
*a. Valvular pneumothorax
b. Closed pneumothorax
c. Mediastinitis
d. Subcutaneous emphysema
e. Open pneumothorax

273. A 39-year-old patient complains of a tumour on the anterior surface of her neck. The tumour has been observed for 2 years. It is nonmobile and has enlarged recently. The patient has a changed tone of voice, a sense of pressure. Objectively: in the left lobe of the thyroid gland a 3 cm node is palpable; it is very dense, tuberous, painless. Cervical lymph nodes are enlarged. Functional status of the thyroid gland is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nodular euthyroid goiter
b. Chronic lymphomatous Hashimotos thyroiditis
c. Chronic fibrous Riedels thyroiditis
*d. Thyroid gland cancer
e. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter

274. An unconscious victim in severe condition is brought to clinic. It is known that the patient touched the bare wire with his hand and during 5 minutes was under the influence of an alternating current with voltage of 220 V. Physical exam: skin is pale, cold by touch. Breath is weakened, BP - 90/50 mm Hg, Ps - 60 bpm, arrhythmical. There are fields of necrosis of the skin on the right hand and on the right foot. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. High voltaged electroburn of the right foot and shank
b. -
c. Electrotrauma, acute cardiovascular failure
d. Vascular collapse due to electric current lesion
*e. Electroburn of the right foot and right hand

275. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
a. Bacteriological analysis of sputum
*b. Bronchography
c. Survey radiograph of lungs
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Pleural puncture

276. A victim of a road accident, aged 44, is operated on account of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. In which case can the patients blood from the abdominal cavity be used for autotransfusion?
a. Liver rupture
b. Bladder rupture
*c. Stomach rupture
d. Splenic rupture
e. Small intestines rupture

277. A 40-year-old woman with acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage was transfused 400 ml of the preserved blood after having conducted all compatibility tests. After hemotransfusion the condition of the patient became worse. She started having headache, muscles pain, her temperature has risen up to 38,8°C. What is the reason for such condition of the patient?
*a. Pyrogenic reaction of medium severity
b. Allergic reaction
c. Air embolism
d. Bacterial and toxic shock development
e. Hemotransfusional shock development

278. A patient complains about pyrosis and permanent pain behind his breastbone. When he bends forward after eating there appears regurgitation. Roentgenological examination revealed extrasaccular cardiofunctional hernia of esophageal opening of diaphragm. Esophagoscopy revealed signs of reflux-esophagitis. What is the necessary tretment tactics?
a. Treatment at a health resort
*b. Operation in a surgical department
c. Conservative treatment in the therapeutic hospital
d. Conservative treatment in an outpatients clinic
e. Conservative treatment in a surgical department

279. Examination of a 38-year-old patient who had been hit with a blunt object on the left side of chest revealed a fracture of the X rib with fragments displacement, parietal pneumothorax. The patient complains of pain in the left subcostal area. Objectively: the patient is pale, AP- 80/40 mm Hg, Ps- 138/min, of poor volume. USI reveals fluid in the left abdomen. Splenic rupture is present. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Anti-schock actions and laparotomy following the arterial pressure rise
b. Left-sided thoracotomy and immediately following laparotomy
c. Immediate upper middle laparotomy and following drainage of the left pleural cavity
d. Immediate laparotomy and alcohol-novocaine block of the X rib
*e. Drainage of the left pleural cavity and laparotomy

280. On the 2nd day after a surgery for toxic mixed goiter IV a 35-year-old patient complains of heart pain. ECG shows prolonged QT intervals. Chvosteks and Trousseau symptoms cannot be clearly defined. The patient is provisionally diagnosed with latent tetany. What study will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Determination of thyrotropic hormone
b. Determination of sodium
c. Determination of thyroid hormones
*d. Determination of blood calcium and phosphor
e. Determination of potassim

281. A patient with bilateral hydrothorax has repeatedly undergone pleural puncture on both sides. After a regular puncture the patients condition has become worse: he presents with fever, chest pain. The next day, the attending physician performing pleural puncture revealed some pus on the right. What is the mechanism of acute right-sided empyema development?
a. Hematogenous
b. Lymphogenous
*c. Contact-and-aspiration
d. Implantation
e. Aerial

282. A 25 y.o. patient was admitted with chest trauma. Clinical and X-ray examination have revealed tense pneumothorax on the left. What emergency treatment should be undertaken?
a. Intubation
b. Analgetics
c. Intravenous infusions
d. Oxigenotherapy
*e. Pleural cavity drainage

283. A 38 y.o. patient complains of pain in lumbar part of spinal column with irradiation to the back surface of the left leg following the lifting of a heavy object. Pain is increasing on change of the body position and in vertical position. positive stretching symptoms were revealed on examination. What is an initial diagnosis?
a. Arachnomielitis
b. Spinal cord tumor
*c. Intervertebral ligaments disorder
d. Polyneuritis
e. Myelopathy

284. A 38 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in pain in the lumbar part of spine irradiating to the posterior surface of his left leg. The pain increases during changing body position and also in the upright position. Examination revealed positive symptoms of tension. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Spinal cord tumor
b. Polyneuritis
c. Myelopathy
*d. Pathology of intercostal disks
e. Arachnomyelitis

285. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
a. Hardening of the child
*b. Strict following of feeding regimen
c. Feces observation
d. Common cold prophilaxis
e. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention

286. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38°C, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Erysipelas
b. Putrid phlegmon
*c. Sepsis
d. Allergic reaction
e. Erysipeloid

287. After a car accident a 37-year-old patient has an acute pain and bleeding in the middle third of his right thigh. Objectively: there is a wound on the anterior surface of the right thigh with massive bleeding, abnormal mobility at the level of the middle third of the thigh. The first aid is to be started with:
a. Venipuncture and intravenous infusion of polyglycine
*b. Digital occlusion of the femoral artery
c. Tourniquet application
d. Injection of pain-killers
e. Immobilization of the extremity with a transportation splint

288. A 9-year-old boy fell from a tree and hit the occipital region, there was a momentary loss of consciousness. Objectively: the childs condition is satisfactory, he complains of the headache and dizziness. The X-ray of skull reveals a comminuted depressed fracture of occipital bone in the region of inion. What treatment is indicated for the patient?
a. Complex conservative treatment
*b. Surgical intervention
c. Hemostatic therapy
d. Anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Therapeutic lumbar punctures

289. A 40-year-old female patient has a history of rheumatism. She complains about acute pain in her left eye, especially at night, vision impairment, photophobia, lacrimation. The patient cannot suggest any reasons for the disease. Objectively: weak pericorneal injection, flattening of iris relief, iris discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Choroiditis
b. Acute attack of glaucoma
c. Iritis
d. Keratitis
*e. Iridocyclitis

290. 14 days ago a 49-year-old patient was operated on for perforated appendicitis and disseminated fibrinopurulent peritonitis. The postoperative period was uneventful. On the 9th day the patient presented with low-grade fever, abdominal pain, frequent liquid stools. USI of the left mesogastrium reveals a fluid formation 9x10 cm large. In blood: leukocytosis with the left shift. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Abdominal cavity tumour
b. Left kidney cyst
c. Spleen abscess
*d. Interloop abscess
e. Liver abscess

291. A patient, aged 81, complains of constant urinary excretion in drops, feeling of fullness in the lower abdomen. On examination: above pubis there is a spherical protrusion, over which there is a dullness of percussion sound, positive suprapubic punch. What symptom is observed in this patient?
*a. Paradoxal ischuria
b. Dysuria
c. Pollakiuria
d. Enuresis
e. Urinary incontinence

292. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: t°- 37,3°С, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchoectatic disease
b. Macrofocal pneumonia
*c. Lung cancer
d. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Exudative pleuritis

293. A 52 year old patient complains about pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with a lot of foul-smelling albuminoid sputum in form of "meat slops". Objectively: the patients condition is grave, cyanosis is present, breathing rate is 31/min, percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed different rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lung gangrene
b. Pleura empyema
c. Chronic pneumonia
d. Multiple bronchiectasis
e. Lung abscess

294. 3 hours ago a 65-year-old female patient felt sharp abdominal pain irradiating to the right scapula, there was a single vomiting. She has a history of rheumatoid arthritis. Objectively: pale skin, AP- 100/60 mm Hg, Ps- 60/min. Abdomen is significantly painful and tense in the epigastrium and right subcostal areat, there are positive symptoms of parietal peritoneum irritation over the right costal arch, that is tympanitis. What is the tactics of an emergency doctor?
a. To inject pain-killers and watch the dynamics
b. To inject spasmolytics
c. To take the patient to the rheumatological department
*d. To take the patient to the surgical hospital
e. To perform gastric lavage

295. A 15 y.o. patient has developmental lag, periodical skin yellowing. Objectively: spleen is 16х12х10 cm large, holecistolithiasis, skin ulcer on the lower third of his left crus. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,0×1012/L, Hb- 90 g/L, C.I.- 1,0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Blood bilirubin - 56 mmole/L, indirect bilirubin - 38 mmole/L. Choose the way of treatment:
a. Omentosplenopexy
b. Omentohepatopexy
c. Spleen transplantation
d. Portocaval anastomosis
*e. Splenectomy

296. A 72-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding during defecation. Digital rectal investigation revealed a tumour of the anal canal. After verification of the diagnosis the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma. The secondary (metastatic) tumour will be most probably found in:
*a. Lungs
b. Pelvic bones
c. Brain
d. Mediastinum
e. Liver

297. 10 years ago a patient had a fracture in the middle one-third of his left femoral bone, and during the last 7 years he has been having acute inflammation in the area of old fracture accompanied by formation of a fistula through which some pus with small fragments of bone tissue is discharged. After a time the fistula closes. What complication of the fracture is it?
a. Trophic ulcer
*b. Chronic osteomyelitis
c. Soft tissue phlegmon
d. Bone tuberculosis
e. False joint

298. A patient has a stab wound on his right foot. On the fourth day after injury the patients body temperature rose up to 38°C, inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and painful, skin over them reddened. What complication might be suspected?
a. Lymphangitis
b. Tetanus
c. Erysipelas
*d. Lymphadenitis
e. Phlegmon

299. During a surgery on a 30-year-old patient a dark ileo-ileal conglomerate was discovered, the intussusceptum intestine was considered to be unviable. The intussuscipiens intestine was dilated to 7-8 cm, swollen, full of intestinal contents and gases. What pathology led to the surgery?
*a. Invagination (combined) obstruction
b. Obturation obstruction
c. Spastic obstruction
d. Paralytic obstruction
e. Strangulation obstruction

300. A 52 year old patient complains about headache, weakness of his upper left extremity. Neurological symptoms become more intense during physical stress of the left extremity. Pulsation on the arteries of the left extremity is sharply dampened but it remains unchanged on the carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thoracal outlet syndrome
b. Takayasus disease
c. Occlusion of brachiocephalic trunk
*d. Occlusion of the left subclavicular artery, steal syndrome
e. Raynauds syndrome

301. A 43-year-old patient had been admitted to a hospital with clinical presentations of ischiorectal periproctitis. On the 12th day of treatment the patients condition deteriorated: there was an increase in the rate of intoxication and hepatic failure, the body temperature became hectic, AP was 100/60 mm Hg. USI of liver revealed a hydrophilic formation. In blood: WBCs - 19,6×109/l, RBCs.- 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 98 g/l. What complication was developed?
*a. Liver abscess
b. Hepatic cyst
c. Budd-Chiari syndrome
d. Liver necrosis
e. Pylephlebitis

302. A 57 year old patient abruptly lost the sight of one eye. Examination revealed that his sight made up 0,02 excentrically, eye fundus has haemorrhages of different forms and sizes ("squashed tomato" symptom). Disc of optic nerve is hyperemic. In anamnesis general vascular pathology is recorded. Direct-acting anticoagulants were administered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Diabetic retinopathy
*b. Thrombosis of central vein of retina
c. Hypertensive angioneuropathy
d. Hypertensive angiopathy
e. Embolism of central artery of retina

303. A 55 year old patient felt suddenly sick in a hospital corridor, he was immediately examined by a doctor. Examination revealed that the patients skin was pale, autonomous respiration was absent, pulse on carotid arteries couldnt be felt, pupils were mydriatic. What action should be taken at the beginning of cardiac resuscitation?
a. Closed-chest cardiac massage
b. Mouth-to-mouth ventilation
*c. Precordial thump
d. Restoration of airway patency
e. Defibrillation

304. A 25-year-old victim of a road accient complains of chest pain, dyspnea. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition, Ps- 120/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg.There is pathological mobility of fragments of III-V ribs on the right. Percussion reveals a box sound over the right lung, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated on the right. What examination should be administered in the first place?
a. Thoracoscopy
*b. X-ray of chest organs
c. Pleural puncture
d. Bronchoscopy
e. USI of chest organs

305. A 6-year-old girl drank some coloured fizzy drink which gave her a feeling of pressure in the throat. 30 minutes later the childs lips got swollen, then edema gradually spread over the whole face, laryngeal breathing became difficult. The child is excited. Ps- 120/min, breathing rate - 28/min, breathing is noisy, indrawing of intercostal spaces is observed. What basic aid is most appropriate for the restoration of laryngeal breathing?
a. Conicotomy
*b. Corticosteroids
c. Tracheostomy
d. Sedative drugs
e. Antibacterial drugs

306. An 8-month-old baby has had problems with nasal breathing and muco-purulent discharge from the nose for a week. Examination reveals a rhinedema, muco-purulent discharges from the middle nasal meatus as well as on the back of pharynx. What disease are these symptoms most typical for?
a. Sphenoiditis
b. Frontitis
c. Hemisinusitis
*d. Ethmoiditis
e. Maxillary sinusitis

307. A 17-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of the left knee joint. Soft tissues of thigh in the affected region are infiltrated, joint function is limited. X-ray picture of the distal metaepiphysis of the left femur shows a destruction focus with periosteum detachment and Codmans triangle found at the defect border in the bone cortex. X-ray of chest reveals multiple small focal metastases. What treatment is indicated?
a. Amputation of the lower extremity
*b. Palliative chemotherapy
c. Distance gamma-ray therapy
d. Radioiodine therapy
e. Disarticulation of the lower extremity

308. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. To make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone
*b. To perform the Heimlich manoever
c. To send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him
d. To perform conicotomy immediately
e. To use an inhalation of beta_2-adrenoceptor agonist

309. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. Use an inhalation of beta_2-adrenoceptor agonist
b. Make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone
c. Perform conicotomy immediately
d. Send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him
*e. Perform the Heimlich manoever

310. A 3-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
*a. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
b. Wound abscess
c. Suture sinus
d. Posttraumatic phlegmon
e. Hematogenic osteomyelitis

311. A 76 y.o. woman complains of progressing swallowing disorder, mostly she has had problems with solid food for the last 6 weeks. Sometimes she has regurgitation of solid masses. Swallowing is not painful. She lost 6 kg. 10 years ago she had myocardiac infarction, she takes constantly aspirine and prolonged nitrates. She consumes alcochol in moderate proportions, smokes. Objectively: icteric skin, neck has no pecularities, lymph nodes are not enlarged. Thorax has no changes, cardiovascular system has no evident changes. Liver is +3 cm. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Diaphragmatic hernia
b. Myasthenia
c. Esophageal achalasia
*d. Cancer of esophagus
e. Diffuse constriction of esophagus

312. A 60 y.o. man complains of sense of heaviness in the region of scrotum. Objectively: scrotum edema in the left part. Testicle is of normal size, but there is a soft, scrotum limited edema over it that can be pressed and disappears when the patient lies down. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Inguinal lymphadenopathy
b. Inguinal hernia
c. Varicosity of subcutaneous veins
*d. Varicocele
e. Ectopic testicle

313. A 40 year old woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Pure discharges from the nipple
*b. Skin induration with inverted nipple
c. Painless movable induration
d. Painful movable induration
e. Bloody discharges from the nipple

314. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved application of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
a. 60 minutes
b. 180 minutes
c. 15 minutes
d. 30 minutes
*e. 120 minutes

315. A 9 y.o. child with diagnosis "chronic tonsillitis" stands dispanserization control. Within 1 year of observation there was one exacerbation of disease. Physical condition is satisfactory. The general state is not infringed. Define group of health:
*a. III (a)
b. I-st
c. III (c)
d. III (b)
e. II-d

316. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Herpes zoster
b. Torsion of the left testicle
c. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
*d. Leftsided renal colic
e. Sigmoid diverticulitis

317. An anestesiologist gives narcosis to the patient, he uses a non-reversive contour. Anesthetic is halothane. Air temperature in the operation room is 21°C, humidity 50%, level of noise 30 dB. What occupational hazard is the principal one under these conditions?
a. High level of noise
b. Improper occupational microclimate
*c. Air pollution with anesthetic
d. Mental overfatigue
e. Compelled working pose

318. If a child has adherent fingers on his right hand, then what will be your diagnosis?
a. Ectrodactyly
b. Ectromelia
c. Polydactyly
d. Macrodactyly
*e. Syndactyly

319. A 34-year-old patient was bitten by a dog 3 hours ago.There is a wound by dog teeth without bleeding in the left arm. What surgical help would you provide to this patient?
a. Aseptic bandage
b. Complete suture of the wound
c. Incomplete suture of the wound
*d. Clean wound with detergent water and apply anti-septic
e. Cream bandage

320. A 63 year old patient was diagnosed with purulent mediastinitis. What of the below listed diseases are NOT the cause of purulent mediastinitis?
a. Perforation of the cervical part of the oesophagus
b. Deep neck phlegmon
*c. Cervical lymphadenitis
d. Perforation of the thoracic part of the oesophagus
e. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea

321. Purulent mediastinitis is diagnosed at a 63-year-old patient. What diseases from the stated below textbfCANNOT cause the purulent mediastinitis?
a. Deep neck phlegmon
b. Perforation of the thoracic part of the easophagus
c. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
*d. Cervical lymphadenitis
e. Perforation of the cervical part of the easophagus

322. A 16 year old patient with complaints of frequent pain in the abdomen was diagnosed with melanoma, examination revealed also pigmentation of the mucosa and skin, polyp in the stomach and large intestine. It is know that the patients mother has an analogous pigmentation and has been often treated for anemia. What disease is suspected?
a. Hirschprungs disease
*b. Peytz-Egerss polyposis
c. Tuberculosis of the intestine
d. Chrons disease
e. Adolescent polyposis

323. A 41 year old patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with haemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
a. Administration of plasma
*b. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube
c. Hemostatic therapy
d. Intravenous administration of pituitrin
e. Operation

324. A 52 year old man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detected murmur. What diagnostic method is to be applied in the first place?
a. Electroencephalography
*b. Ultrasound dopplerography
c. MRI of the brain
d. CT of the brain
e. Cerebral angiography

325. A 10 year old boy complains about pain in his left eye and strong photophobia after he had injured his left eye with a pencil at school. Left eye examination: blepharospasm, ciliary and conjunctival congestion, cornea is transparent, other parts of eyeball have no changes. Visus 0,9. Right eye is healthy, Visus 1,0. What additional method would you choose first of all?
a. X-ray examination of orbit
b. Gonioscopia
c. Cornea sensation-test
*d. Staining test with 1% fluorescein
e. Tonometria

326. A patient had disorder of nasal respiration, mucopurulent discharges from nose, headache for 3 weeks. At anterior rhinoscopy in middle nasal meathus the stria of pus, edema, hyperemia of the mucosa of the nose have been determined. What diagnostic method is necessary to administer first of all?
a. General blood test
*b. An X-ray of paranasal sinuses
c. Bacteriology analysis of the nasal mucous
d. CT of a skull
e. Punction of the maxillar sinus

327. A patient with acute purulent otitis media complicated by mastoiditis was admitted to a hospital. Roentgenogram of mastoid processes showed the shadiowing of the cellular system on the lesion, absence of bone septa was present. What are the necessary therapeutic actions at the second stage of mastoiditis?
*a. Mastoidotomy
b. Radical operation on the middle ear
c. Cateterization of the Eustachian tube
d. Tympanoplasty
e. Paracentesis of the drum

328. A 35-year-old woman was admitted to resuscitation department in asthmatic status. What is the most trustworthy criterion of breath effectiveness?
a. Respiratory volume
b. Minute respiratory volume
c. Determination of “dead” space
*d. РаСО_2 and РаО_2
e. Respiration rate

329. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
a. Depositing of blood in venous channel
b. Presence of hypervolemia
c. Increase of bleeding speed
*d. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
e. Shunting

330. A rounded well-defined shadow was found in the costo-vertebral angle on the chest roentgenogram of an otherwise healthy 9 year old girl. Make a preliminary diagnosis:
a. Sarcoma of the vertebra
*b. Ganglioneuroma
c. Ganglioneuroblastoma
d. Sympatoblastoma
e. Sympatogonioma

331. A 4 y.o. child attends the kindergarten. Complains of poor appetite, fatigue. Objective examination: skin and mucous membrane are pale, child is asthenic. In the hemogram: hypochromatic anemia 1st, leucomoide reaction of the eosinophile type. What pathology must be excluded first of all?
*a. Helminthic invasion
b. Hypoplastic anemia
c. Atrophic gastritis
d. Duodenal ulcer
e. Lymphoprolipherative process

332. A 33 year old male patient was brought to Emergency Department with the signs of cardiovascular collapse: BP - 60/30 mm Hg, Ps - 140 bpm, the skin is pale and moist, diuresis 20 ml/h, Hb - 80 g/l, red blood cell count - 2,5×1012/l. The reduction of blood volume averages:
*a. 30-40%
b. 15-20%
c. 25-30%
d. 20-25%
e. 10-15%

333. What preparations are used for prevention of fungal infection?
a. Rubomycin, Bleomycin, Mytomycin C
b. Captopril, Enalapril
c. Isoniazid, Ftibazid, Pyrazinamid
*d. Fluconozol, Orungol, Nisoral
e. Cytosar, Cormyctin, Lomycitin

334. What developes most often after accidental intake of Hydrochloric acid?
a. Deyladss syndrome
b. Acute pancreatitis
c. Cushings syndrome
d. Kutlings syndrome
*e. Cardiac insufficiency

335. A 36 y.o. patient is diagnosed with right sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Antiinflammation therapy
b. Pleural puncture
c. Thoracotomy
*d. Surgical drainage of the pleural cavity
e. Symptomatic therapy

336. A 28 year old woman was admitted to the emergency room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot" 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Cellulitis
b. Subcutaneous hematoma
c. Early deep vein thrombosis
d. Insect bite
*e. Superficial venous thrombosis

337. A 22 y.o. man complains of acute throat pain, increasing upon swallowing during 3 days. Body temperature 38,3°C, neck lymph nodules are slightly enlarged and painful. Pharyngoscopically - tonsilar hyperemia, enlargement and edema, tonsils are covered by round yellow fibrinous patches around crypts openings. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus in swab analysis. What is the diagnosis?
a. Іnfectious mononucleosis
b. Pharyngeal candidosis
c. Acute follicular tonsilitis
d. Pharyngeal diphtheria
*e. Acute membranous tonsilitis

338. A patient is staying in the hospital with the diagnosis of abdominal typhus. During the 3-d week from the beginning of the disease the patient stopped keeping diet and confinement to bed. As a result the body temperature and rapid pulse decreased and melena appeared. What kind of complications should we think about first of all?
*a. Intestinal haemorrhage
b. Meningitis
c. Hepatite
d. Nephroso-nephritis
e. Thrombophlebitis

339. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute ileitis
*b. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum
c. Ulcerative colitis
d. Perforated Meckels diverticulum
e. Ileocecal tuberculosis

340. A 50 year old woman with a 2-year history of mild, diffuse, tender thyroid enlargement complains of 10 pound weight gain and fatigue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Riedels thyroiditis
b. Suppurative thyroiditis
c. Papillary thyroid carcinoma
*d. Hashimotos thyroiditis
e. Subacute thyroiditis

341. A severely traumatized patient who has been receiving prolonged parenteral alimentation develops diarrhea, mental depression, alopecia and perioral and periorbital dermatitis. Administration of which of the following trace elements is most likely to reverse these complications?
a. Copper
*b. Zinc
c. Selenium
d. Iodine
e. Silicon

342. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the reception room of the Central District Hospital. He complains of a severely painful swelling localized on posterior neck, fever up to 38,40C and general weakness. In anamnesis: diabetes mellitus within 5 years. On physical examination on the posterior neck surface there is an infiltrate elevated above surrounding skin. The tissues affected by swelling are tense and blue reddish discoloration in central area. There are also several purulent necrotic pustules which are connected with each other and form a large skin necrosis. A thinned necrotic skin of this swelling has holes looking like sieve, pus discharges through out. What disease should a doctor consider first of all?
a. Carbuncle associated with anthrax
b. Skin abscess
c. Furuncle
d. Acute skin cellulitis
*e. Carbuncle

343. A 19 y.o. man was admitted to the reception department in 20 minutes after being wounded with the knife to the left chest. The patient is confused. The heart rate is 96 bpm and BP- 80/60 mm Hg. There are the dilated neck veins, sharply diminished apical beat and evident heart enlargement What kind of penetrative chest wound complications has developed in patient?
a. Massive hemothorax
b. Closed pneumothorax
c. Valve-likes pneumothorax
*d. Pericardium tamponade
e. Open pneumothorax

344. A 35 y.o. patient complains of a difficult swallowing, pain behind the breastbone. He can eat only liquid food. While swallowing sometimes he has attacks of cough and dyspnea. Above mentioned complaints are progressing. It is known that the patient has had a chemical burn of esophagus one month ago. What complication does the patient have?
*a. Corrosive esophagitis and stricture
b. Esophageal diverticula
c. Cardiac insufficiency
d. Cardiac achalasia
e. Esophagitis

345. Survey radiograph of chest of a 62 year old smoker who often suffers from "pneumonias" showed a triangle shadow in the right lung, its vertex is pointing towards the lung root. It also showed deviation of heart and mediastinum shadows towards the lesion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung abscess
b. Peripheral cancer of lung
c. Atelectasis
*d. Cenral cancer of lung
e. Lung cyst

346. A patient operated for acute paraproctitis undergoes antibacterial and detoxification therapy, the local course of the disease has the positive dynamics. Since the operation the patient has had chills, pyrexia, tachycardia, euphoria for five days. The doctor suspected sepsis. What study will confirm the diagnosis?
a. Determining the rate of microbial contamination of wound
b. Determining the rate of average-weight molecules
c. X-ray of lungs
d. Liver ultrasound
*e. Blood culture for a pathogen

347. A 44-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital with complaints of dull, aching pain in the left lumbar region, the admixture of pus in the urine. Examination revealed a grade II staghorn calculus on the left. What method of treatment is indicated for this patient?
a. Contact lithotripsy
b. Conservative therapy
c. Ascending litholysis
*d. Surgery
e. Distance lithotripsy

348. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, to- 35,0°C. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. -
*b. Hypothermia
c. Apparent death
d. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
e. Frostbite of trunk and extremities

349. A 24-year-old patient got a puncture injury below the Pouparts ligament accompanied by intense arterial bleeding. The best method to temporarily stop the bleeding in the patient would be:
a. Maximum limb bending
b. Esmarchs tourniquet
*c. Compression band
d. Compressing a blood vessel with a clamp
e. Wound suturing

350. A 65-year-old patient complains of dull pain in the rectum during and after defecation, discharge of mucus and small amount of blood mixed up with mucus and faeces. The discharged blood is of dark red color, sometimes with small amount of clots. The patient is sick for 8 months, has lost some weight. On digital examination, there is a round constriction of the rectum with infiltrate at a height of 4-5 cm from the anus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Crohns disease
b. Non-specific ulcer colitis
c. Cicatricial stenosis of the rectum
d. Chronic paraproctitis
*e. Cancer of the medium-ampullar section of the rectum

351. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subcapsular kidneys rupture
b. Paranephral hematoma
c. Kidneys abruption
*d. Kidneys contusion
e. Multiple kidneys ruptures

352. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6°C. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5х2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Alveolar echinococcus of liver
b. Liver abscess
c. Paravesical liver abscesses
d. Cystous liver cancer
e. Liver cancer

353. A 36-year-old woman applied to doctor with complaints of the enlargement of the right mammary gland. On physical exam: the right mammary gland is enlarged, hardened; nipple with areola is pasty and hydropic, looks like "lemon peel". There palpates a lymph node in the right axilla, 1,5 cm in diameter, dense consistence, not mobile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute mastitis
b. Diffusive mastopathy
c. Pagets cancer
d. Erysipelatouslike cancer of the mammary gland
*e. Hydropic and infiltrative cancer of the mammary gland

354. A 54-year-old patient applied with complaints of acute pain in the shoulder-joint. 10 minutes earlier he fell in the street with his arms stretched. Doctor of the traumatological unit noticed an acute deformation of the right shoulder-joint, the impossibilty of active movement in the right extremity. Roentgenologically: uncoincidence of articulating surfaces. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Contusion of the humerus
b. Dislocation of the humerus
*c. Dislocation of the clavicle
d. Dislocation of the scapula
e. Fracture of the humerus

355. A 62-year-old patient has been delivered to the surgical department with complaints of sudden pain in the umbilical region irradiating to the back and groin, which was accompanied by a syncope. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, umbilical region is tender on palpation, bowel sounds are diminished. AP drop is present. USI reveals: free fluid in the abdomen, thickening of the wall of the abdominal aorta. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute appendicitis
*b. Rupture of abdominal aortic aneurism
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Stomach ulcer perforation
e. Peritonitis

356. Parents of a 2-year-old boy applied to clinic complaining of right testicle absence in the scrotum of a boy. While examining the boy, hypoplasia of the right half of the scrotum was revealed, absence of the testicle. Testicle is miniaturized, it palpitates along the inguinal canal but it could not be moved down to scrotum. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right-sided cryptorchism, abdominal form
b. Ectopia of the right testicle, pubic form
c. Retraction of the right testicle (pseudocryptorchism)
d. Left-sided monorchism
*e. Right-sided cryptorchism, inguinal form

357. A patient complains of an extremely intense pain in epigastrium. He has peptic ulcer disease of duodenum for 10 years. The patient is in the forced position being on the right side with legs abducted to stomach. Abdomen has acute tenderness in the epigastrium. Guarding contraction of the abdominal wall muscles is observed. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Penetration of ulcer into pancreas
b. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Acute condition of peptic ulcer disease
*e. Perforation of ulcer

358. A 30-year-old man has suffered from traffic accident. Consciousness is absent. Pulse on the carotid artery is undeterminable, no respiration. There is a wide leather belt on mans waist. What measures are to be taken?
a. Turn the victim to the right side
b. Start immediate artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage
*c. Conduct an artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage after having released from the belt
d. Do not touch the victim until the arrival of the police
e. Put the victim with his back on the shield

359. An emergency team deliverd a 83-year-old patient complaining of inability of her right leg to support the body after falling on her right side. Objectively: the patient lies on a gurney, her right leg is rotated outwards, the outside edge of foot touches the bed. There is positive straight leg raising sign. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Cotyloid cavity fracture
*b. Femoral neck fracture
c. Hip dislocation
d. Femoral diaphysis fracture
e. Hip joint contusion

360. A 50-year-old patient complains of bursting pain in the left lower limb that is getting worse on exertion, swelling in the region of shin and foot. Objectively: left shin and foot are doughy, skin of the lower shin is indurated and has a bronze tint, subcutaneous veins are dilated, there is an ulcer with necrotic masses. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gangrene of the lower extremity
*b. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome
c. Acute arterial thrombosis
d. Chronic arterial insufficiency
e. Deep vein thrombosis of the lower limbs

361. 3 days ago a 29-year-old patient presented with pulsating pain in the region of rectum, fever, general weakness. Objectively: local tenderness in the anal region in the 6 oclock position. Digital investigation of rectum revealed a painful infiltration reaching the pectinate line. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute haemorrhoids
b. Acute anal fissure
*c. Acute periproctitis
d. Rectum tumour
e. Acute prostatitis

362. A 65-year-old patient complains of gradual worsening of the left eye vision during 10 months. On physical examination: acuty of vision of the left eye is 0,01, not correctable. The eye is quiet, pupil of the eye is grayish, reflex from the eye-ground is absent. Intraocular pressure is 18 mm/Hg. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Leukoma of the cornea
b. Exfoliation of the retina
c. Open-angle glaucoma
d. Disorder of blood circulation in retina vessels
*e. Senile cataract

363. A 36 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with sharp pain in substernal area following occasional swallowing of a fish bone. On esophagoscopy the foreign body wasnt revealed. The pain increased and localized between scapulas. In a day temperature elevated, condition became worse, dysphagia intensified. What complication has developed?
a. Pulmonary atelectasis
b. Aspirative pneumonia
c. Esophageal hemorrhage
d. Obstruction of esophagus
*e. Perforation of esophagus with mediastinitis

364. A patient complains of intense pressing pain in the pharynx, mainly to the right, impossibility to swallow even liquid food. The illness started 5 days ago. The patients condition is grave. Body temperature - 38,90C, speech is difficult, voice is constrained, difficulties in opening the mouth. Submaxillary glands to the right are painful, enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Vincents disease
b. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
c. Diphtheria
d. Pharyngeal tumour
*e. Peritonsillar abscess

365. In a 65 y.o. female patient a tumor 13х8 сm in size in the umbilical area and above is palpated, mild tenderness on palpation, unmovable, pulsates. On ausculation: systolic murmur. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Abdominal aortic aneurism
b. Arterio-venous aneurism
c. Mitral insufficiency
d. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
e. Stomach tumor

366. A patient with suspicion of pelvic bones fraction is under examination conducted by the doctor who presses alae ilii in medial direction with his both hands. What causes painful syndrome of the patient?
a. Fracture of sciatic bones
b. Fracture of the sacrum
c. Retroperitoneal hematoma
*d. Disorder of continuity of the pelvic ring
e. Traumatic injury of the intrapelvic organs

367. A 30-year-old man was injured in a fire and got thermic burns of III-A and III-B degree that affected 20% of the total skin. AP - 110/70 mm Hg, heart rate -120/min. What transfusion means should be used for blind infusion before transportation?
a. Polyglycine
b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Albumin
*d. Saline solutions
e. 10% glucose solution

368. Development of chronic venous insufficiency of lower extremities depends on the functional condition of so-called musculovenous pump. This term refers to the following group of muscles:
a. Foot muscles
*b. Shin muscles
c. Buttock region muscles
d. Abdominal wall muscles
e. Thigh muscles

369. A 27-year-old patient was brought to clinic with a crashed wound of the posterior surface of the right shin in 2 hours after the accident happened. During surgical treatment pieces of dirty clothes and gravel were removed. What actions from the given below are the decisive ones to prevent an anaerobic infection?
*a. Radical surgical treatment
b. Introduction of the medical dose of the anti-gangrene serum
c. Hyperbaric oxygenation
d. Rational antibiotic therapy
e. Introduction of the preventive dose of an anti-gangrene serum

370. A 32-year-old patient lives in an area endemic for echinococcosis. In the last 6 months he reports of pain in the right subcostal area, fever. He is suspected to have liver echinococcosis. What study would be the most informative in this case?
a. Liver scanning
*b. USI
c. Biochemical laboratory examination
d. Survey radiography of abdominal cavity
e. Angiography

371. A patient complains of nycturia, constant boring pain in perineum and suprapubic region, weak urine jet, frequent, obstructed and painful urination. He has been ill for several months, pain in perineum appeared after getting problems with urination. Rectal examination revealed that prostate is enlarged (mostly owing to the right lobe), dense, asymmetric, its central sulcus is flattened, the right lobe is dense, painless, tuberous. What disease can it be?
a. Urolithiasis, stone of the right lobe of prostate
b. Prostate sclerosis
*c. Cancer of prostate
d. Prostate tuberculosis
e. Chronic congestive prostatitis

372. The patient complains of a painful swelling in the chin region, malaise, headache. Examination reveals an acutely inflamed cone-shaped dense node. The skin over it is tense, red. In the center of the node there is an ulcer with overhanging edges and a necrotic core of a dirty-green colour. Submandibular lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous form)
b. Parasitic sycosis
c. Tuberculosis
d. Carbuncle
*e. Furuncle

373. On the 5th day after a surgery for colon injury a patient complains of bursting pain in the postoperative wound, weakness, drowsiness, headache, fever up to 40°C. Objectively: the skin around the wound is swollen, there is gas crepitation. The wound discharges are scarce foul-smelling, of dark-gray colorl. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Anaerobic clostridial wound infection
b. Postoperative wound infection
c. Phlegmon
d. Erysipelas
e. Abscess

374. A childrens surgical unit admitted a 1-month-old boy who had been prenatally diagnosed with the left-sided pyelectasis. Such studies as drip infusion urography, cystography and USI allowed to reveal initial hydronephrosis. There is no information confirming the secondary pyelonephritis. What tactics of this patient management is most advisable?
*a. 6-month surveillance
b. Anderson-Hynes operation
c. Antibacterial therapy
d. There is no need in further surveillance and treatment
e. Urgent nephrostomy

375. A 60 y.o. man complains of significant pain in the right eye, photophobia, lacrimation, reduced vision of this eye, headache of the right part of the head. Pain occured 2 days ago. On examination: Vis OD- 0,03, congested injection of the eye ball, significant cornea edema, front chamber is deep, pupil is narrow, athrophic iris, there is optic nerve excavation on the eye fundus, intraocular pressure- 38 mm Hg. Vis OS- 0,8 unadjustable. The eye is calm, healthy. Intraoccular pressure- 22 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right eyes uveitis
b. Eye nerves neuritis
c. Maculodystrophy
*d. Acute glaucoma attack
e. Right eyes keratitis

376. A 54-year-old female patient has been admitted to a hospital 12 days after the beginning of acute pancreatitis. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition. The body temperature is hectic. Ps - 112 bpm. The abdomen is swollen. Epigastrium palpation reveals a very painful infiltration falling in the localization of pancreas. Abdominal cavity contains fluid. There is an edema of the left lumbar region. In blood: WBCs - 18cdot109/l. What is the required tactics of the patients treatment?
a. Increase in antienzymes
b. Massive antibacterial therapy
c. Further conservative treatment
d. Peritoneal dialysis
*e. Surgical treatment

377. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
*a. Citrate intoxication
b. Allergic reaction
c. Pyrogenous reaction
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Citrate shock

378. A 20 y.o. patient suddely felt ill 12 hours ago. There was pain in epigactric area, nausea, sporadic vomiting. He had taken alcohol before. In few hours the pain localized in the right iliac area. On examination: positive rebound tenderness symptoms. WBC- 12,2*10^9/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute cholecystitis
*b. Acute appendicitis
c. Perforated ulcer
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Rightside kidney colic

379. After an accident a patient complains of pain in the hip joint. Objectively: the leg is in the position of flexion, adduction and internal rotation, significantly contracted. There is elastic resistance to passive adduction or abduction of the extremity. Major trochanter is located high above the Roser-Nelaton line. A significant lordosis is present. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Cotyloid cavity fracture with a central dislocation of hip
b. Femoral neck fracture with a displacement
*c. Iliac dislocation of hip
d. Inferoposterior dislocation of hip
e. Pertrochanteric fracture of hip

380. Three weeks after acute angina the patient is still weak, inert, subfebrile, his retromaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged. Tonsils are flabby, stick together with arches, there are purulent plugs in lacunae. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chronic tonsillitis
b. Acute lacunar tonsillitis
c. Tonsillar tumour
d. Paratonsillitis
e. Chronic pharyngitis

381. A child undergoes in-patient treatment for acute staphylococcal destruction of the right lung. Unexpectedly he developed acute chest pain on the right, dyspnea, cyanosis. The right side of chest lags behind in the respiratory act. Percussion reveals dullness in the lower parts on the right, bandbox resonance in the upper parts. Borders of the relative cardiac dullness are shifted to the left. What complication has most likely developed?
a. Right lung abscess
*b. Right-sided pyopneumothorax
c. Spontaneous pneumothorax
d. Pleural empyema
e. Exudative pleuritis

382. A 98 y.o. male patient complains of pain in the left lower limb which intensifies on walking, feeling of cold and numbness in both feet. He has been ill for 6 years. On examination: pale dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Hairy covering is poorly developed on the left shin. "Furrow symptom " is positive on the left. Pulse on foot arteries and popliteal artery isnt palpated, on the femoral artery its weak. On the right limb the artery pulsation is reserved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemoral arthery thombosis
b. Obliterating endarteritis
*c. Arteriosclerosis obliterans
d. Raynaulds disease
e. Buergers disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)

383. Examination of the corpse of a man who died from hanging reveals: death spots disappear when pressed upon and restore after 50 seconds, rigor mortis is moderately expressed only in the masticatory muscles as well as neck and finger muscles, body temperature is of 31°C. The time of death:
*a. 6-7 hours ago
b. 16-24 hours ago
c. 10-18 hours ago
d. 8-10 hours ago
e. 1-2 hours ago

384. After contusion of the right eye a patient complains of sudden loss of vision with remaining light perception. Objectively: the eye is not irritated. The cornea is transparent. Pupil reacts to light. The pupil area is black. The fundus reflex is absent. What is the most likely cause of vision loss?
a. Traumatic cataract
b. Retinal detachment
*c. Hemophthalmia
d. Acute occlusion of retinal vessels
e. Optic nerve avulsion

385. A 65-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). The rate of prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Excretory urography
b. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
*c. Computer tomography of pelvis
d. Bone scintigraphy
e. Roentgenography of chest

386. X-ray picture of chest shows a density and an abrupt decrease in the upper lobe of the right lung. The middle and lower lobe of the right lung exhibit significant pneumatization. The right pulmonary hilum comes up to the dense lobe. In the upper and middle parts of the left pulmonary field there are multiple focal shadows. In the basal region of the left pulmonary field there are clear outlines of two annular shadows with quite thick and irregular walls. What disease is this X-ray pattern typical for?
a. Peripheral cancer
b. Pancoast tumour
c. Atelectasis of the right upper lobe
d. Abscessing pneumonia
*e. Fibro-cavernous pulmonary tuberculosis

387. A patient complains of impaired far vision. Previously his eyes often turned red and hurt. Objectively: the eyes are not irritated, the cornea is transparent, anterior chambers are median deep, their liquid is transparent. The iris of the right eye has not changed in colour, its pattern is unchanged. The pupil is of irregular shape, scalloped. Biomicroscopy of the crystalline lens reveals the areas of opacity and vacuoles. Make a diagnosis:
a. Diabetic cataract of the right eye
b. Senile cataract of the right eye
*c. Complicated cataract of the right eye
d. Tetanic cataract of the right eye
e. Radiation cataract of the right eye

388. A 26-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the right hand for 4 days. The pain arose at the site of corns on the palmar surface at the base of the II and III fingers. Some time later the dorsum of hand became edematic. I and III fingers are half-bent in the interphalangeal joints, the hand looks like "rake". What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenophlegmon of the right hand
b. U-shaped phlegmon of the right hand
c. Tendovaginitis
*d. Phlegmon of the second interdigital space of the right hand
e. Corn abscess of the right hand

389. A 30-year-old patient had deep burn covering 30% of body 30 days ago. Now he presents with continued fever, loss of appetite, night sweats. Burned surface weakly granulates. What is the stage of burn disease?
a. Secondary burn shock
b. Primary burn shock
*c. Septicotoxemia
d. Acute burn toxemia
e. Convalescence

390. A 29 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute girdle pain in epigastric area, vomiting in 1 hour after the meal. On examination: pale, acrocyanosis. Breathing is frequent, shallow. Abdominal muscles are tensed, positive Schotkin-Blumbergs symptom. What is the maximal term to make a diagnosis?
a. In 6 hours
*b. In 2 hours
c. In 1 hour
d. In 0,5 hours
e. In 3 hours

391. A 30 year old patient undergoes treatment because of Werlhofs disease. Objectively: the patient is pale, there are petechial haemorrhages on the extension surfaces of forearms. Ps is 92 bpm, AP is 100/60 mm Hg. The lower edge of spleen is at a level with umbilicus. Blood count: erythrocytes: 2,8×1012/l, Hb - 90 g/l, Ht - 0,38, thrombocytes - 30cdot109/l. The patient is being prepared for splenectomy. What transfusion medium should be chosen in the first place for the preoperational preparation?
a. Erythrocytic suspension
b. Washed erythrocytes
c. Stored blood
d. Native erythrocytic mass
*e. Thrombocytic mass

392. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
*a. A doctor of any speciality
b. A surgeon
c. An anaesthesilogist
d. A traumatologist
e. A laboratory physician

393. A 36-year-old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
a. Subcutaneous emphysema
b. Mediastinitis
c. Open pneumothorax
d. Closed pneumothorax
*e. Valvular pneumothorax

394. A victim of the car crash was brought to neurosurgery due to craniocerebral trauma. During examination symptoms of focused injury of the cerebrum are found, cerebrum contusion is suspected. What method of examination is to be used?
a. X- ray of cranium bones
b. Ultrasound examination of vessels of the cerebrum
c. Eye-ground examination
*d. Computed tomography of the cerebrum
e. Antiography of vessels of the cerebrum

395. A 35 y.o. female patient was admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of ulcerative gastric hemorrhage. Its been the third hemorrhage for the last 2 years. After conservative treatment vomiting with blood stopped, hemoglobin elevated from 60 till 108 g/L. General condition became better. But profuse vomiting with blood reoccured in 2-3- hours. Hemoglobin decreased to 93,1 g/L then to 58,1 g/L. What is the tactics of treatment?
a. Conservative treatment
b. Deferred surgery
*c. Urgent surgery
d. Conservative treatment with following surgery
e. Taylors treatment

396. A 39-year-old patient complains of a tumour on the anterior surface of her neck. The tumour has been observed for 2 years. It is nonmobile and has enlarged recently. The patient has a changed tone of voice, a sense of pressure. Objectively: in the left lobe of the thyroid gland a 3 cm node is palpable; it is very dense, tuberous, painless. Cervical lymph nodes are enlarged. Functional status of the thyroid gland is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous Riedels thyroiditis
*b. Thyroid gland cancer
c. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter
d. Nodular euthyroid goiter
e. Chronic lymphomatous Hashimotos thyroiditis

397. An unconscious victim in severe condition is brought to clinic. It is known that the patient touched the bare wire with his hand and during 5 minutes was under the influence of an alternating current with voltage of 220 V. Physical exam: skin is pale, cold by touch. Breath is weakened, BP - 90/50 mm Hg, Ps - 60 bpm, arrhythmical. There are fields of necrosis of the skin on the right hand and on the right foot. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Electrotrauma, acute cardiovascular failure
b. High voltaged electroburn of the right foot and shank
c. -
*d. Electroburn of the right foot and right hand
e. Vascular collapse due to electric current lesion

398. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
a. Bronchoscopy
b. Pleural puncture
c. Bacteriological analysis of sputum
*d. Bronchography
e. Survey radiograph of lungs

399. A victim of a road accident, aged 44, is operated on account of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. In which case can the patients blood from the abdominal cavity be used for autotransfusion?
*a. Stomach rupture
b. Liver rupture
c. Small intestines rupture
d. Splenic rupture
e. Bladder rupture

400. A man with a stab-wound of the right foot applied to doctor. He stepped on the board with nail two hours ago. In the patient medical chart it is stated that 3 years ago he passed the whole course of vaccination against tetanus. What is the tactics of doctor to prevent tetanus in this case?
a. Administer 0,5 ml of tetanus toxoid
b. Administer 3000 U of anti-tetanic serum
c. Administer 1 ml tetanus toxoid and 3000 U of anti-tetanic serum
*d. Do not conduct specific prophylaxis
e. Administer 1,0 ml of tetanus toxoid

401. A 42-year-old patient with acute haemorrhage and class III blood loss underwent blood transfusion and got 1,8 l of preserved blood and erythromass of the same group and Rh. After the transfusion the patient complained of unpleasant retrosternal sensations, his arterial pressure dropped to 100/60 mm Hg, there appeared convulsions. Blood serum calcium was at the rate of 1,7 millimole/liter. What is the mechanism of this complication development?
*a. Citrate binds calcium ions, hypocalcemia impairs myocardial function
b. Citrate causes the development of metabolic acidosis
c. Citrate binds potassium causing severe hypokalemia
d. The increased citrate rate causes convulsions
e. Citrate is cardiotoxic and nephrotoxic

402. A 40-year-old woman with acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage was transfused 400 ml of the preserved blood after having conducted all compatibility tests. After hemotransfusion the condition of the patient became worse. She started having headache, muscles pain, her temperature has risen up to 38,8°C. What is the reason for such condition of the patient?
a. Air embolism
*b. Pyrogenic reaction of medium severity
c. Allergic reaction
d. Hemotransfusional shock development
e. Bacterial and toxic shock development

403. A 27-year-old patient with a knife stomach wound has been delivered to a hospital 4 hours after injury. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition. Ps- 120 bpm, weak. AP- 70/40 mm Hg. Laparotomy revealed a lot of liquid blood in the abdominal cavity. The patient has been found to have bleeding from the mesenteric vessels of the small intestine. Damage to hollow organs has not been revealed. What is the best way to restore the blood loss?
*a. Autoblood reinfusiont
b. Transfusion of washed erythrocytes
c. Rheopolyglucinum transfusion
d. Transfusion of fresh frozen plasma
e. Erythromass transfusion

404. A patient presented to a hospital with a carbuncle of the upper lip. The body temperature is 39°C. There is a pronounced edema of the upper lip and eyelids. What is the surgeons tactics of choice?
a. Administer out-patient course of antibiotics
b. Administer physiotherapy
c. Disclose the carbuncle and administer antibiotics
*d. Hospitalize in the surgical unit
e. Disclose the carbuncle and administer out-patient treatment

405. A 62-year-old male patient complains of intense pain in the left leg that suddenly arose three hours before, leg numbness and coldness. During the year there has been pain in the leg while walking, hypersensitivity to cooling. Objectively: the left foot and shin have marbled skin, subcutaneous veins are collapsed. The foot is cold, active movements of the foot and toes are preserved. Pulse is present only on the femoral artery. There is rough systolic murmur above the artery. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute thrombophlebitis
b. Acute arterial thrombosis ileofemoral
c. Occlusive disease
d. Stenosis of the left popliteal artery
*e. Acute occlusion of the left femoral artery

406. Examination of a 38-year-old patient who had been hit with a blunt object on the left side of chest revealed a fracture of the X rib with fragments displacement, parietal pneumothorax. The patient complains of pain in the left subcostal area. Objectively: the patient is pale, AP- 80/40 mm Hg, Ps- 138/min, of poor volume. USI reveals fluid in the left abdomen. Splenic rupture is present. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Anti-schock actions followed by laparotomy after the arterial pressure rise
b. Left-sided thoracotomy immediately followed by laparotomy
c. Immediate upper median laparotomy followed by drainage of the left pleural cavity
d. Immediate laparotomy and alcohol-novocaine block of the X rib
*e. Drainage of the left pleural cavity followed by laparotomy

407. On the 2nd day after a surgery for toxic mixed goiter IV a 35-year-old patient complains of heart pain. ECG shows prolonged QT intervals. Chvosteks and Trousseau symptoms cannot be clearly defined. The patient is provisionally diagnosed with latent tetany. What study will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Determination of sodium
b. Determination of thyroid hormones
c. Determination of thyrotropic hormone
d. Determination of potassim
*e. Determination of blood calcium and phosphor

408. A 38 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in pain in the lumbar part of spine irradiating to the posterior surface of his left leg. The pain increases during changing body position and also in the upright position. Examination revealed positive symptoms of tension. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Myelopathy
*b. Pathology of intercostal disks
c. Arachnomyelitis
d. Spinal cord tumor
e. Polyneuritis

409. Two hours ago a 38-year-old patient got pain in his right shin. He was diagnosed with popliteal artery embolism, acute arterial insufficiency of grade I. What is the most appropriate therapeutic tactics?
a. Bypass grafting
b. Amputation at the middle of shin
c. Destruction of the embolus by the catheter
d. Resection of the popliteal artery
*e. Embolectomy

410. A 38-year-old patient has suddenly developed pain in the left side of his chest, suffocation. Objectively: moderately grave condition, Ps - 100/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg, breath sounds on the left cannot be auscultated. Chest radiography shows the collapse of the left lung up to 1/2. What kind of treatment should be administered?
a. Rest, resolution therapy
b. Operative therapy
c. Active thoracostomy
*d. Passive thoracostomy
e. Pleural puncture

411. A 47-year-old female patient complains of leg heaviness, fatigue when standing and walking. This feeling disappears when she takes a horizontal position. Objectively: dilatation of the superficial veins of the left shin and thigh with pigmentation and trophic skin disorders. What functional test should the examination be started with?
a. Pratt test 2
b. Sheinis test
c. Perthes test
*d. Trendelenburgs test
e. Pratt test 1

412. A neonatologist examining a full-term mature baby revealed the shortening and external rotation of the newborns lower extremity. Clinical examination revealed positive Ortolani sign, symptom of non-vanishing pulse, additional skin folds on the internal surface of thigh. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Varus deformity of the femoral neck
b. Dysplasia of the hip joint
*c. Congenital hip dislocation
d. Femoral neck fracture
e. Fracture of the femoral shaft

413. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
a. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention
b. Hardening of the child
c. Common cold prophilaxis
d. Feces observation
*e. Strict following of feeding regimen

414. A 10-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital with a closed craniocerebral injury with suspected cerebral edema. The patient is in grave condition, unconscious. The dyspnea, tachycardia, hypertension are present. Muscle tone is increased, there is nystagmus, pupillary and oculomotor reactions are disturbed. The mandatory component of intensive care is dehydration. What diuretic is adequate in this case?
a. Hydrochlorthiazide
b. Mannitol
*c. Furosemide
d. Spironolactone
e. Moduretic

415. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38°C, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Erysipeloid
*b. Sepsis
c. Erysipelas
d. Putrid phlegmon
e. Allergic reaction

416. A 42-year-old builder consulted a doctor about a foot injury with a nail that he got in the morning of the same day. The wound was washed with water. Three years ago he was vaccinated against tetanus. Examination established satisfactory condition of the patient. The left foot was slightly edematic, there was a stab wound on the sole. In order to prevent tetanus it is primarily required to:
a. Give an intravenous injection of 1 ml of tetanus anatoxin, 3000 IU of antitetanus serum
b. Treat the wound with suds
c. Administer a course of antibiotic therapy
*d. Give an intravenous injection of 0,5 ml of tetanus anatoxin
e. Give an intravenous injection of 3000 IU of antitetanus serum

417. A 9-year-old boy fell from a tree and hit the occipital region, there was a momentary loss of consciousness. Objectively: the childs condition is satisfactory, he complains of the headache and dizziness. The X-ray of skull reveals a comminuted depressed fracture of occipital bone in the region of inion. What treatment is indicated for the patient?
*a. Surgical intervention
b. Hemostatic therapy
c. Complex conservative treatment
d. Therapeutic lumbar punctures
e. Anti-inflammatory therapy

418. A 40-year-old female patient has a history of rheumatism. She complains about acute pain in her left eye, especially at night, vision impairment, photophobia, lacrimation. The patient cannot suggest any reasons for the disease. Objectively: weak pericorneal injection, flattening of iris relief, iris discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute attack of glaucoma
*b. Iridocyclitis
c. Keratitis
d. Iritis
e. Choroiditis

419. 14 days ago a 49-year-old patient was operated on for perforated appendicitis and disseminated fibrinopurulent peritonitis. The postoperative period was uneventful. On the 9th day the patient presented with low-grade fever, abdominal pain, frequent liquid stools. USI of the left mesogastrium reveals a fluid formation 9x10 cm large. In blood: leukocytosis with the left shift. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Left kidney cyst
b. Spleen abscess
c. Abdominal cavity tumour
d. Liver abscess
*e. Interloop abscess

420. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: t0- 37,3°C, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
b. Exudative pleuritis
c. Macrofocal pneumonia
d. Bronchoectatic disease
*e. Lung cancer

421. A 15 year old patient suffers from headache, nasal haemorrhages, sense of lower extremity coldness. Objectively: muscles of shoulder girdle are developed, lower extremities are hypotrophied. Pulsation on the pedal and femoral arteries is sharply dampened. AP is 150/90 mm Hg, 90/60 on the legs. Systolic murmur can be auscultated above carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Aortal stenosis
b. Aorta aneurism
*c. Aorta coarctation
d. Aortal insufficiency
e. Coarctation of pulmonary artery

422. A 15 y.o. patient has developmental lag, periodical skin yellowing. Objectively: spleen is 16х12х10 cm large, holecistolithiasis, skin ulcer on the lower third of his left crus. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,0×1012/L, Hb- 90 g/L, C.I.- 1,0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Blood bilirubin - 56 mmole/L, indirect bilirubin - 38 mmole/L. Choose the way of treatment:
*a. Splenectomy
b. Portocaval anastomosis
c. Omentohepatopexy
d. Omentosplenopexy
e. Spleen transplantation

423. A 72-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding during defecation. Digital rectal investigation revealed a tumour of the anal canal. After verification of the diagnosis the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma. The secondary (metastatic) tumour will be most probably found in:
a. Pelvic bones
b. Liver
*c. Lungs
d. Mediastinum
e. Brain

424. A patient has a stab wound on his right foot. On the fourth day after injury the patients body temperature rose up to 38°C, inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and painful, skin over them reddened. What complication might be suspected?
a. Tetanus
b. Erysipelas
c. Lymphangitis
d. Phlegmon
*e. Lymphadenitis

425. During a surgery on a 30-year-old patient a dark ileo-ileal conglomerate was discovered, the intussusceptum intestine was considered to be unviable. The intussuscipiens intestine was dilated to 7-8 cm, swollen, full of intestinal contents and gases. What pathology led to the surgery?
a. Strangulation obstruction
b. Paralytic obstruction
c. Spastic obstruction
*d. Invagination (combined) obstruction
e. Obturation obstruction

426. A 52 year old patient complains about headache, weakness of his upper left extremity. Neurological symptoms become more intense during physical stress of the left extremity. Pulsation on the arteries of the left extremity is sharply dampened but it remains unchanged on the carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Occlusion of brachiocephalic trunk
*b. Occlusion of the left subclavicular artery, steal syndrome
c. Raynauds syndrome
d. Thoracal outlet syndrome
e. Takayasus disease

427. A 43-year-old patient had been admitted to a hospital with clinical presentations of ischiorectal periproctitis. On the 12th day of treatment the patients condition deteriorated: there was an increase in the rate of intoxication and hepatic failure, the body temperature became hectic, AP was 100/60 mm Hg. USI of liver revealed a hydrophilic formation. In blood: WBCs - 19,6cdot109/l, RBCs.- 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 98 g/l. What complication was developed?
a. Budd-Chiari syndrome
*b. Liver abscess
c. Hepatic cyst
d. Pylephlebitis
e. Liver necrosis

428. A 57 year old patient abruptly lost the sight of one eye. Examination revealed that his sight made up 0,02 excentrically, eye fundus has haemorrhages of different forms and sizes ("squashed tomato" symptom). Disc of optic nerve is hyperemic. In anamnesis general vascular pathology is recorded. Direct-acting anticoagulants were administered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive angioneuropathy
b. Hypertensive angiopathy
*c. Thrombosis of central vein of retina
d. Embolism of central artery of retina
e. Diabetic retinopathy

429. Half an hour ago a 67-year-old patient with a hernia picked up a heavy object, which caused acute pain in the region of hernia protrusion, the hernia couldnt be reduced. Objectively: the hernia in the right inguinal region is roundish, tight, moderately painful; during palpation it was reduced back to the cavity, the pain was gone. Specify the further medical tactics:
a. Immediate laparotomy
b. Immediate hernioplasty
*c. Inpatient surveillance
d. Planned hernioplasty a month later
e. Planned hernioplasty a year later

430. A 55 year old patient felt suddenly sick in a hospital corridor, he was immediately examined by a doctor. Examination revealed that the patients skin was pale, autonomous respiration was absent, pulse on carotid arteries couldnt be felt, pupils were mydriatic. What action should be taken at the beginning of cardiac resuscitation?
a. Mouth-to-mouth ventilation
b. Restoration of airway patency
c. Defibrillation
*d. Precordial thump
e. Closed-chest cardiac massage

431. A 30-year-old patient has been admitted to the intensive care unit for multiple bee stings. The skin is covered with cold sweat. The pulse is felt just on the carotid arteries, 110 bpm, respiration is 24/min, rhythmic, weakened. Which drug should be given in the first place?
*a. Adrenalin hydrochloride intravenously
b. Adrenalin hydrochloride intramuscularly
c. Tavegil intravenously
d. Dopamine intravenously
e. Prednisolone intravenously

432. A 25-year-old victim of a road accient complains of chest pain, dyspnea. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition, Ps- 120/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg.There is pathological mobility of fragments of III-V ribs on the right. Percussion reveals a box sound over the right lung, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated on the right. What examination should be administered in the first place?
a. Pleural puncture
b. Bronchoscopy
*c. X-ray of chest organs
d. USI of chest organs
e. Thoracoscopy

433. After the pneumatic dilatation of oesophageal stricture a patient developed acute retrosternal pain getting worse when throwing the head back and swallowing. Objectively: dilatation of the neck veins, dropped beat pulse, signs of purulent intoxication, oliguria, emphysema of the upper portion of chest. What disease can be suspected?
*a. Suppurative mediastinitis
b. Pleural empyema
c. Spontaneous pneumothorax
d. Acute myocardial infarction
e. Thrombosis of the superior vena cava

434. A 6-year-old girl drank some coloured fizzy drink which gave her a feeling of pressure in the throat. 30 minutes later the childs lips got swollen, then edema gradually spread over the whole face, laryngeal breathing became difficult. The child is excited. Ps- 120/min, breathing rate - 28/min, breathing is noisy, indrawing of intercostal spaces is observed. What basic aid is most appropriate for the restoration of laryngeal breathing?
*a. Corticosteroids
b. Tracheostomy
c. Conicotomy
d. Antibacterial drugs
e. Sedative drugs

435. An 8-month-old baby has had problems with nasal breathing and muco-purulent discharge from the nose for a week. Examination reveals a rhinedema, muco-purulent discharges from the middle nasal meatus as well as on the back of pharynx. What disease are these symptoms most typical for?
a. Maxillary sinusitis
b. Sphenoiditis
*c. Ethmoiditis
d. Frontitis
e. Hemisinusitis

436. A 28-year-old female patient has been admitted to a hospital. She states to be ill for 12 years. On examination she has been diagnosed with bronchiectasis with affection of the left lower lobe of lung. What is the optimal treatment tactics for this patient?
a. Active drainage of the left pleural cavity
b. Bronchopulmonary lavage
c. Left-sided pneumoectomy
d. Antibiotic therpy
*e. Left lower lobectomy

437. 4 weeks after myocardial infarction a 56-year-old patient developed acute heart pain, pronounced dyspnea. Objectively: the patients condition is extremely grave, there is marked cyanosis of face, swelling and throbbing of neck veins, peripheral pulse is absent, the carotid artery pulse is rhythmic, 130 bpm, AP is 60/20 mm Hg. Auscultation of heart reveals extremely muffled sounds, percussion reveals heart border extension in both directions. What is the optimal treatment tactis for this patient?
*a. Pericardiocentesis and immediate thoracotomy
b. Puncture of the pleural cavity on the left
c. Pleural cavity drainage
d. Conservative treatment, infusion of adrenomimetics
e. Oxygen inhalation

438. Esophagus wall of a 72 year old patient with severe concomitant pathology was injured during urgent fibroesophagogastroscopy. This resulted in progressing of acute respiratory failure and collapse of the left lung. What aid should be rendered?
a. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus and mediastinum wound
b. Buelaus drainage of pleural cavity, antibacterial therapy
*c. Drainage of pleural cavity by Bullaux method, mediastinum drainage, antibacterial therapy
d. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus wound
e. Endoscopic closure of esophagus wound, drainage

439. A 17-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of the left knee joint. Soft tissues of thigh in the affected region are infiltrated, joint function is limited. X-ray picture of the distal metaepiphysis of the left femur shows a destruction focus with periosteum detachment and Codmans triangle found at the defect border in the bone cortex. X-ray of chest reveals multiple small focal metastases. What treatment is indicated?
a. Disarticulation of the lower extremity
b. Amputation of the lower extremity
c. Radioiodine therapy
d. Distance gamma-ray therapy
*e. Palliative chemotherapy

440. A 35-year-old victim of a road accident has got an injury of the right side of his chest. Objectively: respiration rate - 28-30/min, respiration is shallow, restricted respiratory excursion and acrocyanosis are present. Ps- 110 bpm, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Respiratory sounds over the right lung cannot be auscultated. Chest radiograph shows fractures of the VI-VII ribs on the right, the right pleural cavity contains both air and fluid, with the fluid at about the level of the V rib, the shadow of the mediastinum is displaced to the left. What first aid should be provided to the victim?
a. Vagosympathetic blockade
b. Antibiotic administration
*c. Puncture of the pleural cavity
d. Artificial ventilation of lungs
e. Urgent thoracotomy

441. On the first day after a surgery for diffuse toxic goiter a patient developed difficulty breathing, cold sweats, weakness. Objectively: pale skin, body temperature - 38,5°C, RR - 25/min, Ps- 110/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. What early postoperative complication occurred in the patient?
a. Postoperative tetany
b. Hypothyroid crisis
*c. Thyrotoxic crisis
d. Acute thyroiditis
e. Compression of the trachea by the hematoma

442. A 20-year-old patient complains of pain in the left lumbar region, arterial pressure rise up to 160/110 mm Hg. USI revealed that the structure and size of the right kidney were within age norms, there were signs of 3 degree hydronephrotic transformation of the left kidney. Doppler examination revealed an additional artery running to the lower pole of the kidney. Excretory urogram shows a narrowing in the region of ureteropelvic junction. Specify the therapeutic tactics:
a. Administration of beta-blockers
*b. Surgical intervention
c. Administration of ACE inhibitors
d. Administration of spasmolytics
e. Kidney catheterization

443. An emergency physician arrived to provide medical care for a hangman taken out of the loop by his relatives. The doctor revealed no pulse in the carotid arteries, absence of consciousness, spontaneous breathing and corneal reflexes; cadaver spots on the back and posterior parts of extremities. A person can be declared dead if the following sign is present:
a. Absence of corneal reflexes
b. Absence of spontaneous breathing
*c. Cadaver spots
d. Pulselessness
e. Unconsciousness

444. A patient undergoing treatment for the left-sided destructive pneumonia presents with deterioration of his general condition, progressing dyspnea, cyanosis. Objectively: the left side of chest is not involved in respiration, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated. Radiograph shows a shadow reaching the 5 rib with a horizontal fluid level and a radiolucency above it, the mediastinum is displaced to the right. What is the medical tactics?
a. Infusion and antibacterial therapy
b. Emergency bronchoscopy
c. Open thoracotomy
d. Endotracheal intubation
*e. Thoracostomy

445. A 26-year-old patient consulted a doctor abut sore throat, fever up to 38,2°C. A week ago, the patient had angina, didnt follow medical recommendations. On examination, the patient had forced position of his head, trismus of chewing muscles. Left peritonsillar region is markedly hyperemic, swollen. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Phlegmonous angina
b. Meningitis
*c. Left-sided peritonsillar abscess
d. Diphtheria of the pharynx
e. Tonsil tumour

446. A 4 month old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, there was also one-time vomiting. Objectively: the childs condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctors finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Wilms tumour
b. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
*c. Ileocecal invagination
d. Helminthic invasion
e. Pylorostenosis

447. A 3-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
a. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
b. Posttraumatic phlegmon
c. Suture sinus
*d. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
e. Wound abscess

448. A 40-year-old female patient complains of having a bulge on the anterior surface of neck for 5 years. Objectively: Ps- 72 bpm, arterial pressure - 110/70 mm Hg, in the right lobe of thyroid gland palpation reveals a mobile 4x2 cm node, the left lobe is not palpable, the basal metabolic rate is 6%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Nodular euthyroid goiter
b. Riedels thyroiditis
c. The median cervical cyst
d. Mixed euthyroid goiter
e. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter

449. Forensic medical expertise of corpse of a newborn revealed: body weight 3500 g, body length 50 cm, the umbilical cord was smooth, moist, glossy, without any signs of drying. Hydrostatic tests were positive. The test results are the evidence of:
*a. Live birth
b. Primary atelectasis
c. Hyaline membrane disease
d. Secondary atelectasis
e. Stillbirth

450. A week ago a 65-year-old patient suffered an acute myocardial infarction, his general condition deteriorated: he complains of dyspnea at rest, pronounced weakness. Objectively: edema of the lower extremities, ascites is present. Heart borders are extended, paradoxical pulse is 2 cm displaced from the apex beat to the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cardiosclerotic aneurysm
b. Pulmonary embolism
c. Recurrent myocardial infarction
d. Acute pericarditis
*e. Acute cardiac aneurysm

451. A 75-year-old male patient complains of slight pain in the right iliac region. The abdominal pain arose 6 days ago and was accompanied by nausea. Surgical examination revealed moist tongue, Ps- 76 bpm. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Abdomen was soft, slightly painful in the right iliac region on deep palpation, the symptoms of the peritoneum irritation were doubtful. In blood: RBCs - 4,0*10^12/l, Hb- 135 g/l, WBCs - 9,5*10^9/l, stab neutrophils - 5%, segmentonuclear - 52%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 5%, ESR - 20 mm/h. Specify the doctors further tactics:
a. Refer the patient to a district therapist
b. Administration of additional examination: abdominal ultrasound, x-ray contrast study of the gastrointestinal tract
c. Hospitalization, dynamic surveillance
d. Send the patient home
*e. Emergency operation for acute appendicitis

452. A 56-year-old patient was undergoing a surgery for suture repair of perforated ulcer. During the operation the cardiomonitor registered ventricular fibrillation. The first-priority measure should be:
a. Injection of calcium chloride
*b. Electrical defibrillation
c. Injection of lidocaine
d. Injection of adrenalin
e. Injection of atropine

453. A 78-year-old patient complains of severe pain in the lower abdomen, perineum and rectum; intense urge to urinate and inability to urinate without assistance. Abdomen palpation reveals a moderately painful globular formation above the pubis, there is percussion dullness over the formation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic incomplete urinary retention
b. Chronic urinary retention
*c. Acute urinary retention
d. Paradoxical ischuria
e. Cystitis

454. A 24-year-old patient had been delivered to the thoracic department with a chest injury, a fracture of the IV, V, VI ribs on the right. Plan radiography shows the fluid level in the pleural cavity reaching the III rib on the right. Puncture blood contained clots. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Hemostatic therapy
b. Medical thoracoscopy
c. Pleural puncture
d. Thoracentesis and thoracostomy
*e. Emergency thoracotomy

455. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax, it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made in:
a. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
b. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line
*c. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
d. In the projection of pleural sinus
e. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion

456. Name a statistical observation unit for determination of influence amount of bloodsugar on the healing of wounds surface in a postoperative period:
a. Blood analysis
b. An amount of bloodsugar
*c. The patient in a postoperative period
d. The patient who has a wound surface
e. The patient who was discharged on an after-care

457. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved application of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
a. 30 minutes
b. 15 minutes
*c. 120 minutes
d. 60 minutes
e. 180 minutes

458. A 9 y.o. child with diagnosis "chronic tonsillitis" stands dispanserization control. Within 1 year of observation there was one exacerbation of disease. Physical condition is satisfactory. The general state is not infringed. Define group of health:
a. II-d
b. III (b)
c. III (c)
*d. III (a)
e. I-st

459. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Sigmoid diverticulitis
b. Herpes zoster
*c. Leftsided renal colic
d. Torsion of the left testicle
e. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage

460. A 40 year old woman has a self-detected hard breast mass. The procedure of choice for confirming the diagnosis is:
a. Mammography
b. Ultrasonography
c. Aspiration biopsy with cytology
*d. Excision biopsy
e. Thermography

461. During investigation for chronic, severe, epigastric pain, a 40 year old alcoholic man is found to have multiple areas of narrowing alternating with dilatation ("chain of lakes" appearance) of the main pancreatic duct. The operation of choice is:
a. Distal pancreatectomy
b. Total pancreatectomy
c. Distal pancreaticojejunostomy
d. Sphincterotomy
*e. Lateral pancreaticojejunostomy

462. The treatment of choice for duodenal obstruction caused by secondary duodenal hematoma that developed a few days after blunt abdominal injury is:
*a. Nasogastric decompression and parenteral alimentation
b. Duodenojejunostomy
c. Tube duodenostomy
d. Immediate exploration
e. Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy

463. An anestesiologist gives narcosis to the patient, he uses a non-reversive contour. Anesthetic is halothane. Air temperature in the operation room is 21°C, humidity 50%, level of noise 30 dB. What occupational hazard is the principal one under these conditions?
a. Compelled working pose
*b. Air pollution with anesthetic
c. High level of noise
d. Improper occupational microclimate
e. Mental overfatigue

464. A patient suddenly felt an acute chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Objectively: the patient is excited, with pale skin. Breathing rate - 38/min, AP - 180/110 mm Hg. Later the patient lost consciousness and fell down. Pulse on the great vessels was absent, the pupils were equally dilated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Heart attack
b. Disorder of the cerebral circulation
c. Agonal state
d. Coma
*e. Clinical death

465. A 37-year-old patient has come to clinic being wounded in the area of umbilicus an hour ago.On physical exam, there is a prick and cut painful wound of about 0,5x1 cm around umbilicus on the abdominal skin with slight bleeding.How would you help this patient?
a. Drainage of the wound with rubber strip
b. Aseptic bandage
c. Suture on the wound
*d. Laparotomy, abdominal cavity organs inspection. Primary surgical processing of the wound
e. Inspection of the wound with canal probe

466. A 63 year old patient was diagnosed with purulent mediastinitis. What of the below listed diseases are NOT the cause of purulent mediastinitis?
a. Deep neck phlegmon
b. Perforation of the thoracic part of the oesophagus
c. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
*d. Cervical lymphadenitis
e. Perforation of the cervical part of the oesophagus

467. The diagnosis of a right-sided pneumothorax is made to a 36- year-old patient. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Antiinflammation therapy
b. Pleural puncture
c. Thoracotomy
*d. Drainage of the pleural cavity
e. Symptomatic therapy

468. A 16 year old patient with complaints of frequent pain in the abdomen was diagnosed with melanoma, examination revealed also pigmentation of the mucosa and skin, polyp in the stomach and large intestine. It is know that the patients mother has an analogous pigmentation and has been often treated for anemia. What disease is suspected?
a. Adolescent polyposis
b. Hirschprungs disease
c. Chrons disease
d. Tuberculosis of the intestine
*e. Peytz-Egerss polyposis

469. A 41 year old patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with haemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
*a. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube
b. Hemostatic therapy
c. Administration of plasma
d. Operation
e. Intravenous administration of pituitrin

470. It is suspected that a 34 year old patient has an abscess of Douglas pouches. What diagnostic method is to be chosen?
a. R-scopy of abdominal cavity
*b. Digital examination of rectum
c. Laparoscopy
d. Rectoromanoscopy
e. Percussion and auscultation of stomach

471. A patient has restrained umbilateral hernia complicated by phlegmon hernia, it is necessary to take following actions:
a. Herniotomy by Sapezhko
b. Herniotomy by Mayo
*c. Herniotomy by Mayo-Sapezhko
d. Herniotomy by Lekser
e. Herniotomy by Grenov

472. A 10 year old boy complains about pain in his left eye and strong photophobia after he had injured his left eye with a pencil at school. Left eye examination: blepharospasm, ciliary and conjunctival congestion, cornea is transparent, other parts of eyeball have no changes. Visus 0,9. Right eye is healthy, Visus 1,0. What additional method would you choose first of all?
a. Tonometria
b. X-ray examination of orbit
*c. Staining test with 1% fluorescein
d. Gonioscopia
e. Cornea sensation-test

473. A 35-year-old woman was admitted to resuscitation department in asthmatic status. What is the most trustworthy criterion of breath effectiveness?
a. Respiratory volume
b. Minute respiratory volume
c. Determination of “dead” space
*d. РаСО2 and РаО2
e. Respiration rate

474. A 19 year old girl was admitted to emergency department: unconsciousness, cyanosis, myotic pupils are present, superficial breathing is 12/min. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action necessary in this clinical situation:
a. Oxygen inhalation
b. Gastric lavage
*c. Controlled respiration
d. Caffeine injection
e. Cordiamine injection

475. A 36 y.o. patient is diagnosed with right sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Pleural puncture
b. Thoracotomy
c. Antiinflammation therapy
d. Symptomatic therapy
*e. Surgical drainage of the pleural cavity

476. A 30 year old man complains of acute pain in his right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 mm, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
a. Chronic secretory otitis media
b. Acute mastoiditis
*c. Acute purulent otitis media
d. Chronic purulent otitis media
e. Eustachian tube disfunction

477. A 22 y.o. man complains of acute throat pain, increasing upon swallowing during 3 days. Body temperature 38,3°C, neck lymph nodules are slightly enlarged and painful. Pharyngoscopically - tonsilar hyperemia, enlargement and edema, tonsils are covered by round yellow fibrinous patches around crypts openings. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus in swab analysis. What is the diagnosis?
a. Acute follicular tonsilitis
b. Іnfectious mononucleosis
c. Pharyngeal candidosis
*d. Acute membranous tonsilitis
e. Pharyngeal diphtheria

478. A patient is staying in the hospital with the diagnosis of abdominal typhus. During the 3-d week from the beginning of the disease the patient stopped keeping diet and confinement to bed. As a result the body temperature and rapid pulse decreased and melena appeared. What kind of complications should we think about first of all?
a. Nephroso-nephritis
b. Hepatite
c. Thrombophlebitis
d. Meningitis
*e. Intestinal haemorrhage

479. A 45-year-old woman, mother of four children, comes to the emergency room complaining of a sudden onset of the epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, radiating to the back, accompanied by vomiting. On examination, tenderness is elicited in the right upper quadrant, bowel sounds are decreased, and laboratory data shows leukocytosis, normal serum levels of amylase, lipase, and bilirubin. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute pancreatitis
*b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Perforated peptic ulcer disease
e. Sigmoid diverticulitis

480. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Perforated Meckels diverticulum
b. Ileocecal tuberculosis
c. Acute ileitis
*d. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum
e. Ulcerative colitis

481. A severely traumatized patient who has been receiving prolonged parenteral alimentation develops diarrhea, mental depression, alopecia and perioral and periorbital dermatitis. Administration of which of the following trace elements is most likely to reverse these complications?
a. Silicon
b. Copper
c. Iodine
d. Selenium
*e. Zinc

482. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with vomiting and acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease should be suspected?
a. Acute appendicitis
*b. Acute pancreatitis
c. Acute enterocolitis
d. Renal colic
e. Perforated gastric ulcer

483. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the reception room of the Central District Hospital. He complains of a severely painful swelling localized on posterior neck, fever up to 38,4°C and general weakness. In anamnesis: diabetes mellitus within 5 years. On physical examination on the posterior neck surface there is an infiltrate elevated above surrounding skin. The tissues affected by swelling are tense and blue reddish discoloration in central area. There are also several purulent necrotic pustules which are connected with each other and form a large skin necrosis. A thinned necrotic skin of this swelling has holes looking like sieve, pus discharges through out. What disease should a doctor consider first of all?
a. Carbuncle associated with anthrax
b. Skin abscess
c. Furuncle
d. Acute skin cellulitis
*e. Carbuncle

484. A 19 y.o. man was admitted to the reception department in 20 minutes after being wounded with the knife to the left chest. The patient is confused. The heart rate is 96 bpm and BP- 80/60 mm Hg. There are the dilated neck veins, sharply diminished apical beat and evident heart enlargement What kind of penetrative chest wound complications has developed in patient?
a. Valve-likes pneumothorax
*b. Pericardium tamponade
c. Open pneumothorax
d. Massive hemothorax
e. Closed pneumothorax

485. A patient operated for acute paraproctitis undergoes antibacterial and detoxification therapy, the local course of the disease has the positive dynamics. Since the operation the patient has had chills, pyrexia, tachycardia, euphoria for five days. The doctor suspected sepsis. What study will confirm the diagnosis?
a. Determining the rate of average-weight molecules
*b. Blood culture for a pathogen
c. Liver ultrasound
d. X-ray of lungs
e. Determining the rate of microbial contamination of wound

486. A 44-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital with complaints of dull, aching pain in the left lumbar region, the admixture of pus in the urine. Examination revealed a grade II staghorn calculus on the left. What method of treatment is indicated for this patient?
a. Conservative therapy
b. Ascending litholysis
c. Contact lithotripsy
d. Distance lithotripsy
*e. Surgery

487. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, to- 35°C. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Frostbite of trunk and extremities
b. -
c. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
d. Apparent death
*e. Hypothermia

488. A 48-year-old patient got a job-related injury of a hypodermic varicose vein on his shin that was accompanied by the intensive phleborrhagia. Choose the optimal variant of first aid:
*a. Pressure bandage and limb strapping
b. Application of Esmarchs tourniquet beneath the injury
c. Maximal limb flexion in knee joint
d. Occlusion of femoral artery in a typical place
e. Application of Esmarchs tourniquet above the injury

489. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Kidneys contusion
b. Multiple kidneys ruptures
c. Kidneys abruption
d. Paranephral hematoma
e. Subcapsular kidneys rupture

490. A 43 year old patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenosing papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
*a. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
b. To perform external choledoch drainage
c. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
d. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
e. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs

491. A 49-year-old male patient who had been scheduled for a surgery for gastric cancer underwent preoperative infusion therapy. Up to 3,0 liters of liquid was introduced into the right cubital vein. The following day, he felt a dragging pain in the right shoulder. Objectively: on the inner surface of the shoulder there is a longitudinal hyperemic zone, edema of skin, a tender cord. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Venepuncture and edema of paravenous tissue
b. Acute lymphangitis
c. Paravenous tissue phlegmon
*d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Paravenous tissue necrosis

492. A 62-year-old patient has been delivered to the surgical department with complaints of sudden pain in the umbilical region irradiating to the back and groin, which was accompanied by a syncope. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, umbilical region is tender on palpation, bowel sounds are diminished. AP drop is present. USI reveals: free fluid in the abdomen, thickening of the wall of the abdominal aorta. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Stomach ulcer perforation
*c. Rupture of abdominal aortic aneurism
d. Peritonitis
e. Acute appendicitis

493. A 62-year-old patient complains of the pain behind the sternum, bad passing of solid and liquid food, bad breath, increased salivation weight, loss of 15 kg during the period of 2 months. Appetite is retained. On physical exam: face features are sharpened. The skin is pale, with sallow tint, its turgor is decreased. The liver is not enlarged. Blood Hb - 86g/L. Gregersen reaction is positive. What kind of pathology caused the given clinical situation?
*a. Esophagus cancer
b. Cicatricial constriction of esophagus
c. Chronic non-specific esophagitis
d. Achalasia of esophagus
e. Benign growth of esophagus

494. A patient suffers from suddenly arising crampy pain in the right loin area. 2 hours after the pain had started, hematuria took place. Loin X-ray: no pathological shadows. Ultrasound: pyelocaliectasis on the right, the left part is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Intestine invagination
b. Acute appendicitis
*c. Stone of the right kidney, renal colic
d. Twist of the right ovary cyst
e. Tumour of the right kidney pelvis

495. A patient complains of an extremely intense pain in epigastrium. He has peptic ulcer disease of duodenum for 10 years. The patient is in the forced position being on the right side with legs abducted to stomach. Abdomen has acute tenderness in the epigastrium. Guarding contraction of the abdominal wall muscles is observed. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Penetration of ulcer into pancreas
c. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
*d. Perforation of ulcer
e. Acute condition of peptic ulcer disease

496. A 30-year-old man has suffered from traffic accident. Consciousness is absent. Pulse on the carotid artery is undeterminable, no respiration. There is a wide leather belt on mans waist. What measures are to be taken?
*a. Conduct an artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage after having released from the belt
b. Turn the victim to the right side
c. Put the victim with his back on the shield
d. Do not touch the victim until the arrival of the police
e. Start immediate artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage

497. An emergency team deliverd a 83-year-old patient complaining of inability of her right leg to support the body after falling on her right side. Objectively: the patient lies on a gurney, her right leg is rotated outwards, the outside edge of foot touches the bed. There is positive straight leg raising sign. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Femoral neck fracture
b. Hip dislocation
c. Cotyloid cavity fracture
d. Hip joint contusion
e. Femoral diaphysis fracture

498. 3 days ago a 29-year-old patient presented with pulsating pain in the region of rectum, fever, general weakness. Objectively: local tenderness in the anal region in the 6 oclock position. Digital investigation of rectum revealed a painful infiltration reaching the pectinate line. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rectum tumour
b. Acute prostatitis
c. Acute anal fissure
d. Acute haemorrhoids
*e. Acute periproctitis

499. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patients condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min, Ps- 96 bpm, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are moist rales of different types above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Pleural empyema
c. Pyopneumothorax
*d. Acute pulmonary abscess
e. Acute focal pneumonia

500. A patient complains of intense pressing pain in the pharynx, mainly to the right, impossibility to swallow even liquid food. The illness started 5 days ago. The patients condition is grave. Body temperature - 38,9°C, speech is difficult, voice is constrained, difficulties in opening the mouth. Submaxillary glands to the right are painful, enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Vincents disease
b. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
c. Diphtheria
d. Pharyngeal tumour
*e. Peritonsillar abscess

501. An hour before an elective surgery, a 56-year-old patient of the surgical department got a dramatic increase in blood pressure, tachycardia, hand tremor. The patient is confused, anxious, depressed, fearful, is pessimistic about the operation outcome, refuses the surgery. What tactics should be chosen by a surgeon?
a. Predict the psychological state of the patient
b. Isolate the patient
*c. Start the surgery after correction of blood pressure
d. Organize monitoring of the patient by medical personnel and mental health counselor
e. Organize monitoring of the patient by his family members

502. A 48-year-old male patient complains of pain in the lower extremities, especially when walking, intermittent claudication, numbness in the fingers, cold extremities, inability to walk more than 100 meters. Sleeps with his leg lowered. The patient has been a smoker since he was 16, abuses alcohol, has a history of CHD. The left lower extremity is colder than the right one, the skin of extremities is dry, pedal pulse cannot be palpated, femoral pulse is preserved. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Raynauds disease
b. Deep thrombophlebitis
c. Diabetic angiopathy
d. Leriche syndrome
*e. Obliterating endarteritis

503. A 24 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about continued fever, night sweating. She lost 7 kg within the last 3 months. She had casual sexual contacts. Objectively: enlargement of all lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome. Blood count: leukocytes - 2,2×109/L. What disease can be suspected?
a. Chroniosepsis
*b. HIV-infection
c. Tuberculosis
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Infectionous mononucleosis

504. A 27-year-old patient was brought to clinic with a crashed wound of the posterior surface of the right shin in 2 hours after the accident happened. During surgical treatment pieces of dirty clothes and gravel were removed. What actions from the given below are the decisive ones to prevent an anaerobic infection?
a. Hyperbaric oxygenation
*b. Radical surgical treatment
c. Introduction of the medical dose of the anti-gangrene serum
d. Introduction of the preventive dose of an anti-gangrene serum
e. Rational antibiotic therapy

505. A 32-year-old patient lives in an area endemic for echinococcosis. In the last 6 months he reports of pain in the right subcostal area, fever. He is suspected to have liver echinococcosis. What study would be the most informative in this case?
a. Biochemical laboratory examination
b. Survey radiography of abdominal cavity
*c. USI
d. Angiography
e. Liver scanning

506. The patient complains of a painful swelling in the chin region, malaise, headache. Examination reveals an acutely inflamed cone-shaped dense node. The skin over it is tense, red. In the center of the node there is an ulcer with overhanging edges and a necrotic core of a dirty-green colour. Submandibular lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous form)
c. Parasitic sycosis
*d. Furuncle
e. Carbuncle

507. A 54-year-old female patient has been admitted to a hospital 12 days after the beginning of acute pancreatitis. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition. The body temperature is hectic. Ps - 112 bpm. The abdomen is swollen. Epigastrium palpation reveals a very painful infiltration falling in the localization of pancreas. Abdominal cavity contains fluid. There is an edema of the left lumbar region. In blood: WBCs – 18×109/l. What is the required tactics of the patients treatment?
*a. Surgical treatment
b. Peritoneal dialysis
c. Massive antibacterial therapy
d. Increase in antienzymes
e. Further conservative treatment

508. A 37-year-old male patient has a histrory of diabetes of moderate severity. On the left side of face the patient has a carbuncle. What severe complication might have occurred in the patient?
a. Lymphangitis
b. Thrombophlebitis
c. Thromboembolism
*d. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
e. Endarteritis

509. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
a. Pyrogenous reaction
*b. Citrate intoxication
c. Allergic reaction
d. Citrate shock
e. Anaphylactic shock

510. A 20 y.o. patient suddely felt ill 12 hours ago. There was pain in epigactric area, nausea, sporadic vomiting. He had taken alcohol before. In few hours the pain localized in the right iliac area. On examination: positive rebound tenderness symptoms. WBC- 12,2×109/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Rightside kidney colic
c. Acute cholecystitis
*d. Acute appendicitis
e. Perforated ulcer

511. After an accident a patient complains of pain in the hip joint. Objectively: the leg is in the position of flexion, adduction and internal rotation, significantly contracted. There is elastic resistance to passive adduction or abduction of the extremity. Major trochanter is located high above the Roser-Nelaton line. A significant lordosis is present. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Inferoposterior dislocation of hip
b. Pertrochanteric fracture of hip
c. Femoral neck fracture with a displacement
d. Cotyloid cavity fracture with a central dislocation of hip
*e. Iliac dislocation of hip

512. A 43 year old patient had right-sided deep vein thrombosis of iliofemoral segment 3 years ago. Now he is suffering from the sense of heaviness, edema of the lower right extremity. Objectively: moderate edema of shin, brown induration of skin in the lower third of shin, varix dilatation of superficial shin veins are present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
*b. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome, varicose form
c. Lymphedema of lower right extremity
d. Acute thrombosis of right veins
e. Parkes-Weber syndrome

513. A child undergoes in-patient treatment for acute staphylococcal destruction of the right lung. Unexpectedly he develped acute chest pain on the right, dyspnea, cyanosis. The right side of chest lags behind in the respiratory act. Percussion reveals dullness in the lower parts on the right, bandbox resonance in the upper parts. Borders of the relative cardiac dullness are shifted to the left. What complication has most likely developed?
*a. Right-sided pyopneumothorax
b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Right lung abscess
d. Exudative pleuritis
e. Pleural empyema

514. Examination of a dead man who died from hanging revealed that cadaver spots disappeared when pressed upon and restored after 50 seconds, rigor mortis was moderately expressed only in the masticatory muscles and the muscles of neck and fingers. Body temperature was 31°C. Specify the time of death:
a. 8-10 hours
b. 10-18 hours
c. 1-2 hours
d. 16-24 hours
*e. 6-7 hours

515. Examination of the corpse of a man who died from hanging reveals: death spots disappear when pressed upon and restore after 50 seconds, rigor mortis is moderately expressed only in the masticatory muscles as well as neck and finger muscles, body temperature is of 31°C. The time of death:
a. 1-2 hours ago
b. 8-10 hours ago
c. 10-18 hours ago
*d. 6-7 hours ago
e. 16-24 hours ago

516. A 65-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). The rate of prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
b. Bone scintigraphy
c. Roentgenography of chest
*d. Computer tomography of pelvis
e. Excretory urography

517. X-ray picture of chest shows a density and an abrupt decrease in the upper lobe of the right lung. The middle and lower lobe of the right lung exhibit significant pneumatization. The right pulmonary hilum comes up to the dense lobe. In the upper and middle parts of the left pulmonary field there are multiple focal shadows. In the basal region of the left pulmonary field there are clear outlines of two annular shadows with quite thick and irregular walls. What disease is this X-ray pattern typical for?
a. Pancoast tumour
*b. Fibro-cavernous pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Abscessing pneumonia
d. Atelectasis of the right upper lobe
e. Peripheral cancer

518. A 26-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the right hand for 4 days. The pain arose at the site of corns on the palmar surface at the base of the II and III fingers. Some time later the dorsum of hand became edematic. I and III fingers are half-bent in the interphalangeal joints, the hand looks like "rake". What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Phlegmon of the second interdigital space of the right hand
b. Corn abscess of the right hand
c. Tendovaginitis
d. U-shaped phlegmon of the right hand
e. Adenophlegmon of the right hand

519. A surgeon examined a 42-year-old patient and diagnosed him with right forearm furuncle at the purulo-necrotic stage. The furuncle was lanced. At the hydration stage the wound dressing should enclose the following medication:
a. Ichthyol ointment
b. Vishnevsky ointment
*c. Hypertonic solution
d. Chloramine
e. Dimexide

520. A 30 year old patient undergoes treatment because of Werlhofs disease. Objectively: the patient is pale, there are petechial haemorrhages on the extension surfaces of forearms. Ps is 92 bpm, AP is 100/60 mm Hg. The lower edge of spleen is at a level with umbilicus. Blood count: erythrocytes: 2,8×1012/l, Hb - 90 g/l, Ht - 0,38, thrombocytes – 30×109/l. The patient is being prepared for splenectomy. What transfusion medium should be chosen in the first place for the preoperational preparation?
a. Erythrocytic suspension
b. Washed erythrocytes
c. Stored blood
d. Native erythrocytic mass
*e. Thrombocytic mass

521. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. An anaesthesilogist
*b. A doctor of any speciality
c. A surgeon
d. A laboratory physician
e. A traumatologist

522. An unconscious victim in severe condition is brought to clinic. It is known that the patient touched the bare wire with his hand and during 5 minutes was under the influence of an alternating current with voltage of 220 V. Physical exam: skin is pale, cold by touch. Breath is weakened, BP - 90/50 mm Hg, Ps - 60 bpm, arrhythmical. There are fields of necrosis of the skin on the right hand and on the right foot. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. -
*b. Electroburn of the right foot and right hand
c. Vascular collapse due to electric current lesion
d. Electrotrauma, acute cardiovascular failure
e. High voltaged electroburn of the right foot and shank

523. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
a. Survey radiograph of lungs
b. Bronchoscopy
*c. Bronchography
d. Pleural puncture
e. Bacteriological analysis of sputum

524. Blood typing resulted in positive isohemagglutination reaction with standard sera of A(II) and B(III) groups and negative reaction with sera of 0(I) and AB(IV) groups. What is this result indicative of?
a. The third blood group
b. The fourth blood group
c. The first blood group
d. The second blood group
*e. Faulty standard sera

525. A victim of a road accident, aged 44, is operated on account of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. In which case can the patients blood from the abdominal cavity be used for autotransfusion?
a. Small intestines rupture
*b. Stomach rupture
c. Liver rupture
d. Bladder rupture
e. Splenic rupture

526. A 42-year-old patient with acute haemorrhage and class III blood loss underwent blood transfusion and got 1,8 l of preserved blood and erythromass of the same group and Rh. After the transfusion the patient complained of unpleasant retrosternal sensations, his arterial pressure dropped to 100/60 mm Hg, there appeared convulsions. Blood serum calcium was at the rate of 1,7 millimole/liter. What is the mechanism of this complication development?
a. The increased citrate rate causes convulsions
b. Citrate binds potassium causing severe hypokalemia
c. Citrate is cardiotoxic and nephrotoxic
d. Citrate causes the development of metabolic acidosis
*e. Citrate binds calcium ions, hypocalcemia impairs myocardial function

527. A 27-year-old patient with a knife stomach wound has been delivered to a hospital 4 hours after injury. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition. Ps- 120 bpm, weak. AP- 70/40 mm Hg. Laparotomy revealed a lot of liquid blood in the abdominal cavity. The patient has been found to have bleeding from the mesenteric vessels of the small intestine. Damage to hollow organs has not been revealed. What is the best way to restore the blood loss?
a. Erythromass transfusion
b. Transfusion of fresh frozen plasma
c. Rheopolyglucinum transfusion
*d. Autoblood reinfusiont
e. Transfusion of washed erythrocytes

528. A patient presented to a hospital with a carbuncle of the upper lip. The body temperature is 39°C. There is a pronounced edema of the upper lip and eyelids. What is the surgeons tactics of choice?
a. Administer physiotherapy
b. Disclose the carbuncle and administer antibiotics
c. Administer out-patient course of antibiotics
d. Disclose the carbuncle and administer out-patient treatment
*e. Hospitalize in the surgical unit

529. A patient, aged 25, suffering from stomach ulcer. Had a course of treatment in the gastroenterological unit. 2 weeks later developed constant pain, increasing and resistant to medication. The abdomen is painful in epigastric area, moderate defence in pyloroduodenal area. Which complication development aggravated the patients state?
a. Stenosis
*b. Malignisation
c. Perforation
d. Penetration
e. Haemorrhage

530. A 62-year-old male patient complains of intense pain in the left leg that suddenly arose three hours before, leg numbness and coldness. During the year there has been pain in the leg while walking, hypersensitivity to cooling. Objectively: the left foot and shin have marbled skin, subcutaneous veins are collapsed. The foot is cold, active movements of the foot and toes are preserved. Pulse is present only on the femoral artery. There is rough systolic murmur above the artery. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Stenosis of the left popliteal artery
b. Occlusive disease
*c. Acute occlusion of the left femoral artery
d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Acute arterial thrombosis ileofemoralny

531. A patient complains about pyrosis and permanent pain behind his breastbone. When he bends forward after eating there appears regurgitation. Roentgenological examination revealed extrasaccular cardiofunctional hernia of esophageal opening of diaphragm. Esophagoscopy revealed signs of reflux-esophagitis. What is the necessary tretment tactics?
a. Conservative treatment in a surgical department
b. Treatment at a health resort
c. Conservative treatment in an outpatients clinic
d. Conservative treatment in the therapeutic hospital
*e. Operation in a surgical department

532. A 45-year-old male patient with acute abscess of the left lung has suddenly developed acute chest pain and dyspnea while coughing, tachycardia has increased. The control Ro-gram shows left lung collapse, the air in the left pleural cavity and a horizontal fluid level. What is the mechanism of this complication?
a. Atelectasis of the left lung
b. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
c. Bullae rupture of the left lung
d. Inflammation spread to the visceral pleura
*e. Abscess burst into the pleural cavity

533. Examination of a 38-year-old patient who had been hit with a blunt object on the left side of chest revealed a fracture of the X rib with fragments displacement, parietal pneumothorax. The patient complains of pain in the left subcostal area. Objectively: the patient is pale, AP- 80/40 mm Hg, Ps- 138/min, of poor volume. USI reveals fluid in the left abdomen. Splenic rupture is present. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
*a. Drainage of the left pleural cavity followed by laparotomy
b. Immediate laparotomy and alcohol-novocaine block of the X rib
c. Left-sided thoracotomy immediately followed by laparotomy
d. Anti-schock actions followed by laparotomy after the arterial pressure rise
e. Immediate upper median laparotomy followed by drainage of the left pleural cavity

534. On the 2nd day after a surgery for toxic mixed goiter IV a 35-year-old patient complains of heart pain. ECG shows prolonged QT intervals. Chvosteks and Trousseau symptoms cannot be clearly defined. The patient is provisionally diagnosed with latent tetany. What study will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Determination of blood calcium and phosphor
b. Determination of potassim
c. Determination of thyroid hormones
d. Determination of sodium
e. Determination of thyrotropic hormone

535. A 25 y.o. patient was admitted with chest trauma. Clinical and X-ray examination have revealed tense pneumothorax on the left. What emergency treatment should be undertaken?
a. Intravenous infusions
b. Intubation
c. Analgetics
*d. Pleural cavity drainage
e. Oxigenotherapy

536. A 38 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in pain in the lumbar part of spine irradiating to the posterior surface of his left leg. The pain increases during changing body position and also in the upright position. Examination revealed positive symptoms of tension. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Pathology of intercostal disks
b. Arachnomyelitis
c. Myelopathy
d. Polyneuritis
e. Spinal cord tumor

537. Two hours ago a 38-year-old patient got pain in his right shin. He was diagnosed with popliteal artery embolism, acute arterial insufficiency of grade I. What is the most appropriate therapeutic tactics?
a. Resection of the popliteal artery
b. Destruction of the embolus by the catheter
*c. Embolectomy
d. Bypass grafting
e. Amputation at the middle of shin

538. A 38-year-old patient has suddenly developed pain in the left side of his chest, suffocation. Objectively: moderately grave condition, Ps- 100/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg, breath sounds on the left cannot be auscultated. Chest radiography shows the collapse of the left lung up to 1/2. What kind of treatment should be administered?
a. Active thoracostomy
*b. Passive thoracostomy
c. Pleural puncture
d. Rest, resolution therapy
e. Operative therapy

539. A 47-year-old female patient complains of leg heaviness, fatigue when standing and walking. This feeling disappears when she takes a horizontal position. Objectively: dilatation of the superficial veins of the left shin and thigh with pigmentation and trophic skin disorders. What functional test should the examination be started with?
a. Sheinis test
b. Perthes test
c. Pratt test 2
d. Pratt test 1
*e. Trendelenburgs test

540. A neonatologist examining a full-term mature baby revealed the shortening and external rotation of the newborns lower extremity. Clinical examination revealed positive Ortolani sign, symptom of non-vanishing pulse, additional skin folds on the internal surface of thigh. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Congenital hip dislocation
b. Varus deformity of the femoral neck
c. Fracture of the femoral shaft
d. Femoral neck fracture
e. Dysplasia of the hip joint

541. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
a. Common cold prophilaxis
b. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention
c. Hardening of the child
*d. Strict following of feeding regimen
e. Feces observation

542. A 10-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital with a closed craniocerebral injury with suspected cerebral edema. The patient is in grave condition, unconscious. The dyspnea, tachycardia, hypertension are present. Muscle tone is increased, there is nystagmus, pupillary and oculomotor reactions are disturbed. The mandatory component of intensive care is dehydration. What diuretic is adequate in this case?
*a. Furosemide
b. Hydrochlorthiazide
c. Moduretic
d. Spironolactone
e. Mannitol

543. After a car accident a 37-year-old patient has an acute pain and bleeding in the middle third of his right thigh. Objectively: there is a wound on the anterior surface of the right thigh with massive bleeding, abnormal mobility at the level of the middle third of the thigh. The first aid is to be started with:
a. Immobilization of the extremity with a transportation splint
b. Venipuncture and intravenous infusion of polyglycine
c. Injection of pain-killers
d. Tourniquet application
*e. Digital occlusion of the femoral artery

544. A 42-year-old builder consulted a doctor about a foot injury with a nail that he got in the morning of the same day. The wound was washed with water. Three years ago he was vaccinated against tetanus. Examination established satisfactory condition of the patient. The left foot was slightly edematic, there was a stab wound on the sole. In order to prevent tetanus it is primarily required to:
a. Give an intravenous injection of 3000 IU of antitetanus serum
b. Give an intravenous injection of 1 ml of tetanus anatoxin, 3000 IU of antitetanus serum
*c. Give an intravenous injection of 0,5 ml of tetanus anatoxin
d. Treat the wound with suds
e. Administer a course of antibiotic therapy

545. A 55-year-old patient complains of severe itching, burning and pain in the eyes, skin redness in the outer corners of the palpebral fissure. Objectively: skin around the outer corners of the palpebral fissure is macerated, eczematous, there are single moist cracks. Palpebral conjunctiva is hyperemic, quaggy. There are minor discharges in form of stringing mucus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Blepharitis
b. Atopic eyelid dermatitis
c. Acute conjunctivitis
d. Sty
*e. Chronic conjunctivitis

546. A patient, aged 81, complains of constant urinary excretion in drops, feeling of fullness in thelower abdomen. On examination: above pubis there is a spherical protrusion, over which there is a dullness of percussion sound, positive suprapubic punch. What symptom is observed in this patient?
*a. Paradoxal ischuria
b. Dysuria
c. Pollakiuria
d. Enuresis
e. Urinary incontinence

547. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: to- 37,3°C, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchoectatic disease
b. Macrofocal pneumonia
*c. Lung cancer
d. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Exudative pleuritis

548. A 52 year old patient complains about pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with a lot of foul-smelling albuminoid sputum in form of "meat slops". Objectively: the patients condition is grave, cyanosis is present, breathing rate is 31/min, percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed different rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic pneumonia
*b. Lung gangrene
c. Pleura empyema
d. Lung abscess
e. Multiple bronchiectasis

549. 3 hours ago a 65-year-old female patient felt sharp abdominal pain irradiating to the right scapula, there was a single vomiting. She has a history of rheumatoid arthritis. Objectively: pale skin, AP- 100/60 mm Hg, Ps- 60/min. Abdomen is significantly painful and tense in the epigastrium and right subcostal areat, there are positive symptoms of parietal peritoneum irritation over the right costal arch, that is tympanitis. What is the tactics of an emergency doctor?
*a. To take the patient to the surgical hospital
b. To perform gastric lavage
c. To take the patient to the rheumatological department
d. To inject spasmolytics
e. To inject pain-killers and watch the dynamics

550. A 15 year old patient suffers from headache, nasal haemorrhages, sense of lower extremity coldness. Objectively: muscles of shoulder girdle are developed, lower extremities are hypotrophied. Pulsation on the pedal and femoral arteries is sharply dampened. AP is 150/90 mm Hg, 90/60 on the legs. Systolic murmur can be auscultated above carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Aortal insufficiency
b. Coarctation of pulmonary artery
c. Aorta aneurism
d. Aortal stenosis
*e. Aorta coarctation

551. A 72-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding during defecation. Digital rectal investigation revealed a tumour of the anal canal. After verification of the diagnosis the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma. The secondary (metastatic) tumour will be most probably found in:
a. Brain
*b. Lungs
c. Pelvic bones
d. Liver
e. Mediastinum

552. A patient with frostbite of both feet was delivered to the admission ward. What actions should be taken?
a. To administer cardiac medications
b. To rub feet with snow
c. To apply an alcohol compress
*d. To apply a bandage, to introduce vasodilating medications
e. To put feet into hot water

553. 10 years ago a patient had a fracture in the middle one-third of his left femoral bone, and during the last 7 years he has been having acute inflammation in the area of old fracture accompanied by formation of a fistula through which some pus with small fragments of bone tissue is discharged. After a time the fistula closes. What complication of the fracture is it?
a. Bone tuberculosis
b. False joint
c. Trophic ulcer
*d. Chronic osteomyelitis
e. Soft tissue phlegmon

554. A 21-year-old male patient got a deep cut wound in his right thigh. In the emergency room a surgeon on duty performed primary debridement of the wound and primary wound closure with a suture. After 4 days, there appeared pain, redness, edema, purulent discharge from the wound gap, body temperature rose up to 39°C. What kind of wound complication can you think of and what actions should be taken?
a. Erysipelas, prescribe antibiotics
b. Infiltration, apply a hot compress
*c. Wound abscess, remove the sutures and drain the wound
d. Tetanus, active-passive immunization against tetanus
e. Lymphangitis, apply a hot compress

555. During a surgery on a 30-year-old patient a dark ileo-ileal conglomerate was discovered, the intussusceptum intestine was considered to be unviable. The intussuscipiens intestine was dilated to 7-8 cm, swollen, full of intestinal contents and gases. What pathology led to the surgery?
a. Obturation obstruction
b. Strangulation obstruction
*c. Invagination (combined) obstruction
d. Paralytic obstruction
e. Spastic obstruction

556. A 43-year-old patient had been admitted to a hospital with clinical presentations of ischiorectal periproctitis. On the 12th day of treatment the patients condition deteriorated: there was an increase in the rate of intoxication and hepatic failure, the body temperature became hectic, AP was 100/60 mm Hg. USI of liver revealed a hydrophilic formation. In blood: WBCs - 19,6×109/l, RBCs.- 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 98 g/l. What complication was developed?
a. Liver necrosis
b. Budd-Chiari syndrome
c. Pylephlebitis
d. Hepatic cyst
*e. Liver abscess

557. A 57 year old patient abruptly lost the sight of one eye. Examination revealed that his sight made up 0,02 excentrically, eye fundus has haemorrhages of different forms and sizes ("squashed tomato" symptom). Disc of optic nerve is hyperemic. In anamnesis general vascular pathology is recorded. Direct-acting anticoagulants were administered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Embolism of central artery of retina
b. Diabetic retinopathy
c. Hypertensive angiopathy
d. Hypertensive angioneuropathy
*e. Thrombosis of central vein of retina

558. Half an hour ago a 67-year-old patient with a hernia picked up a heavy object, which caused acute pain in the region of hernia protrusion, the hernia couldnt be reduced. Objectively: the hernia in the right inguinal region is roundish, tight, moderately painful; during palpation it was reduced back to the cavity, the pain was gone. Specify the further medical tactics:
a. Planned hernioplasty a year later
*b. Inpatient surveillance
c. Immediate laparotomy
d. Immediate hernioplasty
e. Planned hernioplasty a month later

559. A 55 year old patient felt suddenly sick in a hospital corridor, he was immediately examined by a doctor. Examination revealed that the patients skin was pale, autonomous respiration was absent, pulse on carotid arteries couldnt be felt, pupils were mydriatic. What action should be taken at the beginning of cardiac resuscitation?
a. Defibrillation
*b. Precordial thump
c. Closed-chest cardiac massage
d. Mouth-to-mouth ventilation
e. Restoration of airway patency

560. A 25-year-old victim of a road accient complains of chest pain, dyspnea. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition, Ps- 120/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg.There is pathological mobility of fragments of III-V ribs on the right. Percussion reveals a box sound over the right lung, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated on the right. What examination should be administered in the first place?
a. Bronchoscopy
b. USI of chest organs
c. Thoracoscopy
*d. X-ray of chest organs
e. Pleural puncture

561. After the pneumatic dilatation of oesophageal stricture a patient developed acute retrosternal pain getting worse when throwing the head back and swallowing. Objectively: dilatation of the neck veins, dropped beat pulse, signs of purulent intoxication, oliguria, emphysema of the upper portion of chest. What disease can be suspected?
a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Thrombosis of the superior vena cava
d. Pleural empyema
*e. Suppurative mediastinitis

562. A 6-year-old girl drank some coloured fizzy drink which gave her a feeling of pressure in the throat. 30 minutes later the childs lips got swollen, then edema gradually spread over the whole face, laryngeal breathing became difficult. The child is excited. Ps- 120/min, breathing rate - 28/min, breathing is noisy, indrawing of intercostal spaces is observed. What basic aid is most appropriate for the restoration of laryngeal breathing?
a. Antibacterial drugs
b. Conicotomy
c. Sedative drugs
d. Tracheostomy
*e. Corticosteroids

563. An 8-month-old baby has had problems with nasal breathing and muco-purulent discharge from the nose for a week. Examination reveals a rhinedema, muco-purulent discharges from the middle nasal meatus as well as on the back of pharynx. What disease are these symptoms most typical for?
a. Frontitis
b. Hemisinusitis
c. Sphenoiditis
d. Maxillary sinusitis
*e. Ethmoiditis

564. A 28-year-old female patient has been admitted to a hospital. She states to be ill for 12 years. On examination she has been diagnosed with bronchiectasis with affection of the left lower lobe of lung. What is the optimal treatment tactics for this patient?
a. Left-sided pneumoectomy
b. Active drainage of the left pleural cavity
c. Bronchopulmonary lavage
*d. Left lower lobectomy
e. Antibiotic therpy

565. 4 weeks after myocardial infarction a 56-year-old patient developed acute heart pain, pronounced dyspnea. Objectively: the patients condition is extremely grave, there is marked cyanosis of face, swelling and throbbing of neck veins, peripheral pulse is absent, the carotid artery pulse is rhythmic, 130 bpm, AP is 60/20 mm Hg. Auscultation of heart reveals extremely muffled sounds, percussion reveals heart border extension in both directions. What is the optimal treatment tactis for this patient?
a. Conservative treatment, infusion of adrenomimetics
b. Pleural cavity drainage
c. Oxygen inhalation
d. Puncture of the pleural cavity on the left
*e. Pericardiocentesis and immediate thoracotomy

566. A 17-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of the left knee joint. Soft tissues of thigh in the affected region are infiltrated, joint function is limited. X-ray picture of the distal metaepiphysis of the left femur shows a destruction focus with periosteum detachment and Codmans triangle found at the defect border in the bone cortex. X-ray of chest reveals multiple small focal metastases. What treatment is indicated?
a. Radioiodine therapy
b. Disarticulation of the lower extremity
c. Amputation of the lower extremity
*d. Palliative chemotherapy
e. Distance gamma-ray therapy

567. On the first day after a surgery for diffuse toxic goiter a patient developed difficulty breathing, cold sweats, weakness. Objectively: pale skin, body temperature - 38,5°C, RR - 25/min, Ps- 110/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. What early postoperative complication occurred in the patient?
*a. Thyrotoxic crisis
b. Postoperative tetany
c. Compression of the trachea by the hematoma
d. Acute thyroiditis
e. Hypothyroid crisis

568. A 20-year-old patient complains of pain in the left lumbar region, arterial pressure rise up to 160/110 mm Hg. USI revealed that the structure and size of the right kidney were within age norms, there were signs of 3 degree hydronephrotic transformation of the left kidney. Doppler examination revealed an additional artery running to the lower pole of the kidney. Excretory urogram shows a narrowing in the region of ureteropelvic junction. Specify the therapeutic tactics:
*a. Surgical intervention
b. Administration of ACE inhibitors
c. Administration of beta-blockers
d. Kidney catheterization
e. Administration of spasmolytics

569. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a doctor about difficult swallowing, voice hoarseness, weight loss. These symptoms have been gradually progressing for the last 3 months. Objectively: the patient is exhausted, supraclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged. Esophagoscopy revealed no esophageal pathology. Which of the following studies is most appropriate in this case?
a. X-ray of lungs
b. Radioisotope investigation of chest
c. Ultrasound investigation of mediastinum
*d. Computed tomography of chest and mediastinum
e. Multiplanar imaging of esophagus

570. A 36-year-old male patient complains of having headache, obstructed nasal breathing, purulent nasal discharge for 2 weeks. A month before, he had his right maxillary premolar filled. Radiolography revealed an intense opacity of the right maxillary sinus. Diagnostic puncture revealed a large amount of thick malodorous crumbly pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tumor of the maxillary sinus
*b. Chronic suppurative odontogenic sinusitis
c. Chronic purulent sinusitis
d. Acute purulent sinusitis
e. Chronic atrophic sinusitis

571. A patient with autoimmune thyroiditis accompanied by multinodular goiter underwent the right lobe ectomy and subtotal resection of the left lobe. What drug should be administered to prevent postoperative hypothyroidism?
a. Merkazolil
b. Lithium drugs
c. Insulin
*d. L-thyroxine
e. Iodomarin

572. An emergency physician arrived to provide medical care for a hangman taken out of the loop by his relatives. The doctor revealed no pulse in the carotid arteries, lack of consciousness, spontaneous breathing and corneal reflexes; cadaver spots on the back and posterior parts of extremities. A person can be declared dead if the following sign is present:
*a. Cadaver spots
b. Lack of corneal reflexes
c. Unconsciousness
d. Pulselessness
e. Lack of spontaneous breathing

573. A 69-year-old male patient has been hospitalized with hypothermia. Objectively: the patient is pale, has shallow breathing. AP is 100/60 mm Hg, Ps is 60/min. Palpation of the abdomen and chest reveals no pathological signs. The body temperature is of 34,8°C. The patients breath smells of alcohol. Give treatment recommendations:
a. Body warming with hot-water bags
b. Rubbing with alcohol and snow
c. Antishock therapy
*d. Warm bath + intravenous administration of warm solutions
e. Forced diuresis

574. A patient undergoing treatment for the left-sided destructive pneumonia presents with deterioration of his general condition, progressing dyspnea, cyanosis. Objectively: the left side of chest is not involved in respiration, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated. Radiograph shows a shadow reaching the 5 rib with a horizontal fluid level and a radiolucency above it, the mediastinum is displaced to the right. What is the medical tactics?
a. Emergency bronchoscopy
*b. Thoracostomy
c. Endotracheal intubation
d. Open thoracotomy
e. Infusion and antibacterial therapy

575. A 26-year-old male patient consulted a doctor abut sore throat, fever up to 38,2°C. A week before, the patient had quinsy, didnt follow medical recommendations. On examination, the patient had forced position of his head, trismus of chewing muscles. Left peritonsillar region is markedly hyperemic, swollen. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pharyngeal diphtheria
b. Tonsil tumour
c. Meningitis
d. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
*e. Left-sided peritonsillar abscess

576. A 26-year-old patient consulted a doctor abut sore throat, fever up to 38,2°C. A week ago, the patient had angina, didnt follow medical recommendations. On examination, the patient had forced position of his head, trismus of chewing muscles. Left peritonsillar region is markedly hyperemic, swollen. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Meningitis
b. Diphtheria of the pharynx
c. Tonsil tumour
*d. Left-sided peritonsillar abscess
e. Phlegmonous angina

577. A 77-year-old male patient complains of inability to urinate, bursting pain above the pubis. The patient developed acute condition 12 hours before. Objectively: full urinary bladder is palpable above the pubis. Rectal prostate is enlarged, dense and elastic, well-defined, with no nodes. Interlobular sulcus is distinct. Ultrasonography results: prostate volume is 120 cm3, it projects into the bladder cavity, has homogeneous parenchyma. Prostate-specific antigen rate is of 5 ng/ml. What is the most likely disease that caused acute urinary retention?
*a. Prostatic hyperplasia
b. Sclerosis of the prostate
c. Acute prostatitis
d. Tuberculosis of the prostate
e. Prostate carcinoma

578. A 4 month old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, there was also one-time vomiting. Objectively: the childs condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctors finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Ileocecal invagination
b. Wilms tumour
c. Pylorostenosis
d. Helminthic invasion
e. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage

579. A 40-year-old female patient complains of having a bulge on the anterior surface of neck for 5 years. Objectively: Ps- 72 bpm, arterial pressure - 110/70 mm Hg, in the right lobe of thyroid gland palpation reveals a mobile 4x2 cm node, the left lobe is not palpable, the basal metabolic rate is 6%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mixed euthyroid goiter
b. The median cervical cyst
c. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter
d. Riedels thyroiditis
*e. Nodular euthyroid goiter

580. A week ago a 65-year-old patient suffered an acute myocardial infarction, his general condition deteriorated: he complains of dyspnea at rest, pronounced weakness. Objectively: edema of the lower extremities, ascites is present. Heart borders are extended, paradoxical pulse is 2 cm displaced from the apex beat to the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute cardiac aneurysm
b. Acute pericarditis
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Cardiosclerotic aneurysm
e. Recurrent myocardial infarction

581. A 36-year-old injured has been taken to the emergency station with open tibial fractures. Examination reveals bleeding: pulsating blood spurts out of the wound. What medical manipulations are required at this stage of medical care?
a. Stop the bleeding by a compressive bandage and transport the patient to the operating room
b. Transport the patient to the operating room
c. Immobilize the fracture and transport the patient to the operating room
d. Apply a tourniquet on the thigh distal to the source of bleeding and transport the patient to the operating room
*e. Apply a tourniquet on the thigh proximal to the source of bleeding and transport the patient to the operating room

582. A 75-year-old male patient complains of slight pain in the right iliac region. The abdominal pain arose 6 days ago and was accompanied by nausea. Surgical examination revealed moist tongue, Ps- 76 bpm. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Abdomen was soft, slightly painful in the right iliac region on deep palpation, the symptoms of the peritoneum irritation were doubtful. In blood: RBCs - 4,0×1012/l, Hb- 135 g/l, WBCs - 9,5×109/l, stab neutrophils - 5%, segmentonuclear - 52%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 5%, ESR - 20 mm/h. Specify the doctors further tactics:
a. Administration of additional examination: abdominal ultrasound, x-ray contrast study of the gastrointestinal tract
*b. Emergency operation for acute appendicitis
c. Send the patient home
d. Hospitalization, dynamic surveillance
e. Refer the patient to a district therapist

583. A 78-year-old patient complains of severe pain in the lower abdomen, perineum and rectum; intense urge to urinate and inability to urinate without assistance. Abdomen palpation reveals a moderately painful globular formation above the pubis, there is percussion dullness over the formation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute urinary retention
b. Chronic incomplete urinary retention
c. Cystitis
d. Paradoxical ischuria
e. Chronic urinary retention

584. A 24-year-old patient had been delivered to the thoracic department with a chest injury, a fracture of the IV, V, VI ribs on the right. Plan radiography shows the fluid level in the pleural cavity reaching the III rib on the right. Puncture blood contained clots. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Medical thoracoscopy
*b. Emergency thoracotomy
c. Thoracentesis and thoracostomy
d. Pleural puncture
e. Hemostatic therapy

585. During medical examination a cadet in the naval college was detected to have a painless dense ulcer 1.5x0.5 in size in his perianal area at the 2 o’clock position. The ulcer floor resembles ”old fat”. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Rectal fistula
b. Rectal fissure
*c. Hard syphilitic chancre of the rectum
d. Anal cancer
e. Anal crypt suppuration

586. A 32-year-old woman complains of tumorlike formation on the anterior surface of her neck that appeared 2 years ago. Within the last 3 months the tumor has been rapidly growing. It hinders swallowing and impairs speech; the tumor causes a sensation of pressure. Objectively the skin moisture is normal, pulse is 80/min., rhythmic, blood pressure is 130/80 mm Hg. In the right lobe of the thyroid gland there is a dense lumpy node 3.0x3.5 cm that moves during swallowing. Scanning image shows a ”cold nodule” in the thyroid gland. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Thyroid cyst
b. Thyroid adenoma
*c. Thyroid cancer
d. Nodular goiter
e. Autoimmune thyroiditis

587. After a surgery for a left thigh phlegmon the disease progression was complicated by sepsis. On the 7th day after the surgery there are marked signs of a generalized inflammatory reaction, in blood there are signs of toxic anemia and progressing hypoproteinemia, bilirubin levels are 40 mcmol/L, AST and ALT exceed the norm by 2.5 times. Oliguria persists (700 mL of urine per day). Name the phase of sepsis progression:
a. Recovery phase
b. Mixed phase
c. Stress phase
d. Anabolic phase
*e. Catabolic phase

588. A 10-year-old boy, who was outdoors in windy and cold weather, developed moderate pain and tingling in his fingers and toes. When he returned home, his parents noticed that the tips of his fingers and toes were white and their sensitivity was lost. As the affected areas were warming up, the fingers and toes developed tingling and painful sensations. Skin pallor changed into redness, tingling stopped, mild itching and swelling of the fingers appeared. Determine the frostbite degree in this child:
a. Frostbite of the III degree
b. Frostbite of the IV degree
c. Perniosis
d. Frostbite of the II degree
*e. Frostbite of the I degree

589. A 16-year-old patient has made an appointment with an otolaryngologist. He complains of elevated body temperature and sore throat. Disease onset was 2 days ago, after the patient ate two portions of ice-cream. Pharyngoscopy shows hyperemic mucosa of the palatine tonsils, with purulent exudate in the lacunae. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute pharyngitis
b. Pseudomembranous (Vincent’s) tonsillitis
c. Follicular tonsillitis
d. Diphtheria
*e. Lacunar tonsillitis

590. A 35-year-old woman complains of high body temperature and pain in the upper outer quadrant of her right buttock, which developed after an injection. She has been presenting with this condition for 3 days. At the site of injection the skin is hyperemic; there is a painful infiltrate with an area of softening in its center. The woman is diagnosed with a postinjection abscess of the right buttock. What tactics should the surgeon choose in this case?
a. 10-15 minutes of low-intensity laser radiation directed at the right buttock
b. Antipyretic agents, massage, and application of dry heat to the right buttock
c. Hospitalization, prescription of antibiotics, UHF
d. Abscess puncture, pus removal followed by application of antiseptics
*e. Abscess incision, sanation and drainage of the cavity

591. A 65-year-old woman on abdominal palpation presents with a tumor in the umbilical region and above it; the tumor is 13x8 cm in size, moderately painful, nonmobile, pulsing. On auscultation systolic murmur can be observed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Arteriovenous aneurysm
b. Gastric tumor
*c. Abdominal aortic aneurysm
d. Tricuspid insufficiency
e. Bicuspid insufficiency

592. A 32-year-old man complains of pain in his legs that intensifies during walking, intermittent claudication, numbness of his toes, extremity coldness, and inability to walk more that 100 meters. When he sleeps, his leg usually hangs down. The patient has been smoking since he was 16. He drinks alcohol in excess. The left leg is colder than the right one; the skin of the extremities is dry. No pulse can be detected on the pedal arteries, while pulsation of the femoral arteries is retained. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Raynaud disease
b. Deep thrombophlebitis
c. Diabetic angiopathy
d. Leriche syndrome (aortoiliac occlusive disease)
*e. Obliterating endarteritis

593. A 50-year-old patient was brought to a hospital with complaints of blood in urine. Urination is painless and undisturbed. Macrohematuria had been observed for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys cannot be palpated, suprapubic area is without alterations, external genitalia are nonpathologic. On rectal investigation: prostate is not enlarged, painless, has normal structure. Cystoscopy revealed no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Varicocele
b. Bladder tuberculosis
*c. Renal carcinoma
d. Dystopic kidney
e. Necrotic papillitis

594. A 59-year-old man complains of pain in his left eye and left side of his head, significant vision impairment of the left eye, nausea, and vomiting. Visual acuity of the right eye is 1.0. Visual acuity of the left eye is 0.03, attempts at correction bring no improvement. Right eye intraocular pressure - 21 mm Hg, left eye intraocular pressure - 65 mm Hg. Congestive injection is observed on the sclera of the left eye. The cornea is thick and swollen. The anterior chamber is shallow, moist, and clear. The pupil is dilated and unresponsive to the light, the fundus of the eye is not visible. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Stage II intraocular tumor of the left eye
b. Acute iridocyclitis of the left eye
*c. Acute attack of glaucoma of the left eye
d. Endophthalmitis of the left eye
e. Panophthalmitis of the left eye

595. On the 15th day after a small trauma of the right foot, the patient developed indisposition, fatigability, irritability, headache, elevated body temperature, and sensation of constriction, tension, and twitching in the muscles of the right shin. What disease can be suspected?
a. Anaerobic gas gangrene
b. Acute thrombophlebitis
c. Thrombophlebitis of the popliteal artery
*d. Tetanus
e. Erysipelas

596. A patient has the second and third degree burns of the 15% of the body surface. On the 20th day after the trauma the patient presents with sharp increase of body temperature, general weakness, rapid vesicular respiration; facial features are sharpened, BP is 90/50 mm Hg, heart rate is 112/min. What complication is it?
a. Purulent bronchitis
b. Anaerobic infection
c. Pneumonia
d. Acute intoxication
*e. Sepsis

597. 2 hours after a traffic accident a 28-yearold man in a grave condition was brought to a hospital. The patient complains of abdominal pain. He received a blow to the abdomen with the steering wheel. Objective examination revealed the following: the abdomen does not participate in respiration, is tense and acutely painful on palpation; the abdominal muscles are defensively tense, peritoneal irritation signs are positive, hepatic dullness is absent. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart rate is 120/min. What further treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Laparoscopy
b. Ultrasound investigation
c. Laparocentesis
*d. Laparotomy
e. Cold to the abdomen

598. A 48-year-old woman has arrived to the surgical unit with wounds in her thigh. On examination the wound surface has dirty-gray coating with unpleasant sweet smell. Wound content resembles raspberry jelly. Skin tissues around the wound are glossy and turgid. Palpation reveals moderate crepitation in the tissues. What microflora is the most likely to cause such inflammation?
a. Streptococci
b. Anaerobic non-clostridial
*c. Anaerobic clostridial
d. Staphylococci
e. Blue pus bacillus

599. After a pain attack in the right subcostal area, a 58-year-old woman with overnutrition developed icteric skin and sclera, lightcolored feces, and dark urine. Her abdomen is distended and painful on palpation in the right subcostal area. Palpation detects liver enlargement by 2-3 cm. Blood test: total bilirubin - 90 mcmol/L, conjugated bilirubin - 60 mcmol/L. What method of examination will be the most informative for diagnosis clarification?
a. Intravenous cholegraphy
b. Percutaneous transhepatic cholegraphy
c. US of the hepatopancreatobiliary zone
*d. Retrograde cholangiopancreatography
e. Infusion cholegraphy

600. An 11-year-old boy for a month has been presenting with increasing pain in the right femur. In the painful area there is a nonmobile painful tumor with unclear margins. The child complains of general indisposition, weakness, increased body temperature up to 39°C. X-ray shows widened medullary cavity, small foci of cancellous bone destruction, and onion-like lamellar exfoliation of the cortical layer. What is the most likely pathology resulting in such clinical presentation?
*a. Ewing sarcoma
b. Fibrosarcoma
c. Juxtacortical sarcoma
d. Chondrosarcoma
e. Osteogenic sarcoma

601. A 43-year-old man complains of a protrusion in the right inguinal region, that enlarges due to strain. He has been presenting with this condition for 6 months. Within this period the protrusion has grown. Objectively in the right inguinal region an elastic protrusion 8x5 cm is visible. On palpation it disappears, leaving an empty space 4x4 cm between the pedicles of the Poupart ligament. ”Cough push” sign is positive over this opening. Make the diagnosis:
a. Right-sided reducible arcuate line hernia
*b. Right-sided reducible inguinal hernia
c. Cyst of the right spermatic cord
d. Right-sided reducible femoral hernia
e. Right-sided inguinal lymphadenitis

602. A 78-year-old man with a prostate adenoma underwent a herniotomy for a direct inguinal hernia. After the surgery he presents with absent urination. Enlarged urinary bladder is detectable above the patient’s pubis. What measures should be taken in this case?
a. Apply cold to the urinary bladder area
b. Prescribe proserin (neostigmine) intramuscularly
c. Prescribe antispasmodics subcutaneously
*d. Bladder catheterization
e. Prescribe processing of the postoperative wound with UHF field

603. A 38-year-old patient has been brought by an ambulance to the surgical department with complaints of general weakness, indisposition, black stool. On examination the patient is pale, there are dotted hemorrhages on the skin of his torso and extremities. On digital investigation there are black feces on the glove. Blood test: Hb- 108 g/L, thrombocytopenia. Anamnesis states that a similar condition was observed 1 year ago. Make the diagnosis:
a. Hemophilia
b. Rectal tumor
c. Nonspecific ulcerative colitis
*d. Thrombocytopenic purpura
e. Ulcerative bleeding

604. A 30-year-old man came to the family physician. 2 months ago he underwent a surgery for open fracture of the humerus. On examination the patient’s condition is satisfactory; in the area of the postoperative wound there is a fistula that discharges a small amount of pus; the area itself is red; fluctuation is detected. X-ray shows destruction of the humerus with sequestra. What complication did the patient develop during the postoperative period?
a. Hematogenous osteomyelitis
b. Posttraumatic phlegmon
c. Suture sinus
*d. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
e. Wound suppuration

605. 3 hours after a trauma, a young man developed bradycardia of 46/min., anisocoria D>S, hemi-hyperreflexia S>D, hemihypesthesia on the left, and a convulsive disorder. The character of this process needs to be clarified. What method of examination will be the most accurate for this purpose?
a. Electroencephalography
b. Skull X-ray
*c. Brain CT
d. Echoencephalography
e. Lumbar puncture

606. The body of a 24-year-old woman with suspected poisoning has been found on the street. Forensic medical examination was requested by an investigator during examination of the site and the body. According to the Criminal Procedure Code currently in force in Ukraine, forensic medical examination is required when it is necessary to determine the:
a. Mechanism of death
*b. Cause of death
c. Time of death
d. Manner of death
e. Mode of death

607. A 37-year-old patient complains of pain in the spinal column, reduced mobility. The condition persists for 7 years. ”Sway back” is observed, there is no movement in all spinal regions. X-ray shows ”bamboo spine” vertebral column. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteochondrosis
b. Tuberculous spondylitis
c. Spondylolisthesis
*d. Ankylosing spondyloarthritis
e. Spondylitis deformans

608. A surgery unit received a person with an incised stab wound on the upper third of the right thigh. Examination detects an incised stab wound 3.0x0.5x2.0 cm in size on the inner surface of the upper third of the right thigh. Bright-red blood flows from deep within the wound in a pulsing stream. Characterize this type of bleeding:
a. Venous
b. Capillary
c. Mixed
*d. Arterial
e. Parenchimatous

609. A 47-year-old man developed the signs of decompensated laryngeal stenosis against the background of acute flegmonous laryngitis. He presents with inspiratory dyspnea at rest, forced position, cyanotic skin covered in cold sweat, tachycardia, deficient pulse, and low blood pressure. What urgent treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Oxygen therapy
*b. Tracheostomy
c. Intravenous administration of dehydrating agents
d. Oral administration of hyposensitization substances and broncholytics
e. Administration of glucocorticoid hormones

610. Heart X-ray of a 31-year-old man has revealed the following: with tightly filled opacified esophagus there is a marginal filling defect in its middle third on the posterior wall; the defect is 1.8x1.3 cm in size with clear oval border. Mucosal folds are retained and envelop the defect; wall peristalsis and elasticity are not affected. There are no complaints regarding the condition of the patient’s alimentary canal. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Barrett esophagus
*b. Esophageal tumor
c. Esophageal burns
d. Achalasia cardiae
e. Diverticulum

611. A 25-year-old man was hospitalized with complaints of pain in his lower abdomen and right lumbar area that appeared one hour ago. Patient’s general state is moderately severe. Body temperature - 38.2°C, heart rate - 102/min. The tongue is dry. The abdomen is painful on deep palpation in the right iliac area and in the Petit triangle. AureRozanov and Gabay signs are positive. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Acute appendicitis
b. Cecal tumor
c. Acute cholecystitis
d. Intestinal obstruction
e. Right-sided renal colic

612. A 45-year-old man diagnosed with acute pulmonary abscess suddenly developed sharp pain in his chest on the right and dyspnea up to 30/min. Examination detects facial cyanosis and shallow rapid respirations. Auscultation reveals acutely weakened respiration throughout the whole right lung; percussion reveals a vesiculotympanitic (bandbox) resonance at the lung apex and dullness in the lower lobe. What complication developed in this patient?
a. Pneumothorax
b. Pleuropneumonia
*c. Pyopneumothorax
d. Acute mediastinitis
e. Esophageal perforation

613. A 5-year-old child was brought to the ENT department by an ambulance. The child presents with cough and difficult respiration. From the patient’s history it is known that the child was playing with a toy construction set, when suddenly started coughing and developed labored breathing. Examination detects periodical cough, labored expiration, and respiratory lag in the left side of the child’s thorax. Auscultation: diminished respiration on the left. Percussion: tympanitis. X-ray shows a displacement of the mediastinal organs to the right. Make the diagnosis:
a. A foreign body in the left bronchus, complete bronchostenosis
b. A foreign body in the right bronchus, partial bronchostenosis
c. A foreign body in the right bronchus, valvular bronchostenosis
d. A foreign body in the trachea
*e. A foreign body in the left bronchus, valvular bronchostenosis

614. A 30-year-old man was brought to the neurosurgical department with complaints of constant headaches, nausea, vomiting, fever, and weakness of the right-side limbs. Anamnesis states that one month ago the patient had a surgery for left-sided suppurative otitis and mastoiditis. He has been undergoing treatment in an ENT department. Approximately 2 weeks ago the temperature increased, and the patient developed headaches. Objectively: heart rate - 98/min., BP- 140/90 mm Hg, temperature - 38.3°C. Neurologically manifested stiff neck: bilateral Kernig’s symptom, unsteadiness during the Romberg’s maneuver. Computer tomography of the brain revealed a threedimensional growth with a capsule in the left hemisphere. Make the diagnosis:
a. Echinococcus
b. Hydrocephalus
c. Arnold-Chiari malformation
*d. Cerebral abscess
e. Hemorrhage

615. The burns unit received a patient, who 6 hours ago during a fire received flame burns. On the patient’s body there is graybrown area of necrosis that covers 3/4 of the body perimeter. Occasionally there are small blisters with hemorrhagic contents and patches of shredded epidermis. What local therapy is necessary in this case?
a. Necrectomy with xenotransplantation
b. Necrectomy with dermal autograft
c. Chemical necrolysis
d. Blister puncture
*e. Decompression necrectomy

616. A woman in her early- to mid-thirties has lost her consciousness 3-5 minutes ago. On examination: the skin is pale, no pulse over the carotid arteries, no spontaneous respiration, pupils are dilated; the patient is nonresponsive, presents with atony. The patient’s condition can be determined as:
a. Comatose state
*b. Clinical death
c. Syncope
d. Natural death
e. Brain death

617. A boy had a foreign body removed from under his nail plate. 3 days later he developed a sharp throbbing pain at the end of his distal phalanx, which intensifies when the phalanx is pressed, hyperemia of the nail fold, elevated body temperature up to 38.5°C, and nail plate discoloration. Make the diagnosis:
a. Erysipeloid
b. Abscess
c. Erysipelas
d. Paronychia
*e. Subungual panaritium

618. A 32-year-old woman complains of body weight loss despite her increased appetite, nervousness, and tremor of the extremities. Objectively: the skin is moist; the thyroid gland is diffusely enlarged, painless, soft, and mobile. Blood test: increased level of T3, T4, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (THS). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis
b. Thyroid carcinoma
*c. Diffuse toxic goiter
d. Thyroid adenoma
e. Diffuse nontoxic goiter

619. A 19-year-old young man complains of cough with expectoration of purulent sputum in the amount of 100 mL per day, hemoptysis, dyspnea, increased body temperature up to 37.8°C, general weakness, weight loss. The patient’s condition lasts for 4 years. Exacerbations occur 2-3 times a year. The patient presents with malnutrition, pale skin, cyanosis of the lips, drumstick (clubbed) fingers. Tympanic percussion sound in the lungs, weakened respiration, numerous various moist crackles in the lower pulmonary segments on the left can be observed. In blood: erythrocytes - 3.2·1012/L, leukocytes - 8.4·109/L, ESR- 56 mm/hour. On X-ray: lung fields are emphysematous, the left pulmonary root is deformed and dilated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Multiple bronchiectasis of the left lung
b. Chronic abscess of the left lung
c. Suppuration of the cyst in the left lung
d. Left-sided pulmonary cystic dysplasia
e. Chronic left-sided pneumonia

620. A 57-year-old woman during a regular ultrasound examination presented with a space-occupying heterogeneous lesion in the right kidney. What is the most informative method of renal tumor diagnostics?
a. Radioisotope renography
b. Three glass urine test
c. Excretory urography
d. Retrograde pyelography
*e. Spiral computed tomography

621. A 40-year-old victim of a traffic accident sustained the following injuries: closed diaphyseal femur fracture, brain concussion, multiple rib fractures, hemopneumothorax, degloving shin injuries. What injuries require the most urgent attention?
*a. Multiple rib fractures, hemopneumothorax
b. Brain concussion
c. All injuries are equivalent
d. Degloving shin injuries
e. Closed diaphyseal femur fracture

622. At the railroad crossing a passenger train collided with a bus. In this collision 26 bus passenges died, another 18 passengers received mechanical injuries of varying severity. Where will be professional medical aid provided for the victims of this accident? Who will provide this aid?
a. In medico-prophylactic institutions; specialized second-response emergency teams
b. In medical institutions; all listed types of healthcare workers
c. At the site of the accident; first-response emergency teams
d. At the site of the accident; specialized second-response emergency teams
*e. In medico-prophylactic institutions; general physicians and surgeons

623. A 45-year-old man underwent a cardiac surgery one week ago. His general state has been deteriorating since then: dyspnea at rest, retrosternal pain that irradiates to the neck, marked weakness. Objectively his body temperature is hectic. His cardiac borders are expanded, apical beat is weakened. Auscultation detects pericardial friction rub. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute myogenic dilatation of the heart
b. Pulmonary embolism
c. Acute cardiac aneurysm
d. Myocardial infarction
*e. Acute pericarditis

624. A 45-year-old man was brought by an ambulance into the emergency hospital. He complains of sudden pain in the lumbar area, frequent painful urination, and vomiting. Examination detects pain in the lumbar area, costovertebral angle tenderness, pain on palpation of kidneys and along the ureter on the right. Urine test: proteins, fresh erythrocytes, leukocytes. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Urolithiasis, renal colic
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Polycystic kidney disease
d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute pyelonephritis

