1. During preventive examination a 40-year-old man presents with the following changes: marginal gingiva is enlarged, torus-shaped, cyanotic, slightly bleeding when touched with a dental probe; there is no pain. Staining the gums with Lugol's iodine solution results in light-brown coloring of mucosa. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

2. After adenotonsillectomia it is necessary to break the mouth breathing habit in a 4-year-old child. The orthodontist recommends application of an oral vestibular shield (Kerbitz' vestibular plate). Vestibular shield facilitates training of the following muscle:
*a. Orbicular muscle
b. Medial pterygoid muscle
c. Temporal muscle
d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
e. Masseter muscle

3. A 50-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of deteriorated fixation of her partial removable laminar denture for the upper jaw that she has been using for 3 months. Objectively, the alveolar process in the edentulous areas is atrophied, but the base of the denture corresponds with the prosthetic bed, the denture balances. What tactics should the doctor choose in this case?
a. Making a new denture
b. Reduction of the denture base
c. Making a denture with an elastic lining
*d. Activation of the retaining clasps  (clammers)
e. Changing the denture base

4. The dental surgery department received a women with complaints of swollen right side of the fase and indisposition. According to her medical history, one week ago she sensed itching in the right side of her face and noticed there a small dense nodule. She started to apply various ointments. Swelling was gradually increasing, the woman developed pain and fever. Objectively her condition is of moderate severity, body temperature is 39^oC) Her right buccal region is swollen, with hyperemic skin; in the center there is an oval edema elevated above the surrounding tissues with a black scab visible on its apex. Palpation detects a painful infiltration, 3.5 cm in diameter, and enlarged and painful submandibular lymph nodes. Mouth opening is slightly impaired, oral cavity is clean. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute lymphangitis
*b. Furuncle
c. Carbuncle
d. Acute lymphadenitis
e. Phlebitis of the facial vein

5. The parents of a 7-year-old girl brought her to a dentist with complaints that the child feels pain in her lower lateral tooth during eating. Objectively, tooth 75 has a Black's class I carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the communication area is very painful, a drop of blood appeared in the process. Percussion is painless. Thermal test results are weakly positive. Make the diagnosis.
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

6. A 25-year-old man complains of incorrectly positioned maxillary left central incisor due to trauma sustained 2 months ago. Objectively tooth 21 is rotated around its axis into palatal position. What would be the most advisable treatment method for correction of this defect?
*a. Orthodontic treatment
b. Surgical treatment
c. -
d. Splinting followed by prosthetic treatment
e. Instrumental surgical treatment

7. A 12.5-year-old child came to the dentist for oral cavity sanitation. Objectively caries progression in this child is severe: decay-missing-filled index is DMF=2+0+4=6. Green-Vermillion index is 1.7. Gingival mucosa is pale pink. What toothpastes should be prescribed in this case for oral hygiene?
*a. Amine fluoride
b. Salt supplement
c. Enzyme
d. Antiseptic
e. Herbal extract

8. A 40-year-old man complains of constant decementation of the porcelain-fused-to-metal crown on tooth 11. The crown was made for him one year ago. How must the stump of the prepared tooth look like for proper functioning of this type of dental crown?
a. Conical shape, convergence angle of 15-20 degrees, single-plane preparation, circular ledge
b. Cylindrical shape, two-plane  preparation, circular ledge
*c. Conical shape, convergence angle of 5-7 degrees, two-plane preparation, circular ledge
d. Conical shape, convergence angle of 10-15 degrees, single-plane preparation, circular ledge
e. Cylindrical shape, single-plane  preparation, no ledge

9. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic. He complains of inability to chew his food due to partial loss of teeth. Objectively in the lateral regions teeth 18, 16, 15, 25, 26, 28, 38, 35, 36, 44, 46, 48 are missing. Other teeth present with I-II degrees of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of the II degree. What type of denture would be optimal for this patient?
a. -
*b. Clasp-retained (bugel) dentures with splinting elements
c. Non-removable full cast dental bridges
d. Removable partial laminar denture
e. Metal-based dentures

10. A 24-year-old woman complains of a constant increasing pain in her lower right tooth that intensifies on biting. Objectively in her tooth 46 there is a carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity, percussion is mildly painful, probing of cavity walls and floor is painless. X-ray imaging shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

11. A porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for tooth 11 is being made for the patient. The tooth will be left vital. What measures should be taken during treatment to prevent pulpitis in this tooth?
a. Physical therapy
b. Anti-inflammatory preparations
c. Fluorine preparations
d. Calcium preparations
*e. Pharmaceutical crown

12. A 39-year-old woman complains of teeth mobility in her lower jaw. Objectively her dental formula is as follows: 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 / 21 22 23 24 25 26 27, 47 46 45 44 43 42 41/31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The teeth are intact, crowns are tall. Gingival pockets and mobility of the I and II degrees are observed in teeth 42 41/31 32. To immobilize the mobile teeth, a cap splint with fixed crowns was made for 43/33. What type of stabilization provides this splint?
*a. Frontal
b. Circumferential
c. Frontal-sagittal
d. Sagittal
e. Parasagittal

13. A 64-year-old man undergoes fixation of a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. The dentist examined the denture base and noticed there a clearly visible ''marble pattern''. This net of white lines runs through the whole plastic base. What is the most likely cause of this defect?
*a. Disturbed process of acrylic resin polymerization
b. Foreign admixtures in the denture base
c. Fractures in the denture base caused by mechanical damage
d. Disturbed process of denture base polishing
e. Uneven moistening of acrylic resin with a monomer

14. A 46-year-old man needs a classic 2-stage surgical installation of implants into the upper jaw. How long should be the interval between stages 1 and 2?
a. 0.5 months
b. 1.5 months
c. 2 months
d. 1 month
*e. 3-6 months

15. A 50-year-old patient, an employee of the print shop, complains of foul smell from his mouth and excessive salivation. Objectively against the background of hyperemic and slightly swollen gums there is a blue-black border along the gum margin of the lower jaw and upper front teeth. There is a large amount of dental deposit observed. Name the type of stomatitis in this patient:
a. Bismuth
b. Mercury
*c. Lead
d. Necrotizing ulcerative
e. Catarrhal

16. A 12-year-old child presents with temperature 38^oC, chills, nausea, vomiting, delirium, and weakness. On the middle third of the face there is hyperemia in a butterfly-shaped pattern. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and mildly painful. In blood: leukocytes - 12cdot10^9/L, lymphocytes - 8.0cdot10^9/L, ESR- 26 mm/hour. What diagnosis should be made?
a. Cutaneous actinomycosis
b. Streptoderma, submandibular lymphadenopathy
c. Acute non-odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Facial vein thrombophlebitis
*e. Erysipelatous inflammation

17. One of the stages of making a removable full denture includes fitting of an impression tray and obtaining the functional impression. What material is applied to the edges of the impression tray?
*a. Orthocor
b. Kromopan
c. Plaster
d. Stomalgin
e. Thiodent

18. A 26-year-old woman needs dental prosthetics. Objectively the crown of 16 is destroyed by 1/3. Its anatomical shape will be restored with a porcelain inlay. Direct method is chosen for inlay-making. What should be used to obtain the impression of the formed inlay cavity?
a. Thermoplastic materials
b. Solid crystal materials
*c. Gold or platinum foil
d. Silicone materials
e. Wax

19. The parents of a 6-year-old girl complain of the child's fever of 38^oC and a rash in her mouth and on the skin of her face and scalp. Objectively, the mucosa of the hard palate and tongue has small round vesicles and erosions with an inflammed margin, some of which are covered in grayish coating. On the torso, face, and scalp, there are blisters 4-5 mm in diameter with transparent contents. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*c. Chickenpox
d. Measles
e. Scarlet fever

20. A 49-year-old man has been hospitalized into the maxillofacial department in a severe condition with the diagnosis of phlegmon of the mouth floor with the purulent process spreading to the neck. While lying on the operating table, the patient developed signs of asphyxia. What measures should be taken first in this case?
a. Perform fixation of the tongue
b. Place the patient into an upright position
*c. Perform a tracheotomy
d. Provide symptomatic pharmacotherapy
e. Perform phlegmon dissection under face mask anesthesia

21. A 35-year-old man complains of thickening of his maxillary alveolar process. Preliminary diagnosis of maxillary radicular cyst was made. What substance will be obtained as the result of the puncture of the alveolar process in the area of buccal thickening?
a. Blood
b. Epithelium
c. Pus
*d. Yellowish liquid
e. Turbid infiltration

22. Examination of a woman by a dentist detects marked hyperemia of her oral mucosa that in places is covered in a whitish coating that can be easily removed by scraping. Angular cheilitis is observed in the corners of her mouth. Her cervical and axillary lymph nodes are enlarged. For the last 3 months she was presenting with general weakness, temperature increasing to 37.5°С in the evening, weight loss, and prolonged diarrheas. What examination method can confirm the diagnosis in this case?
a. Lymph node biopsy
b. Microscopy of the coating
c. Complete blood count
d. Inoculation to obtain blood culture
*e. Blood test for antibodies to HIV

23. A 42-year-old man came to the dental surgeon for oral sanation. After application of anesthesia, the patient suddenly developed nausea, acute weakness, constricting sensation behind the sternum, and cardiac pain. The patient's skin is pale and covered in cold clammy sweat. The patient started vomiting, lost his consciousness, and developed seizures. The patient's pupils are unresponsive to the light. The pulse is thready, blood pressure cannot be measured. Make the diagnosis:
a. Traumatic shock
b. Collapse
c. Epileptic seizure
d. Unconsciousness
*e. Anaphylactic shock

24. A 46-year-old man is undergoing endodontic treatment of tooth 26 due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. X-ray shows significant obliteration of buccal root canals of tooth 26. What chemical solutions should be used during the mechanical widening of root canals in this case?
*a. EDTA and sodium hypochlorite
b. Chlorhexidine and hydrogen peroxide
c. Chloramine and hydrogen peroxide
d. Sodium hypochlorite and decamethoxine
e. Sodium hypochlorite and chlorhexidine

25. A 45-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums and bad breath. After examination the patient was provisionally diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis of the II degree. To make the final diagnosis, it is necessary to:
a. Measure the depth of the periodontal pockets
b. Determine teeth mobility
*c. Perform an X-ray
d. Perform Kulazhenko test (capillary resistance test)
e. Perform Kotzshke test (periodontal pocket suppuration test)

26. What medical establishment provides dental and prosthodontic (making of splints, appliances, and dentures) treatment for those who received maxillofacial injuries on the battlefield?
a. Separate medical battalion
*b. Specialized surgical field hospital
c. Separate medical platoon
d. Evacuation hospital
e. Civilian medical establishment

27. A 6-year-old child for a 3rd day presents with body temperature up to 38-39^oC and painful swallowing. Objectively on the mucosa of the palatine arches, tonsils and a part of the soft palate there are several erosions up to 2 mm in diameter. The erosions are situated on the hyperemic mucosa and covered in whitish plaque. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*b. Herpetic angina
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Diphtheria

28. A 63-year-old completely edentulous patient (the upper jaw - Schroeder's type II, the lower jaw - Keller's type II) has the so-called "senile progeny". What factors underlie the mechanism of its development?
a. The basal arch of the upper jaw is wider than its alveolar arch, and the basal arch of the lower jaw is narrower than its alveolar arch
b. Basal arches of the upper and lower jaw are narrower than their alveolar arches
c. Basal arches of the upper and lower jaw are wider than their alveolar arches
*d. The basal arch of the upper jaw is narrower than its alveolar arch, and the basal arch of the lower jaw is wider than its alveolar arch
e. Basal and alveolar arches of the upper and lower jaw are of the same width

29. A 37-year-old woman complains of a white formation on the mucosa of her upper lip. The formation was noticed accidentally. Objectively, on the teeth of her lower jaw there are 2 dental bridges, the crown of tooth 21 is half-destroyed, the tooth is untreated. In the projection of tooth 21 on the labial mucosa, there is an irregularly-shaped white plaque 4x9 mm in size with clear margins. The plaque is slightly raised above the mucosa, cannot be scraped off, painless, and without an infiltration in its base. The regional lymph nodes cannot be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Candidal cheilitis
*b. Leukoplakia
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Lupus erythematosus

30. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and creaking in the area of his temporomandibular joint during lower jaw movements. Objectively, his face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with a slight displacement to the left. The dentition is preserved. To clarify the diagnosis, it is planned to conduct an X-ray of the temporomandibular joint. What type of X-ray scan would be the most informative in this case?
a. Parma X-ray projection
b. Orthopantomography
*c. Computed tomography of the  temporomandibular joint
d. Schuller X-ray projection
e. Teleradiography

31. A 35-year-old man complains of missing teeth on his lower jaw. Objectively, teeth 36, 37, and, 38 are missing. Teeth 34 and 35 are intact. What type of dentition restoration would be optimal in this case?
a. Adhesive dental bridge
b. Porcelain-fused-to-metal cantilever  denture with abutment crowns on teeth 34 and 35
c. Removable partial laminar denture for the lower jaw
d. Clasp (bugel) denture with a continuous clasp (clammer) for the lower jaw
*e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns with abutment implants in place of teeth 36 and 37

32. A 48-year-old man, who for several years already has been suffering from enterocolitis, complains of painful lesions that from time to time appear in different places of his oral mucosa. Objective examination of the mucosa reveals isolated areas of epithelial damage. They are under 5 mm in diameter, have a regular oval shape, hyperemic border, and yellow-white coating. Their palpation is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent herpes
b. Allergic stomatitis
c. Secondary syphilis
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

33. A patient complains of carious cavity in tooth 11. The filling was lost one week ago. The tooth crown is dark, there is residual filling material at the bottom of the carious cavity. Vertical percussion is painless. X-ray shows an oval area of bone tissue resorption with clear margins, 0.4х0.3 cm in size. The root canal is filled by 2/3 of its length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Radicular cyst
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

34. A 46-year-old man came to a dental clinic for a preventive examination. Objectively, his upper front teeth overlap his lower teeth by 3 mm. In the central occlusion, the mesial buccal cusp of the upper first molars is located between the mesial and distal buccal cusps of the lower first molars. What type of bite is it?
a. Direct
*b. Orthognathic
c. Prognathic
d. Open
e. Oblique

35. A 10-year-old child complains of persisting throbbing pain in tooth 36, which appeared one day ago. Hot stimulus aggravates the pain, while cold mitigates it slightly.  Objectively on the masticatory and medial surfaces of tooth 36 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity bottom and percussion are painful. X-ray shows no pathologic changes of the periodontium. What treatment method shold be chosen in this case?
a. Conservative treatment
b. Vital amputation
c. Devital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
*e. Vital extirpation

36. A 62-year-old man came to the dentist for extraction of tooth 44. During examination the patient suddenly fell unconscious. His respiration and pulse were slow. The head was bowed, the elbows and wrists were flexed, the legs were stretched, the jaws were clenching convulsively. After that the patient developed clonic convulsions and started frothing at the mouth. The pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light. After 1.5 minutes after the onset of the seizure the patient's muscles relaxed. His consciousness is clouded. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute disturbance of cerebral circulation
b. Paroxysmal tachycardia attack
*c. Epileptic seizure
d. Unconsciousness
e. Hypertensic crisis

37. A 2.5-year-old child is fussy and refuses to eat because of pain in the mouth that lasts for several days already. The body temperature is 37.2^oC) The child has pneumonia and is being treated in an inpatient department. Objectively, on the hyperemic and edematous mucosa of the cheeks, palate, and tongue, there is a white film that can be easily removed, with the formation of erosions in some areas. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Vincent's necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Mild leukoplakia
*d. Acute candidal stomatitis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

38. A 7-year-old boy was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic granular periodontitis of tooth 75. The crown of tooth 75 is destroyed by its 3/4. During examination, the child behaves calmly and answers the questions. The boy is somatically healthy. What anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Facemask general anesthesia
b. Intravenous anesthesia
c. Infiltration anesthesia
d. Topical anesthesia
*e. Conduction anesthesia

39. A 7-year-old boy underwent fissure sealing in teeth 36 and 46. Fissure sealing would be most effective:
a. If permanent teeth are affected with caries
b. In 1-2 years after tooth eruption
c. In 3-4 years after tooth eruption
*d. Immediately after eruption of the permanent tooth
e. After permanent occlusion is formed

40. A white non-glossy spot was detected on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 of an 18-year-old patient. What additional method of examination should be used to make the diagnosis?
*a. Staining tests with dyes
b. Thermal stimulation
c. Electric pulp testing
d. Measuring hygiene indices
e. X-ray

41. A 42-year-old man complains of painful bleeding gums that especially trouble him during eating. There are also complaints of muscle weakness, pain in the limbs, and chills. For the last 15 years, he has been living in the North and engaging in hard physical labor. Objectively, his skin is dry, brown, and peeling. His oral mucosa is edematous and hyperemic with a cyanotic tinge. His gingival papillae cover the tooth crowns to the half of their height and bleed in response to the slightest stimulus. Teeth mobility of the I degree is observed. There are numerous petechiae on the mucosa of the soft palate. These signs are likely to indicate the following type of avitaminosis:
a. Vitamin B_1
b. Vitamin A
*c. Vitamin C
d. Vitamin B_2
e. Vitamin PP

42. A 38-year-old man came to the dentist. After history-taking and examination  he was found to have exacerbated generalized periodontitis of the II degree with periodontal pockets 3-5 mm deep. After the local factors were removed and anti-inflammatory treatment was provided to the patient, it is necessary to remove the periodontal pockets. What method should be applied in this case?
a. Vestibuloplasty
b. Flap surgery
*c. Curettage
d. Gingivectomy
e. Gingivotomy

43. A man came to a dentist with complaints of a painless tumor-like formation on his left lower jaw. Palpation detects Dupuytren's sign. The crown of tooth 36 has a deep carious cavity. In the area of the rooth apices of tooth 36, X-ray shows an area of bone destruction 2x2 cm in size with clear margins. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Follicular cyst of the lower jaw
b. Giant-cell tumor of bone
*c. Radicular cyst of the lower jaw
d. Mandibular keratocyst
e. Mandibular ameloblastoma

44. A 19-year-old young man complains of constant pain in tooth 22, which intensifies on biting with this tooth, sensation of ''protruding'' tooth, and upper lip edema. The patient has history of upper jaw trauma. Objectively tooth 22 is intact. Vertical percussion is acutely painful. The upper lip is swollen, mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 22 is red and painful on palpation. What examination method is necessary for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Dental pulp test
b. Thermometry
c. Rheodentography
d. Transillumination
*e. X-ray

45. To treat crowded teeth of a 9-year-old girl, the Hotz method of systemic tooth extraction was proposed. Why was this method of treatment chosen by the doctor?
*a. Size mismatch of teeth and jaws
b. Jaw size mismatch
c. Elongation of the anterior portion of the dental arch
d. Narrowing of the jaws
e. Supernumerary teeth

46. A 37-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in his left lower jaw and reduced mouth opening. Objectively, edema and hyperemia of the mucosa are observed in the area of the left retromolar fossa that is painful to palpation. The mouth opening is reduced to 2 cm. X-ray shows dystopia of tooth 38 in the mesial direction. Make the diagnosis.
a. Pterygomaxillary space abscess
*b. Pericoronitis of tooth 38
c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
d. Parapharyngeal space abscess
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 38

47. A 9-year-old girl complains of persisting pain in tooth 11 that one month ago sustained a trauma resulting in broken crown. The tooth received no treatment. Objectively the 1/4 of the tooth crown of 11 is broken off, the remaining crown is grayish, the dental cavity is not exposed. Percussion is acutely painful. The mucogingival fold is hyperemic and acutely painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute traumatic periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse suppurative pulpitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

48. A 13-year-old girl complains of pain and swelling in her right submandibular region and a fever of 38.5^oC) Objectively, her general condition is moderately severe, her face is asymmetrical due to a soft tissue edema in the right submandibular region. Palpation detected a dense painful circumscribed infiltrate; the skin over the infiltrate is hyperemic and cannot be pinched into a fold; fluctuation sign is positive. In the oral cavity, the crown of tooth 46 is destroyed and discolored, tooth percussion is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute odontogenic serous periostitis of the mandible originating from tooth 46
*b. Odontogenic abscess of the right  submandibular area originating from tooth 46
c. Acute odontogenic purulent periostitis of the mandible originating from tooth 46
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of tooth 46
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the  mandible originating from tooth 46

49. A 19-year-old young man complains of cosmetic defect of all his teeth, which developed immediately after the teeth eruption. Objectively on the vestibular and masticatory surfaces of all patient's teeth there are enamel defects, tooth crowns present with dark brown discoloration. Percussion and probing are painful. In this area fluoride levels in water are 2.6 mg/L. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Systemic hypoplasia
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Enamel erosion
d. Chronic superficial caries
*e. Fluorosis

50. In the dentist's office, after a treatment of tooth 26 a 46-year-old woman suddenly developed a pulsing headache, dizziness, ringing in her ears, tachycardia, and blood pressure of 220/160 mm Hg. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Hypoglycemic coma
*c. Hypertensive crisis
d. Acute cerebrovascular accident
e. Syncope

51. During a preventive examination of an 11-year-old child, an orthodontist observes the following: the face is symmetrical and proportional; in the oral cavity, tooth 22 is located orally and blocked by the lower teeth. The distance between teeth 21 and 23 is 5 mm, while the width of tooth 22 is 7 mm. What treatment tactics should be chosen in this clinical situation?
a. Extract tooth 24, move tooth 22 to its  proper place in the dentition
*b. Expand the upper dentition, open the  bite, move tooth 22 to its proper place in the dentition
c. Replant tooth 22
d. Extract tooth 22, retract the front upper  teeth
e. Expand the upper dentition and move  tooth 22 to its proper place in the dentition

52. A 22-year-old woman came to a dentist for preventive examination of her oral cavity. Examination detected a defect of hard dental tissues in the cervical area of tooth 22 within its mantle dentin. The dentin is dense and pigmented. Percussion and probing provoke no response. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Cuneiform defect
*c. Chronic median caries
d. Necrosis of hard dental tissues
e. Enamel erosion

53. The parents of a 5-year-old girl complain that their child developed acute fever of 39°C, weakness, sore throat, and rash on the body, and started refusing to eat. Objectively, her oral mucosa is dry, the tongue is bright red and has edematous papillae, the mucosa of the tonsils, palatal arches, and soft palate is sharply hyperemic. Submandibular lymphadenitis is observed. Bright red, fine rashes that merge together are observed on the skin of the child's face and neck, except the nasolabial triangle. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Diphtheria
b. Measles
c. Infectious mononucleosis
*d. Scarlet fever
e. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis

54. A 30-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a swelling of his upper lip. Objectively, he has facial asymmetry due to upper lip edema, his nasolabial fold on the left is smoothed-out. In the oral cavity on the maxillary vestibular surface, the mucogingival fold at the level of teeth 11, 21, and 22 is edematous and hyperemic. Its palpation provokes pain and fluctuation. X-ray shows signs of bone tissue destruction in the area of the root apex of tooth 21. The bone lesion is 3-4 mm in diameter. The root canal of tooth 21 is filled to 2/3 of its length. The man was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw, originating from tooth 21. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Extraction of teeth 12, 21, and 22,  periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Extraction of tooth 21, periosteotomy,  anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Repeat endodontic treatment of tooth 21, anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Extraction of tooth 21, periosteotomy
*e. Repeat endodontic treatment of tooth 21, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy

55. A 63-year-old man is referred for the extraction of his tooth 36 due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively, the crown of the tooth is destroyed by 1/2. What forceps should be used in this case?
a. Beak-shaped forceps curved along the  edge without a spike
b. Beak-shaped forceps curved in a plane
*c. Beak-shaped forceps curved along the  edge with a spike
d. Bayonet forceps
e. S-shaped left-sided forceps

56. A 56-year-old man during obtaining a full anatomical impression of the upper jaw with alginate mass developed acute dyspnea, pale skin, increased sweating, cyanosis, and wheezing respirations. What urgent condition developed in this case?
a. Bronchial asthma attack
b. Overactive gag reflex
c. Pneumothorax
d. Acute bronchitis
*e. Aspiration asphyxia

57. Parents of an 8-year-old girl complain of their child having an aesthetic defect of her teeth. Objectively the patient's lower face is shortened. Her chin protrudes forwards and her upper lip is sunken. During teeth closure the deep underbite becomes apparent. Mesio-occlusion is observed in the lateral areas. Choose the apparatus optimal for the treatment:
a. Osadchy apparatus
b. Frankel functional regulator - 2
*c. Frankel functional regulator - 3
d. Frankel functional regulator - 1
e. Andresen-Haupl activator

58. During preventive examination a 10-year-old child was found to have matt white spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth. The spots are located in the area of tooth cervix. Enamel surface in the affected area is undamaged and can be stained with methylene blue. Subjectively the child has no complaints. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. ART technique
b. Impregnation method
c. Preparation and filling
*d. Remineralization therapy
e. Teeth sealing

59. A 47-year-old man complains of discolored teeth 11 and 21. Objectively, his teeth 11 and 21 are pink, their canals are sealed to the apex. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns are planned for teeth 11 and 21. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of proximal surfaces of the abutment teeth?
a. 20^o
b. 0^o
c. 15^o
*d. 5^o
e. 10^o

60. Complete removable laminar dentures are being made for a patient. Objectively, the alveolar processes of the jaws are mildly atrophied, the mucosa is moderately pliable. Anatomical impressions were obtained. What is the next clinical stage of denture-making?
a. Determining the central ratio of the jaws
b. Checking the placement of the teeth
c. Making individual impression trays
*d. Obtaining functional impressions
e. Checking the wax models of the dentures

61. A 25-year-old patient has been diagnosed by a dentist with acute limited pulpitis of tooth 26. The treatment was carried out using the vital amputation method. What is necessary in this method of treating pulpitis?
a. Removal of the crown pulp and root pulp under anesthesia
*b. Removal of the crown pulp and preservation of the root pulp vitality
c. Removal of the crown pulp followed by the application of a mummifying paste to the opening of the root canals
d. Preservation of the vitality of crown pulp and root pulp
e. Pulp extirpation from the accessible root canals and its mummification in the tooth canals that are difficult to access

62. An 8-year-old girl complains of pain in her mouth during eating. Objectively, on the mucosa of the mucogingival fold in the frontal part of the mandible there is an oval erosion with a yellowish coating and red margin, 5x7 mm in size. The erosion appeared one year ago. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. -
*b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Sutton aphthae
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Behcet disease

63. A 26-year-old man came to a dentist for oral cavity sanation. Objective examination of tooth 16 revealed on its masticatory surface a hard tissue defect  within the mantle dentin. The dentin is dense and pigmented. Probing, thermal testing, and percussion are painless. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
*c. Chronic median caries
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Acute deep caries

64. A 28-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a cavity in her upper right tooth. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 16 there is a carious cavity with a wide opening. The cavity is located within the parapulpar dentin and filled with dense pigmented dentin. The carious cavity does not communicate with the dental cavity. Probing of the carious cavity walls and floor, cold stimulus, and percussion cause no pain. Electric pulp testing - 12 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic median caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

65. In a 56-year-old woman, a preventive examination by a dentist has detected a deep red oval erosion with a smooth surface on the vermilion border of her lower lip. On the surface of the erosion, there are bloody scabs that are difficult to remove. After their removal, a slight bleeding occurs. Mild injury to the erosion in the areas without scabs causes no bleeding. What type of precancerous lesion of the lower lip is observed in this case?
a. Erythroplasia
b. Bowen's disease
*c. Manganotti abrasive precancerous  cheilitis
d. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion  border
e. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis of  the vermilion border

66. A 71-year-old man came to a dental orthopedist to have a denture made for him. During examination, the dentist noticed that the mucosa that covers the palate and the alveolar processes was worn thin and barely pliant. What Supple class is it?
*a. Second
b. Fourth
c. First
d. Third
e. -

67. An 8-year-old boy complains of a dull pain in his lower right tooth. The pain appears in response to thermal stimuli and slowly abates after the stimuli are removed. Objectively on the approximal surface of tooth 46 there is a deep carious cavity. During necrectomy with a dental excavator, communication between the carious and dental cavities is detected. Probing of the communication area results in sharp pain and bleeding. What method of pulpitis treatment is recommended in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
*c. Vital amputation
d. Biological approach
e. Devital extirpation

68. A 50-year-old woman with compensated insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus needs dental prosthetics. She has been in a clinic for several hours already, during which she was nervous and skipped her meals. In the process of obtaining her dental impressions, she suddenly became aggressive, paled, broke out in cold sweat, and fell unconscious. What substance is used for emergency aid in such clinical situations?
a. Nitroglycerine
*b. Glucose solution
c. Valocordin
d. Insulin
e. Ammonia solution

69. A patient is indicated extraction of tooth 46, the crown of which is completely destroyed, its distal and mesial roots are separated at the point of bifurcation. What forceps should be used for the tooth extraction in this case?
a. Beak-shaped non-converging forceps
b. Bayonet forceps
c. Forceps curved in a plane
*d. Beak-shaped converging forceps
e. Beak-shaped forceps with spikes

70. Parents of a 9-year-old child came to the dentist complaining that their child presents with enlarged cervical lymph nodes on the right. During examination palpation revealed the lymph nodes in the right submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and infraclavicular areas to be enlarged up to 2-2.5 cm in diameter, painless, non-matted together, and non-fused to the skin (resemble ''potatoes in a sack''). The parents note rapid fatigability and night sweats in their child. What additional examinations should the child be referred for?
*a. Puncture biopsy of the lymph nodes
b. Pirquet and Mantoux tests
c. Wassermann test
d. Clinical blood and urine tests
e. CT of the cervical spine

71. A 5-year-old child has all temporary teeth in the oral cavity with tremas between them. The incisors are in direct contact and their cutting edges are worn off. The distal surfaces of two temporary molars form a mesio-sagittal step - the Zielinsky sign. What period of bite formation is it?
a. Early transitional dentition
b. Late transitional dentition
c. Stabilization of the temporary bite
d. Formation of the temporary bite
*e. Aging of the temporary bite

72. A complete removable denture is being made for the lower jaw of a 67-year-old man. The individual tray is being adjusted using the Herbst technique. The location of the tray edge in the sublingual region, 1 cm away from the midline, needs to be further specified. What Herbst test must be performed for this purpose?
a. Opening the mouth slowly
*b. Alternately touching the cheeks with the tongue
c. Active movements of facial muscles
d. Swallowing
e. Running the tongue over the vermilion  border of the upper lip

73. During his shift a dentist of the prosthodontics unit has consulted and examined the patient, checked the crowns, installed dental bridges, measured centric jaw relation, and made necessary corrections to the removable dentures. What is the normal workload of a dentist per shift and per month measured in arbitrary units of labor intensity (AU) in a five-day work week and according to the normatives for provision of healthcare to the adults?
*a. 6 AU - 126 AU
b. 7 AU - 147 AU
c. 5 AU - 105 AU
d. 8 AU - 168 AU
e. 9 AU - 189 AU

74. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated infiltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the infiltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the infiltration there is a fistula. In the oral cavity the crown of 46 is destroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the fistula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cheek furuncle
b. Actinomycosis
*c. Migrating facial granuloma
d. Odontogenic lymphadenitis
e. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis

75. A 47-year-old man complains of frequent recurrent jaw dislocations. Objectively, the teeth are retained and the molars are covered with artificial crowns. What treatment tactics should be chosen in this case?
a. Physiotherapy
b. Myogymnastics, physiotherapy
c. Restriction of the mouth opening, using the Schroeder appliance
d. Immobilization of the jaw with teeth ligation
*e. Restriction of the mouth opening, using the Petrosov appliance

76. A 15-year-old girl has been provisionally diagnosed with localized parodontitis by the dentist. What instrument should be used to measure the depth of the periodontal pockets?
a. Button probe
b. Endodontic ruler
c. Periodontal knife
d. Gracey curette
*e. Periodontal probe

77. An 18-year-old girl, having returned from a summer vacation, developed complaints of a mild pain in the lips, her lips are dry and peeling. Objectively, her lower lip is bright-red, its red border is dry and covered in small silvery-white scales. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meteorological cheilitis
*b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Glandular glandularis
d. Chronic exematous cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

78. A child with unilateral nonunion of the upper lip underwent Limberg cheiloplasty. What is normally the optimal period for the surgical treatment of an upper lip nonunion?
a. 2-3 years
b. 4-6 years
*c. 6-8 months
d. The first days after birth
e. 1-1.5 years

79. A 38-year-old man needs to have his 12 tooth extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Infraorbital, palatal and incisor
*b. Infraorbital and incisor
c. Incisor
d. Infraorbital and palatal
e. Infraorbital

80. A 45-year-old woman complains of a mildly painful tumor-like formation in her right parotid region. The formation appeared 2 months ago for no apparent reason. The woman notes weakness and occasional temperature of 37.2-37.6^oC) Two weeks ago she underwent an anti-inflammatory therapy that produced no positive results. Objectively, her face is asymmetrical due to a slight swelling in the right parotid region. Palpation detects a round dense-elastic neoplasm with smooth contours. The neoplasm is mildly painful and not fused to the skin. A small amount of clear saliva is being produced from the Stensen duct. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
b. Sjogren sialopathy
c. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
d. Parotid atheroma
e. -

81. A 59-year-old woman complains that fixation of her partial removable laminar denture became worse. She has been using this denture for one year. Objectively, the alveolar process in the edentulous areas is atrophied, the denture base corresponds with the denture bed, the denture is easy to place in and take out. What would be the doctor's tactics in this case?
a. Making a denture with an elastic lining
b. Rebasing the denture
*c. Activation of the retaining clasps (clammers)
d. Making a new denture
e. Making the denture base smaller

82. When fitting the metallic frame of a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge, it was determined that in the central occlusion the frame is in a contact with the antagonist teeth. It reaches the ledges of the abutment teeth and is 0.3 mm thick. What tactics should a dentist choose?
a. File down the metallic frame in the areas of its contact with the antagonist teeth
b. Send the frame to the next laboratory stage of the denture-making
c. Obtain an impression with the frame  fitted into the oral cavity
*d. Complete the preparation of the  abutment teeth and make a working impression
e. Determine the areas that prevent  normal installation of the dental bridge

83. A 55-year-old man complains of heartburn and unpleasant sensations in his tongue. The patient has been suffering from gastritis with low acidity for approximately 5 years. What changes in the tongue are the most likely to be detected in this patient?
a. Coated tongue
b. Erosions on the lateral surfaces of the tongue
c. Hypertrophic lingual papillae
*d. Atrophied and smoothed out lingual papillae
e. Fissured tongue

84. An 8-year-old boy was diagnosed by a dentist with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 36. Previously, the treatment and extraction of temporary teeth was performed with local anesthesia. What would be the most rational treatment method in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
c. Biological method
d. Devital extirpation
*e. Vital amputation

85. Vestibular surfaces of the upper and lower incisors of a 27-year-old patient are affected by destructive form of fluorosis. What construction of a denture will provide the maximum aesthetic effect with minimum invasion?
a. Ceramic crowns
b. -
*c. Ceramic veneers
d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns
e. Plastic crowns

86. During teeth preparation without anesthesia, a 33-year-old patient suddenly developed dizziness, weakness, and nausea. Objectively, the patient presents with sudden facial pallor, slightly cyanotic lips, cold sticky sweat, and blood pressure of 80/50 mm Hg. What emergency condition developed in this case?
a. Angina pectoris
b. Myocardial infarction
*c. Collapse
d. Unconsciousness
e. Hypertensive crisis

87. A partial removable laminar denture is to be made for the upper jaw of a 53-year-old man. He has teeth 16, 15, 23, 24, and 27. What type of clasp (clammer) fixation would be optimal in this case?
a. Linear sagittal fixation
b. Linear diagonal fixation
c. Point fixation
*d. Plane fixation
e. Linear transverse fixation

88. What anatomical landmarks are used to locate the mandibular foramen, when administering mandibular anesthesia intraorally in a 6-year-old child?
a. 6 mm above the masticatory surface of the last lower molar
b. 10 mm above the masticatory surface of the last lower molar
*c. At the level of the masticatory surface of a lower temporary molar
d. 10 mm below the masticatory surface of the last lower molar
e. 5 mm below the level of the lower alveolar ridge

89. A 45-year-old man came to the prosthodontic department to have a denture made for him. Before the preparation of the hard tissues of the intact teeth, the patient was given an infiltration anesthesia with 0.5% lidocaine solution. Several minutes later he developed depressed level of consciousness, his blood pressure dropped, convulsions started, and involuntary urination occurred. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
a. Heart failure
*b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Collapse
d. Syncope
e. Pain shock

90. Parents of a 6-month-old child complain of their child having a large amount of dental deposit in the oral cavity. Objectively the oral mucosa is hyperemic, covered in white easily removed deposit that resembles curdled milk. What is the causative agent of this disease?
*a. Candida fungi
b. Klebs-Loeffler bacillus
c. Epstein-Barr virus
d. Herpes simplex virus
e. Coxsackie virus

91. A 43-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 24. Tooth preparation, pulp extirpation, and mechanical and medical treatment of root canals were performed. How must the root canals be sealed in this case?
a. To the anatomical apex
*b. To the physiological apex
c. To the radiographic apex
d. Reaching 1 mm over the apex
e. -

92. In a maternity clinic, conversations were held with pregnant women about the importance of nutrition for the budding and development of the teeth of unborn children. At what week of intrauterine development does the bud stage of temporary tooth follicles begin in a fetus?
a. 4th week
b. 18th week
*c. 7th week
d. 12th week
e. 15th week

93. After sustained trauma a man developed nose bleeding, reduced mouth opening, sensation of paresthesia in the right infraorbital region and lower eyelid. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to concave right temporal region; step deformity symptom is observed in the middle of the lower right eye socket and in the area of zygomaticoalveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nondisplaced fracture of the temporal bone
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
c. Zygomatic arch fracture
*d. Displaced fracture of the temporal bone
e. Le Fort II maxillary fracture

94. A 21-year-old young man came to an orthodontist complaining about his markedly visible labiomental fold. Objectively, the lower third of his face is reduced and the labiomental fold is markedly visible. Intraoral examination reveals no contact between the front teeth of both jaws when they are closed, the sagittal fissure is 4 mm, the anterior buccal cusp of the first upper molar is in contact with its counterpart of the first lower molar. What abnormal bite is it characteristic of?
*a. Distal bite
b. Crossbite
c. Deep bite
d. Mesial bite
e. Open bite

95. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with acute odontogenic mandibular periostitis on the right originating from tooth 74. What treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. Endodontic treatment of 74, pharmacotherapy
b. Periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
*c. Extraction of 74, periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
d. -
e. Endodontic treatment of 74, periosteotomy

96. A 35-year-old patient has a fresh mental fracture of the mandible without visible displacement of the fragments. What orthopedic appliance is indicated in this case?
*a. Fixation appliance
b. Combined appliance
c. Replacement appliance
d. Reponation appliance
e. Forming appliance

97. A 21-year-old man with facial furuncle was brought to the maxillofacial department. What facial localization of furuncles and carbuncles is often complicated by trombophlebitis of the angular vein?
a. Lower lip and jaw angle
*b. Upper lip and infraorbital area
c. Nose and external canthus of the eye
d. Lower lip and chin
e. Cheek and parotid-masseteric region

98. A 15-year-old girl complains of a carious cavity in her tooth, spontaneous pain that quickly abates. The child is somatically healthy. Objectively in tooth 36 there is a carious cavity within the parapulpar dentin, response to a cold stimulus is painful, pain abates in 1-2 miuntes. Probing is painful in one spot. Percussion is painless. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Acute local serous pulpitis
c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute diffuse serous pulpitis
*e. Pulp hyperemia

99. A 50-year-old man complains to a dentist of pain and creaking in his left temporomandibular joint when eating, especially solid foods. After the irritation is removed, the pain gradually subsides in 20-30 minutes. In the morning there is no pain. Objectively, the patient chews food mainly on the left side. X-ray of the left temporomandibular joint shows narrowing of the joint space. Make the diagnosis:
a. Pain dysfunction of the  temporomandibular joint
b. Acute arthritis of the left  temporomandibular joint
*c. Chronic arthritis of the left  temporomandibular joint
d. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
e. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint

100. An 18-year-old young man complains of a cavity in his tooth 37 and pain that occurs when food gets into this cavity. The tooth was painful one year ago but he did not make an appointment with the doctor back then. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 37 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. Overgrown granulation tissue protrudes from the perforation into the pulp chamber and fills practically the whole carious cavity. Probing of the granulations provokes bleeding and slight pain. Percussion is painless. Mucosa in the projection of the roots of tooth 37 is pale pink and has no pathologic changes. Electric pulp testing - 60 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic papillitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Granulations from the area of root  bifurcation
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

101. A clasp (bugel) denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 47-year-old woman. Objectively, the abutment teeth are intact, the crowns are tall. When checking the denture frame, the width of the arch needs to be estimated. What is the optimal width of the denture arch?
a. 0.5-1.0 mm
*b. 2.0-3.0 mm
c. 1.5-2.0 mm
d. 1.0-1.5 mm
e. 4.0-5.0 mm

102. A 37-year-old man complains of a whitish spot on the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively, against the background of visually unchanged vermilion border of the lower lip in the middle between the lip midline and the mouth angle, there is a grayish-white irregular (polygonal) lesion 7x4 mm in size. The lesion is slightly concave and covered in small scales tightly attached to its surface. Palpation detects no induration of the lesion base, though lateral palpation of the lesion detects a superficial induration. Regional lymph nodes remain unchanged. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Lichen ruber planus
*b. Limited precancerous hyperkeratosis
c. Cancer of the lower lip
d. Manganotti cheilitis
e. Flat leukoplakia

103. A 40-year-old man presents with pathologic teeth grinding caused by their functional overload due to the loss of many antagonist teeth. With direct occlusion, vertical grinding of the front teeth resulted in protrusion of the patient's lower jaw forwards. Interalveolar space is diminished, the lower third of the face is shortened. What would be the most advisable treatment in this case?
a. Instrumental surgical treatment
b. Prosthetic treatment
c. Prothetic treatment
d. Teeth shortening
*e. Prosthetics that increase interalveolar height

104. A clasp (bugel) denture is being made for the upper jaw of a 64-year-old man, who has a Kennedy's class II dentition defect. After parallelometry, the types of boundary lines were determined on the abutment teeth. Tooth 24 has a type 1 boundary line. What type of clasp (clammer) according to the Ney classification is indicated in this case?
a. Type IV
b. Type V
c. Type II
*d. Type I
e. Type III

105. A patient has been diagnosed with a unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was carried out by applying a two-jaw dental wire splint with hook loops and an interjaw elastic band. The fracture is healing without complications. After what period of time should the splint be removed?
a. 2 weeks
b. 7 days
c. 10 days
d. 1 month
*e. 3 weeks

106. During examination of schoolchildren, the orthodontist noticed that some of them present with strained orbicularis oris muscle. What dental appliance can be used for exercising of the orbicularis oris muscle?
a. Bruckl appliance
b. Angle appliance
c. Frankel functional regulator III
*d. Dass activator appliance
e. Andresen-Haupl activator appliance

107. A 21-year-old woman after a domestic accident presents with a fracture of the maxillary alveolar process in the area of teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23. What splint should be used for this fracture?
a. With supporting plane
b. With inclined plane
c. With spreader arch
*d. Smooth dental brace
e. With retention loops

108. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed a hemorrhage from the socket of the extracted tooth. What tactics should the dentist choose in this case?
a. Administer vicasol (menadione) solution intramuscularly
b. Administer 5-10 mL of 10% calcium chloride solution intravenously
c. Insert a gauze pack soaked in 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
d. Place sutures into the soft tissues
*e. Tightly pack the tooth socket with a strip of iodoform gauze

109. A patient complains of a slowly growing neoplasm in the frontal area on the left. The neoplasm is mobile, painless, and fused with the skin. Punctate skin depressions can be observed on its surface. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Frontal lipoma
b. Frontal fibroma
c. Frontal keratoacanthoma
d. Exophytic form of skin cancer
*e. Frontal atheroma

110. A 38-year-old man has undergone the first stage of a two-stage dental implant installation in the area of his tooth 45. At this stage, the root part of the implant was installed. What minimum period must pass before the second stage of the procedure can be performed?
a. 7-8 months
b. 10-12 months
c. 5-6 months
*d. 3-4 months
e. 1-2 months

111. A 58-year-old woman complains of a red spot on her lower lip that first appeared 4 years ago. Objectively, on the vermillion border of the lower lip there is a red spot with velvety surface. The lesion is slightly concave, when compared to the surrounding tissues. It does not change its color when pressed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Bowen's disease
b. Verrucous precancer
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
d. Simple leukoplakia
e. Hemangioma

112. The parents of a 3-year-old child complain that their child refuses to eat and has painful rashes on the lips and fever of 38^oС. Examination detects 10 small vesicles with clear contents on the skin around the mouth. The mucosa of the lips has several round aphthae 1-3 mm in diameter. Acute catarrhal gingivitis and submandibular lymphadenitis are observed. What medicines should be used for etiotropic treatment in this case?
a. Anti-inflammatory agents
*b. Antiviral agents
c. Antibiotics
d. Antifungal agents
e. Hyposensitization agents

113. A 34-year-old man came to a dental clinic to have his tooth 38 extracted. He has an inflammatory contracture of the II degree (mouth opens by 1.5 cm). What anesthesia must be provided to eliminate the contracture in this case?
a. Torusal anesthesia
b. Mandibular anesthesia
*c. Berchet-Dubov anesthesia
d. Gow-Gates anesthesia
e. Mental anesthesia

114. A 75-year-old patient complains of being unable to use his complete removable laminar denture for the lower jaw because its fixation became worse and it frequently breaks. The denture was made 7 years ago. Objectively, the alveolar part of the lower jaw is significantly atrophied, the denture sways, balancing in place, and cannot be properly fixated. What is the most likely cause of poor denture fixation and its frequent breakages?
a. Eating solid foods
b. Using the denture when sleeping
c. Incorrect usage of the denture
d. Mistakes were made during the denture manufacturing
*e. Exceeding the service life of the denture

115. A 2-year-old child received a dental trauma. Objectively the crowns of 51 and 61 are shorter than the crowns of adjacent teeth by 1/3. Mucosa in the area of 51 and 61 is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray shows no periodontal fissure in the apical area of the roots of 51 and 61. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Extraction of teeth 51, 61
*b. Dispensary observation
c. Ligature splinting
d. Reimplantation
e. Reposition of teeth 51, 61

116. A 32-year-old man has been brought into the maxillofacial department of a clinic. He was diagnosed with an open displaced bilateral fracture of the lower jaw in the area of the gonial angle. X-ray shows a large diastasis between the fragments and muscle interposition. What main treatment technique should be chosen for this patient?
a. Make a Port splint for the fixation of the lower jaw
b. Make a Vankevich splint for the fixation of the lower jaw
c. Apply a smooth splint-bracket
*d. Bilateral osteosynthesis of the lower jaw
e. Apply a splint with wire loops to the  lower jaw

117. A 33-year-old man undergoes treatment of tooth 15 for acute median caries. What type of anesthesia will be the most advisable in this case?
a. Inhalation anesthesia
b. Non-inhalation anesthesia
c. Application anesthesia
d. Conduction anesthesia
*e. Infiltration anesthesia

118. Epidemiological examination of certain age groups to study the prevalence of the signs that indicate periodontal diseases and to assess the need for treatment uses the following index:
*a. CPITN (WHO)
b. IR (Ramfjord)
c. PMA (Parma)
d. PI (Russel)
e. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion)

119. When treating chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 21, a dentist performed instrumental processing of the dental root canal using the apex-to-crown step-back technique. After the processing was complete, ledges formed on the walls of the root canal. What endodontic instrument must be used to smooth-out these ledges?
a. K-reamer
b. Flexofile
*c. H-file
d. Gates Glidden
e. K-file

120. A 12-year-old child complains of high body temperature of 39.7^oC, enlarged lymph nodes, sore throat, runny nose, and cough. Objectively, acute catarrhal stomatitis is observed in the oral cavity, some of the palatine tonsils have a yellow-gray coating that crumbles and can be easily removed. The cervical, occipital, and submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, and slightly painful. Laboratory blood testing shows leuko-, lympho-, and monocytosis and atypical mononuclear cells. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Loeffler bacillus
b. Coxsackievirus
c. Hemolytic streptococcus
d. Herpes simplex virus
*e. Epstein-Barr virus

121. A 10-year-old boy complains of a painful ulcer in his mouth. The ulcer has been persisting and increasing in size for 1.5 months. Objectively, on the buccal mucosa there is a soft shallow ulcer 1 cm in diameter with uneven undermined edges. The floor of the ulcer is bumpy and covered in a yellow-gray coating. The ulcer is surrounded with numerous small yellowish tubercles. The regional lymph nodes are elastic, painful, and matted together. These signs are characteristic of the following disease:
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Actinomycosis
*c. Tuberculosis
d. Cancer
e. Syphilis

122. An 8-year-old boy complains of an acute pain in his lower left jaw, general weakness, high body temperature of 38.6^oC, and problems with opening the mouth and swallowing. Objectively, the face is asymmetrical because of edema in the submandibular region and in the lower third of the left cheek. Mucosa in the area of teeth 73, 74, and 75 is edematous on the both sides of the alveolar process. The teeth are mobile, percussion is positive, the Vincent's sign is positive. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Inflammatory infiltration of the left  cheek
b. Odontogenic phlegmon of the  submandibular region
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Non-odontogenic acute purulent  lymphadenitis
*e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

123. A 30-year-old man complains of a carious cavity in a lower left tooth. Objectively, tooth 34 has a deep carious cavity that at one point communicates with the pulp chamber. Probing of the cavity floor is painless, while percussion of the tooth is slightly painful. Thermal stimuli provoke no response. On the gums, there is a fistula in the projection of the root apex of tooth 34. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

124. What are diamond dental burs with red markings used for in dentistry?
a. Finishing composite fillings
b. Quick removal of dental tissues
*c. Preliminary polishing of composite fillings
d. Opening carious cavities
e. Universal application

125. A 4-year-old child with mouth breathing is registered for regular check-ups with an orthodontist. One year ago the child underwent an adenotomy. Objectively, the child has deciduous occlusion, the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by 1/3, the distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are located in one vertical plane. What preventive appliance is the most advisable in this case for elimination of the bad habit of mouth breathing?
a. Janson bionator
b. Dass activator
c. Frankel functional regulator, type I
*d. Schonherr standard vestibular plate
e. Kraus vestibulo-oral plate

126. A 16-year-old boy came to a dentist with complaints of frequent injuries to the inner surface of his lower lip during his boxing training. Examination revealed a reverse overlap of his front teeth. It is recommended to make him a boxing mouthguard from <<Elastoplast>>. For what jaw should such a gear be made in this case?
a. Mandibular dentition
b. Maxillary dentition, maxillary alveolar  process, and hard palate
*c. Mandibular dentition and mandibular  alveolar process
d. Maxillary dentition
e. Both maxillary and mandibular dentition

127. A 47-year-old man complains of pain in the throat on the left that intensifies during talking and swallowing, reduced mouth opening, and generally feeling unwell. Objectively, the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is limited, the jaw cannot be moved to the right. The mucosa in the area of the left pterygomandibular fold and tooth 38 is hyperemic and painful. A painful infiltrate is palpable on the inner surface of the left gonial angle. What diagnosis can be suspected in this case?
a. Abscess of the lingual sulcus on the left
b. Acute purulent pericoronitis in the area of tooth 38
*c. Phlegmon of the left pterygomandibular space
d. Peritonsillar abscess
e. Phlegmon of the left parapharyngeal space

128. A 34-year-old woman complains of a pain in her lower left jaw. Two months ago her teeth 35, 36, and 37 were extracted. Objectively, her lower left jaw has a cuff-like thickening. X-ray shows a sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Mandibular sarcoma
b. Acute serous alveolitis
c. Acute purulent periostitis
*d. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Ameloblastoma

129. A 75-year-old man complains of poor fixation of his full removable denture for the lower jaw and food particles accumulating under the denture base. The lower third of his face is shortened. The alveolar processes are markedly atrophied. What anatomical structure of the lower jaw can be used for improvement of full removable denture fixation?
*a. Retroalveolar space
b. Vestibule of the oral cavity
c. Mucogingival fold
d. Mylohyoid ridge
e. Internal oblique line

130. A 38-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a burning sensation, pain, and bleeding gums. Objectively, her gums are edematous, hyperemic, doughy, and bleed when lightly touched. The gingival attachment is not destroyed. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. -
b. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage
*c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis

131. Removable full dentures are being made for a 65-year-old man. Progenic occlusion is determined. What are the specifics of teeth placement in case of progenic occlusion of edentulous jaws?
a. Short-bite anterior teeth
b. Anterior teeth are placed in orthognathic occlusion
c. Inferior dental arch is shortened by two premolars
d. Anterior teeth are placed in direct occlusion
*e. Superior dental arch is shortened by two premolars

132. A 32-year-old man presents with fever of 38.9^oC, general weakness, impaired speech, and inability to eat. This condition has been recurring for the last 4 years in autumn and spring. There are vesicles and erosions covered in grayish fibrinous coating on the hyperemic and edematous mucosa of the lips and cheeks. The lips are covered in massive blood-brown scabs.The Nikolsky's sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Dermatitis herpetiformis  (Duhring's disease)
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Pemphigus vulgaris
d. Nonacantholytic pemphigus
*e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

133. A non-removable porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge is being made for a 35-year-old woman. Two-layer impressions were obtained using ''Silafex'' silicone material. The impression were sent for disinfection. What antiseptic should be used to process the impressions?
a. 3% chloramine solution
b. 1.5% sodium bicarbonate solution
c. 0.5% hydrogen peroxide solution
*d. 0.5% hypochlorite sodium solution
e. 70% alcohol solution

134. A patient complains of a painless neoplasm on the lower lip, which appeared 2 weeks ago after an injury. Objectively, there is a painless dense spherical translucent neoplasm approximately 5 mm in diameter, with clear margins and signs of fluctuation. The mucosa around this formation is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Retention cyst of the salivary gland
b. Trophic ulcer
c. Angiomatous epulis
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Decubital ulcer

135. A 35-year-old woman came to a dental surgeon complaining of a slight deformity of the mandibular body on the right. Orthopantomogram shows a round homogeneous shadow with clear margins in the mandibular body. The density of the shadow is close to that of dental tissues. On its periphery, the neoplasm is surrounded by a transparent zone 1 mm wide. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Odontogenic fibroma
b. Ameloblastoma
*c. Odontoma
d. Mixoma
e. Osteoma

136. A 32-year-old woman complains of white and pigmented spots on her teeth. She lives in an area, where fluorine levels in drinking water are 1.7 mg/L. She was diagnosed with fluorosis, chalky-speckled form. What toothpastes are indicated in this case?
*a. Calcium phosphate-containing  toothpastes
b. Highly abrasive toothpastes
c. Fluorine-containing toothpastes
d. Herbal toothpastes
e. Triclosan-containing toothpastes

137. An 11-year-old girl was diagnosed with chronic parenchymatous parotitis. What X-ray sign indicates this disease?
*a. ''Bunch of grapes'' sign
b. Filling defect
c. Fluctuation sign
d. ''Leafless tree'' sign
e. ''String of pearls'' sign

138. A 69-year-old woman came to a dentist complaining of problematic swallowing and her teeth clacking when she talks. The complaints arose after she started using her recently made complete removable dentures for the upper and lower jaws. What mistake did the doctor make when making the dentures for this patient?
a. The edges of the functional impression  are designed incorrectly
*b. The bite height is too high
c. The Bonville three-point contact has not been formed
d. The denture plane is defined incorrectly
e. The bite height is too low

139. A practically healthy 7-year-old child complains of a broken crown of the upper right front tooth and pain in this tooth. Objectively, 1/3 of the crown of tooth 11 is missing, the pulp is exposed in one spot, acutely painful, red, and bleeds when probed. Percussion of the tooth is slightly painful. The trauma was 2 hours ago. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Vital amputation
b. Vital extirpation
c. Devital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
*e. Biological method

140. A 7-year-old girl received conduction anesthesia with 2% articaine solution for extraction of tooth 16. She has no history of allergies. After receiving anesthesia the patient complained of weakness, she developed skin pallor, cyanosis, and nausea. Her blood pressure dropped significantly. The patient is conscious. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pain shock
*b. Collapse
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Vertigo
e. Allergic response to the anesthetic

141. A 27-year-old woman complains of an aesthetical defect in the area of her upper central incisors. She was diagnosed with chronic deep caries, Black class IV. Aesthetic restoration of teeth 11 and 21 is planned. What material has optimal combination of strength and aesthetical properties?
a. Compomers
b. Liquid composites
*c. Hybrid composites
d. Macrofilled composites
e. Microfilled composites

142. A 16-year-old young man complains of temperature increase up to 38.7^oC, pain when eating and swallowing, foul acrid smell from his mouth. Lymph nodes, especially cervical ones, are enlarged, mobile, and painless. Objectively the patient presents with generalized hyperemia of the oral mucosa, multiple petechiae, necrotic spots, and profuse coating of the anterior pharynx. Blood test: increased ESR, marked leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypical mononuclear cells, thrombocytopenia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Herpetic angina
c. Vincent stomatitis (acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis)
d. Monoblastic leukemia
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

143. During intraoral examination the dentist suspected that the patient has syphilis. What should the dentist do in this case?
a. Inform the patient of the suspected diagnosis and end the visit
b. Obtain the impressions to study the diagnostic models
*c. Complete the examination and refer the patient for necessary tests
d. Continue the examination and start the teeth preparation
e. Decline to provide dental services for this patient

144. After the extraction of tooth 38, the patient developed bleeding from the tooth socket. The dentist performed tamponade of the socket, but 20 minutes later, the socket is still bleeding. What should the doctor do in this case?
a. Perform tamponade of the socket again
*b. Suture the socket
c. Finish the visit, give advice to the patient about properly taking care of the tooth socket
d. Refer the patient to the inpatient department
e. Refer the patient to a hematologist for a consultation

145. A 14-year-old girl complains of a pulsing pain in her upper left teeth that lasts for 3 days already and sharply increases on biting. Objectively there is a carious cavity that does not communicate with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity floor is painless. Vertical and horizontal percussion is sharply painful. Mucosa in the area of tooth 16 is hyperemic. What is the diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute serous pulpitis
*c. Acute purulent periodontitis
d. Pulpitis complicated with periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

146. After a clasp-retained (bugel) maxillary denture is made, it is necessary to assess the quality of the newly-made construction. Width of the denture arch should be:
a. 12-15 mm
*b. 5-8 mm
c. 10-12 mm
d. 1.5-2 mm
e. 3-5 mm

147. As a result of a trauma, an upper front tooth was broken in a 39-year-old patient. Objectively, the cutting edge on the mesial surface of tooth 22 is destroyed, with the area of destruction remaining within the mantle dentin. What class of cavity is it according to the Black's classification?
a. III
b. VI
c. V
d. II
*e. IV

148. A 42-year-old woman had her tooth 36 extracted 2 months ago. In the left buccal region, she has a dense infiltrate, painful to palpation. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. Teeth 34, 35, and 37 are mobile. The mucosa in the area of the mobile teeth is doughy, cyanotic, and has a fistula. The socket of tooth 36 produces purulent discharge. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Chronic limited osteomyelitis
b. Odontogenic abscess of the buccal region
c. Migrating facial granuloma
d. -
e. Chronic rarefying periostitis

149. A 25-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for oral cavity sanation. Objectively the crown of tooth 37 is destroyed by 2/3. Gingival mucosa around tooth 37 is without changes. What anesthesia should the dental surgeon give to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Mental nerve block
b. Intraoral infraorbital nerve block
c. Mandibular anesthesia
*d. Mandibular and buccal anesthesia
e. Tuberal anesthesia

150. Removable partial dentures for both jaws are being made for a 60-year-old man. The patient has a history of chronic angular stomatitis. When making his dentures, special attention should be paid to the:
*a. Restoration of the interalveolar height
b. Choice of material for denture base
c. Oral cavity sanation
d. Choice of impression material
e. Final processing of the denture base

151. A 65-year-old woman came to a dentist complaining of a mildly painful ulcer on the mucosa of her tongue. The ulcer appeared 2-3 weeks ago. The woman has a history of chronic circulatory failure. On the lateral surface of the tongue, examination detects a shallow ulcer up to 1 cm in diameter, covered in a gray-white coating and moderately painful to palpation. The color of the surrounding mucosa is unchanged. The oral cavity is sanated. What type of ulcer is likely in this case?
a. Tubercular ulcer
b. Cancerous ulcer
c. Decubitus ulcer
d. Syphilitic ulcer
e. Trophic ulcer

152. A 49-year-old man was diagnosed with recurrence of lower lip cancer two years after he had undergone radiation therapy. Objectively in the area of his lower right lip there is a neoplasm 1x2 cm in size with an ulcer in its center. In the right submandibular area there are 2 round, enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes. What approach to the treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Rectangular resection of the lower lip
b. Trapezial resection of the lower lip
c. Combined treatment
d. Wedge resection of the lower lip
e. Vanakh's operation

153. A 19-year-old young man, who was waiting for the appointed time at the dentist's, suddenly developed an attack: his face became purple, bloody foam flowed from his mouth (bitten tongue), pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light, the patient developed first tonic then clonic convulsions that stopped spontaneously, after that he calmed down and fell asleep quickly. What happened with the patient?
a. Spasmophilia
b. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Sympathoadrenal crisis
e. Epileptic seizure

154. A 27-year-old woman came to the dentist for the purpose of oral cavity sanation. After anesthesia, she started complaining of dizziness, ringing in her ears, dimming vision, and general weakness. Objectively, her skin is pale and covered in cold sweat. Her pulse is 94/min., of low volume and pressure. Her blood pressure is 96/60 mm Hg. She had a brief episode of unconsciousness that lasted 30 seconds. What urgent condition developed in this woman?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Collapse
d. Acute heart failure
e. Syncope

155. A 60-year-old woman complains of a pain in the oral cavity that increases during eating. She has a history of ischemic heart disease. Objectively, her oral mucosa is pale pink, without visible pathological changes. On the lateral surface of the tongue there is an ulcer 0.7 cm in diameter. The ulcer has clear and even margins, is covered in a gray coating, and is painful on palpation. In the surrounding tissues there is no inflammatory reaction. Make the correct diagnosis:
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Cancerous ulcer
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Syphilitic chancre
e. Decubitus ulcer

156. Missing tooth 12 of a 35-year-old man is being restored with a ceramic crown fixed on a zirconium dioxide implant. What cement should be used to fix the crown in this case?
a. Glass ionomer
b. Phosphate
c. Silicate
d. Composite
e. Polycarboxylate

157. A 50-year-old man complains of gum discoloration, pain when eating spicy food, weakness, and irritability. He notes that periodically spots and vesicles appear on his skin. For a long time he has been working in the galvanic workshop of a factory. On examination the patient is pale, he has a gray-black border on his gums, and on his oral mucosa there are single erosions that are painful on palpation. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute leukemia
b. Lead salt poisoning
c. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis (Vincent stomatitis)
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
e. Mercury salt poisoning

158. A 39-year-old man came to a dentist with complains of mobility of his upper and lower teeth. Objectively, the bite is orthognathic, the dentition is continuous, the teeth have pathological mobility of the I-II degree. The marginal periodontium is in a satisfactory condition. What type of dentition stabilization must be used in this case?
a. Arched
b. -
c. Parasagittal
d. Frontosagittal
e. Sagittal

159. A 52-year-old man complains of unpleasant sensations during swallowing and erosions on the oral mucosa. The disease onset was over a month ago. Objectively, on the normal mucosa of the soft palate, cheeks, and gums there are bright red erosions with the remains of erupted vesicles. The mucosa easily sloughs off. The Nikolsky's sign is positive. What medicines must be prescribed for the treatment first?
a. Corticosteroids
b. Antibiotics
c. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
d. Proteolytic enzymes
e. Antifungal agents

160. A 45-year-old man has been diagnosed with a maxillary fracture. The fracture line passes between teeth 43 and 44. Pathological wear is observed in his lower teeth, the crowns of the teeth are low, wire splint fixation is difficult, the fragments can be easily repositioned manually. What laboratory-made splint should be used in this case?
a. Limberg splint
b. Port splint
c. Zbarzh splint
d. Vankevych splint
e. Vasiliev splint

161. A 9-year-old boy complains of a sore throat and fever. Objectively, he has catarrhal gingivitis, plaque on his tongue, hyperemia of the palatine arches, hypertrophied tonsils, bad breath, and lymphadenitis. According to the pediatrician, the boy's liver and spleen are enlarged and he has severe monocytosis. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
b. Herpetic tonsillitis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

162. A 20-year-old young woman complains of pain and marked bleeding in her gums when she brushes her teeth and eats even soft food. Objectively her gingival mucosa is swollen, hyperemic and bleeds even on the slightest touch. The teeth are covered with moderate amount of soft dental plaque. What toothpaste should be recommended to this patient as a part of complex treatment of her condition?
a. Antifungal toothpaste
b. Gel toothpaste with microelements
c. Mineral-rich toothpaste
d. Fluoride toothpaste
e. Herbal toothpaste

163. A 59-year-old woman needs splinting of her lower teeth. Objectively, the dentition integrity is preserved, the crowns of the lower teeth are tall, the teeth are intact, with exposed cervices and mobility of the II degree. What dental splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Splint made of equatorial crowns
b. Cap splint
c. Semi-crown splint
d. Solid-cast removable splint
e. Splint made of soldered crowns

164. During or immediately after an injection, certain local complications can develop. What is textbf{NOT one of those complications?
a. Damage to a blood vessel by the needle
b. Dermal ischemia
c. Diplopia
d. Functional paralysis or paresis of facial muscles
e. Mucosal necrosis

165. To extract tooth 27, the patient was given tuberal and palatal anesthesia. When the needle was being pulled out from the soft tissues after the palatal anesthesia, the patient developed bleeding. What should be done to stop the bleeding in this case?
a. Intramuscular administration of vicasol (menadione)
b. Intravenous administration of 10% calcium chloride solution
c. Press the place of injection with a tampon
d. Ligate the external carotid artery
e. Place sutures

166. A patient with ischemic heart disease and exertional angina pectoris complains of a sudden constricting retrosternal pain that lasts for over 30 minutes and irradiates to the left arm. The pain occurred during a physical exertion. The pain attack did not stop after the patient had taken 3 tablets of nitroglycerine. On examination, the skin is pale gray, moist, and cold to touch; the facial features are sharp; acrocyanosis is observed; pulse is 102/min., arrhythmic; blood pressure is 90/40 mm Hg. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Angina pectoris attack
b. Cardialgia
c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Stable angina pectoris
e. Hypotension

167. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of bleeding and edematous gums. Objectively, the gums on his upper and lower jaws are hyperemic and edematous, there are deposits of supra- and subgingival calculus. What diagnostic method must be used to make a final diagnosis?
a. Immunological method
b. Microbiological method
c. Radiological method
d. Clinical method
e. Biochemical method

168. A 35-year-old woman came to the dental office complaining of teeth mobility. Objectively, teeth 42, 41, 31, 32 have II degree mobility and teeth 43, 33 have I degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact. The patient presents with deep occlusion. X-ray shows resorption of the interdental septa by 1/3 of the root height. What splint construction is advisable in this case for temporary use?
a. Consisting of semi-crowns
b. Cap splint
c. Clasp-retained (bugel) denture
d. Consisting of equator crowns
e. Made of armored composite

169. The parents of a 17-year-old teenager brought him to a dental surgeon with complaints of a neoplasm on his left upper lip. The neoplasm appeared several months ago. Objectively, on the mucosa of the upper lip there is a wart-like pedunculated growth, clearly separated from the surrounding tissues. Its surface is bumpy and coarse-grained, resembling a cauliflower. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
a. -
b. Papilloma
c. Cutaneous horn
d. Fibroma
e. Verrucous precancer

170. A 60-year-old man has completely edentulous jaws. He has been using dentures for 15 years. Objectively, the lower third of the face is reduced, the alveolar processes of the upper and lower jaws are sharply atrophied, the palate is flat, the torus is pronounced. The mucosa of the prosthetic bed is thin, atrophied, and without a submucosal layer. What impression should be obtained in this case and what material must be used for this purpose?
a. Complete anatomical impressions  obtained with plaster
b. Functional decompression impression  obtained with dentaflex
c. Functional differentiated impression  obtained with repin
d. Complete anatomical impressions  obtained with stomalgin
e. Functional compression impression  obtained with stens

171. A 40-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of bleeding gums, teeth mobility on both his jaws, and bad breath. Examination was performed and the diagnosis was made: generalized periodontitis of moderate severity. After therapeutic treatment it is necessary to splint the intact dentitions. What splint design would be optimal in this case?
a. Clasp (bugel) denture with continuous  clammers
b. Elbrecht's cast continuous splint
c. Mamlok splint
d. Cap splint
e. Crown splint

172. A 44-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of pain in the area of the left cheek, deterioration of his general condition, and a fever of 38°С. Objectively, in the area of his left cheek, there is edema that is painful to palpation. The mucosa of the cheek and the mucogingival junction on the left is hyperemic and edematous, it has imprints of teeth and protrudes into the oral cavity. The left lower molars are destroyed, their remains have sharp edges. The patient was diagnosed with a deep phlegmon of the cheek on the left. What incision would be optimal in this case?
a. Incision along the edge of the mandible
b. Mucosal incision from within the oral cavity
c. External buccal incision above the center of the infiltrate
d. Submandibular skin incision 2 cm below the edge of the mandible
e. Incision along the nasolabial fold

173. A 7-year-old boy was brought to the dentist. Objectively his gums are hyperemic and bleeding, the teeth are mobile and covered in plaque, their roots are exposed, periodontal pockets are pathologic and filled with granulations. The child is registered for regular check-ups with the pediatrician. According to the mother, lately the child's condition has been deteriorating. The boy presents with diabetes insipidus and exophthalmos. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
b. Taratinov disease (eosinophilic granuloma of bone)
c. Gaucher disease
d. Letterer-Siwe disease
e. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome

174. The parents of an 8-year-old girl brought her to a dental orthodontist for a preventive examination. Objectively, her lower lip protrudes, the shape of her upper dentition is trapezoidal, while the lower dentition is normal. Between the upper and lower front teeth there is a sagittal gap 2 mm wide, the closure of the first permanent molars is Angle's class III. What dental appliance can be used to treat this occlusion pathology?
a. Frankel functional regulator, type I
b. Frankel functional regulator, type III
c. Schonherr plate
d. Bracket system
e. Muhlemann propulsor

175. A 65-year-old patient complains of poor mandibular fixation of the clasp (bugel) denture that was made one month ago. Objectively, teeth 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 46 are preserved, the denture balances when one of ist sides is pressed. At what stage of making the clasp denture did a mistake occur?
a. Casting the frame
b. Modeling the clasps (clammers)
c. Obtaining the impressions
d. Performing parallelometry
e. Determining the centric occlusion

176. A 60-year-old man with completely edentulous upper and lower jaws complains of pain in his lower right jaw. The pain developed after an injury on the day before. Objectively, the lower jaw is slightly swollen in its right mental region, the mouth opening is not restricted. X-ray shows a right-sided non-displaced mandibular fracture in the area of the mental foramen. What splint must be used in this case?
a. Weber splint
b. Vasiliev splint
c. Port splint
d. Tigerstedt splint
e. Vankevych splint

177. A 30-year-old man complains of lost dental filling on his upper right jaw. Objectively in tooth 16 there is a deep carious cavity filled  with dense pigmented dentin. What dentin layer forms as the result of tooth irritation in the course of caries process?
a. Primary
b. Tertiary
c. Secondary
d. Hybrid
e. Predentin

178. The parents of a 5-year-old child explain that lately their child has started chewing only on one side and refusing hard foods. Objectively, tooth 74 has a carious cavity and there are dental deposits on teeth 73, 74, and 75. Probing of the cavity floor in tooth 74 is painful and provokes a slight bleeding in the area where the cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

179. A 28-year-old woman complains of general weakness and pain during eating and swallowing. The disease onset was acute and manifested as elevated body temperature of 37.9^oC and muscle pain. Objectively, against the background of edematous and hyperemic mucosa of the soft palate, anterior arches, and posterior pharyngeal wall there are single vesicles and their clusters filled with serohemorrhagic content, as well as mildly painful to touch eroded areas of varying size with scalloped edges and fibrine coating. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Influenza-associated stomatitis
b. Herpangina
c. Shingles
d. Foot-and-mouth disease
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

180. A 54-year-old patient is prescribed full cast porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridges for the upper and lower jaws. What type of impression material should be chosen in this case?
a. Zinc oxide eugenol
b. Silicone
c. Thermoplastic
d. Plaster
e. Alginate

181. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of missing upper teeth. Objectively, his teeth 24 and 25 are missing, the bite is orthognathic, the crowns of teeth 23 and 26 are tall and intact. It is planned to make a porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge for this patient. What impression material must be used to obtain an impression in this case?
a. Silicone
b. Alginate
c. Thermoplastic
d. Zinc oxide eugenol
e. Plaster

182. A 46-year-old man complains of facial asymmetry, intense pain in the area of his teeth 17 and 18, severe headache, body temperature of 39^oC, and general weakness. Objectively, his face is asymmetrical due to a slight edema of the right buccal, zygomatic, and lower temporal regions. His mouth opening is limited. The crown of tooth 18 is destroyed. The mucosa of the mucogingival fold in the projection area of the roots of tooth 18 is hyperemic and edematous. Palpation reveals a painful infiltrate behind the right maxillary tuberosity. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Odontogenic abscess of the  pterygopalatine fossa
b. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Odontogenic buccal phlegmon
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Odontogenic acute purulent periostitis

183. A 35-year-old man complains of involuntary acute paroxysmal pain in his tooth 25. The pain attacks last up to 30 minutes and intensify at night, with painless intervals up to three hours. The pain is provoked and exacerbated by thermal stimuli. Objectively, on the masticatory surface of tooth 25 there is a deep carious cavity filled with softened dentin; the pulp chamber is not breached; probing is sharply painful at one point - the projection of a pulp horn. Electric pulp testing - 25 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Pulpal hyperemia
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Acute limited pulpitis

184. 10-year-old child complains of pain in the area of the upper front teeth during eating cold food. The pain started occurring one month ago after a trauma. Examination shows missing crown corner of tooth 21, the incisal edge of tooth 11 is broken off, with the fracture line located within the dentin. Probing of teeth 11 and 21 is painless. Response to a cold stimulus is painful, short-term. Electric pulp test - 7 microamperes. What filling material should be used in this case?
a. Dental compomer
b. Glass ionomer
c. Microfilled composite
d. Microhybrid composite
e. Amalgam

