1. A 57 year old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by ⅔ in the area of the 33, and by ½ of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
a. Garland modelling in the precervical area
b. Devitalization of supporting teeth
c. Massive grinding off of hard tissues
*d. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress
e. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges

2. An 11 year old girl has adentia, the 35 tooth is missing, it was proved roentgenologically. Between the 34 and 33 teeth as well as between the 34 and 36 teeth there are diaereses, the 34 tooth is turned by 30o relative to its glossobuccal direction. What abnormal position does the 34 tooth have?
a. Oral
b. Vestibular
c. Distal
d. Mesial
*e. Tortoocclusion (rotation of teeth) and distal

3. An oral surgeon attended a 3 day old child staying in the newborn pathology department. Objectively: bilateral hypogenesis of zygomatic bones and orbits, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures, nonclosure of inferior eyelids, hypogenesis of mandible (bird face), deformity of auricles with a preauricular fistula on the right. What congenital disease does the child have?
*a. Mandibulofacial dysostosis
b. Oculomandibulofacial syndrome
c. Oculocerebrorenal syndrome
d. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia
e. Oculodentodigital syndrome

4. A 37 year old patient was diagnosed with arthrosis of mandibulotemporal joint. During auscultation the doctor heard pathological rustle in the area of the joint, namely "clicking" that was caused by a loa D. What is the mechanism of this pathological rustle?
a. Calcification of mandibulotemporal joint disc
b. Friction of bone surfaces in the joint
c. Inflammation of cartilaginous tissue of the disc
d. Loosening of mandibulotemporal joint ligaments
*e. Asynchronous movement of disc and articulation head

5. A 9 year old child complains about pain and swelling of soft tissues beneath his mandible on the right. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory; there is face asymmetry due to the inflammatory infiltration and collateral tissue edema in the right submandibular area. Crown of the 85 tooth is decayed, mucous membrane of gums in the area of the 84, 85, 46 teeth is hyperemic, edematic; mucogingival fold is flattened. What treatment should be administered?
a. Extraction of the 85 tooth and incision along the mucogingival fold
*b. Extraction of the 85 tooth
c. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth
d. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth and periosteotomy
e. Periosteotomy

6. A patient has indication for removal of his medial incisor of the right upper jaw on account of chronic periodontitis. What types of anaesthesia should be applied for tooth removal?
a. Infraorbital, palatine and incisive
*b. Infraborbital and incisive
c. Terminal and incisive
d. Infraorbital and palatine
e. Plexual and incisive

7. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II degre E. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
*a. Circle
b. Frontal-lateral
c. Frontal
d. Transversal
e. Sagittal

8. A visiting nurse examined a newborn chil D. Examination revealed that lower face part is shorter than median one, chin is retrodeviated, teeth are missing, lower jaw is retrodisplace D. What is the name of such mandible position of a newborn?
a. Edge-to-edge occlusion
*b. Physiological infantile retrogenia
c. Distal occlusion
d. Physiological occlusion
e. Mesial occlusion

9. A 36 year old patient complains about acute pain, "clicking" in the right mandibulotemporal joint, burning in the area of her right external acoustic meatus. Movements of her lower jaw are step-like, along with brief blocking moments in the joint and acute pain. Objectively: the face is symmetric. Occlusion is orthognathic, intraoral palpation of lateral pterygoid muscle causes pain on the right. Tomograms show that contours of bone structures of articular surfaces are regular and smooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Mandibulotemporal joint disfunction
b. Anchylosis of mandibulotemporal joint
c. Acute posttraumatic artritis of mandibulotemporal joint
d. Rheumatic arthritis of mandibulotemporal joint
e. Deforming arthrosis of mandibulotemporal joint

10. A 57 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about dull pain in the area of his right temporomandibular joint that is getting worse during eating. The disease developed gradually, it began with constrained mandibular motion in the morning that sometimes grew more intensive, sometimes less. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the mouth can be opened up to 3 cm. Opening of mouth is accompanied by articular noise and clicking (step-like dislocation of mandible). Skin above the joint is intact. Muscle tone is palpatory unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subluxation of mandible
b. Neuromuscular syndrome
c. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
*d. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint
e. Occlusive articulation syndrome

11. A teenager applied to an orthodontist complaining about tooth malposition. Objectively: the face is without pecularities. Occlusion of permanent teeth is present. There are no abnormalities of jaw correlation in three planes. The 23 tooth is vestibularly over the occlusive plane; the space in the dental arch is less than ⅓ of crown siz E. How is it possible to make room for the malpositioned 23 tooth?
a. To remove the 23 tooth
b. To enlarge vertical dimensions
*c. To remove the 24 tooth
d. To enlarge transversal jaw dimensions
e. To enlarge sagittal jaw dimensions

12. A 1,8 year old boy was under treatment in the infectious disease department. He was given ampicillin. On the 6th day of treatment there appeared white deposits in form of caseous films that were revealed on the hyperemic mucous membrane in the area of gingival torus, cheeks and on the tongue. The films can be removed leaving hyperemic surface underneath them. General condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 36,7°C. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Mild case of leukoplakia
c. Drug-induced stomatitis
d. Chronic candidous stomatitis
*e. Acute candidous stomatitis

13. A 64 year old patient was waiting to see an oral surgeon. Suddenly she fell, there appeared coarse breathing, spasmatic twitching of upper and lower extremities. Face and neck became cyanotic, pupils became mydriatic, reaction to the light was absent, arterial pressure and pulse could not be detected, heart tones could not be heard, involuntary urination was observe D. What state are these symptoms typical for?
a. Myocardium infarction
b. Loss of consciousness
c. Stroke
*d. Clinical death
e. Collapse

14. A 49 year old patient applied to a dentist complaining about a growing mole, its peeling and itching. According to the patient, the part of skin started changing its colour and size 1 year ago, after an injury got during shaving. Objectively: in the infraorbital area on the left there is an intensely pigmented brown spot, up to 2 cm large, with small nodules on its surface; it is oval, bulging, with signs of peeling, palpatory painless. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, adhering to skin, painless. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Squamous cell carcinoma of skin
b. Verrucous nevus
c. Pigmented nevus
*d. Melanoma
e. Papillomatosis

15. A 13 year old child complains about acute spontaneous short-term attack-like pain in the area of the 36 tooth that is getting worse during eating. The pain appeared yesterday. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 36 tooth. Tooth cavity is closed, floor probing is painful in one point. Cold stimulus causes short-term pain. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
b. Accute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute localized pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

16. A 32 year old patient applied to a dental surgeon for oral cavity sanitation before prosthetics. During examination of oral cavity the dentist revealed that crown of the 35 tooth was decaye D. The root is stable, its percussion is painless. Mucous membrane of alveolar process was unchange D. X-ray picture showed a slight broadening of periodontal fissur E. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
c. Cystogranuloma
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 25 tooth
e. Chronic periodontitis of the 25 tooth

17. A patient is 48 year old, according to the results of clinicoroentgenological examination it is indicated to remove the 26 tooth because of acute condition of chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What conduction anesthesia is indicated for this operation?
*a. Tuberal and palatinal
b. Torus
c. Infraorbital and palatinal
d. Plexus
e. Infraorbital and incisive

18. An 11 year old patient complains about tooth mobility and gingival haemorrhag E. He has been suffering since he was 3 years ol D. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic, edematic, bleed during instrumentl examination. Tooth roots are dehisced by ⅓ and covered with white deposit. There is 2 degree tooth mobility. Dentogingival pockets are 4-5 mm deep. External examination revealed dryness and thickening of palms, anterior third of forearms, sole surfaces; there are scratches. What is the most probable provisional diagnosis?
a. Hand-Schueller-Christian disease
b. Niemann-Pick disease
*c. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
d. Gauchers disease
e. Letterer-Siewe disease

19. A 25 year old man complains about itching and reddening of his skin in the buccal area, general weakness, flaccidity. He associates the begin of disease with a skin injury he had got during shaving. Objectively: body temperature is 39,0oC. In the buccal area a part of skin is hyperemic, slightly bulging, well-define D. Hyperemic surface has some vesicles with serous flui D. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
b. Buccal phlegmon
c. Furuncle
d. Anthrax
*e. Erysipelatous inflammation of face

20. A girl is 1,2 year ol D. Vestibular surface of her 52, 51, 61, 62 teeth has large carious cavities within the enamel. Probing is slightly painful, percussion of the 52, 51, 61, 62 teeth is painless. What treatment is to be administered?
a. Remineralizing therapy
b. Amalgam filling
*c. Silver impregnation
d. Coating with fluorine lacquer
e. Filling with phosphoric acid cement

21. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57 year old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp dentur E. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edg E. What type of Neja clasp should be applied?
a. I-II type clasp
b. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
c. II type clasp
d. I type clasp
*e. V type clasp

22. A patient applied to a dentist and complained about periodical pain in his upper jaw. Anamnesis data: the 12 tooth has been previously treated on account of pulpitis. Objectively: crown of the 12 tooth was restored by permanent filling material. X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows a focus of bony tissue destruction near the root apex of the 12 tooth up to 15 mm in diameter. Root canal is filled up to the top. What is the most optimal treatment method?
*a. Root apex resection of the 12 tooth
b. Replantation of the 12 tooth
c. Dissection along the mucogingival fold
d. Removal of the 12 tooth
e. Conservative treatment

23. A patient complained about pain in his 45 tooth induced by cold, sour and sweet food stimuli. The pain abates when the stimulus action is stoppe D. Objectively: there is a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within mantle dentin consisting of food rests and softened dentin, overhanging enamel edeges are chalky. What is the diagnosis?
*a. Acute median caries
b. Acute superficial caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Acute deep caries

24. During lateral motions of a mandible frontal teeth are deviated. Sideward relocation of incisive point from the central position has an angle of 100-110°. What is characterized by such value of incisive point deviation?
a. Sagittal articulate tract
b. Sagittal incisive tract
c. Lateral articulate tract
d. Bennetts angle
*e. Lateral incisive tract

25. A 12 year old girl complains about burning and painfulness of her tongue, especially during eating spicy foo D. Objectively: there are oval red spots on the tip and dorsum of tongu E. Filiform papillae are not present in the affected are A. The girl mentions that the spots become periodically larger and have migratory natur E. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Raspberry tongue
*b. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
c. Lingua plicata
d. Glossotrichia
e. Median rhomboid glossitis

26. A 58 year old patient complains about clicking in the mandibulotemporal joint during eating. Periodically as a result of wide mouth opening the mandible takes up such a position that makes mouth closing impossibl E. The mandible can be easily placed into its initial position by pressing with fingers upon its coronoid processes. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Posterior dislocation
*b. Habitual dislocation of mandible
c. Anterior dislocation
d. Acute dislocation of mandible
e. Subluxation of mandible

27. Walls and floor of a dental room were painted with recommended light colours. What is the required coefficient of reflection from the walls, ceiling and floor?
a. 25
*b. 60
c. 30
d. 20
e. 35

28. An 8 year old child has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 16 tooth within circumpulpar dentin. Probing of cavity floor is painful, dentin is softened, slightly pigmente D. Cold stimulus causes short-term pain. Choose a dental treatment paste:
a. Thymol
*b. Hydroxycalcium-containing
c. Resorcin-formaline
d. Paraformaldehyde
e. Arsenious

29. A 12 year old boy complains about pain and swelling in the parotidomasticatory area on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5oC. He has been suffering from this for 5 years. Objectively: palpation reveals a dense painful nonmobile formation 3,5х5 large in the parotidomasticatory area on the left. Skin colour is unchange D. Orifice of the left salivary gland duct excretes transparent secretion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Buccal abscess
*b. Herzenbergs pseudoparotitis
c. Acute condition of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
d. Epidemic parotitis
e. Mixed tumour of parotid gland

30. During local anesthetization (with 2 ml of 10% solution of lidocaine) a 9 year old girl cried out, lost consciousness, there appeared generalized convulsions. Objectively: the childs skin is pale and cyanoti C. It is impossible to feel the pulse because of convulsions. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Febrile convulsions
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Lidocaine intoxication
d. Quinckes edema
e. Bronchial obstruction

31. A 24 year old soldier injured by a shell splinter was diagnosed with fracture of mandible accompanied by an over 2 cm long bone defect in the chin area. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Tigerstedts splints
b. Direct osteosynthesis
c. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
*d. Break fixation by means of Rudkos apparatus
e. Gunning-Ports splint

32. A patient with a missile wound of his face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
*a. Secondary care
b. Dental orthopaedic service
c. Consultancy
d. Professional care
e. Dental health service

33. A patient is 24 years ol D. Artificial crown of his 22 tooth broke of The tooth was devitalized 8 years ago and its crown is totally decaye D. What microprosthesis should be made for restoration of tooth crown?
a. Stamped crown
b. Filling
c. Inlay
*d. Stump-root inlay
e. Application

34. A 37 year old man complained about pain and a slight swelling emerging during eating in the left submaxillary are A. Objectively: a painful elastic infiltration in the left submaxillary are A. Mouth opening is not limite D. Bimanual palpation in the area of mylohyoid groove revealed a compact movable oblong induration. Mucous membrane is unchange D. Duct of the left submandibular gland doesnt excrete saliv A. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic lymphadenitis
*b. Salivolithiasis
c. Submaxillary lipoma
d. Retention cyst
e. Pleomorphic adenoma

35. Prophylactic examination of a 6 year old child revealed: occlusion of temporary teeth. Both superior and inferior dental arches are trapeziform. Superior incisors overlap the inferior ones by more than ⅔. Correlation of canines and second molars is homonymous. There are no spaces between frontal teeth. Superior dental arch is larger than inferior one by the size of buccal cusp. In what planes can the occlusion deformity be defined?
a. Sagittal and Frankforts
b. Sagittal and occlusal
c. Sagittal and transversal
d. Sagittal and nasal
*e. Sagittal and vertical

36. After anesthetization a 55 year old patient felt sudden attack of weakness, pain behind his breastbone irradiating to his left arm and scapular area, palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, his forehead is covered with cold sweat, the skin is pale, AP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart tones are dull, pulse is thready and arrhythmi C. What state is developing?
a. Collapse
b. -
*c. Myocardium infarction
d. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
e. Stenocardia attack

37. A 25 year old patient applied to a clinic for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. During preparation of the 45 tooth on account of chronic median caries the patient turned pale, there appeared cold clammy sweat on her forehead, nausea, ear nois E. The patient lost consciousness. Objectively: pulse - 50 bpm, AP - 80/60 mm Hg, shallow breath, miotic pupils. Make a diagnosis of this state:
a. Stenocardia
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Syncope
d. Collapse
e. Quinckes edema

38. A 68 year old patient has a defect in the lower third of his nose as a result of malignant tumour removal. Objectively: dorsum of nose up to the middle third and external nostril outlines are intact. Skin at the base of nose is thinned and erosiv E. The patient strongly objects to any plastic operation. What method of fixation of nose ectoprosthesis is the most acceptable?
a. Anatomic retention
b. Head cap
c. Transparent adhesive tape
d. By means of lace
*e. On the glasses frame

39. A 13 year old child complained about painfulness of his lower lip. He has been suffering for two months. Objectively: mucous membrane of lower lip is hyperemic, excretory ducts of minor salivary glands are dilated, "dew" symptom is present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Contact allergic cheilitis
b. Cheilitis exfoliativa
c. Microbal cheilitis
*d. Cheilitis glandularis
e. Meteorological cheilitis

40. At the stage of adjustment of an individual tray the Herbst test should be don E. What muscles cause the shift of the individual tray during functional testing - alternate touching right or left cheek with the tip of tongue?
a. Mimic muscles
*b. Mylohyoid
c. Mastication muscles
d. Digastric, geniohyoid
e. Mentalis and orbicular muscle of mouth

41. A 24 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for root removal of her upper wisdom tooth. Tuberal anesthesia caused a postinjection haematom A. What was injured during anesthetization?
a. Infraorbital artery
b. Maxillary artery
c. Palatine artery
*d. Pterygoid venous plexus
e. Zygomatic artery

42. A 70 year old patient is awaiting complete removable dentures for both upper and lower jaws. Teeth placement will be made by Vasilyevs metho D. What teeth in the upper denture must not touch glass?
a. First and second premolars
b. Canines and first molars
c. Second premolars and first molars
d. Central incisors and first molars
*e. Lateral incisors and second molars

43. A 45 year old patient complains about pain induced by thermal stimuli, spontaneous pain in the 26 tooth. A week ago this tooth was treated on account of pulpitis. Objectively: the 26 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, thermal stimuli induce long-lasting, slowly intensifying pain. X-ray picture shows that palatine canal is filled by ⅔, no material can be seen in the buccal canals. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Injury of periodontium tissue
b. Inadequate canal filling
c. Inflammation in periodontium
d. Infection
*e. Incomplete pulp extirpation

44. A 35 year old man complains about pain in the area of the 38 tooth, painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. What anesthesia method will be optimal during operation on account of pericoronaritis?
*a. Conduction Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
b. Infiltration anesthesia
c. Stem anesthesia
d. General anesthesia
e. Application anesthesia

45. A 5 year old child was diagnosed with congenital complete nonclosure of soft and hard palat E. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for uranostaphyloplasty?
*a. Nasotracheal narcosis
b. Intravenous narcosis
c. Orotracheal narcosis
d. Endotracheal narcosis through tracheostome
e. Mask narcosis

46. A 13 year old boy complains about pain in the 46 tooth induced by cold stimuli. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth within light softened circumpulpar dentin. Probing of carious cavity floor is overall painful, cold stimulus causes acute pain that is quickly relieved after the stimulus elimination. Choose an optimal dental treatment paste:
a. Resorcin-formaline
b. Thymol
c. Iodoform
*d. Hydroxycalcium-containing
e. Zink-eugenol

47. A 22 year old patient complained about colour change of the 11 tooth crown. The tooth was treated on account of chronic deep caries a year ago. Immediately after treatment the patient felt slight pain. She didnt consult a dentist. X-ray picture shows broadening of periodontal fissure in the area of root apex of the 11 tooth. Percussion is painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulematous periodontitis
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic deep caries

48. A 31 year old man complains about dryness, burning of tongue dorsum that appeared for about a week ago and is getting worse during eating stimulating foo D. Some time ago the patient had pneumoni A. He spent two weeks at a hospital, was taking antibiotics. He doesnt take any drugs at the moment. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is hyperemic, dry and glossy. On the tongue dorsum and palate some greyish-white films are present that can be easily remove D. Threads of saliva follow the spatul A. What is the most probable provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic hyperplastic candidosis
b. Drug-induced stomatitis
*c. Acute pseudomembranous candidosis
d. Acute atrophic candidosis
e. Chronic atrophic candidosis

49. A 16 year old patient complains of a cosmetic defect in the area of his upper frontal teeth in form of white spots that were revealed long ago and havent changed since that. Objectively: there are white spots on the vestibular surfaces of the 11, 12, 21, 22 teeth by the cutting edge and on the vestibular surfaces of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth close by the masticatory surfac E. Probing showed that the spot surface was smooth, painless; reaction to the cold stimulus was painless. The spots couldnt be stained by 2% solution of methylene blu E. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Erosion of hard tooth tissues
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
*c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Fluorosis, spotty form
e. Acute initial caries

50. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous areas is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
a. Wear of artificial teeth
b. Denture using during sleep
c. Consumption of solid food
d. Improper care of denture
*e. Alveolar process atrophy

51. A 20 year old man got a blow to the chin. He remained conscious. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. He has an edema and haematoma in the area of his lower jaw on both sides. Jaw palpation causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited. There is also a rupture of mucous membrane of oral cavity in the area of the 44, 43 and 34, 35 teeth. Occlusion is deviated. What asphyxia type can be developed?
a. Aspiration
b. Valve
*c. Dislocation
d. Obturation
e. Stenotic

52. An 11 year old girl complains about bleeding of a tooth on her lower jaw during eating and tooth brushing. This tooth hurt her before but she didnt consult a dentist. Examination of the 46 tooth revealed a deep cavity communicating with tooth cavity and filled with red growth tissu E. Probing causes a slight haemorrhage and pain, percussion is painless, cold stimulus cause mild pain. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Gingival polyp
b. Chronic papillitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
e. Chronic simple pulpitis

53. A 5 year old girl with crossbite was referred to an orthodontist. Objectively: between frontal teeth there are diaereses and diastems, canine tubera have no signs of physiological wear out. Central line between incisors doesnt match. What is the doctors tactics?
*a. To remove unworn tubera of canines
b. To make a screw plate for the upper jaw
c. To wait for autoregulation
d. To administer jaw massage
e. To disconnect occlusion

54. A 60 year old man has got a pustule on his chin skin that quickly developed into a hard, strongly painful infiltrate 3х3 cm larg E. In the epicentre three necrosis zones around hair follicles are present. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged, painful. Body temperature is 38,5oC. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chin carbuncle
b. Allergic chin dermatitis
c. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin
d. Suppurated atheroma
e. Chin furuncle

55. A 42 year old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that is getting worse during eating, body temperature rise up to 37,6oC. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
b. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area
c. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area
*d. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
e. Abscess of maxillolingual groove

56. Examination of a 9 year old patient revealed a milky spot on the vestibular surface of the 11 tooth close to the cutting edg E. Probing and tempearture stimuli cause no pain reaction. The child was diagnosed with local enamel hypoplasia of the 11 tooth. What treatment should be administered?
a. Prophylactic hygiene of oral cavity
b. Spot removal
*c. A course of remineralizing therapy
d. Hermetization of the affected part
e. Cosmetic filling

57. A 10 year old boy applied to a dentist and complained about pain in his palate during eating. Objectively: the lower third of his face is shortened, mouth opening is not reduced. During joining of teeth the cutting edge of inferior incisors contacts with mucous membrane of palate. On the site of contact mucous membrane is hyperemic and slightly edematic. Lateral teeth have 1 class joining (according to Angles classification). Propose a rational plan of treatment of the patients lower jaw:
*a. To knock in the frontal part
b. To knock in the lateral parts
c. To lengthen the lateral parts
d. To broaden lower jaw
e. To lengthen the frontal part

58. A 35 year old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37 tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the pecularity of preparation?
a. Making a flat floor
b. Broadening of cavity floor
c. Making an auxiliary shelf
*d. Making a bevel
e. Making an auxiliary cavity

59. Examination of a patient revealed a roundish neoplasm in the submental area. The skin above it is unchanged, forms a fold. Puncture sample contains some straw-yellow liquid mixed with cholesterol. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dermoid cyst
b. Lipoma
*c. Congenital median cyst
d. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
e. Lymphadenitis

60. A 29 year old patient complains that the crown of his 26 tooth broke of Objectively: tooth decay index is 0,9, root tissues are hard, roentgenography revealed that the canal was filled to the top, no chronic inflammations of periodontium were reveale D. What construction should be used for prosthetics of the 26 tooth?
a. Simplified pin tooth
*b. Pin stump inlay and a crown
c. Pin tooth with an inlay
d. Pin tooth with a ring
e. Pin tooth with protective bar

61. A 38 year old patient was admitted to the orthopaedic department after a therapeutic treatment on account of periodontitis. His anamnesis contains data about frequent recurrences of this disease, acute attacks are accompanied by periodontal abscesses. Objectively: the 42, 41,31, 32 teeth manifest mobility of I-II degree, the 43 and 33 are stable, tooth cervices are dehisced by ¼, hyperesthesia of hard tooth tissues is not observe D. What rational construction of permanent splint should be recommended?
a. Girder Kurliandkys splint
b. Halfcrown splint
*c. Fullcast circle removable splint
d. Mamlocks splint
e. Crown-shell splint

62. A 12 year old girl complained about a crown defect in the frontal part of her upper jaw. Anamnesis data: the tooth was filled more than once but the fillings fell out. Objectively: the 12 tooth is filled. There is IV class defect according to Blacks classification. Devitalization has never been performed, percussion of the 12 tooth is painless. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Metal-ceramic crown
b. Halfcrown
c. Metal crown
d. Ceramic crown
*e. Circumpulpar pin inlay

63. A patient with unilateral dislocation of mandibulotemporal joint was delivered to the maxillofacial department. What type of local anesthesia is indicated for relaxation of masticatory muscles during diaplasis?
a. Intraoral mandibular anesthesia
b. Torus anesthesia
c. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia, retromandibular way
d. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia, submandibular way
*e. Subzygomatic Bersche-Dubov-Uvarovs anesthesia

64. A 35 year old patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the area of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the neoplasm had flattened form, was adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle, was of light-pink colour, up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistensy. Diagnosis: epulis in the area of the 11, 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical presentations typical for?
a. Giant-cell
b. -
*c. Fibrous
d. Epulis of pregnancy
e. Angiomatous

65. A patient complains about pain in the 51 tooth that is getting worse during cutting. Anamnesis data: the patient underwent treatment on account of pulpitis of the 51 tooth, the tooth was treated with devitalizing paste, the patient didnt come to see a dentist for the second tim E. Objectively: carious cavity of the 51 tooth is closed by dentin layer. Percussion is painful. Mucous membrane in the root apex projection of the 51 tooth is hyperemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
*b. Acute arsenous periodontitis
c. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute infectious periodontitis
e. Pulpitis complicated by focal periodontitis

66. A patient got an injury and complains about limited mouth opening, nasal haemorrhage, skin numbness in the infraorbital and inferior eyelid area. Objectively: there is face deformity due to retraction of soft tissues in the zygomatic area on the left, a "step" symptom in the median part of the left inferior edge of eyesocket as well as in the area of zygomaticoalveolar crest. What examination method should be applied for diagnostics of this disease?
a. Roentgenography of facial cranium in the lateral projection
b. Orthopantomogram
c. Roentgenography of facial cranium and paranasal sinuses
d. Roentgenography of facial cranium in the frontal projection
*e. Roentgenography of facial cranium in the axial projection

67. A 38 year old patient came to a hospital with complaints about a wound in the area of her left cheek. She was injured 16-18 hours ago, didnt lose consciousness. Objectively: injury of skin, subcutaneous fat and a muscle for about 3 cm long. The wound is bleeding. What initial surgical d-bridement should be performed?
a. Secondary surgical d-bridement
b. -
c. Initial surgical d-bridement together with plasty
*d. Early initial surgical d-bridement
e. Delayed surgical d-bridement

68. During opening a phlegmon of mouth floor a doctor revealed greyish necrotic masses in purulent foci, gas vesicles and fat droplets, sharp unpleasant smell of exudat E. The tissues are of dark-brown colour, muscles resemble of boiled meat. What medications should be administered in order to prevent further spreading of this process?
a. Challenging dose of broad spectrum antibiotics
b. Hyposensitizing medications
c. Immunomodulators
d. Glucocorticoid medications
*e. Polyvalent antigangrenous serum

69. A 67 year old patient complains about frequently recurring erosion in the area of vermilion border of his lower lip. The erosion is oval, 0,8х1,3 cm large, covered with thin crusts. After their removal some petechial haemorrhages on glossy surface can be seen. There are also some atrophied areas of the vermilion border. Infiltration is absent. Submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarge D. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Glandular cheilitis
b. Erosive-ulcerous form of leukoplakia
c. Keratoacanthosis
*d. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
e. Bowens disease

70. A 65 year old patient complains about pain during eating, reduced tongue mobility, an ulcer in the posterior part of mouth floor on the left, weight loss. Objectively: the patient uses a partial removable denture for the lower jaw. In the area of the left mylohyoid duct there is an ulcer in form of a cleft up to 1,6 cm long with everted edges, covered with grey-yellowish deposit, closely adhering to an infiltrate that can be detected during bimanual palpation. In the left submandibular and superolateral areas of neck several enlarged nonmobile lymph nodes can be palpate D. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous ulcer)
b. Decubital ulcer of mouth floor
*c. Cancer of mucous membrane of mouth floor
d. Actinomycosis of mouth floor
e. Tuberculous ulcer of mouth floor

71. A patient is waiting for a partial removable laminar dentur E. Anatomic models of both jaws were made by means of elastic alginate material "Ipin" and referred for disinfection. What disinfection method should be applied?
a. Alcohol solution 70%
b. Hydrogen peroxide solution 6%
*c. Glutaraldehyde 2,5% рH 7,0-8,7
d. Desoxone 0,1%
e. Sodium hypochloride 0,5%

72. A 7 year old girl was brought to a hospital for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. She was born and has been living in an area where fluorine concentration in water makes up 2,5 mg/l. Examination revealed symmetrically placed dark spots on the vestibular surfaces of the 11, 21, 31, 41 teeth as well as on the tubera of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth. It is known from the anamnesis that the teeth cut out already with affection. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
*c. Tooth fluorosis
d. Amelogenesis imperfecta
e. Odontogenesis imperfecta

73. External examination of a 7 year old child revealed: thickening of nose bridge, semi-open mouth, dry lips. Mouth corners are peeling. Anamnesis data: the child sleeps with open mouth. Examination of oral cavity revealed no changes. What dispensary group will this child fall into?
a. The third
b. The fourth
c. The first
d. -
*e. The second

74. During tooth extraction a 55 year old patient felt dull pain behind her breastbone, got a sense of compression. A dental surgeon diagnosed her with a stenocardia attack. What medication should be given this patient in order to arrest this state?
a. Ketanov
b. Baralgin
c. Dimedrol
d. Analgin
*e. Nitroglycerine, validol

75. A child was brought to the traumatology centre of oral surgery department with complaints about changed position of the 21 tooth that was inclined towards palat E. The day before the child was hit in the fac E. Make a diagnosis:
a. Fracture of crown part of the 21 tooth
b. Break-off of the crown part of the 21 tooth
*c. Subluxation of the 21 tooth
d. Complete dislocation of the 21 tooth
e. Contusion of the 21 tooth

76. An 8 year old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with tooth cavity on the distaloapproximal surface of the 75 tooth. Probing is painful, percussion is painless, cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed a few months ago, wasnt treated. What treatment method is to be applied in this case?
a. Biological method
*b. Devital amputation
c. Vital amputation
d. Vital extirpation
e. Devital extirpation

77. A 13 year old child has been suffering from pain in the left inferior molar induced by cold stimuli for several months. Objectively: on the masticatory surface of the 37 tooth there is a carious cavity with overhanging enamel edges filled with circumpulpar dentin. The cavity is filled with light softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is somewhat painful. Cold stimuli cause short-term pain. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic median caries
*d. Acute deep caries
e. Acute median caries

78. A 45 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for oral cavity sanation. Anamnesis data: mild case of diabetes. Objectively: mucous membrane of cheeks is unchanged, mainly in retromolar area there are symmetrically placed whitish papulae protruding over the mucous membrane and forming a lace-like pattern. On the upper jaw there are two soldered bridge dentures, the 47 tooth has an amalgam filling, the 46 tooth has a steel crown. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus
*b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Secondary syphilis
d. Chronic atrophic candidosis
e. Leukoplakia

79. A patient complained about frequent haemorrhages from the mucous membrane of oral and nasal cavities, he mentioned also that his father had the same problems. Objectively: there are multiple telangiectasias and angimatous formations on face skin as well as on mucous membrane of nose, cheeks and lips. Blood count is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cushings basophilism
b. Werlhofs disease
c. Vaquez disease
d. Addison-Biermer disease
*e. Rendu-Osler-Weber disease

80. A 55 year old patient has a painless, tuberous, cyanotic pedunculated formation 2х1х1,5 cm large that appeared on the spot of the removed 46th tooth. Opening of mouth is not limite D. Intra-oral X-ray picture of alveolar process in the area of the removed 46th tooth shows a focus of bone tissue destruction. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Giant-cell epulis
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Ameloblastoma of the lower jaw
d. Papilloma of mucous membrane in the area of the removed 46th tooth
e. Hard odontoma of lower jaw

81. A 7 year old child complains of spontaneous pain in the upper right molar teeth. Examination of medial contact and masticatory surfaces of the 55 tooth revealed a carious cavity composed of softened light dentin and localized within circumpulpar dentin. Floor probing is acutely painful, tooth percussion is slightly painful. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process in projection of 55 tooth roots is intact, there are no roentgenological changes in this area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

82. A 2 year old girl has body temperature 38,5°C, a swelling below her jaw on the right. On the 5th day of illness there apeared rhinitis, cough, a small movable globule under her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: general condition of the child is moderately severe. The face is asymmetric due to the swelling in the right submaxillary area. The skin is hyperemic, glossy, there is a diffuse infiltrate in the right submaxillary area spreading to the upper neck parts on the right, it is dense and painful; the skin doesnt make folds. Teeth are healthy. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Adenophlegmon of the right submaxillary area
b. Acute sialoadenitis of the right submandibular salivary gland
c. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible on the right
d. Acute nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis on the right
e. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible on the right

83. Unused stomatological instruments were left on a sterile table in the dental room after the end of working day. What actions should be taken in order to provide sterility of these stomatological instruments?
a. Disinfection, sterilization
b. Presterilizing cleansing, sterilization
c. Disinfection, presterilizing cleansing, sterilization
*d. Sterilization without pretreatment
e. Disinfection only

84. As a result of a road accident a 45 year old patient got an injury of his upper jaw. Examination revealed elongated and flattened face, profuse nasal haemorrhage, liquorrhea from the nose and ears. These clinical presentations are typical for the following fracture of upper jaw:
*a. Subbasal (Le Fort III)
b. Suborbital (Le Fort II)
c. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
d. Subnasal (Le Fort I)
e. -

85. A 56 year old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory area, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mixed tumour
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
c. Glandular tuberculosis
d. Cyst of the gland
*e. Adenocarcinoma

86. A 49 year old patient complains about pain in the oral cavity induced by eating. He suffers from CHD. Objective examination revealed dyspnea, limb edema. Oral cavity isnt sanitated. On the mucous membrane, on the right, there is an ulcer with irregular edges covered with greyish-white necrotic deposit with low-grade inflammation around it. There is also halitosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer
b. Ulcero-necrotic stomatitis
c. Traumatic ulcer
d. Cancerous ulcer
*e. Trophic ulcer

87. A 45 year old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
a. Clasp denture with obturating part
*b. Lesser saddle denture with clasps fixation
c. Common dental bridge
d. Common partial removable denture
e. Protective palatal bars

88. A 19 year old patient came to traumatology centre and complained about face asymmetry, right-sided paresthesia of his upper lip, nasal haemorrhag E. Objectively: evident face asymmetry due to an edema and haematoma of the right inferior eyelid and infraorbital are A. Opening of mouth is slightly limited, occlusion is normal. Palpation reveals a symptom of "step" in the area of the right zygomaticomaxillary suture, deformity in the area of external edge of the right orbit and zygomaticoalveolar crest, gaseous crepitation in the right infraorbital area; percussion reveals a "bursted nut" symptom. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
b. Fracture of nose bones
c. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
d. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw (inferior)
e. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw (superior)

89. An 8 year old child complains about pain in the 21 tooth that is getting worse during cutting. A month ago a part of tooth crown broke off as a result of a fall. The child didnt consult a dentist. Objectively: in the area of medial angle of the 21 tooth there is a crown defect that makes up 1/3 of the crowns height. Tooth cavity is open, probing and thermal stimulus cause no pain. Percussion is acutely painful. Gum around the 21 tooth is edematic and hyperemic. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
d. Pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
*e. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis

90. A 43 year old man applied to the dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 37th tooth is decayed by ⅔, buccal and lingual walls are thin. Occlusion picture shows strong contact with antagonists. How thick should be the layer of tooth surface that must be ground off during preparation for metallic stamped crown?
*a. 0,28-0,3 mm
b. 0,6-0,7 mm
c. 0,7-0,8 mm
d. 0,1-0,2 mm
e. 0,5-0,6 mm

91. A 20 year old patient complains about gingival pain and haemorrhage she has been suffering from for a week. The pain is getting worse during eating, haemorrhage is usually induced by mechanical stimuli. Objectively: there are evident hyperemia and edema of gums in the area of inferior frontal teeth. Apices of gingival papillae are dome-shaped, enlarged. Gum palpation causes pain, slight haemorrhage. No roentgenological changes were revealed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Atrophic gingivitis
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
*d. Catarrhal gingivitis
e. Localized periodontitis

92. During restoration of a II class (according to Blacks classification) carious cavity of the 25 tooth a doctor applied methods of total mordanting and drying of hard tissues. After that he noticed that enamel surface became chalky and dentin became completely dry. How should he treat enamel and dentin surfaces for the further restoration by method of "wet-Bonding"?
*a. With dentin wetting agent
b. Enamel and dentin should be treated with hydrogen peroxide
c. Enamel and dentin should be treated with alcohol
d. Enamel and dentin should be treated with adhesive system
e. Enamel and dentin should be treated with mordanting gel once again

93. A patient has got a traumatic fracture of mandible in the area of the missing 34, 35 teeth with a slight displacement and a defect of alveolar part in the area of the 34, 35 teeth. Other teeth on both lower and upper jaws are intact. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Ports splint
b. Plain splint cramp
*c. Tigerstedts splint with a spreading curve
d. Vasilyevs splint
e. Vankevich splint

94. Objective examination of a patient revealed hard tissue defect of the 24 tooth. Tooth decay index is 0,8. The defect is partly restored by a filling that doesnt meet the requirements. The tooth has pink colouring. X-ray picture shows no pathological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
*a. Pin construction
b. Halfcrown
c. Inlay
d. Equator crown
e. Artificial crown

95. A 38 year old driver complains of acute pain in his mouth and sore throat, difficult ingestion, indisposition, temperature rise up to 38,6oC. These symptoms appeared after exposure to col D. He has been ill for a day, in the evening he has to go to work. Objectively: gums in the area of inferior frontal teeth as well as pharynx mucous membrane are hyperemic, edematic; gingival edge is necrotic, tonsills are enlarge D. Results of bacterioscopy: fusospirochetal symbiosis. In blood: erythrocytes - 4,51012/l; leukocytes - 7,2109/l; ESR - 18 mm/h. What actions should a stomatologist take?
a. To give him an order for hospitalization in oral department
b. To refer him to an infectious disease specialist
c. To refer him to an otolaryngologist
*d. To prescribe a medication and give a sick-list
e. To prescribe a medication and allow to go to work

96. A 40 year old patient with mandible fracture applied to a doctor 3 weeks after immobilization of breaks because of pain and body temperature ris E. Objectively: a slight swelling in the chin area, mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 2 1 | 1 2 teeth is hyperemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Overtooth splint on 5 4 3 2 1 | 1 2 3 4 5 teeth is in satisfactory condition, no occlusion abnormalities were detecte D. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of mandibl E. What surgical action is indicated?
a. Removal and replacement of the overtooth splint by a new one
b. Trepanation of the 2 1 and 1 2 teeth
*c. Lancing of abscess to the bone
d. Supervision of patient
e. Intraoral novocaine block

97. A patient came to a dental clinic for dental prosthetics. Objectively: total lack of teeth on the mandible. Sharp and regular atrophy of alveolar part. Frenula attachment and fold position is high. Name the type of atrophy of edentulous mandible using Kellers classification:
a. I type
b. V type
*c. II type
d. III type
e. IV type

98. A 25 year old patient complains of a light brown spot on the frontal tooth of her upper jaw. Oblectively: a single light brown spot in the precervical area of the 23 tooth, probing revealed that its surface was smooth. Reaction to the cold stimulus and probing was painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Fluorosis
c. Acute initial caries
d. Local enamel hypoplasia
*e. Chronic initial caries

99. A 58 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon and complained about painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongu E. Objectively: left lateral surface of tongue has a roundish ulcer with undermined soft overhanging edges, palpatory painful, ulcer floor is slightly bleeding and covered with yellowish nodules. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Actinomycosis
b. Trophic ulcer
c. Traumatic ulcer
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Syphilis

100. A child is 2,5 year ol D. The parents complain about thumb sucking during sleep. What tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Medical intervention is unnecessary
b. To talk with a child about harm from thumb suction
c. Non-removable device for suppression of bad habit
d. Removable device for suppression of bad habit
*e. To recommend an ulnar fixator

101. A 46 year old patient complains about difficult mouth opening, body temperature rise, edematic tissues around both mandibulotemporal joints. Anamnesis data: 2-3 months ago the patient had undurable mild bilateral pain attacks in the parotidomasticatory areas that lasted for a few days, limited mouth opening, sense of tension and discomfort in some areas of left and right mandibulotemporal joint. What is the most probable provisional diagnosis?
a. Fibrous anchylosis
b. Infectious arthritis
c. Arthrosis
d. Deforming arthrosis
*e. Rheumatic arthritis

102. Examination of an 11 year old girl revealed: caries intensity (sum of carious, filled and extracted teeth) = 3, Green-Vermillions hygienic index - 1,6, papillary-marginally-alveolar index = 20%. The girl catches a cold once or twice a year. Average caries intensity index for this age group in this region is 4. How many times a year should the girl see a dentist?
a. 3-4
b. 2
c. 1-2
*d. 1
e. 2-3

103. A 43 year old patient applied to a prosthetic dentistry for the purpose of prosthetics. In anamnesis: has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. The patient has been very anxious before the appointment with a doctor. Suddenly the patients condition grew worse, he felt limb weakness. The patient became covered with cold clammy sweat and lost consciousness. What critical state is it?
a. Myocardium infarction
b. Syncope
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Hyperglycemic coma
*e. Hypoglycemic coma

104. A 46 year old patient complains about pain and bleeding from the carious cavity of her 27 tooth during eating. Previously she had spontaneous pain. Examination of the 27 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface consisting of red tissue, probing induced pain and haemorrhag E. What treatment method should be chosen?
a. Vital amputation
*b. Vital extirpation
c. Devital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Biological method

105. A 43 year old patient complains of a neoplasm in the right submaxillary area that appeared a month ago after angina. Body temperature is 37,0-37,2°C. The patient underwent anti-inflammatory therapy but the neoplasm didnt diminish. Objectively: palpation of the right submaxillary area reveals a slightly painful spherical neoplasm of dense elastic consistency with regular outlines that is not adherent to skin. The duct of submandibular salivary gland excretes transparent saliva. Sublingual torus is unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Salivary adenoma
b. Chronic sialoadenitis
*c. Chronic lymphadenitis
d. Salivolithiasis
e. Atheroma

106. A 50 year old patient has a defect of his lower dentition. It is planned to make a bridge denture supported by implants. X-ray picture showed that the height of osseous tissue mass from projection of mandibular canal to the top of alveolar crest was 2 cm. What implant wil be recommended?
a. Leaflike
b. Conical
c. Subperiosteal
*d. Screw
e. Endodonto-endoossal

107. A patient complains about spontaneous pain in the area of his 15 tooth he has been feeling for 2 days. Thermal stimuli make the pain worse, its attacks last up to 30 minutes. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 15 tooth consisting of light softened dentin, floor probing is painful in one point, reaction to the thermal stimuli is positive, percussion is painless. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Acute local pulpitis
b. Pulp hyperemia
c. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute deep caries
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

108. A patient came to a dental clinic for the purpose of prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of her face is diminished, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of teeth on both upper and lower jaws is missing, crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn by ⅔ of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth, pigmented, alveolar process is not hypertrophied, interalveolar height is reduce D. What form of pathological tooth wear is it?
a. Horizontal, compensated, II degree of severity
b. Vertical, compensated, III degree of severity
c. Vertical, noncompensated, III degree of severity
d. Mixed, noncompensated, III degree of severity
*e. Horizontal, noncompensated, III degree of severity

109. A 52 year old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: tooth wear in the lateral parts of the lower jaw at a level of gums and wear by ⅓ in the frontal parts. The treatment had two stages. What denture construction for occlusion disconnection and reconstruction of myostatic reflexes should be applied in this case?
a. Plastic cap in the frontal part
b. Plastic cap for the whole dentition
c. Crown splint in the lateral parts
*d. Dentogingival splint in the lateral parts
e. Elastic plastic cap

110. Preventive examination of an 8 year old boy revealed matted chalky spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth localized in the precervical area. The child has no subjective complaints. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute superficial caries
*b. Acute initial caries
c. Local enamel hypoplasia
d. Spotty fluorosis
e. Chronic initial caries

111. A 23 year old patient complained about unpleasant sensations in the area of the 12 tooth, X-ray picture shows a well-defined low-density area up to 8-10 mm in diameter around the root apex of the 12 tooth. What method of surgery will be the most reasonable?
a. Tooth removal
b. Cystotomy
c. Root amputation
d. Hemisection
*e. Root apex resection

112. A boy is 1 month ol D. He has a wound with purulent discharge near the medial edge of inferior eyelid, on the right. The illness began abruptly, body temperature is up to 40oC. General condition is grav E. On the second day of illness there appeared an infiltration near the internal edge of orbit and cheek on the right. Skin above it is hyperemic, fluctuation cannot be detecte D. Palpebral fissure is narrowe D. Right nasal meatus discharges pus. There is an infiltration on the vestibular surface of alveolar process and palate on the right. Mucous membrane above it along the mucogingival fold is hyperemic, there is fluctuation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periostitis
*b. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
c. Right-side orbital phlegmon
d. Acute dacryocystitis
e. Acute right-side maxillary sinusitis

113. A 42 year old patient complains about tooth mobility, change of tooth position, foul taste, pain during food mastication. Objectively: teeth of both upper and lower jaws are mobile (2-3 degree), there are also diastems and diaereses. Tooth roots are dehisced by ½. There are serous purulent discharges from periodontal pockets. Orthopantomogram shows bony tissue destruction down to ⅔ of root length. There are bone pockets. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Atrophic gingivitis
d. Chronic generalized periodontitis (II degree)
*e. Chronic generalized periodontitis (III degree)

114. A 65 year old patient complains of pain in the area of mucous membrane of hard palate on the left that is getting worse during eating with use of a complete removable dentur E. He has been suffering from this for 1,5 month. Objectively: left-sided hyperemia and edema of mucous membrane of hard palate; at the border of distal denture edge there is an ulcer with dense walls and fundus, surrounding tissues are infiltrate D. The ulcer floor is tuberous, covered with fibrinous deposit; ulcer palpation is painful. What examination method is to be applied in the first place?
a. Allergic contact plastic test
b. Serological reactions
*c. Biopsy
d. Bacterioscopy
e. Cytology

115. A 7 month old child was brought to a dentist because of an ulcer in the oral cavity. The child was born prematurely. She has been fed with breast milk substitutes by means of a bottle with rubber nippl E. Objectively: on the border between hard and soft palate there is an oval ulcer 0,8х1,0 cm large covered with yellowish-grey deposit and surrounded with a roll-like infiltration. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Settons aphtha
c. Tuberculous ulcer
*d. Bednars aphtha
e. Acute candidous stomatitis

116. A virtually healthy 9 year old child complains about crown fracture and pain in the right superior frontal tooth. Objectively: crown part of the 11 tooth is broken by ⅓, pulp is pointwise dehisced, it is red, acutely painful and bleeds during probing. Percussion is slightly painful. The child got a trauma several hours ago. Choose an optimal treatment method:
a. Devital amputation
*b. Biological method
c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

117. A 55 year old woman complains of ulcers on the mucous membrane of oral cavity, pain during eating and talking. She fell abruptly ill over a month ago. Objectively: unchanged mucous membrane of her gums, soft palate and palatine arches has big bright-red erosions on it. Intact mucous membrane peels easily off when slightly rubbed and this results in erosions and small haemorrhages. What is the leading diagnostic symptom in the differential disease diagnostics?
a. Presence of Wickhams striae
b. Presence of phagocytes in the impression smears
*c. Tzanck cells in the impression smears
d. Positive Nikolskys symptom
e. Presence of blisters in the oral cavity

118. Mother of a 2 month old child had acute purulent mastitis. After that the child got edema of left infraorbital and zygomatic areas, skin hyperemia of left face part, body temperature up to 39-40oC, purulent discharges from the nos E. What is presumptive diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis
b. Phlegmon of infraorbital area
c. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
d. Acute maxillary sinusitis
*e. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis

119. A 48 year old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced by ⅔, there is pathological mobility of the III degre E. The patient has indication for removal of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be applied for immediate-insertion prosthetics?
*a. Partial removable lamellar
b. Adhesive
c. Clasp
d. Stamped-soldered bridge
e. Ceramic-metal bridge

120. A patient complains about acute intense pain and a slight swelling in the area of a decayed tooth of the lower jaw on the right, ill health, body temperature rise up to 38,3°C, lack of appetite, insomnia. Objectively: there is collateral edema of soft tissues of submandibular area and lower part of right cheek. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged on the right, palpatory painful. Crown of the 46 tooth is half decayed, the 45, 46, 47 teeth are mobile, there is also a cuff infiltrate in the area of these teeth. Vincents symptom is positive on the right. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute condition of chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent odontogenuos periostitis
d. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
*e. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis

121. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edg E. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Stump fixing
b. Casting
*c. Impression taking
d. Wax construction making
e. Stump fitting

122. A patient was delivered to an admission room after a road accident. Examination of the patient revealed in the area of oral floor a large haematoma spreading to the neck area as well as a significant edema of soft tissues of oral floor and neck. There are signs of asphyxia. What type of emergency care is indicated?
a. Symptomatic medicamental treatment
b. Opening and draining of haematoma
*c. Tracheotomy performing
d. Lobeline introduction
e. Tongue fixation

123. A patient applied to a dentist complaining about inability to close her mouth, laboured speech. Objectively: oral cavity is half-open with saliva outpouring from it, central line is deviated to the right. There is a cavity in front of antilobium; below the malar arch there is a protrusion of mandible head into the infratemporal foss A. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the left
b. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the right
c. Bilateral anterior dislocation
*d. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the left
e. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the right

124. A 47 year old patient complains of permanent pain in the 27 tooth that is getting worse during cutting. Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, skin is of normal colouring, mouth opening is not limited, mucous membrane of alveolar process is edematic and hyperemic at a level with the 27 tooth. The 27 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is presumptive diagnosis?
a. Chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
b. Chronic left-sided odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
c. Acute general purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
d. Acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw beginning from the 27 tooth
*e. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth

125. A 23 year old man complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing, massive formation of dental deposit in spite of thorough oral hygien E. Objectively: gingival papillae are somewhat edematic, congestively hyperemic, bleed when touche D. Fyodorov-Volodkina hygienic index is 3,5. What toothpaste would you recommend this patient as a part of complex therapy of this disease?
*a. Toothpaste with salts
b. Fluorine-containing toothpaste
c. Gel toothpaste with microelements
d. Toothpaste with mineralizing components
e. Toothpaste with antifungal agents

126. A month after cementation of a metal-ceramic crown on the 23 tooth a patient applied to the dentist with complaints about its decementation. Examination revealed that tooth stump was of sufficient height, its walls converged to the vertical tooth axis at an angle of approximately 30 degrees. At what angle was it necessary to establish convergention of stump walls to the tooth axis?
a. 10-12 degrees
b. 15-18 degrees
c. 22-25 degrees
d. 12-15 degrees
*e. Up to 8 degrees

127. A 28 year old man applied to a dental surgeon for removal of the 38 tooth. What forceps should be chosen for this tooth?
a. Broad-beaked forceps (with non-converging beaks)
*b. Beak-shaped curved forceps
c. Root bayonets
d. Beak-shaped forceps with converging beaks
e. Beak-shaped forceps with thorns

128. A 35 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for removal of the 14 tooth because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis after therapeutic treatment proved to be inefficient. What instrument will you choose for removal?
a. Bayonet-shaped root forceps
b. Straight forceps
*c. S-shaped forceps
d. Bayonet-shaped crown forceps
e. S-shaped right forceps

129. A 3 year old child was burnt with boiling water. Face skin is hyperemic and edematic, there are blisters of different sizes filled with transparent liqui D. Define a degree of face skin burn:
a. III degree - B
b. III degree - A
c. IV degree
*d. II degree
e. I degree

130. A 20 year old homeless and unemployed patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39oC, pain during eating and deglutition, nasal haemorrhages. He has been suffering from this for 10 days. Objectively: herpetic rash on the lips, irregular-shaped erosions covered with fibrinous deposit on the mucous membrane of oral cavity; filmy deposits on the tonsils. Liver is enlarged and scleroti C. Blood count: erythrocytes - 4,51012/l; hemoglobin - 120 g/l; ESR - 25 mm/h; leukocytes – 10109/l; eosinophils - 0; rod nuclear cells - 2; segmentonuclear leukocytes - 31, lymphocytes - 41; monocytes - 10; atypical mononuclears -
a. Acute leukosis
*b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Oropharyngal diphtheria
d. AIDS
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

131. A 5 year old child has temperature rise up to 39,2°C, sore throat, nausea. Objectively: mucous membrane of soft palate and palatine arches is brightly hyperemic, it can be distinctly distinguished among the surrounding tissues. The tongue is dry, edematic, bright-red, its lateral surfaces have no fur on them, fungiform papillae are evidently enlarged. Face skin is hyperemic apart of pale nasolabial trigone, is covered with spotty rash. Submaxillary lymph nodes are palpatory painful. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Loefflers bacillus
b. Coxsackie virus
*c. Hemolytic streptococcus
d. Bordet-Gengou bacillus
e. Herpes virus

132. A 19 year old man complained about gingival haemorrhage and painfulness. Objectively: in the frontal part of his upper and lower jaws overcrowding of teeth is present; there are hyperemia, cyanosis and enlargement of gingival papillae up to ⅓ of crown height; massive formation of soft tooth deposit. What procedure should be included into the treatment program?
a. Fluctuating currents
b. Diathermy
c. Ultra-high frequency therapy
d. Microwave therapy
*e. Darsonval currents

133. Parents of a 1,5 year old child complained about tongue enlargement, disturbed food intake. The child has ben suffering from this since birth. Objectively: general condition has no pecularities. Tongue is enlarged (macroglossia). Its mucous membrane has granular vesicle-like outgrowths. Tongue is compact, palpatory painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tongue cyst
b. Tongue fibroma
*c. Lymphangioma of tongue
d. Tongue hemangioma
e. Tongue cancer

134. A 23 year old patient underwent treatment of pulpitis of her 16 tooth. During endodontic procedure an obstructed distal buccal canal was foun D. What medications can be applied for chemical dilatation of root canal?
*a. 10-20% solutions of EDTA sodium salts
b. 30% solution of silver nitrate
c. Medications with antibacterial and anti-inflammatory effect
d. Resorcin-formaline liquid
e. Essential oils

135. A 62 year old man complains about a painless formation on his tongue that appeared several months ago. Objectively: there is a big number of carious and completely decayed teeth, a painless whitish formation 10х5 mm large with irregular surface in form of verrucas on the lateral surface of tongue. Histological examination revealed thickening of corneous layer of epithelium with intermittent cornification. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hyperkeratous form of lichen ruber planus
*b. Verrucous form of leukoplakia
c. Verrucous precancer
d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Hyperplastic form of candidosis

136. A 35 year old woman complains about periodical appearance of small ulcers in the oral cavity. She has been suffering from this for 5 years, recurrences happen 4-5 times a year. The ulcer healing lasts for 10 days. Objectively: on a mucous membrane of lower lip there is a roundish lesion element 0,5 cm large covered with white deposit and surrounded by hyperemia border, very painful when touche D. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Duhrings herpetiform dermatitis
b. Secondary syphilis
c. Chronic recurrent herpes
*d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Traumatic erosion

137. A dentist was called to a patient being treated in the cardiological department after myocardium infarction. The patient was diagnosed with acute condition of chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 36 tooth. What method of pulpitis treatment should be chosen taking into account grave condition of the patient?
a. Conservative method
b. Vital amputation
c. Devital extirpation
*d. Devital amputation
e. Vital extirpation

138. A 20 year old patient got a trauma in the area of his upper jaw. He applied to a dentist and complained about mobility of his frontal upper teeth, pain during cutting and joining of teeth. Objectively: the 11 and 21 teeth have II-III degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact but have oral position. Complete joining of teeth is impossible because the teeth are situated beyond the dental arch. X-ray picture shows a slight broadening of periodontal fissure of the 11 tooth up to 0,5-2 mm. The roots are intact. Make a correct diagnosis:
*a. Traumatic subluxation of the 11, 21 teeth
b. Traumatic complete dislocation of the 11, 21 teeth
c. Traumatic extraction of the 11, 21 teeth
d. Fracture of alveolar process in the area of the 11, 21 teeth
e. Traumatic periodontitis of the 11, 21 teeth

139. A 23 year old woman came to a dental clinic for restoration of the 11th tooths crown. Objectively: root of the 11th tooth is at a level with gingival edge, its walls are thick enough. A dentist made and adjusted a stump inlay upon which a metal-plastic crown will be fixe D. What plastic will be used for veneering?
a. Protacryl
b. Acryloxide
c. Noracryl
*d. Sinma-M
e. Carbodent

140. A 20 year old patient complains about gum itching, gingival haemorrage during tooth brushing and eating, unusual look of gums. He has been observing these presentations for the last 1,5 year. It is known from the patients anamnesis that he has been taking diphenylamine anticonvulsants for 2 years. Objective examination revealed gingival hyperemia and edem A. In the frontal part the gums cover vestibular surface of teeth by ½ of their height. Along the loose gingival edge growth of granulation tissue is present, probing causes gingival haemorrag E. No roentgenological changes were reveale D. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Localized periodontitis
c. Chronic ulcerative gingivitis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

141. A 2 year old child was brought to a dentist to consult about rash and painfulness during eating that appeared yesterday. Objectively: body temperature is 37,5°C, skin is clean, submaxillary lymph nodes are painful. Examination of oral cavity revealed on the mucous membrane of lips and tongue roundish painful erosions 1-3 mm in diameter covered with whitish deposit. The gum on both upper and lower jaws is hyperemic, edematic, bleed when touched. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Multiform exudative erythema
b. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
c. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis
*d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Recurrent herpetic stomatitis

142. A 64 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: there is a sharp bony prominence in the area of the missing 15 tooth. It is planned to make a partial removable denture with two-layer bas E. What plastic should be used for elastic backing?
a. Bacryl
b. Protacryl
c. Ftorax
d. Acryl
*e. Plastic PM-01

143. A 60 year old patient has profuse alveolus haemorrhage after a simple operation of the 37 tooth extraction. It is known from the patients anamnesis that he had been suffering from hypertension for the latest 6 years. Arterial pressure is 180/110 mm Hg. What emergency aid should the doctor render?
a. To perform alveolar packing with a hemostatic sponge
*b. To introduce hypotensive medications and perform tight alveolar packing
c. To make suture ligation of the alveolus
d. To perform tight alveolar packing by means of iodoform tampon
e. To introduce hemostatics

144. A 28 year old woman complains about acute pain on the left of her upper jaw during eating. 6 days ago the 28 tooth was extracted, after that the pain cam E. The patient considers that extraction of the 28 tooth caused "damaging" of the next tooth. Objectively: alveolus of the 28 tooth is at a stage of healing. On the distal surface of the 27 tooth there is a carious cavity in the precervical area that doesnt communicate with the tooth cavity. Cold stimulus causes short attack of pain. Dentin of walls and floor is light and softene D. Probing of the floor is painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
*b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute local pulpitis

145. A 13,5 year old girl complains of gingival painfullness and haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating, halitosis. She has been ill with angina for a week. Objectively: mucous membrane of gums in the area of frontal teeth of her upper and lower jaws is edematic, hyperemi C. Apices of gingival papillae are necrotic, they also bleed when touche D. There is a thick layer of soft tooth plaqu E. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Yeast fungi
b. Herpes virus
c. Staphylococci
d. Streptococci
*e. Anaerobic microflora

146. A patient was admitted to the oral surgery department with a diagnosis "odontogenous phlegmon of mouth floor". Objectively: general condition of the patient is grave, abed position is forced, the patient is sitting with lowered hea D. He complains about pain behind his breastbone that is getting worse during backward flexion of head; cough, dyspne A. What complication has developed?
a. Phlegmon of retropharyngeal space
b. Phlegmon of peripharyngeal space
*c. Mediastinitis
d. Cervical phlegmon
e. Phlegmon of tongue root

147. A 32 year old patient lost his 41 and 31 teeth as a result of a sporting accident. Replantation is impossible because these teeth have cracks and splits both on crown and root surfaces. Clinical and roentgenological examination proved the possibility of immediate implantation. What implant materials should be preferred?
a. Carbon
*b. Titanium
c. Platinum
d. Ceramic
e. Sapphire

148. A 48 year old patient complained about having pain in the 45 tooth during cutting for a year. The 45 was treated befor E. Objectively: mucous membrane in the area of this tooth is hyperemic and slightly cyanoti C. The 45 tooth is pink, the filling fell out. What examination method should be applied in order to choose treatment?
a. Gum palpation
*b. Roentgenography
c. Electric odontodiagnostics
d. Thermometry
e. Probing

149. A 50 year old patient comlains of difficult mastication, tooth mobility, halitosis, gingival haemorrhag E. Objectively: gums are hyperemic, cyanotic, there is also dental scal E. Parodontal pockets of upper molar teeth were 8 mm, of the rest teeth - 6 mm. X-ray picture showed resorption of bone tissue by ⅔-½ of root length. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Generalized III degree periodontitis, chronic
b. Generalized I degree periodontitis, chronic
c. Generalized III degree periodontitis, acute condition
d. Generalized II degree periodontitis, chronic
e. Generalized II degree periodontitis, acute condition

150. A 14 year old patient applied to an orthodontist. Objective examination revealed that on the site of the second incisor a canine tooth had cut out, and on the site of the canine - the second incisor. The same pathology has also the patients father. Make a diagnosis:
a. Mesial position
b. Superocclusion of incisor and infraocclusion of canine
*c. Transposition of lateral incisor and canine
d. Palatine position of lateral incisor
e. Distal position of lateral incisor

151. Examination of a 6 year old child revealed a deep carious cavity in the 85 tooth. Percussion and probing are painless. Removal of softened dentin resulted in intercommunication with tooth cavity. Deep probing is painful. X-ray picture of the 85 tooth shows a focus of bony tissue destruction in the area of bifurcation, cortical plate of the 35 tooth has no pathological changes. What paste should be applied for the root filling in this case?
a. Phosphate cement
*b. Zink-eugenol paste
c. Glass-ionomer cement
d. Calcium-containing paste
e. Resorcin-formaline paste

152. A 3 year old child has a cavity in the 84 tooth. Objectively: there is a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the tooth within mantle dentin. Dentin is softened, probing of cavity walls is painful, percussion is painless. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Acute median caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic deep caries

153. A 43 year old patient complains of tooth mobility and considerable dehiscence of dental cervices of the lower jaw in its frontal part. Objectively: gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale, slightly cyanotic, without haemorrhag E. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have mobility of the I-II degre E. There is also overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced by ½ of root length, of the 43, 33 - by ¼. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Kurlandskys girder splint
b. Semicircle splint
c. Halfcrown splint
d. Cap splint
*e. Fullcast removable kappa

154. A 23 year old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment in a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each sid E. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
a. 2 cm
b. 3,5 cm
c. 4 cm
*d. 1 cm
e. 3 cm

155. Examination of a 23 year old patient revealed chronic candidosis of oral mucous membrane, generalized lymphadenopathy. Anamnesis data: the patient has been suffering from herpes for a year. Body temperature persistently rises up to 37,4-37,5oC, body weight has reduced by 8 kg over the last month. What disease can be indicated by this symptom group?
a. Acute leukosis
b. Candidosis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
*d. AIDS
e. Chronic leukosis

156. A 36 year old woman complains of lip dryness and peeling lasting for a month. Application of indifferent ointments was ineffective. Objectively: vermilion border of her lower lip is bright-red, moderately infiltrated, covered with adherent whitish- grey squamae, their removal causes pain and haemorrhage. On the focus periphery there is epithelium opacity in form of white striae, in the centre of it there is a sinking down area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Leukoplakia
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Candidal cheilitis

157. A 13 year old patient got a trauma in the area of median face zone. She complains about pain, swelling of soft tissues in the area of her upper jaw, pain during mouth closing. Examination revealed mobility of nose bones, significant swelling of soft tissues in the left zygomatic area, haemorrage in the eye sclera, "step" sign along the inferior edge of both orbits and zygomaticomaxillary sutures, nasal haemorrhage, open bite, lengthening of median face part. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
b. Fracture of skull base
c. Fracture of nose bones
d. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
*e. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw

158. A 16 year old patient complained about discomfort in the area of her upper jaw teeth she has been feeling for 2 weeks. Examination of precervical area of the 11 and 12 teeth revealed whitish matt spots with indistinct outlines that absorb dyes intensively. What treatment of the 11 and 12 teeth should be administered?
a. Spot removal
b. Silver impregnation
*c. Remineralizing therapy
d. Antiseptic treatment
e. Preparation and filling

159. A patient complains about long-lasting pain attacks in the lower jaw teeth, on the left. The pain irradiates to the ear, occiput and is getting worse during eating cold and hot food. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the approximal-medial surface of the 36 tooth. Floor probing is overall painful and induces a pain attack. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute local pulpitis
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
*c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

160. A 62 year patient was at a dentists and suddenly there appeared dyspnea and hacking cough, sense of progressing asphyxia. The patients condition is getting progressively worse; number of respiratory movements reached 30/min, acrocyanosis became more evident, there appeared gargling breathing, oral cavity excretes a lot of albuminoid sputum. Psychomotor agitation and arterial hypertension are present. What pathological state is it?
a. Anaphylactic shock
*b. Pulmonary edema
c. An attack of bronchial asthma
d. Spontaneous pneumothorax
e. Epileptic attack

161. A 51 year old woman complained about food sticking in a tooth on the right of her lower jaw. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the distal-masticatory surface of the 45 tooth consisting of compact pigmented dentin and not communicating with tooth cavity. The patient was diagnosed with chronic deep caries. What diagnostic method allowed to eliminate chronic periodontitis?
a. Percussion
*b. Electro-odontometry
c. Cold probe
d. Palpation of root apex projection
e. Probing

162. An 11 year old girl complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating. She has been suffering from this for a year. Gum of both upper and lower jaws is edematic and congestively hyperemi C. Hygienic state of oral cavity is unsatisfactory. Bite is edge-to-edg E. Roentgenological examination of periodontium revealed no pathological changes. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Localized periodontitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

163. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of his 24, 26, 27 teeth, pus excretion from alveolus of the the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 month ago dissection along the mucogingival fold was performed and the 25 tooth was extracted. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of soft tissues in the right infraorbital area, lymph nodes of the right submaxillary area are enlarged, slightly painful, nasal breathing is normal. Mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is edematic and cyanotic. There is also a fistula with bulging granulations along the mucogingival fold. Alveolus of the extracted 25 tooth excretes purulent granulations. What disease does this clinical presentation correspond with?
a. Acute condition of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Chronic alveolitis
c. Acute osteomyelitis
*d. Chronic localized osteomyelitis
e. Acute condition of localized periodontitis

164. A 42 year old patient complains about a neoplasm in the anterior palatal part that has been forming for 10 years. The 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth are intact. Intraoral X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows a single focus of bony tissue destruction, well-defined, 2,5 by 1,5 cm larg E. Periodontal fissure in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth can be well seen. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Nasopalatine canal cyst
b. Radicular cyst
c. Globulomaxillary cyst
d. Follicular cyst
e. Residual cyst

165. An 8 year old boy was referred to the oral surgery for extraction of his 64 tooth because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. Tooth crown is intact. What instrument should be applied?
*a. S-shaped forceps without thorns
b. Broad-beaked forceps
c. Straight forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps with non-converging beaks
e. S-shaped forceps with thorns

166. A 38 year old patient got a blow that resulted in upper jaw fractur E. Objectively: flattening and impression of face, mobility and dangling of broken jaw with cartilage of nose and eyeballs, nasal haemorrhage, tissue edema, "glasses" symptom; palpation reveals crepitation, subcutaneous emphysema, liquorrhea, loss of sensitivity in the area of half the upper jaw, nose wing and frontal teeth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
b. Upper jaw odontoma
*c. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
d. Upper jaw cancer on the right
e. Upper jaw ostemia

167. A dentist is filling a II class carious cavity (Blacks classification) in the 36 tooth of a 35 year old patient by sandwich metho D. What glass-ionomer cement should be chosen as a basic liner in this case?
a. Condensable
b. Water-setting
c. Hardened
d. Classic
*e. Hybrid

168. A 42 year old patient applied to a dentist and complained about white caseous deposit on the dorsum of his tongue and burning sensation. It is known from the patients anamnesis that he underwent treatment in an in-patient hospital on account of pneumoni A. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute pseudomembranous candidosis
b. Scarlet fever
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Typical form of leukoplakia

169. A patient complained about painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. Several days ago the 47 tooth was removed because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. The patients condition kept worsening. Body temperature is 37,9oC. Results of external examination: the face is symmetric, face skin is slightly pal E. Right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, palpatory painful. Examination of oral cavity is impossible because of evident contracture of lower jaw (the mouth opens up to 0,5 cm between central incisors). What anesthesia will provide mouth opening?
*a. Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
b. Plexus
c. Mandibular anesthesia
d. Torus
e. Block of upper cervical plexus

170. A 40 year old woman complains about slight painfulness of gums, high temperature sensitivity of teeth. Objectively: the gums are pale and compact, in the area of lower frontal teeth there is retraction with cervix dehiscenc E. X-ray picture shows steady decrease of interdental septa height down to ⅓ of root length. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Papillitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Gingivitis
d. Localized periodontitis
*e. Parodontosis

171. A 36 year old man complains about acute headache, body temperature rise up to 39,1°C, indisposition. Objectively: a slight face asymmetry because of soft tissue edema of the left infraorbital are A. Crown of the 26 tooth is partly decaye D. Percussion is acutely painful. Mucous membrane on the vestibular side in the area of the 25, 26 teeth is edematic, hyperemi C. Breathing through the left part of nose is laboured, there are purulent discharges. X-ray picture showed a homogeneous shadow of the left part of maxillary sinus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Suppuration of maxillary cyst
*b. Acute purulent odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
c. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
d. Acute periostitis of upper jaw
e. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth

172. An 18 year old patient complains of gingival painfulness and haemorrhage, halitosis, temperature rise up to 38,6oC, general weakness, appetite loss. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is hyperemic and dry; tongue is covered with white fur, gingival papillae are edematic, their apices have areas of necrotic deposit that can be easily removed leaving bleeding surface beneath. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged, palpatory painful. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Candida fungi
*b. Fusospirochetal symbiosis
c. Streptostaphylococci
d. Pale treponema
e. Virus of herpes simplex

173. A patient is waiting for metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. Before preparation conduction anesthesia was performe D. A few minutes later the patient felt anxiety, ear noise, abdominal pain, dizziness. Tachypnoea and rapid pulse are present. Arterial pressure is 60/40 mm Hg. What kind of first aid should be rendered?
a. Lying the patient in horizontal position
b. A cotton-wool wad soaked in liquid ammonia brought to the patients nose
c. Aminophylline introduction
d. Promedol, suprastine
*e. Intravenous introduction of 0,5 ml of 0,1% adrenalin solution, prednisolone

174. One of the methods to define central occlusion is to construct a flat that will go through cutting edges of central incisors and distalobuccal tubercles of last molar teeth providing that there is sufficient quantity of teeth. What flat should be constructed?
a. Vertical
b. Transversal
*c. Occlusal flat
d. Sagittal
e. Frankfort

175. A 68 year old patient underwent full jaw removal. Before the operation an impression of the patients upper and lower jaws was taken and a substitutive denture was mad E. What are the means of the denture fixation in the oral cavity?
a. Attachments
b. Clasps
c. Anchors
*d. Spiral Fosher springs
e. Magnets

176. A 26 year old patient complains about a sense of tooth heaviness and pain caused by hot food stimuli, halitosis. Objectively: crown of the 46 tooth is grey, there is a deep carious cavity communicating with tooth cavity, superficial probing is painless, deep one is painful, percussion is painful, mucous membrane has no pathological changes. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic concrementous pulpitis

177. A 53 year old patient has to undergo resection of the left half of mandible together with its ramus. It is indicated to make an immediate Oxmans dentur E. What denture element keeps the remaining mandible fragment from deviation towards the defect?
a. Artificial teeth
b. Resection part
c. The whole fixing part
d. Multiclasp system
*e. Removable or non-removable inclined plane

178. Mother of a 3 year old child brought the child to an orthodontist and complained about total lack of crown part of the 51 and 61 teeth. What tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Inlay
*b. Thin-walled cap
c. Metal-ceramic crown
d. Stump tooth
e. Tooth extraction

179. A 43 year old patient applied to a doctor complaining about painful deglutition, limited mouth opening. 3 days ago he felt pain in the decayed 37 tooth, on the next day there appeared limitations of mouth opening. Objectively: a slight soft swelling in the left submaxillary area. Palpation revealed an enlarged lymph node. Mouth can be opened up to 1,5 cm. There is also an edema of the left palatine arch and lateral pharynx wall. The 37 tooth is decayed, mucous membrane around the tooth is edematic, percussion is slightly painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Odontogenous submaxillary phlegmon
b. Acute submaxillary lymphadenitis
c. Odontogenous pterygomaxillary phlegmon
d. Peritonsillar abscess
*e. Odontogenous peripharyngeal phlegmon

180. A 20 year old patient complains of a tumour-like formation on the lateral surface of his neck on the right. He revealed this tumour a year ago. Objectively: there is a semi-oval well-defined tumour 3х2 cm large on the lateral neck surfac E. The tumour doesnt hold together with skin, it is painless, dense and elastic, upwardly and sidewardly movabl E. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarge D. After the tumour puncture some light yellow liquid was obtained that consisted of cast-off epithelium, cholesterol crystals, lymphocytes, erythrocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lateral neck cyst
b. Chronic neck lymphadenitis
c. Median neck cyst
d. Neck chemodectoma
e. Dermoid neck cyst

181. A young woman complained about having vesicles in oral cavity, painful ulcers, especially during talking and eating; muscle and joint pain, body temperature rise, indisposition, weakness. She fell suddenly ill 2 days ago. Objectively: t°38,4°C. Vermilion border is covered with bloody crusts that stick together and impede mouth opening. Mucous membrane of lips, cheeks, mouth floor, tongue, soft palate is hyperemic and edematic; there are single vesicles and large painful erosions covered with fibrinous deposit on it. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. There is hypersalivation. Nikolskys symptom is negative. What is the most probable
a. Non-acantholytic pemphigus
*b. Multiform exudative erythema
c. Secondary syphilis
d. Acantholytic pemphigus
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

182. A 36 year old patient applied to a dentist 1,5 month after a mandibular trauma with complaints about difficult food mastication, esthetic face defect. Objectively: the face is proportional, asymmetric as a result of oral displacement of a lateral fragment of the left lower jaw. When the jaws are closed the 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are not in contact with their antagonists. The patient strongly objects to surgical operation. What orthopaedic treatment should be administered?
a. Interjaw traction
b. Crowns with occlusal applications
*c. A denture with double dentition
d. Levelling of occlusal surface
e. Mechanotherapy

183. A 47 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11th tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
*a. Partial removable lamellar denture
b. Clasp denture
c. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth
d. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth
e. Implant

184. A 40 year old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 22 tooth. Objectively: a deep carious cavity on the medial surface of the 22 tooth, probing induces mild pain. What is the optimal material for filling of the 22 tooth?
a. Glass-ionomer chemical-setting cement
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Silica-alumina cement
*d. Composite light-setting material
e. Glass-ionomer light-setting cement

185. A 35 year old patient complained about toothache on the left of his upper jaw that appears during eating, can be caused by thermal stimuli (especially by cold water) as well as by mechanical and chemical stimuli. The pain abates when the stimuli are eliminate D. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity with a narrow inlet within circumpulpar dentin. Probing of carious cavity floor is painful. Thermodiagnosis causes acute pain that abates immediately after stimulus elimination. Electric odontodiagnostics results - 15 microamper E. Make a diagnosis:
a. Chronic simple pulpitis
b. Pulp hyperemia
c. Acute median caries
d. Acute partial pulpitis
*e. Acute deep caries

186. Parents of an 8 year old boy complain about a cosmetic defect, inability to bite off foo D. The child often suffers from acute viral respiratory infections. Objectively: chin skewness, mental fold is most evident. The lower lip is everted, superior central incisor lies on it, nasolabial fold is flattene D. In the oral cavity: occlusion period is early exfoliation perio D. The upper jaw is narrowed, there is gothic palat E. Frontal teeth have fan-shaped position. Sagittal fissure is 6 mm. In the lateral parts contact of homonymous teeth is present. What is the most probable cause of dentoalveolar deformity?
a. Untimely sanitation of oral cavity
*b. Pathology of upper airways
c. Missing of Caelinski ledge
d. Endocrinal diseases
e. Gestational toxicosis

187. A 17 year old girl applied to a dental clinic and complained about hard tissue defects on her frontal and lateral teeth. Subjectively these defects dont cause any inconvenience. Crown defects appeared long ago. The patient was born and and has been living in an area where fluorine concentration in the drinking water makes up 1,2 mg/l. Objectively: on the vestibular surfaces of incisors on both upper and lower jaws in the equator area there are hard tissue defects within deep layers of enamel. The defects are parallel to the cutting edge. The same defects were revealed in the area of tubera of the first molars, floor and walls of the defects are smooth. Enamel of the defect floor is light-brown. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Erosion of hard tissues of tooth
c. Focal odontodysplasia
d. Endemic fluorosis
*e. Systemic hypoplasia

188. An orthodontist was treating a patient infected with AIDS virus. Accidentally he injured skin of one of his fingers with a dental disk during tooth preparation. What actions should the orthodontist take in this case?
a. To apply a tourniquet on the shoulder
b. To perform diathermo-coagulation
c. To treat the skin with 5% iodine solution
d. To press blood out and treat the skin with strong solution of KMnO4
*e. To press blood out and treat the skin with 70% alcohol solution

189. A 52 year old patient complains of gum inflammation, tooth mobility. Objectively: dentitions are intact, all teeth have the 1-2 degree of mobility. What type of teeth stabilization should be applied in this case?
*a. Arch-directed stabilization
b. Parasagittal
c. Sagittal
d. Frontal
e. Frontosagittal

190. A patient had an epileptic attack during tooth preparation. What actions should the doctor take?
a. To seat the patient on an armchair in upright position
b. No actions should be taken
c. To lay the patient in prone, head-down position, to fix his arms
*d. To lay the patient down with laterad position of his head, to fix his tongue
e. To seat the patient with forward position of his head, to fix his hindhead

191. An 18 year old patient complains about gingival enlargement, haemorrhage and pain during eating. Objectively: gingival edema, hyperemia, enlargement is up to ⅓ of tooth crown length. Palpation causes intense haemorhage and pain. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Acute condition of initial generalized periodontitis
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form

192. A 51 year old lecturer came to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced, III degree mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
a. In 4-6 months
b. In 16-30 days
c. In 2-3 months
d. In 5-6 days
*e. On the day of dental extraction

193. An 8 year old child complains about permanent dull pain in the 46 tooth that is getting stronger during cutting. The pain appeared 1 day ago. Previously there has been pain induced by cold stimuli. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth, tooth cavity is closed, probing and temperature stimuli cause no pain reaction. Percussion is painful, a slight mobility is present. Gum around the 46 tooth is hyperemic, edematic, palpatory painful. X-ray picture shows no changes near the apex of undeveloped roots. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periodontitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute general serous pulpitis

194. A 42 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. After anesthetization the patient felt sudden attack of nausea, weakness, he got the sense of compression behind his breastbone, heart pain; he began vomiting. The patient lost consciousness, there appeared convulsions. Objectively: the patients skin is pale, covered with cold clammy sweat, pupils dont react to the light. The pulse is thready, arterial pressure cannot be detected. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Traumatic shock
b. Epileptic attack
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Collapse
e. Syncope

195. A soldier injured by a shell splinter was diagnosed with gunshot fracture of mandible accompanied by an over 3 cm long bone defect in the chin are A. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Tigerstedts splints
b. Gunning-Ports splint
*c. Machine osteosynthesis (Rudko, Bernadsky)
d. Direct osteosynthesis
e. Intermandibular Ivy ligature

196. A 48 year old patient complained about posttraumatic pain in the area of his chin. Examination revealed median fracture of lower jaw with I class dentition defect (according to Kennedy classification). It is indicated to make a Vankevich splint in Stepanovs modification. What will determine the height of directing planes of this splint?
a. It will be determined arbitrary
b. Form of edentulous alveolar crests of the lower jaw
c. Height of central jaw correlation
d. Height of molar teeth of the upper jaw
*e. Extent of mouth opening

197. A dentist applied to a regional sanitary-and-epidemiologic institution for an authorization to open a private dental surgery with 2 universal dental devices. The area of room where he is planning to have surgery hours makes up 26 m2. What area must this room with two universal dental devices have according to the existing regulations?
*a. 14 m2 for each dental device and 10 m2 additionally
b. 20 m2 for each dental device and 12 m2 additionally
c. 7 m2 for each dental device and 7 m2 additionally
d. 10 m2 for each dental device and 7 m2 additionally
e. 10 m2 for each dental device and 10 m2 additionally

198. A 40 year old patient complains about difficult mastication as a result of lower jaw deviation. Anamnesis data: mental fracture 2 months ago. Objectively: the 35; 36; 38 ... 45; 46 teeth are missing. Remaining teeth are intact. The 43; 44; 47; 48 teeth have no contact with antagonists and their oral deviation makes up 1 cm. What is the optimal construction of lower jaw denture?
a. Removable lamellar denture
*b. A denture with double dentition
c. Soldered splint on rings
d. Adhesive denture
e. Metal-ceramic dental bridge

199. A 54 year old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by ⅓ of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
a. Metal stamped
*b. Fullcast
c. Combined Belkins
d. Metal-ceramic
e. Plastic

200. A 50 year old woman complains about a neoplasm on her lower lip on the side of oral cavity that appeared a month ago and has been slowly growing since that. Objectively: there is a roundish, elastic, painless neoplasm inside the lower lip. Mucous membrane hasnt changed its colour. Make a diagnosis:
a. Lip abscess
b. Lip fibroma
c. Lip papilloma
*d. Retention cyst of lower lip
e. Lip lipoma

201. A 45-year-old female patient complains about pain caused by thermal srtimuli and spontaneous pain in the 26 toothA week ago this tooth was treated for pulpitis. Objectively: the 26 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, thermal stimulus causes slowly intensifying longlasting pain. X-ray picture shows that the palatine canal is filled by 2/3, buccal canals contain no filling material. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Trauma of periodontium tissue
*b. Incomplete pulp extirpation
c. Infection
d. Inadequate canal filling
e. Inflammation in the periodontium

202. Preventive examination of a 7-yearold schoolboy revealed unremovable grey-and-white layerings on the mucous membrane of cheek along the line of teeth joining. Mucous membrane is slightly hyperaemic, painless on palpation. The boy is emotionally unbalanced, bites his cheeks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Multiform exudative erythema
c. Chronic recurrernt aphthous stomatitis
d. Chronic candidous stomatitis
*e. Mild leukoplakia

203. A 48-year-old patient complains about itching gums. Objectively: gums are dense, of normal colour; cold water causes short-term toothache. X-ray picture shows osteosclerosis of interalveolar septa (fine granular bone texture), height of interalveolar septa and integrity of compact substance on their tops is unchanged. Which diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Initial periodontitis
b. Atrophic gingivitis
*c. Initial parodontosis
d. I degree periodontitis
e. I degree parodontosis

204. A 26-year-old patient needs an inlay for	a class V cavity of the 35 tooth. During the cavity preparation a prosthodontist has accidentally opened the pulp. What might be the most probable cause of this complication?
*a. Forming a flat floor
b. Forming convergent walls
c. Absence of an additional cavity
d. Forming a bevel
e. Forming divergent walls

205. Parents of a 9-year-old boy complain about permanently open mouth of the child. External examination revealed elongation of the lower face part, nonclosure of lips. Examination of the oral cavity revealed early mixed dentition. Relationship of the first permanent molars is neutral, vertical space is 5 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mesial occlusion
b. Distal occlusion
*c. Open bite
d. Deep overbite
e. Cross bite

206. After removal of dental deposit an 18- year-old patient underwent preventive examination. It revealed painless chalky spots in the precervical area on the vestibular surface of the 22 and 41 teeth. Result of enamel resistance test is 7. What morphological changes are typical for this disease?
a. Degeneratic changes of odontoblasts
*b. Subsurface enamel demineralization
c. Damage of dentinoenamel junction
d. Changes in the mantle dentine
e. Superficial enamel demineralization

207. A 32-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhages during eating and tooth brushing. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 weeks ago the patient got a cast metal crown. Objectively: the 27 tooth has a castmetal crown going beyond the gingival edge by 1-1,5 mm, touching causes haemorrhage. Percussion is slightly painful.What tactics is the most appropriate in this case?
*a. To remove the crown and fabricate a splint
b. To open the crown through the masticatory surface
c. To remove the crown and administer	treatment for marginal periodontitis
d. To give the patient time to get used to	the prosthesis
e. To administer gargling with Rotocan

208. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth.What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Jackson clasp
b. Roach clasp
*c. Acker clasp
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Bent wire clasp

209. A 25-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the 23 tooth is pulpless. The filling restores vestibular-approximal surface of the tooth crown by 1/3, it is stable, closely fits within cavity walls, its colour doesn’t match the colour of the tooth. The tooth itself has changed its colour, its percussion is painless. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for this patient?
a. Metal swaged crown
b. Elastic crown
*c. Metal-ceramic crown
d. Portion crown
e. Inlay

210. A 12-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage and tooth mobility. He has been suffering from this since the age of 4. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic and edematic, bleed during instrumental examination. Tooth roots are exposed by 1/3 and covered with whitish deposit. II degree tooth mobility is present. Dentogingival pouches are 4-5 mm deep. External examination revealed dryness and thickening of superficial skin layer on the hands and feet, there are also some cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Localized periodontitis
d. Letterer-Siwe disease
e. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease

211. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
a. Inverse method of compression molding
b. Direct method of compression molding
*c. Method of transfer molding
d. Combined method of compression	molding
e. In water under pressure

212. A 20-year-old patient complains about feeling spontaneous undurable localised pain in the 26 tooth for one day. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a deep Black’s class I carious cavity. Dentine of its walls and floor is unpigmented, softened, carious cavity is not communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain focused at a single point, cold test induces longlasting pain. What method of treatment is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Vital amputation
*c. Biological method
d. Devital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

213. A 42-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) that irradiates to the ear; headache, general indisposition, impossible mastication and limited mouth opening. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric due to the edema in the region of the left temporomandibular joint. The skin in this region is hyperemic. The pain is made worse by the smallest movements of mandible. Palpation of the joint causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited down to 15-20 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
b. Mandible subluxation
c. Myogenous osteoarthrosis
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
e. Acute purulent parotitis

214. A 42-year-old patient complains about pain in the submandibular and sublingual region that is getting worse during eating; body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C. The patient has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: along the right sublingual plica there is infiltration, hyperaemia, edema of soft tisues, acute pain on palpation. The duct of the right submandibular salivary gland discharges turbid saliva with pus admixtures.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenophlegmon of submandibular	region
b. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of	submandibular region
*c. Exacerbation of urolithiasis
d. Abscess of alveololingual groove
e. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary	gland

215. A 4-year-old girl presents with body temperature rise, aggravation of general condition. The symptoms has been observed for 3 days. Objectively: general condition is grave, body temperature is 38,6°C, the girl is anxious and pale. She presents also with halitosis, hyperaemia and edema of gingival mucous membrane in the region of the 83, 84, 85 teeth on both sides from the alveolar process. The mentioned teeth are mobile, their percussion causes acute pain; the 84 tooth is filled.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenous mandibular	osteomyelitis beginning from the 84 tooth
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of	the 84 tooth
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis beginning from the 84 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radiculodental	mandibular cyst beginning from the 84	tooth
e. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular	salivary gland

216. A 38-year-old female patient came to a hospital and complained about a wound on her left cheek. She got this trauma 16-18 hours ago, didn’t loose consciousness. Objectively: a 3 cm long injury of skin, subcutaneous fat and muscle. The wound is bleeding. What kind of initial surgical d-bridement should be performed?
a. -
*b. Early surgical d-bridement
c. Secondary surgical d-bridement
d. Delayed surgical d-bridement
e. Initial surgical d-bridement along with	plasty

217. A 47-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dental cervix exposure on both jaws. Objectively: the dentitions are intact, the dental cervixes are exposed. Untimely teeth contacts are present. It is planned to perform selective grinding. What controlling method should be chosen?
a. Roentgenography
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Masticatiography
d. Chewing test
*e. Occlusiography

218. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Close-beaked forceps
b. Broad-beaked forceps
*c. Left angled elevator
d. Right angled elevator
e. Straight elevator

219. A 31-year-old patient consulted a dentist about teeth sanitation. Objectively: in the precervical region of the 13 and 23 teeth there are irregularly-shaped defects of hard tissues within deep layers of enamel. The floor of the defects is rough, their edges are chalky.What tactics should be chosen as to these defects?
*a. Preparation and filling
b. Remineralizing therapy
c. Silvering of the defects
d. Grinding of the defects
e. Filling with composite material without	preparation

220. A 51-year-old female patient complains about food sticking in a right inferior tooth. Objectively: distal masticatory surface of the 45 tooth has a deep carious cavity filled with dense pigmented dentin that doesn’t communicate with the tooth cavity. The patient was diagnosed with chronic deep caries. What method of examination allowed the dentist to eliminate chronic periodontitis?
*a. Electro-odontometry
b. Palpation of projection of root apex
c. Cold test
d. Percussion
e. Probing

221. An 18-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise, weakness, pain induced by eating and deglutition. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is erythematic with multiple petechia. Pharynx is hyperaemic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, painless. In blood: leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypic mononuclears, ESR is 30 mm/h. What is the leading factor of disease development?
a. Bacterial infection
b. Immediate allergy
c. Delayed allergy
*d. Viral infection
e. Autoimmune disorders

222. A female patient consulted a stomatologist about inability to close her mouth, speech difficulty. Objectively: the oral cavity is half-open, there is drooling, central line deviates to the right. There is a depression in front of the tragus, and above the malar arch the mandibular condyle bulges inward the infratemporal fossa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Unilateral posterior dislocation of	mandible on the right
b. Bilateral anterior dislocation
c. Unilateral anterior dislocation of	mandible on the right
d. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the left
*e. Unilateral anterior dislocation of	mandible on the left

223. Analysis of a 10-year-old boy’s jaw models revealed that occlusal plane of the frontal maxillary teeth was of concave form, its lateral parts were convex. Form of the alveolar process also represents deformation of dental arches. The upper jaw is of saddle-like form with abrupt narrowing in the region of premolar teeth. What type of bite is it?
a. Deep
b. Distal
*c. Open
d. Mesial
e. Cross

224. A 50-year-old patient complains about increased sensibility of the exposed tooth cervixes, displacement of teeth, gum itch, pain in the region of the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth caused by chemical and thermal stimuli. Objectively: the gums are dense and anemic. X-ray picture shows atrophy of the alveolar bone reaching 2/3 of interalveolar septa height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atrophic gingivitis
*b. III degree parodontosis
c. Chronic generalized III degree parodontosis
d. II degree parodontosis
e. Chronic generalized II degree parodontosis

225. A 32-year-old patient complains of a fistula in the submandibular region. Objectively: cheek is swollen in the region of mandible on the left, palpation revealed induration of soft tissues. In projection of the 35, 36 teeth there is a fistula containing pus and granulations. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone, sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sarcoma
b. Osteoma
c. Actinomycosis
d. Syphilis
*e. Chronic osteomyelitis

226. A 23-year-old patient complains about a small ulcer on the red border of her lower lip that has been irresponsive to self-treatment for two weeks. Objectively: unchanged red border of lower lip has a circular ulcer of 2 mm in diameter with raised regular edges, its floor is of meatlike colour, dense, shiny, with "stearic film", with cartilaginoid infiltration, painless on palpation. Regional lymph node is enlarged, of tight elastic consistency, painless, mobile. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Decubital ulcer
b. Lupus erythematosus
c. Tuberculous ulcer
*d. Primary syphilis
e. Cancerous ulcer

227. X-ray picture depicts a circular welldefined area of bone tissue destruction 0,7х0,7 cm large in the projection of root apex.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cystogranuloma
b. Granuloma
c. Osteoma
d. Odontoma
e. Cyst

228. A 29-year-old patient complains about acute attack-like pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left, as well as in the region of his left maxillary sinus, eye and temple. The pain is long-lasting (2-3 hours), it is getting worse at night. The patient has a history of recent acute respiratory disease. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity, floor probing is painful, thermal stimuli cause long-lasting pain, percussion causes slight pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute apical periodontitis
d. Acute focal pulpitis
e. Inflammation of maxillary sinus

229. A 45-year-old patient complains about pain in his mandible that arose after extraction of the 36 tooth. Objectively: alveolar socket is covered with bloody clot. X-ray picture shows unextracted root of the 36 tooth. What tools are necessary for extraction of this root?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Angled elevator curved left
d. Straight elevator
*e. Angled elevator curved right

230. A patient complains of pain and swelling in the right submandibular area. She has been treating the 45 tooth for a week. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. There is a painful tense infiltration in the right submandibular region. The skin doesn’t make a fold, its hyperemic and glossy. The mouth can be opened by 3 cm. Deglutition is painless. These clinical findings correspond with the following disease:
*a. Odontogenous phlegmon of the right submandibular region
b. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular region
c. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
d. Acute odontogenous sialoadenitis
e. Abscess of the right alveololingual groove

231. A 5-year-old boy presents with body temperature rise up to 39, 2°C, sore throat, headache, nausea. Objectively: mucous membrane of soft palate and palatine arches is evidently hyperemic, there is distinct border between it and surrounding tissues. The child’s tongue is dry, edematic, its lateral surfaces are red and free of fur, fungiform papillae are evidently enlarged. Face skin is covered with spotty rash, hyperemic except for pale nasolabial triangle. Submandibular lymph nodes are painful on palpation. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Loffler’s bacillus
*b. Haemolytic streptococcus
c. Herpes virus
d. Coxsackie virus
e. Bordet-Gengou bacillus

232. Preventive examination of a 4,5-yearold child revealed untimely missing of all the upper molars. The lower incisors contact with mucous membrane of palate. What is the tactics of choice?
*a. Fabrication of a removable lamellar prosthesis
b. Annual examination till cutting of the permanent teeth
c. Medical intervention is not required
d. Half-yearly examination till cutting of the permanent teeth
e. Fabrication of an orthodontic appliance for deep overbite correction

233. A 20-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in an upper right tooth. Objectively: the 16 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity, probing at the opening point is painless, percussion of the 16 causes mild pain. There is a fistula on the gingiva in the region of root apex projection of the 16 tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
*d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

234. A 16-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in form of white spots in the region of the upper frontal teeth. The defect was revealed long ago and doesn’t change with time. Objectively: white spots on the vestibular surfaces of the 11, 12, 21,22 teeth close to the cutting edge and on the vestibular surfaces of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth close to the masticatory surface. On probing the spot surface was smooth, painless; cold stimulus produced no pain. The spots couldn’t be stained with 2%solution of methylene blue.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
b. Acute initial caries
c. Erosion of dental solid tissues
d. Fluorosis in form of spots
e. Local enamel hypoplasia

235. A 35-year-old patient complains about a cavity in a lower jaw tooth on the left, and the pain caused by sweet, sour and solid food. Examination of the 36 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity filled with light softened dentine. Probing of the carious cavity floor is painful, reaction to the cold stimulus is painful, undurable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute focal pulpitis
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic deep caries

236. A 31-year-old male patient complains of dryness and burning of tongue back that appeared for about a week ago and get worse when he eats irritating food. The patient has a history of recent pneumonia. He had been treated in the in-patient hospital for 2 weeks, the treatment program included antibiotics. Now he doesn’t take any drugs. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is hyperemic, dry, glossy. Tongue back and palate have greyish-white plicae that can be easily removed. Threads of saliva trail behind the spatula.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic atrophic candidiasis
*b. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
c. Acute atrophic candidiasis
d. Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis
e. Medicamental stomatitis

237. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
a. Crown cap splint
b. Fixed crown splint
*c. Inlay splint
d. Equator crown splint
e. Intradental splint

238. A 28-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 13 tooth is decayed by 2/3 of its height, the stump sticks out above the gumline by 2 mm. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled up to the top. What construction should be fabricated for the patient?
*a. Pivot tooth
b. Inlay
c. The crown should be restored with photopolymer
d. Equator crown
e. Crown

239. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
a. On the saddle
b. On the base
c. On the clasps
*d. On the arch
e. On the artificial teeth

240. A 10-year-old boy consulted a dentist about pain in the palate during eating. Objectively: the lower third of his face is shortened, mouth opening is not limited. By joining the teeth the cutting edge of inferior incisors contacts with the mucous membrane of palate. Mucous membrane in the contact point is hyperemic, slightly edematic. Lateral teeth exhibit Angle’s class I malocclusion. What is the most appropriate plan of treatment of the lower jaw?
*a. To impact frontal part
b. To widen the lower jaw
c. To protract lateral parts
d. To protract frontal part
e. To impact lateral parts

241. A patient consulted an oral surgeon about pain in the region of his left upper jaw that appeared 3 days ago. After examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 17 tooth. It is indicated to extract the 17 tooth. What nerves should be blocked for painless extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Anterior alveolar nerves and incisor nerve
b. Greater palatine nerve
*c. Posterior alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
d. Median alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
e. Nasopalatine nerve

242. A 40-year-old patient complains about frequent falling out of a filling. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious (Black’s class II) cavity. It is planned to restore the anatomic form of the tooth by means of a metal inlay. What is the peculiarity of the cavity preparation for the inlay in this case?
*a. Forming a bevel
b. Cavity floor widening
c. Cavity deepening
d. Preparation for parapulpar posts
e. Forming an additional shoulder

243. A 10-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous spasmodic pain in an upper jaw tooth on the left. Objectively: distal contact surface of the 26 tooth exhibits a carious cavity filled with light softened dentine and localized within parapulpar dentine. Probing of the cavity floor causes acute pain, percussion is painless. Cold stimuli cause a long-standing pain attack. The child has a history of lidocaine allergy. Choose an optimal paste to be used during the first visit:
a. Formocresol
b. Zinc oxide eugenol
c. Iodoform
d. Thymol
*e. Paraformaldehyde

244. A 35-year-old patient complains about itch, burning and edema of lips. He has been suffering from this for a week. Objectively: reddening of red border and skin, especially in the region of mouth corners, there are also vesicles, crusts, small cracks along with erythematous affection of red border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Multiform exudative erythema
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
c. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis
*d. Acute eczematous cheilitis
e. Acute herpetic cheilitis

245. Preventive examination of an 8-yearold boy revealed some lusterless chalklike spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth, which are localised in the precervical region. Subjective complaints are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Chronic initial caries
c. White-spotted fluorosis
d. Local enamel hypoplasia
*e. Acute initial caries

246. A 27- year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the 34 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Roentgenographical survey revealed an ill-defined zone of bone tissue destruction in the periapical region of root of the 34 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Exacarbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis complicated by periodontitis

247. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed fullcast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. Visually by means of models in the articulator
b. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
c. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
*d. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials
e. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper

248. An 18-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 21 tooth is pulpless, of dark-grey colour. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. It is planned to crown the tooth with a plastic crown. Choose the plastic mass for its fabrication:
a. Ethacryl
b. Ftorax
c. Bakril
*d. Sinma
e. Acrel

249. A 47-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the 27 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patient’s face is symmetric, skin is of normal colouring, the mouth can be fully opened, mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic and hyperemic at a level of the 27 tooth. The 27 tooth has a deep carious cavity interconnecting with pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic left-sided odontogenous highmoritis
*b. Exacerbated chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
c. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
d. Chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw beginning from the 27 tooth

250. A 64-year-old female patient was waiting for her turn at the dentist’s. Suddenly she fell down, her respiration became hoarse, she got convulsive twitching in her upper and lower limbs, face and neck turned cyanotic, eye pupils became mydriatic, reaction of eye to light was absent. Arterial pressure and pulse couldn’t be measured. Heart sounds couldn’t be auscultated. Involuntary urination was noted. What condition is characterized by such symptoms?
a. Shock
b. Epilepsy
*c. Clinical death
d. Coma
e. Collapse

251. A 3-year-old child complains of a cavity in a lower jaw tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 84 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within mantle dentine. Dentine is softened, probing of the cavity walls is painful, percussion is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic deep caries
*d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

252. A 43-year-old patient complains about a neoplasm in the right submandibular region that appeared a month ago after angina. Body temperature is up to 37, 0 ? 37, 2°C. The patient underwent anti-inflammatory therapy but it led to no reduction of the neoplasm. Objectively: in the right submandibular region palpation reveals a slightly painful, spherical, freely movable, well-defined neoplasm of dense and elastic consistency. The duct of submandibular salivary gland discharges transparent saliva. The sublingual plica is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sialolithiasis
b. Chronic sialoadenitis
*c. Chronic lymphadenitis
d. Adenoma of salivary gland
e. Atheroma

253. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
*a. Gelin
b. Stomalgin
c. Dentafol
d. Orthocor
e. Stomatoplast

254. A 35-year-old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37th tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the peculiarity of tooth preparation?
*a. Forming a bevel
b. Forming flat floor
c. Widening of cavity floor
d. Forming additional cavity
e. Forming an additional shoulder

255. A 64-year-old patient complains about a slightly painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue that appeared over 2 months ago. Objectively: lateral surface of tongue has an ulcer with raised edges, tissues around it are infiltrated. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, adhering to each other and surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Ulcero-necrotic lesion associated with blood disorders
*b. Lingual cancer
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Syphilis (hard chancre)
e. Decubital ulcer

256. A 56-year-old patient complains about missing lateral teeth on both sides of mandible. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. Make a diagnosis:
a. Kennedy II denttion defect
b. Kennedy IV denttion defect
*c. Kennedy I denttion defect
d. Kennedy III denttion defect
e. Betel’man II denttion defect

257. A 4-year-old child got a face trauma 2 hours agoA stomatologist on duty made a diagnosis: intrusive luxation of the 61 tooth. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Splinting of the 61 tooth
b. Removal of pulp of the 61 tooth
c. Observation
d. Reposition of the 61 tooth
*e. Extraction of the 61 tooth

258. An 18-year-old student complains of roughness and dryness of mucous membrane of the oral cavity. He always bites uncontrolledly off mucous membrane along the line of teeth joining. The patient suffers from chronic cholecystitis, he is smoker. Hygiene index is 2,3. Objectively: mucous membrane along the line of teeth joining is quaggy, edematic, whitish. What is the leading factor of this disease development?
a. Unsatisfactory level of oral cavity hygiene
b. Xerostomia
c. Smoking
*d. Habitual biting of mucous membrane of the oral cavity
e. Somatic pathology

259. A 57-year-old patient complains about dryness and burning of the lateral surface of her tongue. These sensations disappear during eating. She noted such sensations three months ago. She has a history of gastritis with reduced secretory function. Objectively: mucous membrane of tongue and oral cavity has no peculiarities. The back of tongue has thin white coating. Regional lymph nodes are unpalpable. Oral cavity is sanitized. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hunter-Moeller glossitis
*b. Glossodynia
c. Candidiasis
d. Lingual nerve neuritis
e. Desquamative glossitis

260. A 23-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 15 tooth that he noted a year ago. Examination revealed that approximal surface had a deep carious cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity and filled with dense pigmented dentine. Probing, cold test, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 10 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

261. A 7-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in the upper right molars. Both medial contact and masticatory surfaces of the 55 tooth have a carious cavitiy filled with clear softened dentin and localized within parapulpar dentin. Floor probing causes acute pain, tooth percussion is slightly painful. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process in the root projection of the 55 is intact, examination of this region revealed no roentgenological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Deep acute caries
*b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

262. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaw. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic.What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
b. Fabricate occlusal rims
c. Locate and fix central occlusion
d. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity
*e. Adjust individual trays

263. A 33-year-old patient complains about pain, gingival haemorrhage, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37, 8°C. Objectively: gums are apparently hyperaemic, edematic, bleed easily, parodontal pouches are 3- 4 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar process, resorption of interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis

264. An 8-year-old boy complains about acute short-term pain in the 11 tooth caused by cold and sweet stimuli. Objectively: medial contact surface of the 11 tooth has a carious cavity within dentinoenamel junction filled with softened moist dentine that can be easily removed. Enamel edges are white, undermined, friable. Superficial probing is painless, thermal test is positive, percussion is negative. What is the filling material of choice?
a. Silicate cement
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Composite material
d. Silicophosphate cement
e. Silver amalgam

265. A 40-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 38°C, and of a roundish infiltration on his upper lip. Objectively: there is a roundish infiltration on the upper lip on the left, the skin above it is wine red, the infiltration adheres to the surrounding tissues and has a seapus necroticus in the middle. The upper lip is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst
b. Acute periostitis of the upper lip
*c. Upper lip furuncle
d. Acute lymphadenitis
e. Upper lip carbuncle

266. .A female patient complains about pain in the 11 tooth caused by sour and sweet food. Objectively: enamel changes in form of chalky appearance, a defect with light bottom within dentinoenamel junction on the vestibular surface in the precervical area of the 11 tooth. Probing was painless, percussion and cold stimulus caused no pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Acute initial caries
*c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel hypoplasia
e. Fluorosis

267. A 69-year-old patient needs extraction of the 12, 11 teeth. He is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis, the 12 and 11 teeth exhibit II degree mobility. Choose a proper instrument for extraction:
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
*d. Straight forceps
e. S-shaped forceps curved right

268. An 8-year-old child presents with an edema of the submandibular region, the mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm, further opening is difficult, body temperature is 37, 6°C, mucogingival fold is vestibularly flattened, hyperaemic and swollen. The 84 and 85 teeth have fillings, their percussion is painless. The 84 tooth exhibits I degree mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Acute odontogenic periostitis
e. Chronic odontogenic periostitis

269. A 25-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible without evident displacement of fragments. All the teeth are intact. What kind of wire splint is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Pomerantseva-Urbanskaya’s splint
*b. Smooth splint
c. Splint with hooks
d. Smooth splint with a spreading curve
e. Splint with guide plane

270. A 19-year-old patient complains about pain in the submental part of mandible. The day before he got a trauma. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of tissues in the mental area. The mouth can be opened widely enough. All the teeth are intact. Mucous membrane is edematic in the region of central incisors, it bleeds slightly. In this region mobility of mandible fragments is present. Occlusion is undisturbed. What splint should be chosen by the dentist?
*a. Smooth brace
b. Splint with guide plane
c. Ivy loops for 31 32, 42 41
d. Anchor splint with intermandibular fixation
e. Splint with spreading curve

271. A 25-year-old man complains of itching and reddening of skin in the buccal	area, general weakness, inertness. He associates origin of the disease with a skin injury he got during shaving. Objectively: body temperature is 39, 0°CA welldefined section of skin in the buccal area is hyperemic, it slightly protrudes above the surface. Hyperemic surface has some vesicles containing serous fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
*b. Erysipelatous inflammation of skin
c. Furuncle
d. Phlegmon of buccal area
e. Anthrax

272. A 30-year-old saxophonist complains about wearing of the occlusal surface of his frontal teeth along with separation between the upper and lower teeth (apertognathia). Height of the lower third of the patient’s face remains unchanged. What method should be applied for elimination of this deformity?
a. Shortening of teeth
b. Increase of the interalveolar height
*c. Protetic
d. Orthodontic
e. Instrumental-and-surgical

273. A 32-year-old patient complains about mouth soreness, body temperature rise up to 38, 5°C, indisposition. Such condition has been occurring periodically for several years after the patient had had a cold. Objectively: lips are covered with haemorrhagic crusts, hyperaemic mucous membrane of lips and cheeks has erosions covered with fibrinous films. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpes recidivicus
b. Pemphigus vulgaris
*c. Multiform exudative erythema
d. Herpetiform Duhring’s dermatitis
e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

274. Examination of a patient revealed a roundish neoplasm in the submental area. Skin above it is unchanged, makes a fold easily. Puncture sample contains strowyellow liquid with cholesterol admixture. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Congenital median cyst
b. Lymphadenitis
c. Dermoid cyst
d. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
e. Lipoma

275. A 13-year-old girl complains about frequent falling out of a filling in the 21 tooth. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 years ago she underwent treatment on account of a dental trauma. Objectively: a transverse defect of 1/3 of the crown in the 21 tooth. Percussion is painless. Tooth colour is unchanged. X-ray picture shows that root canal is filled by 1 mm from the apex, filling material closely fits the walls of root canal. What stomatological tactics should be chosen?
a. The tooth should be extracted
b. The tooth should be crowned with an artificial crown
c. The root canal should be refilled
d. The root apex should be resected
*e. The defect should be restored with photopolymer

276. A 35-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronicmedian caries of the 36 tooth. There is a Black’s class II cavity affecting masticatory surface.Whatmaterial should be chosen for the tooth filling?
*a. Light-cure microhybride composite
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Light-cure microfilled composite
d. Light-cure fluid composite
e. Glass ionomer cement

277. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
*a. Dentures with elastic lining
b. Dentures with metal bases
c. Implant-supported dentures
d. Dentures with shortened borders
e. Dentures with extended borders

278. A 48-year-old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervixes of the 42, 41, 31, 32 are exposed by 2/3, there is pathological III degree mobility. It is indicated to extract the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be used for the direct prosthetics?
*a. Removable partial lamellar denture
b. Adhesive
c. Swaged-and-soldered bridge-like denture
d. Metal-ceramic bridge-like denture
e. Clasp denture

279. Examination of a 13-year-old patient allowed to make a final diagnosis: vestibular position of the 13 and 23 teeth with the total space deficit, narrowing of maxillary dental arch, torsion of the 12 and 22 tooth. To eliminate this pathology it was suggested to widen the dental arch and to extract some teeth. What teeth have orthodontic indication for their extraction?
a. Canines
b. Second premolars
c. First molars
*d. First premolars
e. Second incisors

280. Parents of a 2-year-old girl complain about fistulas with purulent discharge in the region of the upper frontal teeth. Objectively: crowns of the 51, 52, 61, 62 teeth are significantly decayed, probing of root canal orifices is slightly painful, it causes significant haemorrhage. Percussion is painless. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is pastose and cyantotic, there are cicatrices and fistulas in this region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis

281. A month after cementing the metalceramic crown on the 23 tooth a patient complained of its decementing. Examination revealed that the tooth stump was of sufficient height, stump walls were convergent to the vertical tooth axis at an angle of approximately 30 degrees. What angle of convergence had to be formed?
a. 22-25 degrees
b. 10-12 degrees
c. 12-15 degrees
d. 15-18 degrees
*e. Up to 8 degrees

282. During lateral movements of mandible the frontal teeth are displaced sidewards. Deviation of incisor point from the central position is measured by an angle of 100 ? 110o.What is characterized by such a value of incisor point deviation?
a. Lateral joint path
b. Sagittal joint path
c. Bennett’s angle
*d. Lateral incisor path
e. Sagittal incisor path

283. Parents of a 1,5-year-old child complain about the child’s tongue enlargement and ingestion disorder. The child has been suffering from this since birthday. Objectively: general condition has no peculiarities. The tongue is enlarged (macroglossia). Its mucous membrane exhibits granular vesicular outgrowths. The tongue is dense, painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemangioma of tongue
b. Cyst of tongue
c. Cancer of tongue
*d. Lymphangioma of tongue
e. Fibroma of tongue

284. A 52-year-old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: in the lateral parts of mandible teeth are worn down to the gums, in the frontal parts teeth are worn by 1/3. Treatment includes two stages. What prosthetic construction should be applied for bite disjoining and myotatic reflex change?
a. Elastic plastic splint
*b. Periodontal splint for the lateral parts
c. Plastic splint for the frontal part
d. Plastic splint for the whole dentition
e. Crown splint for the lateral parts

285. A girl is 18 months old. Vestibular surfaces of the 52, 51, 61, 62 teeth have wide carious cavities within enamel. Probing is slightly painful, percussion of the 52, 51, 61, 62 is painless.What is the treatment of choice?
a. Filling with amalgam
b. Fluorine laquer coating
c. Filling with phosphate cement
*d. Silver impregnation
e. Remineralizing therapy

286. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 13 and 24 teeth remain as well as all the teeth on the lower jaw. The lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, crowns of the 13, 24 teeth are worn off by 2/3. What constructional element will provide optimal fixation of the partial removable prosthesis on the upper jaw?
a. Retaining clasps
b. Compound clasps
*c. Telescopic crowns
d. Bars
e. Dentoalveolar clasps

287. Parents of a 6-year-old child applied to a pedodontist for preventive examination of their child. The oral cavity is sanitized. According to the parents, the child has recently cut the 36 and the 46 tooth. What method of caries prevention should be applied within 1,5-2 years after cutting of the mentioned teeth?
*a. Fissure hermetization
b. Coating the teeth with fluorine lacquer Ftorlak
c. Gargling with sodium fluoride
d. Remodentum solution applications
e. Fissure silvering

288. Examination of a 6-year-old girl revealed a deep carious cavity in the 85 tooth. Percussion and probing are painless. After removal of the softened dentine communication with the tooth cavity showed up. Deep probing is painless. Xray picture of the 85 tooth shows the focus of destruction of bone tissue in the region of bifurcation; cortical plate of the 35 has no pathological changes. It ismost expedient to use the following material for the root filling:
a. Calcium-containing paste
*b. Zinc oxide eugenol cement
c. Glass ionomer cement
d. Resorcin-formalin paste
e. Phosphate cement

289. A 48-year-old patient got a pustule on his chin that quickly developed into a dense and acutely painful infiltration 3x5 cm large. The skin above it is of blue-red colour. In the centre one can see three zones of necrosis around the hair follicles. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged and painful.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chin carbuncle
b. Dermal actinomycosis of chin
c. Chin furuncle
d. Suppurated atheroma
e. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin

290. A patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about pain and edema in the right infraorbital region and right zygomatic region, skin numbness in the area of the right half of his upper lip; nasal haemorrhage. These symptoms turned up after a trauma.What disease should be suspected?
*a. Fracture of zygomatic bone
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Fracture of nose bones
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
e. Le Fort I maxillary fracture

291. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
a. Erythroplasia
*b. Abrasive precancerous Manganotti’s cheilitis
c. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border
d. Verrucous precancer of red border
e. Bowen’s disease

292. A 12-year-old child complains about bleeding from the tooth socket during eating and tooth brushing. The tooth has hurt him before. Objectively: the 36 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity and filled with red excrescences. Probing causes pain and slight haemorrhage; percussion is painless, thermal stimuli cause mild pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic simple pulpitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic papillitis
d. Chronic granulating pulpitis
e. Gingival polyp

293. A 23-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating solid food. Objectively: gingiva of the frontal part of mandible is hyperaemic, edematic, it bleeds on palpation. Mucous membrane of the oral cavity as well as gingiva in other regions present no changes. The patient has deep overbite. Teeth are stable except for the 41 and 31 (I degree of mobility). X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 1/3 of root length in the region of the 42, 41, 32, 31 teeth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. I degree parodontosis
*b. Localised periodontitis
c. Generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Initial generalized periodontitis
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

294. A 13-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gums around all the teeth are hyperemic and edematic, PMA index (papillary marginal alveolary index) is 46%, Greene-Vermillion hygiene index is 2,5. Provisional diagnosis: exacerbation of chronic generalized catarrhal gingivitis. This patient should be recommended to use a toothpaste with the following active component:
a. Calcium glycerophosphate
b. Vitamins A, D, E
c. Microelement complex
*d. Chlorhexidine
e. Monofluorophosphate

295. A 30-year-old patient has got an edema and hyperemia of nose wing skin spreading to the skin of his upper lip and cheek. Examination revealed a fissure along the infra-external edge of the left nostril. The skin is tense, dense, red and cyanotic, skin line pattern is smoothed; rise of local temperature is present. The zone of affection is well-defined and irregularly shaped. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermal actinomycosis
b. Dermal cancer
c. Thrombophlebitis of the facial vein
*d. Erysipelatous inflammation
e. Dermal tuberculosis

296. On the second day after tooth extraction a 35-year-old woman applied to a facial surgeon and complained about pain in the parotid-masticatory region and sensation of lacking contact between the upper and lower jaw teeth on the right. Examination revealed chin deviation to the left, halfopenmouth, closed lips, disturbed occlusion. There is also limitation of lateral mandible movements. In front of the right ear tragus soft tissues sink down. What examination is expected to be the most informative in this case?
a. Bimanual TMJ investigation
b. -
c. TMJ ultrasound
d. Mandible roentgenography
*e. TMJ roentgenography

297. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm.What type of implant should be applied?
*a. Threaded
b. Plate-form
c. Conical
d. Subperiosteal
e. Endodontic-endoosseous

298. A10-year-old child undergoes sanitation of the oral cavity. The girl was found to have chalky spots on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical region of the 21 and 12 teeth. Enamel surface is dull, smooth. Pain reaction to the temperature stimuli is absent. What additional method of examination is expected to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Intraoral roentgenography
b. Orthopantomography
*c. Vital staining
d. Electroodontodiagnostics
e. Ultraviolet stomatoscopy

299. A 20-year-old patient complains about pain and haemorrhages in the region of the 36 tooth occuring during eating solid food. Objectively: medial masticatory surface of the 36 tooth has a large carious cavity occupied by a carneous tumour-like formation, probing induces haemorrhage and pain in the region of connection of the carious cavity with the pulp chamber. Percussion is painless. Electroodontodiagnosis is 40 microampere. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Hypertrophic papillitis
d. Epulis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

300. An infant was born full-term with body weight at a rate of 3200 g and body length at a rate of 53 cm. It was the first physiological delivery. What position of child’s mandible is usually observed after birth?
a. Physiological progenia
b. Deep overbite
c. Open bite
*d. Physiological retrogenia
e. Direct relation

301. A 14-year-old child has orthodontic indication for extraction of the 14 tooth. What forceps should be applied for extraction of the 14 tooth?
*a. S-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Curved on flat forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps
e. Straight forceps

302. A 14-year-old child was undergoing extraction of the 16 tooth on account of chronic periodontitis. During the tooth extraction it came to perforation of maxillary sinus along with penetration of the distal buccal root into the maxillary sinus. What is the further dentist’s tactics?
a. The dentist should form a clottage without informing the patient
b. The dentist himself should try to extract the root
*c. The patient should be directed to the hospital for a surgical procedure
d. The dentist should close the perforation with mucoperiosteal graft
e. The dentist should perform maxillary sinusotomy in the outpatient setting

303. .A2-month-old child is anxious, sleeps badly, refuses food, has subfebrile body temperature. Objectively: hyperaemic mucous membrane of the child’s tongue, lips, cheeks and palate has a caseous coating that can be easily removed with a tampon. Regional lymph nodes are slightly enlarged and painful on palpation. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Measles-associated stomatitis
*b. Acute pseudomembranous candidous stomatitis
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Chronic atrophic candidous stomatitis
e. Diphtheria

304. A 35-year-old patient complains about progressing throbbing pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity filled with softened dentine, tooth cavity is closed, probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain. There is I degree tooth mobility. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

305. A patient complains of burning, itch and lower lip enlargement. He has been suffering from this for a long time. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric due to the flattening of nasolabial fold. His lower lip is edematic, of normal colour, painless on palpation. The patient has plicated tongue. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
b. Lymphangioma
c. Granulomatous Miescher’s cheilitis
d. Hemangioma
e. Quincke’s edema

306. A 30-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect and slight pain in the 44 tooth during tooth brushing. Objectively: there is a Black’s class V carious cavity within mantle dentine. Probing of the cavity walls causes slight pain, thermal probe is positive. What filling material is to be chosen for restoration of this cavity?
a. Metal ceramics
*b. Compomer restorative material
c. Amalgam
d. Chemical-cure composite
e. Polycarboxylate cement

307. An 18-year-old patient complains of short-term pain in the 37 tooth caused by sweet and cold stimuli. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity within mantle dentine. The cavity is filled with softened dentine. Probing of the cavity walls induces pain in the region of dentinoenamel junction, electroodontodiagnosis is 6 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulp hyperaemia
*b. Acute median caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

308. A 24-year-old soldier was injured by a shell splinter. He was diagnosed with a mandibular fracture with a bone defect in the mental region over 2 cm long. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Direct osteosynthesis
*b. Fragments fixation by means of Rudko’s apparatus
c. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
d. Tigerstedt’s splints
e. Gunning-Port’s splint

309. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the area of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flattened, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the regiob of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
*a. Fibrous
b. Giant-cell
c. -
d. Pregnancy epulis
e. Angiomatous

310. A 49-year-old patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about permanent intense dull pain in the region of the right upper jaw. It is known from the anamnesis that the 17 tooth has been repeatedly treated for exacerbation of chronic periodontitis but the treatment appeared to be ineffective. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Torus
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Tuberal, incisor and palatinal
d. Tuberal and incisor
e. Incisor and paltinal

311. Stomatological examination of a child revealed abnormal form of the central incisors: they are barrel-shaped, there is a semilunar groove on the cutting edge. It is known from the anamnesis that the child’s mother had syphilis during pregnancy. Besides the dental abnormality the child presents also with deafness and parenchymatous keratitis. This abnormality of tooth development is called:
a. Wedge-shaped defect
b. Pfluger teeth
*c. Hutchinson’s teeth
d. Fluorosis (destructive form)
e. Erosion of hard tissues

312. A patient ordered partial removable lamellar dentures for the upper and lower jaw. An orthodontist made elastic alginate impressions of both jaws. What is his next step?
a. To invite a dental mechanic for joint analysis of the impressions
b. To let the impressions dry out in the open air
*c. To send the impressions for disinfection
d. To send the impressions immediately to the laboratory
e. To put the impressions into the microten bag for 90 minutes

313. A 12-year-old patient complains about an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, upper frontal teeth overbite the lower teeth by 3/3 of height, exhibit oral inclination, lateral parts all along exhibit cusp-tocusp relationship between the antagonists; Angle’s class II malocclusion (joining of the upper permanent molars) is also present. Malocclusion is observed in the following planes:
a. In transversal and vertical
b. In transversal
*c. In sagittal and vertical
d. In vertical
e. In sagittal

314. A 65-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about fabrication of an external prosthesis of orbit that was lost as a result of a trauma. What is the fixing element of the orbit prosthesis?
a. Magnets
*b. Spectacle frame
c. Swivel devices
d. Watch spring
e. Clamps

315. A 56-year-old patient needs a partial removable lamellar denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 25, 26, 27, 28 teeth on the upper jaw are missing. In order to provide transversal line of clasps the clasp arms should be placed upon the following teeth:
a. 24 and 18
b. 13 and 18
*c. 13 and 24
d. 24, 13 and 18
e. -

316. A 56-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain underneath the bar of her clasp prosthesis. It is known from the anamnesis that the clasp was placed in another city a week ago. Examination revealed a mechanic injury of mucous membrane of the palatine vault caused by the bar of the clasp prosthesis. What distance should exist between the palate and the bar of the clasp prosthesis in order to prevent this complication?
a. 5-6 mm
*b. 0,5 mm
c. 0,2-0,3 mm
d. 2-3 mm
e. 1,5-2,0 mm

317. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patient’s face is symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painless. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ
b. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ
*c. Arthrosis of the right TMJ
d. Fracure of the right condyle of mandible
e. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible

318. A 50-year-old patient complains about problems with mastication, tooth mobility, halitosis, gingival haemorrhages. Objectively: gums are hyperemic with cyanotic colouring, there is dental calculus. Parodontal pouches of the superior molars are 8 mm deep, the pouches of other teeth are 6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of bone tissue by 2/3-1/2 of root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized periodontitis of III	degree
b. Chronic generalized periodontitis of I degree
c. Acute generalized periodontitis of II	degree
d. Acute generalized periodontitis of III degree
e. Chronic generalized periodontitis of II degree

319. An 18-year-old patient complains about gingival enlargement, pain and haemorrhage when eating solid food. Objectively: hyperaemia, gingival edema, hypertrophy of gingival edge up to 1/2 of crown height by the 12, 13, 14 teeth. Formalin test is painless.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Ulcero-necrotic gingivitis
e. Generalized II degree periodontitis, chronic course

320. A 34-year-old patient got a trauma (fall) that resulted in mobility of alveolar process and all the upper jaw teeth, occlusion was also changed. X-ray picture depicts the fracture line that runs in both directions from the piriform opening along the floor of maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Unilateral maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
e. Partial fracture of the alveolar process

321. A boy is 1 month old. At the medial edge of the inferior eyelid on the right there is a wound with purulent discharge. The boy fell ill suddenly, body temperature rose up to 40°C. The general condition is grave. On the second day of disease there appeared an infiltration at the internal edge of eye socket and right cheek. The skin above it is hyperemic, fluctuation cannot be determined. Palpebral fissure is narrowed. The right nasal meatus discharges pus. There is an infiltration on the vestibular surface of alveolar process and on the right palate. Mucous membrane above it is hyperemic along the mucogingival fold, fluctuation can be determined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute dacryocystitis
b. Acute right-sided highmoritis
c. Acute serous periostitis
*d. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
e. Phlegmon of the right eye socket

322. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patient’s chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth aremissing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get specialmedical aid?
*a. Specialized army surgical hospital
b. Regimental aid station
c. Separate medical battalion
d. Separate medical detachment
e. Battalion aid station

323. A 45-year-old patient complains about a rapidly growing formation on his lower lip. Examination of the red border of lips revealed a greyish-red nodule with a hollow in the centre which is filled with corneous masses that can be easily removed. The nodule is painless, mobile. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Nodulous verrucous precancer of red border
b. Papilloma
*c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Basal cell carcinoma
e. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border

324. A 60-year-old patient underwents sanitation of the oral cavity before an operation on account of cataract. After examination the patient was diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 22 tooth (Black’s class V). What filling material should not be used in this patient?
*a. Light-cure microhybrid material
b. Chemical-cure glass ionomer cement
c. Chemical-cure macrofilled composite
d. Silicate cement
e. Chemical-cure microhybrid material

325. A 23-year-old patient complains about periodical pain in the region of the 11 tooth, protrusion of the alveolar process. The patient got a trauma 4 years ago. Objectively: crown of the 11 tooth is dark, percussion is painless. X-ray picture shows roundish well-defined area of bone tissue rarefication by the root apex of the 11 tooth. The area is 2,0 cm in diameter. Puncture results: yellow fluid with cholesterol crystals. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Maxillary radicular cyst
b. Maxillary ameloblastoma
c. Maxillary osteoclastoma
d. Soft maxillary odontoma
e. Chronic maxillary osteomyelitis

326. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a freeend edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements	should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
a. Dentoalveolar clasps
*b. Attachments and bar system
c. Ney clasps
d. Telescopic crowns
e. Jackson clasps

327. A 34-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain and clicking in the final stage of mouth opening. The patient has a history of a dislocation. Amplitude of maximal mouth opening is 58 mm. Mouth opening should be limited down to the following amplitude:
a. Up to 10-15 mm
b. Up to 90-100 mm
c. Up to 25-30 mm
d. Up to 50-60 mm
*e. Up to 40-50 mm

328. A 12-year-old patient presents with abnormal position of the upper jaw canine. The 13 tooth is in the vestibular position, above the occlusal plane. Space between the 14 and the 12 tooth is 6,5mm. Choose a rational treatment method:
a. Surgical and physiotherapeutic
b. Surgical and instrumental
*c. Instrumental
d. Instrumental and myogymnastics
e. Surgical and myogymnastics

329. Unused stomatological instruments were left on a sterile table at the end of the working day. What measures should be taken in order to provide sterility of these instruments?
a. Disinfection, sterilization
b. Presterilization treatment, sterilization
c. Disinfection only
*d. Sterilization without preliminary processing
e. Disinfection, presterilization treatment, sterilization

330. A 42-year-old patient complains about gingival pain, progressing gingival haemorrhage, increasing tooth mobility, halitosis. Objectively: gums are evidently hyperaemic, extremely edematic, they bleed easily on palpation. Tooth roots are exposed, parodontal pouches are 4-6 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate, there is also supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. II-III grade tooth mobility is present. Orthopantomogram shows	resorption of interdental septa down to 1/2 of their height.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized III degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

331. A 60-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication due to the mandible displacement that resulted from an untreated fracture. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38, 45, 46 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with the upper lateral teeth, and exhibit oral deviation up to 1 cm. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for the manible?
a. Whole-piece bridge
b. Adhesive prosthesis
c. Vankevich splint
*d. Prosthesis with double dentition
e. Arch bar prosthesis

332. Apatient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed by 80%, the root is stable, the canal is filled up to the top. After examination it was decided to restore the decayed tooth with a cast stump inlay. The root canal of the 23 tooth should be broadened by:
*a. 2/3 of canal length
b. 1/3 of canal length
c. By the total canal length
d. 1/4 of canal length
e. 1/2 of canal length

333. Regimental Aid Station (RAS) admitted a soldier with an injury in the maxillofacial region. Dosimetric control revealed radiation affection in this patient. The injured should be referred to the following functional unit of RAS:
*a. Decontamination station
b. Evacuation pavilion
c. Admission and sorting pavilion
d. Isolator
e. Dressing pavilion

334. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain in the left parotidmasticatory region, disorder of mandible movements. Objectively: skin over the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is reddened, the surrounding tissues are edematic. Disfunction of the left temporomandibular joint is present.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of TMJ
b. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
c. Ankylosis of the left TMJ
*d. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of TMJ
e. Arthrosis of the left TMJ

335. A patient complains about limited mouth opening. She has a history of intra-articular disorders in the left temporomandibular joint. Roentgenological examination revealed subchondral sclerosis of articular plates, regular narrowing of articular cavity, limited excursion of condylar process of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
d. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Deforming arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint

336. A 46-year-old patient complains of difficult opening of her mouth, body temperature rise, tissue edema around both temporomandibular joints (TMJ). It is known from the anamnesis that the patient had short-term non-intense bilateral pain in the parotid-masticatory region, limited mouth opening, tension and discomfort in the region of both temporomandibular joints that had been observed for a couple of days.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibrous ankylosis
b. Deforming atrhrosis
c. Infectional arthritis
d. Arthrosis
*e. Rheumatic arthritis

337. A boy is 10 years old. His face is symmetric and proportional. He presents with mouth breath. Examination of the oral cavity revealed saddle-like form of dental arches and high arched palate. Upper first molar relationship (Angle’s key to occlusion) remains intact. What is	the most likely diagnosis?
a. Widening of dental arches
b. Elongation of dental arches
c. Distal occlusion
d. Mesial occlusion
*e. Narrowing of dental arches

338. A 56-year-old patient complains about a painless neoplasm on the alveolar crest of the right upper jaw. Objectively: there is a bright-red wide-based tumour in the region of premolars. It is localized on both sides from the alveolar crest. The tumour is dense and elastic, painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Peripheral osteoclastoma
b. Gingival fibromatosis
c. Papilloma
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Central osteoclastoma

339. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and "hurt"her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and doesn’t make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible
b. Cheek phlegmon
c. Acute lymphadenitis
*d. Suppurated cheek haematoma
e. Cheek haematoma

340. A 40-year-old patient suffers from chronic generalized periodontitis. Objectively: both dentitions are intact, the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit I degree mobility. What splint would be aesthetically acceptable for this group of teeth?
a. Guard splint
b. Cap splint
c. Ring splint
*d. Glass Span and photopolymer splinting
e. Splint of soldered combined crowns

341. Renovation of a dental room involves installation of luminous tube lamps. Specify the required illuminance level in lux:
a. 300 lux
b. 400 lux
*c. 500 lux
d. 200 lux
e. 100 lux

342. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Examination revealed that the 21 tooth was missing, the crowns of the 11 and the 22 tooth are intact, high, relatively parallel. The patient refused teeth preparation as well as implantation or fabrication of a removable denture. What orthopedic construction should be fabricated?
a. Lamellar denture
b. Clasp denture
*c. Adhesive denture
d. Immediate denture
e. Polypropylene denture

343. A 47-year-old patient consulted a doctor about an itching tumour in the right buccal area that has significantly enlarged lately. Examination revealed an irregularly shaped tumour up to 1,5 cm large, the tumour is black and glossy.What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Dermal cancer
b. Cutaneous horn
c. Pigmented nevus
d. Dermal basalioma
*e. Dermal melanoma

344. A 38-year-old patient consulted an orthopedist about metal taste, dry mouth and tongue burning. Objectively: defects of the lower dental arch were replaced with soldered stainless steel bridges. What examination method would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Masticatiography
b. Myography
c. Electroodontometry
*d. Galvanometry
e. Occlusiography

345. A 5-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute serous pulpitis
e. Acute periodontitis

346. A 28-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw. Objectively: the crown part of the 11 tooth is decayed below the gum level. The root is stable, percussion is painless. It is planned to restore the tooth with a stump inlay and cover it with a metal-ceramic crown. What additional method of diagnostics should be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Electromyography
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Electroodontodiagnostics
*d. X-ray diagnostics
e. Masticatiography

347. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the child’s submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37, 5°C. Objectively: the child’s face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Submandibular adenophlegmon
*b. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
d. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

348. A patient complains about paroxysmal upper jaw toothache on the left that is getting worse at night. Toothache intensifies also under stimulation and irradiates to the left eye and temple. Similar attacks were noted three months ago, the patient didn’t undergo any treatment. Objectively: the 25 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain at the point of communication, vertical percussion is slightly painful, horizontal one is painless. Mucous membrane in the projection of root apex of the 25 tooth is unchanged, its palpation is painless. Thermal probe causes acute pain, the pain attack is longlasting. Electroodontodiagnosis is 60 microampere. X-ray picture shows slight widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 25 tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute generalized pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

349. A 23-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing, intensive formation of dental plaque despite thorough dental care. Objectively: gingival papillae are slightly edematic, congestively hyperemic, bleed when touched. Hygiene index according to Fedorov and Volodkina is 3,5. What toothpaste would you recommend this patient as a part of complex therapy?
*a. Salt-containing toothpaste
b. Fluorine-containing toothpaste
c. Toothpaste with antifungal agents
d. Gel toothpaste with microelements
e. Toothpaste containing mineralizing components

350. A pregnant 24-year-old woman complains about emergence of several new carious cavities, falling out of old fillings. Objective examination revealed: index of decayed, missing and filled teeth (DMF) = 16, Feodorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 3,3. Choose the optimal material for carious cavity filling in this case:
a. Silicophosphate cement
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Chemical-cure composite
d. Silver amalgam
e. Light-cure composite

351. A group of specialists conducts an epidemiological survey of certain age groups of population aimed at evaluation of periodontal disease prevalence and treatment needs. These rates are studied by means of the following index:
a. PI (Russel index)
b. PMA (Parma)
c. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion index)
d. PDI (Ramfjord index)
*e. CPITN (WHO index)

352. After the unproblematic extraction of the 37 tooth a 60-year-old patient presents with profuse haemorrhage from the tooth socket. The patient has a 6-year history of essential hypertension. Now his AP is 180/110 mm Hg. What emergency aid should be rendered?
a. Pack of the tooth socket with iodoform tampon
b. Pack of the tooth socket with haemostatic sponge
*c. Injection of hypotensive drugs and tight pack of the tooth socket
d. Suture ligature of the tooth socket
e. Injection of haemostatic drugs

353. A 48-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the region of the 38 tooth. She has been suffering from this for 3 days. Crown of the 28 tooth is completely decayed. What forceps should be applied for extraction of roots of the 28 tooth?
a. S-shaped broad-beak forceps
*b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Straight root forceps
d. S-shaped forceps curved left
e. S-shaped close-beak forceps

354. During military operations the head of the Army Medical Department gave the order to deploy a stomatological aid unit on the territory of the Army Hospital BaseA patient with missile wound of face was admitted to the unit. What kind of aid can be rendered in the stomatological unit?
*a. Specialized (secondary) aid
b. Consultation aid
c. Prosthodontic aid
d. Stomatological aid
e. Qualified aid

355. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinstein’s pivot point
*b. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilow’s pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxman’s pivot point

356. A 68-year-old patient complains about pain in the palate that occurs during wearing a complete removable denture the patient got 3 months ago. Objectively: palatine torus is strongly marked, mucous membrane around it is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
*a. Torus wasn’t isolated
b. Functional impression was taken by means of a rigid individual tray
c. Prosthesis base is made of acrylic plastic
d. It was made anatomic teeth arrangement
e. Previous impression was made in plaster

357. A 27-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the region of her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the patient’s face is slightly asymmetric due to thickening of mandibular body on the right. Adjacent soft tissues are of unchanged colour and normal consistency. Mouth opening is not limited. Mucous membrane of oral cavity presents no changes. In the right lower dentition the 45 tooth is missing. X-ray picture of the right half of the mandible in its lateral view shows an oval well-defined 2x3 cm large radiolucency in the bone tissue. The coronal portion of the retinated horizontally positioned 45 tooth is turned inward the radiolucent area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Follicular cyst of mandible
b. Sarcoma of mandible
c. Osteoclastoma of mandible
d. Odontoma of mandible
e. Adamantinoma of mandible

358. A 52-year-old patient complains about a nonhealing ulcer on his lower lip. The patient is smoker. He hasn’t ever consulted a doctor about it. In the region of red border of the lower lip a roundish ulcer is present. It is up to 2,0 cm in diameter. The ulcer edges are thickened and a little bit raised in form of a whitish swelling. In the left submandibular region palpation revealed enlarged, painless, dense lymph nodes with limited mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Erosive verrucous leukoplakia
*c. Cancer of the lower lip
d. Fibroma of the lower lip
e. Syphilitic ulcer

359. A 25-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the mouth, headache, articular pain, body temperature rise up to 38, 6°C. Red border of lips is covered with haemorrhagic crusts, mucous membrane of the oral cavity has big erosions and ulcers coated with greyish incrustation. Hand skin exhibits erythematous spots 1-1,5 cm in diameter with a vesicle in the middle.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lyell’s syndrome
b. Behcet’s syndrome
*c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Multiform exudative erythema
e. Medicamentous stomatitis

360. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous spasmodic pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute focal pulpitis
*e. Acute purulent pulpitis

361. A 3-month-old child has an inborn tissue defect in the oral cavity. Objectively: the lip is intact, the oral cavity exhibits a cleft defect of soft palate and median part of hard palate. The child was diagnosed with complete schistasis of soft palate and partial schistasis of hard palate. Specify the dispensary group according to
a. Fourth
*b. Kolesov:
c. Second
d. First
e. Third

362. A dentist treats a 22-year-old patient on account of acute deep caries of the 26 tooth. As lining material the dentist chose calcium salicylate cement "Life". What material should be chosen for insulation of the lining?
a. Zinc oxide eugenol cement
*b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Adhesive composite system
d. Insulating varnish
e. Zinc phosphate cement

363. A 62-year-old patient complains of a painless formation on his tongue that appeared several months ago. Objectively: the patient has a lot of carious and completely decayed teeth, lateral surface of tongue exhibits a painless whitish formation 10x5 mm large with irregular surface in form of verrucae. Histological examination revealed thickening of corneal epithelial layer of intermittent keratinization type. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Keratoacanthoma
*b. Verrucous form of leukoplakia
c. Hyperplastic form of candidiasis
d. Verrucous precancer
e. Hyperkeratotic form of lichen ruber planus

364. A 35-year-old man has a medium deep carious cavity in the 37 tooth (Black’s class II). For its filling a dentist chose technique of layer-by-layer restoration. What composite should be coating the floor and walls of the carious cavity in order to form superadaptive initial layer?
a. Microfilled
*b. Flowable
c. Macrofilled
d. Condensable
e. Microhybrid

365. A 9-year-old boy presents with face asymmetry due to the chin deviation to the left. When the third Il’ina- Marcosian diagnostic test is performed face asymmetry disappears. What is the most likely clinical form of this occlusal anomaly?
a. Unilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch
*b. Habitual deviation of mandible
c. Unilateral hypoplasia of mandible
d. Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Bilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch

366. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 12 cm
b. 18 cm
c. 5 cm
d. 7 cm
*e. 9 cm

367. A 40-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about upper jaw teeth mobility that turned up after therapeutic treatment. Objectively: the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless, exhibit II degree mobility, unchanged colour. What prosthetic construction should be applied?
a. Cast bar splint
b. Wire-band splint
c. Crown soldered splint
d. Elastic crown splint
*e. Mamlock splint

368. A 5-year-old child was bitten by a dog 2 days ago. The child is diagnosed with a bite wound of cheek. The parent’s didn’t appear for medical aid in proper time. The wound exhibits pyoinflammatory process. What kind of surgical d-bridement should be performed?
*a. Secondary
b. Initial delayed
c. Surgical procedure is not required
d. Initial late
e. Initial early

369. A 16-year-old teenager complains about halitosis, general weakness, body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C. These symptoms turned up 2 days ago, the boy has a history of recent angina. Objectively: oral cavity hygiene is unsatisfactory, teeth are covered with soft white deposit. Gums are hyperaemic, gingival papillae are covered with greyish coating. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Desquamative gingivitis
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Hypertrohic gingivitis
*e. Ulcero-necrotic gingivitis

370. A patient being at a dentist presented suddenly with tachycardia, sweating, trembling, nausea, hunger. The patient is conscious. He suffers from diabetes mellitus. What aid should be rendered by the dentist?
a. The dentist should make intramuscular injection of adrenaline (0,5-1,0 mg)
b. The dentist should make intravenous injection of corticosteroids
c. The dentist should lay the patient down on a flat surface, lower cephalic pole, open the windows
d. The dentist should give the patient nitroglycerine in form of spray or sublingually
*e. The dentist should break the procedure off and give the patient sugar in any form

371. Tooth replacement with complete removable dentures involves adjustment of occlusal relations by different movements of the lower jaw. Transversal movements of the lower jaw are initiated by the following muscle:
*a. External (lateral) pterygoid muscle
b. Temporal muscle
c. Digastric muscle
d. Mastication muscle
e. Internal (medial) pterygoid muscle

372. A 50-year-old patient complains about pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mouth opening. Dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44. While opening the mouth the lower jaw moves in a zigzag manner towards the affected joint. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Chronic arthritis of TMJ
b. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
c. Habitual TMJ dislocation
d. Sclerosing arthrosis of TMJ
*e. Musculoarticular dysfunction

373. A 35-year-old patient is at a dentist. He is anxious, complains of being afraid of the dentist, is unwilling to let the dentist examine him. Drugs of which group should be given the patient before stomatological manipulations?
a. Analgetics
b. Cardiac glycosides
c. Desensitizing
*d. Sedative
e. Hypotensive

374. A 76-year-old patient has a roundish ulcer in the area of the right nasolabial sulcus. The ulcer has dense, rough floor covered with yellowish-grey crusts, and resembles of a cone. The ulcer edges are dense, crater-like; the ulcer grows both sidewards and deepwards. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Syphilitic ulcer
b. Squamous cell carcinoma of skin
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Actinomycotic ulcer
*e. Basalioma

375. A 40-year-old patient complains about a long-existing fissure in the central part of red border of his lower lip. He has been smoking from the age of 16. Objectively: there is a deep 1,0 cm long fissure along the median line of red border of the lower lip, the fissure edges are bulgingl. Characteristic quality of the fissure is its spontaneous healing, but after epithelization the fissure recurs. The patient was diagnosed with chronic fissure of the lower lip. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Choose the most appropriate treatment method in this situation:
*a. Excision within evidently healthy tissues
b. Diathermo-coagulation
c. Close-focus roentgenotherapy
d. Excision 0,5 cm off the neoplasm limits
e. Cryodestruction

376. It is planned to lance an abscess of hard palate (it is localized close to the 23, 24, 25 teeth) and to extract the causative 24 tooth that had caused abscess development. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Tuberal and palatinal
*b. Infraorbital, palatinal and incisor
c. Tuberal, infraorbital and palatinal
d. Tuberal, infraorbital and incisor
e. Tuberal and incisor

377. A 36-year-old patient consulted a dentist about permanent acute pain in the upper jaw teeth, body temperature rise. The dentist found out that the 26 tooth had been repeatedly treated, the rest of teeth were intact. After roentgenological examination the patient was diagnosed with acute highmoritis. What is the most effective way of treatment?
*a. Extraction of the causative tooth and medicamentous therapy
b. Puncture of the maxillary sinus and medicamentous therapy
c. Medicamentous and physiotherapeutic treatment
d. Medicamentous therapy
e. Caldwell-Luc maxillary sinusotomy

378. A 44-year-old patient complains about the astringent sensation in the upper jaw incisors, which appeared 1,5 years ago. Objectively: the most convex part of the vestibular surfaces of the 12, 11, 21, 22 crowns has roundish defects with smooth, shiny, dense surface, that reach dentine in depth. The depth of defects is gradually decreasing from the centre to the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Wedge-shaped defect
b. Chronic median caries
c. Destructive fluorosis
*d. Enamel erosion
e. Systemic hypoplasia

379. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boy’s mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
c. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
d. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation
e. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation

380. A 32-year-old patient complains about pain and swelling in the region of his mandible and left cheek. He has been suffering from this for 2 days. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 37, 5°C. There is an edema of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes are bilaterally enlarged, painful on palpation. Crown of the 37 tooth is partially decayed, the tooth is immobile, percussion is slightly painful. Mucogingival fold in the region of the 37 tooth is edematic, hyperaemic, flattened, its palpation causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
b. Abscess of alveololingual groove on the left
c. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
d. Chronic productive periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
*e. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth

381. A 12-year-old girl complains about swelling, reddening and itching of lips. She has a history of bronchial asthma. Such condition has been observed in the child for 3 years in winter period. Objectively: red border of lips and adjacent skin exhibit a well-defined erythema and edema, small cracks. There are signs of lip lichenification. There are also marks of scratches on the skin of lips, cheeks and forehead in form of abrasions and crusts. Mucous membrane exhibits no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Microbal cheilitis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis
e. Contact allergic cheilitis

382. Parents of a 5-year-old child noted irregular colour of the child’s back of tongue and consulted a pedodontist about this. Objectively: the oral cavity is sanitized, DF index = 4, dorsal and lateral surfaces of tongue have area of desquamating epithelium bordering upon areas of hypertrophy and increased cornification of filiform papillae. The child has a history of being allergic to some foodstuffs. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Herpetic tongue lesion
b. Acute catarrhal glossitis
c. Tuberculous glossitis
d. Candidous glossitis
*e. Desquamative glossitis

383. A 4-year-old girl was bitten by a dog in her upper lip. Which of the following solutions should be primarily used for the wound d-bridement?
a. 1%solution of hydrogen oxide
b. 0,002% solution of chlorhexidine
*c. 10%solution of laundry soap
d. 1 : 5000 solution of potassium permanganate
e. 3%soda solution

384. A 12-year-old boy complains about permanent intense throbbing toothache that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric because of a collateral edema of soft tissues, submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. The 26 tooth has a deep cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity. Thermal test is positive, probing is painless, percussion causes acute pain, the tooth is mobile. X-ray picture of the 26 tooth shows no changes in the periodontium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

385. A 6-year-old girl was brought to the dentist for completing the treatment of the 75 tooth for chronic granulating periodontitis. The patient has no complaints. Objectively: occlusive dressing on the 75 tooth remains intact, percussion is painless, mucous membrane in the region of the 75 tooth exhibits no pathological changes, is painless on palpation. What material is the most appropriate for the root canal filling in this case?
a. Sealer with gutta-percha point
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Iodoform paste
*d. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
e. Calcium-containing paste

386. A 4-year-old child presents with headache, nausea, pain when swallowing. Body temperature is 39°C. Examination of the oral cavity revealed extremely hyperaemic mucous membrane and tonsils. On the first day of disease the child’s tongue was furred with greyish coating, on the second day the tongue was found to be self-purified. On the third day the tongue was smooth, of crimson colour, with hyperaemic fungiform papillae.What is presumptive diagnosis?
a. Diphtheria
b. Herpangina
c. Varicella
d. Measles
*e. Scarlet fever

387. A 15-year-old child presents with puffiness in the region of the mandible branch; enlarged, dense and painless lymph nodes adhering to the surrounding tissues. X-ray picture of mandible branch shows a well-defined bone resorption area containing small sequestra. After Mantoux test a 12 mm papule was noted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible branch
b. Mandibular actinomycosis
*c. Tuberculosis of mandible branch
d. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Ewing’s sarcoma

388. An 11-year-old child complains about missing crown of the 12 tooth as a result of a trauma. The tooth root is well treated. What prosthetic construction is indicated for elimination of this defect?
a. Bridge-like prosthesis supported by the 13 and 11 teeth
b. Partial removable replacing prosthesis
c. Cantilever prosthesis supported by the 11 tooth
d. Cantilever prosthesis supported by the 13 tooth
*e. Il’ina-Marcosian’s pivot tooth

389. A 34-year-old patient has indication for extraction of the 38 tooth because of chronic fibrous periodontitis. Oral surgeon performed torus anaesthesia. This anaesthesia blocked transmission of pain information from the following nerves:
a. Lingual, buccal, mental
*b. Infraalveolar, lingual, buccal
c. Infraalveolar, buccal
d. Lingual, buccal
e. Infraalveolar, lingual

390. A patient got a trauma that resulted in limited mouth opening, nasal haemorrhage, numbness of inferior eyelid as well as skin in the infraorbital area. Objectively: there is face deformation caused by depression of soft tissues in the malar region on the left; there is also a step-off deformity in the median part of the infraorbital rim and in the region of zygomatico-alveolar crest. What method of examination will be the most effective for the diagnostics?
*a. X-ray study of facial skull in the axial projection
b. X-ray study of facial skull in the lateral projection
c. Orthopantomogram
d. X-ray study of facial skull and paranasal sinuses
e. X-ray study of facial skull in the frontal projection

391. A 22-year-old patient is afraid of pain from conduction anaesthesiaA dentist decided that this anaesthesia should be preceded by applicational anaesthesia of mucous membrane on the spot of injection. What drug should be used for this purpose?
a. 5% oxacillin ointment
b. 1%synthomycin ointment
*c. 5% lidocaine ointment
d. 3% sinaflan ointment
e. 3% doxycyclin ointment

392. A 12-year-old girl complains about intense pain in the region of the 46 tooth socket that was extracted 3 days ago. The pain is irradiating along the branches of trigeminus. Objectively: lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation, tissues around the tooth socket are edematic and hyperaemic. The socket walls are covered with grey-and-green deposition with putrid smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ostitis
b. Pericoronaritis
*c. Alveolitis
d. Periostitis
e. Osteomyelitis

393. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about intense lancinating paroxysmal pain accompanied by a sensation of current passage in the region of her upper lip on the right. Pain attacks occur spontaneously and last 3- 5 minutes. The patient usually has 2-3 attacks a day. The patient is unable to establish the cause of this disease. Examination of her oral cavity revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
b. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
*c. Peripheral neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
d. Central neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
e. Right-sided upper jaw pulpitis

394. A 23-year-old patient was delivered to a traumatology centre with a dirty cut wound of her right footA doctor performed initial surgical dbridement and made an injection of antitetanus serum. Some time later the patient’s condition got abruptly worse: she developed extreme weakness, dizziness, palpitation. Objectively: the skin is pale, the patient has cold sweat, frequent pulse 2009 28 of poor volume at a rate of 100 bpm, AP is 90/40 mm Hg. What is the cause of such aggravation?
a. Haemorrhagic shock
b. Infectious-toxic shock
c. Drug disease (seroreaction)
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Pain shock

395. A man was found in a street in unconscious state and delivered to the sanitary inspection room. At small intervals the man presents with recurrent attacks of tonic and clonic convulsions of the upper and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, his pupils are mydriatic, don’t react to light. The tongue has teeth indentations. Involuntary urination was noted. Examination revealed no symptoms of focal cerebral lesion. AP is 140/90 mm Hg. The patients head can be freely brought to the chest. Specify the most probable pathology:
a. Tetanus
b. Acute meningoencephalitis
c. Parenchymatous hemorrhage
d. Cerebral infraction
*e. Epilepsy, status epilepticus

396. A patient was found unconscious in her flat heated with firewood. The stove pipe damper was closed, it smelt of smoke in the room. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, her skin and mucous membranes are of cherry red colour. Pupils exhibit no reaction to light, corneal and tendinous reflexes are absent, muscle tone is decreased. Ps is 96 bpm, of poor volume. Heart sounds are muffled, there are solitary extrasystoles, AP is 90/60 mm Hg. In the lower lungs solitary small bubbling rales are present, respiratory rate is 28/min.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute intoxication with carbon oxide
b. Acute intoxication with sulfur dioxide gas
c. Acute benzol intoxication
d. Acute methane intoxication
e. Acute chlorine intoxication

397. During transportation of a 60-year old patient an emergency doctor noted aggravation of his general condition, pulselessness, mydriatic pupils, absence of respiratory movements. It will take 5 minutes to get to the admission ward. What actions should the doctor take in the first place?
a. Deliver the patient to the hospital as soon as possible
b. Facilitate oxygen inhalation
c. Make an intravenous injection of polyglucinum
*d. Start cardiopulmonary resuscitation
e. Make an intracardiac injection of adrenaline

398. An 18-year-old woman has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 5 years. She receives 36 units of insulin per day. During pneumonia her condition got abruptly worse: the patient presented with increased thirst, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and sleepiness. In the evening the patient refused to eat and didn’t get her regular insulin dose; in the morning she lost consciousness. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, the skin is dry, turgor is decreased. The tongue is also dry. Respiration is deep and noisy, there is sharp smell of acetone from the mouth. Body temperature is 36, 6°C, Ps is 100 bpm, small; AP is 90/50 mm Hg. Urine exhibits extremely positive reaction to acetone. Blood glucose is 33 millimole/l. What is your diagnosis?
a. Hyperosmolar coma
b. Hepatic coma
c. Cerebral coma
*d. Ketoacidotic coma
e. Lactacidemic coma

399. A 28-year-old man attended a glasshouse in a botanic garden. After he had smelt at an orchid he turned pale and lost consciousness. Objectively: heart rate is 115/min, arterial pressure is 50/0 mm Hg. What drug should be injected to the patient in the first place?
*a. Prednisolone
b. Strophanthine
c. Dimedrol
d. Mesaton
e. Cordiamin

400. A68-year-old patient has been taking diclofenac because of pain in the knee joints for about a year. In the evening after substantial meal the patient presented with liquid black stool, drastic weakness, single vomiting after which the patient lost consciousness. Emergency team delivered him to the hospital. Objectively: the patient is conscious, with slightly deferred reaction, pale. Heart rate is 20 breaths/min, Ps is 102 bpm, AP is 110/70 mm Hg. Abdomen is soft, painful in the epigastrium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of mesenterial arteries
*b. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
c. Myocardium infarction
d. Food poisoning
e. Apoplectic attack

401. A 42-year-old patient complains about general weakness. Body temperature is 41°C, he presents with sickness, emesis, dyspnea. There is evident well-defined skin redness in form of flame tips on her face. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus
b. Anthrax
c. Streptococcal impetigo
d. Phlebitis of facial vein
*e. Erysipelas

402. A victim got a perforating wound of the left cheek contaminated with radioactive materials on the battlefield. The wound was dressed with aseptic bandage from the individual first-aid pack and processed with anaesthetic and antibacterial medicaments. The dressing should be changed at the following station of medical evacuation:
a. At the regimental aid station
b. At the battalion aid station
*c. At each station of evacuation
d. At the station of the separate medical battalion
e. Only when the dressing is unsatisfactory

403. Mother of a 6,5-year-old child consulted a dentist about checking fissure hermetizatioon of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth. They were treated six month ago. Sealant in the 36, 46 teeth is preserved, but sealant in the 16 and 26 teeth is absent. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Coating the teeth with fluorine lacquer Ftorlak
b. Electrophoresis with 1% sodium fluoride solution
c. Preventive filling
d. Applications with remodentum solution
*e. To repeat fissure hermetization

404. A 12-year-old boy complains about short-term pain in a lower jaw tooth on the right caused by cold stimuli. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within the circumpulpar dentine which has no intercommunication with the dental cavity. The cavity floor and walls are coated with light softened dentine. Cold test causes short-standing pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute localized pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

405. A 12-year-old child complains about sore throat, headache, body temperature rise up to 38, 5°C, rhinitis, cough in summer period. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is hyperemic, edematic. There are 10-15 erosions up to 0,5 mm large on the palate and palatine arches, that aren’t covered with deposit and have red floor. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*c. Herpetic angina
d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

406. .A43-year-old man complains about painful swallowing, limited mouth opening. Destroyed 37 tooth caused pain 3 days ago. Painful swallowing appeared the next day. Limited mouth opening was present a day later. Objectively: there is a small soft swelling in the left submaxillary area. An enlarged lymph node is palpated. The mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm. Edema of left palatine arch and pharynx lateral wall is present. The 37 tooth is destroyed. Mucous membrane around the tooth is edematic. Percussion is slightly painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Peritonsillar abscess
b. Acute submaxillary lymphadenitis
c. Odontogenic pterygomandibular phlegmon
d. Odontogenic submaxillary phlegmon
*e. Odontogenic peripharyngeal phlegmon

407. A 34-year-old male patient consults a dentist about an ulcer on the hard palate. It appeared about a month ago. He has treated it by rinsing with herbal water, but the ulcer is gradually "creeping". Objectively: there is a shallow erethistic ulcer with uneven and undermined edges of soft consistency within the mucous membrane of hard palate. Granulations of the ulcer floor are also present. Yellowish granules are visible on the ulcer periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis? 2010 2
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Syphilitic ulcer
c. Actinomycosis
*d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Cancerous ulcer

408. A 27-year-old male patient underwent extraction of the medial root of the 36 tooth, but the distal tooth root was broken in its middle third. What tools should be applied for root extraction?
a. Broad-beaked forceps
b. Close-beaked forceps
c. Right angled elevator
d. Straight elevator
*e. Left angled elevator

409. A 55-year-old woman complains about liquid pouring through her nose during eating of fluid food. Objectively: there is a perforating defect of alveolar process 3x2,8 cm deep in the lateral part of the upper jaw at level with the extracted 16 tooth. The patient refused operative intervention. What construction should be offered?
*a. Minor saddle prosthesis with clasp fixation
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
c. Celluloid mouth protector
d. Fixed dental bridge
e. Clasp dental prosthesis with obturating element made of elastic plastic

410. A 53-year-old patient was diagnosed with leucoplakia nicotinica Tappeiner. What pathohistological process predominates in histologic pattern of this disease?
a. Acanthosis
b. Parakeratosis
c. Papillomatosis
*d. Hyperkeratosis
e. Dyskeratosis

411. A 24-year-old female patient complains about hard tissues defect of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/3 along the cutting edge, it is changed in color. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled to the top. It was decided to fabricate a plastic crown. Where should the crown edge be situated against the marginal gingiva?
*a. At a level with gingiva
b. 1,0 mm away of gingiva
c. 1,0 mm below the gingiva
d. 0,5 mm below the gingiva
e. 0,5 mm away of gingiva

412. A 70-year-old male patient ordered complete removable dentures for both jaws. In the clinical stage he came for "identification of central relationship". For verification of interalveolar height the patient underwent speaking test. The patient was asked to pronounce the sounds "O", "E", "M". What distance should be between the occlusal rims for correct identification of interalveolar height?
a. 7-8 mm
*b. 5-6 mm
c. 3-4 mm
d. 9-10 mm
e. 1-2 mm

413. A 16-year-old male patient complains about pain in the oral cavity, ulceration, body temperatureup to 38°C, headache. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is hyperemic and edematic. There are a lot of confluent erosions of polycyclic shape, covered with grey and white deposit, located on hard palate, gums, lips. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Allergic stomatitis
*b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Pemphigus vulgaris
d. Erythema multiforme
e. Aphthous fever

414. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with granulating periodontitis of the 55 tooth. The crown is completely destroyed. X-ray picture shows separated tooth roots. Choose an optimal tool for operative intervention:
*a. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
b. Root beak-shaped forceps
c. Crown S-shaped forceps
d. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
e. Root straight forceps

415. An 8-year-old boy was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 21 tooth. It was treated by extirpation method. Choose the material for root filling:
*a. Calcium-containing material
b. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
c. Phosphate cement
d. Resorcin-formalin paste
e. Glass-ionomer cement

416. A 12-year-old female patient was diagnosed with open bite and dentoalveolar elongation of lateral part of mandible. What construction of apparatus is required?
a. Angle’s sliding face bow
b. Extraoral face bow
*c. Upper jaw appliance with occlusal rest seats
d. Herbst appliance
e. Upper jaw appliance with a face bow

417. An 18-year-old patient complains about an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the lower teeth are set forward and overlap the upper antagonists. This symptom is typical for the following bite abnormality:
a. Distal bite
b. Open bite
c. Cross bite
*d. Mesial bite
e. Deep bite

418. A 70-year-old male patient complains about total teeth missing on both jaws. It is planned to fabricate a complete removable lower jaw prosthesis. Objectively: alveolar process of the lower jaw is atrophied only in the frontal aspect. Identify the type of lower jaw atrophy according to Keller’s classification:
a. II
b. III
c. -
*d. IV
e. I

419. A18-year-old female patient ordered a metal-ceramic crown for the 24 tooth. It is necessary to choose an optimal impression material for combined impression of the upper jaw. What material should be used for a preliminary impression?
a. Dentafol
b. Wax
c. Protacryl
*d. Stens
e. Orthocar

420. A patient consulted a dentist about constant dull pain in the 38 tooth. Mouth opening is limited down to 1 cm. It is necessary to extract the 38 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for operation?
a. Torus
b. Mandibular
*c. Bercher-Dubov
d. Extraoral mandibular technique
e. Tuberal

421. One minute after perfoming torus anaesthesia with 2% novocaine solution (4ml) during extraction of the 17 tooth the patient complained about respiration obstruction. Objectively: upper and lower lips are edematic, mucous membrane of larynx and oral cavity is edematic and extremely hyperemic. What complication turned up in this patient?
a. Anesthetic intoxication
b. Collapse
c. Acute pulmonary insufficiency
*d. Quincke’s edema
e. Anaphylactic shock

422. A 37-year-old male patient complains about pain of the 46 tooth during food intake, especially hot food, offensive breath when he sucks his tooth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, masticatory surface of the 48 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 46 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

423. A17-year-old girl complains about painfulness and gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing and food intake. She has been suffering from it for 1,5 year. She consulted a dentist. There was no considerable effect from treatment. Objectively: gingival papillae are flabby and cyanotic in the region of frontal teeth on both jaws, they overlay teeth crowns by 1/3-1/2 of their height, they bleed on touch. Therapeutic effect can be achieved by means of electrophoresis with:
a. Aloe
b. Tripsin
c. Sodium fluoride
*d. Heparin
e. Vitamin B1

424. A 38-year-old female patient complains about pain in projection of the external acoustic meatus, clicking during mouth opening, ear stuffiness. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth is opened in staright path. There is Kennedy I type dentition defect, the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. What anatomical formation carries the maximum load?
a. Glenoid fossa floor of temporal bone
b. Joint capsule
c. Articular head
d. Distal clivus of medial articular tubercle
*e. Articular disk (meniscus)

425. Physical examination of a patient revealed a hard tissues defect of the 24 tooth. Index of occlusal surface destruction was 0,8. The defect was restored by filling that doesn’t meet the requirements. The tooth is of rose colouring. X-ray picture shows no patological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
a. Equator crown
*b. Pivot crown
c. Inlay
d. Artificial crown
e. Portion crown

426. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a dental surgeon about an enlarging "mother’s mark", itch and desquamation. According to patient, changed in color and size skin area appeared a year ago after a shaving trauma. Objectively: there is an intensely pigmented brown spot up to 2 cm large with small oval protruding nodules on its surface in the infraorbital region on the left. Desquamation factors are present. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are matted together with skin and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Melanoma
b. Verrucous nevus
c. Papillomatosis
d. Epidermoid cancer
e. Pigmented nevus

427. Asoldier was delivered to the regiment medical station with dislocation asphyxia caused by a gunshot wound. What actions should be taken for asphyxia suppression?
a. Intubation of trachea
b. Artificial airway
c. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
*d. Pul the tongue forwards and sew it through
e. Tracheostoma establishment

428. A 58-year-old male patient has considerable microstomia as a result of a face trauma and burn. The patient has indication for fabrication of a partial removable prosthesis. What construction of prosthesis should be used in this case?
a. Pivot-point removable prosthesis
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
c. Clasp dental prosthesis
d. Clasp dental prosthesis with attachments
*e. Collapsible prosthesis

429. X-ray picture depicts a circular welldefined area of bone tissue destruction 0,7х0,7 cm large in the projection of root apex.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Granuloma
b. Cyst
*c. Cystogranuloma
d. Odontoma
e. Osteoma

430. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect caused by partial teeth missing. Objectively: the 15, 14, 24, 25 teeth are missing, the central group of upper jaw teeth is in protrusion and presents with diasthemas. What orthodontic appliance should be used to prepare the oral cavity for prosthetics?
a. Schwarz’ guard
b. Brueckl’s appliance
c. Expansion plate for the upper jaw with orthodontic lock
*d. Palatine plate with vestibular bow
e. Palatine plate with oblique plane and vestibular bow

431. A 35-year-old patient has teeth mobility of I degree, the teeth have apparent dental cusps. The dentist recommends to do occlusive teeth grinding. What method is the most objective for determining the grinding topography?
a. Roentgenography
b. Masticatiography
*c. Occlusiography
d. Gnathodynamometry
e. Rubinov’s masticatory test

432. A 3-year-old girl complains about pain and tumescence in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37, 5 ? 37, 9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a tumescence in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II degree of the 51, 52 teeth is also present.What is themost likely diagnosis?
a. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
c. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
d. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis

433. A 6-year-old boy hit his forehead one day agoA few hours later a swelling appeared in the right superciliary region. Objectively: there is a considerable edema of forehead tissues spreading to eyelids of the right eye, the skin over the swelling is cyanotic, the swelling is of soft consistency. Fluctuation is also present. General condition of the boy is normal. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Postraumatic edema of tissues of the right superciliary region
b. Hematic abscess of the right superciliary region
c. Inflammatory infiltration of tissues of the right superciliary region
*d. Hematoma of the right superciliary region
e. Fracture of frontal bone

434. A 70-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the central upper jaw incisors with III degree mobility. What tools should be applied?
a. Bayonet-shaped forceps
b. S-shaped forceps
c. Straight elevator
d. Beak-shaped forceps
*e. Straight forceps

435. Apatient complains of pain and swelling in the right submandibular area. She has been treating the 45 tooth for a week. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. There is a painful tense infiltration in the right submandibular region. The skin doesn’t make a fold, its hyperemic and glossy. The mouth can be opened by 3 cm. Deglutition is painless. These clinical findings correspond with the following disease:
*a. Odontogenous phlegmon of the right submandibular region
b. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular region
c. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
d. Acute odontogenous sialoadenitis
e. Abscess of the right alveololingual groove

436. Preventive examination of tongue back of a 6-year-old child revealed areas of epithelium desquamation in form of red oval spots located close to the zones of hyperkeratinization of filiform papillae. Clavate papillae are hypertrophic. There are no complaints. The child has a history of intestinal dysbacteriosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetic affection of tongue
*b. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
c. Acute catarrhal glossitis
d. Candidal glossitis
e. Rhomboid glossitis

437. During endodontic treatment of periodontitis a tool was broken in the middle third of the medial root. Choose the treatment method:
*a. Medial root hemisection
b. Crown radicular separation
c. Tooth extraction
d. Resection of medial root apex
e. Medial root amputation

438. A 14-year-old child complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal teeth region. Objectively: enamel of the 11, 12, 21, 22, 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth is thin in the region of cutting edge, there is a sulcate enamel pit 1,5 mm wide which encircles the tooth and is parallel to the cutting edge. The cusps of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth are underdeveloped and have conical form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Stainton-Capdepont dysplasia
c. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
d. Enamel dysplasia
*e. Systemic hypoplasia

439. Examination of a 9-year-old child revealed protrudent chin, the lower lip overlapping the upper lip. There are diastemas and tremas beetwen the lower incisors, the lower incisors overlap the upper ones by 2/3 of crown height. Sagittal fissure is 3 mm. Specify the treatment tactics:
a. Schwartz’ quard
b. Bynin’s guard
*c. Brueckl’s appliance
d. Angle’s sliding appliance
e. Myogymnastics complex

440. It is planned to organize a dental room with three universal dental sets. The total area of the room must be:
a. No less than 42 square metres
b. No less than 18 square metres
c. No less than 21 square metres
d. No less than 30 square metres
*e. No less than 28 square metres

441. During pulpitis treatment of the 25 tooth a 30-year-old patient received an injection of 2% lidocaine as anaestheticA few minutes after the injection th patient presented with numb tongue, asphyxia, dry cough, cyanosis, anxiety, convulsions. Arterial pressure fell down to 90/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Syncope
c. Epilepsy
d. Quincke’s edema
e. Acute heart failure

442. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect 1 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Oxman’s bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilow’s pivot point
c. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxman’s pivot point
e. Clasp denture

443. A 60-year-old male patient has an extensive defect of nose caused by an injury. The patient temporarily refused operative intervention, it was suggested to fabricate an external nasal prosthesis fixed by eyeglass frame. What impression material should be used?
a. Gypseous impression
*b. Gypseous impression of the whole face
c. Impression of the defect with elastic material
d. Impression of the whole face with thermoplastic material
e. Impression of the defect with thermoplastic mass

444. A 35-year-old woman was admitetd to the oral surgery department two hours after a road accident. Objectively: cutaneous integuments are pale, there are beads of sweat on her face. Respiration is heavy and obstructed. Pulse rate is 120 bmp, AP is 70/60 mm Hg. There is wound penetrating to the oral cavity on the left cheek. During transportation the woman was in supine position with her head thrown backwards.What kind of asphyxia is likely to develop in this patient?
a. Dislocational
*b. Aspirating
c. Stenotic
d. Valvular
e. Obturative

445. Parents of a 4-year-old child complain about speech defect, namely lallation. Examination shows limited tongue movements, when the tongue is moved forward it turns down, the lower edge of tongue frenulum is positioned in front of the submandibular salivary ducts. The frenulum is thin and transparent. Specify the terms of operative intervention:
a. After formation of permanent occlusion
b. After eruption of permanent molars
c. After complete development of maxillofacial bones
d. After eruption of permanent incisors
*e. After making the diagnosis

446. A 43-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, as well as significant cervixes exposure. Objectively: gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale with cyanotic tint. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth present with I-II degree mobility. The 42, 41, 31, 31 teeth are overcrowded. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have cervix exposure by 1/2 and the 43, 33 teeth have cervix exposure by 1/4. What orthopaedic construction should be used in this situation?
a. Cast bar Kurliandsky splint
b. Portion crown splint
c. -
*d. One-piece guard
e. Cap splint

447. Preventive examination of an 8-yearold boy revealed some lusterless chalklike spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth, which are localised in the precervical region. Subjective complaints are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. White-spotted fluorosis
b. Acute superficial caries
c. Chronic initial caries
*d. Acute initial caries
e. Local enamel hypoplasia

448. A 66-year-old male patient suffers from coronary heart disease (CHD) and atherosclerosis. During stomatological treatment the patient complained about acute retrosternal pain with irradiation to the left scapula, that was accompanied by stupor of the left hand. Objectively: the skin was pale, the sweat stood out on his forehead. The arterial pressure was 140/90 mm Hg, pulse was rhythmic 75 bpm. The pain wasn’t relieved by Validol but it started to abate after nitroglycerin intake. What disease provoked the attack in this patient?
*a. Stenocardia
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Paroxysmal tachycardia
d. Tachycardia
e. Myocardial infarction

449. A patient complains about intensive throbbing toothache in his lower jaw on the left. He can’t show the aching tooth. It hurts all the time, the pain goes down sometimes, but it becomes stronger as affected by stimuli. Within the last hours the pain provoked by cold stimuli has somewhat reduced. Objectively: the 17 tooth has a carious cavity, probing causes no pain, the pulp chamber is closed. What method of treatment is indicated?
a. Devital amputation
b. Devital extirpation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Biological method
e. Vital amputation

450. months after the immediate prosthetics a patient complained about the prosthesis balancing. Objectively: there is a gap between the prosthesis edge and vestibular surface of alveolar process. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Correction of prosthesis edges
b. Dentition buildup with quick-setting plastic
c. Correction of dentitions
*d. Fabrication of a new prosthesis
e. Prosthesis relocation with quick-setting plastic

451. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed fullcast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
b. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
c. Visually by means of models in the articulator
d. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper
*e. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials

452. A 19-year-old girl complains about having crusts, lip tenderness, especially at lip joining. Objectively: there are yellow-brown crusts on the lip red border from Klein zone to it’s middle, after their removal bright red smooth surface without erosions appears. Mucous membrane in Klein zone is slightly hyperemic and edematic.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exudative form of cheilitis exfoliativa
b. Epidermolysis bullosa
c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Exudative form of cheilitis actinica

453. A 43-year-old patient complains about constant pain in the upper jaw region on the right, that irradiate to the temple. The pain was noted one month ago. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of the swollen right cheek. Mucous membrane has no changes. The breathing through the right nasal meatus is obstructed, there are foul-smelling saniopurulent discharges. Plan X-ray film of facial skeleton in the semi-axial projection shows intensive opacity of the right maxillary sinus and violated intactness of its interior and superior walls. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Upper jaw osteoma
*b. Upper jaw cancer
c. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
e. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus

454. A 44-year-old patient consulted a surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain was noted 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unlimited. The crown fof the 26 tooth is half-destroyed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperemic on the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth was treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
c. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
d. Acute purulent periostitis of upper jaw of the 26 tooth on the left
e. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth

455. Parents of a 6-year-old child consulted a dentist about oral cavity sanitation. Objectively: the 85 tooth has a carious cavity on the distal surface within the mantle dentine. Floor and walls are dense and pigmented. Probing is painless. Cold stimuli and percussion cause no pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic periodontitis
e. Acute median caries

456. A patient complains about acute constant pain that is getting worse when biting down on food, sensation of a recently erupted tooth on the right upper jaw. Examination of the 15 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Tooth percussion causes acute pain. Probing is painless. Mucous membrane in projection of the root apex is hyperemic, painful on palpation. X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute albuminous periostitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

457. A 48-year-old male patient has been wearing partial removable dentures for 3 months. According to the patient, results of physical examination and additional methods of testing, the patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis provoked by dyes of the acrylic resin of his prosthesis. Allergic effects of dyes can be eliminated in the following way:
a. Fabrication of cast metal prosthetic bases
b. Fabrication of swaged metal bases
c. Fabrication of bilayer bases
d. Moulding of plastic by method of casting
*e. Fabrication of a denture out of colorless plastic

458. A 43-year-old patient complains about a neoplasm in the right submandibular region that appeared a month ago after angina. The patient underwent antiinflammatory therapy but it led to no reduction of the neoplasm. Objectively: body temperature is up to 37, 2°C. Palpation reveals a slightly painful, spherical, freely movable, well-defined neoplasm of dense and elastic consistency in the right submandibular region. The duct of submandibular salivary gland discharges transparent saliva. The sublingual plica is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenoma of salivary gland
b. Atheroma
c. Chronic sialoadenitis
d. Sialolithiasis
*e. Chronic lymphadenitis

459. A patient ordered soldered stainlesssteel bridge prostheses. Their fabrication involves calibration of crown sleeves. Which device is used for this purpose?
a. Cope’s
b. Bromshtrom
c. Parker’s
d. Larin’s
*e. Samson

460. A 20-year-old patient complains about unaesthetic look of the 24 tooth from the moment of its eruption. Objectively: enamel of the 24 tooth is partly absent, the dentine is yellow. The 64 tooth was treated more than once when she was a child, but because of frequent exacerbations, edemas and gingival fistula the 64 tooth was extracted when she was 9 years old. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Initial caries
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Enamel aplasia
*d. Localised hypoplasia
e. Fluorosis

461. A 50-year-old female patient complains about sensation of tightness of buccal mucosa and roughness of the lateral surface of tongue. The patient undergoes regular check-up at a dispensary department for compensated form of diabetes mellitus. Objectively: there are white and grey areas in form of lacy pattern on the buccal mucosa on the right and on the lateral surface of tongue. The surface of affected region cannot be scraped off. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Leukoplakia
*b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Pseudomembranous candidiasis

462. A 45-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 13 tooth. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. Straight elevator
b. S-shaped forceps
c. S-shaped forceps curved right
d. Bayonet-shaped forceps
*e. Straight forceps

463. According to the mother, a 5-yearold child complains about pain during swallowing, weakness, body temperature rise upt to 39, 5°C, swelling of submental lymph nodes. Objectively: the child’s condition is grave, body temperature is 38, 8°C. Mucous membrane of oral cavity is brightly hyperemic and edematic with haemorrhages and ulcerations. Pharynx is brightly hyperemic, lacunae are enlarged and have necrosis areas. Regional, cervical, occipital lymph nodes are painful, enlarged and dense. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetic angina
b. Lacunar tonsillitis
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivostomatitis
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

464. A 28-year-old patient suffers from a disease without prodromal manifestations that declares itself through oral mucosa lesion consisting of 1-2 roundish elements 5-8 mm large which are circumscribed by a hyperemic rim and covered with yellowgrey coating. The disaese recurrence is observed quite regularly 3-4 times a year. These presentations are typical for the following disease:
a. Erythema multiforme
b. Papular syphilis
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Chronic herpes recidivicus
*e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

465. A 48-year-old female patient complains about some discomfort induced by wearing an upper jaw clasp denture with elastic attachments. The patient notes the denture mobility during mastication and articulation. The patient asks to fabricate a new denture with consideration of the indicated defects. Clinical crowns of abutment teeth are low. What fixation should be the most efficient in this case?
*a. Telescopic
b. Locking
c. Clasp
d. Saddle-type
e. Arch-bar

466. A 75-year-old patient ordered a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. While adjusting the individual tray by Herbst’s method the orthodontist revealed that the tray could be thrown off when the patient rounded his lips. What part of the tray requires correction?
a. Behind the maxillary tuber
*b. Vestibular part between the canines
c. In the region of buccal cords
d. Distal part along the A line
e. Along the whole vestibular edge

467. A 36-year-old woman complains about experiencing lip dryness and desquamation for a month. Application of indifferent ointments is ineffective. Objectively: red border of lower lip is of rich red color, it is moderately infiltrated, covered with closely adhering greyish scales, it bleeds and hurts in the attempt to remove them. Opacification of epithelium in form of white stripes is present in the nidus periphery, there is also an area of depression in the centre. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Cheilitis exfoliativa
d. Leukoplakia
e. Commissural cheilitis

468. A 30-year-old patient complains about pain in the upper jaw tooth caused by sweet and cold food, that was first registered one month ago. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity within mantle dentine. Dentine of its walls is softened. Probing along the enamel-dentine junction is painful. Percussion is painless. Thermodiagnosis causes pain, that quickly abtes after elimination of stimulus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulp hyperaemia
b. Acute initial caries
*c. Acute median caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

469. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaws. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic.What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
b. Fabricate occlusal rims
c. Locate and fix central occlusion
d. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity
*e. Adjust individual trays

470. A 47-year-old patient complains about a sensation of foreign body on his tongue, discomfort during talking, oral cavity dryness. Objectively: there are dark filiform papillae up to 5 mm long on the back of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Median rhomboid glossitis
b. Fissured tongue
c. Acute glossitis
*d. Glossophytia
e. Benign migratory glossitis

471. A patient complains about destroyed crown of the 27 tooth. The patient was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the indicated tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 27 tooth is destroyed completely. It is necessary to extract this tooth. What field block anesthesia should be applied for operation?
a. Tuberal and incisor
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Tuberal
d. Infraorbital
e. Infraorbital and tuberal

472. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Objectively: the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are destroyed by caries by 2/3 of their height. The occlusion is orthognathic. X-ray picture shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no patological changes in periapical tissues. What construction should be the most efficient in this situation?
a. Artificial metal swaged crowns
b. Fabrication of plastic inlays
c. Richmond’s pivot crowns
*d. Stump inlays and metal-ceramic crowns
e. Restoration of tooth crowns with composite materials

473. A25-year-old male patient came to the traumatology. He complains about pain in the right half of his face, limited mouth opening. Objectively: there is a moderate edema and haematoma in the region of the right malar arch. Palpation shows a slightly painful impaction of bone tissue in the region of the right malar arch. The bite isn’t disturbed. Amplitude of mouth opening is 1,5 cm. At making an attempt to open the mouth wider the patient feels a mechanical obstacle and pain intensification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
b. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
*d. Fracture of the right malar arch
e. Traumatic arthritis of TMJ

474. The patient is 75 years old. The inspection of construction of complete removable dentures revealed that only lateral artificial teeth were in contact, there was a gap between frontal teeth. In the lateral part on one side cusp-to -cusp contact was present, on the other side there was a horizontal gap; the central line was deviated.What mistake was made?
*a. The patient was thought to have lateral occlusion
b. The patient was thought to have anterior occlusion
c. Wax moulds were deformed while determining central occlusion
d. Interalveolar height was increased
e. Occlusal rims were irregularly softened

475. A 5-year-old child sustained a dental injury. Objectively: the crowns of the 51, 61 teeth are shorter than neighbouring teeth by 1/2. Mucous membrane is edematic and hyperemic in theregion of the 51, 61 teeth. X-ray picture shows that there is no periodontal fissure in the apical parts of roots of the 51, 61 teeth, apexes of the 51, 61 teeth are imbedded into the spongy substance of body of maxilla. What treatment tactics would be the most efficient?
a. Ligature splinting of the 51, 61 teeth
b. Reimplantation
c. Regular medical check-up
d. Reposition of the 51, 61 teeth
*e. Extraction of the 51, 61 teeth

476. A 5-year-old child had to undergo an operated for ankyloglossya. There were no external symptoms of preoperative anxiety. Aafter injection of 1,5 ml of 0,5% novocaine solution the child presented with motor anxiety, vomiturition, stomachache. Objectively: the child is conscious, face and neck skin is hyperemic, tachypnoe is present, pulse is rapid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pain shock
b. Giddiness
c. Overdosage of anesthetics
*d. Allergic reaction to novocaine
e. Cardiovascular collapse

477. A 19-year-old patient complains about pain in the submental part of mandible. The day before he got a trauma. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of tissues in the mental area. The mouth can be opened widely enough. All the teeth are intact. Mucous membrane is edematic in the region of central incisors, it bleeds slightly. In this region mobility of mandible fragments is present. Occlusion is undisturbed. What splint should be chosen by the dentist?
a. Ivy loops for 31, 32, 42, 41
*b. Smooth brace
c. Splint with guide plane
d. Splint with spacer bar
e. Anchor splint with intermandibular fixation

478. A 27-year-old woman has been treated for pulpitis by method of devital extirpation. Arsenic paste was left in the 15 tooth. The patient came to see a dentist for the second time only on the fourth day after her previous visit. She was diagnosed with toxic periodontitis. What is the most optimal agent for treatment of root canal in this case?
a. Cresophene
b. Eugenol
c. Hydrocortisone emulsion
*d. Unithiol
e. Tripsin

479. A 37-year-old female patient complains about pain, gingival haemorrhage, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37, 2°C. Objectively: gums are apparently hyperaemic, edematic, bleed easily, parodontal pouches are 3- 4 mm deep and contain purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar process, resorption of interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Exerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

480. A 24-year-old woman complains about severe pain in the mouth, body temperature up to 38°C, indisposition. The same condition occurs periodically for several years after catching a cold. Objectively: the lips are covered with bloody crusts, there are opened bladders and erosions, covered with fibrinogenous deposit on mucous membrane of lips and cheeks that is apparently hyperemic and edematic. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic herpes recidivicus
*b. Erythema multiforme
c. Dermatitits multiformis, Duhring’s disease
d. Pemphigus vulgaris
e. Nonacantholytic pemphigus

481. A 30-year-old patient complains	about a carious cavity. Objectively: the 16 tooth is discoloured and has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 100 microampere. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

482. A 65-year-old patient complains about unsatisfactory fixation of complete removable lamellar denture of his upper jaw. The denture was fabricated 6 years ago. Objectively: balancing and poor fixation of complete removable denture is present. What is the reason of such condition?
a. Bad hygiene of removable denture
b. Wear of artificial teeth
*c. Atrophy of osseous base of the prosthetic bed tissues
d. Discoloration of basic plastic
e. Loss of certain antagonists

483. A 10-year-old boy complains about missing teeth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, disproportional because of shortening of the lower third. In the oral cavity: the 12, 14, 15, 17, 22, 24, 25, 27, 34, 35, 37, 44, 45, 47 teeth are missing. X-ray picture shows partial adentia and absence of some tooth germs. Choose the most efficient prosthetic device:
a. Bridge prostheses
b. Cantilever dental bridges
c. The defect should be restored by implants
*d. Partial removable lamelalr prosthesis for both jaws
e. Clasp dental prostheses

484. A child was born with body weight at a rate of 3200 g and body length at a rate of 53 cm, 9 points on Apgar score. It was the first physiological delivery. What position of child’s mandible is usually observed after birth?
a. Posterior occlusion
*b. Physiological retrogenia
c. Central occlusion
d. Physiological progenia
e. Direct relation

485. A 3-month-old child has been in disease state for two days. The child is anxious, refuses food, has normal body temperature. Objectively: mucous membrane of oral cavity is edematic and hyperemic. There is white caseous coating on the back of tongue and buccal mucosa. After the coating removal one can see extremely hyperemic surface with petechial haemorrhages.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Mild leukoplakia
*c. Acute candidal stomatitis
d. Herpetic angina
e. Lichen ruber planus

486. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 14 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis following ineffective therapeutic treatment. What tools should be applied for extraction?
*a. S-shaped forceps
b. S-shaped forceps curved right
c. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
d. Straight forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

487. The 12, 22 teeth of an 8-year-old child are missing. There is not enough space in dentition for them. X-ray picture shows no tooth germs. The 12 tooth of the child’s father is missing and the 22 tooth is conoid. What is the reason for such pathological changes?
*a. Hereditary adentia
b. Extraction of teeth
c. Rachitis
d. Trauma
e. Caries

488. A 35-year-old patient complains about constant dull pain in the 25 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 25 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. The purulent discharges from the canal followed the probing. What method of diagnostics should be applied to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. X-ray examination
b. Thermal test
c. Deep probing
d. Bacteriological examination
e. Electric pulp test

489. After complex extraction of the 37 tooth a patient experienced anaesthesia of the left half of his lower lip and chin. Electroodontodiagnos showed reduction of lower jaw teeth electroexcitability on the left.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpes Zoster n.Trigemini
b. Acute osteomyelitis of mandible body
c. Neuralgia of the left inferior alveolar nerve
d. Alveolitis in the region of socket of the 37 tooth
*e. Neuritis of the left inferior alveolar nerve

490. A female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of lower and upper jaw teeth is missing, the crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn off by 2/3 of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented. The alveolar process isn’t hypertrophied. Interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological tooth wear in this patient:
a. Vertical, compensated, III grade severity
b. Combined, noncompensated, III grade severity
c. Horizontal, compensated, II grade severity
d. Vertical, noncompensated, III grade severity
*e. Horizontal, noncompensated, III grade severity

491. A 25-year-old man consulted a dentist about extraction of the 18 tooth, it’s crown is destroyed by 1/2. The tooth was treated more than once. During tooth extraction the maxillary tuber was accidentally torn off. What actions should be taken?
a. To remove the fragment
b. To remove the fragment and tampon the wound
c. To try to restore the fragment to its place
d. To restore the fragment to its place and fix it there
*e. To remove the fragment and stitch up the wound

492. Preventive examination of a 4-yearold child revealed a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 54 tooth. The cavity has no intercommunication with the tooth cavity and is filled with dense dentine. Probing, percussion, thermal test of the 54 tooth provoke no pain. The decay/filled index is 1, hygiene index is 1,9. What filling material is the most suitable for permanent filling of the 54 tooth?
a. Silicate cement
b. Chemical composite
c. Photopolymer composite
*d. Glass-ionomer cement
e. Silicophosphate cement

493. A 34-year-old male patient complains about acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is getting worse as affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he didn’t consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

494. A 69-year-old patient underwent an operation for complete removal of his lower jaw. They took impressions of both jaws and fabricated a lower jaw replacement prosthesis before operation. What elements will provide fixation of this prosthesis in the oral cavity?
a. Magnets
b. Attachments
c. Wire loops
d. Clasps
*e. Foshar’s spiral springs

495. Parents of a 7-year-old boy complain about missing of the 11 tooth. Objectively: there is enlargement of alveolar process in projection of the 11, 12 teeth. X-ray picture shows multiple shades of different size. They have dentate shape and look like hard tooth tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Follicular cyst of maxilla starting from the 11 tooth
b. Adamantinoma of maxilla
c. Odontogenic fibroma of maxilla
*d. Odontoma of maxilla
e. Cementoma of maxilla

496. A 47-year-old patient complains about discolouration of the 11, 12 teeth. Objectively: the 12, 12 are changed in colour, canals are filled to the top. It was decided to make metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of approximal surfaces of abutment teeth?
a. 15-20 degrees
b. 20-25 degrees
c. 30-35 degrees
*d. 5-8 degrees
e. 10-15 degrees

497. After preventive examination a 10-year-old child was diagnosed with osteoporosis circumscripta of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. The patient was administered electrophoresis with remineralizing solutions. What preparations and in what order are to be applied in this case?
a. Phosphorus preparations only
b. Fluorine preparations only
c. Fluorine preparations with the following application of calcium and phosphorus preparations
d. Calcium preparations only
*e. Calcium and posphorus preparations with the following application of fluorine praparation

498. A 12-year-old male patient consulted an orthodontist about odontoloxia. Objectively: the face is symmetric and proportional. In the oral cavity: permanent occlusion, occlusal relationship is orthognathic in the lateral parts, the 13 tooth is located off dentition on the palate, biometric measurements show that the width of the 13 tooth is 11,4 mm, the distance between the 12 and 14 teeth is 4,6 mm, the width of the 14 tooth is 7,6 mm. Suggest the treatment plan:
a. No treatment is required
b. Extraction of the 14 tooth
c. Open the bite and move the 13 tooth into its due place
d. Move the 13 tooth into its due place without bite opening
*e. Extract the 14 tooth and move the 13 tooth into it’s place

499. Parents of an 8-year-old child complain about a painful formation in the child’s oral cavity that obstructs food intake. The same complaints were registered two years ago. Mucous membrane of lateral tongue surface is hyperemic and edematic. There is an oval erosion over 0,7 cm large covered with yellow greyish deposit. Erosion edges are hyperemic and painful on palpation. The child has a history of chronic cholecystocholangitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Behcet’s syndrome
b. Erythema multiforme
*c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
e. Traumatic erosion

500. A 50-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the upper frontal teeth. After meticulous examination the patient was diagnosed with wedgeshaped defect of the 11, 12, 13, 21, 22, 23 teeth.What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
a. Chemical-cure composite
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Silicate cement
d. Glass-ionomer cement
*e. Compomer restorative material

501. A 12-year-old child complains about bleeding and pain in the 46 tooth during eating. He has a history of acute pain some time before. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity (Black’s class II) communicating with the dental cavity, partially filled with overgrown pulp. Pulp tissue is bleeding, painful on touch. There is soft white dental deposit. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic simple pulpitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic papillitis

502. Examination of a 6-year-old girl revealed a deep carious cavity in the 85 tooth. Percussion and probing are painless. After removal of the softened dentine, communication with the tooth cavity showed up. Deep probing is painless. Xray picture of the 85 tooth shows the focus of destruction of bone tissue in the region of bifurcation; cortical plate of the 35 has no pathological changes. It ismost expedient to use the following material for the root filling:
*a. Zinc oxide eugenol cement
b. Glass-ionomer cement
c. Calcium-containing paste
d. Phosphate cement
e. Resorcin-formalin paste

503. A 33-year-old male patient complains about tongue pain that is getting worse during eating and talking. Objectively: there is a painful ulcer 0,6 cm large on the lateral surface of tongue. The floor is covered with grey deposit. The crown of the 47 tooth is destroyed.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cancerous ulcer
*b. Decubital ulcer
c. Hard chancre
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

504. A 27-year-old patient complains about pain of the 35 tooth caused by cold stimuli, that quickly abates after elimination of stimulus. Objective examination of the 35 tooth revealed a defect of hard tooth tissue within enamel. Defect edges are fragile and white. Electroodontodiagnosis is 5 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
*c. Acute superficial caries
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Enamel erosion

505. Examination of a male patient revealed that a tumour occupied the major part of his tongue; tongue mobility was limited, there were solitary regional nodes in the region of affection. After the cytological analysis the patient was diagnosed with cancer of tongue T2N1MWhat treatment should be chosen for this patient?
a. Radiation therapy
b. Chemotherapy
c. Removal of lymph nodes
*d. Combined method
e. Surgical removal of tumor

506. A 22-year-old patient complains about short-lasting spasmodic pain in the 26 tooth with long periods of pain absence. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity in the masticatory surface, dental cavity is not opened. Probing causes pain in the pulp horn projection. Thermal stimuli cause sharp pain, percussion is painless. Regional lymph nodes are not palpable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

507. A 27-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival edge is hyperaemic, edematic, painful on touch. Periodontal pouches are absent. X-ray picture shows resorption of cortical plate, osteoporosis of interdental septa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Initial generalized periodontitis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Periodontitis

508. A 25-year-old male patient got bilateral fracture of the lower jawA fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Weber’s appliance
b. Shur’s appliance
c. One-jaw bite-guard splint
d. Kurlyandsky’s appliance with levers
*e. Post’s appliance

509. A 9-year-old child complains about pain caused by sweet and sour food in an upper tooth on the left. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within the enamel limits. What is the optimal material to fill the 26 tooth?
a. Silicophosphate cement
b. Glass ionomer
*c. Сomposite
d. Silicate cement
e. Zinc phosphate cement

510. A 57-year-old patient complains about dental hypersensitivity to chemical stimuli, gum itch. Objectively: roots are exposed down to 1/3 of their length, gums are dense and pale rose. Wedge-shaped defects in the area of the 14, 13, 24, 25, 26, 34 teeth are within the dentine. Probing of dental cervixes and wedge-shaped defects is painfull. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Localised periodontitis
*b. I degree parodontosis
c. II degree periodontitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Atrophic gingivitis

511. A 7-year-old child was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 64, 85 teeth. The child suffers from hemophilia.Specify the treatment tactics:
*a. Extraction of teeth is contra-indicated because of high risk of haemorrhage
b. Extraction of teeth is possible in both in-patient and out-patient hospitals
c. Extraction of teeth can be performed in the oral surgery department
d. Extraction of teeth can be performed in an out-patient hospital with the following socket tamponade by means of haemostatic sponge
e. Extraction of teeth in hematological department after due pretreatment

512. Preventive examination of a 6-yearold child revealed temporary teeth bite. Upper and lower dental arches are trapeziformed. Upper incisors overlap lower incisors more than by 2/3. Incisors and second molars are in the same relation. There is no space between frontal teeth. Upper dental arch is bigger than lower dental arch by the cheek tubercle size. Bite abnormality is observed in the following planes:
*a. Sagittal and vertical
b. Sagittal and occlusal
c. Sagittal and frankfurt
d. Sagittal and nasal
e. Sagittal and lateral

513. Preventive examination of a 9- year-old girl revealed broad bridge of nose, narrow nasal passages, halfopened mouth, problems with lip joining, elongated lower third of face. The child presents with transitional occlusion. There is vertical gap 4-5 mm large from the 53 to the 64 tooth in the frontal region. Relationship of the first permanent molars complies with Angle’s class I. The child pronounces hissing sounds indistinctly. Specify the most likely factor of occlusion deformation:
a. Tongue sucking
b. Tongue parafunction
*c. Nasal respiration disorder
d. Infantile swallowing
e. There is no correct answer

514. A 40-year-old patient is hospitalized with Le Fort II maxillary fracture. The teeth are intact. Choose the most appropriate apparatus for this patient:
a. Gunning-Port’s splint
*b. Standard Zbarzh construction
c. Rudko’s apparatus
d. Yadrova’s apparatus
e. Yermolaev-Kulagov’s apparatus

515. A 57-year-old patient complains about a slowly growing swelling in the sublingual region. She noted it 3 months ago. Objectively: there is an elastic swelling in the sublingual region. The swelling is painless, mucous membrane over it is with tints of blue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Ranula
b. Dermoid cyst of oral cavity floor
c. Hemangioma of sublingual area
d. Lipoma of sublingual area
e. Salivolithiasis

516. A 38-year-old patient consulted dental surgery about extraction of the 36 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction?
a. Infiltration
b. Voino-Yasenetsky truncal
c. Mandibular
d. Tuberal
*e. Torus

517. A patient ordered partial removable lamellar dentures for the upper and lower jaw. An orthodontist took elastic alginate impressions of both jaws. What is his next step?
a. To let the impressions dry out in the open air
b. To send the impressions immediately to the laboratory
c. To put the impressions into the microten bag for 90 minutes
*d. To send the impressions for disinfection
e. To invite a dental mechanic for joint analysis of the impressions

518. A 42-year-old woman came to prosthetic dentistry to make dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 18 . . . . 13 12 11 21 22 23 . . . . 28 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Partial removable lamelalr prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps
b. Clasp denture
c. Dental bridges
d. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
*e. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base

519. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
*a. Fixed Oxman’s prosthesis with pivot point
b. Gavrilow’s prosthesis with pivot point
c. Oxman’s double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
d. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp
e. Oxman’s single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point

520. A 39-year-old patient complains about experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the anamnesis that the indicated tooth was treated for carious. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metalceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is sharply painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to take off the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anesthesia should be applied?
*a. Field block anesthesia
b. Intraligamentous anesthesia
c. Intraosseous anesthesia
d. Application anesthesia
e. Infiltration anesthesia

521. A 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with dental cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed some months ago and wasn’t treated. What treatment method is efficient in this case?
*a. Devital amputation
b. Vital extirpation
c. Devital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Biological method

522. A patient consults a prosthodontist about a dentition defect of the 14, 15, 16 teetht. It is necessary to prepare teth for crowning. Before the preparation the handpiece must be processed with:
a. With furacilin solution
*b. With 3% solution of chloramine (two times with 15 minute interval)
c. With 3%solution of chloramine once
d. With 3% solution of hydrogen oxide
e. With solution of potassium permanganate

523. A 36-year-old female patient complains about acute pain, clicking in the right temporomandibular joint, burning pain in the region of the right external acoustic meatus. Movements of lower jaw are step-like with short-standing disabling moments and acute pain in the joint. Objectively: the face is symmetric. Occlusion is orthognathic. Palpation of lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the right. Tomogram shows that bone structure circuits of joints are smooth and slick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute posttraumatic arthritis of TMJ
b. Rheumatic arthritis of TMJ
*c. Dysfunction of TMJ
d. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
e. Ankylosis of TMJ

524. A 45-year-old teacher consulted a prosthodontist about choosing efficient prosthetic tactics. Objectively: the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth present with III degree mobility.	What orthopaedic care is the most efficient?
*a. Immediate prosthetics
b. Fixed prosthesis
c. Clasp denture
d. Delayed prosthetics
e. Early prosthetics

525. A 62-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about orthopaedic treatment of the 12, 21, 22 teeth. The arterial pressure was 165/110 mm Hg before prosthetic procedure. Because of emotional stress arterial pressure rose up to 220/130mm Hg.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute heart failure
b. Acute respiratory failure
*c. Hypertensive crisis
d. Syncope
e. Collapse

526. A 16-year-old patient complains about experiencing gingival enlargement, pain and haemorrhage throughout a year. Objectively: gingival papillae are enlarged and overlap tooth crowns by 1/2 of their height. Gums exhibit bright red granulations and are painful on palpation. There are considerable calculus deposits. Xray picture shows no changes of alveolar process.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ulcerous gingivitis
b. Localised periodontitis
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

527. Examination of a 25-year-old male patient revealed maximal number of occlusional contacts of opposing teeth during denture joining. X-ray picture shows that the articular head of the lower jaw is near the base of the slope of articular tubercle. What type of occlusion is present?
*a. Central occlusion
b. Right lateral occlusion
c. Posterior occlusion
d. Left lateral occlusion
e. Anterior occlusion

528. A49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to 1/3 of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Kopeinin
*b. Novotny
c. Treuman
d. Mamlock
e. Kogan

529. For fabrication of an external prosthesis a 62-year-old male patient needs "Hippocratic facies". What impression material should be applied?
a. Stens
b. Dentafol
*c. Gypsum
d. Stomaflex
e. Repin

530. A 67-year-old patient was diagnosed with cemental caries of the 35 tooth.What filling material should be chosen?
a. Chemical-cure composite material
b. Silver amalgam
*c. Glass-ionomer cement
d. Silidont
e. Silicin

531. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patient’s face is	symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painful.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ
b. Fracture of the right condyle of mandible
c. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible
*d. Arthrosis of the right TMJ
e. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ

532. A 10,5-year-old child complains about painful skin rash on his lips. Objectively: red border is edematic and hyperemic, covered with cracks and multiple bloody crusts. There are small vesicles with serous contents on the upper lip skin that merge together in certain areas. Maceration andmadescence of skin is also present, especially in the mouth corners. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meteorological cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
*d. Eczematous cheilitis
e. Atopic cheilitis

533. An injured man was hospitalized to the oral surgery department with rupture of soft tissues of palate and pharynx. In process of respiration the dangling flap from the wound partially or completely blocks the larynx aperture. What kind of asphyxia may develop in this patient?
a. Stenotic
*b. Valvular
c. Obturative
d. Aspirating
e. Dislocational

534. A 27-year-old female patient is pregnant, duration of gestation is 21 weeks. She has indication for extraction of the 28 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis after ineffective therapeutic treatment. What kind of anaesthesia should be used for tooth extraction?
a. Mandibular
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Infraorbital and palatinal
d. Tuberal and incisor
e. Torus

535. A 50-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication, teeth mobility, offensive breath, gingival hemorrhage. Objectively: the gum is hyperemic and cyanotic, dental calculus is present. Parodontal pouches are 8 mm deep within upper jaw molars. The pouches of other teeth are 6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of bone tissue by 2/3-1/2 of tooth roots. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Acute generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Acute generalized III degree periodontitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

536. A 20-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 44 tooth. Objectively: the 44 tooth has a deep carious cavity in the masticatory surface, the dentine is dense and pigmented. Probing, percussion cause no pain. Electroodontodiagnosis is 12 microampere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*e. Chronic deep caries

537. A 32-year-old female patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 14, 25 teeth. It is planned to make metal-ceramic crowns. What impression material should be used for making these crowns?
a. Wax
b. Hardening
*c. Silicone
d. Alginate
e. Zinc oxide eugenol

538. A 25-year-old patient complains about a light brown spot in the upper foretooth. Objectively: the 23 tooth has a single light brown spot in the cervical region. Probing shows smooth surface. The tooth is nonresponsive to cold and probing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Acute initial caries
e. Fluorosis

539. A 60-year-old patient underwents sanitation of the oral cavity before an operation on account of cataract. After examination the patient was diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 22 tooth (Black’s class V). What filling material should NOT be used in this patient?
a. Chemical-cure macrofilled composite
*b. Light-cure microhybrid material
c. Chemical-cure glass-ionomer cement
d. Chemical-cure microhybrid material
e. Silicate cement

540. A 33-year-old patient complains about an ulcer of oral cavity floor, that is located under his tongue on a level between the 43 to the 33 tooth. Examination reveales that ulcer edges are undermined and scalloped. Its greyyellow floor is shallow and it is covered with small, easily bleeding granulations. There is no ulcer infiltration. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Migratory granuloma of oral cavity floor
*b. Tubercular ulcer of oral cavity floor
c. Cancerous ulcer of oral cavity floor
d. Decubital ulcer of oral cavity floor
e. Gummatous ulcer of oral cavity floor

541. A steeplejack with a long record of service consults a dentist about dryness, burning and insignificant lip edema. The same symptoms were noted one year ago in autumn. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Meteorogical cheilitis
b. Cheilitis glandularis
c. Cheilitis exfoliativa
d. Manganotti’s cheilitis
e. Contact cheilitis

542. A 42-year-old patient complains about gingival pain, progressing gingival haemorrhage, increasing tooth mobility, halitosis. Objectively: gums are evidently hyperaemic, extremely edematic, they bleed easily on palpation. Tooth roots are exposed, parodontal pouches are 4-6 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate, there is also supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. II-III grade tooth mobility is present. Orthopantomogram shows resorption of interdental septa down to 1/2 of their height.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
c. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of generalized III degree periodontitis

543. A female patient applied to the oral surgery department and underwent radical maxillary sinusotomy with plastic repair of fistula through the alveolar socket of the extrated 27 tooth. Infiltration and all the peripheral block anaesthesias of the left upper jaw were performed with 6,0 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. 3 minutes later the patient registered double vision in her left eye, inability to close it. Which of the performed anaesthesias is the reason for the above-mentioned presentations?
*a. Infraorbital
b. Palatinal
c. Infiltration
d. Incisor
e. Tuberal

544. . On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region
*b. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis
c. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
d. Acute epidemic parotiditis
e. Parenchymatous parotiditis

545. A 28-year-old patient complains about constant localised pain that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the carious cavity causes no pain, percussion is painful, X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

546. A 23-year-old patient complains about a carious cavity in the 16 tooth. Objectively: the 16 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing, percussion cause no pain. There is a fistula on the gingiva in the region of root apex projection of the 16 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

547. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a swelling in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of upper lip edema, nasolabial fold is smoothed. Mucogingival fold of the upper jaw vestibular surface in the region of the 11, 12, 21 teeth is smoothed, hyperemic. Palpation is painful. Fluctuation is present. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw satrting from the 21 tooth. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of the 12, 21, 22 teeth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
*b. Preservation of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, ant-inflammatory therapy
d. Preservation of the 21 tooth, antiinflammatory therapy
e. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy

548. A 33-year-old officer delivered from a battlefield has shoot off mental part o fmandible, drooling, insignificant haemorrhage from the oral cavity, asphyxia that occurs periodically because of head repositioning. What actions should be taken to prevent the asphyxia development?
a. Fixation of jaws with a mental sling
b. Thacheostome construction
*c. Fixation of tongue, transportation in prone position
d. Surgical d-bridement, tracheostome construction
e. Transportation in prone position

549. During extraction of the 14 tooth a 64-year-old patient complained about retrosternal pain irradiating to his back. There is paleness of membrane and skin integument as well as pulse assymetry on the carotid arteries. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory failure
b. Hypertensic crisis
*c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Angioneurotic Quincke’s edema
e. Collapse

550. Renovation of a dental office involves installation of luminous tube lamps. Specify the required illuminance level in lux:
a. 300 lx
b. 400 lx
*c. 500 lx
d. 200 lx
e. 100 lx

551. A 42-year-old builder complains about a condyloma on his lower lip. It appeared 1,5 month ago. It has been significantly growing throughout the last week. Objectively: the red border of the lower lip is cyanotic and infiltrated, it has some isolated closly adhering squamae. There is a well-defined hemispherical formation 8 mm in diameter and 4 mm high in the centre. The formation is of grey-and-blue-and-red colour, it has rough surface formed by thin, closely adhering and thick-based squamae. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, dense and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Verruciform precancer
b. Keratoacanthoma
c. Viral wart
*d. Lower lip cancer
e. Pyogenic granuloma

552. During the removal of dermoid cyst of the nose bridge a 14-year-old boy complained about giddiness, sickness, weakness. Objectively: the skin is pale, covered with cold sweat. Tachypnoe is present. The pulse is weak, the arterial pressure is low (80/60 mm Hg), hands feel cold. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Syncope
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Toxic shock
d. Collapse
e. Traumatic shock

553. Apatient complains about pain in the oral cavity, burning and dryness. Exami	nation revealed fiery-red dry mucous membrane. The tongue is crimson, dry, glossy, filiform papillae are atrophied. There is some deposit in tongue folds that is hard to be removed. The patient undergoes treatment for pneumonia, she takes antibiotics. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. B2 hypovitaminosis
b. Benign migratory glossitis
c. Fastened erythema
d. Pellagrous glossitis
*e. Acute atrophic candidiasis

554. A dentist applied to the regional sanitation center for a permission to open a private dental office with two universal dental sets. Planned area of the reception room is 26m2 (square meters). According to existing norms, the dental office with two universal dental sets must have the following area:
a. 20m2 for each set and 12m2 in addition
*b. 14m2 for each set and 10m2 in addition
c. 10m2 for each set and 7m2 in addition
d. 10m2 for each set and 10m2 in addition
e. 7m2 for each set and 7m2 in addition

555. A 40-year-old patient underwent selective grinding of teeth on account of TMJ disease provoked by functional occlusal disorder. 3 days later the patient consulted the orthopaedist about injuring buccal mucosa because of its getting in between dentitions on the right. What mistake was made during teeth grinding?
a. Upper teeth tubercles were ground off
*b. Tops of the support palatal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
c. Lingual tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
d. Tops of the buccal tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
e. Buccal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off

556. A 20-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic deep caries of the 12 tooth. Objectively: the 12 tooth has a deep carious cavity on the aproximal-distal surface. Distal crown angle of the 12 tooth is also affected with caries. Choose the material for correction of the indicated defect:
a. Polycarboxylate cement
b. Silica-alumina cement
c. Chemical-cure glass ionomer cement
d. Light-cure glass-ionomer cement
*e. Light-cure composite material

557. A 9-year-old child complains about dull pain that is getting worse while pressing the tooth. The tooth was treated for pulpitis one mounth ago. Objectively: the 36 tooth is filled. Percussion causes acute pain. Mucous membrane is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

558. A 24-year-old victim consulted a doctor about a face burn. He was injured by the open flame. He complains about pain and burning of face skin. Objectively: hyperemia of face skin; in the region of chin, nose, forehead, eyebrows, cheekbones there are burn blisters containing transparent liquid. These presentations correspond with the following degree of burn severity:
a. II-III A degree
b. III B-IV degree
c. II-IV degree
*d. I-II degree
e. II-III B degree

559. A 20-year-old patient complains about inability to move with his lower jaw, speech difficulty and problems during eating. He associates his condition with a trauma he got when biting on apple. Examination revealed half-open mouth, open bite due to the solitary contacts of distal tubercles of the last molars, salivation, indistinct speech. Articular heads of mandible can be felt anterior to both tragi. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute anterior bilateral mandible luxation
b. Exacerbation of osteoarthritis of temporomandibular joint
c. Fracture of articular processes of mandible
d. Traumatic bilateral fracture of articular processes of mandible
e. Fibrous ankylosis of temporomandibular joint

560. A 6,5-year-old child has a gap 2,5-3 mm large between frontal teeth from canine to canine. Relationship of the first permanent molars complies with Angle’s class I. Specify the severity degree of bite deformation:
a. II degree
b. IV degree
c. V degree
*d. I degree
e. III degree

561. A 5-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis
b. Acute serous pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

562. A 13-year-old boy complains about pain in the upper jaw caused by warm and hot stimuli, offensive breath when he sucks his tooth. Objectively: the 24 tooth is changed in color, there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Deep probing is painful. Percussion causes no pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

563. A 30-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39, 0°C, a roundish infiltrate on his upper lip, general weakness. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 days. Objectively: a roundish infiltrate in the region of the upper lip 2,5 cm in diameter, the skin over the infiltrate is red with a necrotic core in the centre. The upper lip is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute periostitis of the upper jaw
b. Acute glandular abscess
c. Carbuncle of the upper lip
d. Retention cyst of the upper lip
*e. Furuncle of the upper lip

564. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the child’s submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37, 5°C. Objectively: the child’s face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Submandibular adenophlegmon
d. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

565. A 48-year-old woman complains about aching dull pain in the region of the left TJM, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. Xray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ
b. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
c. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
d. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
*e. Arthrosis of the TMJ

566. A 30-year-old patient was diagnosed with posttraumatic osteomyelitis of mandible in the region of mandible body on the right. The patient got the trauma 1,5 month ago. X-ray picture shows the fracture line and the shadow of osseous sequestre along the fracture line. There is a fistula with purulent discharge on skin. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Sequestrectomy
b. Physiotherapy
*c. Fistulectomy, sequestrectomy
d. Fistulectomy
e. Fistulectomy, antibacterial therapy

567. A dentist fills a Black class II carious cavity in the 36 tooth of a 35-year-old man by sandwich method in one office visit. What glass-ionomer cement should be chosen as basic liner in this case? 2010 24
a. Reinforced
*b. Hybrid
c. Classical
d. Water-hardening
e. Condensable

568. A 54-year-old male patient complains about progressing pain in the area of upper jaw on the left that first arose 3 days ago. Body temperature is up to 37, 2°C. Objectively: gingival mucous membrane is edematic, hyperemic, it bleeds slightly. Parodontal pouches are 6-7 mm deep and contain a small amount of purulent exudateA painful infiltrate is palpated in the region of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth has III degree mobility, the rest of teeth have I-II degree mobility. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 2/3 of root length. What is the most appropriate treatment method of the 26 tooth?
a. Lancing of abscess via parodontal pouch
*b. Extraction of the 26 tooth
c. Curettage of parodontal pouche
d. Temporal splintage, conservative therapy
e. Lancing of abscess via gum

569. A 27-year-old victim was delivered to to the facial surgery department with a cut wound of right cheek. The trauma is civilian, the patient got it in a fight. The deadline for early surgical d-bridement without preliminary antibiotic injection is no more than:
a. 48 hours
b. 12 hours
c. 1 hour
*d. 24 hours
e. 72 hours

570. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilow’s pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinstein’s pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxman’s pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point

571. After supercooling a 42-year-old patient presented with headache in the left frontal region and left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetric, breathing through the left nasal meatus is obstructed, seropurulent discharges are present. Palpation is slightly painful in the infraorbital region as well as along the mucogingival fold in projection of the 24, 25 teeth. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. Mucuous membrane of alveolar process has no visible changes. X-ray picture shows reduced pneumatization of the left upper jaw sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left upper jaw
*b. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth
d. Acute periodontitis of the 24 tooth
e. Acute rhinogenous maxillitis

572. An 8,5-year-old child is apparently healthy. The child complains about pain in an upper tooth on the left caused by traumatic injury sustained three hours ago. Objectively: the crown part of the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/2, the pulp is red and significantly exposed, probing causes acute pain and bleeding. Percussion of the 21 tooth is extremely painful. Choose the most efficient treatment method of the 21 tooth:
*a. Vital amputation
b. Devital amputation
c. Bioassay technique
d. Devital extirpation
e. Vital extirpation

573. A 36-year-old female patient complains about an aesthetic defect of upper frontal teeth. In past history: she undergoes regular check-up in the endocrinological department on account of thyrotoxicosis. Enamel defects appeared several years ago and since that have been gradually expanding. Examination revealed that the 12, 11, 21, 22 2010 25 teeth had transverse oval enamel defects on the vestibular surfaces. Probing and cold test is painless. Floor of the defects is smooth, glossy and hard.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Necrosis of hard tissues
*b. Erosion of hard tissies
c. Wedge-shaped defects
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Systemic hypoplasia

574. A 23-year-old patient complains about root exposition, gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing, gum itch. Objectively: there is supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. Gums are hyperaemic, edematic, pouches are 3,5 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 1/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
*c. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
e. II degree periodontitis

575. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

576. A child’s mother had acute purulent mastitis. Now the 2-month-old child experiences an edema of his left infraorbital and malar regions, dermahemia of the left face side, temperature rise up to 39-40°C, purulent discharges from the nose. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Phlegmon of infraorbital region
d. Acute maxillary sinusitis
*e. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis

577. According to the parents of a 7-year-old child, the child complains about weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, toothache in the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: condition is grave, the child is pale and adynamic, the face is asymmetric because of infiltration of the upper jaw on the left. The 64 tooth has a carious cavity. Percussion is painful, I degree of teeth mobility is also present. There are purulent discharges from the subgingival edge of the 64 tooth. Mucogingival fold of the 63, 64, 65 teeth is smoothed. Vestibular and palatine mucous membrane is edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis starting from the 64 tooth
b. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis starting from the 64 tooth
c. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Suppurative radicular cyst of maxilla
e. Acute albuminous maxillary periostitis

578. A 35-year-old man has a medium deep carious cavity in the 37 tooth (Black’s class II). For its filling a dentist chose technique of layer-by-layer restoration. What composite should be coating the floor and walls of the carious cavity in order to form superadaptive initial layer?
a. Microhybrid
b. Microfilled
c. Condensable
d. Macrofilled
*e. Flowable

579. A 32-year-old male patient was delivered to traumatology. He complains about nosebleed, severe cephalalgia, giddiness, face deformation, heavy breathing, mastication inability. He sustained an injury in the mine over three hours ago. He was conscious. Objectively: the middle third of his face is elongated, there are considerable hematomas and there is an edema in the region of nose root and eyelids of both eyes. The upper jaw is displaced downwards, it is mobile together with nasal bones, cheek bones and eyeballs. Palpation reveals deformation, pain and pathological mobility in the region of the nose bridge, external socket	edges, pterygoid processes of basilar bone. Nosebleed is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (lower)
*c. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
d. Fracture of zygomatic bone
e. Fracture of nasal bone

580. A 9-year-old boy presents with face asymmetry due to the chin deviation to the left. When the third Il’ina- Marcosian diagnostic test is performed face asymmetry disappears. What is the most likely clinical form of this occlusal abnormality?
a. Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
b. Bilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch
c. Unilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch
*d. Habitual deviation of mandible
e. Unilateral hypoplasia of mandible

581. A 13-year-old girl has been experiencing gingival hemorrhages and frontal teeth mobility throughout the last month. Objectively: gingival mucous membrane in the region of lower incisors and canines is edematic, hyperemic, it bleeds on touch. These teeth present with I degree mobility, parodontal pouches are 3 mm deep. Orthopantomogram shows reduction of bone tissue of interalveolar septa by 1/3 of their height. Frontal teeth of the lower jaw are overcrowded. Hygiene index is 4,2.What local treatment should be provided in the first place?
a. Anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Physical therapy
c. Antibacterial therapy
*d. Professional hygiene
e. Orthodontic care

582. A 16-year-old teenager complains about halitosis, general weakness, body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C. These symptoms turned up two days ago, the boy had a history of recent angina. Objectively: oral hygiene is unsatisfactory, the teeth are coated with soft dental deposit. Gums are hyperemic, gingival papillae are covered with greyish deposit. Specify the causative agent of this disease:
a. Herpes viruses
b. Streptococci
*c. Fusobacteria, spirochetes
d. Staphylococci
e. Yeast fungi

583. A 65-year-old male patient complains about crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, angular fissures and cracks are also present. Palpation reveals crepitatnt rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular arthritis
b. Temporomandibular dislocation
c. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
*d. Costen’s syndrome
e. Temporomandibular arthrosis

584. A 40-year-old patient complains about a long-existing fissure in the central part of red border of his lower lip. He has been smoking since he was 16. Objectively: there is a deep 1,0 cm long fissure along the median line of red border of the lower lip, the fissure edges are bulging. Characteristic quality of the fissure is its spontaneous healing, but after epithelization the fissure recurs. The patient was diagnosed with chronic fissure of the lower lip. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Choose the most appropriate treatment method in this situation:
a. Close-focus roentgenotherapy
*b. Excision within evidently healthy tissues
c. Diathermo-coagulation
d. Cryodestruction
e. Excision 0,5 cm off the neoplasm limits

585. A 52-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. There is gingival edema, parodontal pouches are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by 1/2 of root length. Adentist made a diagnosis: generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic	construction is the most efficient in this situation?
a. Temporary Novotny splint
*b. Elbrecht splint
c. Murray’s splint
d. Plastic mouthguard
e. Mamlock splint

586. Avictimgot a face and temporal region traumaA doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
a. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
*b. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
c. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone
d. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
e. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone

587. A 28-year-old patient had to undergo extraction of the 46 tooth underWeisbrem’s apodactylic mandibular anaesthesia. What is the target site of the anaesthetic solution injection?
a. Retromolar fossa
b. A segment of maxillary tuber
*c. A segment of mandibular torus
d. A segment of temporal crest of mandible
e. Retromandibular fossa

588. A 7-year-old child sustained a sport injury. He complains about pain in the region of mandible, inability to join his teeth. Pressing against the chin causes intensification of pain in the region of mandible on the right. The child is diagnosed with a fracture of mandible body without fragment displacement. What therapeutic tactics should be chosen in order to prevent the displacement of bone fragments in the transitional dentition?
a. Application of sling bandage
b. Administration of anti-inflammatory therapy
*c. Fragment immobilization by means of an intraoral splint
d. Fixation by means of Tigerstedt splints
e. Osteosynthesis

589. A 44-year-old patient complains about the astringent sensation in the upper jaw incisors, which appeared 1,5 years ago. Objectively: the most convex part of the vestibular surfaces of the 12, 11, 21, 22 crowns has roundish defects with smooth, shiny, dense surface, that reach dentine in depth. The depth of defects is gradually decreasing from the centre to the periphery. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Destructive fluorosis
c. Wedge-shaped defect
d. Systemic hypoplasia
*e. Enamel erosion

590. During the planned oral cavity sanitation an 11,5-year-old girl complained about periodic spontaneous chilalgia during food intake. Objectively: mucous membrane of lips is hyperemic, edematic and dry. During talking one can observe small drops of mucous secretion. Make the provisionaldiagnosis:
*a. Cheilitis glandularis
b. Eczematous cheilitis
c. Cheilitis exfoliativa
d. Contact allergic cheilitis
e. Angular cheilitis

591. A 38-year-old patient consulted a dentist about aching pain in the region of the 48 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C and aggravation of general condition is present. Objectively: insignificant swelling of retromolar region as well as hyperaemia of mucous membrane. The 48 tooth is covered with occlusal pad. It is painful on palpation. Purulent discharges are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aphthous stomatitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Acute pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis of the 48 tooth
*e. Acute purulent pericoronitis

592. A patient ordered metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. Block anaesthesia was performed before preparation. In a few minutes the patient felt anxiety, tinnitus, abdominal pain, giddiness. Breathing is hurried, pulse is rapid, AP is 60/40 mm Hg. What aid should be rendered to the patient in the first place?
a. To soak a cotton web with some liquid ammonia and give it for the patient to inhale
b. Promedol, suprastin
*c. Intravenous introduction of 0,5 ml of 0,1%adrenaline solution, prednisolone
d. To bring the patient into horizontal position
e. Make an injection of aminophylline

593. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lower jaw subluxation
b. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
c. Meniscus tresis
d. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
e. Lower jaw dislocation

594. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Keller’s classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
*a. First
b. Fifth
c. Fourth
d. Second
e. Third

595. An 18-year-old patient complains about ulceration in the oral cavity, spontaneous bleeding of mucous membrane, pain during food intake and talking, nosebleeds. He has a history of: aggravation of general condition, weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, headache, joint pain. What method of diagnostics should be applied to confirm the diagnosis?
a. HIV test
b. Allergy test
c. Blood sugar test
d. Immunogram
*e. Clinical blood analysis

596. A14-year-old girl complains about an aesthetic defect in form of white spots on her teeth. Fluorine concentration in the drinking water in the area of her residence is 2 mg/l. Objectively: vestibular surfaces of all teeth are covered with ill-defined white spots. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Fluorosis
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
d. Multiple caries
e. Local hypoplasia

597. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about intense lancinating paroxysmal pain accompanied by a sensation of current passage in the region of her upper lip on the right. Pain attacks occur spontaneously and last 3- 5 minutes. The patient usually has 2-3 attacks a day. The patient is unable to establish the cause of this disease. Examination of her oral cavity revealed no pathological changes. Oral cavity is sanitated. Test orthopantomogram shows an impacted supernumerary 13 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Peripheral neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
b. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
c. Right-sided upper jaw pulpitis
d. Central neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
e. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis

598. A 5-year-old child presents with chronic deep caries within the contact and masticatory surfaces of the 75, 74, 84, 85 teeth. Which filling material should be used?
a. Evicrol
b. Silicin
*c. Silver amalgam
d. Silidont
e. Infantid

599. A 26-year-old patient consulted a dentist about the 24 tooth extraction because of chronic periodontitis exacerbation. The crown of the 24 tooth is intact. Choose the right tool for the tooth exraction:
*a. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
b. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
c. Straight elevator
d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

600. A 57-year-old patient complains of a tumor in the left parotid region, which appeared 3 years ago. Over the past six months, the tumor has increased significantly. Objectively: there is a non-mobile lobulated tumour in the left parotid region, palpation causes minor pain reaction. The skin over the tumour plicates easily, its upper part has well-defined margins, the bottom part grows into the depth of gland. The tumour is 3x2,5 cm large. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic parotitis
b. Cyst
c. Fibroma
d. Parotid gland carcinoma
*e. Pleomorphic adenoma

601. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boy’s mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
c. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation
d. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
e. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation

602. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous spasmodic pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute focal pulpitis
e. Acute periodontitis

603. After a fall a 28-year-old patient visited the clinic of maxillofacial surgery and complained of restricted mouth opening, skin numbness in the left infraorbital region, upper lip, wing of the nose, pain in the left zygomatic region that gets worse when he opens his mouth. Palpation revealed step deformity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort I (top type)
b. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone
c. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone without a displacement
d. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort II (medium type)
*e. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone with a displacement

604. A 22-year-old patient undergoes treatment for acute deep caries of the 26th tooth. The pulp-capping material of choice is Ca(OH)2/salicylate cement "Life", the constant filling material is ligh-cure condensable composite "Solitaire-2". The pulp cap should be covered with:
a. Phosphate cement
*b. Glass-ionomer cement
c. Zinc-eugenol cement
d. Adhesive composite system
e. Insulating varnish

605. On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
b. Parenchymatous parotiditis
c. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region
d. Acute epidemic parotiditis
*e. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis

606. A 35-year-old patient complains about progressing throbbing pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity filled with softened dentine, tooth cavity is closed, probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain. There is I degree tooth mobility. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
*b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

607. At the end of the reception hours a dental surgeon has to fill in the stomatological forms. Name the form of everyday reporting on children dental reception:
a. Form 49
b. Form 9
*c. Form 39
d. Form 29
e. Form 19

608. Rising from a chair after a dental procedure, a 60-year-old patient felt retrosternal pain radiating to the left arm, nausea, weakness. Objectively: the patient is pale, his face is sweaty. AP is 90/60 mm Hg, pulse is arrhythmic, of poor volume, 100/min. Heart sounds are muffled, vesicular breathing is present. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Stenocardia
*b. An attack of coronary artery disease
c. Hypertensic crisis
d. Pulmonary artery thrombosis
e. Myocardial infarction

609. A 38-year-old male patient complains of a carious cavity. He had experienced spontaneous dull pain in the tooth in question before. Objectively: the distal masticatory surface of the 37 tooth presents a deep cavity made of soft pigmented dentin. Percussion is painless. After removing the decay from the cavity, cold water has caused pain lasting for about a minute. X-ray picture shows the deformation of the periodontal gap in the region of the 37 root apices. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

610. A 20-year-old patient complains about unaesthetic look of the 24 tooth from the moment of its eruption. Objectively: enamel of the 24 tooth is partly absent, the dentine is yellow. The 64 tooth was treated more than once when she was a child, but because of frequent exacerbations, edemas and gingival fistula the 64 tooth was extracted when she was 9 years old. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Initial caries
*b. Localised hypoplasia
c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Enamel aplasia
e. Fluorosis

611. A 47-year-old patient complains of pain in the lateral part of mandible to the left of the toungue edge, which is caused by tongue movements. Two days ago the patient was provided with claspps fixation a partial removable clasp denture for the 47, 42, 33 teeth. Retroalveolar region of the mucous membraneis exhibits a localized hyperemic area matching the edge of the denture. Which muscle contractions demarcate the boundary in this region?
*a. Mandibulohyoid
b. Hyoglossal
c. Medial wing muscle
d. Masticatory
e. Geniohyoid

612. A 27-year-old patient has been referred for endodontic treatment on the 45 tooth. Objectively: the tooth crown is decayed, the lateral surface of tongue and cheek mucosa being in direct contact with the 45 tooth are covered with grayish plaques of macerated epithelium that are somewhat raised above the surface of the mucous membrane. Uvula and palatine arches are of dark red colour, and the hard palate has papules with a red rim and covered with grayish epithelium. Submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. White sponge nevus
c. Lupus erythematosus, plaque stage
*d. Secondary syphilis
e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

613. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Broad-beaked forceps
b. Right angled elevator
c. Straight elevator
*d. Left angled elevator
e. Close-beaked forceps

614. A 32-year-old patient presented to a clinic for takingof an upper jaw impression. During this procedure she choked with a piece of impression material, there was risk of asphyxia. What are the first-priority actions within emergency care?
*a. Abrupt push-like compressions of the lower thorax
b. Plaster removal from the airways
c. Tracheotomy
d. Artificial ventilation of lungs
e. Closed-chest cardiac massage

615. A 30-year-old patient has a carious cavity in the 11 tooth within parapulpar dentin. The tooth corner and its cutting edge are affected. What filling material is best for restoration of the anatomic tooth form?
a. Light-cure glass-ionomer cement
b. Chemical-cure paste-paste composite
c. Silicate cement
*d. Light-cure composite
e. Chemical-cure powder-liquid composite

616. A 53-year-old patient with generalized periodontitis presented to a prosthodontics clinic for fabrication of fixed splints for his both jaws intended to stabilize the dentitions along the entire dental arch. Which of the upper jaw buttresses will be functionally significant for the distribution of masticatory pressure?
a. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine
b. Frontonasal, zygomatic, palatine
c. Zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
d. Frontonasal, pterygopalatine, palatine
*e. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine

617. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth. What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
*a. Acker clasp
b. Jackson clasp
c. Telescopic fixation
d. Bent wire clasp
e. Roach clasp

618. A 36-year-old patient requires a full coverage swaged metal crown for the 37 tooth. The patient presented to a clinic for the crown adjustment. During the adjustment it was revealed that the crown was to loose to fit the tooth cervix properly. How to eliminate this defect?
a. To bend in the crown edges by using clamp forceps
b. To bend in the crown edges by using beak-shaped forceps
*c. To get an impression and swage the crown anew
d. To swage a new crown using the same matrix
e. To anneal the crown

619. A 50-year-old patient complains of a traumatic break-off in the front teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 12, 21 teeth are broken off by 3/4, X-ray picture shows that the channels of the 11, 21 teeth are properly filled, the other teeth are intact. What actions should the dentist take?
*a. Fabricate fullcast metal stumps with a post and restorative metal-ceramic crowns
b. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a partial removable lamellar denture for the upper jaw
c. Fabricate restorative swaged metal crowns for the 11 and 21 teeth
d. Fabricate a dentogingival plastic splint
e. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 12 and 22 teeth

620. A 37-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage, offensive breath, tooth mobility, difficult mastication. Objectively: the gums are of cyanotic-red colour, periodontal pockets are 6 mm deep and contain serous exudate, there is II class tooth mobility, moderate amount of subgingival and supragingival tartar; hygiene index is 3 points, there is traumatic occlusion along the entire length of the dental arches. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Histiocytosis-X
c. Acute generalized II grade periodontitis
d. Acute generalized grade I periodontitis
*e. Chronic generalized grade II periodontitis

621. A 43-year-old patient complains of increased tooth sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli, gum itch. Objectively: the roots of the teeth are exposed to ⅓ of their length, the gums are dense, pale pink. Thre is a small amount of dental plaque. In the region of the 15, 14, 24, 25, 44, 34 teeth there are wedge-shaped defects within the dentin. Probing of exposed cervices and wedge-shaped defects causes pain reaction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Localized periodontitis
b. Gingival recession
c. Atrophic gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
*e. Parodontosis

622. A 48-year-old patient complains of pain in the 32, 38 teeth which arose 3 months after installing a dental bridge upon them. Objectively: the gums around the abutment teeth are hyperemic, edematous, mobile in the vestibular-oral direction. What is the most likely cause of this complication?
a. The form of the intermediate denture part
b. Solid food consumption
c. Improper preparation of abutment teeth
d. Contact of the denture with opposing teeth
*e. Functional overload of abutment teeth paradontium

623. A 32-year-old 3-month pregnant patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic for the prosthetics. Objectively: the 16 tooth is missing. It is planned to fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 15 and 17 teeth. The patient was given an anaesthetic of articaine group Ultracain DS. The orthopaedist chose this anaesthetic because:
a. It is low-toxic
b. It reduces the volume of uteroplacental circulation
c. It is most commonly used in the stomatological practice
d. It doesnt contain sulphites
*e. It is low-toxic, is not capable of crossing the hemato-placental barrier

624. An 18-year-old patient presented to the orthopedic department with complaint of a large diastema. Objectively: bodily lateral movement of central incisors induced by the missing 12, 22 teeth. What is the optimal appliance for moving the central incisors together?
*a. Korkhaus apparatus
b. Kalvelis apparatus
c. Vasilenko apparatus
d. Cotton ligature
e. Begg appliance

625. A victim got a face and temporal region trauma. A doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
*a. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
b. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
c. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
d. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone
e. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone

626. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
b. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
c. Straight forceps
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight elevator

627. A 53-year-old patient presented to a dental clinic for the orthopaedic treatment of the 27 tooth. During preparation for local anesthesia, the patient felt sick (weakness, pallor, hyperperspiration), and lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Syncope
b. Collapse
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Cardiogenic shock
e. Traumatic shock

628. Parents of a 12-year-old child complain about white patches on the upper front teeth, which appeared six months ago. Objectively: chalk-like patches on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. Their enamel is dull, pliable and rough on probing. There is a history of short-term pain caused by chemical stimuli. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Dental fluorosis
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
*d. Acute initial caries
e. Acute superficial caries

629. A 33-year-old patient complains about an ulcer of oral cavity floor, that is located under his tongue on a level between the 43 to the 33 tooth. Examination reveales that ulcer edges are undermined and scalloped. Its grey-yellow floor is shallow and it is covered with small, easily bleeding granulations. There is no ulcer infiltration. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Cancerous ulcer of oral cavity floor
b. Gummatous ulcer of oral cavity floor
c. Migratory granuloma of oral cavity floor
d. Decubital ulcer of oral cavity floor
*e. Tubercular ulcer of oral cavity floor

630. Before extraction of a left upper tooth a 49-year-old patient had been given plexus anaesthesia with Ultracaine Forte. After the operation the socket didnt get filled with a blod clot. What is the way to prevent alveolitis development in this patient?
*a. To fill the socket with a loose iodoform tampon
b. To rinse the socket with microcide solution
c. To fill the socket with antibiotic powder
d. To rinse the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution
e. To fill the socket with a hemostatic sponge

631. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a free-end edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
*a. Attachments and bar system
b. Ney clasps
c. Jackson clasps
d. Dentoalveolar clasps
e. Telescopic crowns

632. A 49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to ⅓ of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Kogan
b. Treuman
c. Mamlock
d. Kopeinin
*e. Novotny

633. A 6,5-year-old child has a gap 2,5-3 mm large between frontal teeth from canine to canine. Relationship of the first permanent molars complies with Angles class I. Specify the severity degree of bite deformation:
a. III degree
b. V degree
c. IV degree
d. II degree
*e. I degree

634. A 10-year-old girl complains of an aesthetic defect. She has a history of sucking her right thumb till the age of 7. Objectively: the height of the lower third of face is somewhat reduced. There is a 9 mm gap in sagittal direction between the upper and lower incisors, Engles class 2. As a result of Eschler-Bittner test the girls face appears at first better, then worse. What clinical form of occlusal anomaly is most likely?
a. Maxillary macrognathia
*b. Maxillary macrognathia and mandibular micrognathia
c. Mandibular retrognathia
d. Mandibular micrognathia
e. Maxillary prognathism with lateral compression

635. Following the upper jaw examination (according to Schroeder) a 65-year-old patient was found to have atrophied maxillary tubers, alveolar processes covered with atrophic, thin and pale mucous membrane. What kind of functional impression technique should be applied?
a. Dosated
b. Differentiated
*c. Decompressive
d. Pressure-free
e. Compressive

636. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the roots of the 36 tooth. The tooth decayed long ago. Objectively: the crown of the 36 is destroyed by ⅔, percussion is painless, mucosa around the 36 tooth exhibits no evident pathological changes. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows a roundish well-defined radiolucency near the apex of the medial root. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

637. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumor-like formation in the region of his lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: there is a round tumour-like formation up to 1cm in diameter on the red border of the lower lip on the right. Roll-like edges of the formation protrude above the level of the red border. In the centre of the formation a brown crust is visible. After its removal a crateriform hole can be seen. There is no bleeding or pain. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lower lip papilloma
b. Lower lip carcinoma
*c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Lower lip fibroma
e. Verrucous carcinoma

638. A 16-year-old girl consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect on her front teeth, namely some dark spots and dentin defects. The spots were detected immediately after teeth eruption, the defects developed with the lapse of time. The patient was diagnosed with erosive form of dental fluorosis of the 16, 11, 12, 22, 26, 31, 32, 36, 41, 42, 46 teeth. Select a method of treatment:
*a. Restoration
b. Surgical treatment
c. Regular surveillance
d. Prosthetics
e. Remineralization

639. A 60-year-old patient presented to a clinic for checking her complete removable denture. During the teeth placement on the wax bases a gap between the front teeth and cuspal interference of the lateral teeth was revealed. What mistake was made?
a. The patient was found to have posterior occlusion instead of centric one
b. During establishing the centric occlusion, the occlusal rims were overpressed
c. The patient was found to have lateral occlusion instead of centric one
d. The models were improperly plastered in the occludator
*e. The patient was found to have anterior occlusion instead of centric one

640. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patients chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth are missing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get special medical aid?
*a. Specialized army surgical hospital
b. Battalion aid station
c. Separate medical detachment
d. Separate medical battalion
e. Regimental aid station

641. A 31-year-old patient complains of experiencing recurrent pain in the 48 tooth for 4 years. Objectively: right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. Mucous membrane around the partialy erupted 48 tooth is hyperemic. On probing the subgingival pocket of the 48 tooth exudes pus mixed with blood. What additional study will be most informative for diagnosing this pathology?
a. Blood count
b. Blood and urine tests
*c. Radiography
d. Electroodontometry
e. Contrast radiography

642. A 7-year-old child presents withf facial asymmetry, severe pain in the lower jaw on the left, body temperature rise up to 39,0°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the massive swelling of soft tissues in the mandibular region on the left. The skin over the infiltration is hyperemic and cannot be plicated. Mouth opening is limited, painful. The crown of the 75 tooth is destroyed by ⅔, the tooth exhibits the grade II mobility. Percussion of the 36 tooth is painful, the 75 tooth - painless. Edema and fluctuation of soft tissues on the buccal and lingual sides of these teeth are present. What measures are to be taken in the first place?
a. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
b. To lance the inflammation focus in the submandibular region
c. To lance the inflammation focus on the lingual and buccal sides
d. To extract the 75, 36 teeth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
*e. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on both sides

643. A 28-year-old male patient presented to a clinic on the 2nd day after the face trauma and complained of bilateral mandibular pain, difficult swallowing and obstructed breathing. Objectively: there was a slight swelling in the region of the molars on both sides, the teeth were intact but the jaw fragment with the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth deviated downward and backward. Manual reposition didnt produce any positive result. Which appliance should be used for treatment?
a. One-jaw Katz appliance
*b. Posts appliance
c. Brun appliance
d. One-jaw Kurliandsky appliance
e. Betelman appliance

644. A 42-year-old woman came to prosthetic dentistry to make dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 8 . . . . 13 12 11&21 22 23 . . . . 28/48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41&31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
*b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base
c. Dental bridges
d. Clasp denture
e. Partial removable lamelalr prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps

645. A 42-year-old patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of generalized grade II periodontitis accompanied by abscess formation. What method of general treatment should be administered in the first place?
a. Detoxification therapy
b. Vitamin therapy
*c. Antibiotic therapy
d. Stimulating therapy
e. Hyposensitization therapy

646. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joint. The dentures were fabricated a month ago. Objectively: face configuration is abnormal, the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can only be closed with difficulty, the speech is indistinct. When smiling, the base of the complete removable denture is exposed. What mistakes were made during the fabrication of complete removable dentures for the upper jaw?
a. Misplacement of maxillary teeth
*b. The vertical occlusal dimension was overrated
c. The vertical occlusal dimension was underrated
d. Misidentified posterior occlusion
e. Misidentified anterior occlusion

647. A 14-year-old teen complains of gingival haemorrhages during tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival mucosa is hyperemic, pastous, bleeds when touched. Schiller-Pisarev test is positive. PMA index - 70%. Hygienic index - 3,0. X-ray picture of the frontal area depicts no evident changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Chronic periodontitis
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

648. A 32-year-old patient complains of experiencing dryness and burning of tongue back for a week. The burning intensifies during taking irritating foods. Some time ago he had pneumonia and was treated with antibiotics. Objectively: skin and oral mucosa are pale. The lingual mucosa is hyperemic and edematous, the folds at the back of tongue are covered with the crumbling gray-white plaque, desquamation of the lateral surface of tongue is also present. Saliva is thick and attaches to a spatula. Choose the most effective drug complex for the local treatment:
a. Furacilin + solcoseryl
*b. Methylene blue + pimafucin
c. Hydrocortizone ointment + solcoseryl
d. Decamin + hydrocortizone ointment
e. Furacilin + methylene blue

649. An 11-year-old child complains of a carious cavity in the left upper molar, which appeared six months ago. Objectively: the medial contact surface of the 26 tooth exhibits a carious cavity located within the mantle dentin. The cavity floor and walls are dense, pigmented, with no pain upon probing. The response to thermal stimuli is absent. Percussion of the tooth causes no pain. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic periodontitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Acute deep caries

650. An orthodontist monitors a 4-year-old child with mouth breath. The child has a history of adenotomy. Objectively: primary dentition occlusion; the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by ⅓; distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are situated in the same vertical plane. What preventive device will help the child to give up the habit of mouth breath?
*a. Standard Schonherrs vestibular screen
b. Rudolphs appliance
c. Vesibular and oral Kraus screen
d. Andresen-Haupl activator
e. Frankels function regulator

651. A 13 year-old girl has presented with gingival haemorrhage and mobility of the front teeth over the last month. Objectively: gingival mucosa around the lower incisors and canines is edematous, hyperemic, bleeds on touch. There is grade l tooth mobility, periodontal pockets are 3 mm deep. Orthopantomogram shows the resorption of interalveolar septa by ⅓ of their height. There is crowding of the lower front teeth. Hygiene index is 4,2. The patient has to consult the following specialist:
a. Endocrinologist
b. Gastroenterologist
*c. Orthodontist
d. Haematologist
e. Neuropathologist

652. A child was born with schistasis of alveolar process, hard and soft palate. The optimal way to feed the child before the surgery will be through:
*a. Obturator
b. Spoon
c. Baby bottle nipple
d. Enteric feeding tube
e. -

653. A group of specialists conducts an epidemiological survey of certain age groups of population aimed at evaluation of periodontal disease prevalence and treatment needs. These rates are studied by means of the following index:
*a. CPITN (WHO index)
b. PI (Russel index)
c. PDI (Ramfjord index)
d. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion index)
e. PMA (Parma)

654. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
a. Bowens disease
b. Verrucous precancer of red border
c. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border
*d. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
e. Erythroplasia

655. An 8,5-year-old child is apparently healthy. The child complains about pain in an upper tooth on the left caused by traumatic injury sustained three hours ago. Objectively: the crown part of the 21 tooth is destroyed by ½, the pulp is red and significantly exposed, probing causes acute pain and bleeding. Percussion of the 21 tooth is extremely painful. Choose the most efficient treatment method of the 21 tooth:
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Vital amputation
c. Devital amputation
d. Bioassay technique
e. Vital extirpation

656. A 50-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing. The state of the abutment teeth is satisfactory. What type of fixation will provide the best conditions for the stabilization of a removable denture?
a. Linear
b. Point
*c. Planar
d. Sagittal
e. Transversal

657. After a preventive orthodontic examination a 9-year-old child was diagnosed with mesial occlusion. The treatment of this pathology involves application of an apparatus with mechanic action. What working element is to be applied in the apparatus intended for the correction of this pathology?
a. Occlusal applications
*b. Screw or spring
c. Inclined plane
d. Elastics and buccal shields
e. Screw and bite plate

658. A 57-year-old patient complains of mobility of all mandibular teeth. Objectively: the 34, 35, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth are missing. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows resorption of the alveolar process within ⅓ of interdental septa height. What construction should be offered to the patient?
*a. Clasp denture with splinting appliances
b. Cap splint
c. Van-Thiel splint
d. Bridge dentures in the region of masticatory teeth
e. Partial removable lamellar denture

659. A 15-year-old girl consulted a dental surgeon about a moderate swelling of the parotid-masticatory region on the left. Objectively: on palpation, the left parotid gland is nodular, dense, painless. The duct exudes somewhat turbid saliva. The duct mouth is dilated, the surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, pasty, with imprints of teeth. Make a diagnosis:
a. Pleomorphic adenoma
b. Chronic interstitial sialoadenitis
c. Sialolithiasis
d. Cyst
*e. Chronic parenchymatous sialoadenitis

660. A 38-year-old patient complains of tension and enlargement of her lower lip and eyelids occuring after taking aspirin for headache. The edema resolves soon after taking antihistaminic drugs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas of lips
*b. Quinckes edema
c. Lymphadenic macrocheilitis
d. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
e. Meige trophedema

661. A 4,5-year-old child presents with eruptions on skin and in the mouth which appeared on the previous day. Objectively: the child is in medium severe condition, body temperature is 38,3°C. Scalp, trunk skin and extremities are covered with multiple vesicles with transparent content. Mucous membrane of cheeks, tongue, hard and soft palate exhibits roundish erosion covered with fibrinous film. Gums remain unchanged. Submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged. What diagnosis can be assumed?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*b. Chicken pox-induced stomatitis
c. Scarlet fever-induced stomatitis
d. Exudative erythema multiforme
e. Measles-induced stomatitis

662. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 5 cm
b. 18 cm
c. 7 cm
*d. 9 cm
e. 12 cm

663. During the examination of a soldered dental bridge supported by the 35 and 38 teeth the following flaws were revealed: the pores in the soldered joints between the intermediate part and supporting crowns, strongly expressed masticatory tubercles, early contact with the opposing teeth, the intermediate part is tightly adjacent to the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What is the way to eliminate these defects?
a. To correct the intermediate part
b. To correct the masticatory surface and polish the joints
c. To remove the tubercles of opposing teeth
*d. To remake the dental bridge
e. To correct the masticatory surface and increase the height of the intermediate saddle part up to 2 mm

664. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. Anamnesis: the tooth hasnt been treated before, decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is destroyed by over ⅔, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. Crown bayonet forceps
b. Straight elevator
c. S-shaped forceps (right)
*d. Bayonet root forceps
e. S-shaped closed-beak forceps

665. A patient complains about paroxysmal upper jaw toothache on the left that is getting worse at night. Toothache intensifies also under stimulation and irradiates to the left eye and temple. Similar attacks were noted three months ago, the patient didnt undergo any treatment. Objectively: the 25 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain at the point of communication, vertical percussion is slightly painful, horizontal one is painless. Mucous membrane in the projection of root apex of the 25 tooth is unchanged, its palpation is painless. Thermal probe causes acute pain, the pain attack is long-lasting. Electroodontodiagnosis is 60 microampere. X-ray picture shows slight widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 25 tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Acute generalized pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

666. A patient has orthopaedic indications for the 37 tooth extraction. What kind of anaesthesia should be given to this patient before the extraction?
a. Mental + buccal anaesthesia
b. Mandibular
*c. Mandibular torus anaesthesia
d. Tuberal + buccal anaesthesia
e. Infraorbital + buccal anaesthesia

667. A 17-year-old patient consulted an orthodontist about improper position of an upper canine. Objectively: permanent occlusion, class I Angles relationship of the first molars, the 13 tooth has vestibular position above the occlusal line, there is a 6,5 mm gap between the 14 and 12 teeth. What period of orthodontic treatment will reduce the time of lidase phonophoresis therapy?
a. Preparatory period
b. -
c. Retention period
*d. Active period
e. Passive period

668. A 50-year-old patient needs a splint for the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43 teeth present I-II class mobility and are devitalized. Which splint would be the most appropriate in this case?
*a. Mamlok-type splint
b. Kurliandsky splint
c. Murrays splint
d. Van Thiel splint
e. Elbrechts splint

669. A 25-year-old patient has a face trauma. Objectively: there is a significant soft tissue swelling of the left half face, haemorrhage into the left eye sclera, crepitation in the region of nose bones. Palpation reveals the mobility of the upper jaw, its percussion reveals tympanitis. X-ray picture shows the fracture line running through the lower margin of the orbit on both sides of the sphenozygomatic suture and reaching behind the maxillary tuber. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
c. Fracture of the left articular bone
d. Fracture of nose bones
e. Le Fort I maxillary fracture

670. A 32-year-old patient complains about mouth soreness, body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, indisposition. Such condition has been occurring periodically for several years after the patient had had a cold. Objectively: lips are covered with haemorrhagic crusts, hyperaemic mucous membrane of lips and cheeks has erosions covered with fibrinous films. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatitis
b. Herpes recidivicus
*c. Multiform exudative erythema
d. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

671. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
a. Oxmans single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
b. Oxmans double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
*c. Fixed Oxmans prosthesis with pivot point
d. Gavrilows prosthesis with pivot point
e. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp

672. A patient complains about mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth, periodic pain, sensation of heaviness in the corresponding half of the upper jaw, haemorrhagic discharges from the left side of nose. These presentations have been observed for 4 months, within the last month the pain has become worse, the patient presents now with general weakness. Examination of the oral cavity reveals the grade II mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth. On palpation of the maxillary tuber, the bone wall was found to be absent. X-ray picture shows a homogeneous shadowing of maxillary sinus; bone structures have unclear contours. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
b. Upper jaw osteoclastoma
*c. Upper jaw cancer
d. Upper jaw adamantinoma
e. Upper jaw sarcoma

673. A 43-year-old female patient complains of mobility of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. The 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit grade II mobility, the mucous membrane around them is swollen and cyanotic. What splinting construction is optimal for this patient?
a. Clasp denture with multilink clasp and claw-like processes
b. Clasp denture with antithrowers
*c. Composite splint reinforced with fiberglass
d. Partial removable denture with a vestibular bar
e. Clasp denture-splint in the frontal part

674. A 5-year-old child complains about spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute serous pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

675. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the child’s submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. Objectively: the child’s face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Submandibular adenophlegmon
*c. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
d. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

676. A 67-year-old patient needs a complete removable denture for his lower jaw. The adjustment of custom tray is done by method of Herbst. It is required to specify the boundary of tray for the sublingual region, 1 cm away from the midline. What Herbst test should be applied for this purpose?
*a. Alternate touching the cheeks with the tongue
b. Active movements of mimic muscled
c. Touching the red border of the upper lip with the toungue
d. Slow mouth opening
e. Swallowing

677. A 68-year-old patient had a stroke, after which she now often experiences urges to vomit causing unilateral TMJ dislocations. The dislocations could only be reduced under anesthesia. The 21-28, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36, 37, 44, 46, 47 teeth are missing. What denture construction is optimal for this patient for the treatment period?
a. Petrosovs appliance with a stopper
b. Schroeder appliance with sliding pivot
c. Khodorovich-Burgonskaya appliance with a stopper
*d. Removable lamellar denture with a mouth opening stopper
e. Yadrovas appliance

678. A 62-year-old patient has a median mandibular fracture complicated by pseudoarthrosis. Objectively: the dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. There is minor mobility of fragments without displacement. What is the most appropriate type of denture for this patient?
a. Lamellar denture without a pivot point
b. Lamellar denture with Oksmans pivot point
*c. Dental bridge without a pivot point
d. Lamellar denture with Weinsteins pivot point
e. Lamellar denture with Gavrilows pivot point

679. A 45-year-old patient presented to aclinic for prosthetics. Objectively: Kennedy III type, I subtype dentition defect is present, the 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, teeth are missing. The bite is fixed. Che Crowns of the 47, 43, 33, 37 teeth are high, of a well-defined anatomical shape, intact. It is planned to fabricate a clasp denture. What system of the clasp denture fixation is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Roach clasp
b. Attachments
c. Continuous clasp
d. Telescopic system
*e. Rumpels bar system

680. A 75-year-old patient has been admitted to the dental department for the right-angle mandibular fracture with a displacement. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the post-traumatic swelling, palpation reveals the mobility of fragments and pain. The patient has a lifelong history of epilepsy. What is the best method of treatment?
a. Immobilization with Vankevich splint
b. Immobilization with Port splint
c. Immobilization with Vasilyev splints
d. Immobilization with Tigerstedt splints
*e. Osteosynthesis

681. A 27-year-old victim was delivered to to the facial surgery department with a cut wound of right cheek. The trauma is civilian, the patient got it in a fight. The deadline for early surgical d-bridement without preliminary antibiotic injection is no more than:
a. 48 hours
b. 12 hours
c. 1 hour
d. 72 hours
*e. 24 hours

682. A 37-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage, pain, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. Objectively: the gums are markedly hyperemic, swollen, bleed on touch, periodontal pockets are 3 mm deep, contain sero-purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar processes, resorption of the interdental septa down to ⅓ of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized grade II periodontitis, chronic course
*b. Generalized grade I periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Generalized grade II periodontitis, exacerbation
e. Generalized grade I periodontitis, chronic course

683. A 25-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage and enlargement. Objectively: hypertrophy of gingival papillae by ⅓ of the crown height in the frontal region of mandible. Periodontal pockets are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epulis
b. Localized periodontitis
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Ulcerous gingivitis
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

684. Examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed some white patches on the buccal mucosa along the teeth closure line that didnt protrude above the inflamed and edematous surrounding tissues. The patches could not be removed on scraping. A patient has smoken an average of 3 packs of cigarettes a day for 20 years. Specify the disease of buccal mucosa:
a. Erosive leukoplakia
*b. Leukoplakia plana
c. Pemphigus
d. Tappeiners leukoplakia (leukoplakia nicotinica)
e. Lichen ruber planus

685. A 7-year-old child sustained a sport injury. He complains about pain in the region of mandible, inability to join his teeth. Pressing against the chin causes intensification of pain in the region of mandible on the right. The child is diagnosed with a fracture of mandible body without fragment displacement. What therapeutic tactics should be chosen in order to prevent the displacement of bone fragments in the transitional dentition?
a. Administration of anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Application of sling bandage
*c. Fragment immobilization by means of an intraoral splint
d. Fixation by means of Tigerstedt splints
e. Osteosynthesis

686. A 25-year-old got a polytrauma as a result of a road accident. On examination, he was diagnosed with dislocation asphyxia. What kind of first aid should be rendered?
*a. Tongue fixation
b. Artificial ventilation of lungs
c. Tracheotomy
d. Medicamental management of laryngeal stenosis
e. Removal of mucus and foreign bodies from the upper airways

687. A 14-year-old child complains of bleeding and pain during eating in the lower right molar. Objectively: the medial contact and masticatory surfaces of the 46 tooth exhibit a large carious cavity filled with red tissue. Superficial probing causes pain and moderate bleeding. Deeper probing causes acute pain. Percussion is painlessl. What is your provisional diagnosis:
*a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic papillitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

688. A 13-year-old boy complains of pain in the region of the extracted 46 tooth, irradiating to the ear and temple, halitosis. The tooth was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Mucosa around the extracted tooth is hyperemic, edematous. The socket of the 46 tooth is filled with a gray clot. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 46 tooth
*b. Alveolitis of the extracted 46 tooth
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis starting from the 46 tooth
d. Neuralgia of the III branch of trigeminus
e. Acute odontogenous lymphadenitis of the right submandibular region

689. A 48-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the 37 tooths roots. What tool should be chosen?
a. Broad-beak forceps
*b. Closed-beak forceps
c. S-shaped forceps
d. Bayonet forceps
e. Curved beak-shaped forceps

690. A 29-year-old patient complains of acute paroxysmal pain in the upper jaw on the left, that gets worse during having cold food and irradiates into the ear and temple. A year ago she experienced intense pain in the 27 the tooth but didnt consult a dentist. Three days ago there was the second attack of pain. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 27th tooth, interconnecting with the tooth cavity. Probing the open area causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute limited pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

691. A 43-year-old patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 36th tooth. X-ray examination revealed a breakage of an endodontic tool in the distal root. The root apex exhibits a well-defined area of bone tissue destruction (d = 5 mm) with clear margins. What method of treatment is most appropriate in this case?
a. Tooth replantation
b. Conservative treatment
c. Root apex resection
*d. Dental hemisection
e. Root amputation

692. A patient complains of general weakness, pain in the gums, halitosis. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic, body temperature is 38,5°C, submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Interdental gingival papillae are inflamed, their tops are "detruncated", covered with gray-yellow necrotic incrustation. Radiography of alveolar process and blood count reveal no apparent changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis
b. Localized periodontitis
c. Acute leukosis
*d. Acute ulcerous gingivitis
e. Agranulocytosis

693. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a swelling in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of upper lip edema, nasolabial fold is smoothed. Mucogingival fold of the upper jaw vestibular surface in the region of the 11, 12, 21 teeth is smoothed, hyperemic. Palpation is painful. Fluctuation is present. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw satrting from the 21 tooth. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Extraction of the 12, 21, 22 teeth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy
d. Preservation of the 21 tooth, anti-inflammatory therapy
*e. Preservation of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy

694. A 53-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right parotid region. The tumour was revealed six months ago, within this period it doubled in size. Objectively: the right parotid region has a dense 1,5 x 2 cm large neoplasm, the duct of the right parotid gland secretes transparent saliva. The gland puncture gave no results. What disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Lipoma of parotid-masticatory region
b. Retention cyst of parotid gland
c. Chronic lymphadenitis of parotid-masticatory region
d. Fibroma of parotid-masticatory region
*e. Pleomorphic adenoma of parotid gland

695. A dentist performing gum anesthetization before the closed curettage had mistakenly used the 10% solution of silver nitrate instead of 10% lidocaine solution. The gums immediately became white, swollen, painful. Which of these medications is to be used for emergency care?
a. 50% of ethyl alcohol
b. 0,1% solution of liquid ammonia
c. 2% solution of citric acid
*d. 3% solution of potassium iodide
e. 0,5% solution of acetic acid

696. During the examinations and everyday orthopedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. How to sterilize dental mirrors?
a. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
b. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes
c. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
*d. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
e. in the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes

697. A 45-year-old patient complains of burning tongue, a metallic taste in mouth. Three months ago she got a dental bridge made of gold and supported by the 16, 14 teeth. Oral cavity exasmination reveals no objective changes. The 36, 37, 46 teeth are sealed with amalgam fillings. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
*a. Galvanic currents
b. Allergy
c. Neurologic disorder
d. Mechanic trauma
e. Chemical factors

698. A 10-year-old child complains of sore throat, cough, fever (up to 38°C). These presentations turned up 2 days ago. Objectively: acute catarrhal stomatitis is present. Tonsils are swollen, hyperemic, covered with yellow-gray friable film which can be easily removed. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes are significantly enlarged, painful on palpation. Laboratory analysis revealed leuko- and monocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diphtheria
b. Rubella
c. Measles
d. Scarlet fever
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

699. A chemical plant worker consulted a dentist about an oral mucosa burn caused by caustic soda. Which of the following medications should be chosen for emergency care?
a. 2% citric acid solution
b. 50% ethyl alcohol
*c. 0,5% acetic acid solution
d. 3% sodium chloride solution
e. 0,1% liquid ammonia

700. A 7-year-old boy complains of fever up to 38°C, headache, sore throat. Objectively: slightly hyperemic soft palate mucosa, anterior palatine arches and tonsils exhibit erosions. Submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, painless. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Loefflers Bacillus
b. Herpes simplex
c. Epstein-Barr virus
d. Bordet-Gengou bacillus
*e. Coxsackie virus

701. A 38-year-old patient complains of discomfort, occasional sensation of tearing in the 17 tooth, infrequent pain during eating hot food that lasts for 10-20 minutes. Objectively: the 17 tooth is filled with composite materials, the tooth is slightly darker than the other ones. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Recurrent caries
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic granulating pulpitis
*e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

702. A 7-year-old child presents with deterioration of general health status, body temperature rise up to 38,0°C. Objectively: buccal mucosa is covered with white maculae of a pinhead size, protruding above the level of the mucosa. There are pink maculae on the palate. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diphthera
b. Scarlet fever
c. Chicken pox
*d. Measles
e. Infectious mononucleosis

703. A 37-year-old patient has been diagnosed with abscessed furuncle of the upper lip. After dissection of the inflammation focus the exudate has been sent for bacteriological analysis. Which causative agent for furuncle is most likely to be found?
*a. Staphylococcus monoculture
b. Proteus monoculture
c. Staphylococcus and protozoa association
d. Colibacillus monoculture
e. Streptococcus monoculture

704. A 20-year-old patient is to be given applicative anaesthesia in the frontal region of the upper jaw prior to the conduction anesthesia. What concentration of lidocaine solution is required for applicative anesthesia?
a. 3%
b. 0,5%
c. 15%
d. 2%
*e. 10%

705. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on both jaws by means of fullcast combined dental bridges. The patient has a history of essential hypertension. Which haemostatic drug SHOULD NOT be used for the gums retraction?
a. Iron sulphate
*b. Noradrenaline
c. Tetrahydrozoline
d. Aluminium chloride
e. Hydrogen peroxide

706. A 30-year-old patient complains of a painless tumour-like formation in the region of the left mandibular alveolar process. Objectively: there is a pale pink 1x1,5 cm large tumour-like formation on the vestibular surface of the alveolar process at the 34 and 35 teeth. The formation has a broad base, it does not bleed. Crowns of the 34, 35 teeth are intact, the teeth are non-mobile. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows no changes in bone structure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic epulis
b. Giant-cell epulis
c. Mucosa papilloma
*d. Fibrous epulis
e. Pleomorphic adenoma

707. A 32-year-old patient needs to be provided with metal-ceramic crowns for the 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. During the dental visit he is given infiltration anaesthesia with Ultracain DS anaesthetic. What elements enter into its composition?
a. 2% articaine with epinephrine
b. 2% mepivacaine with adrenaline
c. 4% articaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
d. 3% mepivacaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
*e. 4% articaine with adrenaline

708. A patient complains of "clicking" in the TMJ. On auscultation, the sounds can be heard in the middle and at the beginning of mouth opening. These signs give evidence of:
a. Joint subluxation
*b. Reduction in occlusal vertical dimension
c. Increase in occlusal vertical dimension
d. TMJ dislocation
e. Joint capsule distension

709. A 52-year-old female patient complains of severe paroxysmal pain in the region of the 34 tooth. Throughout the year the 35, 36, 37 teeth were sequentially extracted because of pain complaints. Percussion of the 34 tooth causes acute paroxysmal pain. The same pain arises when talking and washing the projection area of the mental foramen. Clinical and roentgenologic examination revealed no signs of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. 34 tooth pulpitis
b. Facial nerve neuritis
c. Neuritis of the 3 branch of trigeminus
*d. Neuralgia of the 3 branch of trigeminus
e. Ganglionitis of pterygopalatine ganglion

710. An 8-year-old child is found to have convex facil profile, forced closing of lips, sagittal gap of 7 mm. Eschler-Bittner test produces some face improvement. This abnormality can be eliminated by means of Frankel type regulator. What is the mechanism of action of this device?
*a. Normalization of labial, buccal and lingual pressure as well as of mandible position
b. Normalization of upper front teeth position by means of a vestibular bar
c. Maxillary expansion by means of a screw
d. Inhibition of maxilla growth in the sagittal direction
e. Normalization of mandible position and growth by means of intermandibular traction

711. Preventive examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed a carious cavity in the 23 tooth located within the mantle dentin. The cavity floor and walls are of dense, markedly pigmented dentin, probing and cold test provoke no pain, percussion of the 23 tooth is painless. Electroodontometry results - 6 ma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic periodontitis
c. Chronic deep caries
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

712. A 65-year-old patient complains of a break off of three front artificial porcelain teeth of the removable denture fabricated 2 months ago. In what way are the porcelain teeth linked with the plastic denture base?
a. By means of glue
b. By means of diatoric cavities
c. By means of clasps
*d. By means of crampon-fixing wire elements
e. Due to physicochemical connection

713. On removing a dental plaque, a 19-year-old patient is found to have two white patches in the precervical region of the 11 and 21 teeth. After drying the patches increase in size. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fluorosis
*b. Initial caries
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Local hypoplasia

714. A 72-year-old patient complains of burning pain in the corners of mouth. Objectively: the folds of mouth corners have erosions, covered with white coating that can be easily removed, mucous membrane of mouth corners is macerated, of pearly colour. There is pathological tooth wear and decreased vertical dimension of occlusion. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent labial fissure
b. Streptococcal angular cheilitis
c. Atopic cheilitis
*d. Angular cheilitis candidiasis
e. Syphilitic angular cheilitis

715. A 35-year-old woman was admitetd to the oral surgery department two hours after a road accident. Objectively: cutaneous integuments are pale, there are beads of sweat on her face. Respiration is heavy and obstructed. Pulse rate is 120 bmp, AP is 70/60 mm Hg. There is wound penetrating to the oral cavity on the left cheek. During transportation the woman was in supine position with her head thrown backwards. What kind of asphyxia is likely to develop in this patient?
a. Valvular
b. Dislocational
c. Obturative
*d. Aspirating
e. Stenotic

716. A 39-year-old patient complains of some soft ulcers and tubercles on the oral mucosa, gingival haemorrhage, pain and loosening of teeth. Objectively: mucous membrane of tongue and gums presents single ulcers with soft, swollen, slightly painful edges, covered with a yellow film. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, soft, painless, not adherent to the surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Scrofuloderma
b. Lepra
c. Suttons aphthae
d. Tertiary syphilis
*e. Lupus tuberculosis

717. A 46-year-old patient has been diagnosed with chronic concrementous pulpitis of the 27 tooth. X-ray picture shows that the concrement is located in the crown part of the tooth cavity and occupies ¼ of its volume. Select an adequate method of treatment:
a. Vital amputation
b. Biologic method
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

718. A girl is 13 years old. She lives in an area where fluoride concentration in the drinking water is at the rate of 1,6 mg/l. Dental examination revealed some chalk-like spots on the vestibular surfaces of all her teeth. The white coloration is more intense in the cenre and less on the periphery. There is light-brown pigmentation in the region of the central incisors along the cutting edge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Dental fluorosis
b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
c. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
d. Amelogenesis imperfecta
e. Acute initial caries

719. A 28-year-old patient has been admitted to the oral and maxillofacial surgery for a carbuncle of face. Objectively: the patient is in a critical condition, face, mucous membranes of lips and conjunctiva are edematous and cyanotic. Body temperature is 40°C. The patient presents with delirium, hallucinations. The carbuncle is located on the upper lip, the surrounding soft tissues are swollen. Palpebral fissures are closed due to the edema of eyelids. What is the most likely complication of carbuncle?
a. Sepsis
b. Cerebral abscess
c. Meningitis
d. Orbit phlegmon
*e. Cavernous sinus thrombosis

720. Preventive examination of a 20-year-old student revealed chronic candidiasis of the oral mucosa, generalized lymphadenopathy. He has a 1-year history of herpes simplex. The body temperature often rises to 37,4-37,5°C, the patient has lost 8 kg of body weight over the last month. These symptoms may be indicative of the following disease:
*a. AIDS
b. Acute leukosis
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Chronic leukosis

721. Parents of a 5-month-old baby complain of food refusal, ulcers on the palate. The infant was born prematurely, is now artificially fed. Objectively: at the junction of hard and soft palate there is an oval well-defined ulcer, covered with yellow-gray film and limited by a hyperemic swelling, protruding above the surface of oral mucosa. Which group of drugs should be administered for the aphtha epithelization?
a. Antimycotic drugs
b. Antiseptics
c. Antibiotics
*d. Keratoplastic agents
e. Antiviral drugs

722. A patient has been diagnosed with traumatic open angular fracture of mandible with a fragments displacement. Which of the following should be applied for transport immobilization of the fragments?
*a. Entin head-chin strap
b. Weber splints
c. Gunning splints
d. Standard Vasyliev splints
e. Tigerstedt splints

723. A 45-year-old female patient complains of a slightly painful, tumour-like formation in the right parotid region that appeared two months ago for no apparent reason. The patient notes weakness, occasional body temperature rise up to 37,2°C-37,6°C. Two weeks ago she underwent the anti-inflammatory therapy which did not have positive effect. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to a minor swelling in the right parotid region. Palpation reveals a roundish dense and elastic formation with even contours, it is slightly painful, not adherent to the skin. Incisive canal exudes a small amount of transparent saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sjogrens syndrome
*b. Hertsenbergs pseudoparotitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
d. Parotid atheroma
e. Acute infectious parotitis

724. A 3-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic for the traumatic loss of an upper central incisor. The patient hasnt undergone prosthetics before. He has a history of asthma. What are the first-priority measures of bronchospasm prevention?
a. Fabrication of a temporary construction
b. Teeth treatment with a remineralizing solution
c. Administration of sedative drugs
*d. Tests for plastic and metal allergy
e. Preparation following the anaesthetization

725. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and "hurt" her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and doesn’t make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphadenitis
*b. Suppurated cheek haematoma
c. Cheek haematoma
d. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible
e. Cheek phlegmon

726. A 35-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 36 tooth. There is a Blacks class II cavity affecting masticatory surface. What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
a. Light-cure microfilled composite
*b. Light-cure microhybride composite
c. Light-cure fluid composite
d. Glass ionomer cement
e. Silicophosphate cement

727. A 53-year-old patient complains of missing of mandibular teeth. He has a history of microstomy. Objectively: the 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47 and 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are stable, immobile. What kind of denture construction is recommended for this patient?
a. Clasp denture
b. Dental bridge supported by the 43, 33 teeth and removable denture
*c. Collapsible removable partial lamellar denture
d. Splint-denture
e. Removable partial lamellar denture

728. After removal of dental deposit an 18-year-old patient underwent preventive examination. It revealed painless chalky spots in the precervical area on the vestibular surface of the 22 and 41 teeth. Result of enamel resistance test is 7. What morphological changes are typical for this disease?
a. Changes in the mantle dentine
b. Damage of dentinoenamel junction
c. Degeneratic changes of odontoblasts
d. Superficial enamel demineralization
*e. Subsurface enamel demineralization

729. A 3-year-old girl has been diagnosed with acute odontogenous periostitis of mandible starting from the 74 tooth. It is required to perform periostomy and extract the 74 tooth. The child is excited. Choose the best type of anesthesia for the surgery:
a. Intubation anaesthesia
*b. Intravenous anaesthesia
c. Mandibular anaesthesia
d. Central anaesthesia
e. Infiltration anaesthesia

730. A 25-year-old patient complains of intermittent pain during taking sweet and cold food in the 21 tooth. Objectively: there is a hard tissue defect within the enamel in the cervical region of the 21 tooth. The enamel edges are uneven and chalky. Probing the cavity bottom provokes no pain, there is short-term pain reaction to cold stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Initial caries
c. Wedge-shaped defect
d. Enamel erosion
*e. Superficial caries

731. X-ray examination of the 46 tooth in a 7-year-old child reveals the following: the root walls are parallel, their thickness gradually decreases, they have pointed ends. The root canal converges towards the tooth cavity, and diverges at the developing apical hole. Periodontal gap is of the same width along the entire length of the root. At the root apex it merges with the growth zone. Specify the stage of root development:
a. Complete root and periodontium development
b. Continuing root development
c. Open apex
*d. Continuing root apex development
e. Continuing periodontium development

732. A 6-year-old boy hit his forehead one day ago. A few hours later a swelling appeared in the right superciliary region. Objectively: there is a considerable edema of forehead tissues spreading to eyelids of the right eye, the skin over the swelling is cyanotic, the swelling is of soft consistency. Fluctuation is also present. General condition of the boy is normal. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Hematoma of the right superciliary region
b. Hematic abscess of the right superciliary region
c. Fracture of frontal bone
d. Inflammatory infiltration of tissues of the right superciliary region
e. Postraumatic edema of tissues of the right superciliary region

733. The child is 13 years old. The disease began suddenly with a body temperature rise up to 39°C, swelling of the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the left cheek edema. The skin over the swollen area is hyperemic and tense. The 26 tooth exhibits a large carious cavity, percussion of the 26 tooth causes pain reaction. The 25, 26, 27 teeth are mobile. Mucogingival junction in the region of the 24, 25, 26, 27 tooth is indistinct, alveolar mucosa is hyperemic and bilaterally swollen in the region of the 25, 26. 27 teeth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Odontogenous maxillary periostitis to the left of the 26 tooth
b. Odontogenous purulent maxillary sinusitis induced by the 26 tooth
*c. Odontogenous maxillary osteomyelitis to the left of the 26 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radicular cyst induced by the 26 tooth
e. Chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth

734. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
a. Dentafol
b. Stomalgin
*c. Gelin
d. Stomatoplast
e. Orthocor

735. A 42-year-old builder complains about a condyloma on his lower lip. It appeared 1,5 month ago. It has been significantly growing throughout the last week. Objectively: the red border of the lower lip is cyanotic and infiltrated, it has some isolated closly adhering squamae. There is a well-defined hemispherical formation 8 mm in diameter and 4 mm high in the centre. The formation is of grey-and-blue-and-red colour, it has rough surface formed by thin, closely adhering and thick-based squamae. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, dense and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pyogenic granuloma
*b. Lower lip cancer
c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Verruciform precancer
e. Viral wart

736. After the extraction of the 26 tooth a 43-year-old patient presents with a communication between the oral cavity and the maxillary sinus. X-ray picture shows no changes in the maxillary sinuses. What tactics should be chosen by a dental surgeon to prevent maxillary sinusitis?
a. Socket tamponade with a iodoform turunda
*b. Plastic restoring of the communication
c. Sinus rinsing with an antibiotic solution
d. Socket filling with a hemostatic sponge
e. Socket filling with a blood clot

737. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child reveals the infantile swallowing. The bad habit of thrusting the tongue between the teeth may cause the following complication:
a. Broadenning of the upper dental arch
*b. Incomplete eruption of the front teeth
c. Broadening of the lower dental arch
d. Narrowing of the upper dental arch
e. Narrowing of the lower dental arch

738. A 13-year-old girl has been experiencing gingival hemorrhages and frontal teeth mobility throughout the last month. Objectively: gingival mucous membrane in the region of lower incisors and canines is edematic, hyperemic, it bleeds on touch. These teeth present with I degree mobility, parodontal pouches are 3 mm deep. Orthopantomogram shows reduction of bone tissue of interalveolar septa by ⅓ of their height. Frontal teeth of the lower jaw are overcrowded. Hygiene index is 4,2. What local treatment should be provided in the first place?
a. Physical therapy
b. Anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Antibacterial therapy
d. Orthodontic care
*e. Professional hygiene

739. A 21-year-old patient complains of a drop-shaped bulge in the cervical region. Objectively: there is an enamel droplet of about 2 mm in diameter on the vestibular surface of the 33 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fluorosis
b. Supernumerary tooth
c. Marble-bone disease
*d. Enamel hyperplasia
e. Enamel hypoplasia

740. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lower jaw dislocation
b. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
*c. Lower jaw subluxation
d. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
e. Meniscus tresis

741. A 47-year-old patient complains of persistent ache in the 27 tooth, that gets worse when biting. Objectively: skin colour is normal, the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens without any difficulties, alveolar mucosa at the level of 27 tooth is edematous and hyperemic. The 27 tooth presents a deep carious cavity communicating with the pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
*b. Exacerbation of acute periodontitis of the 27 tooth
c. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 27 tooh
d. Acute purulent maxillary periostitis in the region of the 27 tooth
e. Chronic odontogenic left-sided maxillary sinusitis

742. A 27-year-old patient complains of bleeding, pain and swelling of gums, tooth mobility, halitosis, general weakness. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful, gums are hyperemic and cyanotic, they are also swollen and bleed at probing, periodontal pockets are 5-8 mm deep and contain sero-purulent exudate. There is massive dental deposit, gingival recession and tooth migration. X-ray picture shows diffuse osteoporosis and irregular, predominantly vertical, resorption of alveolar septa down to ⅔ of root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Grade III parodontosis
b. Chronic generalized grade III periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized grade II periodontitis
d. Eosinophilic granuloma
*e. Exacerbation of generalized grade III periodontitis

743. A 25-year-old patient complains about a light brown spot in the upper foretooth. Objectively: the 23 tooth has a single light brown spot in the cervical region. Probing shows smooth surface. The tooth is nonresponsive to cold and probing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Acute initial caries

744. A 40-year-old patient has an open occlusion resulting from the bilateral fracture of his upper jaw and following malunion of fragments. The occlusal vertical dimension is maintained only by molar teeth. There is a gap of about 1-1,5 mm between the rest of teeth. The dentitions are without gaps. What kind of treatment would be most appropriate in this situation?
a. Orthodontic treatment
b. Combined apparatus and surgical treatment
c. Prosthetics with combined crowns
*d. The molar teeth should be ground off and covered with crowns
e. Open reposition

745. A 41-year-old patient complains of mobility of the 24, 26, 27 teeth, purulent discharges from the socket of the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 months ago the patient underwent a dissection along the mucogingival junction and extraction of the 25 tooth. Objectively: alveolar mucosa in the region of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is cyanotic and edematic. Along the mucogingival junction there is a fistula with protruding granulations. There are also purulent granulation discharges from the socket of the extracted 25 tooth. In the right infraorbital region some soft tissue swelling is present. Which disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Exacermation of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Chronic diffuse osteomyelitis
c. Maxillary actinomycosis
d. Chronic alveolitis
*e. Chronic limited osteomyelitis

746. Analysis of a 10-year-old boys jaw models revealed that occlusal plane of the frontal maxillary teeth was of concave form, its lateral parts were convex. Form of the alveolar process also represents deformation of dental arches. The upper jaw is of saddle-like form with abrupt narrowing in the region of premolar teeth. What type of bite is it?
a. Distal
b. Cross
c. Mesial
d. Deep
*e. Open

747. A 34-year-old male patient complains about acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is getting worse as affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he didnt consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

748. A 29-year-old patient undergoes a procedure of a metal inlay fabrication by the direct method. The inlay is intended for the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth presents a Black class I carious cavity. Electroodontometry results - 6 ma. Examination of the ready inlay revealed a casting defect in the region of the external angle. The dentists further actions will be:
a. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with a composite
b. Cement fixation of the inlay
*c. Fabrication of a new inlay
d. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with amalgam
e. Plastic fixation of the inlay

749. A gravida (36 weeks) complains of gingival haemorrhages and excessive plaque despite a thorough hygienic care of oral cavity. Objectively: gingival papilla and marginal gingival edge are spongiose, bleeding when touched. Fedorov-Volodkinas hygiene indexis 3,7 points. What kind of toothpaste should be recommended to this patient after the professional oral hygiene?
*a. Chlorhexidine-containing toothpaste
b. Fluorine-containing toothpaste
c. Gel toothpaste
d. Herbal toothpaste
e. Toothpaste with mineralizing agents

750. Two years after radiation therapy a 49-year-old patient has been diagnosed with recurrence of the lower lip carcinoma. Objectively: there is a 1x2 cm large neoplasm with an ulcer in the centre in the region of the right half of the lower lip. Palpation of the right submandibular region reveals two enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes of round shape. Specify the stage of the disease:
a. T1 N0 M0
b. T2 N0 M0
c. T1 N2 M0
d. T1 N1 M0
*e. T2 N1 M0

751. A 7-year-old child has been diagnosed with a complete dislocation of the 11 tooth caused by a trauma that occurred 24 hours ago. The tooth has been taken along with the patient to the dentists. Objectively: the alveolar socket edges are slightly hyperemic, the socket bone walls are intact, the socket itself is filled with a blood clot. What is the optimal way of treatment?
*a. Replantation of the 11th tooth with a prior filling of the channel
b. Extraction of the 11th tooth
c. Replantation of the 11th tooth before the filling of the channel
d. Reposition and fixation of the 11th tooth
e. Socket suturing with catgut

752. X-ray examination of the maxillary alveolar process of a 35-year-old patient reveals a root fracture of the 11 tooth in its apical region. The tooth has been treated before, the canal is filled. The patient has a history of the tooth trauma. What method of treatment is indicated for this case?
a. -
*b. Root apex resection
c. Tooth replantation
d. Tooth extraction
e. Tooth crowning

753. Mother of a 3-year-old child complains about white spots on the upper anterior teeth of her child. Objectively: the vestibular surface of the 51 and 61 teeth exhibits a defect within the enamel. Probing is painless. What is the optimal method of treatment?
a. Treatment with fluorine lacquer
b. Electrophoresis of sodium fluoride solution
c. Remodentum application
*d. Impregnation with silver nitrate solution
e. Preparation and filling

754. A patient with haemophilia consulted a dental surgeon about decay of a right lower tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 46 tooth is completely decayed below the gum level. Percussion causes minor pain reaction. It is planned to extract the 46 tooth. The extraction procedure should be performed in:
*a. Haematological department
b. Maxillofacial surgery department after the consultation with a haematologist
c. Stomatological clinic and following administration of haemostatic drugs
d. Maxillofacial surgery department
e. Stomatological clinic

755. External examination of a 9-year-old boy revealed strongly expressed nasolabial and labio-mental folds, a shortening of the lower third of face. Examination of the oral cavity revealed late transitional dentition, the upper front teeth completely overbite the lower teeth, the palate exhibits imprints of the lower incisors. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Supraocclusion
b. Mesial occlusion
c. Dentoalveolar mandibular lengthening
d. Dentoalveolar maxillary lengthening
e. Distal occlusion

756. A 38-year-old patient complains of acute paroxysmal pain in the region of his left upper jaw, left eye and temple. The pain is lasting (2-3 hours), gets worse at night. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a deep carious cavity, floor probing causes painful response, thermal stimuli provoke long-lasting pain, percussion provokes minor pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Pulpitis complicated by the periodontitis
*c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of the chronic pulpitis
e. Acute limited pulpitis

757. A 52-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. There is gingival edema, parodontal pouches are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by ½ of root length. A dentist made a diagnosis: generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is the most efficient in this situation?
a. Plastic mouthguard
b. Temporary Novotny splint
c. Mamlock splint
d. Murrays splint
*e. Elbrecht splint

758. A 12-year-old boy repeatedly visits a dentist to finish treatment of the 36 tooth for the exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. The complaints are absent. Objectively: occlusive dressing on the 36 tooth is preserved, tooth percussion is painlessl, mucous membrane of the 36 has no pathological changes, is painless on palpation. What material should be used for root canal filling in this case?
*a. Sealer with a gutta-percha point
b. Phosphate cement
c. Resorcinol-formalin paste
d. Calcium-containing paste
e. Zinc-eugenol paste

759. A 14-year-old child complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal teeth region. Objectively: enamel of the 11, 12, 21, 22, 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth is thin in the region of cutting edge, there is a sulcate enamel pit 1,5 mm wide which encircles the tooth and is parallel to the cutting edge. The cusps of the 16, 26, 36, 46 teeth are underdeveloped and have conical form. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Stainton-Capdepont dysplasia
*c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
e. Enamel dysplasia

760. A 12-year-old boy complains of severe pain caused by cold food in the 11 tooth. A day before he had a crown break off of the 11 tooth. Examination revealed an oblique fracture of the 11 tooth crown with the opening of the tooth cavity, probing causes acute pain, comparative percussion is painful, there is minor tooth mobility. What treatment should be administered?
*a. Vital extirpation
b. Biologic method
c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

761. A 68-year-old patient with compensated insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus had to spend 8 hours at a hospital. Within this time he didnt eat and was nervous. The patient became aggressive, pale and sweaty, then he lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Acute respiratory failure
c. Collapse
d. Hypertensic crisis
*e. Hypoglycemic coma

762. An 8-year-old child complains of a painless round formation under the tongue on the left which was noticed by accident about a month ago. Objectively: there is a roundish formation up to 2,0 cm in diameter in the sublingual region deep in the soft tissues of mouth floor. It is soft, painless to palpation, the mucous membrane over it is of grayish-blue color. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidermoid cyst of the mouth floor
b. Lymphangioma of the mouth floor
*c. Ranula of the left sublingual salivary gland
d. Hemangioma of the mouth floor
e. Dermoid cyst of the mouth floor

763. A 70-year-old patient complains about the mobility of the 21 tooth. The tooth has not been treated before. Objectively: there is II class mobility of the 21 tooth, the root is exposed by ½. What tool should be used to extract the tooth?
a. Beak-shaped forceps
*b. Straight forceps
c. S-shaped forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. Bayonet forceps

764. A 12-year-old child presents with missing 31 and 41 teeth, the gap between the 32 and 42 teeth is 10 mm. Choose the most rational denture construction:
a. Dental bridge
*b. Partial lamellar removable adjustable denture
c. Interdental wedge
d. Clasp denture
e. Adjustable microprosthesis

765. A 44-year-old patient consulted a surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain was noted 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unlimited. The crown fof the 26 tooth is half-destroyed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperemic on the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth was treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
b. Acute purulent periostitis of upper jaw of the 26 tooth on the left
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
e. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth

766. Parents of a 1,5-month-old child complain of whitish depositions on the childs buccal and labial mucosa. Objectively: labial and buccal mucosa is hyperemic and covered with caseous deposition that can be easily removed. Specify the causative agent of this disease:
a. Fusiform bacillus
b. Vincents spirochaetes
c. Loefflers bacillus
*d. Candida fungi
e. Diplococci

767. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the red border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumor-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the red border, it is dense and grayish-red. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can be hardly removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Verrucous precancer of the red border of lip
b. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
c. Bowens disease
d. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the red border of lip
e. Erythroplasia of Queyrat

768. An 8-year-old boy was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 21 tooth. It was treated by extirpation method. Choose the material for root filling:
a. Glass-ionomer cement
*b. Calcium-containing material
c. Phosphate cement
d. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
e. Resorcin-formalin paste

769. A 20-year-old patient complains of general weakness, fever, headache. These presentations appeared three days ago. Objectively: the regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpationl, body temperature is 37,8°C, oral mucosa is hyperemic and edematous. Mucous mebrane of lips, palate, gums, cheeks presents single erosions of polycyclic irregular shape, covered with grayish-white film, painful. Which drugs should be administered for the local treatment of the early disease?
*a. Antiviral
b. Antiseptics
c. Corticosteroid ointments
d. Keratoplastic agents
e. Dyes

770. Examination of a 5-year-old child revealed a cariuos cavity communicating with the tooth cavity on the approximal surface of the 54 tooth. Halitosis is present. Superficial probing of the cavity is painless, deeper probing causes pain reaction. Percussion is painless. Interviewing revealed that hot food caused pain. Select the medication for antiseptic treatment of root canals:
a. Furacilin solution
b. Formalin solution
c. Aethonium solution
*d. Sodium hypochlorite
e. Alcohol

771. A 40-year-old patient has been given anesthesia, immediately after which he developed severe weakness, heart palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, skin is markedly hyperemic, there is acute headache, AP is 180/100 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. What state is it?
a. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
b. Cardial pain
c. Myocardial infarction
d. An attack of stenocardia
*e. Hypertensic crisis

772. A 26-year-old patient presented at a clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 16 tooth is destroyed by ⅓. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of cavity preparation?
a. Completing the cavity floor
b. Completing the cavity walls
c. Making additional cavities
*d. Cavity widening and necrosectomy
e. Beveling

773. An 18-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise, weakness, pain induced by eating and deglutition. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is erythematic with multiple petechia. Pharynx is hyperaemic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, painless. In blood: leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypic mononuclears, ESR is 30 mm/h. What is the leading factor of disease development?
a. Bacterial infection
b. Immediate allergy
c. Delayed allergy
d. Autoimmune disorders
*e. Viral infection

774. A 63-year-old patient requires a full-arch denture for the upper jaw. Objectively: the 18, 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing, the gag reflex is not marked, the torus is of average size. In order to avoid possible inconvenience while using the denture, the arch should be located at the following distance from the palatine fossae:
a. 16-22 mm
b. 2-3 mm
c. 23-25 mm
*d. 10-12 mm
e. 4-8 mm

775. During extration of the 26 tooth a 34-year-old patient developed tinnitus, skin pallor, weakness. She was diagnosed with vertigo. What is the most appropriate tactics of emergency care?
a. Intravenous injection of cordiamin
b. Intravenous injection of 50% analgin
c. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
d. Intravenous injection of 0,1% adrenalin
*e. Placing the patient in Trendelenburg position

776. Preventive examination of a 55-year-old man revealed a well-defined area of opaque mucosal epithelium of the left cheek that didnt protrude above the surrounding tissues and could not be removed on scraping. Crowns of the 34, 35, 36 teeth were strongly decayed and had sharp edges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Candidiasis
c. Soft leukoplakia
*d. Leukoplakia
e. Lupus erythematosus

777. A 42-year-old patient complains of a cavity in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity, dentine is dense, pigmented, there is pain reaction to a cold stimulus, percussion and probing are painless. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

778. A 59-year-old patient has a bilateral fracture of mandible in the region of the 44, 34 teeth, other masticatory teeth are missing, toothless fragments are not displaced but mobile. Which orthosis should be used for the immobilization of bone fragments?
*a. Vankevich splint with orthodontic elastics
b. Rudkos apparatus
c. Limbergs splint
d. Zbarzh apparatus
e. Petrosovs apparatus

779. A maxillofacial surgery department admitted a patient with a half-open mouth, his chin was put forward and deviated to the right. On palpation, the left mandibular fossa was found to be empty. Internal palpation failed to detect the left articular head. Mandibular movements were possible but restricted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Unilateral dislocation of the left TMJ
b. Bilateral dislocation of the TMJ
c. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
d. Unilateral dislocation of the right TMJ
e. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ

780. A 62-year-old patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic with complaints about poor fixation of complete removable lamellar dentures that shows up during talking and wide mouth opening. The dentures were fabricated 5 days ago. In course of denture fabrication process a mistake was made during:
a. Wax reproduction check
b. Occlusal plane orientation
c. Plastic polymerization
*d. Obtaining the functional impression
e. Interalveolar dimension measurement

781. A patient consulted a doctor about recurrent pain in the frontal part of his upper jaw. He has history of previous treatment for pulpitis. Objectively: the crown of the 12 tooth is restored with a filling. X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows an area of bone tissue destruction (up to 1 cm in diameter) at the root apex of the 12 tooth. The root channel of the 12 tooth is filled up to the top. The patient was diagnosed with cystogranuloma of the 12 tooth. Choose the best method of treatment:
a. Dissection along the mucogingival junction
b. Replantation of the 12 tooth
c. Conservative treatment
d. Extraction of the 12 tooth
*e. Root apex resection

782. A 47-year-old patient with completely edentulous upper jaw underwent delayed implantation with cylindrical implants. Prosthetics is recommended in:
a. 3 months
b. 2 weeks
c. 1 month
d. 24 hours
*e. 5-6 months

783. A 23-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhages, fatigue, indisposition. The symptoms have appeared quite recently. Objectively: the skin and oral mucosa are pale. Gums bleed when touched. There are petechiae on the mucous membrane of cheeks, lips and palate. What laboratory test will allow to make a diagnosis?
*a. Complete blood count
b. Immunogram
c. Blood test for sugar
d. Blood test for Vitamin C
e. Bleeding time test

784. A 32-year-old patient complains about pain and swelling in the region of his mandible and left cheek. He has been suffering from this for 2 days. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 37,5°C. There is an edema of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes are bilaterally enlarged, painful on palpation. Crown of the 37 tooth is partially decayed, the tooth is immobile, percussion is slightly painful. Mucogingival fold in the region of the 37 tooth is edematic, hyperaemic, flattened, its palpation causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
*b. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
c. Chronic productive periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
d. Abscess of alveololingual groove on the left
e. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible

785. A 35-year-old male consulted a dentist about the 26 tooth extraction. After the patient had been given tuberal anaesthesia, he presented with progressing tissue edema and limited mouth opening. This condition was caused by:
a. Hypersensitivity to the anaesthetic
b. Nerve trunk trauma
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Muscle trauma during anaesthetization
*e. Vessel trauma

786. Parents of a 12-year-old child consulted an orthodontist about improper position of the childs upper teeth. Objectively: the face is narrow, elongated; the developing occlusion is present (temporary second molars). The 13 and 23 teeth are located beyond the dental arch, they deviate to the lips above the occlusal plane, there is a 2,5 mm gap between the 12 and 14 teeth, and a 1,5 mm gap between the 22 and 24 ones, 45o rotation the 33 and 43 teeth is present. Choose the most rational method of treatment:
a. All the answers are wrong
b. Extraction of temporary premolars and expansion of dental arches
*c. Extraction of the premolars and relocation of the canines
d. Compact osteotomy and expansion of dental arches
e. Expansion of dental arches in the region of canine apices

787. A 10-year-old girl complains of minor pain in a lower jaw tooth occuring during having cold food. Objectively: the masticatory surface of the 36 tooth exhibits a carious cavity with a narrow inlet located within the mantle dentin. Probing causes pain along the enamel-dentin border. Make a diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Acute deep caries
*c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Superficial caries

788. A 23-year-old patient complains of whitish spots on the masticatory teeth, drawing of mouth during taking acidic food. The spots appeared about 3 months ago. Objectively: the cervical region of the 46, 36, 27 teeth exhibits some chalk-like spots that can be easily stained with 2% methylene blue, probing reveals the surface roughness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Endemic fluorosis
*c. Acute initial caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

789. During the cystectomy involving resection of the root apices of the 11, 21 and 22 teeth a 45-year-old patient developed skin pallor and cyanosis, a cold sweat, a sharp drop in blood pressure (70/40 mmHg). The patient is conscious but complains of weakness. What state has been developed?
*a. Collapse
b. Syncope
c. Quinckes edema
d. Epileptic seizure
e. Haematoma

790. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
*a. Method of transfer molding
b. Direct method of compression molding
c. In water under pressure
d. Inverse method of compression molding
e. Combined method of compression molding

791. A 40-year-old patient needs the oral cavity sanation, which involves extraction of the upper central incisors. What nerve structure will be blocked as a result of incisor anaesthesia?
a. Median superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
*b. Nasopalatine nerve
c. Anterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
d. Posterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
e. Dental nerve plexus

792. An 80-year-old patient presented to a clinic for the adjustment of the impression tray for the upper jaw. Objectively: alveolar process exhibits marked homogenous atrophy, maxillary tubers are absent, torus is weakly expressed. Buccal muscles and frenulum of the upper lip are attached almost at the top of the alveolar process, the palatal slope is not steep. How to adjust the impression tray in order to make a close-fitting valve?
a. To extend the external borders
b. To extend the borders in the region of maxillary tubers
*c. To extend the borders along the A line
d. To overlay buccal muscles and frenulum with the impression tray
e. To extend the borders in the frontal region

793. A 32-year-old male complains of constant mandibular movements simulating chewing that take place when he is excited. Besides that, the patient complains of teeth grinding. Objectively: the lateral surfaces of teeth have signs of abrasion, the tubercles are absent. What is the most rational method of treatment?
a. Consultation with a dental surgeon
b. Restoration with opposite-directed dentures
c. Medicamental and machine treatment with further consultation with a dental surgeon
*d. Night guard, myogymnastics, self-massage
e. Teeth alignment (selective tubercle removal)

794. A 58-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 22 tooth is stable, intact. The atrophy of the alveolar crest is present, the palate is flat. It is planned to fabricate a removable denture. What tactics should be chosen in respect of the 22 tooth?
*a. It is required to fabricate a telescopic crown
b. It is required to fabricate a stump crown
c. It should be extracted
d. It should be depulped
e. There is no need of any intervention

795. A 48-year-old woman complains about aching dull pain in the region of the left TJM, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ
b. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
c. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
d. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
*e. Arthrosis of the TMJ

796. A 22-year-old patient was undergoing treatment of the 25th tooth for deep acute caries. During preparation a dentist accidentally opened the horn of pulp. What method of treatment should be applied?
a. Devital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
*d. Biologic method
e. Vital amputation of pulp

797. A 23-year-old patient complains about root exposition, gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing, gum itch. Objectively: there is supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. Gums are hyperaemic, edematic, pouches are 3,5 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by ⅓. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
*b. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
e. II degree periodontitis

798. A 3-year-old child got an injury of the upper teeth as a result of a fall. Objectively: crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are deep in the surrounding tissues with only their cutting edge visible, the gingival margin is hyperaemia, edematic. What is the treatment tactics?
a. Monitoring
b. Reposition
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
*d. Tooth extraction
e. Endodontic treatment

799. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Implant-supported dentures
b. Dentures with metal bases
*c. Dentures with elastic lining
d. Dentures with shortened borders
e. Dentures with extended borders

800. According to the mother, a 5-year-old child complains about pain during swallowing, weakness, body temperature rise upt to 39,5°C, swelling of submental lymph nodes. Objectively: the childs condition is grave, body temperature is 38,8°C. Mucous membrane of oral cavity is brightly hyperaemic and edematic with haemorrhages and ulcerations. Pharynx is brightly hyperemic, lacunae are enlarged and have necrosis areas. Regional, cervical, occipital lymph nodes are painful, enlarged and dense. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Lacunar tonsillitis
c. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivostomatitis
d. Herpetic angina
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

801. An 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with tooth cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed several months ago and wasnt treated. What treatment method would be efficient in this case?
a. Biological method
b. Vital extirpation
c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
*e. Devital amputation

802. A  27-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the 34 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Roentgenographical survey revealed an ill-defined zone of bone tissue destruction in the periapical region of root of the 34 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis complicated by periodontitis

803. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Kellers classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
a. Fifth
*b. First
c. Third
d. Fourth
e. Second

804. Preventive examination of an 8-year-old boy revealed some lusterless chalk-like spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth, which are localised in the precervical region. Subjective complaints are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute initial caries
b. Local enamel hypoplasia
c. Acute superficial caries
d. Chronic initial caries
e. White-spotted fluorosis

805. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boys mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation
c. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
d. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
e. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation

806. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain and bleeding from the carious cavity of her 27 tooth during eating. Previously she had spontaneous pain. Examination of the 27 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface consisting of red tissue, probing induced pain and haemorrhage. What treatment method should be chosen?
a. Devital amputation
b. Biological method
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Vital amputation

807. A 55-year-old patient has a painless, tuberous, cyanotic pedunculated formation 2?1?1,5 cm large that appeared on the site of the extracted 46 tooth. Opening of mouth is not limited. Intra-oral X-ray picture of alveolar process in the region of the removed 46 tooth shows a focus of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Papilloma of mucous membrane in the area of the extracted 46th tooth
*c. Giant-cell epulis
d. Ameloblastoma of mandible
e. Hard odontoma of mandible

808. A 49-year-old patient complains about pain in the oral cavity induced by eating. He suffers from CHd. Objective examination revealed dyspnea, limb edema. Oral cavity isnt sanitated. On the mucous membrane on the right, there is an ulcer with irregular edges covered with greyish-white necrotic deposit with low-grade inflammation around it. There is also halitosis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Traumatic ulcer
b. Ulcero-necrotic stomatitis
*c. Trophic ulcer
d. Cancerous ulcer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

809. Parents of a 12-year-old child complain of white patches on the upper front teeth, which appeared six months ago. Objectively: chalk-like patches on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical region of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. Their enamel is dull, pliable and rough on probing. There is a history of short-term pain caused by chemical stimuli. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Chronic initial caries
*c. Acute initial caries
d. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
e. Dental fluorosis

810. A boy is 10 years old. His face is symmetric and proportional. He presents with mouth breath. Examination of the oral cavity revealed saddle-like shape of dental arches and high arched palate. Upper first molar relationship (Angles key to occlusion) remains intact. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mesial occlusion
b. Distal occlusion
c. Widening of dental arches
*d. Narrowing of dental arches
e. Elongation of dental arches

811. A 35-year-old man complains about pain in the region of the 38 tooth, painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. What anaesthesia method will be optimal during operation on account of pericoronaritis?
a. Infiltration anaesthesia
*b. Conduction Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
c. Stem anaesthesia
d. General anaesthesia
e. Application anaesthesia

812. A 12-year-old patient complains of gingival haemorrhage, tooth mobility. He has has these presentations since the age of 4. Objectively: gingiva around all the teeth is hyperaemic, edematic, bleeds during instrumental examination. The teeth roots are exposed by 1/3 and covered with whitish plaque. The teeth are mobile. Dentogingival pockets are 4-5 mm deep. External examination revealed dryness and thickening of the outer layer of skin on the palms, anterior third of the forearms, soles; there are skin cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cyclic neutropenia
*b. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
c. Letterer-Siewe disease
d. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
e. Niemann-Pick disease

813. A 4-year-old girl complains of spontaneous acute toothache in the upper jaw on the right increasing during eating. The pain arose two days ago. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity filled with softened dentin in the 55 tooth. There is no intercommunication with the tooth cavity. Probing of the cavity floor is slightly painful. Percussion is painful. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
*a. Acute pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute generalized (serous) pulpitis

814. A 52-year-old man undergoes treatment of the 36 tooth for chronic periodontitis. Radiography revealed convoluted medial root canals; an irregular-shaped focus of destruction of bone tissue 0,2x0,2 cm large in the region of the medial root apex. Which of the following drugs is optimal for intracanal electrophoresis?
a. 1% solution of decamethoxin
b. 1% solution of novocaine
c. 3% solution of copper sulphate
*d. 10% solution of potassium iodide
e. 0,1% solution of trypsin

815. A 23-year-old patient complains about unpleasant sensations in the region of the 12 tooth, X-ray picture shows a well-defined low-density area up to 8-10 mm in diameter around the root apex of the 12 tooth. What method of surgery will be the most efficient?
*a. Root apex resection
b. Tooth removal
c. Cystotomy
d. Hemisection
e. Root amputation

816. A 9-year-old boy presents with face asymmetry due to the chin displacement to the left. When the third Ilina-Marcosian diagnostic test is performed, face asymmetry disappears. What is the most likely clinical form of this occlusal abnormality?
*a. Habitual displacement of mandible
b. Unilateral hypoplasia of mandible
c. Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
d. Bilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch
e. Unilateral narrowing of the maxillary dental arch

817. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
*a. Threaded
b. Plate-form
c. Conical
d. Endodontic-endoosseous
e. Subperiosteal

818. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Right angled elevator
b. Close-beaked forceps
c. Straight elevator
*d. Left angled elevator
e. Broad-beaked forceps

819. A 24-year-old male complains of pain, bad breath, body temperature rise up to 38,0°C. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. Gums are edematic, hyperaemic, ulcerated, covered with necrotic plaque. There is an excessive buildup of calculus. What additional study should be done in the first place?
a. Microscopy of gingival plaque
*b. Complete blood count
c. Test for HIV infection
d. X-ray of jaws
e. Blood sugar test

820. A 40-year-old patient complains of discoloration of the vermilion border of the lower lip that he noticed about 4 months ago. Objectively: in the center of the vermilion border of the lower lip there is an irregular homogeneous grayish-white area 1x1,5 cm large that doesnt rise above the vermilion border and has distinct outlines. Palpation of this area is painless, the surrounding tissues are not changed. The film cannot be removed when scraped. The 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth are missing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Premalignant circumscribed hyperkeratosis
c. Candidous cheilitis
d. Lichen ruber planus
*e. Leukoplakia

821. A 32-year-old female patient needs dental prosthetics. After the objective examination it was decided to use ceramic-metal crown. What impression material should be used for taking impressions for this construction?
a. Stens
*b. Stomaflex
c. Orthocor
d. Stomalgin
e. Plaster

822. A 32-year-old patient complains of acute spontaneous attacks of pain in the 14 tooth. The pain lasts for 10-20 minutes and occurs every 2-3 hours. Carious cavity in the 14 tooth is filled with softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful at one point. Cold stimulus causes pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute localized pulpitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Acute deep caries
e. Hyperemia of the pulp

823. A 47-year-old female patient complains of inability to eat hot and cold food, as well as of intense pain caused by sour, sweet and salty food. Objectively: there is a slight loss of enamel on the molars and incisors. Probing and cold test cause acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hyperesthesia of dental hard tissues
b. Enamel hypoplasia
c. Pathological abrasion of dental hard tissues
d. Enamel erosion
e. Enamel necrosis

824. A 35-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the sublingual region which impairs speech and causes discomfort during eating. The swelling turned up about a week ago. Objectively: there is a roundish bulge up to 3 cm in diameter in the right sublingual region. Mucous membrane over it is not hyperaemic, there is fluctuation symptom in the center. Which disease do these symptoms correspond with?
a. Retention cyst of the right submandibular salivary gland
b. Sjogrens disease
c. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
d. Chronic sialoadenitis of sublingual salivary gland
*e. Retention cyst of the right sublingual salivary gland

825. During taking of impressions at a dentists appointment a patient presented with the following symptoms: paroxysmal cough, cyanosis, vomiting, clapping sound during inspiration. Make the diagnosis:
a. Hypersensitive gag reflex
b. Acute bronchitis
*c. Aspiration of a foreign body
d. Attack of bronchial asthma
e. Tracheitis

826. Preventive examination of a 4,5-year-old child revealed some hidden cavities on the contact surfaces of the 54 and 55 teeth. After removal of the overhanging edges of the enamel the softened dentin could be easily removed within the mantle dentin. Select the optimal material for a permanent filling:
*a. Compomer material
b. Composite material
c. Silicophosphate cement
d. Silicate cement
e. Polycarboxylate cement

827. A 5-year-old child was found to have missing upper molars. Lower incisors are in contact with the mucous membrane of palate. Specify the doctors tactics:
a. Fabricate an orthodontic appliance for the treatment of closed bite
b. Examine the child every six months until the eruption of permanent teeth
c. Examine the child once a year until the eruption of permanent teeth
*d. Fabricate a removable laminar denture
e. Medical intervention is not needed

828. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 14 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis following ineffective therapeutic treatment. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps curved right
b. Straight forceps
*c. S-shaped forceps
d. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

829. A 42-year-old patient has been hospitalized with Le Fort II fracture of maxilla. Select an appliance for the treatment of this patient:
a. Kulagin
b. Yadrova
c. Rudko
*d. Zbarzh
e. Penn-Brown

830. A patient complains of burning, itch and lower lip enlargement. He has been suffering from this for a long time. Objectively: the patients face is asymmetric due to the flattening of nasolabial fold. His lower lip is edematic, of normal colour, painless on palpation. The patient has plicated tongue. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Lymphangioma
*b. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
c. Quinckes edema
d. Granulomatous Mieschers cheilitis
e. Hemangioma

831. A 59-year-old patient has a bilateral fracture of mandible in the region of the 44, 34 teeth, other masticatory teeth are missing, toothless fragments are not displaced but mobile. Which orthosis should be used for the immobilization of bone fragments?
a. Limbergs splint
b. Rudkos apparatus
c. Petrosovs apparatus
*d. Vankevich splint with orthodontic elastics
e. Zbarzh apparatus

832. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that is getting worse during eating, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area
*b. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
c. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
d. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
e. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area

833. A 52-year-old female patient complains of dry mouth, taste impairment, burning and pricking sensations in the tongue that disappear during eating but intensify at the end of the day. For the first time such problems arose 2 years ago after a psychic trauma. She has a history of anacid gastritis. Objectively: the general condition is satisfactory, the patient is restless, tearful. Oral mucosa is pale pink, dry; filiform papillae on the dorsum of tongue are reduced. Pharyngeal reflex is dramatically reduced. There is segmetal disturbance of facial skin sensation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Glossodynia
b. Chronic atrophic candidous glossitis
c. Moller-Hunter glossitis
d. Ganglionitis of sublingual ganglions
e. Desquamative glossitis

834. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joints. The pain occurs when she uses complete removable dentures fabricated a month ago. Objectively: the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can be closed with difficulty, smiling causes exposure of the denture base, the articulation is impaired. A mistake must have been made at the following stage of denture fabrication:
a. Testing the denture construction
*b. Determination and fixation of the central occlusion
c. Fitting the dentures and their correction
d. Taking anatomic impressions
e. Taking functional impressions

835. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57-year-old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Neys clasp should be applied?
a. II type clasp
*b. V type clasp
c. I-II type clasp
d. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
e. I type clasp

836. A 35-year-old patient seeks prosthetic dentistry. Objectively: 18, 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28. The crowns confining the defect are high and stable. To restore the integrity of the dentition it is planned to fabricate a one-piece clasp denture. What kind of mechanical fixator should be used?
a. Telescopic fixation
b. Dentoalveolar clasps
*c. Bar fixation
d. Retaining clasps
e. Supporting-retaining clasps

837. At a dentists appointment a patient complained of weakness, nausea, blackout, and then he lost consciousness. Make a diagnosis:
a. Coma
*b. Syncope
c. Shock
d. Insult
e. Collapse

838. Analysis of the contents of periodontal pockets revealed a significant contamination with Candida yeast fungi. Which of the following drugs should be used for instillations?
a. Dioxydin
b. Tinidazole
c. Diclofenac sodium
*d. Clotrimazole
e. Trichopol

839. During the preparation of a tooth a patient had an epileptic seizure. The seizure was arrested. What mistake did the orthopaedist make?
a. Violated the rules of preparation
b. Did not apply one of the types of local anesthesia
c. Skipped psychological preparation of the patient
d. Didnt apply general anaesthesia
*e. Didnt collect complete history data

840. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
a. On the base
b. On the saddle
*c. On the arch
d. On the artificial teeth
e. On the clasps

841. A 54-year-old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by 1/3 of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
a. Metal stamped
b. Combined Belkins
c. Plastic
*d. Fullcast
e. Metal-ceramic

842. A 22-year-old medical student complains of the changed colour of his central upper incisor on the right. Two years ago the tooth was gray. Objectively: the 2 tooth is filled, changed in colour, stable, percussion is painless. The patient has closed bite. What is the absolute contraindication to making porcelain crowns for this patient?
a. Defects of pulpless teeth that can not be restored by inlays
b. Enamel hypoplasia with a change of tooth shape and colour
c. Defects of the anterior teeth that cannot be restored by fillings
*d. Closed bite
e. Abnormal tooth colour

843. While conducting experiments in chemistry lesson a 14 year-old child got a traumatic shock of face. Objectively: the skin dehydrated in the affected region. It is covered with thick dry crust with clear boundaries and peripheral hyperaemia, the crust is recessed into the skin. What is the most likely traumatic agent?
a. Radiation
b. Saline
c. Alkaline
*d. Acid
e. Thermal

844. A 44-year-old patient consulted a surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain was noted 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unlimited. The crown for the 26 tooth is half-destroyed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperaemic at the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth had been treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of upper jaw of the 26 tooth on the left
*b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
c. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
e. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth

845. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred to orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are stable. What is the most aesthetic splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Brace
b. Ring adhesion splint
*c. Mamlok splint
d. Cap splint
e. Soldered combined crowns

846. A soldier was delivered to the regiment medical station with dislocation asphyxia caused by a gunshot wound. What actions should be taken for asphyxia suppression?
a. Tracheostoma establishment
b. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
c. Artificial airway
d. Intubation of trachea
*e. Pul the tongue forwards and sew it through

847. A patient complains about paroxysmal upper jaw toothache on the left that is getting worse at night. Toothache intensifies also under stimulation and irradiates to the left eye and temple. Similar attacks were noted three months ago, the patient didnt undergo any treatment. Objectively: the 25 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain at the point of communication, vertical percussion is slightly painful, horizontal one is painless. Mucous membrane in the projection of root apex of the 25 tooth is unchanged, its palpation is painless. Thermal probe causes acute pain, the pain attack is long-lasting. Electroodontodiagnosis is 60 microampere. X-ray picture shows a slight widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 25 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute generalized pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

848. A 25-year-old patient presents with fluorosis of vestibular surfaces of the upper incisors. Which of the following constructions will provide the maximum aesthetic result?
a. Metal-plastic crown
b. Combined Kurylenko crown
c. Ceramic crown
*d. Veneers
e. Plastic crown

849. At a dentists appointment a 12-year-old child inhaled a cotton turunda: he developed noisy respiration with a whistling sound, sudden dyspnea, pallor along with pronounced cyanosis, sweating. What kind of urgent condition developed in this patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Dislocation asphyxia
*c. Obstructive asphyxia
d. Valvular asphyxia
e. Collapse

850. A 56-year-old patient presents to a dental clinic. He has an indication for the extraction of the 22 tooth. Examination revealed periosteal abscess in the projection of the 21, 22, 23 teeth, flattening of the mucogingival junction. What kind of peripheral conduction anaesthesia is most advisable?
a. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + incisor anaesthesia
b. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + palatinal anaesthesia
c. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + palatinal anaesthesia
d. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia
*e. Extraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia

851. External examination of a 7-year-old child revealed: thickening of nose bridge, semi-open mouth, dry lips. Mouth corners are peeling. Anamnesis data: the child sleeps with open mouth. Examination of oral cavity revealed no changes. What dispensary group will this child fall into?
*a. The second
b. The first
c. The third
d. The fourth
e. -

852. A patient complains of heaviness in the left section of his head, pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is destroyed by 2/3 by caries, the tooth percussion is weakly positive. X-ray picture of paranasal sinuses shows definite unilateral dome-shaped veiling of the upper left maxillary sinus. On the X-ray picture of the 26 tooth the periodontal fissure at the root apex is missing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rhinoantritis
b. Odontogenic sinusitis
*c. Radicular cyst ingrown into the maxillary sinus
d. Malignant maxillary tumour
e. Cyst of the maxillary sinus mucosa

853. An oral surgeon attended a 3-day-old child staying in the newborn pathology department. Objectively: bilateral hypogenesis of zygomatic bones and orbits, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures, nonclosure of inferior eyelids, hypogenesis of mandible (bird face), deformity of auricles with a preauricular fistula on the right. What congenital disease does the child have?
a. Oculomandibulofacial syndrome
b. Oculodentodigital syndrome
c. Oculocerebrorenal syndrome
*d. Mandibulofacial dysostosis
e. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia

854. A 3-year-old girl complains of pain and swelling in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5-37,9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a swelling in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II grade of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
b. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
c. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
d. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis

855. A female patient applied to the oral surgery department and underwent radical maxillary sinusotomy with plastic repair of fistula through the alveolar socket of the extrated 27 tooth. Infiltration and all the peripheral block anaesthesias of the left upper jaw were performed with 6,0 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. 3 minutes later the patient registered double vision in her left eye, inability to close it. Which of the performed anaesthesias is the reason for the above-mentioned presentations?
a. Incisor
b. Tuberal
*c. Infraorbital
d. Palatinal
e. Infiltration

856. A 35-year-old patient complains of a neoplasm on the tip of the tongue which he hurts with his teeth. The neoplasm sometimes increases, and sometimes decreases in size. Objectively: on the tip of tongue there is a roundish neoplasm 0,5 cm in diameter with distinct borders and broad base. The neoplasm is the same colour as the mucosa of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lipoma of tongue
*b. Papilloma of tongue
c. Abscess of tongue
d. Fibroma of tongue
e. Hemangiofibroma of tongue

857. After removal of dental plaque an 18-year-old patient underwent preventive examination. It revealed painless chalky spots in the precervical region on the vestibular surface of the 22 and 41 teeth. Result of enamel resistance test is 7. What morphological changes are typical for this disease?
a. Degeneratic changes of odontoblasts
b. Superficial enamel demineralization
*c. Subsurface enamel demineralization
d. Changes in the mantle dentine
e. Damage of dentinoenamel junction

858. A 25-year-old student complains of a carious cavity in the 22 tooth. The fillings fell out 2 months ago. The tooth had been treated before for pulpitis. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity with the rests of filling on the medial surface of the 22 tooth. The crown of the 22 tooth is dirty pink. X-ray shows a root canal filled with the filling material by 1/2 of the root length; in the region of the root apex there is a well-defined focus of destruction of bone tissue 0,3x0,3 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*b. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
c. Residual pulpitis
d. Radicular cyst
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

859. A 12-year-old child complains of body temperature rise up to 39,8°C, weakness, headache and pain in throat getting worse when swallowing. Objectively: mucous membrane of gums is edematic, hyperemic. Tonsils are bright red, hypertrophic, covered with yellow-gray deposit which does not extend beyond the lymphoid tissue and can be easily removed. Submandibular, occipital lymph nodes are significantly enlarged, slightly painful on palpation. Hepatosplenomegaly is present. Identify the causative agent of this disease:
a. Loefflers Bacillus
b. Coxsackie virus
c. Bordet-Gengou bacillus
d. Herpes virus
*e. Epstein-Barr virus

860. It is planned to lance an abscess of hard palate (it is localized close to the 23, 24, 25 teeth) and to extract the causative 24 tooth that had caused abscess development. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Tuberal and palatinal
b. Tuberal and incisor
c. Tuberal, infraorbital and incisor
*d. Infraorbital, palatinal and incisor
e. Tuberal, infraorbital and palatinal

861. A 12-year-old boy has been injured. In the region of the 44 and 45 teeth there is pathological displacement of the alveolar process and the body of the mandible, rupture of the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What additional tests should be done to specify the diagnosis?
*a. Radiography of mandible in the frontal and lateral projections
b. Tomogram of mandible
c. Radiography of skull in the frontal projection and of mandible in Parma projection
d. Radiography of skull in axillary projection
e. Radiography of skull in the axillary projection

862. A patient has got a traumatic fracture of mandible in the area of the missing 34, 35 teeth with a slight displacement and a defect of alveolar part in the area of the 34, 35 teeth. Other teeth on both lower and upper jaws are intact. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Ports splint
b. Vankevich splint
c. Vasilyevs splint
d. Plain splint cramp
*e. Tigerstedts splint with a spreading curve

863. A 25-year-old patient consulted a doctor about massive gingival haemorrhages, dry mouth, mobility and shifting of teeth, purulent discharges from the gums, bad breath. According to the patient, these presentations turned up about 2 months ago. Before the diagnosis can be made, the following tests should be done in the first place:
a. Immunological studies
b. Allergological tests
c. Serologic studies
*d. Blood sugar test
e. Acute-phase reactants tests

864. Parents of a 6-year-old child applied to a pedodontist for preventive examination of their child. The oral cavity is sanitized. According to the parents, the child has recently cut the 36 and the 46 tooth. What method of caries prevention should be applied within 1,5-2 years after cutting of the mentioned teeth?
a. Fissure silvering
b. Gargling with sodium fluoride
*c. Fissure hermetization
d. Remodentum solution applications
e. Coating the teeth with fluorine lacquer Ftorlak

865. A 25-year-old male patient has bilateral fracture of the lower jaw. A fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Shurs appliance
b. One-jaw bite-guard splint
c. Webers appliance
d. Kurlyandskys appliance with levers
*e. Posts appliance

866. A 43-year-old patient consulted a maxillofacial surgeon about a cosmetic defect in the right half of his nose. It is known from the history that 7 months ago he got a gunshot wound. Objectively: there is a perforating defect 1,5 x2 cm large in the right half of the nose. The skin around the defect has not changed in colour. It was decided to use the "Indian" method of rhinoplasty. What tissue should be taken for the defect correction?
a. Shoulder flap
*b. Forehead flap
c. Infraorbital flap
d. Cheek flap
e. Scapulohumeral flap

867. A 4-year-old girl presents with body temperature rise, aggravation of general condition. The symptoms has been observed for 3 days. Objectively: general condition is grave, body temperature is 38,6°C, the girl is anxious and pale. She presents also with halitosis, hyperaemia and edema of gingival mucous membrane in the region of the 83, 84, 85 teeth on both sides from the alveolar process. The mentioned teeth are mobile, their percussion causes acute pain; the 84 tooth is filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
b. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis beginning from the 84 tooth
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radiculodental mandibular cyst beginning from the 84 tooth
*e. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis beginning from the 84 tooth

868. A 15-year-old patient has got a trauma. He complains of mandibular pain getting worse during swallowing, chewing, especially mouth opening. Objectively: face configuration isabnormal, there is a large haematoma in the region of the right mandibular angle. Palpation of this region is painful. The mouth is half open, lower lip frenulum is shifted to the right of the central line. Pressing upon the chin causes pain in the part of mandible on the right. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Anterior unilateral dislocation of mandible
b. Posterior unilateral dislocation of mandible
*c. Fracture of mandibular angle on the right
d. Bilateral fracture of mandibular branches
e. Bilateral fracture of articular processes

869. An 8-year-old boy complains of having toothache during eating. Objectively: approximal surface of the 55 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain, there is bleeding, percussion is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
*e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

870. An orthodontist monitors a 4-year-old child with mouth breath. The child has a history of adenotomy. Objectively: primary dentition occlusion; the upper incisors overlap the lower ones by 1/3; distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are situated in the same vertical plane. What preventive device will help the child to give up the habit of mouth breath?
a. Vesibular and oral Kraus screen
b. Andresen-Haupl activator
c. Frankels function regulator
*d. Standard Schonherrs vestibular screen
e. Rudolphs appliance

871. A 13-year-old girl complains of toothache increasing while biting. Objectively: the 36 tooth has a deep carious cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity, the response to thermal stimuli is painless, percussion is sharply painful, mucous membrane is intact. X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute purulent periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

872. An 8,5-year-old child is apparently healthy. The child complains of pain in an upper tooth on the left caused by a traumatic injury sustained three hours ago. Objectively: the crown part of the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/2, the pulp is red and significantly exposed, probing causes acute pain and bleeding. Percussion of the 21 tooth is extremely painful. Choose the most efficient treatment method of the 21 tooth:
a. Bioassay technique
*b. Vital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Devital amputation

873. A 31-year-old male patient complains of dryness and burning of tongue back that appeared for about a week ago and get worse when he eats irritating food. The patient has a history of recent pneumonia. He had been treated in the in-patient hospital for 2 weeks, the treatment program included antibiotics. Now he doesnt take any drugs. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is hyperemic, dry, glossy. Tongue back and palate have greyish-white plicae that can be easily removed. Threads of saliva trail behind the spatula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute atrophic candidiasis
b. Medicamental stomatitis
*c. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis
d. Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis
e. Chronic atrophic candidiasis

874. A 53-year-old patient consulted a dentist about pain and an ulcer that turned up in the region of hard palate under his partial removable denture. He hasnt used the denture for three weeks, but the ulcer does not heal or reduce in size. Examination reveals a 2x1,5 cm large ulcer in the region of the alveolar process and hard palate at the level of the missing 14 tooth. The ulcer has everted rolled edges and necrotic floor, it is dense and painful. Gingival and palatal tissues around the ulcer are infiltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Maxillary actinomycosis
b. Decubital ulcer
c. Maxillary syphilis
d. Maxillary tuberculosis
*e. Maxillary carcinoma

875. A 37-year-old male patient complains about pain of the 46 tooth during food intake, especially hot food, offensive breath when he sucks his tooth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, masticatory surface of the 48 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 46 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

876. A 45-year-old female patient complains of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of her partial removable laminar denture for the lower jaw, which she has used for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar process in edentulous areas is considerably atrophied, the denture keeps balance. What is the most likely cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture in this case?
*a. Atrophy of the alveolar process
b. Improper keeping of the denture
c. Wear of artificial teeth
d. Using the denture during sleep
e. Eating solid food

877. A 57-year-old patient complains about dryness and burning of the lateral surface of her tongue. These sensations disappear during eating. She noted such sensations three months ago. She has a history of gastritis with reduced secretory function. Objectively: mucous membrane of tongue and oral cavity has no peculiarities. The back of tongue has thin white coating. Regional lymph nodes are unpalpable. Oral cavity is sanitized. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Candidiasis
b. Desquamative glossitis
c. Hunter-Moeller glossitis
d. Lingual nerve neuritis
*e. Glossodynia

878. A 5-year-old boy complains of a carious cavity, periodic toothache, gum swelling. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 74 tooth has a deep cavity not communicating with the tooth cavity, cold stimuli, probing and percussion are painless, mucous membrane is pale pink, there is a caicatrix from a fistula. X-ray picture shows an ill-defined focus of bone tissue destruction in the region of the roots bifurcation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

879. A 65-year-old patient needs complete removable dentures for both jaws. At the stage of "testing the denture construction" the doctor checks the pronunciation of sounds "S" and "Z". Which method of normalization of speech functions should be applied in this case?
a. Graphic
b. Acoustic
c. Myogymnastics
d. Spectrographic
*e. Phonetic tests

880. A patient working as a bricklayer complains of itching, burning, soreness of lips that show up only in the summer period. He has been ill for 3 years. Objectively: vermilion border of the lower lip is hyperemic, edematic, covered with blisters and painful erosions 2 mm in diameter, crusts, cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Contact allergic cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Eczematous cheilitis, exudative form
*e. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form

881. A patient needs a clasp denture for the lower jaw. Objectively: dental formula is 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 44. The 44 tooth is inclined toward the cheek. What type of Neys clasp should be used?
a. Second
b. First
*c. Fourth
d. Fifth
e. Third

882. A 20-year-old patient has asymmetric face due to an upper lip edema on the left. The skin over it is bluish, there are positive symptoms of "compression" and "filling in". What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cavernous hemangioma
b. Lymphangioma
c. Capillary hemangioma
d. Branched hemangioma
e. Lentigo

883. A 70-year-old patient is awaiting complete removable dentures for both upper and lower jaws. Teeth placement will be made by Vasilyevs method. What teeth in the upper denture must not touch glass?
a. Canines and first molars
b. First and second premolars
c. Central incisors and first molars
d. Second premolars and first molars
*e. Lateral incisors and second molars

884. A 48-year-old female patient had been delivered to a hospital with a cheek wound and severe headache, nausea, dizziness. It is known from the history that the patient got a trauma as a result of a fall. After examination she was diagnosed with a contused lacerated wound of cheek, closed craniocerebral injury, brain concussion. This trauma can be qualified as:
a. Combined trauma
b. Single
*c. Concominant trauma
d. Polytrauma
e. Isolated trauma

885. A 22-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic because of missing of the 21 tooth, the 11 and 22 teeth are intact. The 21 tooth was extracted 2 months ago. What construction is most suitable in this case?
a. One-stage implantation with simultaneous fabrication of metal-ceramic crown
b. Stamped-soldered denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
c. Partial removable denture
d. Metal-plastic denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
*e. Two-stage implantation

886. A 23-year-old patient complains of root exposition, gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing, gum itch. Objectively: there is supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. Gums are hyperaemic, edematic, pockets are 3,5 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 1/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. II degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
e. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis

887. After supercooling a 42-year-old patient presented with headache in the left frontal region and left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetric, breathing through the left nasal meatus is obstructed, seropurulent discharges are present. Palpation is slightly painful in the infraorbital region as well as along the mucogingival fold in projection of the 24, 25 teeth. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. Mucuous membrane of alveolar process has no visible changes. X-ray picture shows reduced pneumatization of the left upper jaw sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis of the 24 tooth
b. Acute rhinogenous maxillitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth
e. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left upper jaw

888. A patient complains about pain in the 45 tooth induced by cold, sour and sweet food stimuli. The pain abates when the stimulus action is stopped. Objectively: there is a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within mantle dentin filled with food rests and softened dentin, overhanging enamel edeges are chalky. What is the diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Acute median caries

889. A 56-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the root extraction of the 17 toot. What kind of anaesthesia should be applied?
a. Mandibular anaesthesia
b. Infiltration, inscisor anaesthesia
c. Torus anaesthesia
d. Palatinal, infraorbital anaesthesia
*e. Palatinal, tuberal anaesthesia

890. A 6-year-old child presents with weakness, pain in throat when swallowing, body temperature rise up to 38,0°C. Examination of the the oral cavity revealed massive hyperaemia of the mucous membrane of the soft palate, palatine arches, tonsils, uvula; there were also single vesicles and erosions extremely painful when touched. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chickenpox
b. Mycotic angina
*c. Herpangina
d. Diphtheria
e. Infectious mononucleosis

891. A 44-year-old male patient complains of fatigue and headache, limb numbness, dry mouth, burning and pain in the tongue. Objectively: skin and oral mucosa are pale. There are painful cracks in the corners of mouth. Dorsum of tongue is smooth, glossy, with bright red striae. In blood: Hb- 70 g/l, RBCs - 1,51012/l, color index - 1,6, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, lymphocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aplastic anemia
b. Late chlorosis
*c. Addison-Biermer anemia
d. Chronic posthaemorrhagic anemia
e. Iron deficiency anemia

892. A 51-year-old lecturer presented to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed, III grade mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
a. In 16-30 days
*b. On the day of dental extraction
c. In 2-3 months
d. In 4-6 months
e. In 5-6 days

893. A patient with a missile wound of face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
*a. Secondary care
b. Dental orthopaedic service
c. Dental health service
d. Professional care
e. Consultancy

894. A 49-year-old patient complains of constant mandibular pain irradiating to the ear, soft tissue edema, body temperature rise up to 39,0°C. Objectively: there is an edema in the submandibular region, the skin has not changed in colour. Alveolar mucosa around the 45, 46 teeth is hyperemic and edematic on the oral and vestibular side. Crowns of the 45, 46 teeth are completely destroyed, the teeth are mobile. Vincents symptom is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
b. Abscess of submandibular region
c. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
*d. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Acute serous periostitis of mandible

895. A 18-year-old patient complains of acute spontaneous toothache irradiating to the right eye and temporal region. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 27 tooth within circumpulpar dentin. Dentin is light, softened. Probing of the cavity floor and cold test cause acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

896. A 10-year-old child undergoes sanitation of the oral cavity. The girl was found to have chalky spots on the vestibular surfaces in the precervical region of the 21 and 12 teeth. Enamel surface is dull, smooth. Pain reaction to the temperature stimuli is absent. What additional method of examination is expected to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Orthopantomography
*b. Vital staining
c. Intraoral roentgenography
d. Electroodontodiagnostics
e. Ultraviolet stomatoscopy

897. An 8-year-old boy complains of improper arrangement of teeth. Examination at an orthodontic clinic revealed broad, tight, low-attached upper lip frenulum. Broad frenulum and its low attachment may cause:
a. Narrowing of the upper dentition
b. Protrusion of the upper front teeth
*c. Diastema
d. Elongation of the upper dentition
e. Shortening of the upper dentition

898. A 35-year-old patient complains of a significant enlargement of the upper lip and eyelids, which developed within a few minutes (during cleaning the house with a detergent). Objectively: there is an edema of the upper part of face, upper lip and eyelids. Palpation is painless. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Angioneurotic Quinckes edema
b. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
c. Lymphedema
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Macrocheilitis

899. A 57-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility, inability to eat. Objectively: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 47 teeth exhibit II grade mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
b. Kurliandsky splint bar
c. Removable partial denture
d. Removable Bynin splint
*e. Removable whole-piece splint

900. A 21-year-old patient complains of constant progressing throbbing pain in the 27 tooth. Objectively: a large carious cavity is filled with softened dentin, the tooth cavity is closed. Probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain, there is grade II tooth mobility. Palpation of the mucous membrane in the projection of the root apex of the 27 tooth causes pain. Radiological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

901. As a result of a car accident a 45-year-old patient got an injury of his upper jaw. Examination revealed elongated and flattened face, profuse nasal haemorrhage, liquorrhea from the nose and ears. These clinical presentations are typical for the following fracture of upper jaw:
a. Subnasal (Le Fort I)
b. Suborbital (Le Fort II)
c. -
*d. Subbasal (Le Fort III)
e. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones

902. A 12-year-old patient complains about an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, upper frontal teeth overbite the lower teeth by 3/3 of height, exhibit oral inclination, lateral parts all along exhibit cusp-to-cusp relationship between the antagonists; Angles class II malocclusion (joining of the upper permanent molars) is also present. Malocclusion is observed in the following planes:
a. In transversal and vertical
b. In transversal
c. In sagittal
d. In vertical
*e. In sagittal and vertical

903. A 39-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the history that the indicated tooth had been treated before for caries. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is edematic and hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to remove the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anaesthesia should be given?
a. Infiltration anaesthesia
b. Application anaesthesia
*c. Field block anaesthesia
d. Intraligamentous anaesthesia
e. Intraosseous anaesthesia

904. An 8-year-old child presents with an edema of the submandibular region, the mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm, further opening is difficult, body temperature is 37,6°C, mucogingival fold is vestibularly flattened, hyperaemic and swollen. The 84 and 85 teeth have fillings, their percussion is painless. The 84 tooth exhibits I degree mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Chronic odontogenic periostitis
*e. Acute odontogenic periostitis

905. A 26-year-old patient needs prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 16 tooth is destroyed by 1/3. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of making a cavity for the inlay?
a. Making the cavity walls
b. Making additional cavities
*c. Removal of affected tissues
d. Making the cavity floor
e. Making a bevel

906. A 42-year-old woman prsented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic seeking dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 18 . . . . 13 12 11&21 22 23 . . . . 2848 47 46 45 44 43 42 41&31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Clasp denture
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps
c. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
*d. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base
e. Dental bridges

907. A 43-year-old patient was found to have no crown of the 13 tooth. The root protrudes above the gum by 0,5-1 mm. The apical part is filled. History: coronal part of the tooth broke off three weeks ago. Prior to this the tooth had been treated for chronic periodontitis. Percussion is painless. The root edges are made by hard moist mucous membrane of pale pink colour. Specify the dentists tactics:
a. Fabricate a simple pivot crown
b. Remove the tooth root
*c. Fabricate a crown-root inlay and metal-ceramic crown
d. Fabricate a pivot Richmond crown
e. Restore the tooth by means of an anchor and photopolymer material

908. A 33-year-old female patient has been admitted to the maxillofacial department with complaints of pain and edema of the right submandibular region, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C. Objectively: the patient has asymmetric face because of soft tissue edema of the right submandibular region, palpation reveals a dense infiltration, the skin over it is hyperemic, does not make a fold. The 46 tooth has a deep carious cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
b. Acute right-sided osteomyelitis of mandible
c. Acute submandibular sialoadenitis
*d. Submandibular phlegmon on the right
e. Acute purulent submandibular lymphadenitis

909. A 20-year-old pregnant woman complains of gingival enlargement, bleeding and pain during eating and tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival papillae on the upper and lower jaw are hyperaemic, haemorrhagic, painfu, cover the crowns of teeth by 1/2. Scalloped contours of marginal gingiva are abnormal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form

910. A 32-year-old patient complains of mouth soreness, body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, indisposition. Such condition has occurred periodically for several years after the patient had had a cold. Objectively: lips are covered with haemorrhagic crusts, hyperaemic mucous membrane of lips and cheeks has erosions covered with fibrinous films. Hypersalivation is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
b. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatitis
*c. Multiform exudative erythema
d. Pemphigus vulgaris
e. Herpes recidivicus

911. A 45-year-old patient complains of a rapidly growing formation on his lower lip. Examination of the red border of lips revealed a greyish-red nodule with a hollow in the centre which is filled with corneous masses that can be easily removed. The nodule is painless, mobile. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Basal cell carcinoma
b. Papilloma
*c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Nodulous verrucous precancer of vermilion border
e. Circumscribed precancerous hyperkeratosis of vermilion border

912. A 34-year-old male patient complains of acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is getting worse as affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he didnt consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

913. A 24-year-old patient complains of aching pain in the 11 tooth that is getting worse on biting. Two days ago the tooth was filled for pulpitis. Objectively: the 11 tooth is filled. The thermal test causes no pain, vertical percussion is slightly painful. X-ray picture of the 11 tooth shows that the endodontic filling is 1 mm above the root apex. Which of the following methods will be most effective for eliminating this complication?
a. Ultrahigh frequency therapy
b. Analgetics
c. Relaxing incision
d. Submucous injection of 1% solution of hydrocortisone
*e. Fluctuorization

914. A week ago an 18-year-old girl complained of pain in the 22 tooth which was treated and filled several years ago. Over the past two days the pain got worse. Objectively: the 22 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, mucous membrane is hyperaemic and edematic. Spot-film roentgenograph of the 22 tooth shows an ill-defined pariapical bone rarefaction 0,4x0,5 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 22 tooth
b. Suppuration of the radicular cyst
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Acute maxillary periostitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 22 tooth

915. A 14-year-old girl complains of indistinct pronunciation that showed up at the age of 14 after the acute respiratory viral disease. Examination revealed normal face and normal teeth alignment, occlusal disharmony was not found. Palpation didnt reveal cleft palate. Uvula doesnt move during pronunciation of sounds, its palpation does not cause gag reflex. What is the reason for indistinct pronunciation of sounds?
a. Hypertrophy of lingual tonsil
b. Deformation of the bite
c. Palatal slit
d. Adenoid vegetations
*e. Paresis of the soft palate and uvula muscles

916. A patient consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect in the cervical region of the upper and lower canines. Various stimuli cause no pain. Objectively: there are V-shaped defects on the vestibular surface in the cervical area of the upper and lower canines. Their surface is smooth, shiny, hard. The reaction to probing and cold stimuli is absent. What treatment should be administered?
a. Application of fluorine lacquer
b. Medical intervention is not necessary
c. Metal crowns
d. Applications with 10% solution of calcium gluconate
*e. Filling of the defects

917. A 48-year-old patient complains of subfebrile temperature and a growing ulcer on the gingival mucosa around the molars; looseness of teeth in the affected area, cough. Objectively: gingival mucosa in the region of the lower left molars has two superficial, extremely painful ulcers with undermined edges. The ulcers floor is yellowish, granular, covered with yellowish, and sometimes pink granulations. The ulcers are surrounded by the tubercles. Dental cervices are exposed, there is a pathological tooth mobility. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and make dense matted together groups. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Tuberculosis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Acute aphthous stomatitis
d. Syphilis
e. Decubital ulcer

918. An 18-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise, weakness, pain induced by eating and deglutition. Objectively: mucous membrane of the oral cavity is erythematic with multiple petechia. Pharynx is hyperaemic. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, mobile, painless. In blood: leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypic mononuclear cells, ESR is 30 mm/h. What is the leading factor of disease development?
a. Immediate allergy
b. Delayed allergy
c. Bacterial infection
d. Autoimmune disorders
*e. Viral infection

919. A 33-year-old patient complains about pain, gingival haemorrhage, halitosis, body temperature rise up to 37,8°C. Objectively: gums are apparently hyperaemic, edematic, bleed easily, parodontal pouches are 3-4 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate. Orthopantomogram shows diffuse osteoporosis of alveolar process, resorption of interdental septa down to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic generalized I degree periodontitis

920. A 34-year-old patient had got in a car accident. The patient stayed conscious. He complains of headache, dizziness, general weakness, nausea. 12 hours after the injury the patient got "raccoon eyes" (periorbital haematomas) within the circular muscles of eye. What fracture does the victim have?
*a. Fracture of skull base
b. Fracture of frontal bones
c. Fracture of nasal bones
d. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
e. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla

921. A 13-year-old girl complains about frequent falling out of a filling in the 21 tooth. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 years ago she underwent treatment on account of a dental trauma. Objectively: a transverse defect of 1/3 of the crown in the 21 tooth. Percussion is painless. Tooth colour is unchanged. X-ray picture shows that root canal is filled by 1 mm from the apex, filling material closely fits the walls of root canal. What stomatological tactics should be chosen?
a. The tooth should be crowned with an artificial crown
*b. The defect should be restored with photopolymer
c. The root canal should be refilled
d. The tooth should be extracted
e. The root apex should be resected

922. A 65-year-old patient complains about unsatisfactory fixation of complete removable lamellar denture of his upper jaw. The denture was fabricated 6 years ago. Objectively: balancing and poor fixation of complete removable denture is present. What is the reason of such condition?
a. Wear of artificial teeth
b. Discoloration of basic plastic
c. Loss of certain antagonists
*d. Atrophy of osseous base of the prosthetic bed tissues
e. Bad hygiene of removable denture

923. A 50-year-old woman complains about a neoplasm on her lower lip on the side of oral cavity that appeared a month ago and has been slowly growing since that. Objectively: there is a roundish, elastic, painless neoplasm inside the lower lip. Mucous membrane hasnt changed its colour. Make a diagnosis:
a. Lip papilloma
b. Lip lipoma
*c. Retention cyst of lower lip
d. Lip fibroma
e. Lip abscess

924. A 46-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 36 tooth. Its crown is decayed. The patient presented with edema of soft tissues adjacent to the mandible. Body temperature rose up to 39,0°C, the patient has chill. Examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced edema of the left mandibular alveolar process on the vestibular and oral side (acute periostitis); the 35, 36, 37 teeth are mobile, subgingival pockets contain purulent exudate; their percussion causes acute pain. Positive Vincents symptom is present. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis from the 36 tooth
c. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
e. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis

925. During orthopaedic treatment a 47-year-old patient was given anaesthesia (with Ultracain DS forte). 20 minutes after the injection the patient presented with hyperaemia of skin, headache, dizziness, increased heart rate. The patient had previously undergone dental treatment with the use of this anaesthetic. What complication developed in this patient?
a. Syncope
b. Collapse
c. Attack of stenocardia
*d. AP rise
e. Anaphylactic shock

926. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous regions is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
a. Consumption of solid food
b. Wear of artificial teeth
c. Denture using during sleep
d. Improper care of denture
*e. Alveolar process atrophy

927. The department of maxillofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a post-traumatic defect of nose wing up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
a. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
*b. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
c. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions
d. Free grafting with dermal flap
e. Grafting with tubed pedicle (Filatovs) flap

928. 2 days ago a 12-year-old patient prsented with body temperature rise up to 38,0°C, on the second day he developed a bilateral edema in the parotid region. The skin over the edema was tense, of normal color. Palpation revealed soft, enlarged, painful parotid salivary glands. Salivation from the parotid ducts was abnormal, the duct orifices were hyperaemic. Palpation caused pain in the angle of mandible, at the top of mastoid bone, in front of the antilobium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
b. Purulent-necrotic parotitis
c. Sjogrens syndrome
d. Acute bacterial parotitis
*e. Mumps

929. A 23-year-old female patient complains of a pronounced limitation of mouth opening, throat pain irradiating to the ear. Objectively: body temperature is 37,9°C. The face is symmetrical, the colour of skin has not changed. Palpation of the jaw causes acute pain, mouth opens by 1 cm. The patient had been given anasthesia by Berchet-Dubov. After it oral examination revealed an edema and hyperemia of the mucous membrane of the pterygomaxillary fold, there was an infiltration painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of alveololingual groove
b. Submandibular phlegmon
c. Parapharyngeal space phlegmon
d. Peritonsillar space abscess
*e. Abscess of pterygomaxillary space

930. Intraoral examination of a 5-year-old child revealed primary occlusion, tremas and diastemas, worn tubercles and cutting surfaces of teeth. The distal surfaces of the second lower molars are anterior to the distal surfaces of the second upper molars. This stage of primary occlusion is called:
*a. Aging
b. Stable occlusion
c. Eruption
d. Formation
e. There is no correct answer

931. A 52-year-old patient complains of teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth exhibit I grade mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit II grade mobility. There is gingival edema, peridontal pockets are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by 1/2 of root length. The patient has been diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is most efficient in this situation?
a. Plastic mouthguard
b. Murrays splint
c. Mamlock splint
d. Temporary Novotny splint
*e. Elbrecht splint

932. Objective examination of a 10-year-old child revealed that the whole lower lip was slightly hyperemic, infiltrated, dry, covered with small scales. Architectonics of lips is changed. The child complains of dryness and a feeling of tense lips, especially in autumn and winter. The child had a bad habit of lip sucking. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Microbial cheilitis
*b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Allergic cheilitis
d. Atopic cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

933. A 47-year-old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11 tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
a. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth
b. Implant
c. Clasp denture
*d. Partial removable lamellar denture
e. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth

934. A 25-year-old patient complains of a light brown spot in the upper front tooth. Objectively: the 23 tooth has a single light brown spot in the precervical region. Probing shows smooth surface. The tooth is nonresponsive to cold and probing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Fluorosis
c. Acute initial caries
*d. Chronic initial caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

935. A 35-year-old patient complains of progressing throbbing pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity filled with softened dentine, tooth cavity is closed, probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain. There is I grade tooth mobility. Roentgenological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

936. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
*c. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinsteins pivot point

937. A 32-year-old patient complains of the long-term dull toothache caused by hot food. The toothache appeared a month ago. Objectively: the 26 tooth has changed in colour, on the masticatory surface there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Superficial probing of pulp is painless, deep probing is painful. Electro-odontodiagnostics results: 85 µa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
*e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

938. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child revealed half-open mouth, difficult closing of lips, primary occlusion, 4 mm sagittal gap, homonymous canines and second molars. The upper dental arch is V-shaped, the lower one is trapezoid. Both dental arches in primary occlusion should have the following shape:
a. Semiellipse
*b. Semicircle
c. Triangle
d. Quadrangle
e. Parabola

939. A patient complains about spontaneous pain in the area of his 15 tooth he has been feeling for 2 days. Thermal stimuli make the pain worse, its attacks last up to 30 minutes. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 15 tooth consisting of light softened dentin, floor probing is painful in one point, reaction to the thermal stimuli is positive, percussion is painless. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
*d. Acute local pulpitis
e. Pulp hyperemia

940. A 45-year-old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
a. Clasp denture with obturating part
b. Common partial removable denture
*c. Minor saddle denture with clasp fixation
d. Protective palatal bars
e. Common dental bridge

941. An 18-year-old man complains of the 14, 13, 12, 23, 24 teeth being sensitive to sweet and sour food. Examination revealed some isolated ill-defined chalky spots in the precervical region. What is the most informative method of study that allows to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Probing
b. Thermometry
*c. Vital staining
d. X-ray
e. Electro-odontometry

942. A 25-year-old patient got a trauma in the chin region. On the basis of X-ray he was diagnosed with bilateral mental fracture of mandible. Specify the direction of displacement of the minor fragment:
a. Downward and forward
*b. Downward and backward
c. Upward and backward
d. There is no displacement
e. Upward and forward

943. A 27-year-old patient complains of the long-term pain in the 22 tooth caused by cold and hot food, as well as of spontaneous pain lasting for 30 minutes and occurring 3-4 times per day, getting worse at night. Pain arose 3 days ago after preparation of the tooth for the acrylic crown. Objectively: the 22 tooth is intact, the thermal test causes acute long-lasting pain, percussion is painless. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Biological treatment of pulpitis
*b. Vital pulp extirpation
c. Vital pulp amputation
d. Devital pulp extirpation
e. Application of fluorine lacquer

944. A 35-year-old patient complains about itch, burning and edema of lips. He has been suffering from this for a week. Objectively: reddening of vermilion border and skin, especially in the region of mouth corners, there are also vesicles, crusts, small cracks along with erythematous affection of vermilion border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
b. Multiform exudative erythema
c. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis
*d. Acute eczematous cheilitis
e. Acute herpetic cheilitis

945. A 7-year-old child has to undergo plastic surgery of the upper lip frenulum. What operation should be performed to lengthen the frenulum of the upper lip?
*a. Dieffenbach grafting
b. Szymanowsky grafting with local flaps
c. Relaxing incisions of the mucosa
d. Grafting with a pedicle flap
e. Thiersch grafting with local flaps

946. A 43-year-old patient complains about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II grade. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
a. Frontal-lateral
*b. Circle
c. Sagittal
d. Frontal
e. Transversal

947. Parents of a 7,5-year old child brought him to the dentist for oral cavity sanitation. Objectively: DEF (for primary teeth) + DMF (for permanent teeth) index = 4, Green-Vermillion index = 2,5. Fissures of the first permanent molars are open, intact, non-pigmented. What method of primary prevention of dental caries may be appropriate in this case?
a. Application of calcium gels
b. Application of fluoride varnish
*c. Non-invasive hermetization
d. Invasive hermetization
e. Application of antibacterial varnish

948. A 40-year-old patient with mandible fracture consulted a doctor 3 weeks after immobilization of fragments because of pain and body temperature rise. Objectively: a slight swelling in the mental region, mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 21|12 teeth is hyperaemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Overtooth splint on 54321|12345 teeth is in satisfactory condition, no occlusion abnormalities were detected. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of mandible. What surgical action is indicated?
a. Trepanation of the 21 and 12 teeth
b. Intraoral novocaine block
c. Surveillance of patient
d. Removal and replacement of the overtooth splint by a new one
*e. Lancing of abscess to the bone

949. A 65-year-old male patient complains of crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies having rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, there are angular fissures and cracks. Palpation reveals crepitant rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular arthrosis
b. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
*c. Costens syndrome
d. Temporomandibular arthritis
e. Temporomandibular dislocation

950. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient got a cheek abrasion which healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38,6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the parotid-masticatory region
b. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
*c. Acute lymphadenitis
d. Epidemic parotitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis

951. A 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with congenital complete nonclosure of soft and hard palate. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for uranostaphyloplasty?
a. Endotracheal narcosis through tracheostome
b. Orotracheal narcosis
c. Mask narcosis
*d. Nasotracheal narcosis
e. Intravenous narcosis

952. A 9-year-old boy has been diagnosed with a complete dislocation of the 21 tooth. The child got injured 20 hours ago. He has diabetes. Select a treatment tactics:
*a. The tooth cannot be preserved or reimplanted
b. Reimplantation, fixation of the tooth and further follow-up
c. Root apex resection, reimplantation, fixation of the tooth
d. Filling of the root canal with paste containing calcium, reimplantation, fixation of the tooth
e. Filling of the root canal with amalgam, reimplantation

953. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumour-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the vermilion border, it is dense and grayish-red. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bowens disease
*b. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion border of lip
c. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the vermilion border of lip
d. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
e. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis

954. A 42-year-old female patient complains of tooth mobility, difficult mastication. Objectively: face configuration is unchanged. The 35, 36, 38, 44, 46, 48 teeth are missing. The 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth have 1-2 grade mobility. What is the most efficient denture construction in this case?
a. Whole-piece splint with Roach clasps and a multijoint clasp
b. Interdental splint
c. Mamlock splint
*d. Whole-piece splint with vestibular clowlike hooks
e. Removable plastic splint

955. Parents of an 8-year-old child complain about a painful formation in the childs oral cavity that obstructs food intake. The same complaints were registered two years ago. Mucous membrane of lateral tongue surface is hyperemic and edematic. There is an oval erosion over 0,7 cm large covered with yellow greyish deposit. Erosion edges are hyperemic and painful on palpation. The child has a history of chronic cholecystocholangitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme
*b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Behcets syndrome
d. Traumatic erosion
e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

956. A pregnant 24-year-old woman complains about emergence of several new carious cavities, falling out of old fillings. Objective examination revealed: index of decayed, missing and filled teeth (DMF) = 16, Feodorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 3,3. Choose the optimal material for carious cavity filling in this case:
a. Silver amalgam
b. Chemical-cure composite
*c. Glass ionomer cement
d. Light-cure composite
e. Silicophosphate cement

957. Examination of an 11-year-old boy revealed thickened, somewhat cyanotic, dense gingival margin overlapping the crowns of all teeth by 1/2 of their height. Fedorov-Volodkina oral hygiene index is 2,6, PMA index is 20%. X-ray picture shows no pathological changes of periodontium. The child has a 2-year history of neuropsychiatric treatment for epilepsy. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Generalized periodontitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Localized periodontitis
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

958. During tooth extraction a 32-year-old patient presented with sudden weakness, pale skin, cold sweat, weak pulse, a significant AP drop (diastolic pressure - 40 mm Hg). What complication developed in the patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Attack of stenocardia
c. Traumatic shock
d. Syncope
*e. Collapse

959. An 11-year-old girl complains about gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing and eating. She has been suffering from this for a year. Gum of both upper and lower jaws is edematic and congestively hyperemic. Hygienic state of oral cavity is unsatisfactory. Bite is edge-to-edge. Roentgenological examination of periodontium revealed no pathological changes. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Localized periodontitis

960. A 52-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic complaining of missing upper jaw teeth and difficult mastication. The patient has an indication for a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw with retaining clamps on the 14, 23 teeth. What kind of denture stabilization will enable such positioning of the clasps?
a. Sagittal
b. Sagitally-transversal
c. Diagonally-sagittal
d. Diagonal
*e. Transversal

961. During the examinations and everyday orthopaedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. What is the way of dental mirrors sterilization?
a. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
b. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
c. In the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes
*d. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
e. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes

962. A 5-year-old child complains of spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-standing pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute serous pulpitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute periodontitis

963. A 23-year-old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment at a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each side. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
a. 4 cm
b. 3 cm
c. 2 cm
d. 3,5 cm
*e. 1 cm

964. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. Straight forceps
b. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
c. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight elevator

965. A 10-year-old child complains of gingival pain and haemorrhage which appeared two days ago after a cold. Objectively: the gingiva is edematic, hyperaemic, bleeds easily, painful on palpation. The tips of gingival papillae are dome-shaped. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ulcerative gingivitis
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

966. A 42-year-old patient complains about gingival pain, progressing gingival haemorrhage, increasing tooth mobility, halitosis. Objectively: gums are evidently hyperaemic, extremely edematic, they bleed easily on palpation. Tooth roots are exposed, parodontal pouches are 4-6 mm deep, and contain purulent exudate, there is also supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. II-III grade tooth mobility is present. Orthopantomogram shows resorption of interdental septa down to 1/2 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized III degree periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of generalized III degree periodontitis

967. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay for the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edge. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Stump fixing
b. Casting
c. Wax construction making
*d. Impression taking
e. Stump fitting

968. A patient is 48 year old, according to the results of clinicoroentgenological examination it is indicated to remove the 26 tooth because of acute condition of chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What kind of conduction anesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Torus
b. Infraorbital and incisive
*c. Tuberal and palatinal
d. Plexus
e. Infraorbital and palatinal

969. A 25-year-old man consulted a dentist about extraction of the 18 tooth, its crown is destroyed by 1/2. The tooth was treated more than once. During tooth extraction the maxillary tuber was accidentally torn of what actions should be taken?
a. To restore the fragment to its place and fix it there
b. To remove the fragment and tampon the wound
*c. To remove the fragment and stitch up the wound
d. To remove the fragment
e. To try to restore the fragment to its place

970. A 36-year-old patient complains of pain under the dental bridge. After its removal the patient has been found to have an ulcer 0,3x0,5 cm large on the alveolar process. The ulcer is slightly painful and soft, the surrounding mucosa is hyperaemic, submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Trophic ulcer
*b. Decubital ulcer
c. Sutton aphtha
d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Cancerous ulcer

971. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. History: the tooth hasnt been treated before, decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is destroyed by over 2/3, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. Crown bayonet forceps
b. S-shaped closed-beak forceps
c. S-shaped forceps (right)
d. Straight elevator
*e. Bayonet root forceps

972. A 39-year-old patient complains of a cosmetic defect, hypersensitivity of the 12, 11, 22 teeth. Objectively: vestibular surface of these teeth has oval defects with smooth shiny walls. Probing causes no pain, there is a pain reaction to cold stimuli. The defects can be stained with 5% tincture of iodine. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Systemic hypoplasia
*b. Enamel erosion
c. Wedge-shaped defect
d. Fluorosis, erosive form
e. Superficial caries

973. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flat, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
*a. Fibrous
b. Giant-cell
c. -
d. Angiomatous
e. Pregnancy epulis

974. A 32-year-old patient needs to be provided with metal-ceramic crowns for the 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. During the dental visit he is given infiltration anaesthesia with Ultracain DS anaesthetic. What elements enter into its composition?
a. 3% mepivacaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
b. 2% mepivacaine with adrenaline
*c. 4% articaine with adrenaline
d. 2% articaine with epinephrine
e. 4% articaine without a vasoconstrictor agent

975. A 30-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39,0°C, a roundish infiltrate on his upper lip, general weakness. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 days. Objectively: a roundish infiltrate in the region of the upper lip 2,5 cm in diameter, the skin over the infiltrate is red with a necrotic core in the centre. The upper lip is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst of the upper lip
b. Acute periostitis of the upper jaw
c. Carbuncle of the upper lip
d. Acute glandular abscess
*e. Furuncle of the upper lip

976. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory region, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mixed tumour
b. Glandular tuberculosis
c. Cyst of the gland
d. Chronic lymphadenitis
*e. Adenocarcinoma

977. A 57-year-old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by 2/3 in the area of the 33, and by 1/2 of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
*a. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress
b. Massive grinding off of hard tissues
c. Garland modelling in the precervical region
d. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges
e. Devitalization of supporting teeth

978. An 8-year-old child complains about pain in the 21 tooth that is getting worse during biting down. A month ago a part of tooth crown broke off as a result of a fall. The child didnt consult a dentist. Objectively: in the region of medial angle of the 21 tooth there is a crown defect that makes up 1/3 of the crowns height. Tooth cavity is open, probing and thermal stimulus cause no pain. Percussion is acutely painful. Gum around the 21 tooth is edematic and hyperaemic. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute condition of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
*e. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis

979. A 12-year-old girl undergoes treatment at the maxillofacial department for nonodontogenic abscess of the left submandibular region. Postoperative wound in the stage of granulation and epithelialization. What medications speed up these processes?
a. 0,5-1% dioxydin solution, 0,1-0,2% chlorhexidine solution
b. Levomecol, laevosin ointments etc
c. Laevosin, luronitum, trypsin ointments
*d. Vishnevsky ointment, methyluracil ointment, solcoseryl gel
e. Trypisin, chymotrypsin, terrilytin etc

980. Examination of an 8-year-old child revealed irregular white spots on the vestibular surface in the precervical region of the of 11 and 12 teeth. The spots are smooth and stainable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Focal demineralization
b. Enamel hypoplasia
c. Superficial caries
d. Fourniers teeth
e. Enamel erosion

981. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic metal-ceramic denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
*a. Sielast
b. Stomalgin
c. Stens
d. Orthocor
e. Repin

982. A 17-year-old man complains of a cosmetic defect in form of light spots on the teeth. In the area of his residence the fluoride concentration in drinking water is at the rate of 1 mg/l. Objectively: vestibular surface of the 11,12, 21, 22, and tubercles of the 16, 26, 36 and 46 teeth have chalky spots with shiny surface that have been present since the time of eruption. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Endemic fluorosis
b. Amelogenesis imperfecta
c. Enamel erosion
*d. Systemic hypoplasia
e. Multiple caries

983. A 35-year-old man complains of short-term pain caused by thermal stimuli in the 46 and 47 teeth. Objectively: masticatory surfaces of the 46, 47 teeth are intact, approximal surfaces could not be examined because of a very close arrangement of teeth. What methods of study can be used in this case if you suspect the presence of hidden cavities?
a. Fluorescent study
b. Electro-odontometry
*c. X-ray
d. Measuring electrical resistance
e. Vital staining

984. A 7-year-old child has protruding chin, the lower lip overlaps the upper one. There are diastemas and tremas between the lower incisors, the lower incisors overlap the upper incisors by 2/3 of the crown height. First permanent molars demonstrate Angles class III relation. Sagittal gap is 3 mm. The correct doctors tactics will be to:
a. Recommend a complex of myogymnastic exercises
b. Use Bynin appliance
*c. Use Bruckls appliance
d. Use Schwartz appliance
e. Use Angles apparatus

985. A 45-year-old patient complains of missing teeth in the lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the 46, 45, 38, 48 teeth are missing. The 47 tooth is mobile (1 grade mobility), the crown of the 44 tooth is destroyed by 1/2. What orthopedic construction should be recommended for restoration of masticatory efficiency and prevention of periodontal overload of the 47, 44 teeth?
a. Soldered bridge supported by the 48, 44 teeth
b. Metal-ceramic bridge supported by the 47, 46 teeth
*c. Arch denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44, 34 teeth
d. Bridge supported by the 47 tooth
e. Small saddle denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44 teeth

986. A 40-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication as a result of lower jaw displacement. He has a history of mental fracture 2 months ago. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38 ... 45, 46 teeth are missing. Remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with antagonists and their oral deviation makes up 1 cm. What is the optimal construction of lower jaw denture?
a. Adhesive denture
b. Metal-ceramic dental bridge
c. Soldered splint on rings
d. Removable lamellar denture
*e. Denture with double dentition

987. A 25-year-old HIV-infected patient presented to a clinic of prosthetic dentistry seeking prosthetic services. What aseptic and antiseptic precautions should be taken?
a. The patient should be refused appointment
*b. According to the scheme
c. The impressions should be desinfected by means of a quartz lamp
d. The orthopaedist should work in gloves and a mask
e. No special precautions are required

988. A 48-year-old woman complains of aching dull pain in the region of the left TMJ, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
b. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
*c. Arthrosis of the TMJ
d. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
e. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ

989. A 9-year-old child complains of pain caused by sweet and sour food in an upper tooth on the left. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity on the masticatory surface within the enamel limits. What is the optimal material to fill the 26 tooth?
a. Glass ionomer
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Zinc phosphate cement
*d. Composite
e. Silicate cement

990. A 48-year-old patient complains about itching gums. Objectively: gums are dense, of normal colour; cold water causes short-term toothache. X-ray picture shows osteosclerosis of interalveolar septa (fine granular bone texture), height of interalveolar septa and integrity of compact substance on their tops is unchanged. Which diagnosis is the most likely?
a. I degree parodontosis
b. Atrophic gingivitis
c. Initial periodontitis
d. I degree periodontitis
*e. Initial parodontosis

991. A 22-year-old student complains of gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: hyperaemia and edema of marginal gingiva of the front teeth on both jaws, periodontal pockets are absent. X-ray reveals no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Localized periodontitis
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
*d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

992. A 48-year-old patient has undergone unilateral resection of the upper jaw. He needs a resection prosthesis. Objectively: the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 teeth are stable, hard palate is broad, flat. What connection of clasps with the base will reduce the instability of the resection prosthesis?
a. Elastic
*b. Articular
c. Fixed
d. Stable
e. Does not matter

993. A 70-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower jaw region on the right. He has been using complete removable dentures for the upper and lower jaw for 12 years. He is smoker. Objectively: the right retromolar region exhibits a 1,5х1,2 cm large proliferation of mucous membrane in form of cauliflower, here and there there are dense fissure-like ulcers. The surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, infiltrated. When the teeth are closed, the mentioned formation contacts with the posterior edges of the dentures. What is the provisional diagnosis:
a. Leukoplakia
b. Papillomatosis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Decubital ulcer
*e. Cancer of the mucous membrane

994. A victim got a perforating wound of the left cheek contaminated with radioactive materials on the battlefield. The wound was dressed with aseptic bandage from the individual first-aid pack and processed with anaesthetic and antibacterial medicaments. The dressing should be changed at the following station of medical evacuation:
a. At the station of the separate medical battalion
*b. At each station of evacuation
c. Only when the dressing is unsatisfactory
d. At the regimental aid station
e. At the battalion aid station

995. A child is 7 years old. He has early transitional dentition. There is overcrowding of the lower front teeth: the 42 and 32 teeth erupted orally with a complete lack of space. Make a plan of treatment:
*a. Serial consecutive extraction by Hotz method
b. Extraction of the 84 and 74 teeth
c. Extraction of the 83 and 73 teeth
d. Extraction of the 41 and 31 teeth
e. Extraction of the 42 and 32 teeth

996. A 14-year-old child complains about acute spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. The pain has been lasting for 3 days, it is throbbing, irradiating to the temple, getting worse at night. Objectively: surface of the 15 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentine. Dentine is softened, of greyish colour. Probing of the whole cavity floor is painful, percussion of the 15 tooth is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute focal pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis
*e. Acute purulent pulpitis

997. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumour-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the vermilion border, it is dense and grayish-red. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the vermilion border of lip
b. Bowens disease
c. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
d. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
*e. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion border of lip

998. A 5-year-old boy has been diagnosed with acute mumps. The child is in a moderately grave condition, body temperature is of 38,6°C, the patient complains of acute pain in the left hypochondrium and epigastrium, radiating to the back. What complication has developed in the child?
a. Orchitis
b. Epididymitis
c. Mediastinіtis
d. Gastritis
*e. Pancreatitis

999. During an armed conflict soldier K. was injured and delivered to the station of the separate medical battalion. The patient has a gunshot wound of his right cheek, splintered fracture of the body of mandible, arterial bleeding from the wound. A brigade of the separate medical battalion performed surgical debridement and final bleeding arrest. Specify the scope of further medical and evacuation actions for this patient:
a. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
b. No need of fragment immobilization, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
c. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, no need of further evacuation
d. Therapeutic immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
*e. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation of the patient to the military field surgical hospital

1000. A patient complains of acute short-term toothache caused by thermal and chemical irritants. The tooth has not been treated before, the pain arose about a month ago. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 36 tooth there is a deep carious cavity within circumpulpal dentin with overhanging chalky enamel. Probing of the cavity floor causes a slight pain. There is also a short-term pain from the cold stimulus. The result of electric pulp test is 8 ma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Pulp hyperemia
e. Acute median caries

1001. A 35-year-old patient has been diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 36 tooth. There is a Blacks class II cavity affecting masticatory surface. What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
a. Light-cure microfilled composite
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Light-cure fluid composite
*d. Light-cure microhybride composite
e. Silicophosphate cement

1002. A 7,5-year-old child has square dental arches of both jaws, the relationship between the canines and the first permanent molars corresponds with Angles class I. Specify the dental anomaly according to Kalvelis classification:
a. Anomalies of jaw size
b. Anomalies of individual teeth
c. Malocclusion
d. Anomaly of dental arch development
*e. Anomaly of the dental arch shape

1003. A 28-year-old patient hadan appointment with a dental surgeon to prepare the oral cavity for a prosthesis. Examination revealed that the 11 tooth crown was decayed, the root was stable, its percussion was painless. The mucous membrane of the alveolar process was not changed. Ro-gram of the alveolar process shows widening of periodontal ligament space in the region of the 11 tooth. Alveolar process structure is not changed. The root canal was passable all through. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis of the 11 tooth
b. Chronic periodontitis of the 11 tooth, hypercementosis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 11 tooth
d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 11 tooth
*e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 11 tooth

1004. A 45-year-old patient presented to a prosthodontics clinic. During the objective examination the doctor checked the sagittal movements of the lower jaw. What muscles are responsible for sagittal movements of the lower jaw?
a. Mentohyoid muscle
b. Medial pterygoid muscles
*c. Lateral pterygoid muscles
d. Digastric muscle
e. Mandibulohyoid muscle

1005. A 16-year-old male patient complains of itchy rash on the vermilion border of lips and in the mouth corners. The patient has a 4-year-old history of this disease with exacerbation periods mainly in autumn and winter. Objectively: vermilion border of lips and skin in the mouth corners is dry, peeling with small scales. Mouth corners are characterized by lichenification, deep folds and fissures, bloody crusts. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exfoliative cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
*d. Atopic cheilitis
e. Eczematous cheilitis

1006. A 78-year-old patient is completely edentulous. He has been wearing dentures for 19 years. The patient complains of poor fixation of the upper denture. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, the alveolar processes of both jaws are markedly atrophied, the palate is flat. Mucous membrane in the denture-supporting area is atrophied. How often should the dentures be remodelled or restored?
a. Every 7 years
b. Every 10-12 years
*c. Every 3-4 years
d. Once a year
e. Every 6 months

1007. A 26-year-old patient needs prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 16 tooth is decayed by 1/3. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of making a cavity for the inlay?
a. Making a bevel
b. Making additional cavities
*c. Removal of affected tissues
d. Making the cavity floor
e. Making the cavity walls

1008. A 52-year-old patient complains of pain and a swelling in the right parotid region. These manifestations have been present for about 2 years. Over the last month the swelling has grown bigger, pain has intensified. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the dense infiltrate in the right parotid region. The poorly circumscribed, painful formation infiltrates the surrounding tissues. At the right side of neck in front and behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle there are enlarged, dense, mobile lymph nodes. The right naso-buccal groove is flattened, the corner of mouth is downturned. The mouth opens freely. The are pronounced symptoms of the right facial nerve paresis. What disease can be suspected?
a. Chronic lymphadenitis
*b. Adenocarcinoma of the parotid salivary gland
c. Actinomycosis of the parotid-masseter region
d. Chronic parotitis
e. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland

1009. A 43-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right submandibular region which appeared two months ago after having flu. Objectively: palpation of the right submandibular region reveals a painful spherical neoplasm of dense elastic consistency with regular outlines which is not attached to the skin. Submandibular salivary gland secretes transparent saliva. Sublingual plica is unchanged. Which disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
a. Lipoma
b. Adenoma of the salivary gland
c. Sialolithiasis
d. Chronic sialoadenitis
*e. Chronic lymphadenitis

1010. A 25-year-old patient complains of a light brown spot in the upper front tooth. Objectively: the 23 tooth has a single light brown spot in the precervical region. Probing reveals smooth surface. The tooth is nonresponsive to cold and probing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic superficial caries
*b. Chronic initial caries
c. Local enamel hypoplasia
d. Acute initial caries
e. Fluorosis

1011. A 7-year-old child has to undergo plastic surgery of the upper lip frenulum. What operation should be performed to lengthen the frenulum of the upper lip?
a. Thiersch grafting with local flaps
b. Grafting with a pedicle flap
c. Szymanowsky grafting with local flaps
*d. Dieffenbach grafting
e. Relaxing incisions of the mucosa

1012. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a swelling on the left cheek, redness of its skin. 2 months ago he noticed an induration on the left cheek which has been eventually enlarging. The skin over it turned bluish-red and soft in the center. Objectively: the left cheek skin has a lesion sized 2,5x1, 5 cm with regular edges, the skin is dramatically thinned, cyanotic, glossy, makes folds and bumps. Intraoral palpation reveals a cord going from the 37 tooth to the cheek lesion. The 37 tooth is filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Furuncle of cheek
b. Phlegmon of cheek
c. Carbuncle of cheek
d. Lymphadenitis of cheek
*e. Odontogenic facial granuloma

1013. Mother of a 3-year-old child consulted a dentist about discolouration and abrasion of the childs teeth. The child has a history of enamel spalling shortly after the tooth eruption. Objectively: the crowns of all the teeth are worn by nearly a half and have yellow-gray colour. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
b. Osteogenesis imperfecta
c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Amelogenesis imperfecta
e. Dentinogenesis imperfecta

1014. A 21-year-old patient complains of blood that oozes from a cavity in an upper jaw tooth during eating. Objectively: the approximal occlusal surface of the 27 tooth has a deep carious cavity filled with soft tissue overgrowth of purple-red colour that bleeds easily when touched by the probe. Probing causes a slight pain. There is a slight pain reaction to cold stimuli. EPT result is 60 ma. Ro-gram shows no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Hypertrophic papillitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

1015. A 23-year-old serviceman needs orthopedic treatment in a specialized hospital. The patient has been diagnosed with false joint in the anterior lower jaw. The teeth are intact, stable, 3 on each side. Orthopedic treatment can be carried out using a bridge prosthesis, if the jaw defect is no bigger than:
a. 2,5 cm
b. 2 cm
c. 3,5 cm
*d. 1 cm
e. 3 cm

1016. A 60-year-old patient needs a partial removable denture for the upper jaw. The central occlusion has been determined. What is the next stage of prosthetics?
*a. Checking the wax denture construction
b. Relining the denture
c. Fabrication of plaster models
d. Try-in of the denture
e. Taking impressions

1017. A 14-year-old girl complains of indistinct pronunciation that developed at the age of 14 after the acute respiratory viral disease. Examination revealed normal face and normal teeth alignment, occlusal disharmony was not found. Palpation didnt reveal cleft palate. Uvula doesnt move during pronunciation of sounds, its palpation does not cause gag reflex. What is the reason for indistinct pronunciation of sounds?
*a. Paresis of the soft palate and uvula muscles
b. Adenoid vegetations
c. Hypertrophy of lingual tonsil
d. Palatal slit
e. Deformation of the bite

1018. A 45-year-old patient undergoes teeth preparation. 15 minutes after anesthetization with 4% solution of Ubistesin forte the patient developed hyperemia of skin, increased heart rate, headache, syncope. Previously the patient had not exhibited such reaction to this anesthetic. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Collapse
*b. Arterial pressure rise
c. Syncope
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Myocardial infarction

1019. Examination of a 9-year-old child revealed chalky spots in the cervical part of the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth. The spots appeared two weeks ago. Their surface is dull in appearance and can be stained with methylene blue. The affected teeth are nonresponsive to cold stimulus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Surface caries
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Focal hypoplasia
d. Fluorosis
*e. White spot stage of caries

1020. A 34-year-old patient was undergoing treatment for acute deep caries of the 37 tooth. During the tooth preparation the buccal pulp horn was accidentally opened. What is the most rational treatment of the 37 tooth?
*a. Biological method
b. Non-vital amputation
c. Vital amputation
d. Vital extirpation
e. Non-vital extirpation

1021. A 43-year-old patient was found to have no crown of the 13 tooth. The root protrudes above the gum by 0,5-1 mm. The apical part is filled. History: coronal part of the tooth broke off three weeks ago. Prior to this the tooth had been treated for chronic periodontitis. Percussion is painless. The root edges are surrounded with hard moist mucous membrane of pale pink colour. Specify the dentists tactics:
a. Fabricate a simple pivot crown
b. Restore the tooth by means of an anchor and photopolymer material
c. Fabricate a pivot Richmond crown
*d. Fabricate a crown-root inlay and porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. Extract the tooth root

1022. During a dental visit a 50-year-old patient suddenly developed tinnitus, nausea, dizziness, blackout, loss of consciousness, dramatic paleness, myosis. There were no pupillary reaction to light and corneal reflexes. Heart sounds were muffled, blood pressure was decreased. The described symptoms correspond with the following medical emergency:
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Hypertensive crisis
*e. Syncope

1023. A 21-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about a tumour-like formation on the left cheek. The patient noticed the swelling for the first time a year ago. Objectively: on the left cheek skin there is a painless roundish pedunculated tumour up to 0,5 cm in diameter. The surface of the formation looks like cauliflower, the surrounding skin is not changed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Botryomycoma of cheek
b. Cutaneous horn
c. Fibroma of cheek
d. Hemangioma of cheek
*e. Papilloma of cheek

1024. A 25-year-old patient complains of heavy gingival haemorrhages, pain in the oral cavity, weakness, fatigue, fever up to 38°C. These presentations appeared a week ago. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic. Examination of the oral mucosa reveals multiple haemorrhages, friable gums, necrotic areas on the tops of gingival papillae, as well as enlarged, soft, painless lymph nodes. The oral mucosal lesion can be a symptom of the following disease:
a. Hypovitaminosis C
*b. Acute leukemia
c. Intoxication with heavy metal salts
d. Vincent stomatitis
e. Chronic leukemia

1025. A 34-year-old male patient complains of a cosmetic defect, a cavity on the vestibular surface in the cervical part of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the carious cavity is within the enamel, the floor and the walls are pigmented, probing and percussion and painless. There is no pain reaction to stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
b. Chronic median caries
*c. Chronic surface caries
d. Acute surface caries
e. Acute median caries

1026. A 56-year-old patient has indications for a clasp denture for the upper jaw. Objectively: the 15, 16, 17, 18, 25, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. What are the construction peculiarities of the denture in this case?
a. Rigid clasp elements
b. Denture bar is located in the anterior third of palate
c. Reduced number of clasp elements
*d. Indirect retainers
e. Increased occlusal surface of artificial teeth

1027. During the blood transfusion a patient developed seizures, tremor, lumbal and retrosternal pain. Objectively: skin became hyperemic and later turned pale, the patient had hyperhydrosis, laboured breathing, Ps at the rate of 110/min, AP- 70/40 mm Hg, black urine. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Hypotensive crisis
c. Acute renal failure
*d. Transfusion shock
e. Pulmonary embolism

1028. A 20-year-old female patient complains of sore gums, purulent discharges from under the gums, tooth mobility. Objectively: the gums are markedly hyperemic, cover the tooth crowns by 1/3. Periodontal pockets are 7-8 mm deep with moderate purulent discharge. The 16, 26, 36, 31, 46, 41 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are characterized by the 2 grade mobility. Ro-gram shows root exposure by 2/3, the deep bone niches in the alveolar bone. The skin keratinization of the extensor surfaces of the elbows and knees is present, as well as limb keratoderm. Nails are rough, dull. What disease can be suspected?
a. Eosinophilic granuloma
b. Generalized periodontitis
*c. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
d. Cyclic neutropenia
e. Gomphosis

1029. Parents of a 3-year-old child report that the child has constant pain in the upper front teeth. Objectively: the coronal part of the 61 tooth is gray and decayed. Probing of the root canal orifice is painful and accompanied by bleeding. The tooth percussion provokes acute pain. Mucosa is hyperemic, edematic and painful. Palpation in the region of the 61, 62 teeth reveals a fistula. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

1030. A 65-year-old patient needs prosthetic services. Objectively: the 43, 33 teeth are decayed by 2/3. EPT result is 6 ma. Other teeth in the lower jaw are missing. What crowns should be fabricated for fixing the removable denture?
a. Equator crowns
b. Plastic crowns
*c. Telescopic crowns
d. Full cast crowns
e. Portion crowns

1031. A 40-year-old patient complains of constant intense throbbing pain in the 23 tooth lasting for 3 days. This problem hasnt bothered him before. Vertical and horizontal percussion is positive, the tooth is mobile, mucous membrane around the 26 tooth is hyperemic and edematous. Palpation of the mucogingival fold in the root apex projection is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute serous periodontitis of the 26 tooth
c. Acute purulent pulpitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute serous pulpitis of the 26 tooth
e. Acute localized periodontitis of the 26 tooth

1032. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred to orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are stable. What is the most aesthetic splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Brace
*b. Mamlok splint
c. Cap splint
d. Soldered combined crowns
e. Ring adhesion splint

1033. A 56-year-old male patient complains of tooth hypersensitivity to all kinds of stimuli. Objectively: gingival mucosa is anemic, thinned, dense on touch, tooth necks and roots are exposed by 1/3 of their length, ache when touched with a tool. Teeth are stable. There are wedge-shaped defects in the cervical region of all the premolars. What kind of toothpaste should be advised this patient for the complex therapy of the disease?
a. Paste containing chlorhexidine
*b. Gel containing microelements
c. Paste containing herbal extracts
d. Paste containing proteolytic enzymes
e. Paste containing salt additives

1034. A 44-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain appeared 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is not limited. The crown of the 26 tooth is half-decayed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperaemic at the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth had been treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
b. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
c. Acute purulent periostitis of the left upper jaw extending from the 26 tooth
d. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth
*e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth

1035. A 28-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding of gums in the frontal part of the upper jaw on the left. Two years ago, the 22 tooth was covered with a porcelain-fusd-to-metal crown. Objectively: interdental papilla between the 21 and 22 tooth is hypertrophied, markedly hyperemic, overlaps the crown of the 22 by 1/3 of its height, bleeds when touched. Periodontal pocket between the 21 and 22 tooth is 4 mm deep. Artificial crown is located on gingival margin. Radiography reveals resorption of the interalveolar septa between the 21 and 22 tooth by 1/3 of their height. Specify a priority action in the treatment of this patient:
a. Sclerotherapy
b. Anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Curettage of the periodontal pocket
*d. Removal of the artificial crown
e. Gingivectomy

1036. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child revealed a habit of lower lip biting. What malocclusion may develop if the child keeps this habit?
a. Deep overbite
b. Cross-bite
*c. Anterior bite
d. Open bite
e. Prognathic bite

1037. A 12-year-old child complains of burning lips, pain at mouth opening, yellowish crusts on the vermilion border. Objectively: there are yellowish crusts on the vermilion border extending from one mouth corner to another, from the wet-dry line to the middle of the vermilion border. When the crusts are removed, the smooth bright red moist surface can be seen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exfoliative cheilitis
b. Atopic cheilitis
c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Meteorological cheilitis

1038. A 23-year-old female patient complains of short-term pain caused by thermal stimuli in a lower jaw tooth on the right. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 46 tooth there is a deep cavity with softened light dentin on the floor and walls. Probing causes a slight pain across the cavity floor. Pulp electroexcitability is 10 ma. During the cavity preparation a drop of blood showed up on its floor. What paste should be applied to the cavity floor?
*a. Calcidont
b. Paraformaldehyde
c. Resorcinol-formalin
d. Corticosteroid
e. Arsenous

1039. An 8,5-year-old girl complains of pain in the lower right molar during eating. Objectively: the occlusal surface of the 85 tooth exhibits a carious cavity filled with softened dentin. The cavity is located within circumpulpal dentin and communicates with the tooth cavity. Probing causes acute pain, moderate bleeding. Percussion is painless. What is the optimal treatment?
a. Biological method
b. Vital amputation
*c. Non-vital amputation
d. Non-vital extirpation
e. Vital extirpation

1040. As a result of an injury the 51and 61 teeth of a 3-year-old child have completely cut into the alveolar bone. History record: the teeth were partially decayed, changed in colour. Select an appropriate treatment tactics:
a. Reposition of teeth, endodontic treatment
b. Treatment is not required
c. Extraction of teeth, endodontic treatment, reposition
*d. Extraction of the injured teeth
e. Follow-up as the teeth may erupt again

1041. A patient is 12 years old. He has been undergoing orthodontic treatment for pseudo prognathism with Angles fixed appliance for 10 months. What is the optimal duration of the retentive period?
a. 10 months
b. 6 months
c. 3 months
*d. 20 months
e. 12 months

1042. A 22-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic because of missing of the 21 tooth, the 11 and 22 teeth are intact. The 21 tooth was extracted 2 months ago. What construction is most suitable in this case?
a. Metal-plastic denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
b. Partial removable denture
c. Swaged and soldered denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
d. One-stage implantation with simultaneous fabrication of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
*e. Two-stage implantation

1043. A 5-year-old child complains of spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that is getting worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-lasting pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Acute periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute serous pulpitis

1044. A 10-year-old girl complains of bleeding from the alveolar socket of the extracted 63 tooth lasting for three days. The patient has a history of prolonged bleeding after removal of primary teeth and frequent nosebleeds. Objectively: oral mucosa is pale, there are small hemorrhages. The socket of the extracted 63 tooth is filled with a big bulging clot with blood oozing from under it. Forearm skin has petechiae. What specialist should be visited in the first place?
a. Infectious diseases specialist
b. Neuropathist
c. Gastroenterologist
d. Endocrinologist
*e. Hematologist

1045. A 42-year-old female patient presented to a dentist for oral sanitation. She has a history of tonsillitis, rheumatoid arthritis, Botkins disease. What are the conditions of instrument treatment after the patients visit?
a. Processing with 0,1% solution of chloramine
b. Dry-air sterilization
c. Under general conditions
*d. Under the special scheme
e. Processing with lysol

1046. A 64-year-old patient presents with bleeding from the left nostril, mobility of the upper left teeth. For the last 2 years the patient has had dull pain in the left side of maxilla. On the left side of neck there is a dense tumour-like formation. The patient is exhausted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Left-sided maxillary cyst
*b. Left-sided maxillary carcinoma
c. Left-sided sinusitis
d. Osteoclastoma of the left upper jaw
e. Chronic osteomyelitis of the left upper jaw

1047. A 37-year-old patient had an appointment with his orthopaedist about dental prosthetics. During the preparation of hard dental tissues for a fixed denture he was given conduction anesthesia. During the injection the patient developed cold sweat, sudden pallor and cyanosis, thready pulse. The patient stayed conscious, but became relaxed and lethargic. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Intoxication
b. Syncope
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Hypertensive crisis
*e. Collapse

1048. A 42-year-old patient complains of a painful ulcer in the mouth that is getting bigger and does not heal over 1,5 months. Objectively: on the buccal mucosa there is a shallow soft ulcer 2 cm in diameter with irregular undermined edges. The ulcer floor is uneven and covered with yellow-gray coating. The ulcer is surrounded by many small yellowish tubercles. Regional lymph nodes are elastic, painful, matted together. Which disease is characterized by such symptoms?
a. Cancer
b. Lichen planus
c. Syphilis
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Ulcerative necrotizing stomatitis

1049. A 32-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic with a diagnosis of maxillary fracture.The fracture can be treated by means of standard maxillo-mandibular Zbarzh set. Which construction provides the intra-oral fixation?
a. Crown-supported soldered splint
b. Aluminium arch bar
c. Plastic biteplate
d. Webers splint
*e. Standard double arch

1050. A 40-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about difficult mouth opening. Clinical examination revealed mouth opening limited to 1 cm. The 48 tooth crown is decayed by 2/3, percussion is strongly positive. What kind of peripheral conduction anesthesia should be applied for the surgical extraction of the 48 tooth?
*a. Subzygomatic Berchet-Dubov anesthesia
b. Mandibular anesthesia
c. Torusal (Weisbrems) anesthesia
d. Mental anesthesia
e. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia

1051. During examination of a 5-year-old child the orthodontist revealed no wear of teeth, no tremata and diastemata, orthogenic occlusion. Which of the following symptoms in a 5-year old child is a sign of future teeth overcrowding?
a. Absence of mesial step in the region of second temporary molars
b. Orthogenic occlusion
c. Absence of wear of teeth
*d. Absence of tremata and diastemata
e. Orthognathic bite

1052. After an injection of 30 IU of inslulin a diabetic patient developed a short-term excitation followed by loss of consciousness. What is the most likely cause?
a. Myocardial infarction
*b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Ketoacidotic coma
d. Hyperglycemic coma
e. Stroke

1053. A 28-year-old patient complains of dull pain in the 17 tooth caused by hot meal, the pain slowly abates after removing the irritant. There is also a feeling of tooth bursting, and bad breath after the tooth suction. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
e. Chronic concrementous pulpitis

1054. A 33-year-old female patient has been admitted to the maxillofacial department for pain and edema of the right submandibular region, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C. Objectively: the patient has asymmetric face because of soft tissue edema of the right submandibular region, palpation reveals a dense infiltration, the skin over it is hyperemic, does not make a fold. The 46 tooth has a deep carious cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Acute right-sided osteomyelitis of mandible
c. Acute submandibular sialoadenitis
d. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
*e. Submandibular phlegmon on the right

1055. A patient working as a bricklayer complains of itching, burning, soreness of lips that show up only in the summer period. He has a 3-year history of this disease. Objectively: vermilion border of the lower lip is hyperemic, edematic, covered with blisters and painful erosions 2 mm in diameter, crusts, cracks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Eczematous cheilitis, exudative form
b. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
*c. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Contact allergic cheilitis

1056. A 14-year-old child has been lately complaining about overgrowth and permanent bleeding of gums during tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival papillae in the anterior part of both jaws are swollen, hyperemic, overlap the tooth crowns by 1/3 of their height, bleed easily during the instrumental examination. Caries intensity is of average level. Hygiene of the oral cavity is not satisfactory. In this case it is advisable to recommend a toothpaste containing:
*a. Aluminum compounds
b. Calcium compounds
c. Zinc compounds
d. Fluorine compounds
e. Pyrophosphate

1057. After a car accident a patient consulted a dentist about pain at the base of the nose. Palpation reveals tenderness of the nose wall, mobility of the nasal bones. Nasal passages are filled with blood clots. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Fracture of cheekbone
b. Le Fort III fracture of maxilla
c. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla
*d. Fracture of nasal bones
e. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla

1058. A 30-year-old patient needs a post and core for the 36 tooth prior to the tooth restoration with a crown. Objectively: the crown of the 36 tooth is decayed down to the gums, percussion is painless. Radiograph shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no changes of the periapical tissues. What is the optimal number of posts in this case?
a. Five
b. One
c. Three
d. Four
*e. Two

1059. A 12-year-old girl visited a dentist for a regular check-up. Objectively: the teeth are intact, the bite is open, the mucosa in the papillary and marginal regions is hyperemic and cyanotic, the gingival papillae are roundish, enlarged and cover one third of the crown height of the upper anterior teeth. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Gingival fibromatosis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. -

1060. A patient needs a clasp prosthesis. It is planned to study the jaw model by means of a parallelometer in order to determine the required depth of the undercuts on the abutment teeth. Specify the length of the measuring rods used for this purpose:
a. 0,35 0,60 0,85
b. 0,15 0,40 0,65
c. 0,20 0,45 0,70
d. 0,30 0,55 0,80
*e. 0,25 0,50 0,75

1061. Parents of a 3-year-old child took the child to a pedodontist for oral sanitation. The child has cerebral palsy. Objectively: there is multiple dental caries, gingival mucosa is hyperemic, oral hygiene is inadequat. What method of dental health care may be appropriate in this case?
*a. Under general anesthesia
b. Under local anesthesia injection
c. Without anesthesia
d. Under local application anesthesia
e. Giving sedatives

1062. A 55-year-old patient complains of general weakness, spasmodic neuralgic pain in the right side of face, rash in the mouth and on the skin. Objectively: lip and chin skin is markedly hyperemic, there are numerous vesicles with clear exudate on the right. The right cheek mucosa is hyperemic, there is a string of erosions covered with fibrinous pellicle. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pemphigus vulgaris
b. Aphthous fever
c. Allergic stomatitis
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*e. Herpes zoster

1063. After unilateral resection of the upper jaw a 52-year-old patient received the immediate-insertion denture. What is the term of its use?
*a. 1-3 months
b. 2-3 years
c. 7-12 months
d. 1-2 months
e. 4-5 years

1064. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanitation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. History: the tooth hasnt been treated before, it has decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is decayed by over 2/3, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. Straight elevator
*b. Bayonet root forceps
c. S-shaped forceps (right)
d. Crown bayonet forceps
e. S-shaped closed-beak forceps

1065. An injured patient complains of limited opening of the mouth, nose bleeding, skin numbness in the infraorbital and lower eyelid region. Objectively: there is face deformation due to the depression of soft tissues in the left cheekbone region, step deformity in the middle part of the inferior margin of the left orbit and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
b. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone without displacement of fragments
c. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla
d. Fracture of the malar arch
*e. Zygomatic bone fracture with displacement of bone fragments

1066. A 48-year-old female patient had been delivered to a hospital with a cheek wound and severe headache, nausea, dizziness. It is known from the history that the patient had got a trauma as a result of a fall. After examination she was diagnosed with a contused lacerated wound of cheek, closed craniocerebral injury, brain concussion. This trauma can be qualified as:
a. Combined trauma
b. Polytrauma
*c. Concominant trauma
d. Single
e. Isolated trauma

1067. A 23-year-old patient complains of minor root exposure, gingival haemorrhage during tooth brushing, gum itch. Objectively: there is supragingival and subgingival dental calculus. Gums are hyperaemic, edematic, pockets are 3,5 mm deep. X-ray picture shows resorption of interalveolar septa by 1/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized II degree periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of generalized I degree periodontitis
c. II degree periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized II degree periodontitis
*e. Chronic generalized I degree periodontitis

1068. A 35-year-old patient complains about itch, burning and edema of lips. These presentations occured a week ago. Objectively: there is reddening of vermilion border and skin, especially in the region of mouth corners, there are also vesicles, crusts, small cracks along with erythematous affection of vermilion border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
b. Multiform exudative erythema
c. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis
*d. Acute eczematous cheilitis
e. Acute herpetic cheilitis

1069. A 24-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a cavity in an upper jaw tooth, which appeared three months ago. The tooth had not ached before. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 15 tooth there is a small carious cavity within the mantle dentin filled with leftover food. Probing revealed that the cavity walls and floor were dense. The response to thermal stimuli is absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic median caries
b. Initial caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Pulp hyperemia

1070. A 42-year-old female patient complains of tooth mobility, difficult mastication. Objectively: face configuration is unchanged. The 35, 36, 38, 44, 46, 48 teeth are missing. The 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth exhibit 1-2 grade mobility. What is the most efficient denture construction in this case?
a. Interdental splint
b. Mamlok splint
c. Removable plastic splint
d. Whole-piece splint with Roach clasps and a multijoint clasp
*e. Whole-piece splint with vestibular clowlike hooks

1071. A 67-year-old patient consulted a doctor about a formation on his upper lip on the left, which appeared two months ago. Objectively: on the border of skin and vermilion border of the upper lip on the left there is a roundish cone-shaped formation up to 1 cm at the base, narrowing towards the apex, up to 1.3 cm high, gray, dense, painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuroma
*b. Cutaneous horn
c. Fibroma
d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Nevus

1072. A 28-year-old patient has been scheduled for the surgical resection of the root apex of the 12 tooth for chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What kind of anesthesia should be given the patient before the surgery?
a. Tuberal and palatine
b. Plexual and palatine
c. Infraorbital and palatine
d. Terminal and incisive
*e. Bilateral infraorbital and incisive

1073. A 35-year-old patient complains of gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gums of both jaws are hyperemic and cyanotic, supragingival and subgingival tartar is present. The periodontal pockets are 4-6 mm deep. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Exacerbation of I grade generalized periodontitis
*c. II grade generalized periodontitis, chronic course
d. II grade parodontosis
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

1074. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the right side of her head, restricted movements of the lower jaw, clicking sound, periodic spasms of chewing muscles. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is restricted. On palpation of the right temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ) there are crepitation and clicking accompanying mandible movements. Examination of the oral cavity revealed also a Kennedys class II defect on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Pain dysfunction of the right TMJ
b. Myositis ossificans
c. Contracture of the right TMJ
d. Sclerosing osteoarthritis of the right TMJ
e. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ

1075. During the surgical removal of a retention cyst of the lower lip a 14-year-old boy complained of sudden weakness, dizziness, nausea. Objectively: the skin is covered with cold sweat. Respiration is frequent, pulse is weak, AP is decreased (90/60 mm Hg), the hands are cold. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic shock
b. Collapse
*c. Syncope
d. Toxic shock
e. Anaphylactic shock

1076. After examination a 5-year-old child was diagnosed with acute total pulpitis of the 74 tooth. What treatment will be most efficient in this case?
a. Tooth extraction
b. Vital amputation
*c. Pulp extirpation
d. Biological method
e. Non-vital amputation

1077. A 55-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic for prosthetics. During the patient examination the movements of the lower jaw were checked. Specify the position of the heads of mandible relative to the articular tubercle with maximal mouth opening:
a. The heads slide over the surface of the articular tubercle
b. At the base of the articular tubercle
c. At the posterior edge of the articular tubercle
*d. At the top of the articular tubercle
e. At the antrior edge of the articular tubercle

1078. A 30-year-old female patient complains of limited mouth opening. She has a history of a trauma received at the time when her jaws were closed. Objectively: mouth opening is limited to 1,5 cm, the bite is normal, mouth opening causes the displacement of mandible to the left. Palpation reveals pain in the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ). X-ray picture shows that the bone integrity is preserved. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute unilateral dislocation of the TMJ
b. Contusion of the left TMJ
c. Fracture of the left articular process of mandible
d. Fracture of the left cheekbone with displacement of bone fragments
*e. Acute traumatic arthritis of the left TMJ

1079. A 48-year-old patient is in grave condition: body temperature is of 39,8°C, the face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submental and both submandibular triangles. Speech is difficult as the tongue is displaced upwards. Swallowing is painful. Sublingual plicae are markedly hyperemic and edematous. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of submental triangle
*b. Phlegmon of mouth floor
c. Phlegmon of submandibular triangle
d. Abscess of tongue root
e. Phlegmon of alveololingual groove

1080. The department of maxillofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a post-traumatic defect of nose wing up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
a. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
*b. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
c. Grafting with tubed pedicle (Filatovs) flap
d. Free grafting with dermal flap
e. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions

1081. A 29-year-old patient complains of decay of the 21 tooth, an aesthetic defect. Objectively: on the medial surface of the 21 tooth there is a carious cavity, the cutting edge is partly decayed. Specify the class of this cavity according to Blacks classification:
a. Class III
b. Class II
c. Class V
*d. Class IV
e. Class I

1082. A 48-year-old patient has undergone unilateral resection of the upper jaw. He needs a resection prosthesis. Objectively: the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 teeth are stable, hard palate is broad, flat. What connection of clasps with the base will reduce the instability of the resection prosthesis?
a. Elastic
*b. Articular
c. Fixed
d. Does not matter
e. Stable

1083. A patronage nurse visited a newborn baby. Examination revealed the shortened lower part of the face, the backward-sloping chin, missing teeth, the retroposed lower jaw. What is the number of dental follicles in each jaw of a newborn baby?
a. 14
b. 12
c. 16
d. 10
*e. 18

1084. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic porcelain-fused-to-metal denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
a. Repin
*b. Sielast
c. Stens
d. Stomalgin
e. Orthocor

1085. Preventive examination of a 13,5-year-old child revealed congestive hyperemia and a slight edema of the gingival margin in the region of the front teeth on both jaws. The patient has periodic gingival haemorrhages during tooth brushing. DMF index is 2. What kind of toothpaste should be recommended for the individual oral hygiene?
a. Toothpaste containing calcium
*b. Toothpaste containing herbal extracts
c. Toothpaste containing aminofluorides
d. Toothpaste containing salt additives
e. Toothpaste containing sodium fluoride

1086. A 25-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about acute pain in the upper jaw on the left. The pain occurs during eating. Objectively: on the distal approximal surface of the 26 tooth there is a cavity filled with light soft dentin. Probing causes a slight pain along the dentin-enamel junction, percussion is painless. Cold water causes quickly abating pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic median caries

1087. A patient with ischemic heart disease has developed ventricular fibrillation. What is the first-priority therapeutic action?
a. Adrenaline injection
*b. Electric defibrillation
c. Lidocaine injection
d. Potassium chloride injection
e. Novocaine amide injection

1088. A 12-year-old boy complains of fever up to 38 °C, weakness, headache, pain in the mouth, presence of vesicles and ulcers. The acute condition developed three days ago. The patient has a history of recent pneumonia treated with antibiotics. Objectively: oral mucosa is hyperemic and edematous. The mucosa of lips, tongue and cheeks has large erosions covered with fibrinous pellicle. The lips are covered with thick brown crusts. The back of the hand has papules of double-contour colour. Which of the listed agents should be primarily used in the topical treatment?
a. Antifungal
*b. Painkillers
c. Antiviral
d. Antiinflammatory
e. Antimicrobial

1089. A 28-year-old patient complains of experiencing gum discomfort, gingival haemorrhages and pain, especially during eating, for a week. Objectively: the gums are swollen and markedly hyperemic, especially within the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth, soft plaque and tartar are present, gingival sulcus is up to 2 mm deep. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Exacerbation of initial generalized periodontitis
c. Initial stage of chronic generalized periodontitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Acute deep gingivitis

1090. During the dental care procedures a 4-year-old child has been found to have a carious cavity in the 64 tooth. The cavity filled with softened dentin is located within parapulpal dentin and doesnt communicate with the tooth cavity. Probing of the cavity floor is painless. Gingival mucosa in the projection of the root apices of the 64 tooth exhibits a healed fistula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic periodontitis fibrotic
*b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic periodontitis garnulematozny

1091. At a prosthetics dentistry clinic a 35-year-old patient received a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for the 21 tooth. What is the minimum warranty period for porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns under the current legislation?
a. 3 months
b. 6 months
c. 36 months
*d. 12 months
e. 24 months

1092. A 30-year-old patient has a cut wound of the upper lateral surface of tongue. The wound was given with a separating disk. Bood penetrated into the airways causing asphyxia. What form of asphyxia occurred in the patient?
a. Dislocation
*b. Aspiration
c. Valvular
d. Obstructive
e. Stenotic

1093. A 67-year-old patient consulted an orthodontist about missing of the 34, 35, 36, 37, 45, 46 teeth. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows the alveolar bone resorption in the range of 1/3 of the interdental septa height. What construction should be offered the patient?
*a. Clasp prosthesis with splinting elements
b. Cap splint
c. Van Thiel splint
d. Removable partial lamellar denture
e. Bridges on the posterior teeth

1094. Parents of a 6-year-old child consulted a doctor about a swelling in his right parotid-masseteric region, dry mouth, fever up to 37,7°C. Similar presentations turned up about 6 months ago. Examination revealed a tuberous, slightly painful infiltrate in the right parotid-masseteric region. Saliva is viscous, the right salivary gland duct discharges some secretion with whitish inclusions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of parotid gland
b. Parotitis
c. Acute purulent parotitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
e. Mixed tumor, salivary gland type

1095. During the examinations and everyday orthopaedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. What is the way of its sterilization?
a. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
*b. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
c. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
d. In the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes
e. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes

1096. A 30-year-old patient complains of toothache caused by hot and cold stimuli. The pain irradiates to the ear and temple. Previously there was spontaneous nocturnal toothache. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity communicating at one point with the tooth cavity. Probing at the communication point, as well as cold stimulus, cause acute pain. The pain persists for a long time. Electric pulp test result is 5 ma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

1097. An orthopedist plans to fabricate a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for the 23 tooth. In order to correct its abnormal position in the dental arch the orthopedist is going to use a cast post and core. What is the maximum permissible value (in degrees) of the core deviation from the tooth axis?
a. 10
*b. 15
c. 4
d. 6-8
e. 20-25

1098. Parents of a 2-month-old baby complain about caseous films on the mucous membrane of his cheeks and tongue. After examination the child has been diagnosed with acute oral candidiasis of moderate severity. Topical treatment should be started with the administration of the following agents:
a. Antiviral
b. Enzymatic
c. Antiseptic
*d. Antifungal
e. Keratoplastic

1099. A 38-year-old female complains of experiencing pain in her lower lip for half a year, difficult eating and talking. The patient sought medical help at place of residence, but the administered treatment was ineffective. Examination of the lower lip revealed a deep fissure in the centre which affected the vermilion border and partly the mucous membrane of lips. The fissure was covered with a brown crust, after its removal the fissure started bleeding. The fissure edges are hyperkeratinized, infiltrated. Select the optimal treatment tactics:
a. Application of antibiotic ointment
*b. Fissure excision
c. Irradiation with helium-neon laser
d. Application of corticosteroid ointment
e. Application of keratoplastic agents

1100. A 57-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility, inability to eat. Objectively: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 47 teeth exhibit II grade mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable Bynin splint
b. Kurlyandsky splint bar
*c. Removable cast splint
d. Removable partial denture
e. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp

1101. A 19-year-old patient complains of indisposition, fever, pain in the gums and oral mucosa. These presentations showed up two days ago. Objectively: body temperature is of 38,8 °C, regional lymph nodes on the right are enlarged, painful, mobile. Oral mucosa is hyperemic, edematous; gingival papillae are hemorrhagic, with grayish-white coating, on the buccal mucosa there are painful ulcers with irregular edges covered with the same grayish-white coating. What organisms are most likely to be found on microbiological study?
a. Colon bacillus
*b. Fusospirillary symbiosis
c. Diphtheria bacillus
d. Fungal pathogens
e. Virus

1102. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital 6 hours after injury. Objectively: the patient has malocclusion due to the displacement of bone fragments. The teeth on both jaws are intact except for the missing 35 tooth. Ro-gram shows fracture of mandible. The fragments are displaced. What treatment is most appropriate?
a. Intermaxillary ligature
b. Chin cup
c. Smooth brace
d. Intraoral miniplate osteosynthesis
*e. Anchor splints with intermaxillary rubber traction band

1103. A 12-year-old child presents with body temperature of 38°C, chills, nausea, vomiting, delirium, weakness. In the middle third of face there is butterfly-shaped rash. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, slightly painful. Blood count: WBC- 12*10^9/l, LYMP - 8,0*10^9/l, ESR - 26 mm/h. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Erysipelas
b. Facial vein phlebitis
c. Cutaneous actinomycosis
d. Streptoderma, submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute nonodontogenic sinusitis

1104. After the clinical and radiographic examination a 32-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic odontogenic sinusitis, fistula between sinus and oral cavity through the socket of the 27 tooth. Specify the optimal method of surgical treatment of this disease:
*a. Radical maxillary sinusotomy and local tissue plasty of fistula
b. Local tissue plasty of fistula, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Fistula plasty with a hard palate graft
d. Fistula suturing, sinus lavage
e. Radical maxillary sinusotomy

1105. A 47-year-old patient complains of a burning sensation and pain in the mouth. Objectively: on the mucous membrane of cheeks along the line of teeth contact and in the corners of mouth there are multiple polygonal bright red erosions 1,0-1,5 cm in diameter located on the hyperkeratinized plaque and opaque whitish mucosa. Cytological analysis revealed keratinizing epithelial cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus, erosive type
b. Secondary syphilis
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Lichen planus, erosive type
*e. Leukoplakia, erosive type

1106. A 58-year-old patient complains of missing teeth on the upper jaw. Objectively: in the place of the missing central upper incisors there is a fan-shaped vestibularly located cord on the alveolar process. The cord is 1 cm wide, it makes prosthetics more complicated. What is the optimal medical tactics?
a. Operation on the alveolar process
b. Not to cover the cord with the denture
c. To cover the cord with the denture
d. Silicone implant
*e. Surgical excision of the cord

1107. Mother of a 1,5-year-old child complains of a formation on the childs right cheek. This formation appeared a few months after birth. Objectively: on the right cheek there is a crimson formation sized 1,5-2,0 cm, painless, with a positive sign of filling. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hematoma of the right cheek
b. Erysipelas
c. Lymphangioma of the right cheek
d. Vascular nevus
*e. Cavernous hemangioma of the right cheek

1108. An 18-year-old patient lives in an area with fluoride concentration in the drinking water at the rate of 0,7 mg/l. The patient complains of white spots on the front teeth, sensitivity to sweet food. Objectively: there are chalky spots on the vestibular surface in the cervical part of teeth. Enamel has lost its gloss. Which of the following methods will allow to make a diagnosis?
*a. Vital staining
b. Electric pulp test
c. Thermal test
d. Probing
e. Radiography

1109. A 24-year-old patient complains of acute pain and swelling in the submandibular triangle that is getting worse when he eats spicy food. He has been diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic calculous sialoadenitis with the concrement localized in the median part of the salivary duct. Which method is most rational in this case?
a. Gland extirpation
b. Physiotherapy
c. Duct bougienage
*d. Duct dissection and concrement removal
e. Ptyalalogue diet

1110. A 47-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 24, 25 teeth are missing, there is a slight dento-alveolar lengthening in the region of the 34, 35 teeth. Which of the following methods of the occlusal surface correction should be applied?
a. Orthodontic method
*b. Shortening of teeth
c. Tooth extraction
d. Increase of interalveolar height
e. Orthodontic and surgical method

1111. Parents of a 6,5-year-old boy consulted an orthodontist about no contact between the front teeth. The child has a bad habit of sucking his tongue. Objectively: there is a symptom of multiple pits in his chin when the lips are closed, speech disturbance, between the front teeth there is a vertical gap up to 8 mm. Specify the occlusion anomaly:
a. Cross-bite
*b. Open bite
c. Mesial bite
d. Overbite
e. Distal occlusion

1112. X-ray examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced damage of the compact bone, mild osteoporosis of apices of interalveolar septa and widened periodontal ligament space around the dental necks. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized periodontitis, I stage
b. Periodontosis, initial stage
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Periodontosis, I stage
*e. Chronic generalized periodontitis, initial stage

1113. A 35-year-old female patient seeks prosthetic dentistry. Objectively: the 18, 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28 teeth need restoration. The crowns confining the defect are high and stable. To restore the integrity of the dentition it is planned to fabricate a cast clasp denture. What kind of mechanical fixator should be used?
a. Telescopic fixation
b. Supporting-retaining clasps
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
d. Retaining clasps
*e. Bar fixation

1114. A 6-year-old girl has unrestricted opening of the mouth. The alveolar process of the upper jaw is intact. Soft and hard palate are of a triangular shape and have a cleft up to the level of the 13 and 23 teeth. Soft palate is shortened. Speech is indistinct. The child was born with this defect. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. -
*b. Natural partial cleft palate
c. Submucous cleft palate
d. Isolated partial uranoschisis
e. Isolated complete cleft palate

1115. A 25-year-old patient presented to a clinic on the fourth day after a face trauma complaining of pain in the lower jaw on both sides, difficult swallowing. Objectvely: there is a slight swelling in the mental region, dentitions are intact but a fragment of 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 teeth is displaced downwards and backwards. Single-step fragment reposition is not effective. Which appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Betelmans
b. Schurs
c. Kurlyandsky cap splint for one jaw
*d. Posts
e. Webers

1116. A 40-year-old patient complains of discomfort in the 24 tooth. He has a history of periodical swelling in the region of the affected tooth. Objectively: the 24 tooth cavity is wide open. Probing and percussion are painless. There is positive vasoparesis symptom. Radiograph shows bone destruction with indistinct outlines. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

1117. A 13-year-old girl complains of gingival haemorrhages during tooth brushing and eating solid food. Objectively: the gingival mucosa of the upper and lower jaws is somewhat edematic, hyperemic. The oral hygiene is inadequate. X-ray shows no changes. Make a diagnosis:
a. Desquamative gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. Chronic atrophic gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

1118. A 47-year-old female patient complains of inability to eat hot and cold food, as well as of intense pain caused by sour, sweet and salty food. Objectively: there is a slight loss of enamel on the molars and incisors. Probing and cold test cause acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel hypoplasia
*b. Hyperesthesia of dental hard tissues
c. Enamel erosion
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Pathological abrasion of dental hard tissues

1119. A 23-year-old patient complains of pain and swelling in the region of a central incisor which was injured some time ago. After clinical and radiographic examination the patient has been diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jawmaxilla extending from the 11 tooth; radiograph shows a slight widening of periodontal ligament space of the 11 tooth. Choose the best method of treatment:
a. Endodontic treatment of the 11 tooth, anti-inflammatory therapy
*b. Subperiosteal abscess opening, endodontic treatment of the 11 tooth
c. Extraction of the 11 tooth
d. Extraction of the 11 tooth, subperiosteal abscess opening
e. Extraction of the 11 tooth, anti-inflammatory therapy

1120. A 5-year-old child complains of acute spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right. Hot stimuli make the pain significantly worse. The tooth had been previously treated for median caries. The pain arose a day before. On the medial occlusal surface of the 54 tooth there is a deep carious cavity, the tooth cavity is closed. Probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion is slightly painful. After necrotomy the pulp horn was opened. Deep probing is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute serous pulpitis
*b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute purulent periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

1121. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain caused by cold and sweet food in the 11, 21 teeth, as well as of a cosmetic defect. Examination of the 11, 21 teeth revealed some oval, diagonally arranged enamel defects on the convex part of the vestibular surface of tooth crowns. The defects had smooth, glossy, dense floor. The patient has a history of thyrotoxicosis. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Amelogenesis imperfecta
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Surface caries
*d. Erosion of dental hard tissues
e. Wedge-shaped defect

1122. Routine examination of a 9-year-old girl revealed symmetrical horizontal grooves on the vestibular surfaces of the 16, 12, 11, 21, 22, 26, 31, 32, 36, 41, 42, 46 teeth. The grooves alternated with intact tooth tissues and were present in these teeth at the time of their eruption. The patient has a history record of pneumonia at the age of 10 months treated with a course of antibiotics. Make a diagnosis:
a. Dental fluorosis
b. Local hypoplasia
*c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Focal hypoplasia
e. Initial caries

1123. An 8-year-old child has been clinically diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth. The crown is decayed by 1/2. What is the dentists optimal tactics?
a. Endodontic treatment and drug therapy
*b. Extraction
c. Endodontic treatment
d. Opening along the mucogingival fold, drug thrapy
e. Drug therapy

1124. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumour-like formation in the region of the lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: on the vermilion border of the lower lip on the right there is a roundish tumour up to 1 cm in diameter with raised rolled edges. The tumour is painless, the regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Carcinoma of the lower lip
b. Fibroma of the lower lip
c. Papilloma of the lower lip
*d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Verrucous precancer

1125. A 25-year-old patient consulted a dentist about orthopedic treatment of the 17 tooth. After the patient had been given local anesthesia, his condition suddenly deteriorated (he developed anxiety, general weakness, acute headache, nausea, loss of consciousness, poor pupillary reaction to light, abrupt drop of arterial pressure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Septic shock
*b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Toxic shock
d. Cardiogenic shock
e. Traumatic shock

1126. A 62-year-old patient diagnosed with TMJ arthritis presented to a clinic. The patient underwent radiography. Specify the radiological presentations of TMJ arthritis:
a. Joint space widening
b. No joint space
c. Compaction of the articular head cortex
d. Joint space narrowing
*e. Changed shape of the bone elements of the joint

1127. Parents of an 8-year-old child with Down syndrome took the child to a doctor for oral cavity sanitation. After the examination entailing great difficulties the child was found to have four teeth decayed as a result of chronic periodontitis. What kind of anesthesia should be chosen for surgical sanitation in one visit?
a. Conduction anesthesia
b. Endotracheal anesthesia
*c. Phlebonarcosis
d. Mask anesthesia
e. Endotracheal anesthesia through a tracheostoma

1128. A patient is 56 years old. 6 months after resection of the right side of the upper jaw the patient is going to receive a permanent resection prosthesis. What device can be used to determine the optimal state of the resection prosthesis borders?
a. Micrometer
b. Gnathodynamometer
c. Myotonometer
d. Larins appliance
*e. Parallelometer

1129. A 67-year-old female patient has a burning sensation under her complete removable denture for the upper jaw which was fabricated of plastics 3 days ago. Examination revealed hyperemia and edema of the mucous membrane within the boundaries of the denture-supporting area. What is the cause of this pathology?
a. Galvanism in the oral cavity
b. Paresthesia of the oral mucosa
c. Dysbiosis of the oral cavity
d. Sensitization to the plastics
*e. Excess of monomer in the plastics

1130. A 44-year-old male patient complains of fatigue and headache, limb numbness, dry mouth, burning and pain in the tongue. Objectively: skin and oral mucosa are pale. There are painful cracks in the corners of mouth. Dorsum of tongue is smooth, glossy, with bright red striae. Blood count: Hb- 70 g/l, RBCs - 1,5*10^12/l, colour index - 1,6, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, lymphocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aplastic anemia
b. Iron deficiency anemia
c. Late chlorosis
*d. Addison-Biermer anemia
e. Chronic posthaemorrhagic anemia

1131. A 24-year-old patient complains of a growing tumour in the body of mandible on the right. The tumour growth has been observed for 5 months. Objectively: in the angle of mandible there is a swelling. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. Ro-gram shows a well-defined focus of bone destruction at the level of the 46, 47, and 48 teeth and in the ramus of mandible. The lesion is in form of individual cavities with osseous septa. The roots of the 46, 47, 48 teeth are resorbed. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Odontoma of mandible on the right
b. Follicular cyst of mandible on the right
c. Ameloblastoma of mandible on the right
d. Radicular cyst of mandible on the right
*e. Osteoclastoma of mandible on the right

1132. After examination a 42-year-old patient has been diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the lower jaw extending from the 35 tooth. What is the most rational method of anesthesia for the 35 tooth extraction and lancing the subperiosteal abscess?
a. Plexual
b. Berchet
c. Infiltration
d. General anesthesia
*e. Torusal (Weisbrems)

1133. A 25-year-old patient has necrosis foci along the gingival margin on both jaws. Face skin is sallow, he looks older than his age. Submandibular, mental, cervical and axillary lymph nodes are enlarged, painless, mobile. The patient leads a hectic life, abuses drugs. Over the last month he has complained of weakness, constant body temperature of 37,3-37,5°C, diarrhea, weight loss of 15 kg. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
*a. AIDS
b. Vincents gingivitis
c. Hypovitaminosis C
d. Acute leukemia
e. Agranulocytosis

1134. A male patient complains of acute pain in the 26 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. 4 days ago arsenic paste was applied, but the patient did not keep the appointment with the dentist. Objectively: the dressing of the 26 tooth is kept. There is pain reaction to percussion. Ro-gram shows no changes in the periapical tissues. After mechanical and pharmacological treatment of the root canals the gauze pads are moist, not stained. What drug substance must be left in the root canals for the maximal clinical effect?
*a. Unitiol
b. Hydrogen peroxide
c. Chloramine
d. Trypsin
e. Chlorhexidine

1135. Examination of a 5-year-old child revaled reverse overlap of the incisors and canines. What is the most effective way of abnormal bite prevention at this age?
*a. Selective grinding of milk teeth tubercles
b. Vestibular plate
c. Treatment with an orthodontic appliance
d. Myogymnastics
e. Tongue frenulum plasty

1136. A 64-year-old patient with edentulous jaws has a minor uniform atrophy of maxilla and a pronounced atrophy of lateral parts of mandible. The mucosa in these parts makes longitudinal folds, the alveolar crest is mobile in the anterior part. The condition of mandible should be taken into consideration at the following stage of fabrication of a complete removable denture:
*a. Taking differentiated functional impression
b. Determining the central occlusion
c. Taking anatomical impression
d. Taking decompression functional impression
e. Taking compression functional impression

1137. Parents of a 7,5-year old child brought him to a dentist for oral cavity sanitation. Objectively: DEF (for primary teeth) + DMF (for permanent teeth) index = 4, Green-Vermillion index = 2,5. Fissures of the first permanent molars are open, intact, non-pigmented. What method of primary prevention of dental caries may be appropriate in this case?
a. Application of calcium gels
b. Invasive hermetization
c. Application of antibacterial varnish
*d. Non-invasive hermetization
e. Application of fluoride varnish

1138. A 2-month-old baby has acute pneumonia complicated by an abscess. In course of treatment the baby has developed soft tissue swelling of the left supraorbital and infraorbital region due to an edema and inflammatory infiltrate. The child is in grave condition. What complication has developed?
a. Facial vein thrombophlebitis
b. Acute dacryocystitis
c. Nonodontogenic abscess of the left infraorbital region
d. Nonodontogenic phlegmon of the left cheek
*e. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis of the left upper jaw

1139. A 6-year-old patient complains of a long-lasting pain in a lower right tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. The tooth has been previously treated for caries. Objectively: the cavity on the occlusal surface of the 36 tooth is filled, percussion is painful. Along the mucogingival fold in the projection of the 36 tooth roots there is a fistula with purulent discharge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
c. Radicular cyst of mandible
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

1140. A 14-year-old boy complains of rash on the lips, pain while talking and eating. These presentations showed up three days ago. Similar rash has appeared 1-4 times a year for three years. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory, the body temperature is of 36,9°C. On the vermilion border of the lower lip and the skin below there are multiple small grouped vesicles with serous content, and crusts. What is the etiology of the disease?
*a. Herpes simplex virus
b. Coxsackie virus
c. Streptococci
d. Staphylococci
e. Herpes zoster Virus

1141. A patient presented to a doctor with a red spot on her chin skin. Two months ago the patient suffered a chin injury. After resorption of traumatic edema there appeared a black punctum which was gradually increasing in size. Objectively: the face is symmetric, on the chin skin there is an irregular wine-coloured painless spot sized 2x1,5 cm that turns white when pressed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Capillary hemangioma
b. Melanoma
c. Telangiectasia
d. Hematoma
e. Pigmented nevus

1142. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
*a. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
b. Straight elevator
c. Straight forceps
d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
e. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips

1143. A 29-year-old female patient complains of peeling, dryness and burning of the lower lip. Objectively: on the vermilion border of lip there are multiple gray scales with tightly attached center and peeling off edges. The scales are found all across the mouth and from the wet-dry line to the middle of the lip. The skin is not affected. Scales removal doesnt lead to erosions. The patient has the lability of psycho-emotional sphere. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meteorological cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis
*c. Exfoliative cheilitis, dry form
d. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
e. Eczematous cheilitis

1144. Preventive examination of a 4,5-year-old child revealed some hidden cavities on the contact surfaces of the 54 and 55 teeth. After removal of the overhanging edges of the enamel the softened dentin could be easily removed with an excavator within the mantle dentin. Select the optimal material for a permanent filling:
*a. Compomer material
b. Composite material
c. Silicate cement
d. Silicophosphate cement
e. Polycarboxylate cement

1145. A 20-year-old male patient complains of acute pain during eating, bad breath, general weakness. Objectively: interdental papillae and marginal gingiva are covered with dirty gray film, any touch is painful. The body temperature is of 37,5°C. Blood count: RBC - 4,8?1012/l, Hb- 150 g/l, colour index - 0,9, WBC - 10,5?109/l, JG - 2%, BASO - 1%, EOS - 5%, segmented neut. - 8%, stabs - 47%, LYM - 35%, PLT – 250?109/l. ESR - 20 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Agranulocytosis
*b. Vincents gingivitis
c. Chronic leukemia
d. Acute leukemia
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

1146. A 36-year-old patient complains of pain under the dental bridge. After its removal the patient has been found to have an ulcer 0,3x0,5 cm large on the alveolar process. The ulcer is slightly painful and soft, the surrounding mucosa is hyperaemic, submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
*a. Decubital ulcer
b. Sutton aphtha
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Trophic ulcer

1147. It is planned to open a city dental clinic to serve 200,000 of adult population. How many positions of dentists should be provided for the orthopedic department?
a. 5
*b. 20
c. 10
d. 15
e. 30

1148. A 28-year-old patient complains of a painless nonhealing mouth ulcer. Objectively: regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painless, of cartilaginous consistency. On the buccal mucosa there is a round ulcer 1 cm in diameter with regular raised edges and a dense elastic infiltrate at the base. The ulcer surface is of red colour, painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Secondary syphilis
b. Primary tuberculosis
*c. Primary syphilis
d. Secondary tuberculosis
e. Cancer

1149. A 59-year-old patient presented to a clinic for prosthetics. Three months ago he was treated for the fracture of the body of mandible on the left. The 18, 27, 28, 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48 teeth are missing. The patient has left-sided cross-bite with lateral occlusal contact. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Implant-supported fixed denture
*b. Removable denture with double dentition
c. Selective teeth grinding followed by fixed prosthetics
d. Orthopedic treatment
e. Removable denture with Kemeny clasps

1150. A 22-year-old patient complains of discolouration of the 11 tooth. Objectively: the 11 tooth is pink, hard tissues are intact, percussion is painless, mucous membrane around the tooth is unchanged. Radiography shows that the 11 tooth root canal is filed to the top, there are no changes in the periapical tissues. The deep incisal overlap is present. What is the most suitable construction in this clinical situation?
a. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
b. Combined Belkin crown
*c. Porcelain veneer
d. Metal-plastic crown
e. Plastic crown

1151. Parents of a 6-year-old girl consulted an orthodontist about protrusion of the lower jaw. The child looks like his father. Objectively: the child has primary bite, there are diastemata and tremata on both jaws, reverse incisal overlap of front teeth, the sagittal gap is up to 3 mm, the lateral parts are characterized by mesio-occlusion. Ilyina-Markosyan test for the distal displacement of mandible is negative. What principle of treatment will be most effective?
a. To start orthodontic treatment after the second dentition is completed
b. The treatment is not required
c. No to start treatment until the end of transitional dentition
d. To stimulate the growth of maxilla in sagittal direction
*e. To delay the growth of mandible in sagittal direction

1152. A 24-year-old patient complains of aching pain in the 11 tooth that is getting worse during biting down on food. Two days ago the tooth was filled for pulpitis. Objectively: the 11 tooth is filled. The thermal test causes no pain, vertical percussion is slightly painful. X-ray picture of the 11 tooth shows that the endodontic filling is 1 mm above the root apex. Which of the following methods will be most effective for eliminating this complication?
a. Relaxing incision
*b. Fluctuorization
c. Ultrahigh frequency therapy
d. Submucous injection of 1% solution of hydrocortisone
e. Analgetics

1153. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of a false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect up to 1 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
b. Clasp denture
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
*d. Oxmans bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
e. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point

1154. A 30-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dull pain, numbness in the lower teeth, the lower lip and chin on the right. Anamnesis data: the problems arose a week ago after the extraction of an impacted wisdom tooth on the right lower jaw. The patient developed the following disease:
a. Neuralgia of the auriculotemporal nerve
b. Neuritis of the facial nerve
*c. Neuritis of the inferior alveolar nerve
d. Neuralgia of the third branch of the trigeminal nerve
e. Neuritis of the trigeminal nerve

1155. Preventive examination of a 28-year-old male patient revealed reddish smooth patches in form of different-sized circles on the back of tongue. The patches are circumscribed with a narrow whitish stripe. It is known that these tongue changes are not permanent, show up and disappear throughout a few years and dont bother him. The patient has a history of chronic gastritis. Histological examination of the epithelium revealed hyper- and parakeratosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Desquamative glossitis
b. Rhomboid glossitis
c. Lichen planus
d. Leukoplakia
e. Secondary syphilis

1156. An 18-year-old male has a furuncle in the region of mandible angle. The surrounding tissues are rigid. Cyanosis and induration in form of a cord extend to the corner of the eye. General condition is deteriorated, body temperature is of 38,5°C. What complication has developed in this case?
*a. Facial vein thrombophlebitis
b. Phlegmon of cheek
c. Acute sinusitis
d. Carbuncle of cheek
e. Abscess of cheek

1157. A 21-year-old patient complains of a constant progressing throbbing pain in the 27 tooth. Objectively: a large carious cavity is filled with softened dentin, the tooth cavity is closed. Probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain, there is grade II tooth mobility. Palpation of the mucous membrane in the projection of the root apex of the 27 tooth causes pain. Radiological changes are absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*e. Acute purulent periodontitis

1158. A 13-year-old child complains of a short-term pain caused by cold stimuli in the upper left molar tooth. Occlusal surface of the 27 tooth has a cavity with a small hole. After the overhanging enamel had been removed, the soft light dentin could be easily removed with an excavator within mantle dentin. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Acute surface caries
*d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic surface caries

1159. A 27-year-old male patient complains of aching long-lasting pain in the 15 tooth during having meals, especially cold food. Sometimes the pain occurs when the temperature changes. Objectively: on the distal surface of the 15 tooth there is a cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing is painful. Electroexcitability of the pulp is 35 µa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hyperemia of the pulp
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute deep caries
*d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

1160. A 12-year-old child has half retention of the 25 tooth, the dental arch lacks space for  1/3 of the crown. The upper incisors overlap the lower ones by 2/3, the relationship of the first permanent molars on the left corresponds with Angles class 2. Rational design of orthodontic appliance for the upper jaw should include:
a. Lateral inclined plane
*b. Unilateral screw for the 25 tooth and bite plate
c. Radial asymmetric screw
d. Radial symmetric screw
e. Bilateral expansion screw

1161. Biopsy material obtained by puncture of a maxillary tumour looks like a foul-smelling mush. What kind of tumour is it typical for?
a. Ameloblastoma
*b. Cholesteatoma
c. Atheroma
d. Osteoclastoma
e. Radicular cyst

1162. A 20-year-old patient in the 8th month of pregnancy complains about an aesthetic defect, speech disturbance due to the missing upper front tooth. Objectively: the 12 tooth is missing. The 11, 13 teeth are intact, stable, of anatomical shape. The patient has orthognathic bite. What prosthesic design should be preferred?
a. Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge
b. Implant with a pocelain crown
*c. Immediate prosthesis
d. Plastic bridge
e. Plastic-to-metal bridge

1163. A 45-year-old patient complains of missing teeth in the lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the 46, 45, 38, 48 teeth are missing. The 47 tooth is mobile (1 grade mobility), the crown of the 44 tooth is decayed by 1/2. What orthopedic construction should be recommended for restoration of masticatory efficiency and prevention of periodontal overload of the 47, 44 teeth?
*a. Bugel denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44, 34 teeth
b. Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge supported by the 47, 46 teeth
c. Soldered bridge supported by the 48, 44 teeth
d. Bridge supported by the 47 tooth
e. Small saddle denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44 teeth

1164. A child has been admitted to a hospital with a maxillofacial trauma. It is probable that the wound has been contaminated with tetanus infection. How soon after the injury should the tetanus serum be given?
a. Within 24 hours
b. Within 2 days
c. Within 12 hours
d. Within a week
*e. Immediately at the time of seeking medical help

1165. A 13-year-old child has been taken to an orthodontist. Objectively: the child has permanent dentition. The 13 tooth with mesio-distal dimensions of 8,9 mm erupted vestibularly outside the dental arch, the interval between the 14 and 12 tooth is 9,2 mm. Select a rational plan of treatment:
a. Finger massage of the 13 tooth
b. Expansion of the dental arch and moving the 13 tooth
*c. Moving the 13 tooth into its proper place in the dental arch
d. Extraction of the14 tooth, moving the 13 tooth in the distal direction into the dental arch
e. Extraction of the 13 tooth

1166. According to the mother, a 5-year-old child complains about pain during swallowing, weakness, body temperature rise upt to 39,5°C, swelling of submental lymph nodes. Objectively: the childs condition is grave, body temperature is 38,8°C. Mucous membrane of the oral cavity is markedly hyperaemic and edematic with haemorrhages and ulcerations. Pharynx is markedly hyperemic, lacunae are enlarged and have necrosis areas. Regional, cervical, occipital lymph nodes are painful, enlarged and dense. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetic angina
b. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivostomatitis
c. Lacunar tonsillitis
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

1167. A 45-year-old patient came to a clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37 teeth are missing. There is dento-alveolar vertical displacement of the 17, 16, 26, 27 teeth, alveolar process is enlarged, tooth necks are not exposed. When the teeth are joined, the distance between the occlusal surfaces of teeth and alveolar process is about 3 mm. What is the most efficient method of secondary deformation treatment in this patient?
a. Surgical
b. Tooth pulp removal and selective grinding
c. Deocclusion
d. Selective grinding
*e. Orthodontic and surgical

1168. A patient complains of limited mouth opening, pain during swallowing, fever up to 38,5°C, weakness, indisposition. Objectively: the mouth opens up to 1 cm. After Berchet anesthesia examination of the oral cavity revealed edema, hyperemia, tenderness of the pterygomandibular fold. Lateral and posterior pharyngeal walls are intact. The 38 tooth is semi-impacted. Palpation of the internal surface of the mandibular angle is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute tonsillitis
*b. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
c. Acute pericoronitis of the 38 tooth region
d. Phlegmon of peripharyngeal space
e. Phlegmon of the infratemporal region

1169. During the extraction of the 17 tooth the distal buccal root broke off and remained in the socket. Select a tool to extract the root:
a. Angular elevators
b. S-shaped forceps
*c. Bayonet forceps, straight elevator
d. Beak-shaped forceps, angular elevator
e. Straight forceps, straight elevator

1170. A 15-month-old child diagnosed with intrusive luxation of the 51 tooth has been referred to a childrens dental surgeon. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. 51 tooth replantation
b. 51 tooth splinting
*c. Monitoring the independent eruption of the affected tooth
d. 51 tooth extraction
e. 51 tooth reposition

1171. A patient with a relevant history of allergic reactions had undergone tests for allergic sensitivity to metals. According to indications, the bridges of precious metal (gold) were fabricated. Specify the warranty period starting from the day of finishing the prosthetic procedures?
a. 18 months
b. 3 months
c. 6 months
*d. 12 months
e. 9 months

1172. A 20-year-old male patient with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus has been given anesthesia with Ultracain DS-forte for surgical oral sanitation. What complications may develop in this case?
*a. Abnormal levels of blood glucose
b. Clonus
c. Increased blood pressure
d. Atopic dermatitis
e. Toxic shock

1173. A patient complains of spontaneous, paroxysmal, irradiating pain with short pain-free intervals. The pain arose 2 days ago and occurs only at night. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute deep caries
*d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

1174. A 20-year-old patient seeks dental prosthetics. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 16 tooth there is a cavity, two walls of the tooth crown are intact. Method of orthopedic treatment is determined by the degree of destruction of the occlusal surface of teeth (IROPZ-index). Who suggested its definition?
a. Kopeikin
b. Gavrilov
c. Shcherbakov
*d. Milikevich
e. Kurlyandsky

1175. A 50-year-old patient complains of missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact, stable, with anatomically shaped crowns, rather high, relatively parallel to each other. Boundary line has a typical direction along the 35, 44 abutment teeth. What fixation element should be used in a clasp prosthesis supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Wrought wire clasp
b. Roach clasp
c. Jackson clasp
d. Telescopic fixation
*e. Akers clasp

1176. A 7-year-old child complains of pain and swelling in the left submandibular region. The swelling in this region showed up 2 days ago. Objectively: the child is in satisfactory condition, body temperature is of 37,3°C. Face is asymmetrical due to the soft tissue swelling in the left submandibular region. Palpation reveals a round formation sized 2x2 cm. The formation is mobile, painful, not attached to skin. The 74 tooth is changed in colour, percussion is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
b. Acute purulent odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
c. Lateral cervical cyst
d. Phlegmonous adenitis of the right submandibular region
e. Acute serous nonodontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region

1177. 3 days ago a 35-year-old patient underwent the extraction of the 47 tooth, which was followed by health deterioration. Objectively: the patient is pale, body temperature is of 38,1C, the lower jaw on the left is thickened, the surrounding soft tissues are swollen, opening of the mouth is difficult. Mucogingival fold at the 48, 47, 46 teeth is edematous, mucous membrane is hyperemic. There are purulent discharges from the 47 tooth socket, percussion of the 48, 46, 45 teeth is painful. There is also paresthesia in the lower lip region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis of the 47 tooth
b. Submandibular phlegmon
c. Acute mandibular periostitis
*d. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Abscess of mandibular radicular cyst

1178. A 45-year-old patient has a bilateral mental mandibular fracture with a typical displacement of fragments. What actions should be taken to eliminate asphyxia?
a. Tracheostomy
b. Tracheal intubation through the nose
c. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
*d. Pull out and pierce the tongue
e. Tracheal intubation through the mouth

1179. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about fever up to 37,6°C, soft tissue swelling, pain in the 47 tooth on the lower jaw on the left, the pain is getting worse when the tooth is touched by the antagonist. Objectively: mucogingival fold of the alveolar process is hyperemic and flat on the vestibular side of the decayed 47 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontal abscess
*b. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

1180. A 35-year-old patient complains of a neoplasm on the tip of his tongue which he injures with his teeth. The neoplasm sometimes increases, and sometimes decreases in size. Objectively: on the tip of tongue there is a roundish well-defined neoplasm 0,5 cm in diameter with broad base. The neoplasm is the same colour as the mucosa of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lipoma of tongue
*b. Papilloma of tongue
c. Fibroma of tongue
d. Hemangiofibroma of tongue
e. Abscess of tongue

1181. A 19-year-old patient needs a plastic crown for the 22 tooth. The orthopedist has already taken working and auxiliary impressions. What technological process should be next?
a. Investment of plastered model into a cuvette
b. Making a plastic crown model
c. Making a wax crown model
*d. Moulding of a plaster model
e. Processing, polishing of the crown

1182. A 20-year-old patient complains of the 23 tooth sensitivity to sour or sweet food. The pain abates after the irritants are removed. The problems arose two weeks ago. Objectively: on the vestibular surface of the 23 tooth there are white spots 2-3 mm in diameter. The spots have a rough surface, methylene blue stain cannot be washed away with water. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Initial stage of enamel necrosis
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Local enamel hypoplasia
d. Mottled enamel
*e. Acute initial caries

1183. Objective examination of a 4-year-old child revealed caries in the 74, 84 teeth, abnormal attachment of the upper lip frenulum, which does not require surgical correction. The value of Fedorov-Volodkina oral hygiene index is 1,8. How many times a year the child should see a dentist if the average caries intensity in the respective age group in the given region is 3?
a. 3-4 times
b. 3 times
*c. Once
d. Twice
e. 2-3 times

1184. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient got a cheek abrasion which healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38,6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute lymphadenitis
b. Epidemic parotitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
d. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region
e. Acute non-epidemic parotitis

1185. Floating obturators (Cases, Chasovskayas etc.) for the defects in the hard and soft palate are fabricated according to impressions obtained by means of S-shaped spatula. Which impression material is used in this case?
*a. Stens
b. Orthocor
c. Plaster
d. Stomalgin
e. Dentafol

1186. A 40-year-old patient complains of experiencing eating difficulties for 3 days due to the injury of the alveolar process mucosa of maxilla. Objectively: at a level of the mucogingival fold of the 14, 15 teeth on the vestibular side there is a decubital ulcer sized 1x3 mm with smooth pink edges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Traumatic stomatitis
b. Syphilitic ulcer
c. Candidiasis
d. Allergic stomatitis
e. Tuberculous ulcer

1187. A 32-year-old patient complains of acute spontaneous attacks of pain in the 14 tooth. The pain lasts for 10-20 minutes and occurs every 2-3 hours. Carious cavity in the 14 tooth is filled with softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful at one point. Cold stimulus causes pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hyperemia of the pulp
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Acute localized pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Acute deep caries

1188. A 64-year-old patient needs a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. During fitting the Herbst appliance, the orthopedist revealed that it falls off when the patient swallows. The correction is required in the following area:
a. In the region of buccal muscles
b. In the region of maxillary prominences
*c. Distally along the "A" line
d. Along the vestibular edge
e. Vestibularly between canines

1189. A 24-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 26 tooth. After a physical examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth. During the tooth extraction the coronal part of the tooth was accidentally broken. Further manipulations with bayonet forceps failed to extract the tooth roots. What actions are to be taken for the successful root extraction?
a. To use angular elevator
b. To send the patient to the hospital
c. To complete the tooth extraction during the next visit
d. To use Lecluse elevator
*e. To disjoin the roots by using a drill and fissure burr

1190. A 43-year-old patient complains of mobility and significant neck exposure of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale and cyanotic, non-bleeding. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit the I-II grade mobility. The overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth is present. The necks of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed by 1/2 of the root length, the necks of the 43, 33 teeth are exposed by 1/4. What kind of dental prosthesis should be applied in this case?
a. Cap splint
*b. Cast removable splint
c. Portion crown
d. Half-ring splint
e. Kurlyandsky splint bar

1191. A 6-year-old girl with acute purulent odontogenic lymphadenitis had been given intramuscular injection of cefazolin (0,5 twice a day). 1,5 hour after the drug injection the child developed edema of lips, cheeks, forehead, ears, mucous membrane of mouth and upper airways. What complication developed in the girl?
a. Toxic shock
b. Allergic dermatitis
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Urticaria
*e. Angioneurotic edema

1192. A 19-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about gingival pain and bleeding when eating and brushing his teeth. Objectively: anterior maxillary and mandibular teeth are overcrowded, there is hyperemia, cyanosis and overgrowth of gingival papillae up to 1/3 of the crown height. The soft plaque is present. The gums bleed when touched with a tool. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Localized periodontitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
d. Generalized periodontitis
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

1193. A 14-year-old patient complains of intense, throbbing pain in the region of the 46 tooth which appeared for the first time two days ago. Objectively: the 46 tooth is filled. Percussion causes acute pain, the tooth is mobile, the mucous membrane around the 46 tooth is hyperemic and edematous, palpation of the mucogingival fold in the root apex projection is painful. Ro-gram shows no changes in the periapical region of the 46 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute localized periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*c. Acute purulent periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

1194. A 39-year-old patient had been admitted to the maxillofacial surgery unit for a swelling and bursting pain in the left submandibular region. The swelling appeared after eating spicy foods. After a physical examination, palpation and X-ray the patient was diagnosed with sialolithiais of submandibular gland with the concrement localized in the anterior duct. What tactics should be chosen by a dental surgeon after removal of the concrement from the duct?
*a. The wound and the duct are not to be sutured and drained
b. The wound is to be sutured along the line of incision and drained
c. Plasty of the excretory duct
d. The excretory duct and the wound are to be sutured
e. The wound is to be sutured along the line of incision

1195. A 34-year-old patient had got in a car accident. The patient stayed conscious. He complains of headache, dizziness, general weakness, nausea. 12 hours after the injury the patient got "raccoon eyes" (periorbital haematomas) within the limits of the circular muscle of eye. What fracture does the victim have?
a. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
b. Fracture of nasal bones
c. Fracture of frontal bones
*d. Fracture of skull base
e. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones

1196. A 10-year-old girl complains of a carious cavity in a lower jaw tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth has a carious cavity within circumpulpal dentin, dentin is dense, pigmented, there is pain reaction to the cold stimulus, probing and percussion are painless. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic simple pulpitis
d. Chronic median caries
*e. Chronic deep caries

1197. After examination a 5-year-old child was diagnosed with acute general pulpitis of the 74 tooth.What treatment will be most efficient in this case?
a. Tooth extraction
*b. Pulp extirpation
c. Non-vital amputation
d. Vital amputation
e. Biological method

1198. A 38-year-old female patient complains of pain in the 16 tooth, which appeared 3 days after placing an artificial crown over the tooth. Objectively: the 16 toothis crownedwitha fullmetal swaged crown. The gingiva around the tooth is hyperemic, edematous. The crown margin is submerged into gingival pocket by more than 0,5 mm. What is the cause of this complication?
a. Eating solid food
*b. Excessive submergence of the crown margin into the gingival pocket
c. Interdental contacts
d. Excessively tight fit of the crown
e. Contact of the crown with antagonists

1199. A 34-year-old female patient presented to a dental clinic for the prosthetics of the mandibular teeth. Objectively: the mandibular teeth exhibit the I-II class mobility. Which of the following examination methods should be applied?
*a. Radiography
b. Face-bow record
c. Myotonometry
d. Rheotachygraphy
e. Galvanometry

1200. A 29-year-old female patient presented to a dental clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: there is a carious cavity on the masticatory and mesial surfaces of the 24 tooth. Interdental contact is inadequate. Classify this cavity according to Black’s classification:
*a. II
b. IV
c. V
d. III
e. I

1201. A patient complains of spontaneous, paroxysmal, irradiating pain with short pain-free intervals. The pain arose 2 days ago and occurs only at night. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
b. Acute purulent pulpitis
c. Acute deep caries
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

1202. A 40-year-old female patient complains of swelling of the left submandibular region which appeared three days ago; elevation of body temperature up to 37,4°C. Objectively: the left submandibular region exhibits a soft tissue edema, the skin color is not changed. Palpation reveals a roundish dense elastic node with a smooth surface sized 2,0 x1,5 cm. The node is mobile, somewhat tender. Mouth opening is not restricted, oral mucosa exhibits no visible changes, the crown of the 36 tooth is decayed by 2/3,its percussion causes pain response. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenic serous lymphadenitis of the submandibular region
b. Odontogenic phlegmon of the submandibular region
c. Acute serous sialadenitis of the submandibular salivary gland
d. Chronic odontogenic lymphadenitis of the submandibular region
e. Odontogenic abscess of the submandibular region

1203. A 70-year-old female patient complains of burning sensation under the base of her complete denture; dryness and bitterness in the mouth. The denture was fabricated 3 weeks ago. Objectively: the alveolar bone mucosa is edematous, there is diffuse hyperemia up to the margins of the denture. The tongue is hyperemic, dry and cracked. What additional study would be most appropriate in this case?
a. Sialosemiology
*b. Allergotest
c. Complete blood count
d. Urinalysis
e. Biochemical blood analysis

1204. A 44-year-old female patient 2 presented to a dental clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the 17,16,15,14,12,25,26 teeth are missing; the 18,28 teeth are preserved. Make a diagnosis according to Kennedy classification of partial edentulousness:
a. Class III, subclass 3
b. Class III, subclass 1
*c. Class III, subclass 2
d. Class II, subclass 2
e. Class II, subclass 4

1205. A 45-year-old female patient presents to a dental clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the 47,46,45,35,36,37 teeth are missing. There is dentoalveolar vertical displacement of the 17,16,26,27 teeth; the alveolar process is hypertrophied, the cervical margins are not exposed. When the teeth are closed, the distance between the occlusal surfaces of teeth and the alveolar process is about 6 mm. Specify the most efficient method of treatment of secondary deformation in this patient:
a. Grinding
b. Surgical treatment
*c. Pulp removal and teeth grinding
d. Hardware-associated surgical treatment
e. Disocclusion

1206. A 25-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about acute pain in the mandible on the right that occurs during eating. Objectively: the approximate distal surface of the 45 tooth exhibits a carious cavity filled with light softened dentin. Probing causes a minor pain response across the entire floor. Percussion causes no pain. Cold water causes transient pain.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

1207. A 45-year-old male patient has been admitted to the maxillofacial department with complaints of general weakness, pain and swelling in the left submandibular region, elevation of body temperature up to 39°C. He has a history of frequent pain in the 36 mandibular tooth on the left. The face is asymmetric due to the swelling of the left submandibular region, where a dense infiltrate is palpable; the overlying skin is hyperemic, doesn’t make a fold. There is a deep carious cavity in the 36 tooth, its percussion causes pain response; the surrounding mucosa is hyperemic, edematous. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute left-sided submandibular sialadenitis
b. Acute suppurative left-sided submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Acute left-sided osteomyelitis of the mandible
*d. Phlegmon of the left submandibular region
e. Acute suppurative left-sided periostitis of the mandible

1208. A month after cementing a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for the 23 tooth, the patient complained of its decementation. On examination the tooth stump was of sufficient height, the stump walls were convergent to the vertical axis at an angle of about 30 degrees. What is the required angle of wall convergence?
*a. Up to 8 degrees
b. 20-25 degrees
c. 27-35 degrees
d. 25-30 degrees
e. 18-20 degrees

1209. A 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 85 tooth. What is the optimal material for the root canal filling?
a. Calcium-containing paste
b. Resorcinol-formalin paste
c. Zinc-phosphate cement
d. Glass ionomer cement
*e. Zinc-eugenol cement

1210. A 65-year-old male patient undergoes fabrication of a full removable denture for the mandible. The individual tray for taking a functional impression is adjusted with the use of Herbst tests. The tray is thrown off during swallowing. This means that its edge is to be shortened in the following 3 area:
a. Along the mylohyoid line
b. In the region of the premolars on the lingual side
c. From canine to canine vestibularly
d. From canine to canine lingually
*e. From the space behind the mucous tubercle to the mylohyoid line

1211. A 28-year-old female patient complains of a cosmetic defect in the anterior segment of the maxilla. Objectively: the crown of the 13 tooth is decayed nearly up to the gingival edge, the stump walls are of sufficient thickness. The stump has a slightly changed color, percussion causes no pain response. Radiographical findings: the root canal is straight, wide, and filled along the entire length. What prosthetic construction is most appropriate in this case?
a. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
b. Plastic crown
*c. Post and core
d. Inlay
e. Micro-denture

1212. A 32-year-old patient complains of constant chewing-like movements of the mandible. These movements occur with nervous excitement. The patient’s wife reports him to have gnashing of teeth at night. Objectively: the lateral teeth are worn, have no tubercles. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Alignment of teeth (selective grinding)
*b. Night guard (Michigan-type splint), myogymnastics, self-massage
c. Pharmaceutical and non-invasive treatment following the referral to a dental surgeon
d. Restoration with crowns
e. Referral to a dental surgeon

1213. A 38-year-old female patient complains of pain in front of the external auditory meatus projection, clicking when opening the mouth, sensation of stuffiness in the ears. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the trajectory of mouth opening is straight. There is a I class Kennedy defect, the 18,17,16,26,27,28 teeth are missing. Which anatomical structure takes the greatest load in this situation?
a. Articular head
b. Bottom of the glenoid fossa of the temporal bone
c. Articular capsule
*d. Articular disc (meniscus)
e. Distal surface of the medial articular tubercle

1214. A 70-year-old male patient with the completely edentulous maxilla and a hard palate defect complains of difficult eating, pouring of liquid food through the nose, frequent chronic diseases of the nasal mucosa. Objectively: the maxillary alveolar bone is atrophied (Schroeder class I), the mucosa pliability complies with Supple class I. The hard palate exhibits a cicatrically changed defect sized 2x3 cm. What denture design would be most effective in this case?
a. Soft-core obturator and complete removable denture
b. Complete removable denture with the teeth placed on the artificial gingiva
*c. Complete removable denture with an internal and a peripheral valve
d. Complete removable denture with a thickening in the defect region
e. Complete removable denture with a metal base and soft-core obturator

1215. A 7-year-old child complains of fever up to 38,3°C, headache, sore throat and general weakness. Objectively: the mucosa of the soft palate, tonsils and palatine arches is edematous and hyperemic, there are numerous small painful erosions with red bottom. The erosions are not covered with any plaque. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Herpetic angina
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Diphtheric stomatitis
d. Scarlet fever stomatitis
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

1216. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland region. A week before the patient got a cheek abrasion which was healing under the purulent crust. Over the past two days, the patient had had progressing pain and fever up to 38,6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly tense but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the overlying skin exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region
b. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
*c. Acute lymphadenitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Epidemic parotitis

1217. A 42-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a sudden dramatic enlargement of gingiva, bleeding sores on the mucous membrane, lymph node enlargement. There is body temperature elevation up to 38°C, weakness, pain in the bones. What disease can be suspected in this patient?
a. Eosinophilic granuloma
*b. Acute leukemia
c. Hypovitaminosis C
d. Chronic leukemia
e. Hodgkin’s lymphoma

1218. A 56-year-old male patient presents to a dental clinic for complex dental treatment prior to prosthetic procedures. Objectively: there is a pathological grayish-white triangular lesion sized 0,5x1,5 cm on the buccal mucosa in the mouth corners. The lesion cannot be removed. There are no signs of inflammation, regional lymph nodes are unchanged. Make a diagnosis:
a. Hyperkeratotic lichen planus
*b. Planar leukoplakia
c. Typical lichen planus
d. Mild leukoplakia
e. Mycotic stomatitis

1219. A 24-year-old female patient presented to a dental clinic for the extraction of the maxillary wisdom tooth root. Following the posterior superior alveolar nerve block, a post-injection hematoma occurred. What structure was damaged during anesthesia?
a. Palatine artery
*b. Pterygoid venous plexus
c. Infraorbital artery
d. Maxillary artery
e. Zygomatic artery

1220. What is the most adequate surgical approach for a submandibular phlegmon dissection?
a. Linear 2 cm long incision along the lower edge of the mandible
b. 5-6 cm long incision along the skin crease of the upper cervical region
c. 5-6 cm long incision bypassing the angle of the mandible
d. Intraoral approach along the mucogingival junction at the molar level
*e. 5-6 cm long incision 2 cm below the mandible

1221. A 12-year-old patient has chronic catarrhal gingivitis. The oral vestibule is 7 mm deep. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 4. Examination revealed no abnormalities of lip frenulum attachment. What measures should be taken in the first place?
a. -
*b. Professional oral hygiene
c. Curettage of periodontal pockets
d. Vestibuloplasty
e. Physiotherapy

1222. On the basis of subjective complaints, anamnesis and objective examination, a 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with impacted dislocation of the 71 tooth. What is the most appropriate treatment tactics?
a. Reposition and fixation of the 71 tooth
b. Endodontic treatment of the 71 tooth
c. No intervention is required
*d. Extraction of the 71 tooth
e. Orthodontic treatment of the 71 tooth

1223. A 26-year-old male patient presents 5 to a prosthetic dentistry clinic for a swaged metal crown for the 26 tooth. This is his third visit. During examination he has been found to have a hole on the medial buccal tubercle of the crown which appeared as a result of polishing. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Mount a fixed denture
b. Cement the crown with acryl oxide
c. Seal up the hole in the crown
d. Cement the crown with the cement
*e. Fabricate a new crown

1224. A 28-year-old patient complains that a piece of the 23 tooth crown has broken off. Objectively: the root canal orifices contain the filling material, percussion causes no pain response. What is the tactics of choice?
*a. Radiography of the 23 tooth
b. Fabrication of a metal insert tooth
c. Restoration with Belkin crown
d. Ortho-polymer restoration of the 23 tooth
e. Extraction of the 23 tooth

1225. A 58-year-old patient complains of stuffiness in the ears, hearing impairment, pain in the parotid region when opening the mouth. Objectively: the 18,17,16,15,26,27,28 teeth are restored with swaged metal crowns. There is a 1,5-2 mm gap between the crown edges and gingiva. The 14 and 25 teeth exhibit carious cavities. Probing, percussion and thermal stimuli cause no pain response. The patient has deep incisor overbite. What is the likely cause of otologic symptoms?
a. Galvanosis
*b. Functional TMJ overload
c. Missing mandibular teeth
d. Complication of tooth decay in the 14,25 teeth
e. Cervical margin exposure of the 18,17,16,15,26,27,28 teeth

1226. A 32-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic with a diagnosis of maxillary fracture.The fracture can be treated by means of standard maxillo-mandibular Zbarzh set. What construction provides the intra-oral fixation?
a. Plastic biteplate
b. Aluminium arch bar
*c. Standard double arch
d. Weber’s splint
e. Crown-supported soldered splint

1227. A 25-year-old male complains of pain, a sensation of heaviness in the maxilla on the left. He has a history of the 25 tooth extraction followed by health deterioration. There appeared purulent discharge from the left nasal meatus. He was diagnosed with acute odontogenic left-sided sinusitis. Which nasal meatus should the maxillary sinus be punctured through?
a. Superior and inferior
b. Middle and inferior
c. Superior
d. Middle
*e. Inferior

1228. A 22-year-old male patient presented to a dental clinic with a cavity in the 11 tooth. The patient had no previous history of this tooth treatment. Objective examination revealed a carious cavity filled with light softened dentin on the approximate medial surface. The carious cavity was located within the mantle dentin. The tooth is slightly sensitive to the cold stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Superficial caries
*b. Acute median caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic deep caries

1229. A patient consulted an oral surgeon about maxillary pain on the left, which arose three days ago. After examination, the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 17 tooth. The 17 tooth is indicated for extraction. What nerves should be blocked for a painless extraction of the 17 tooth? 6
*a. Posterior alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
b. Anterior alveolar nerves and incisive nerve
c. Nasopalatine nerve
d. Middle alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
e. Greater palatine nerve

1230. A 35-year-old patient complains about itch, burning and edema of lips. These presentations occured a week ago. Objectively: there is reddening of vermilion border and lip skin, especially in the region of mouth corners, there are also vesicles, crusts, small cracks accompanied by erythematous lesion of vermilion border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute eczematous cheilitis
b. Acute herpetic cheilitis
c. Exudative formof exfoliative cheilitis
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Exudative erythema multiforme

1231. A 6-year-old child complains of pain in a mandibular tooth on the left during eating. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 36 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within the mantle dentin. The cavity is full of light softened dentin which can be easily removed with an excavator. Probing of the cavity walls causes pain response. The teeth are sensitive to thermal stimuli, the pain is of short-term nature. There is no response to percussion. Select the optimal filling material:
a. Zinc phosphate cement
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Polycarboxylate cement
*d. Silver amalgam
e. Silicate cement

1232. A patient undergoes orthopedic treatment for bounded edentulous spaces in the upper jaw with fixed fullcast dentures. At the second appointment it is necessary to check whether the inner surface of the metal frame of the future porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge fits the surface of the prepared teeth. How can this be done?
a. By means of visual models in the articulator
b. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
c. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopy
*d. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials
e. In the oral cavity bymeans of transfer paper

1233. A 44-year-old male patient needs a cast splint for the mandible. Objectively: there is a bilateral terminal defect of the mandibular dental arch. The tooth crowns are high, the teeth are intact, there is I-II class mobility. What impression material should be used?
a. Repin
b. Stens
c. Dentafol
*d. Stomalgin
e. Gypsum

1234. A 35-year-old male complains of short-term pain caused by thermal stimuli in the 46 and 47 teeth. Objectively: masticatory surfaces of the 46,47 teeth are intact, approximate surfaces could not be examined because of a very close arrangement of teeth. What methods of study can be used in this case if you suspect the presence of hidden cavities?
a. Electro-odontometry
*b. X-ray
c. Fluorescent study
d. Vital staining
e. Measuring electrical resistance

1235. A 13-year-old child complains of having a cavity in the front maxillary teeth. Contact medial surfaces of the 11 and 21 teeth exhibit cavities found within the mantle dentine and filled with dense pigmented dentin. Probing of the cavity floor causes no pain response, neither does dental percussion. Select the best filling material for the permanent seals:
a. Silicate cement
b. Zinc phosphate cement
c. Glass ionomer cement 7
*d. Resin composite
e. Silicophosphate cement

1236. Parents of a 3-year-old child report that the child has persistent pain in the front maxillary teeth. Objectively: the coronal part of the 61 tooth is gray and decayed. Probing of the root canal orifice causes pain response and is accompanied by bleeding. The tooth percussion provokes acute pain. Mucosa is hyperemic, edematous and tender. Palpation in the region of the 61,62 teeth reveals a fistula. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

1237. A 15-year-old teenager consulted an orthodontist about misalignment of teeth. Objectively: the face is unremarkable. The patient has permanent dentition. There are no abnormalities of jaw relationship in three dimensions. The 23 tooth has a vestibular position and is located above the occlusal plane, the space in the dental arch is less than 1/3 of crown. The space for the misaligned 23 tooth can be gained due to:
a. Extraction of the 23 tooth
b. Increase of the vertical jaw dimensions
c. Increase of the transverse jaw dimensions
d. Increase of the sagittal jaw dimensions
*e. Extraction of the 24 tooth

1238. An 11-year-old boy complains of a carious cavity in a mandibular tooth on the right. Objectively: the 46 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within the mantle dentin. The dentin is dense, pigmented; there is pain response to the cold stimulus, probing and percussion cause no pain response. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Acute median caries
*c. Chronic median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

1239. A 45-year-old male patient complains of inertness, headache, fever up to 39°C, burning neuralgic pain in the mandible on the right. Objectively: the skin of chin on the right is hyperemic, there is vesicular rash with a vesicle diameter of 1 to 6 mm. Similar vesicles can be found on the hyperemic oral mucosa on the right. They burst easily making erosions which are covered with fibrinous pellicles. Regional lymphadenitis is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pemphigus
b. Exudative erythema multiforme
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Allergic stomatitis
*e. Shingles

1240. A 50-year-old patient complains of dryness and burning sensation in the mouth, pain during eating, taste perversion. The symptoms occurred a week ago after taking the course of antibiotics for acute bronchitis. Objectively: oral mucosa is covered with patches of white caseous deposit. The deposit can be easily removed when scraped, revealing hyperemic areas of mucous membrane. Which is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lichen planus
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis
d. Leukoplakia
*e. Acute pseudomembranous candidiasis

1241. A 56-year-old female patient complains of burning neuralgic pain in the left half of the mandible, which appeared two days ago. There is also rash in form of tense vesicles on the reddened skin and mucosa of the lower lip on the left, accompanied by malaise, headache, body temperature elevation up to 38°C, left-sided lymphadenitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Herpes zoster
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Pemphigus
d. Allergic reaction
e. Murrain

1242. A 21-year-old dental patient has been found to have a circular ulcer on 8 the tongue dorsum. The ulcer is up to 1 cm in diameter, has demarcated raised edges and a deep inflammatory infiltrate at the base. The ulcer floor is flat, clean, of crimson color. The regional lymph nodes are of cartilaginous density, mobile, painless. The ulcer appeared a week ago and doesn’t cause any discomfort. What kind of ulcer should be suspected in the first place?
a. Trophic
b. Tuberculous
c. Cancerous
*d. Syphilitic
e. Traumatic

1243. An 11-year-old boy complains of a short-term pain from the cold in a left mandibular tooth. Objectively: the medial surface of the 36 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin. The cavity is filled with light, softened dentin and does not communicate with the cavity of the tooth. Probing the of the 36 tooth floor causes pain response, the tooth is not sensitive to percussion, the response to the cold stimulus does not stay long after its removal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute median caries
*d. Acute deep caries
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

1244. A 36-year-old patient with the face and neck burns resulting from gasoline ignition has been delivered to the emergency room. Palpebral fissures are closed due to the eyelid edema. The face skin is erythematous, there are large tense blisters on the skin of the chin, cheeks, nose, forehead, superior surface of neck. Specify the degree of burns:
a. IV degree
b. -
c. I degree
d. III degree
*e. II degree

1245. A 9-year-old child has a symmetrical maxillary diastema with crown divergence. The relationship of the lateral teeth is neutral. In the anterior segment the depth of incisal overbite is 1/3 of the crown height. What appliance can be used for simultaneous treatment of diastema and crown divergence?
a. Maxillary plate with protraction springs
b. Bracket system with Andrew’s straight-wire
c. Maxillary plate with vestibular arch
*d. Maxillary plate with spring arms
e. Standard edgewise technique

1246. A 52-year-old female patient complains of a persistent burning sensation at the tip and lateral surface of the tongue. The burning occurs in the morning and gets worse in the evening, the sensation disappears when eating. The patient reports having had these symptoms for about a year and associates the disease with wearing removable dentures. The patient has a history of anacid gastritis, a surgery for uterine fibroids, second degree hypertension, poor sleep, anxiety. Objectively: the tongue is slightly swollen, the tongue dorsum is covered with a thin white plaque, filiform papillae are atrophied. The rest of the mucosa exhibits no visible pathological changes. Pharyngeal reflex is suppressed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Moeller-Hunter glossitis
b. Allergic reaction to plastic
*c. Glossalgia
d. Candidal glossitis
e. Lingual nerve neuritis

1247. A 28-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli in the mandibular and maxillary teeth. Objectively: in the cervical zone of mandibular and maxillary incisors and canines there are irregularly shaped defects of hard dental tissues within the amelodentinal junction in form of tissue softening. In this clinical case a dentist will find it difficult to differentiate between the following diseases: 9
a. Hypoplasia and necrosis
b. Caries and erosion
c. Erosion and wedge-shaped defect
*d. Caries and necrosis
e. Hypoplasia and wedge-shaped defect

1248. A 52-year-old male patient working as a driver consulted a dentist about pain, difficult mouth opening. The patient had been diagnosed with ulcerative leukoplakia. After a 10-day course of therapy sluggish granulation began. On the periphery of the ulcer the keratinization processes became more active. Which of the following tests must be conducted in the first place?
a. Bacteriological stdy
b. Cytological study
c. Bacterioscopy
d. Stomatoscopy
*e. Microscopy

1249. hours after application of arsenic paste to the 36 tooth pulp, a 27-yearold patient complained of pain in the treated tooth. Objectively: on the distal surface of the 36 tooth the temporary filling is present. Percussion causes no pain response. Gingival papilla in the region of the 36,37 teeth is hyperemic and edematous, its apex is necrotized. What is the optimal tactics of this patient management?
*a. Replace the temporary filling, treat the gingiva with 3% iodine solution
b. Keep the temporary filling, treat the gingiva with 3% iodine solution
c. Keep the temporary filling, treat the gingiva with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
d. Replace the temporary filling, treat the gingiva with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
e. Keep the temporary filling, administer soda rinse

1250. A 43-year-old female patient has been diagnosed with generalized periodontitis. What examination is most informative for determining the severity grade of the disease?
a. Calculation of the periodontal index
b. Determining the class of tooth mobility
c. Schiller-Pisarev test
d. Measuring the depth of periodontal pockets
*e. Panoramic radiography

1251. A 7,5-year-old boy fell down on his face and damaged his front maxillary teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 11 and 12 teeth are destroyed by 1/4. The tooth cavity is closed. Probing causes pain along the break-off line, percussion of the 11 and 12 teeth causes no pain response. Mucosa around the 11 and 12 teeth is slightly hyperemic. Radiograph of the 11 and 12 teeth shows the intactness of the dental tissues and alveolar process. What tactics of a dentist would be optimal in the first hours after the injury?
*a. Pulp monitoring
b. Photopolymer filling
c. Composite filling
d. Parapulpar pin reconstruction
e. Fabrication of an artificial crown

1252. A 9-year-old child complains of pain in the left mandibular molar that occurs during eating. The masticatory surface of the 75 tooth exhibits a carious cavitiy filled with softened dentin and localized within parapulpar dentin. The cavity communicates with the tooth cavity. Probing at the site of communication causes acute pain and moderate bleeding. Percussion of the tooth causes no pain response. Radiography revaled no periodontal alterations in the 75 tooth. Select the method of treatment:
a. Vital amputation
b. Biological method
c. Devital extirpation
d. Vital extirpation
*e. Devital amputation

1253. Preventive examination a 6-year-old child revealed that the child had deciduous dentition, direct incisor contact in the frontal segment, no gaps between teeth; contact of homonymous canines and molars; abrasion of masticatory tubercles of the molars. The child’s condition corresponds with the following period:
*a. Physiological wear of deciduous dentition
b. Stable deciduous dentition
c. Exfoliation
d. Mixed dentition
e. Development of deciduous dentition

1254. A 12-year-old girl visited a dentist for a regular check-up. Objectively: the teeth are intact, the bite is open, the mucosa in the papillary and marginal regions is hyperemic and cyanotic, the gingival papillae are roundish, enlarged and cover one third of the crown height of the anterior maxillary teeth. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Gingival fibromatosis
e. -

1255. A 29-year-old male patient complains of gingival hemorrhages during tooth brushing, and bad breath. Objectively: gingival papillae and marginal gingiva are hyperemic with a cyanotic tint, bleed on probing. Periodontal pockets are 3-3,5 mm deep, with serous exudate expressed fromthem. The sub- and supragingival calculus is present. Orthopantomograph shows osteoporosis of the alveolar process, resorption of interalveolar septa to 1/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic generalized periodontitis, initial stage
b. Chronic generalized II grade periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic generalized I grade periodontitis
d. Chronic generalized periodontitis, initial stage
*e. Chronic generalized I grade periodontitis

1256. A 40-year-old patient complains of fever up to 38°C, and a roundish infiltration on the upper lip. Objectively: the upper lip on the left exhibits a round infiltrate, the overlying skin is deep crimson. The infiltrate adheres to the surrounding tissues and has a necrotic core in the center. The upper lip is hyperemic, edematous. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Acute abscess of the upper lip
b. Acute lymphadenitis
c. Upper lip carbuncle
*d. Upper lip furuncle
e. Retention cyst

1257. A 20-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a short-term pain in the 22 tooth caused by cold stimuli or contact with food. The pain had been observed for several months. After the examination, the patient was diagnosed with acute deep caries of the 22 tooth.What material should be used as a base for the cavity filling?
a. Paste with trypsin
b. Silver-containing phosphate cement
c. Silidont
*d. Calcidont
e. Phosphate cement

1258. A 48-year-old female patient underwent parotidectomy for a benign tumor of the parotid gland. Postoperatively, the patient was observed to have mouth downturning, midline deviation towards the unaffected side, speech disturbance. Which branch of the facial nerve was damaged during the surgical intervention?
a. Temporal branch
*b. Marginal mandibular branch of facial nerve
c. Zygomatic branch
d. Buccal branch
e. Cervical branch

1259. On examination a 42-year-old patient was diagnosed with acute suppurative periostitis of the mandible beginning from the 35 tooth. What is the most rational method of anesthesia for the 35 tooth extraction and dissection of the subperiosteal abscess?
a. Infiltration anesthesia
b. General anesthesia
c. Berchet anesthesia
d. Plexus anesthesia
*e. Torusal anesthesia

1260. Examination of a 31-year-old patient revealed perforation of the pulp chamber floor of the 36 tooth with a 11 minor radiolucency of the interradicular septum. Which of the following methods of surgical treatment should be applied in order to save the 36 tooth and use it as an abutment tooth for a bridge denture?
a. Tooth replantation
b. Sealing of perforation
c. Root amputation
d. Root hemisection
*e. Coronary radicular separation

1261. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the right side of her head, restricted movements of the lower jaw, clicking sound, periodic spasms of chewing muscles. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is restricted. On palpation of the right temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ) there are crepitation and clicking that accompany the mandible movements. Examination of the oral cavity revealed also a Kennedy’s class II defect on the right.What is themost likely diagnosis?
a. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ
b. Contracture of the right TMJ
c. Myositis ossificans
*d. Pain dysfunction of the right TMJ
e. Sclerosing osteoarthritis of the right TMJ

1262. A 40-year-old patient complains of malaise, weakness, headache, fever up to 38,5°C. Objectively: there is a symmetric red lesion in form of butterfly-wing rash on the face around the nose and cheeks. The lesion is clearly demarcated, tender on palpation, does not disappear when pressed upon. The skin is raised and glossy. Submandibular and parotid superficial lymph nodes are enlarged, tender to palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Furuncle of face
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*c. Facial erysipelas
d. Microbial eczema
e. Neurodermatitis

1263. A 43-year-old male patient awaits fabrication of full swaged crowns for the 26 and 27 teeth. What material should be used for the dental dies?
*a. Low-fusible alloy
b. Cobalt-chromium alloy
c. Solder alloy
d. Silver-palladium alloy
e. Stainless steel

1264. Examination of a 9-year-old child revealed chalky spots in the cervical zone of the 12,11,21,22 teeth. The spots appeared two weeks ago. Lustreless surface of the spots is stainable with methylene blue. The affected teeth are not sensitive to the cold stimulus. Specify the physician’s tactics in respect of the affected teeth:
a. Case follow-up
b. -
c. Impregnation therapy
d. Grinding of affected areas
*e. Remineralizing therapy

1265. An 18-year-old male has a furuncle in the region of the mandible angle. The surrounding tissues are rigid. Cyanosis and induration in form of a cord extend to the corner of the eye. General condition is deteriorated, body temperature is of 38,5°C.What complication has developed in this case?
*a. Facial vein thrombophlebitis
b. Phlegmon of cheek
c. Carbuncle of cheek
d. Acute sinusitis
e. Abscess of cheek

1266. Regimental aid station admitted a wounded soldier with a diagnosis of a gunshot fracture of the mandibular body. What kind of immobilization is required at this stage?
*a. Transport immobilization
b. Extraoral appliance for fragment fixation
c. Osteosynthesis of the mandible
d. Smooth brace
e. Immobilization with splints for both jaws

1267. A 17-year-old male patient complains about having a fistula on the anterior surface of his neck. The fistula has been present since birth. Periodically there appears a small amount of mucoid discharge. The patient has been diagnosed with a middle cervical fistula. 12 What tactics of treatment should be preferred for this patient?
a. Excision of the fistulous tract without resection of the hyoid bone body
b. Cryodestruction of the fistula epithelium
c. Sclerosing of the fistula epithelium
*d. Excision of the fistulous tract with resection of the hyoid bone body
e. Closure of the fistula with the pursestring suture

1268. A 70-year-old patient complains of inability to take food, a cosmetic and phonetic defect due to the complete loss of mandibular teeth. Objectively: the lateral segment of the alveolar process of the mandible is significantly atrophied, while the frontal segment is relatively preserved. Buccal folds are attached at the crest of the alveolar process. These clinical presentations correspond with the following class of edentulous jaws according to Keller classification:
a. Class I
b. Class II
*c. Class III
d. Class IV
e. Class V

1269. A 24-year-old male who had been injured in a fight was delivered to the maxillofacial department. The patient was diagnosed with a fracture of the left zygomatic bone with a displacement; a fracture of the anterior wall of the maxillary sinus.What kind of surgery is indicated for this patient?
*a. Radical maxillary sinusotomy and reposition of fragments
b. Osteotomy of the maxilla
c. Reposition of fragments
d. Osteosynthesis of the zygomatic bone
e. Radical maxillary sinusotomy

1270. A 50-year-old male patient has a gunshot wound to the mandible and a bone defect in the mental area. What method of immobilization is indicated for this patient?
*a. Extraoral Rudko apparatus
b. Bone suture
c. Immobilization by means of wires and rods
d. One-jaw brace
e. Two-jaw splint with wire loops and intermaxillary elastics

1271. days ago a 35-year-old patient underwent the extraction of the 47 tooth, which was followed by health deterioration. Objectively: the patient is pale, body temperature is of 38,1°C, the mandible on the left is thickened, the surrounding soft tissues are swollen, mouth opening is difficult. Mucogingival junction at the 48,47,46 teeth is edematous, mucous membrane is hyperemic. There are purulent discharges from the 47 tooth socket, the 48,46,45 teeth are sensitive to percussion. There is also paresthesia in the lower lip region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute mandibular periostitis
b. Acute periodontitis of the 47 tooth
c. Abscess of mandibular radicular cyst
*d. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Submandibular phlegmon

1272. A female patient presented to a clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the face is shortened; nasolabial folds are deepened; the front teeth of both jaws are missing; the crowns of the 17,15,26,27,36,37,45,47 teeth are worn by 2/3 of their height; the chewing surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented; alveolar bone is not hypertrophied, interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological dental abrasion in this patient:
a. Horizontal, compensated, III grade of severity
b. Vertical, compensated, III grade of severity
c. Combined, uncompensated, III grade of severity
*d. Horizontal, uncompensated, III grade of severity
e. Vertical, uncompensated, III grade of severity

1273. Following the extraction of the 12,11,21,22,23 teeth, a 50-year-old patient will receive an immediate-insertion denture. What denture should be used in this situation?
a. Fixed bridge denture
b. Clasp denture
*c. Laminar denture
d. Adhesive denture
e. Removable bridge denture

1274. A 10-year-old child was undergoing complex dental care. During the procedures, a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity was revealed in the 36 tooth. The tooth was not sensitive either to probing, percussion, or temperature stimuli. The patient was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis. During the treatment, the accidental perforation of the tooth cavity floor occurred. What measures should be taken in this case?
a. Sealing the perforation with calcium hydroxide
b. Tooth extraction
c. Potassium iodide electrophoresis
d. Application of zinc-eugenol paste
*e. Sealing the perforation with glass ionomer

1275. Dental examination of a 19-year-old girl revealed white spots in the cervical zone of the 11,21 teeth. According to the patient, the spots appeared about two months ago and had slowly enlarged since that time. Which of the following diseases is characterized by such history?
a. Necrosis
b. Enamel hypoplasia
*c. Caries
d. Fluorosis
e. Erosion of hard tissues

1276. A 52-year-old patient complains of pain and a swelling in the right parotid region. These manifestations have been present for about 2 years. Over the last month the swelling has grown bigger, pain has intensified. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to a dense infiltrate in the right parotid region. The poorly circumscribed, tender to palpation lump infiltrates the surrounding tissues. On the right side of neck in front and behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle there are enlarged, dense, mobile lymph nodes. The right naso-buccal groove is flattened, the corner of mouth is downturned. The mouth opens freely. The are pronounced symptoms of the right facial nerve paresis. What disease can be suspected?
a. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland
*b. Adenocarcinoma of the parotid salivary gland
c. Actinomycosis of the parotidmasseteric region
d. Chronic parotitis
e. Chronic lymphadenitis

1277. A24-year-old patient was undergoing the extraction of the 25 tooth roots for the exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. During the operation the roots were dislocated into the maxillary sinus. What would be the surgeon’s optimal tactics?
a. To pack the extraction socket
b. To perform maxillary sinusotomy and remove the roots in the outpatient department
c. Not to remove the roots, suture the extraction socket
d. To remove the roots through the extraction socket
*e. To perform maxillary sinusotomy and remove the roots in hospital environment

1278. A 55-year-old male patient presents to a dental clinic complaining of inability to use complete removable dentures fabricated a week ago. The patient also presents with muscle pain in the region of the temporomandibular joint, tooth chatter during a conversation, and difficult biting on food. Objectively: the face is elongated, nasolabial and labiomental folds are flattened, the chin is retruded, the lips do not close. What is the cause of these disorders?
a. Right displacement of the mandible
*b. Increased occlusal vertical dimension
c. Inadequate fixation of dentures
d. Descending occlusion
e. Left displacement of the mandible

1279. Parents of a 10-year-old boy consulted an orthodontist about misalignment of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is in a vestibular position, there is enough space for it in the dental arch. What additional methods of examination should be applied to specify the treatment plan?
a. Korkhaus’ index measuring
b. Pont’s index measuring
*c. X-ray
d. Paralleling
e. Masticaciography

1280. A 38-year-old chemical plant worker, a smoker, with a history of chronic enterocolitis, was undergoing preventive medical examination. In the posterior third, along the midline of the tongue dorsum there is an area with no papillae. The area is 2x1cm large, slightly dense on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic atrophic candidiasis
b. Desquamative glossitis
*c. Rhomboid glossitis
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Moeller-Hunter glossitis

1281. A female patient presented to a dental prosthetics clinic complaining of acute pain in the 26 tooth. The pain gets worse in the evening and at night. Objectively: the patient has a cantilever porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge supported by the 26 tooth and the 25 tooth cantilever. The tooth is live, the preparation was performed under conduction anesthesia. The prosthesis is fabricated in compliance with all requirements. What medical error might have caused this complication?
a. Preparation of the radial shoulder in the cervical zone
b. Shaping the tooth as a truncated cone
*c. Continuous tooth preparation without cooling, no provisional crowns
d. Lack of medial support for the bridge
e. Cementing the bridge on the phosphate cement

1282. A 64-year-old patient had a myocardial infarction a month ago. He presents to a dental office for the treatment of pulpitis of the 12 tooth. Select the optimal method of anesthesia:
*a. Premedication + anesthetic without a vasoconstrictor
b. Premedication + an anesthetic without a vasoconstrictor
c. Premedication + anesthetic with a vasoconstrictor
d. Premedication + an anesthetic with a vasoconstrictor
e. An anesthetic with a vasoconstrictor

1283. A 45-year-old female patient complains of fever, appearance of rash in the mouth cavity and on the lips. She has a 4-year history of this disease which occurs mainly in autumn and spring. Objectively: oral mucosa is hyperemic, there are painful erosions covered with gray plaque. There are also hemorrhagic crusts on the lips. The skin of the forearm flexor surfaces exhibits maculo-papular rash. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Erythema multiforme
b. Chronic recurrent herpes
c. Pemphigus vulgaris
d. Bullous pemphigoid
e. Dermatitis herpetiformis

1284. A 27-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 35 tooth. The pain is caused by cold stimuli and quickly abates after the stimulus is removed. Objectively: in the cervical region of the 35 tooth there is a dental tissue defect within the enamel. The defect has white crumbling edges. Electroexcitability of the pulp was 5 mkA. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Enamel erosion
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Acute initial caries

1285. A patient has an indication for the 12 tooth extraction for the exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. It was decided to apply infraorbital and incisive anesthesia in this patient. What nerve structures are blocked by this anesthesia?
a. Greater palatine nerve, middle superior alveolar branches
b. Nasopalatine nerve, anterior superior alveolar branches
c. Middle superior alveolar branches, n. Nasopalatinus
d. Posterior superior alveolar branches, n. Incisivus
*e. Anterior superior alveolar branches, n. Incisivus

1286. A 52-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a tumor-like neoplasm in the region of the lower lip vermilion border. Examination of the vermilion border on the left revealed a roundish tumor about 0,5 cm in diameter on a thin pedicle. The tumor had a smooth surface, was mobile, soft, and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Verrucous precancerous lesion of the vermilion border
b. Abrasive Manganotti precancerous cheilitis
c. Cutaneous horn
d. Leukoplakia
*e. Papilloma of the lower lip

1287. A 21-year-old male patient undergoes treatment for chronic catarrhal gingivitis. There is a significant amount of soft dental plaque, high speed of its production. The patient knows how to practice good oral hygiene. Recommend a mouthrinse for this patient:
a. Furacilin
*b. Chlorhexidine
c. Mefenaminum natrium
d. Dimethyl sulfoxide
e. Hydrogen peroxide

1288. A male patient should have the root of the 17 tooth removed prior to prosthetic procedures. The crown of the tooth is decayed beneath the gum line. What tool should be used?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. S-shaped right forceps
c. Straight forceps with non-converging beaks
*d. Bayonet forceps
e. Straight forceps with converging beaks

1289. A patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 47 tooth. X-ray examination revealed fragments of endodontic instruments in the canals of the medial and distal root. In the periapical zone there are well-defined areas of bone destruction. Select the most appropriate method of treatment:
*a. Tooth extraction
b. Tooth replantation
c. Conservative treatment
d. Tooth hemisection
e. Radectomy

1290. A 50-year-old male patient with a defect of the hard palate needs a palatal plate. Objectively: the maxillary teeth are intact. What method of fixation should be used?
*a. Mesio-distal clasps
b. Attachment
c. Telescopic system
d. Bar fixation
e. Supporting clasps

1291. A 40-year-old male patient presents with vicious union after a fracture of the maxilla. Objectively: the remaining 13 and 14 teeth are displaced in a distal direction. What method of orthopedic treatment would be most adequate in this case?
a. Removable laminar denture
b. Cast clasp denture
*c. Removable double-arch denture
d. Removable denture with metal base
e. Removable denture with bilayer base

1292. Following the unilateral resection of the maxilla a 52-year-old patient received the immediate-insertion denture. What is the term of its use?
a. 7-12 months
b. 1-2 months
*c. 1-3 months
d. 2-3 years
e. 4-5 years

1293. A 28-year-old patient complains of pain in the 37 tooth when eating hot food. Objectively: the 37 tooth has changed in color, there is a carious cavity filled with softened dentin, the tooth cavity is open, probing of the root pulp causes pain response, percussion causes no pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

1294. A 16-year-old female patient complains of gingival pain and hemorrhage, a gingival deformity. Over the last 2 years the gums periodically bleed during tooth brushing. Objectively: in the region of the front mandibular teeth the gingival papillae are enlarged and reach 1/2 of the tooth crown height. The gums are swollen and tender, bleed when touched. Radiographic alterations were not revealed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Epulis
d. Catarrhal gingivitis
e. Ulcerative gingivitis

1295. A patient presented to a dental clinic for complex dental care. Objectively: the 37 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. There is no response to stimuli. Radiography reveals widening and deformation of the periodontal ligament space in the apical region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

1296. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about complex dental care. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. History: the tooth hasn’t been treated before, it has decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooth crown is decayed by over 2/3,the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. What tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. Straight elevator
b. S-shaped forceps (right)
*c. Bayonet root forceps
d. S-shaped closed-beak forceps
e. Crown bayonet forceps

1297. A 16-year-old female patient complains of a deformation and restricted mouth opening since birth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, disproportionate, there is a bird-like face symptom. The mouth opens up to 1 cm. The patient has an occlusal abnormality, namely deep incisal overbite. What pathology is found in this patient?
*a. Micrognathia with congenital ankylosis
b. Maxillary protraction
c. Mandibular protraction
d. Prognathism
e. Micrognathia with acquired ankylosis

1298. A 13-year-old boy complains of pain in the region of the extracted 46 tooth, irradiating to the ear and temple; halitosis. The tooth was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, tender on palpation. Mucosa around the extracted tooth is hyperemic, edematous. The socket of the 46 tooth is filled with a gray clot. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis starting from the 46 tooth
b. Neuralgia of the III branch of the trigeminal nerve
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 46 tooth
d. Acute odontogenous lymphadenitis of the right submandibular region starting from the 46 tooth
*e. Alveolitis of the extracted 46 tooth

1299. A 47-year-old male patient consulted a dental surgeon about a slowly growing tumor on his lower lip which appeared six months ago. Objectively: on the lower lip there is a single horny conical projection above the surface of the skin up to 1,5 cm wide. The neoplasm adheres to the skin. Palpation reveals dense keratinous masses. What is the provisional diagnosis? 17
*a. Cutaneous horn
b. Circumscribed hyperkeratosis
c. Abrasive precancerous Manganotti cheilitis
d. Papilloma of lip
e. Verrucous precancerous lesion of lip

1300. A 45-year-old patient has a dense semicircle neoplasm 1 cm in diameter on his lower lip. The tumor projects above the vermilion border by 0,5 cm. The surface is grayish- pink with a small number of closely arranged whitish scales. The tumor is not tender on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Verucca vulgaris
b. Pyogenic granuloma
c. Manganotti cheilitis
*d. Verrucous precancerous lesion of the vermilion border
e. Papilloma

1301. Parents of an 8-year-old child complain about the presence of chalky spots on the child’s front maxillary teeth which have recenly erupted. Objectively: the vestibular surfaces of the 11 and 12 teeth exhibit white spots in the cervical zone. Enamel at these sites is not transparent. What additional test can be used?
a. Radiovisiography
*b. Staining with methylene blue
c. Staining with iodine-containing solutions
d. Radiography
e. Electric pulp test

1302. An 11-year-old boy complains of having a painful lesion in the mouth cavity, which makes it difficult to eat. Such symptoms were first noticed two years ago. Examination of the mouth floor reveals a tender oval erosion sized up to 0,8 cm, and covered with grayish-white plaque. The erosion has a hyperemic rim. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Erythema multiforme
b. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
c. Traumatic erosion
*d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Behcet’s syndrome

1303. A 3-year-old girl has been diagnosed with acute odontogenic mandibular periostitis beginning from the 74 tooth. It is required to perform periostomy and extract the 74 tooth. The child is excited. Select the optimal type of anesthesia for the surgery:
a. Inferior alveolar nerve block
b. Intubation anesthesia
c. Central anesthesia
*d. Phlebonarcosis
e. Mask anesthesia

1304. A 7-year-old child has been diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 64 and 65 teeth. The child has a history of hemophilia A. What is the medical tactics of choice?
*a. Extraction of the affected teeth in the hematology department after taking the appropriate preparatory measures
b. Extraction of the affected teeth on an out-patient basis with further packing of alveolar sockets with a hemostatic sponge
c. Extraction of teeth is contraindicated because of the high probability of bleeding
d. Extraction of the affected teeth in the maxillofacial department
e. Extraction of the affected teeth is possible both on an in-patient and out-patient basis

1305. A 3-year-old child has a hard and soft palate defect. It is planned to fabricate a "floating" Cese obturator (Chasovskaya modification). What impression material should be used?
a. Gypsum
b. Stomalgin
*c. Thermoplastic or silicone
d. Hydrocolloid
e. Eugenol-zinc

1306. Examination of a child hospitalized for scarlet fever revealed alterations of the tongue mucosa which turned bright red, glossy, and dry. At the same time the fungiform papillae were enlarged. The described appearance of tongue is referred to as: 18
a. Rhomboid
b. Plicated
*c. Strawberry
d. Geographic
e. Black

1307. A 64-year-old patient with edentulous jaws has a mild uniform atrophy of the maxilla and a pronounced atrophy of lateral segments of the mandible. The mucosa in these regions makes longitudinal folds, the alveolar crest is mobile in the anterior part. The condition of mandible should be taken into consideration at the following stage of fabrication of a complete removable denture:
a. Taking a decompression functional impression
b. Determining the centric jaw relation
c. Taking an anatomical impression
d. Taking a compression functional impression
*e. Taking a differentiated functional impression

1308. A 30-year-old female patient complains of limited mouth opening. She has a history of an injury received at the time when her jaws were closed. Objectively: mouth opening is limited to 1,5 cm, the bite is normal, mouth opening causes the displacement of mandible to the left. Palpation reveals pain in the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ). X-ray picture confirms bone intactness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Contusion of the left TMJ
b. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone with a displacement of bone fragments
c. Fracture of the left articular process of the mandible
d. Acute unilateral dislocation of the TMJ
*e. Acute traumatic arthritis of the left TMJ

1309. A 41-year-old patient has been diagnosed with a fracture of the mandibular alveolar process. Objectively: the teeth are intact. When the jaws are closed, the multipoint occlusal contact is observed. The patient is to be transported to a specialized hospital. What kind of first aid is indicated in this case?
a. Tigerstedt’s splint with wire loops
*b. Stiff head-chin strap by
c. Smooth brace
d. O. Entin
e. Standard Vasilyev splint

1310. In a 7-year-old child the right mandibular molars overlap the maxillary molars, there are no other occlusion abnormalities. Size and shape of the lower dental arch are normal. Specify the appliance for the treatment of this abnormality:
a. Upper-jaw appliance with a middle expansion screw
b. Upper-jaw appliance with a left guide plane
c. Angle’s coil spring
*d. Upper-jaw appliance with a sector expansion screw
e. Upper-jaw appliance with a right guide plane

1311. Parents of a 5-year-old child consulted an orthodontist about mispronunciation of sounds by the child. Objectively: the child’s face is unremarkable. The patient has deciduous dentition. There are 1-1,5 mm gaps in the frontal segment from 53 to 63. Occlusion in the sagittal and transversal planes is normal. What type of Frankel’s functional regulator is used to treat the above-described malocclusion?
a. Type III
b. Type I
c. -
*d. Type IV
e. Type II

1312. A 35-year-old female patient seeks prosthetic dentistry. Objectively: the 18,14,13,12,11,21,22,23,24,28 teeth need restoration. The crowns confining the defect are high and stable. To restore the integrity of the dental arch, it is planned to fabricate a cast clasp denture. What kind of mechanical fixator should be used? 19
a. Telescopic fixation
b. Dentoalveolar clasps
c. Supporting-retaining clasps
d. Retaining clasps
*e. Bar fixation

1313. A 48-year-old patient has undergone unilateral resection of the maxilla. He needs a resection prosthesis. Objectively: the 21,22,23,24,25,26 teeth are stable, hard palate is broad, flat. What kind of attachment of clasps to the base will reduce the instability of the resection prosthesis?
a. Fixed
b. Does not matter
c. Stable
d. Elastic
*e. Articular

1314. Residents of a remote settlement need prosthetic care. What health care facility should provide it?
a. Occupational health facility
b. City dental clinic
*c. Regional dental clinic
d. Rural district hospital
e. Rural outpatient clinic

1315. A  24-year-old hemophiliac has been diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic pulpitis of the 11 tooth. Select the best method of tooth treatment in this case:
a. Vital amputation
b. Biological treatment
*c. Devital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Vital extirpation

1316. A 25-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about acute pain in the maxilla on the left. The pain occurs while eating. Objectively: on the distal approximate surface of the 26 tooth there is a cavity filled with light softened dentin. Probing causes a slight pain along the dentin-enamel junction, percussion causes no pain response. Cold water causes quickly abating pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Acute deep caries
*e. Acute median caries

1317. A 45-year-old male patient complains of bleeding gums, tooth mobility, hypersensitivity in the cervical zone. Objective examination revealed presence of all teeth, 1-2 class mobility, pathological gingival pockets with serous exudate. Radiograph shows widening of the periodontal ligament space, alveolar bone resorption by 1/3 - 1/2 of the root length. What kind of tooth stabilization is indicated?
*a. Stabilization of entire dental arch
b. Front and sagittal
c. Parasagittal
d. Sagittal
e. Front

1318. During mandibular anesthetization with 4% solution of Ultracainforte, a 13-year-old girl complained of sudden weakness, laboured respiration, nausea, fear. Objectively: the patient has pale skin covered with cold sweat, hyperemic spots on the face and neck. Respiration is frequent, the pulse is weak, blood pressure is 60/40 mm Hg, hands are cold. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Syncope
c. Collapse
d. Traumatic shock
e. Toxic shock

1319. A 65-year-old female patient complains of complete edentulousness. Examination of the oral cavity revealed that alveolar process of the edentulous mandible was markedly atrophied in the frontal region, while it was expressed in the distal region. Specify the class of atrophy according to Keller classification:
a. Class I and III
*b. Class IV
c. Class I
d. Class II
e. Class III

1320. A 28-year-old patient complains of tender gums, gingival hemorrhages and pain, especially while eating, for a week. Objectively: the gums are swollen and markedly hyperemic, especially in the region of the 43,42,41,31,32,33 teeth, soft plaque and tartar are present, gingival sulci are up to 2 mm deep. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Initial stage of chronic generalized periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of initial generalized periodontitis
*d. Acute deep gingivitis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

1321. A 24-year-old male patient complains of acute gingival pain, the inability to eat, bad breath, fever up to 38°C, general weakness. Objectively: the patient is pale, lymph nodes are enlarged. Gingival papillae are swollen and hyperemic, there are individual ulcers covered by necrotic coating. What additional study is required in the first place in order to clarify the diagnosis?
a. Allergologic tests
b. Kavetsky test with trypan blue
c. Urinalysis
d. Panoramic radiography
*e. Complete blood count

1322. A 35-year-old patient complains of gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: gums of both jaws are hyperemic and cyanotic, supragingival and subgingival tartar is present. The periodontal pockets are 4-6 mm deep. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Catarrhal gingivitis
b. Exacerbation of I grade generalized periodontitis
c. II grade parodontosis
*d. II grade generalized periodontitis, chronic course
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

1323. A 27-year-old male patient complains of aching long-lasting pain in the 15 tooth during having meals, especially cold food. Sometimes the pain occurs when the temperature changes. Objectively: on the distal surface of the 15 tooth there is a cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing causes pain reaction. Electroexcitability of the pulp is 35 ?A.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hyperemia of the pulp
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

1324. A 25-year-old patient undergoes treatment at the clinic of maxillofacial surgery for the mandibular ameloblastoma localized in the angle. The patient has been scheduled for a partial resection of the mandible with a single-stage bone autoplasty. It is most expedient to take a bone graft from:
*a. Iliac bone ridge
b. Foot bones
c. VI rib
d. Femur
e. Collarbone

1325. A 36-year-old female patient complains of headache, inability to close the jaws. She has a history of an injury followed by loss of consciousness, nausea. Objectively: the midface tissues are edematous, there is bilateral eyelid hemorrage, open bite. Palpation of the midface bones causes acute pain. In the back of nose there is marked symptom of step deformity, nasal hemorrhage is present. Palpation of the oral cavity reveals mobility of the maxilla. Make a diagnosis:
a. Maxillary Guerin fracture
*b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture (middle), concussion
c. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (bottom )
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (top)
e. Le Fort II maxillary fracture (middle)

1326. Objective examination of a 65year-old patient with the completely edentulous mandible revealed a marked uniform atrophy of the alveolar bone; bony prominences on the lingual surface in the region where premolars had previously been. Mucosa was unevenly pliable; alveolar 21 crest was mobile in the frontal region. The clinical condition of the mandible should be taken into consideration at the following stage of denture fabrication:
a. Taking a decompression impression
b. Measuring the centric relation of jaws
c. Taking an anatomical impression
d. Taking a positive pressure impression
*e. Taking a differentiated impression

1327. Objective examination of a 67year-old patient with the edentulous maxilla revealed minor uniform atrophy of the alveolar processes. Maxillary prominences were well preserved, the frenulum and buccoalveolar folds were attached at the base of the alveolar process, the palate was deep, the torus palatinus was expressed insignificantly. These clinical presentations correspond with the following class of atrophy according to Schroeder classification:
a. 5
*b. 1
c. 3
d. 2
e. 4

1328. A 2-year-old boy has a brown spot with a rough surface covered with coarse hair on his left cheek. According to parents, the neoplasm has been present since birth and exhibits a slight enlargement as the child grows. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Pigmented nevus
b. Kaposi’s sarcoma
c. Melanoma of cheek
d. Facial neurofibromatosis
e. Vascular nevus

1329. A 53-year-old male patient has a history of generalized periodontitis. It is planned to fabricate fixed splints for both jaws intended to stabilize the teeth along the entire dental arch.Which of the maxillary pillars will have the functional significance for the distribution of masticating pressure?
a. Zygomatic, pterygoid, palatine
b. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine
*c. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
d. Frontonasal, pterygoid, palatine
e. Frontonasal, zygomatic, palatine

1330. A 12-year-old girl complains of white spots on the vestibular surfaces of teeth and mouth soreness that occurs during eating sour foods. It is known from the history that the spots appeared about 3 months ago. Objectively: the vestibular surfaces of the front maxillary teeth exhibit chalky spots that are stainable with 2% methylene blue.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Acute superficial caries
*c. Acute initial caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Chronic superficial caries

1331. A 25-year-old male patient has been diagnosed with a linear nondisplaced fracture of the mandible between the 32 and 33 tooth. What splint should be used for the fixation of bone fragments?
a. Brace with an oblique plane
b. Splint with spacer bar
*c. Smooth brace
d. Vasilyev splint
e. Wire anchor splint

1332. A 46-year-old patient complains of a periodic swelling in the right submandibular region when eating, dry mouth. Bimanual palpation of the middle portion of the hyoid region on the right revealed a moderately painful dense lump. From the excretory duct of the submandibular gland some muco-purulent exudate is expressed. The patient should be referred to the following roentgenologic examination:
a. Panoramic radiography of the jaws
b. Survey radiography of the facial bones
c. Spot-film radiography of the alveolar process 22
*d. Radiography of the mouth floor
e. Radiography of the mandible in the lateral projection

1333. An 8-year-old boy complains of a defect in the 11 tooth crown. Objectively: 1/3 of the 11 tooth crown is broken off, the pulp chamber is closed. Radiograph shows incomplete root formation. Select the optimal way of prosthetics for the 11 tooth:
a. Metal-ceramic crown
b. Post and core
c. Combined crown
*d. Thin-walled metal crown
e. Plastic crown

1334. A 9-year-old boy requires complex dental care. Objective examination revealed chalky spots with lustrous surface on the vestibular surfaces of the 22,21,11,12 teeth, as well as on the tubercles of the 26,26,46 teeth. The affected teeth are not sensitive to thermal and chemical stimuli. The child has a previous history of rickets. He lives in a locality where the fluoride concentration in drinking water is 0,5 mg/l.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Amelogenesis imperfecta
c. Fluorosis
d. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
*e. System enamel hypoplasia

1335. A 6-year-old child with contused forehead laceration had been taken to the emergency room at a children’s hospital. The child was examined by the maxillofacial surgeon who performed primary surgical debridement and closed the wound with immediate primary sutures. The child was recommended to undergo further treatment on an outpatient basis at a district polyclinic. Specify the firstpriority measure in this case:
a. Antimicrobial therapy
b. Bed rest
c. Surgeon follow-up
d. Complex dental care
*e. Consultation by a neurosurgeon

1336. An 8-year-old child has been clinically diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth. The crown is decayed by half. What is the dentist’s optimal tactics?
*a. Extraction
b. Endodontic treatment and drug therapy
c. Dissection along the mucogingival junction, drug thrapy
d. Drug therapy
e. Endodontic treatment

1337. months ago a 65-year-old patient received a permanent intracoronal splint for the front maxillary teeth. The splint was fabricated with the use of fiberglass tape. Radiograph shows that the root of the 12 tooth is localized only in the soft tissues. The splint is in a good condition.What is the optimal tactics of this patient management?
*a. Amputate and extract the root of the 12 tooth
b. Start conservative treatment
c. Extract the 12 tooth and restore the defect with a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
d. Replace the 12 tooth in the splint by an artificial plastic tooth
e. Extract the 12 tooth and fabricate a bridge

1338. A 55-year-old male patient diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 33 tooth presented to a dental clinic. It is known from the history that the patient has a cardiac pacemaker What would be the optimal material for a permanent filling?
a. Compomer
*b. Chemical-cure composite
c. Silicophosphate cement
d. Silicate cement
e. Light-curing composite

1339. A 14-year-old patient complains of moderate non-irradiating pain in the region of the 37 tooth. Objectively: the 37 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the pulp chamber. Probing and thermal stimulation cause no pain response, vertical percussion is positive. Radiograph shows no pathological alterations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative pulpitis
d. Acute serous periostitis
e. Acute suppurative periodontitis

1340. A 32-year-old patient lost the 41 and 31 teeth as a result of a sports injury. Reimplantation is impossible because the crown and root surfaces of these teeth are cracked and chipped. Clinical and radiological examination proved the possibility of immediate implantation. What material should be preferred for the implants?
a. Platinum
b. Sapphire
c. Carbon
d. Porcelain
*e. Titanium

1341. Radiography of the 46 tooth in a 7-year-old child revealed parallel root walls with a gradual decrease of their thickness resulting in pointed ends. There is a root canal narrowing in the region that is adjacent to the tooth cavity, and a widening at the nascent apical aperture. Periodontal ligament space has a uniform width over the entire root length. In the periapical region it merges with the growth zone. Specify the stage of the root development:
a. Complete root and periodont development
b. Incomplete root growth
*c. Open apex
d. Incomplete periodont development
e. -

1342. A 5-year-old child complains of spontaneous pain in a maxillary tooth on the right. The pain gets worse at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing causes pain response, the tooth is not sensitive to percussion. Cold water causes longlasting pain. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Acute serous pulpitis
e. Acute periodontitis

1343. A 4-year-old child complains of acute spontaneous pain in a mandibular tooth on the right. The pain is aggravated by cold stimuli. Objectively: the 84 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity that does not communicate with the tooth cavity. Probing causes pain response all over the cavity floor, percussion causes pain. The mucosa in the region of the 84 tooth is hyperemic, edematous. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute serous pulpitis
*c. Acute pulpitis complicated by periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

1344. A patient presented to a dental clinic for the purpose of prosthetics. Objectively: completely edentulous mandible. There is marked and uniform atrophy of the alveolar portion. Frenula and folds are characterized by high attachment. Specify the type of mandibular atrophy according to Keller classification:
a. Class V
*b. Class II
c. Class III
d. Class I
e. Class IV

1345. A 43-year-old patient consulted a dentist about numbness of the left half of his tongue, which developed 10 days ago after the atypical extraction of the 38 tooth. What nerve was damaged during the surgery?
a. Sublingual
b. Facial
c. Glossopharyngeal
*d. Lingual
e. Inferior alveolar

1346. Soon after anesthetization a 55-year-old patient reported severe 24 weakness, retrosternal pain that irradiated to his left arm and scapular region, palpitations. Objectively: the patient is conscious, adynamic, pale, the forehead is covered with cold sweat. AP- 90/60 mmHg, cardiac sounds are muffled, the pulse is thready and arrhythmic. What condition developed in the patient?
a. Angina attack
b. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
*c. Myocardial infarction
d. Collapse
e. -

1347. During tooth extraction a 55year-old female patient reported dull retrosternal pain, feeling of chest compression. The dental surgeon who was performing the tooth extraction made a diagnosis of angina.What drugs should be given the patient for the relief of this condition?
a. Baralgin
b. Analgin
*c. Nitroglycerin, validol
d. Diphenhydramine
e. Ketanov

1348. A 1-month-old child has been brought to a maxillofacial surgeon for examination. Objectively: there is a fissure running transversely from the right corner of mouth through the full thickness of cheek up to the anterior edge of the masseter muscle. What is the patient’s diagnosis?
a. Right upper lip cleft
b. Mandibular cleft
c. Right oblique facial cleft
d. Cleft nasal deformity
*e. Right transverse facial cleft

1349. A 38-year-old female complains of experiencing pain in her lower lip for half a year, difficult eating and talking. The patient sought medical help at place of residence, but the administered treatment was ineffective. Examination of the lower lip revealed a deep fissure in the centre which affected the vermilion border and partly the mucous membrane of lips. The fissure was covered with a brown crust, after its removal the fissure started bleeding. The fissure edges are hyperkeratinized, infiltrated. Select the optimal treatment tactics:
a. Irradiation with helium-neon laser
b. Application of keratoplastic agents
*c. Fissure excision
d. Application of corticosteroid ointment
e. Application of antibiotic ointment

1350. A 48-year-old female patient complains of hard tissue defects found on the maxillary incisors. The defects appeared about a year ago and have been enlarging since that time. Objectively: on the convex portion of the vestibular surface of the maxillary incisors there are oval varisized enamel defects. The defect surface is smooth, lustrous, solid. In order to prevent progression of this process, the patient should be advised to limit consumption of:
*a. Sour food
b. Meat products
c. Tea
d. Sweet food
e. Marine products

1351. During local anesthetization with 2 ml of 10% lidocaine a 9-year-old girl suddenly screamed, lost consciousness and developed generalized convulsions. The skin is pale and cyanotic. The pulse is not palpable because of convulsions. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Angioedema
b. Bronchial obstruction
c. Febrile seizures
*d. Lidocaine intoxication
e. Anaphylactic shock

1352. A 56-year-old patient was undergoing treatment for pulpitis of the 47 tooth. For the purpose of the pulp devitalization arsenic paste was used. The patient failed to keep an appointment with the dentist for further treatment. As a result, toxic arsenic periodontitis developed.Which of the physiotherapy methods should be applied to address the complication?
*a. Potassium iodide electrophoresis
b. D‘arsonvalisation
c. Galvanization
d. Fluctuorization
e. UHF

1353. Following an uncomplicated extraction of the 37 tooth, a 60-year-old patient has profuse phatnorrhagia. The patient has a 6-year history of essential hypertension. AP- 180/110 mm Hg. What kind of emergency care should be rendered?
a. Pack the tooth socket with a hemostatic sponge
b. Suture the tooth socket
c. Give an injection of hemostatic drugs
*d. Give an injection of antihypertensive drugs and pack the tooth socket tightly
e. Pack the tooth socket tightly with an iodoform turunda

1354. A child is 11 years old. Examination of the oral cavity revealed that the front maxillary teeth completely overlap the mandibular ones. Lateral teeth in the sagittal and transversal planes have a normal contact. The child has been diagnosed with a deep overbite. This abnormality is typically accompanied by the dysfunction of:
a. Swallowing, biting off
b. Breathing, swallowing
*c. Chewing, biting off
d. Biting off, breathing
e. Speech, chewing

1355. A 25-year-old male patient presented to the department of maxillofacial surgery with complaints of pain during eating, which arose three days ago after an injury. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the swelling of the buccal and infraorbital regions on the left. Mouth opening is slightly restricted because of pain. Maxillary alveolar process and left maxillary teeth are mobile. There is a hemorrhage along the left mucogingival junction in the region of the said teeth; the site is tender to palpation. What diagnosis can be assumed?
a. Le Fort III fracture of the maxilla
*b. Fracture of the maxillary alveolar process
c. Fracture of the zygomatic bone
d. Le Fort II fracture of the maxilla
e. Fracture of the zygomatic arch

1356. A 34-year-old patient complains of intense, tearing, throbbing pain in the 17 tooth, which appeared for the first time and persists for 4 days. Percussion causes acute pain in any direction, the tooth is mobile, the mucosa around the 17 tooth is hyperemic and edematous; palpation of the mucogingival junction causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative pulpitis
d. Localized periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

1357. A 45-year-old patient complains of acute, spontaneous, nocturnal pain in a maxillary tooth on the right. The pain arose three days ago, has a pulsating nature, irradiates to the zygomatic region and virtually doesn’t cease. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 15 tooth. Dentin is of dirty-gray color, softened. Probing causes pain response across the entire floor, the tooth is sensitive to percussion. Cold stimulus reduces the pain intensity. Electroexcitability of the pulp is 55 µA. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute pulpitis limited
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

1358. A 13-year-old girl complains of experiencing pain, gum bleeding and bad breath for about six months. Objectively: in the region of the front mandibular teeth the gingival papillae and gingival margin are hypertrophied, edematous, cyanotic. There is a soft plaque in the cervical region. Hygiene index -3. The doctor administered a local anti-inflammatory therapy. Specify the further tactics of local treatment:
*a. Sclerotherapy
b. Gingivotomy
c. Vestibuloplasty
d. Physiotherapy
e. Gingival curettage

1359. A 6-year-old child complains of pain in the right submandibular region. A day before he complained of a sore throat. Objectively: the child is in moderately severe condition, temperature  is 37,9°C. The face is asymmetric due to a dense tender infiltrate in the right submandibular region. The infiltrate is slightly mobile, the overlying skin is hyperemic. There is fluctuation in the center. The teeth are intact.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute suppurative non-odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Phlegmonous adenitis
c. Sialadenitis
d. Acute suppurative odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute serous non-odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

1360. A 45-year-old male patient working as an actor consulted a dentist about mobility of his front mandibular teeth, gingival hemorrhages during tooth brushing. Objectively: gingival hyperemia and hemorrhage, periodontal pockets in the front portion of the mandible are up to 5 mm deep, tooth mobility of the I-II class is present. What kind of splinting the mandibular front teeth will be optimal for this patient?
a. Cap splint
b. Full crown splint
c. Cast pin splint
*d. Fiber-reinforced adhesive splint
e. Ligature wire

1361. A 44-year-old female patient with generalized I grade periodontitis is scheduled for the selective grinding of teeth. What examination is required prior to this procedure?
*a. Occlusiography
b. Radiography
c. Electroodontometry
d. Rheoparodontography
e. Gnathodynamometry

1362. A 60-year-old patient undergoes treatment of the 11 and 21 tooth for chronic deep caries (Black’s class III). He has a history of cataract surgery. What is the optimal material for cavity filling in this case?
a. Compomer
b. Hybrid glass ionomer
*c. Chemical cure composite
d. Light cure composite
e. Silicate cement

1363. Clinical examination of a 10-year old girl’s oral cavity revealed an 11 mm gap in a sagittal plane, the contact of the lateral maxillary teeth with the front mandibular teeth, mesiobuccal cusps of the 16 and 26 tooth located on the cusps of the 35 and 45 tooth. What additional examination method will allow to make a definitive diagnosis and specify clinical form of malocclusion?
a. Anthropometric measuring of jaw models
b. Orthopantomography
*c. Profile teleroentgenography
d. Determining morphological facial index
e. Clinical functional tests

1364. A 70-year-old completely edentulous patient undergoes treatment with complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon a spherical surface. Specify the average radius of the spherical surface that would ensure close teeth contact during the mandible motions:
a. 12 cm
b. 18 cm
c. 5 cm
d. 7 cm
*e. 9 cm

1365. A 47-year-old male patient was undergoing complex dental treatment. After anesthetization the patient reported dizziness, ringing in the ears, blackout, general weakness. Ps-96 bpm, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. The patient lost consciousness for 30 seconds.What condition developed in the patient? 27
a. Epileptic seizure
b. Traumatic shock
c. Collapse
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Syncope

1366. A patient consulted a dentist about fabrication of a restorative crown for the 36 tooth. During examination the dentist revealed a roundish, hard, painless, lustrous ulcer on the left lateral surface of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer
b. Decubital ulcer
*c. Syphilitic ulcer
d. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Lichen planus

1367. A 65-year-old male patient complains of a long-lasting pain in a mandibular tooth on the right. The pain increases on biting. The patient has a history of this tooth treatment for caries. Objectively: the cavity on the masticatory surface of the 36 tooth is filled, percussion causes pain responce. Along the mucogingival junction in the projection of the 36 tooth roots there is a fistula with purulent discharge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
c. Radicular cyst of the mandible
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

1368. Prior to installation of complete removable dentures, it is necessary to verify the occlusal relation with different movements of the mandible. What muscle is responsible for transversal movements of the mandible?
a. Inner (medial) pterygopalatine
b. Masticatory
c. Digastric
*d. Outer (lateral) pterygopalatine
e. Temporal

1369. A 65-year-old male patient complains of crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints; pain when moving his mandible to the right; ear noise; dry mouth; glossalgia. He has been using a complete removable denture for the mandible for 6 months. The patient has no history of rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of the face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are downturned, there are angular fissures and cracks. Palpation reveals crepitation during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
*b. Costen’s syndrome
c. Temporomandibular arthrosis
d. Temporomandibular arthritis
e. Temporomandibular dislocation

1370. A 76-year-old patient has a roundish ulcer on the skin in the region of the right nasolabial sulcus. The ulcer floor is dense, rough, covered with yellowishgray crusts, looks like a funnel. The ulcer edges are dense, crater-like. The ulcer grows in size and depth. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Squamous cell skin cancer
*b. Basalioma
c. Actinomycotic abscess
d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Syphilitic ulcer

1371. A 59-year-old male patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic for the purpose of prosthetics. Immediately during the manipulations the patient developed the following symptoms: weakness, prostration, skin pallor and cyanosis, clammy sweat, a decrease in systolic blood pressure down to 80 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Shock
b. Syncope
*c. Collapse
d. Kussmaul’s coma
e. Myocardial infarction

1372. A 40-year-old male patient complains of a long-existing fissure in the central portion of the vermilion border of his lower lip. The patient has been a smoker since the age of 16. Along the midline of the vermilion border of the lower lip there is a deep fissure up to 1,0 cm long with the rolled edges. The fissure heals 28 spontaneously, but recurs soon after epithelialization. The patient was diagnosed with chronic lower lip fissure. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Select the most efficient method of treatment:
a. Cryolysis
b. Excision within 0,5 cm area around the formation
c. Short-distance irradiation
*d. Excision within apparently healthy tissues
e. Diathermocoagulation

1373. A patient is scheduled for the dissection of an abscessed upper lip furuncle. What kind of anesthesia is indicated for this intervention?
*a. Bilateral infraorbital
b. Bilateral infraorbital and palatine nerve block
c. Bilateral palatine nerve block
d. Bilateral tuberal and palatine nerve block
e. Bilateral infraorbital and incisive

1374. An accident victim with an injury of face and the temporal region was diagnosed with a fracture of the zygomatic arch. Which processes of the skull bones are damaged?
a. Zygomatic process of the frontal bone and the zygomatic process of the temporal bone
b. Zygomatic process of the maxilla and the zygomatic process of the temporal bone
c. Zygomatic process of the maxilla and the zygomatic process of the frontal bone
*d. Temporal process of the zygomatic bone and the zygomatic process of the temporal bone
e. Temporal process of the zygomatic bone and the zygomatic process of the frontal bone

1375. With the purpose of the 46 tooth extraction, a 28-year-old male patient was given Weisbrem’s anesthesia. Specify the site of anesthetic injection with this anesthesia:
a. Retromolar fossa
b. Maxillary tuber
*c. Mandibular torus
d. Mandibular temporal crest
e. Retromandibular fossa

1376. A 7-year-old child with a marked bilateral swelling of the parotid regions, tenderness on palpation of the tragus, condylar and mastoid process, dryness of the oral mucosa was diagnosed with mumps of a mild severity grade. Select a medical tactic with respect to this severity grade:
a. The child is allowed to attend children’s institutions
b. Hospitalization in the infectious diseases hospital
c. Outpatient treatment without isolation of the child
d. Hospitalization in children’s department of oral and maxillofacial Surgery
*e. Outpatient treatment with isolation of the child

1377. Examination of a 12-year-old child revealed a significant increase in the size of the jaws, presence of gaps between the teeth, tongue enlargement, disproportionate skeletal growth. This pathology has been caused by the dysfunction of the following gland:
a. Thyroid
b. Pancreas
c. Sex
*d. Pituitary
e. Parathyroid

1378. An 11-year-old boy had been diagnosed with a 6 mm wide diastema of type 2 (by Khoroshilkina F.I. classification). To normalize the incisor position, the Korkhaus appliance was used. What kind of movement is facilitated by this appliance?
a. Intrusion
b. Rotation
*c. Bodily movement
d. Extrusion
e. Torque

1379. A 24-year-old male patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 24 tooth, which arose suddenly and 29 persists for about 15 minutes. Objectively: the distal surface of the 24 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity with overhanging walls. The cavity is filled with light softened dentin and communicates with the tooth cavity. The cold stimulus causes acute, slowly abating pain. Percussion causes no pain response. Select the best method of treatment:
a. Biological method
b. Vital amputation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

1380. A 9-year-old girl has had gingival hemorrhages, cracks in the mouth corners for a month. She has a history of frequent nosebleeds, rapid fatigability. Objectively: the facial skin and oral mucosa are pale. In the mouth corners there are cracks reaching the vermilion border. Gingiva in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth is hyperemic and edematous, bleeds when touched. DMF/dmf = 10. Back of the tongue is bright red, smooth, glossy. Submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, mobile, painless. What specialist is it necessary to consult with in the first place?
a. Gastroenterologist
*b. Hematologist
c. Endocrinologist
d. Neuropathist
e. Infectious disease specialist

1381. A 25-year-old patient complains of pain when biting on the 15 tooth. The pain arose two days ago, has a constant aching nature and increased significantly over the last day.Objectively: the crown of the 15 tooth is gray, the medial contact surface exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Percussion causes acute pain, the gingival mucosa in the projection of the 25 tooth root apex is hyperemic. The regional lymph node is tender. Radiograph shows an ill-defined zone of periapical bone destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis, intoxication stage
*b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

1382. A 5-month-old infant has acute hematogenous osteomyelitis of the maxilla, there are fistulae with purulent exudate at the medial angle of the right eye. Specify the probable long-term effects of the disease:
a. Chronic sinusitis
b. Macrognathia
c. Macrogenia
*d. Bony ankylosis of the right TMJ
e. Chronic rhinitis

1383. A 16-year-old boy has been diagnosed with a fracture of the left zygomatic bone with a fragment displacement. Select the most efficient method of treatment:
a. Bone suture
*b. Open reposition and osteosynthesis with metal plates
c. Any of these methods is applied in children and adolescents
d. Osteosynthesis with metal wires
e. Closed reposition

1384. A 5-year-old girl complains of pain in the mouth corners occurring when opening the mouth. She has a history of acute bronchitis and prolonged antibiotic therapy. Objectively: the vermilion border of lips is dry, the mouth corners are downturned. In the mouth corners there are cracks covered with a white plaque and surrounded by a slightly hyperemic elevation, tender on palpation and mouth opening. Oral mucosa exhibits no pathological alterations, dmf - 2, hygiene index - 2,0. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exfoliative cheilitis
*b. Mycotic cheilitis
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Streptococcal cheilitis
e. Glandular cheilitis

1385. A female patient complains of a moderate gum pain, tooth sensitivity to the thermal stimuli. Objectively: the 30 gingiva is pale, dense, there is gingival retraction in the region of the front mandibular teeth. Radiograph shows the resorption of the interalveolar septa to 1/3 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontosis grade II
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Localized periodontitis
*d. Periodontosis grade I
e. Periodontosis initial stage

1386. A 60-year-old patient needs a partial removable denture for themaxilla. The centric jaw relation has been determined. What is the next stage of prosthetics?
a. Try-in of the denture
b. Relining the denture
c. Taking impressions
*d. Checking the wax denture construction
e. Fabrication of plaster models

1387. A 40-year-old patient complains of clicking in the region of his right TMJ projection which occurs in the final phase of mouth opening. The sounds in the joints arose after prosthetic procedures. Mouth opening is not restricted, the opening trajectory is straight, the opening amplitude is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Subluxation of mandible
b. Anterior dislocation of the articular disc
c. Perforation of the meniscus
d. Posterior dislocation of the articular disc
e. Luxation of mandible

1388. A mother consulted a dentist about the lip lesions in her child. Throughout the 1-2 year of life, the child had diathesis of moderate severity with affection of the face skin. Objectively: the lips are somewhat edematous, there are dry crusts on the vermilion border and the lip skin, in the mouth corners there are cracks and radial scars. The eyelids are edematous with hyperemic edges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Eczematous cheilitis
b. Glandular cheilitis
c. Chronic fissure of lips
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

1389. Examination of a 7-year-old child revealed that all temporary maxillary molars were extracted. Mandibular incisors were in contact with the palatal mucosa. What is the optimal doctor’s tactics?
a. Check-ups once a year until the eruption of permanent teeth
*b. Fabrication of a removable laminar claspless denture for the maxillary teeth restoration
c. Fabrication of a removable denture with clasp fixation for the maxillary teeth restoration
d. Fabrication of an orthodontic device for the treatment of deep overbite
e. Check-ups every six months until the eruption of permanent teeth

1390. A 34-year-old dental patient has an indication for the extraction of the 38 tooth for chronic fibrous periodontitis. The dental surgeon used torusal (Weisbrem’s) anesthesia. What nerves are blocked by this anesthesia?
a. Lingual, buccal
b. Superior alveolar, lingual
c. Lingual, buccal, mental
*d. Superior alveolar, lingual, buccal
e. Superior alveolar, buccal

1391. A 40-year-old patient has an indication for the extraction of central maxillary incisors. What nerve structures are blocked by the incisor anesthesia?
*a. Nasopalatine nerve
b. Middle superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
c. Dental nerve plexus
d. Posterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
e. Anterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve

1392. A 40-year-old male patient complains of having experienced seasonal pain (in spring and summer), and a burning sensation in the lips for 3 years. Examination reveals edema 31 and hyperemia of the vermilion border of the lower lip, numerous erosions sized 2-3 mm, crusts and cracks in the mouth corners. Palpation causes moderate pain, regional lymph nodes are not enlarged, the perioral skin is not changed. What is most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Mycotic angular cheilitis
*b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis, edematous form
e. Lichen planus, erosive form

1393. A 25-year-old male patient lives in a locality where fluoride concentration in drinking water is 5,5 mg/l. Tooth crowns are deformed due to destruction and wear of hard tissues. In the 22,23,32 teeth the enamel is chipped. What form of fluorosis is observed in this patient?
*a. Destructive
b. Spotty
c. Erosive
d. Chalky and speckled
e. Streaked

1394. Prior to the preparation of a tooth for a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown, a dentist anaesthetized a patient with a history of bronchial asthma with 2% solution of novocaine. A few minutes later, the patient complained of shortness of breath (more difficult expiration), there appeared acrocyanosis, swollen neck veins, Ps100 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 180/110 mm Hg. Percussion revealed box sound over lungs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary artery thrombosis
b. Coronary artery disease
*c. Attack of bronchial asthma
d. Bronchiectasis
e. Collapse

1395. A 12-year-old girl complains of acute pain in the left mandibular region, general weakness, fever up to 39°C, difficult swallowing. Objectively: the face is asymmetric, the tongue is plaqued, halitosis is present. Percussion reveals signs of acute periodontitis of the 34,36 teeth, as well as mobility of these teeth. Gums are hyperemic, edematous, there is infiltration on both sides of the alveolar process. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, tender on palpation. Vincent’s symptom is present. Blood test results: leukocytosis with a left shift; urine contains traces of protein. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic purulent lymphadenitis
b. Odontogenic submandibular abscess
c. Acute odontogenic purulent abscess
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the mandible

1396. Parents of a 3-year-old child took the child to a pedodontist for complex dental care. The child has cerebral palsy. Objectively: there is multiple dental caries, gingival mucosa is hyperemic, oral hygiene is inadequate. What method of dental care may be appropriate in this case?
*a. Under general anesthesia
b. Under local application anesthesia
c. Treatment after administration of sedatives
d. Without anesthesia
e. Under local injection anesthesia

1397. ?After examination a 5-year-old child was diagnosed with acute general pulpitis of the 74 tooth. What treatment will be most efficient in this case?
a. Tooth extraction
*b. Pulp extirpation
c. Non-vital amputation
d. Vital amputation
e. Biological method

1398. A 55-year-old female patient complains of pain during eating food, erosions covering oral mucosa. The disease onset was more than one month ago. Objectively: the mucosa of the gums, soft palate and dental arches is unchanged, but has large bright-red erosions. The mucosa is easily damaged and exfoliates when rubbed. The pain is slight. Impression smears contain Tzanck cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme
b. Lichen ruber planus, bullous form
c. Levers bullous pemphigoid
d. Benign nonacantholytic pemphigus
*e. Pemphigus vulgaris

1399. A 17-year-old female patient complains of gingival growth in the area of the upper and lower front teeth. When examined, the gingival papilla appear to be hyperemic, swollen, cover the teeth crowns up to 1/2, bleed when touched. Pathology of the following system is important in etiology of this disease:
a. Immune
b. Nervous
c. Cardio-vascular
d. Digestive
*e. Endocrine

1400. A 48-year-old male patient complains of itching gums. Objectively: the gums are firm; cold water causes short-time pain in the teeth. X-ray imaging shows osteosclerosis of the alveolar septum: close-meshed bone structure, the alveolar septum height and intactness of the cortical plates is retained.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis, stage I
b. Parodontosis, stage I
c. Atrophic gingivitis
d. Initial periodontitis
*e. Initial parodontosis

1401. A patient complains of spontaneous, paroxysmal, irradiating pain with short painfree intervals. The pain arose 2 days ago and occurs only at night. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Acute circumscribed pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

1402. A 34-year-old patient had got in a car accident. The patient stayed conscious. He complains of headache, dizziness, general weakness, nausea. 12 hours after the injury the patient got "raccoon eyes"(periorbital haematomas) within the limits of the circular muscle of eye. What fracture does the victim have?
a. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
b. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
c. Fracture of frontal bones
*d. Fracture of skull base
e. Fracture of nasal bones

1403. In the process of root extraction of the 38th tooth with Lecluse root elevator a dentist has pushed the root through into the perimandibular soft tissues. The root is situated under the alveolar arch mucosa and can be clearly palpated. What approach should the doctor choose in the given case?
a. Surgical root extraction through extraoral submandibular way of access
b. To try and extract the root through the tooth socket
*c. Dissection of soft tissues covering the root followed by root extraction
d. Further actions can be determined only after X-ray examination
e. To leave the root in the soft tissues

1404. An 8-year-old girl complains of bleeding gums. The child suffers from pancreatic diabetes. Objectively: gingival papillas in the area of the upper and lower jaw teeth are hyperemic, swollen, cover 1/3 of the crown. What tests are necessary to determine severity of the illness?
a. Stomatoscopy
*b. X-ray radiography
c. Capillary fragility test
d. Reoparodontography (Impedance phlebography of periodontium)
e. PMA index

1405. A 47-year-old female patient complains of inability to eat hot and cold food, as well as of intense pain caused by sour, sweet and salty food. Objectively: there is a slight loss of enamel on the molars and incisors. Probing and cold test cause acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Enamel hypoplasia
c. Pathological abrasion of dental hard tissues
*d. Hyperesthesia of dental hard tissues
e. Enamel necrosis

1406. A 36-year-old patient complains of pain under the dental bridge. After its removal the patient has been found to have an ulcer 0,3x0,5 cm large on the alveolar process. The ulcer is slightly painful and soft, the surrounding mucosa is hyperaemic, submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer
*b. Decubital ulcer
c. Sutton aphtha
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Cancerous ulcer

1407. A 45-year-old female patient presents to a dental clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37 teeth are missing. There is dentoalveolar vertical displacement of the 17, 16, 26, 27 teeth; the alveolar process is hypertrophied, the cervical margins are not exposed. When the teeth are closed, the distance between the occlusal surfaces of teeth and the alveolar process is about 6 mm. Specify the most efficient method of treatment of secondary deformation in this patient:
*a. Pulp removal and teeth grinding
b. Grinding
c. Disocclusion
d. Hardware-associated surgical treatment
e. Surgical treatment

1408. A 58-year-old patient has made an appointment to make a denture. Objectively: the 22nd tooth is stable and intact. The alveolar crest is atrophied; palate is flat. Removable denture is to be made.What approach regarding the 22nd tooth should be chosen by a dentist?
a. To retain the tooth
b. Tooth extraction
c. To make a stump crown
*d. To make a telescopic crown
e. Removal of tooth pulp

1409. A 35-year-old patient has made an appointment with a doctor to have oral cavity sanation. Objectively: the vestibular surface of the 22nd tooth has a hard tissue defect localised in the mantle dentin; the dentin is hard, darkcoloured, the floor of the cavity is coarse. Cold stimulus and probing are painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Enamel erosion
*c. Chronic median caries
d. Dental fluorosis, destructive form
e. Hard tissue necrosis

1410. A 12-year-old boy complains of a cavity in a tooth on the lower left jaw. Objectively: 1/3 of the 36th tooth is destroyed, the carious cavity opens into the dental cavity; there is sensitivity to cold stimulus; probing and percussion are painless. X-ray imaging shows the periodontal fissure of the 36th tooth roots to be widened. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Chronic simple pulpitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

1411. An 11-year-old girl complains of a cosmetic defect: the placement of the 23rd tooth is incorrect. Objectively: the face is symmetrical. The 24th tooth has buccal placement above the occlusion area. The space between the 22nd and 24th is 3 mm. What additional examination is required?
a. X-ray examination
b. Pont analysis
*c. All of the methods named below
d. Measuring the length of the dentititon
e. Korkhaus analysis

1412. A 48-year-old female patient had been delivered to a hospital with a cheek wound and severe headache, nausea, dizziness. It is known from the history that the patient had got a trauma as a result of a fall. After examination she was diagnosed with a contused lacerated wound of cheek, closed craniocerebral injury, brain concussion. This trauma can be qualified as:
*a. Concominant trauma
b. Combined trauma
c. Single
d. Polytrauma
e. Isolated trauma

1413. Parents of a 6-year-old child are concerned about their child refusing to eat and having grey-and-yellow coating in the oral cavity. The symptoms are observed over a period of one year. The child complains of sharp dryness and burning pain in the mouth. The anamnesis states chronic bronchitis and systematic treatment using anitibiotics. Objectively: swollen and hyperemic mucous membranes of lips and cheeks are covered in yellow and pale-grey coating. There is coating on the tongue, which is connected with the tissue, cannot be removed and has infiltration basis.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*c. Chronic candidiasis of mouth
d. Erythema multiforme
e. Acute candidiasis of mouth

1414. A 24-year-old female patient has Richmond crown being made to restore the crown of the central maxillar incisor. The cap is completed.What step should be the next?
a. Making of combination dental crown
b. Tooth fixation with cement
c. To solder the post with the cap
d. To fit the cap and the post to the tooth root
*e. To fit the cap on the tooth stump and place the post in the root canal

1415. A patient complaining of constant dull pain in the 38th tooth has made an appointment with a dentist. Mouth opening is restricted to 1 sm. The patient is prescribed the extraction of the 38th tooth. What kind of anaesthesia should be administered?
*a. Веrcher-Dubov anaesthesia
b. Torusal
c. Tuberal
d. Extraoral administration of mandibular anaesthesia
e. Mandibular

1416. A 67-year-old patient complains of recurrent erosion on the red border of the lower lip. Objectively: the erosion is oval in shape, 0,8*1,3 sm in size, covered in thin scabs that reveal glossy surface with punctate bleeding when removed. There are atrophic areas of the red border detected. Infiltration elements are absent. The submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What diagnosis can be assumed?
a. Leukoplakia, erosive ulcerative form
b. Bowens disease
c. Cheilitis glandularis
*d. Manganottis abrasive precancerous cheilitis
e. Keratoacanthosis

1417. A 66-year-old patient complains of dense raised induration at the tip of the nose. Protruding part of the induration often breaks off and then continues to grow. Objectively: there is an affected area with focus up to 1 sm in diameter at the tip of the nose. There is a protrusion growing from the focus; the protrusion is 1-1,2 sm high, brownish-grey in colour, with dense consistency. What diagnosis can be assumed?
*a. Cutaneous horn
b. Rhinophyma
c. Hard papilloma
d. Fibroma
e. Keratoacanthoma

1418. A 53-year-old patient complains of pain and clicking in the left temporomandibular joint. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, palpation of the lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left side. Mouth opening is restricted. Tomogram shows the bone outline of joint surfaces to be smooth. Which disease of those given below corresponds with this clinical presentation?
a. Deforming arthrosis
b. Rheumatic arthritis
*c. Temporomandibular joint disfunction
d. Acute posttraumatic arthritis
e. Joint ankylosis

1419. A 38-year-old male patient complains of carious cavity. Prior to that there were attacks of toothache with no external cause. Objectively: the distal masticatory surface of the 37th tooth has deep carious cavity filled with softened pigmented dentine. Percussion is painless. Upon the extraction of the degenerated tissue cold water stimulus causes pain lasting about 1 minute. X-ray imaging shows deformation of the periodontal fissure in the area of the root apexes of the 37th tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

1420. A 32-year-old male patient complains of dryness and burning pain in the back of the tongue. The symptoms have been lasting for 1 week. The pain increases when spicy food is taken. A day prior to that the patient had suffered from pneumonia and had been taking antibiotics. Objectively: the skin and mucosa of oral cavity are pale. The tongue mucosa is hyperemic and swollen; there is crumbling grey-and-white coating in the folds of the back of the tongue; the lateral surfaces of the tongue are desquamated. The saliva is thick and drags in threads after a spatula. Choose the most effective drug complex for topical treatment.
*a. Methylene blue + Pimafucin (Natamycin)
b. Decaminum (Dequalinium chloride) + Hydrocortisone
c. Furacilinum (Nitrofural) + Solcoseryl
d. Furacilinum (Nitrofural) + Methylene blue
e. Hydrocortisone ointment + Solcoseryl

1421. A 37-year-old woman has made an appointment to extraxt the 25th tooth. What kind of anaesthesia is the most advisable?
*a. Unilateral tuberal, infraorbital and palatinal anaesthesia
b. Unilateral infiltration anaesthesia from the vestibular surface
c. Unilateral infraorbital and palatinal anaesthesia
d. Unilateral infraorbital and incisoral anaesthesia
e. Unilateral tuberal and palatinal anaesthesia

1422. A 70-year-old patient with all his lower jaw teeth lost is undergoing the process of fitting individual dental spoon using Herbst tests. When the mouth is opened slowly the spoon rises in the front area. What area requires correction of the spoon placement?
a. 1 cm from the midline on the sublingual end
*b. Vestibular surface between canines
c. Frenulum of tongue area
d. Behind the retromolar trigone to mandibulohyoid line
e. From the retromolar trigone to the place, where the 2nd molar will be placed

1423. Preventive examination of a 4,5-yearold child revealed some hidden cavities on the contact surfaces of the 54 and 55 teeth. After removal of the overhanging edges of the enamel the softened dentin could be easily removed with an excavator within the mantle dentin. Select the optimal material for a permanent filling:
a. Silicate cement
b. Composite material
*c. Compomer material
d. Silicophosphate cement
e. Polycarboxylate cement

1424. A 38-year-old female patient complains of pain in front of the external auditory meatus projection, clicking when opening the mouth, sensation of stuffiness in the ears. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the trajectory of mouth opening is straight. There is a I class Kennedy defect, the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. Which anatomical structure takes the greatest load in this situation?
a. Articular capsule
*b. Articular disc (meniscus)
c. Distal surface of the medial articular tubercle
d. Articular head
e. Bottom of the glenoid fossa of the temporal bone

1425. An 11-year-old child complains of pain and bleeding gums when eating, bad breath, weakness and headache that have been lasting for two days. Objectively: gingival mucosa in the area of front lower teeth is swollen, brightly hyperemic, easily bleeds when touched. Gingival papillas are covered with dirty-grey coating; when coating is removed the underlaying surface is bleeding and painful. The occlusion is deep. There are significant deposits of soft dental plaque. The regional lymph nodes are slightly enlarged and painful when palpated. Body temperature is 37, 6oC. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Acute ulcerative gingivitis
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
c. Generalized periodontitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Acute catarrhal gingivitis

1426. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic porcelain-fused-to-metal denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
a. Orthocor
b. Stomalgin
*c. Sielast
d. Stens
e. Repin

1427. A 67-year-old patient complains of pain, bleeding, chewing disorder. The anamnesis states domestic injury of the lower jaw.Objectively: the upper jaw dentition is retained. The lower jaw has no teeth, there is central fracture of the lower jaw with bone defect, the place of the fracture is swollen.What construction is the most advisable in this case?
a. Gunning gingival splint
b. Port gingival splint
*c. Vankevych dental-gingival splint
d. Weber dental-gingival splint
e. Zbarzh appliance

1428. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland.A week earlier the patient got a cheek abrasion which healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38,6 degrees. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5-3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
b. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
*d. Acute lymphadenitis
e. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region

1429. A 44-year-old patient complains of painful and restricted mouth closing, inability to take food and sharp pain in the temporomandibular joint. Objectively: the mouth is half-open, the lower jaw is displaced in the distal projection, the lower jaw processes are displaced upwards; trismus of the masticatory muscles and swelling in the temporomandibular joint areas are observed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Dystal mandibular dislocation
b. Acute arthritis of temporomandibular joints
c. Bilateral fractures of the condylar processes of mandible
d. Bilateral ankylosis of temporomandibular joint
e. Bilateral mandibular fracture in the mandibular angle area

1430. A 58-year-old patient has significantly narrowed mouth opening due to trauma and burns of the face. He is prescribed partial removable denture. What denture construction is the most advisable in the given case?
a. Attachment-stabilized clasp (bugel) dental prosthesis
b. Clammer-stabilized clasp (bugel) prosthesis
*c. Folding denture
d. Jointed removable denture
e. Simple removable partial laminar denture

1431. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower jaw, malocclusion. He sustained a trauma 6 hours ago. Examination revealed a singular lower jaw fracture between the second incisor and the left canine. Fragments displacement is insignificant. All teeth are retained and stable.What is the optimal treatment?
*a. One arch dental braces
b. Full dental braces
c. Vasilyev splint
d. Gartsatnikov splint
e. Osteosynthesis with mini plate

1432. Having recovered from acute respiratory disease, a patient has made an appointment with a dentist. The patient complains of pain in the gums, bad breath, inability to take food, general weakness. Objectively: the gums are hyperemic, swollen, covered in necrotic dirtygrey coating; the gums bleed when the coating is removed. Microbiological study of tissues revealed a great number of cocci, bacilli, fusobacteria, and spirochaete. Specify the drug for etiotropic treatment.
a. Galascorbinum
b. Tripsin
c. Carotolinum (Betacarotene)
*d. Metronidazole
e. Potassium permanganate

1433. A 4-year-old boy has been diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw from the 64th tooth. Choose the correct approach in treatment.
a. Endodontological treatment of the 64th tooth, periosteotomy
b. Periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory pharmacotherapy
c. The 64th tooth extraction, anti-inflammatory pharmacotherapy
d. Endodontological treatment of the 64th tooth, anti-inflammatory pharmacotherapy
*e. The 64th tooth extraction, periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy

1434. During the examinations and everyday orthopaedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. What is the way of its sterilization?
a. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes
b. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180 degrees for 10 minutes
c. In the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes
*d. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
e. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours

1435. A 45-year-old patient has central defect of the hard palate. The defect is 2х3 sm in size. Dentition is intact. What construction of obturator is the the most advisable in this case?
a. Pomerantseva-Urbanskaya obturator
b. Ilyina-Markosyan obturator
c. Laminar denture with obturating element
*d. Palatal obturator
e. Floating obturator

1436. A 32-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic with a diagnosis of maxillary fracture.The fracture can be treated by means of standard maxillo-mandibular Zbarzh set. Which construction provides the intra-oral fixation?
a. Plastic biteplate
b. Aluminium arch bar
*c. Standard double arch
d. Weber’s splint
e. Crown-supported soldered splint

1437. A 32-year-old patient has made an appointment with a dental surgeon to have oral cavity sanation performed prior to denture installation. During examination the doctor stated the following: the crown of the 25th tooth is destroyed. The tooth root is stable, and its percussion is painless. Mucosa of alveolar process is unchanged. X-ray imaging reveals slight widening of periodontal fissure. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Cystogranuloma
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 25th tooth
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 25th tooth
d. Chronic periodontitis of the 25th tooth
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 25th tooth

1438. A 10-year-old girl complains of an aesthetic flaw. The anamnesis states, that she had been sucking her right thumb up to the age of 7. Objectively: the face lower third is somewhat reduced. The sagittal fissure between the upper and lower incisors, is 9 mm wide, class 2 according to the Angle classification. Eshler-Bittner test leads to initial temporary improvement of the girl’s face, followed by renewed deterioration. What clinical malocclusion is the most probable in this case?
a. Mandibular retrognathia
*b. Maxillary macrognathia and mandibular micrognathia
c. Mandibular micrognathia
d. Maxillary macrognathia
e. Maxillary prognathism with lateral compression

1439. A 35-year-old patient complains about itch, burning and edema of lips. These presentations occured a week ago. Objectively: there is reddening of vermilion border and skin, especially in the region of mouth corners, there are also vesicles, crusts, small cracks along with erythematous affection of vermilion border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis
*b. Acute eczematous cheilitis
c. Acute herpetic cheilitis
d. Multiform exudative erythema
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

1440. A 44-year-old male patient complains of fatigue and headache, limb numbness, dry mouth, burning and pain in the tongue. Objectively: skin and oral mucosa are pale. There are painful cracks in the corners of mouth. Dorsum of tongue is smooth, glossy, with bright red striae. Blood count: Hb- 70 g/l, RBCs - 1, 5 · 1012/l, colour index - 1,6, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, lymphocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Late chlorosis
b. Chronic posthaemorrhagic anemia
*c. Addison-Biermer anemia
d. Iron deficiency anemia
e. Aplastic anemia

1441. A 35-year-old male patient is prescribed adhesive dental bridge. Objectively: the 15th tooth is lost. The 14th and 16th abutment teeth are stable. The teeth crowns are of medium height. The teeth equator is pronounced. Occlusion is orthognathic. What area of the abutment teeth MUST NOT be covered with denture framework?
*a. Cervical circumference of the teeth
b. Tooth equators of the oral surfaces
c. Below the equator of vestibular surfaces
d. Fissures of masticatory surfaces
e. Tooth equators of the approximal surfaces

1442. When a prosthodontist was preparing the patient’s tooth, the patient had epileptic seizure that was subsequently terminated. What mistake had been made by the doctor?
a. Did not decline the appointment
*b. No inquire into the patient anamnesis
c. No anaesthesia
d. No inquire into the antecedent anamnesis
e. Crude preparation

1443. A 30-year-old patient complains of toothache caused by hot and cold stimuli. The pain irradiates to the ear and temple. Previously there was spontaneous nocturnal toothache. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity communicating at one point with the tooth cavity. Probing at the communication point, as well as cold stimulus, cause acute pain. The pain persists for a long time. Electric pulp test result is 55 mA. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Chronic concrementous pulpitis

1444. A 34-year-old-patient complains of hard tissues defect of the 21st and 22nd teeth. He is referred for porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns installation for his 21st and 22nd teeth without removal of tooth pulp. What kind of anaesthesia administration should be used in tooth preparation?
a. General anesthesia
b. Cryanesthesia
c. Audioanalgesia
d. Topical
*e. Injection

1445. An 8-year-old child needs his 74th tooth extracted due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. What kind of anaesthesia should be used?
a. Infiltration anaesthesia
b. Torusal anaesthesia
*c. Mandibular anaesthesia
d. Application anaesthesia
e. Mental nerve block

1446. A 25-year-old patient complains of pain caused by eating sweet, hot and cold food; pain ceases, when stimulation stops. Objectively: the adjoining surface of the 36th tooth has a deep carious cavity localised in the circumpulpar dentin. The dentin is softened. Probing of the carious cavity floor is painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*e. Acute deep caries

1447. A 24-year-old patient complains of aching pain in the 11 tooth that is getting worse during biting down on food. Two days ago the tooth was filled for pulpitis. Objectively: the 11 tooth is filled. The thermal test causes no pain, vertical percussion is slightly painful. X-ray picture of the 11 tooth shows that the endodontic filling is 1 mm above the root apex. Which of the following methods will be most effective for eliminating this complication?
a. Analgetics
*b. Fluctuorization
c. Relaxing incision
d. Ultrahigh frequency therapy
e. Submucous injection of 1% solution of hydrocortisone

1448. A removable denture is being made for a patient. At the stage of designinig the denture accessory material  isocol  is used. What group does it belong to?
a. Forming
b. Polishing
c. Impression
d. Modeling
*e. Insulation

1449. A 46-year-old patient, after his recovery from flu, has suddenly started suffering from pain in the 36th tooth, the crown of which had been destroyed. The soft tissues surrounding the lower jaw are swollen. There are high fever up to 39 degrees and chill observed. Objectively: there is prominent swelling of the left lower jaw alveolar mucosa (both oral and vestibular surfaces). The 34th, 35th and 37th intact teeth are mobile. Percussion is painful. The gingival pockets produce purulent exudate. Vincents symptom is observed. What diagnosis can be assumed?
*a. Acute odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 36th tooth
b. Acute suppurative mandibular periostitis starting from the 36th tooth
c. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 36th tooth

1450. A doctor treating an AIDS-positive patient has accidentally pierced his own skin of the palm with a root needle. What should be the first course of actions?
a. Apply tourniquet to the shoulder
b. Squeeze out blood, process the breach with strong solution of potassium permanganate
*c. Squeeze out blood, process the breach with 70% alcohol solution
d. Process the breach with 5%iodine solution
e. Process the breach with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution

1451. A 45-year-old patient complains of missing teeth in the lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the 46, 45, 38, 48 teeth are missing. The 47 tooth is mobile (1 grade mobility), the crown of the 44 tooth is decayed by 1/2. What orthopedic construction should be recommended for restoration of masticatory efficiency and prevention of periodontal overload of the 47, 44 teeth?
a. Small saddle denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44 teeth
*b. Bugel denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44, 34 teeth
c. Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge supported by the 47, 46 teeth
d. Soldered bridge supported by the 48, 44 teeth
e. Bridge supported by the 47 tooth

1452. A 53-year-old female patient complains of feeling of tightness and coarseness in the mucosa, the red border and the skin of the face. Objectively: the skin of the face has butterflyshaped damage, the red border is infiltrated and tightly covered in hyperkeratinized scales. When an attempt is made to remove them, they bleed and are painful.What disease is this clinical presentation characteristic of?
*a. Lupus erythematosus
b. Lupus vulgaris (Tuberculosis luposa)
c. Secondary syphilis
d. Lichen ruber planus
e. Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis

1453. A 7-year-old boy complains of increased body temperature, up to 38 degrees, headache, sore throat. Objectively: there are erosions on the slightly hyperemic mucosa of the soft palate, anterior palatal bars, tonsils. The submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, painless. Name the causative agent of this disease.
a. Epstein-Barr virus
b. Herpes simplex virus
*c. Coxsackie virus
d. Klebs-Loeffler bacillus
e. Bordet-Gengou bacillus

1454. A 12-year-old girl has complaint of carious cavity in a tooth. Objectively: there is class 1 carious cavity according to the Blacks classification in the 36th tooth; it is localised in the parapulpar dentin; the mouth of the cavity is wide. The dentin is dense and pigmented. It is sensitive to cold stimulus, percussion is painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. -
*b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

1455. A 35-year-old female patient has complaints of cosmetic defects of the front upper teeth crowns. The defects have been increasing for the last 10 years. The patient suffers from unpleasant sensations when brushing her teeth, and when chemical stimuli are applied. Objective examination revealed defects localised in the enamel of the front upper teeth vestibular surface. The defects are oval, saucershaped, and have clear margins. Probing and cold stimuli sensitivity test resulted in positive reaction. Make the diagnosis.
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Chemical necrosis of the tooth
c. Hyperesthesia of tooth hard tissues
*d. Enamel erosion
e. Cuneiform defect

1456. A prosthodontist uses a mouth mirror for examination and manipulation during regular appointments. How are mouth mirrors sterilized?
a. With 0,5% sulfachlorantin solution for 20 minutes
b. With triple solution for 30 minutes
c. In a dry-heat sterilizer under 180 degrees Celsius for 10 minutes
d. With 1% chloramine solution for 10 minutes
*e. With 6% hydrogen solution freshly prepared on the day of use for 6 hours

1457. A 56-year-old male patient complains of pain in the left parotid-masticatory area and progressing facial asymmetry first noticed one month ago. The diagnosis is the cancer of parotid gland - T2N2. What method of treatment is optimal in the given case?
a. Chemotherapy
b. Lymph nodes removal
c. Surgical extraction of neoplasm
d. Radiation therapy
*e. Combined method

1458. A 20-year-old male patient complains of sharp pain in the mouth, increase of body temeperature up to 38, 5oC, headache and aching joints, general weakness. The disease onset was 3 days ago due to overexposure to cold. Objectively: the lips red border has hemorrhagic scabs, oral mucosa has large erosions and ulcers merging with each other and covered with greyish-white coating on the background of diffuse hyperemia. Conjunctivitis is observed. The skin of the forearms has erythematous spots sized 1,5 cm in diameter, with blisters in their center. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lyell’s syndrome
b. Behcet’s syndrome
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Drug-induced stomatitis
*e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

1459. A 36-year-old female patient has complaint of the 23rd tooth filling constantly falling out. Objectively: the 23rd tooth has carious cavity of the V class according to the Black’s classification of caries lesions. A dentist has made a decision to restore anatomical shape of the tooth with dental inlay. What is the specific feature of the cavity preparation for dental inlay in this case?
a. Extention of the cavity floor
b. Creation of additional platform
c. Making cavity outlet to the palatal surface
*d. Designing oval-shaped cavity
e. Creation of retention points

1460. A 68-year-old patient, having suffered from stroke, has time to time bouts of retching, which lead to unilateral diclocation of the temporormandibular joint. Setting the joint was possible only with anaesthesia. Objectively: absent are the following teeth - from the 21st to the 28th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, 36th, 37th, 44th, 46th, 47th. What kind of denture construction will be optimal for the duration of treatment?
a. Petrosov appliance with restrictor
b. Schroder appliance with sliding joint
*c. Removable laminar denture with mouth opening restrictor
d. Yadrova appliance
e. Khodorovych-Burgonska appliance with restrictor

1461. Parents of a 12-year-old child are concerned about the child having white spots on the frontal teeth of the upper jaw; the spots appeared half a year ago. Objectively: there are chalky spots detected in the cervical zone of the 11th, 12th, 13th, 21st, 22nd, 23rd teeth vestibular surface. The enamel in those spots is dull; probing revealed it to be pliant and coarse. The anamnesis states short-time pain caused by chemical stimuli. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Systemic hypoplasia of enamel
b. Dental fluorosis
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Acute initial caries

1462. A 47-year-old patient is undergoing dental treatment of erosive ulcerative form of lichen ruber planus. 1-month-long conservative therapy was inefficiently. What physiotherapeutic method is the most effective as a part of complex therapy?
a. Ultraviolet irradiation
b. Darsonvalization
c. Ultra-high-frequency treatment
d. Electrophoresis
*e. Cryodestruction

1463. A 21-year-old patient complains of a constant progressing throbbing pain in the 27 tooth. Objectively: a large carious cavity is filled with softened dentin, the tooth cavity is closed. Probing of the cavity floor is painless, percussion causes acute pain, there is grade II tooth mobility. Palpation of the mucous membrane in the projection of the root apex of the 27 tooth causes pain. Radiological changes are absent.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent pulpitis
*b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

1464. A child is 13 years old. The third upper tooth is fully cut, but situated slightly above the occlusion surface. What kind of abnormal placement is it?
a. Torsoversion
b. Infraversion
c. Oral
*d. Supraversion
e. Vestibular

1465. A 47-year-old patient complains of ulcer on the back of the tongue. The anamnesis states that the ulcer had been preceded for a long term by protruding infiltrate that was gradually growing until the ulcer appeared. Objectively: the back of the tongue has shallow oblong ulcer surroundedwith bumps with undermined edge.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tongue actinomycosis
b. Primary syphilis
*c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Tongue abscess
e. Decubitus ulcer

1466. A 16-year-old patient has made an appointment with a doctor due to the following complaints: enlarged lymph nodes and fistula in the submandibular area; general weakness; low grade fever. Objectively: the submandibular lymph nodes are dense and slightly painful, with clearly detectable margins. Caseous substance is produced from the fistulous tract. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subcutaneous granuloma
*b. Tuberculosis of lymph nodes
c. Syphilitic lymphadenitis
d. Actinomycosis of lymph nodes
e. Chronic osteomyelitis

1467. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the right side of her head, restricted movements of the lower jaw, clicking sound, periodic spasms of chewing muscles. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is restricted. On palpation of the right temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ) there are crepitation and clicking accompanying mandible movements. Examination of the oral cavity revealed also a Kennedy’s class II defect on the right.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myositis ossificans
*b. Pain dysfunction of the right TMJ
c. Sclerosing osteoarthritis of the right TMJ
d. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ
e. Contracture of the right TMJ

1468. A 13-year-old child suffers from odontogenic osteomyelitis starting from the 36th tooth and complicated by abscess of the pterygomandibular space. The 36th tooth is to be extracted; it is necessary to open the pterygomandibular space. These operations require the following type of anaesthesia:
a. Tuberal and palatinal anaesthesia
b. Torusal anaesthesia
c. Веrcher-Dubov central anaesthesia
d. Infiltration anesthesia
*e. General anaesthesia

1469. Clinical stage of checking the clasp (bugel) dental prosthesis framework as it should be placed in the oral cavity revealed the denture arch to come off unevenly from the hard palate and alveolar process creating the gap up to 0,8 mm in width. What method can be applied to remove this defect?
a. To heat the metal using a gasoline blow torch and make adjustments by pressing to the model
b. This kind of defect does not require adjustments
c. To make adjustments to the framework using crampon forceps
d. To make adjustments to the framework using dental hammer and bench anvil
*e. To make a new framework for clasp dental prosthesis

1470. A 48-year-old man has an X-ray image of his lower jaw made during sanation of the oral cavity. Destruction of the bone tissue in the gonial angle area is detected, the pathology is not connected with tooth roots. The affected area has clear margins. Puncture consists of brown exudate without cholesterol crystals. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Osteoclastoma
b. Adamantinoma
c. Cholesteatoma
d. Mandibular cyst
e. Mandibular hemangioma

1471. A 20-year-old female patient complains of pain caused by eating sweet or sour food. Objectively: the vestibular surface of the 11th tooth has a chalky spot, coarse when probed. The centre of the spot has defect localised in the enamel. Fedorov-Volodkina index equals 2,5 (Oral Hygiene Index). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Enamel necrosis
*b. Acute superficial caries
c. Enamel hypoplasia
d. Acute median caries
e. Initial caries

1472. A 50-year-old male patient complains of small sore on the sublingual mucosa. Pathomorphologic study of tissue sampling revealed the following: polymorphism of spiny epithelial cells has progressed into atypism; increased mitosis; giant and multinucleate cells; acanthosis; hyperkeratosis and parakeratosis; basal membrane and basal layer are retained. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus, hyperkeratotic form
b. Leukoplakia, erosive form
*c. Bowens disease
d. Lupus erythematosus, erosive/ulcerative form
e. Decubitus ulcer

1473. A 15-year-old adolescent complains of high body temperature up to 39, 5 ? 40, 0oC, vomiting, headache and sore throat, especially when swallowing. Objectively: oral mucosa is swollen, hyperemic. The patient is diagnosed with acute catarrhal gingivitis. The tonsils are hypertrophic and covered with yellow-grey coating that does not spread from lymphoid tissue and is easily removed. Submandibular, cervical, and occipital lymph nodes are significantly enlarged since the very first day of illness and are painful when palpated. The liver and spleen are enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Herpetic angina
b. Measles
c. Scarlatina
d. Diphtheria
*e. Infectious mononucleosis

1474. A patient complains of loss of feeling in the left side of his lower lip and chin, which occurred after the complicated extraction of the 37th tooth. Electric pulp test (EPT) revealed decrease in electroexcitability of the left lower jaw teeth.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Alveolitis of the 37th tooth socket
b. Neuralgia of the left inferior dental nerve
*c. Neuritis of the left inferior dental nerve
d. Herpes Zoster n.Trigemini
e. Acute osteomyelitis of the body of mandible

1475. During the extraction of the 17 tooth the distal buccal root broke off and remained in the socket. Select a tool to extract the root:
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Straight forceps, straight elevator
*c. Bayonet forceps, straight elevator
d. Beak-shaped forceps, angular elevator
e. Angular elevators

1476. A partial removable denture is being made for a 50-year-old patient. What impression trays are the more advisable?
a. Disposable stock tray
b. Metal stock tray
*c. Split stock tray
d. Perforated stock tray
e. Customized stock tray

1477. An obturator is being made using Ilyina- Markosyan technique for a 45-year-old-patient to compensate for the defect of the hard and soft palate. What type of connection between the fixing and obturating parts will be used?
*a. Button
b. Clasp
c. Spring
d. Joint
e. Band

1478. A 10-year-old child has fallen and hit stairs with his teeth. An appointment with a dentist was made only 2 days later. There are complains of cold stimulus causing sharp pain.Objectively: the 11th tooth has transversal defect at two third of the crown, the pulp is significantly exposed. Probing causes sharp pain. Percussion is painful, the tooth is mobile. The gums are slightly hyperemic. What method of treatment should be used in this case?
a. Biological method
b. Non-vital extirpation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Non-vital amputation

1479. A 33-year-old patient complains of slowly growing tumor mass in the left submandibular area. Objectively: a tumor with soft elastic consistency can be palpated in the left submandibular area; the tumor changes its configuration when squeezed with fingers and is painless. The skin covering the tumor has no changes in colour, movable. There are no changes detected in the oral cavity. Salivary glands function normaly. Shrinking-inflation symptom is absent. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hemangioma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
c. Brancial cleft cyst
d. Retention cyst of the left submandibular salivary gland
*e. Lipoma

1480. A 52-year-old patient complains of pain and a swelling in the right parotid region. These manifestations have been present for about 2 years. Over the last month the swelling has grown bigger, pain has intensified. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the dense infiltrate in the right parotid region. The poorly circumscribed, painful formation infiltrates the surrounding tissues. At the right side of neck in front and behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle there are enlarged, dense, mobile lymph nodes. The right naso-buccal groove is flattened, the corner of mouth is downturned. The mouth opens freely. The are pronounced symptoms of the right facial nerve paresis.What disease can be suspected?
a. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland
*b. Adenocarcinoma of the parotid salivary gland
c. Actinomycosis of the parotid-masseter region
d. Chronic parotitis
e. Chronic lymphadenitis

1481. A 48-year-old patient complains of the lower jaw teeth mobility. Van Thiel dental splint is to be made for prosthodontic treatment. What construction elements are supposed to fix it in place?
a. Full metal crowns
b. Parapulpar posts
c. Equator crowns
*d. Whole piece proximal grip clasps
e. Wire clasps

1482. A 38-year-old patient has made an appointment with a dentist to extract the 46th tooth in preparation for prosthetics. Objectively: the 46th tooth is destroyed by 2/3. What kind of anaesthesia is the most advisable for the extraction of the 46th tooth?
a. Mandibular
b. Веrcher-Dubov
*c. Torusal
d. Infiltration
e. Mental

1483. A 13-year-old boy complains of general weakness, high body temperature up to 39degrees, lack of appetite, constant pain in the body of the lower jaw. Objectively: observed is significant asymmetry of the face caused by soft tissues swelling in the left buccal and submandibular areas. Mouth opening is restricted. Intraoral examination revealed the following: the 34th, 35th, 36th and 37th teeth are mobile; teeth percussion is painful. The crown of the 36th tooth is completely destroyed. The mucosa of those teeth is hyperemic and painful when palpated. Muff-like enlargement of the lower jaw alveolar process is detected.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the right submandibular area
*b. Acute mandibular odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Acute mandibular odontogenic purulent periostitis
d. Acute mandibular hematogenous osteomyelitis
e. Ewings sarcoma

1484. A 25-year-old woman complains of pain in the 15th tooth, which is caused by thermal stimuli and quickly ceases, when stimulation stops. Objectively: visually detected is a defect with smooth walls that join under an angle, which is located in the cervical zone of the 15th tooth vestibular surface. Thermometry is painful; percussion is painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Enamel erosion
*c. Cuneiform defect
d. Fluorosis
e. Superficial caries

1485. A 40-year-old female patient complains of short-term pain in the 34th tooth caused by thermal stimuli. Objectively: the distal surface of the 34th tooth has a carious cavity localised in the circumpulpar dentin. The walls and floor of the cavity are softened, faintly pigmented; probing of the floor is slightly painful. Cold stimulus causes pain that ceases when stimulation stops.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic deep caries

1486. A 24-year-old patient complains of new growth in the right lateral surface of the neck. The new growth was first noticed 4 months ago, no appointment with doctor was made. Objectively: the face is asymmetrical due to the new growth in the upper third part of the right lateral surface of the neck. Palpation allows to detect the painless rounded new growth sized 3*3,5 cm; its consistency is dence and elastic; the skin abowe the growth has no changes of colour and can be folded. The new growth is not melded with its surrounding tissues and is situated along the front edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Puncture consists of pale yellow viscous fluid. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Branchial cleft cyst
b. Chronic lymphadenitis of neck lateral surface
c. Acute serous lymphadenitis of neck lateral surface
d. Lipoma of neck lateral surface
e. Phlegmon of neck lateral surface

1487. A female patient is 51-year-old, with immobile teeth. The marginal periodontium in the area of the 14th-11th, 21st-23rd teeth has inflammation symptoms; gingival and periodontal pockets are 4-5 mm deep.Whole piece metal and plastic denture construction is to be made for the patient. What are the specifics of the construction edge placement relative to the marginal periodontium in this case?
*a. Circular garland covering necks of all abutment teeth
b. Formation of subgingival circular ledge
c. Construction should have neither lining nor circular ledge
d. Construction should be composed of separate crowns
e. Formation of gum-level circular ledge

1488. Parents of an 8-year-old child with Down syndrome took the child to a doctor for oral cavity sanitation. After the examination entailing great difficulties the child was found to have four teeth decayed as a result of chronic periodontitis. What kind of anesthesia should be chosen for surgical sanitation in one visit?
a. Mask anesthesia
b. Conduction anesthesia
*c. Phlebonarcosis
d. Endotracheal anesthesia
e. Endotracheal anesthesia through a tracheostoma

1489. During examination of the 11-year-old childs oral cavity the 23rd tooth vestibular position was detected. Correlation of the 16th and 46th is Angle class 1, and 26th and 36th is Angle class 2. The width of the 23rd crown is 8 mm. The dentition lacks 4 mm to place the 23rd properly. Front teeth occlusion is normal. Choose the optimal treatment approach.
*a. Move the upper lateral teeth on the right side in distal direction, than move the canine into the correct place
b. Widen the upper and lower dentitions, and move the canine into the correct place
c. Extract the first premolar, and move the canine into the correct place
d. Widen the upper dentition, and move the canine into the correct place
e. Extract the canine; move the 24th and 25th teeth to replace the 23rd

1490. A 47-year-old patient complains of a burning sensation and pain in the mouth. Objectively: on the mucous membrane of cheeks along the line of teeth contact and in the corners of mouth there are multiple polygonal bright red erosions 1,0-1,5 cm in diameter located on the hyperkeratinized plaque and opaque whitish mucosa. Cytological analysis revealed keratinizing epithelial cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lichen planus, erosive form
b. Secondary syphilis
c. Lupus erythematosus, erosive form
*d. Leukoplakia, erosive form
e. Erythema multiforme

1491. A 24-year-old female patient complains of the 15th tooth being lost. The defect is of aesthetic nature. Objectively: the 14th and 16th teeth are intact, stable, clinical crowns are tall with pronounced equators and normal orthognathic overlapping; X-ray image shows no pathologies in the periapical tissues. What kind of denture should be recommended for the patient?
a. Cantilever bridge
*b. Adhesive dental bridge
c. Metal plastic dental bridge
d. Metal ceramic dental bridge
e. Plastic dental bridge

1492. A12-year-old child has a carious cavity on the surface of the 12th tooth. The cavity is localised in the mantle dentin; its floor and walls are covered with pale softened dentin. Probing the enamel-dentin border is painful. Thermal stimuli cause short-term painful reaction. Vertical percussion is painless, horisontal percussion is slightly painful. Gingival papilla between the 12th and 13th teeth is swollen, hyperemic, bleeds when touched. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute median caries, gingival papillitis
c. Acute partial pulpitis, gingival papillitis
d. Acute deep caries, gingival papillitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

1493. A 27-year-old female patient has her 26th tooth cavity accidentially breached along the mesial buccal line angle during treatment of acute deep caries of the 26th. Choose the optimal method of treatment.
*a. Biological method
b. Non-vital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Non-vital extirpation

1494. A 54-year-old patient complaining of tumor-like growth on the red border of the left lower lip has made an appointment with a dentist. Examination revealed the affected area to be sized 1х1,5 cm, and have irregular shape with clear margins. Focus of the affected area does not protrude from the surrounding red border; the affected area is greyish-white in colour and covered in thin closely placed scales.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Verrucous precancer of the lower lip red border
b. Cheilitis abrasiva praecancerosa Manganotti
*c. Local precancerous hyperkeratosis of the lower lip
d. Bowen’s disease
e. Erythroplasia of Queyrat

1495. A 23-year-old male patient complains of gum bleeding when he brushes his teeth or eats tough food. Objectively: the gums of the front lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen and bleed when palpated. The oral and gingival mucosa in other areas are not affected. The occlusion is deep. The teeth are firm, except for the 41st and 31st (class 1 mobility). X-ray imaging shows resorption of the alveolar septum in the area of the 41st, 42nd, 32nd and 31st teeth up to one third of the root length. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Catarrhal gingivitis
b. Parodontosis, stage I
c. Generalised periodontitis, initial stage
d. Generalised periodontitis, stage I
*e. Localised periodontitis

1496. A 78-year-old patient complains of difficulties when taking food and deformity of the dentition. The anamnesis states the lower jaw fracture 2,5 month ago. Objectively: there is a deformity of the lower jaw front area, which equals 19 mm (artificial joint). Both fragments of the lower jaw have 3 stable teeth each.What prosthesis construction is the most advisable in this case?
a. Kurlandsky’s denture with shock absorbing ball-clasp
b. Oxman joint denture with two pivot-points
c. Oxman joint denture with one pivot-point
d. Jointless removable denture
*e. Oxman joint fixed denture

1497. A 3,5-year-old child has symmetrical face, the middle part is predominant in proportions, swallowing is infantile, breathing is nasal. In the oral cavity the dentition corresponds with the age norms, the sagittal fissure is 3 mm, every tooth in the lateral part has its anatagonist, the lower teeth touch the hard palate. Miogymnastics with Dassa orbicularis oris activator is recommended. What function is normalised by this apparatus in the given case?
a. Swallowing
b. Speech
c. Breathing
d. Chewing
*e. Lips closure

1498. A patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 47 tooth. X-ray examination revealed fragments of endodontic instruments in the canals of the medial and distal root. In the periapical zone there are well-defined areas of bone destruction. Select the most appropriate method of treatment:
a. Tooth hemisection
b. Conservative treatment
c. Radectomy
d. Tooth replantation
*e. Tooth extraction

1499. After unilateral resection of the upper jaw a 52-year-old patient received the immediateinsertion denture.What is the term of its use?
a. 1-2 months
b. 2-3 years
c. 4-5 years
*d. 1-3 months
e. 7-12 months

1500. A 57-year-old female patient complains of burning pain, dry mouth, feeling of foreign body on the tongue back and lateral surfaces, which disappears in the process of eating. The first case of such symptoms was noted a year ago after psychic trauma. The patient suffers from pancreatic diabetes and sleep disturbance. Examination revealed the following: the tongue mucosa is without significant changes, moderately moistened. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hunter-Moeller’s glossitis
b. Glossitis with fissured tongue
c. Candidal glossitis
d. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
*e. Glossodynia

1501. A patient with post-resection upper jaw defect that invades the nasal cavity has made an appointment with a prosthodontic clinic. What denture is recommended in the given case?
a. Mouthguard
b. Floating obturator
*c. Replacement denture with obturating element
d. Forming denture
e. Replacement denture

1502. An 18-year-old patient with complaint of large diastem has made an appointment with prosthodontics specialist. Objectively: there is full lateral displacement of central incisors due to absence of the 12th and 22nd teeth. What instrument is the most advisable for moving the central incisors closer together?
a. Simple cotton ligature
b. Vasylenko appliance
*c. Korkhaus appliance
d. Kalvelis appliance
e. Begg appliance

1503. An injured patient complains of limited opening of the mouth, nose bleeding, skin numbness in the infraorbital and lower eyelid region. Objectively: there is face deformation due to the depression of soft tissues in the left cheekbone region, step deformity in the middle part of the inferior margin of the left orbit and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Zygomatic bone fracture with displacement of bone fragments
b. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla
c. Fracture of the malar arch
d. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
e. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone without displacement of fragments

1504. A patient has sustained blunt object trauma to the face central area. Objectively: the nasal bones are mobile, there is significant swelling of the left temporal region soft tissues, uneven "stair-like"shape of bones is observed in the lower edges of both eyesockets and maxillo-zygomatic sutures, bleeding, open bite. The central part of the face is elongated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Le Fort fracture of maxilla, type I
b. Nasal fracture
c. Le Fort fracture, type III
*d. Le Fort fracture of maxilla, type II
e. Left temporal bone fracture

1505. A 44-year-old female patient has complaints of the face swelling at the right lower jaw area and teeth mobility. Objectively: soft tissues are without changes, the regional lymph nodes cannot be palpated. The alveolar process and the body of the lower jaw near the 46th, 47th and 48th teeth are thickened, painless when palpated, have bulges. The teeth in the thickened area are mobile. Puncture consists of brown fluid without cholesterol crystals. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Osteoclastoma
b. Osteoma
c. Odontoma
d. Follicular cyst
e. Adamantinoma

1506. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanitation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. History: the tooth hasn’t been treated before, it has decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooth’s crown is decayed by over 2/3, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
*a. Bayonet root forceps
b. Straight elevator
c. Crown bayonet forceps
d. S-shaped closed-beak forceps
e. S-shaped forceps (right)

1507. A 39-year-old patient, who works in a printing house, complains of burning pain, metallic taste in the mouth and bad breath. Objectively: the skin is sallow in colour. The oral mucosa has black-and-blue spots. The gums are hyperemic and swollen. The edge of the gums has black-and-blue band. The palate is of yellow shade. Intoxication symptoms are observed. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mercurial stomatitis
b. Melanosis
c. Addisons disease
*d. Lead stomatitis
e. Bismuthic stomatitis

1508. A 16-year-old female patient complains of a deformation and restricted mouth opening since birth. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, disproportionate, there is a bird-like face symptom. The mouth opens up to 1 cm. The patient has an occlusal abnormality, namely deep incisal overbite.What pathology is found in this patient?
a. Micrognathia with acquired ankylosis
b. Prognathism
c. Mandibular protraction
*d. Micrognathia with congenital ankylosis
e. Maxillary protraction

1509. To perform a differentiated diagnostics of the lower jaw displacement a patient was asked to open his mouth as wide as possible, and then the lateral displacement of the lower jaw and face asymmetry were measured. What clinical test is it?
a. Ilyina-Markosyan clinical functional test 4
b. Eschler-Bittner clinical diagnostic test
c. Ilyina-Markosyan clinical functional test 1
d. Ilyina-Markosyan clinical functional test 2
*e. Ilyina-Markosyan clinical functional test 3

1510. What measurements are necessary to determine the width of dental arch according to the Pont’s method of analysis?
a. Size of dentition frontal segment
*b. Crown width of four upper incisors
c. Crown width of six upper front teeth
d. Crown width of upper central incisors
e. Crown width of upper central incisors and the first premolars

1511. A patient complains of limited mouth opening, pain during swallowing, fever up to 38, 5oC, weakness, indisposition. Objectively: the mouth opens up to 1 cm. After Berchet anesthesia examination of the oral cavity revealed edema, hyperemia, tenderness of the pterygomandibular fold. Lateral and posterior pharyngeal walls are intact. The 38 tooth is semi-impacted. Palpation of the internal surface of the mandibular angle is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
b. Phlegmon of the infratemporal region
c. Phlegmon of peripharyngeal space
d. Acute pericoronitis of the 38 tooth region
e. Acute tonsillitis

1512. A 35-year-old patient complains of a neoplasm on the tip of his tongue which he injures with his teeth. The neoplasm sometimes increases, and sometimes decreases in size. Objectively: on the tip of tongue there is a roundish well-defined neoplasm 0,5 cm in diameter with broad base. The neoplasm is the same colour as the mucosa of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Papilloma of tongue
b. Lipoma of tongue
c. Fibroma of tongue
d. Hemangiofibroma of tongue
e. Abscess of tongue

1513. A 37-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums, bad breath, loose teeth, difficulties with chewing food. Objectively: gums are bluish-red in colour; periodontal pockets are 6 mm deep and contain serous substance; class II teeth mobility; moderate deposits of subgingival and supragingival dental calculus; Oral Hygiene Index equals 3 points; there is traumatical occlusuion along all the length of the dental arches. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, chronic
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, acute
d. Histiocytosis X
e. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, acute

1514. A 6,5-year-old child has closed nonpigmented fissures in the first permanent molar, which have been revealed during preventive examination. Enamel transparency is retained, its probing does not reveal any coarseness. Choose the optimal method of treatment in this case.
a. ART technique
b. Regular medical check-up
c. Invasive sealing
d. Preventive filling
*e. Non-invasive sealing

1515. A 3-year-old child suffers from extreme gingivitis with slight teeth mobility; teeth are intact. The skin is dry, the hair is brittle, the skin of the palms and soles of the feet is rough and covered in small cracks.What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Niemann-Pick disease
b. Eosinophilic granuloma (Taratynov’s disease)
c. Letterer-Siwe disease
*d. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
e. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease

1516. Parents of an 8-year-old child have made and appointment with an orthodontist. There are complaints of their child having traumas of oral mucosa. Objectively: decreased height of the face lower part, everted lower lip, deep labiomental furrow, milk occlusion. The upper incisors fully cover the lower ones; cutting surface of the lower incisors make contact with the anterior third of the palate. Mesiodistal ratio of the canines and the first permanent molars is normal. Grouping of the upper and lower front teeth is dissimilar. Make the diagnosis according to the Kalvelis classification.
a. Deep incisor overbite
b. Deep prognatic (roof-shaped) occlusion
c. -
*d. Deep traumatic overbite
e. Deep neutral occlusion

1517. A 64-year-old patient with edentulous jaws has a minor uniform atrophy of maxilla and a pronounced atrophy of lateral parts of mandible. The mucosa in these parts makes longitudinal folds, the alveolar crest is mobile in the anterior part. The condition of mandible should be taken into consideration at the following stage of fabrication of a complete removable denture:
a. Determining the central occlusion
*b. Taking differentiated functional impression
c. Taking compression functional impression
d. Taking anatomical impression
e. Taking decompression functional impression

1518. A 46-year-old patient complains of mastication disruption caused by the lack of the 34th, 35th and 36th teeth. The antecedent anamnesis is as follows: the teeth were extracted 3 months ago due to complication of cariosity. The patient anamnesis: the history of tonsillitis, rheumatoid arthritis and Botkin’s disease. After the appointment with this patient instruments should be sterilized in the following way:
*a. Specialized procedure
b. Processing with lysol
c. General procedure
d. Processing with 0,1% chloramine solution
e. Dry-heat sterilizer

1519. A 49-year-old patient has a tooth removed from the left upper jaw under plexus anaesthesia with articaine-forte (Articaine + Epinephrine). After the operation the tooth socket did not fill with blood clot. How to prevent alveolitis in this case?
a. Lavage the socket with microcide solution
b. Fill the socket with hemostatic sponge
*c. Loosely fill the socket with iodoform tampon
d. Lavage the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution
e. Fill the socket with antibiotic dusting powder

1520. A 24-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 26 tooth. After a physical examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth. During the tooth extraction the coronal part of the tooth was accidentally broken. Furthermanipulations with bayonet forceps failed to extract the tooth roots. What actions are to be taken for the successful root extraction?
a. To complete the tooth extraction during the next visit
b. To use angular elevator
c. To send the patient to the hospital
d. To use Lecluse elevator
*e. To disjoin the roots by using a drill and fissure burr

1521. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child revealed a habit of lower lip biting.What malocclusion may develop if the child keeps this habit?
a. Cross-bite
*b. Anterior bite
c. Open bite
d. Prognathic bite
e. Deep overbite

1522. Parents of an 8-year-old girl are concerned that she is chewing food too slowly. Objectively: it is a period of transitional dentition. The first permanent molars has neutral relationship; sagittal fissure is 2 mm wide. The upper front teeth cover the lower ones by two thirds. Name the pathology.
*a. Deepening of incisor overbite
b. Tooth-alveolar lengthening of the front teeth
c. Decrease of the lower face height
d. Tooth-alveolar shortening of the lateral teeth
e. Widening of the sagittal fissure

1523. When checking construction of the soldered dental bridge with the 35th and 38th abutment teeth the following was detected: pores in the place of soldering together abutment crowns with the intermediate part; masticatory tubercules are sharply defined; there is early contact with tooth-antagonists; the intermediate part makes tight contact with the alveolar process mucosa. How can those flaws be corrected?
a. Masticatory surface should be corrected, and soldered places - filed
b. Intermediate part should be corrected
*c. Dental bridge shoold be remade
d. Masticatory surface should be corrected, and the height of the flushing part is to be increased up to 2 mm
e. Tooth-antagonists sholud be filed down

1524. A 14-year-old girl complains of indistinct pronunciation that developed at the age of 14 after the acute respiratory viral disease. Examination revealed normal face and normal teeth alignment, occlusal disharmony was not found. Palpation didn’t reveal cleft palate. Uvula doesn’t move during pronunciation of sounds, its palpation does not cause gag reflex. What is the reason for indistinct pronunciation of sounds?
a. Hypertrophy of lingual tonsil
b. Deformation of the bite
c. Adenoid vegetations
d. Palatal slit
*e. Paresis of the soft palate and uvula muscles

1525. A 53-year-old male patient has made a repeat appointment after 3 days upon the extraction of the 36th tooth. Spot X-ray of the 36th tooth made from within the oral cavity revealed the remainingmesial root.What tools should be used to extract this root?
a. Inward and outward bent elevators and upper beak-shaped forceps without spike
*b. Inward bent elevator and upper beak-shaped forceps without spike
c. Inward bent elevator and lower beak-shaped forceps without spike
d. Outward bent elevator and upper beak-shaped forceps without spike
e. Outward bent elevator and lower beakshaped forceps without spike

1526. A 35-year-old female patient seeks prosthetic dentistry. Objectively: the 18, 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28 teeth need restoration. The crowns confining the defect are high and stable. To restore the integrity of the dentition it is planned to fabricate a cast clasp denture. What kind of mechanical fixator should be used?
a. Telescopic fixation
b. Dentoalveolar clasps
c. Supporting-retaining clasps
d. Retaining clasps
*e. Bar fixation

1527. A 42-year-old female patient has made an appointment with a prosthodontic office to make a denture. Objectively: dental formula is as follows: 18 . . . . 13 12 11 21 22 23 . . . . 28 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . The patient has deep occlusion; clinical crowns are low; equator is not pronounced. The patient suffers from epileptic seizures. What kind of denture should be prescribed for this patient?
a. Clasp (bugel) dental prosthesis
*b. Partial removable laminar metal-based denture
c. Partial removable laminar plastic denture with clasp-retainers
d. Dental bridge
e. Partial removable laminar denture with supporting-retaining clasps

1528. A 22-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic because of missing of the 21 tooth, the 11 and 22 teeth are intact. The 21 tooth was extracted 2 months ago. What construction is most suitable in this case?
a. Metal-plastic denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
*b. Two-stage implantation
c. Partial removable denture
d. One-stage implantation with simultaneous fabrication of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. Swaged and soldered denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth

1529. A 48-year-old patient has undergone unilateral resection of the upper jaw. He needs a resection prosthesis. Objectively: the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 teeth are stable, hard palate is broad, flat. What connection of clasps with the base will reduce the instability of the resection prosthesis?
a. Does not matter
*b. Articular
c. Elastic
d. Stable
e. Fixed

1530. A 15-year-old girl complaining of moderate swelling of the left paroticmasticatory area has made an appointment with a dental surgeon. Palpation revealed the left parotid gland to be bulgy, dense, and painless. Its duct secretes turbid saliva. The duct orifice is dilated, the surrounding mucosa is cyanotic, pastose, with teeth imprints.What disease is it?
*a. Chronic parenchymatous sialoadenitis
b. Calculous sialadenitis (sialolithiasis)
c. Cyst
d. Mixed tumor
e. Chronic interstitial sialoadenitis

1531. The department of maxillofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a posttraumatic defect of nose wing up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
*a. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
b. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
c. Free grafting with dermal flap
d. Grafting with tubed pedicle (Filatovs) flap
e. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions

1532. A 25-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about acute pain in the upper jaw on the left. The pain occurs during eating. Objectively: on the distal approximal surface of the 26 tooth there is a cavity filled with light soft dentin. Probing causes a slight pain along the dentin-enamel junction, percussion is painless. Cold water causes quickly abating pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute median caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic median caries

1533. A 40-year-old female patient has made an appointment with a dentist. She complains of pain in her front teeth of the upper and lower jaws, which is caused by thermal, chemical and mechanical stimuli. Temporomandibular joint is also slightly painful. Objectively: the patient has deep occlusion; the enamel of lingual surface of the front upper teeth and vestibular surface of the front lower teeth is rubbed off exposing the glossy pigmented dentin. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Physiological brygmus
b. Chemical necrosis of the tooth
*c. Pathologic brygmus
d. Hard tissues erosion
e. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome

1534. Whan conduction anaesthesia had been administerd by a dentist, in 2 seconds a patient developed the following symptoms: loss of consciousness, seizures, dilated pupils, absent pupillary response to light, low arterial pressure, laboured breathing, muffled heart sounds.What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
c. Stroke
d. Cardiac infarction
e. Syncope

1535. A 13-year-old boy needs his 46th tooth extracted due to chronic granulomatous periodontitis. He has pancreatic diabetes as a concomitant disease. Choose the most advisable anaesthetic and its way of administration.
a. Infiltration anesthesia with 2% lidocaine solution
b. Intravenous anaesthesia with thiopental sodium solution
*c. Mandibular anaesthesia with 3% Scandonest solution
d. Mandibular anaesthesia with Ultracain DS forte (epinephrine concentration 1:100 000)
e. -

1536. During the surgical removal of a retention cyst of the lower lip a 14-year-old boy complained of sudden weakness, dizziness, nausea. Objectively: the skin is covered with cold sweat. Respiration is frequent, pulse is weak, AP is decreased (90/60 mm Hg), the hands are cold.What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Syncope
b. Traumatic shock
c. Collapse
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Toxic shock

1537. A 10,5-year-old child complains of painful rash on his lips. Objectively: the red border of the lips is swollen, hyperemic, covered in fissures and numerous scabs of dried blood. The skin of the upper lip has small blisters containing serous substance, which merge with each other in some places. Maceration and weeping skin also can be observed, especially in the corners of the mouth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
*c. Exematous cheilitis
d. Actinic cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

1538. An 11-year-old child complains of dryness and tightness of the lips, which the child is licking constantly. Objectively: red border of the lips is dry, infiltrated, hyperemic and covered in numerous thin scales. The skin of the lips is undamaged. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Cheilitis exfoliativa
b. Atopic cheilitis
*c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Exematous cheilitis

1539. Parents of a 7,5-year old child brought him to a dentist for oral cavity sanitation. Objectively: DEF (for primary teeth) + DMF (for permanent teeth) index = 4, Green-Vermillion index = 2,5. Fissures of the first permanent molars are open, intact, non-pigmented. What method of primary prevention of dental caries may be appropriate in this case?
a. Invasive hermetization
b. Application of antibacterial varnish
c. Application of calcium gels
*d. Non-invasive hermetization
e. Application of fluoride varnish

1540. Parents of a 5-year-old child has made an appointment with a dentist for preventive examination of their child. Objectively: the DMF index (Decayed, Missing, Filled)=5, the gingival mucosa is pale pink in colour, Fedorov-Volodkina index is 2,5. For oral hygiene the child should use a toothbrush with the following kind of bristle:
a. Medium
b. Extra-soft
c. Extra-hard
*d. Soft
e. Hard

1541. A 28-year-old patient complains of experiencing gum discomfort, gingival haemorrhages and pain, especially during eating, for a week. Objectively: the gums are swollen and markedly hyperemic, especially within the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth, soft plaque and tartar are present, gingival sulcus is up to 2 mm deep. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute deep gingivitis
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Exacerbation of initial generalized periodontitis
d. Initial stage of chronic generalized periodontitis
e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

1542. An 18-year-old patient complains of chalky spot in the 23rd tooth, which is slightly painful when cold stimulus is applied. Objectively: the vestibular surface near dental cervix of the 23rd tooth has a white spot 2-3 mm in size. Probing is painless and reveals coarseness of the surface. Thermal stimulus causes slightly painful feeling. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Fluorosis
b. Chronic initial caries
*c. Acute initial caries
d. Local hypoplasia
e. Enamel necrosis

1543. A 7-year-old child is diagnosed with complete dislocation of the 11th tooth caused by a trauma that happened 24 hours ago. The tooth was brought along. Objectively: the socket edges are slightly hyperemic, bone walls are intact; the tooth socket is filled with blood clot. What approach is the most advisable for the therapy?
a. Reimplantation of the 11th tooth followed by the canal filling
b. Reposition and fixation of the 11th tooth
c. Socket closure with catgut
*d. Reimplantation of the 11th tooth preceded by the canal filling
e. Extraction of the 11th tooth

1544. A 56-year-old patient suffering from exacerbation of schizophrenia has been hospitalised in an oral in-patient department with a diagnosis of the lower jaw displaced fracture in the area of the 34th-35th teeth. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
*a. Osteosynthesis
b. Full dental splint
c. Vankevytch splint
d. Weber splint
e. One arch smooth dental braces

1545. A 37-year-old patient had an appointment with his orthopaedist about dental prosthetics. During the preparation of hard dental tissues for a fixed denture he was given conduction anesthesia. During the injection the patient developed cold sweat, sudden pallor and cyanosis, thready pulse. The patient stayed conscious, but became relaxed and lethargic. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Syncope
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Intoxication
*e. Collapse

1546. A 48-year-old patient is in grave condition: body temperature is of 39, 8oC, the face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submental and both submandibular triangles. Speech is difficult as the tongue is displaced upwards. Swallowing is painful. Sublingual plicae are markedly hyperemic and edematous. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of tongue root
b. Phlegmon of alveololingual groove
c. Phlegmon of submandibular triangle
*d. Phlegmon of mouth floor
e. Phlegmon of submental triangle

1547. A 32-year-old patient is hospitalised in an oral surgery department with perforating wound of the cheek. The size of the wound opening is 1,5х4,0 mm. What kind of restorative surgical operation is the most advisable in this case?
a. Opposite triangular flaps (Z-plasty)
*b. Filatov-Gillies tube graft
c. Rotation flap
d. Double-end flap
e. Rauer’s double shoulder-breast flap

1548. A 60-year-old patient has been undergoing the procedure of checking the complete removable dentures construction and fixing teeth on wax bases. The following flaws have been detected: fissure between the teeth on the frontal area and tubercule contact in the lateral area.What mistake had been made?
a. Models were plastered in a wrong way in an occluder
b. Swabs were crushed, when central occlusion was being determined
c. Posterior occlusion was determined instead of central one
d. Lateral occlusion was determined instead of central one
*e. Anterior occlusion was determined instead of central one

1549. A 20-year-old patient in the 8th month of pregnancy complains about an aesthetic defect, speech disturbance due to the missing upper front tooth. Objectively: the 12 tooth is missing. The 11, 13 teeth are intact, stable, of anatomical shape. The patient has orthognathic bite. What prosthesic design should be preferred?
*a. Immediate prosthesis
b. Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge
c. Implant with a pocelain crown
d. Plastic-to-metal bridge
e. Plastic bridge

1550. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain and swelling in the area of the left parotid salivary gland, which occurred 7 days after he had undergone abdominal cavity surgery. Objectively: body temperature equals 39oC, restricted mouth opening; dry mouth; when the gland is massaged, there is purulent exudate being secreted from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with the following disease:
a. Acute epidemic parotitis
b. Parenchymatous parotitis
c. Phlegmon of parotid-masticatory region
*d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Phlegmon of submasseteric space

1551. A 16-year-old girl complains of cosmetic defect of the front teeth - there are dark spots and hard tissues defects. The spots were detected in the process of teething, the defects developed later. The following diagnosis was made: erosive form of fluorosis of the 16th, 11th, 12th, 22nd, 26th, 31st, 32nd, 36th, 41st, 42nd, 46th teeth. Choose the method of treatment.
*a. Restoration treatment
b. Prosthetics
c. Regular medical check-up
d. Surgical treatment
e. Remineralization treatment

1552. An 8-year-old boy has thickening of the lower jaw body in the area of the 83rd, 84th and 85th teeth. In the given area a rounded painless tissue protrusion can be detected; the Dupuytren’s symptom is positive. Deciduous teeth are intact. X-ray image of the lower jaw made in lateral projection shows the focus of bone destruction with clear margins in the area of the 83rd, 84th and 85th teeth. The 44th tooth follicle is shifted down in distal direction, the crown is projected on the destruction focus. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Mandibular osteoclastoma
*b. Follicular cyst of mandibula from the 44th tooth
c. Mandibular ameloblastoma
d. Fibrous dysplasia of mandible
e. Radicular cyst of mandibula from the 84th tooth

1553. In the process of the 26th tooth extraction a 34-year-old patient suddenly developed the following symptoms: tinnitus, weakness, paleness of skin. Vertigo was diagnosed. What first aid approach is the most advisable?
a. Intramuscular injection of 50% analgin (mеtamisole sodium) solution
b. Subcutaneous injection of cordiamin
c. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
*d. Put the patient in the Trendelenburg position
e. Intravenous injection of 0,1% epinephrine

1554. A 15-year-old adolescent complains of a two-day long sharp pulsing pain in the tooth, which intensifies when biting or touching the tooth with the tongue. Objectively: the 26th tooth contains composite material filling. Vertical and horisontal percussion of the tooth are painful, the tooth is slightly mobile in vestibular-oral projection. Gingival mucosa of the affected area is hyperemic, swollen, sharply painful when palpated. X-ray imaging shows no changes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute serous pulpitis

1555. A 5-year-old child has a cavity localised in the deep dentin on the masticatory surface of the 75th tooth. The cavity is filled with softened pigmented dentin and food remains. The child complains of dull pain when taking food or cold liquids. Probing of the cavity floor is slightly painful; when the dentin is removed with excavator, pink pulp is visible through the cavity floor.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
*c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

1556. A 9-year-old child complains of dull pain in a tooth, which increases when the tooth is pressed. One month ago the tooth was treated for pulpitis. Objectively: the 36th tooth is filled; percussion is sharply painful; mucosa is hyperemic, swollen. X-ray imaging does not show any changes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

1557. A 50-year-old female patient complains of pain in the upper left jaw, high fever up to 38, 5oC, worsening of her general condition. The disease onset was 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is asymmetrical due to swelling of the right cheek soft tissues, palpation is painful, the skin is hyperemic. The crown of the 16th tooth is destroyed completely; percussion sensitivity is positive. There is hyperemia and edema of the alveolar process soft tissues in the area of the 15th, 16th and 17th teeth vestibular surface.What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenic maxillary periostitis in the area of the 16th tooth
b. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis starting from the 16th tooth
c. Chronic odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
d. Acute odontogenic right-side maxillary sinusitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 16th tooth

1558. A 60-year-old patient complains of a growth in the mental region, which is painless and slowly grows in size. Objectively: there is rounded infiltrate with clear margins in the mental region; it is slightly painfiul, the skin under it is very thin. Palpation in the vestibule of mouth reveals dense band going from the growth to the destroyed 33rd tooth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Odontogenic abscess of the mental region
b. Acute lymphadenitis the mental region
c. Chronic lymphadenitis of the mental region
*d. Odontogenic granuloma of the face
e. Atheroma of the mental region

1559. A 43-year-old patient complains of mobility of all his teeth. Upon examination and additional tests the following diagnosis is made: generalized periodontitis. What kind of treatment does this patient need?
a. Surgical
b. Prosthodontic
*c. Complex
d. Therapeutic
e. Orthodontal

1560. A 38-year-old female complains of experiencing pain in her lower lip for half a year, difficult eating and talking. The patient sought medical help at place of residence, but the administered treatment was ineffective. Examination of the lower lip revealed a deep fissure in the centre which affected the vermilion border and partly the mucous membrane of lips. The fissure was covered with a brown crust, after its removal the fissure started bleeding. The fissure edges are hyperkeratinized, infiltrated. Select the optimal treatment tactics:
a. Application of antibiotic ointment
*b. Fissure excision
c. Irradiation with helium-neon laser
d. Application of keratoplastic agents
e. Application of corticosteroid ointment

1561. A 44-year-old male patient diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis, class II, has had flap surgery of the lower jaw.What kind of oral hygiene procedures are recommended for this patient during the first 2-3 days after the surgery?
a. Teeth cleaning with chewing gum
b. Teeth brushing using soft-bristled toothbrush and anti-inflammatory toothpaste
c. Teeth cleaning with interdental stimulators and interdental brushes
*d. Oral rinsing with sodium bicarbonate solution, chlorhexidine solution
e. Teeth flossing

1562. A 42-year-old female patient presented to a dentist for oral sanitation. She has a history of tonsillitis, rheumatoid arthritis, Botkins disease. What are the conditions of instrument treatment after the patients visit?
a. Processing with lysol
b. Processing with 0,1% solution of chloramine
c. Under general conditions
d. Dry-air sterilization
*e. Under the special scheme

1563. A 50-year-old patient complains of his lower jaw teeth mobility. Objectively: the dentition is intact; the necks of the teeth are bared; the tooth crowns are tall; teeth mobility is class 1-2. What kind of dental splint is the most advisable?
a. Cap splint
*b. Elbrecht splint
c. Full crown splint
d. Mamlock splint
e. Equator crown splint

1564. A patient complains of an increasing new growth in the left sublingual area, which he first noticed 2 months ago. Some time after that he noticed this new growth to secrete large amount of clear viscous fluid, which was colorless and tasteless; initially this caused the new growth to become smaller but subsequently it started to grow again. Objectively: there is a rounded new growth sized 3x3 cm in the left sublingual area, its consistency is soft and elastic, there is no pain. The mucosa above is thinned out, semitransparent, bluish in shade.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Post-traumatic cyst of sublingual area
b. Pleomorphic adenoma of sublingual gland
c. Hemangioma of sublingual area
d. Dermoid cyst of sublingual area
*e. Retention sublingual cyst

1565. After extreme exposure to cold a 42-year old patient complains of headache in the left frontal lobe and the left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical; left nasal meatus breathing is obstructed, and serous-purulent discharge is being produced; palpation of the suborbital area and further along the mucogingival fold in the 24th, 25th teeth projection reveals slight pain. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24th tooth has a filling. The alveolar process mucosa has no visible changes. X-ray imaging shows decreased pneumatization of the left maxillary sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis of the 24th
b. Acute rhinogenous maxillary sinusitis
c. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left maxilla
*d. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24th

1566. A 8,5-year-old child is practically in good health. There is a complaint of pain in the upper left tooth, due to it having been physically damaged 3 hours ago. Objectively: 1/2 of the 21st tooth crown is destroyed, the pulp is significantly exposed, red, sharply painful and bleeding when probed. Percussion of the 21st tooth is sharply painful. Choose the optimal method of the 21st tooth treatment.
a. Biological method
*b. Vital amputation
c. Non-vital amputation
d. Vital extirpation
e. Non-vital extirpation

1567. A 34-year-old male patient complains of a cosmetic defect, a cavity on the vestibular surface in the cervical part of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the carious cavity is within the enamel, the floor and the walls are pigmented, probing and percussion and painless. There is no pain reaction to stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute surface caries
b. Acute median caries
c. Chronic median caries
*d. Chronic surface caries
e. Necrosis of dental hard tissues

1568. A 6-year-old child complains of pain in the right submandibular region. A day before he complained of a sore throat. Objectively: the child is in moderately severe condition, body it is 37, 9oC. The face is asymmetric due to a dense tender infiltrate in the right submandibular region. The infiltrate is slightly mobile, the overlying skin is hyperemic. There is fluctuation in the center. The teeth are intact. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sialadenitis
*b. Acute suppurative non-odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Phlegmonous adenitis
d. Acute serous non-odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute suppurative odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

1569. A dentist treats a 35-year-old patient from chronic deep caries of the 24th tooth that has mesial-occlusal-distal cavity. What should the dentist do to prevent the cavity edges from chipping?
a. To shape a wide-angled slant of enamel
*b. To file down the edges
c. To use extra hard material
d. To insert parapaulpar posts
e. To make retention furrows in the area of enamel-dentin joining

1570. A 19-year-old young man complains of unaesthetical look of his teeth, nearly all of which have spots and defects; his teeth have had such appearance since the moment of teething. The patient was born and had been living until the age of 5 in the area, where the fluorine content of drinking water was 3,2mg/l. Objectively: the enamel of all his teeth is of dull chalky shade with separate dark-brown spots, and has multishaped defects with dense margins, that are the most pronounced on the front upper teeth. What type of fluorosis does this patient have?
*a. Erosive
b. Patchy
c. Destructive
d. Chalky-speckled
e. Lined

1571. To fill a medium depth carious cavity in the 37th tooth (Black class 2) of a 35- year-old male patient a doctor has chosen a technique of layer-by-layer tooth restoration. What compositematerial should be applied for covering the carious cavity walls and floor to create the initial super adaptive layer?
a. Microfilled
*b. Flowable
c. Macrofilled
d. Condensable
e. Microhybrid

1572. A 13-year-old girl has bleeding gums and her front teeth are mobile. These symptoms have been observed during the last month. Objectively: the gum mucosa in the area of the lower incisors and canines is swollen, hyperemic, bleeding when touched. There is class I teeth mobility, periodontal pockets are 3 mm deep. Orthopantomogram shows bone tissue destruction of the alveolar septums up to one third of their height. Congestion of the lower jaw front teeth can be observed. Oral Hygiene Index equals 4,2. What specialist must be consulted first?
*a. Orthodontist
b. Endocrinologist
c. Gastroenterologist
d. Hematologist
e. Neurologist

1573. A 45-year-old patient complains of being unable to chew food due to loss of the lateral teeth. The rest of his teeth have mobility of the 1-2 type. What construction is the most advisable for dental prosthetics?
a. Removable laminar denture
*b. Removable denture splint
c. Metal-based prosthesis
d. Fixed dental bridge
e. Clasp (bugel) dental prosthesis

1574. A 65-year-old male patient complains of a long-lasting pain in a mandibular tooth on the right. The pain increases on biting. The patient has a history of this tooth treatment for caries. Objectively: the cavity on the masticatory surface of the 36 tooth is filled, percussion causes pain responce. Along the mucogingival junction in the projection of the 36 tooth roots there is a fistula with purulent discharge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Radicular cyst of the mandible
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

1575. During examination of an 8-year-old child there were spots detected on the vestibular surface of the 11th, 12th, 21st and 22nd teeth. The spots are pearly-white, glossy, painless when probed, and gradually merge with non-changed enamel. Ultraviolet irradiation revealed the spots to fluoresce blue. The child has been living up to the age of 3 in the region, where fluorine content of drinking water was 2 mg/l.What kind of non-carious lesion is it?
*a. Fluorosis, speckled form
b. Fluorosis, erosive form
c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Local hypoplasia
e. Fluorosis, lined form

1576. A woman with complaints of restricted mouth opening has made an appointment with a prosthodontic clinic. What muscles are responsible for the downwards mowement of the lower jaw?
a. Orbicular muscle of mouth, mylohyoid muscle
b. Geniohyoidmuscle, medial pterygoid muscle
c. Masticatorymuscle, medial pterygoid muscle
d. Temporal muscle, lateral pterygoid muscle, digastric muscle
*e. Mylohyoid muscle, digastric muscle, geniohyoid muscle

1577. A 45-year-old patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis; there is class II mobility of the 13th, 12th, 21st, 22nd, 23rd teeth. The patient has made an appointment with dental clinic to make a prostesis after the extraction of the 11th tooth. What prosthodontic construction is the most advisable for combined therapy of generalized periodontitis in this case?
*a. Combination of photopolymer material with fiberglass framework
b. Adhesive dental bridge
c. Wire splint
d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal whole piece dental bridge
e. Immediate prosthesis

1578. A 45-year-old patient undergoes teeth preparation. 15 minutes after anesthetization with 4% solution of Ubistesin forte the patient developed hyperemia of skin, increased heart rate, headache, syncope. Previously the patient had not exhibited such reaction to this anesthetic. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
c. Myocardial infarction
*d. Arterial pressure rise
e. Syncope

1579. An accident victim with an injury of face and the temporal region was diagnosed with a fracture of the zygomatic arch. Which processes of the skull bones are damaged?
a. Zygomatic process of the maxilla and the zygomatic process of the temporal bone
b. Zygomatic process of the maxilla and the zygomatic process of the frontal bone
c. Zygomatic process of the frontal bone and the zygomatic process of the temporal bone
d. Temporal process of the zygomatic bone and the zygomatic process of the frontal bone
*e. Temporal process of the zygomatic bone and the zygomatic process of the temporal bone

1580. A 20-year-old male patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 24 tooth, which arose suddenly and persists for about 15 minutes. Objectively: the distal surface of the 24 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity with overhanging walls. The cavity is filled with light softened dentin and communicateswith the tooth cavity. The cold stimulus causes acute, slowly abating pain. Percussion causes no pain response. Select the best method of treatment:
a. Devital amputation
b. Devital extirpation
c. Vital amputation
d. Biological method
*e. Vital extirpation

1581. A 25-year-old patient complains of pain when biting on the 15 tooth. The pain arose two days ago, has a constant aching nature and increased significantly over the last day. Objectively: the crown of the 15 tooth is gray, the medial contact surface exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Percussion causes acute pain, the gingival mucosa in the projection of the 25 tooth root apex is hyperemic. The regional lymph node is tender. Radiograph shows an ill-defined zone of periapical bone destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis, intoxication stage

1582. A 27-year-old patient has been referred by a prosthodontist for endodontic treatment of the 45th tooth. Objectively: the 45th tooth crown is destroyed; the lateral surface of the tongue and the buccal mucosa have patches of greyish macerated epithelium slightly rising above the mucosa surface at the points of direct contact with the 45th tooth. The uvula and palatal bars are stagnant-red in colour; hard palate has papulae surrounded with red margin and covered in greyish epithelium. The submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless.What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Lupus erythematosus, patch stage
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
*c. Secondary syphilis
d. Soft leukoplakia (leucoplakia mollis)
e. Lichen ruber planus

1583. A 20-year-old male patient with insulindependent diabetes mellitus has been given anesthesia with Ultracain DS-forte for surgical oral sanitation. What complications may develop in this case?
a. Clonus
b. Increased blood pressure
*c. Abnormal levels of blood glucose
d. Atopic dermatitis
e. Toxic shock

1584. A 43-year-old patient complains of mobility and significant neck exposure of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale and cyanotic, non-bleeding. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit the I-II grade mobility. The overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth is present. The necks of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed by a half of the root length, the necks of the 43, 33 teeth are exposed by a fourth.What kind of dental prosthesis should be applied in this case?
a. Cap splint
b. Kurlyandsky splint bar
*c. Cast removable splint
d. Portion crown
e. Half-ring splint

1585. A 7-year-old child has to undergo plastic surgery of the upper lip frenulum. What operation should be performed to lengthen the frenulum of the upper lip?
a. Grafting with a pedicle flap
b. Szymanowsky grafting with local flaps
c. Thiersch grafting with local flaps
d. Relaxing incisions of the mucosa
*e. Dieffenbach grafting

1586. A 12-year-old boy is in the dental office to complete treatment of the 36th tooth chronic periodontitis exacerbation. There are no complaints. Objectively: occlusive dressing of the 36th tooth is intact; tooth percussion is painless; there are no pathologies of the mucosa surrounding the 36th; mucosa palpation is painless. What material is the most advisable for root canal filling in this case?
a. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
b. Calcium-containing paste
c. Phosphate cement
*d. Sealer with gutta-percha post
e. Resorcinol-formalin paste

1587. A patient with complaints of toothache in the left upper jaw has made an appointment with a dental clinic. He was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 24th tooth. What kind of anaesthesia is necessary for painless extraction of the 24th tooth?
a. Tuberal and palatinal anaesthesia
b. Tuberal and incisor anaesthesia
c. Surface and tuberal anaesthesia
*d. Infraorbital and palatinal anaesthesia
e. Infraorbital and incisor anaesthesia

1588. A 60-year-old patient needs a partial removable denture for the upper jaw. The central occlusion has been determined. What is the next stage of prosthetics?
*a. Checking the wax denture construction
b. Fabrication of plaster models
c. Taking impressions
d. Relining the denture
e. Try-in of the denture

1589. A 12-year-old boy, due to trauma of the 44th and 45th teeth area, suffers from the following: pathologic displacement of the mandibular alveolar process; rupture of the alveolar process mucosa. What additional examination is necessary to specify the diagnosis?
*a. X-ray radiography of mandibula in frontal and lateral projections
b. X-ray radiography of mandibula in frontal and Parma projection
c. -
d. Tomography of mandibula
e. X-ray radiography of cranium in axillary projection

1590. A 5-year-old shild has sustained a trauma. Objectively: the crowns of the 51st and 61st teeth are shorter then their adjacent ones. The mucosa surrounding the 51st and 61st teeth is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray imaging shows the periodontal fissure to be absent in the apical area of the 51st and 61st roots, 51st and 61st roots apexes are submerged in the spongy bone of the body of the lower jaw. Choose the optimal treatment.
*a. Extraction of the 51st and 61st teeth
b. Regular medical check-up
c. Resection of the 51st and 61st teeth and their splinting
d. Anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Splinting of teeth

1591. A 10-year-old child complains of pain and swelling in the left submandibular region; eating causes pain. Objectively: the mouth can be fully opened, the mucosa of the torus mandibularis is hyperemic, excretory duct produces pus. X-ray imaging reveals an oval shade in the left submandibular area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mandibular osteoma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
c. Chronic sialadenitis
*d. Calculous sialadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
e. Foreign body

1592. A patient complains of the alveolar process deformation of the left upper jaw. Objectively: the crown of the 25th tooth is destroyed with cariosity. X-ray image of the paranasal sinuses shows the left one to have veil-like shading with clear dome-shaped margin. X-ray image of the crown of the 25th tooth shows absence of the periodontal fissure at the the palatal root apex. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Maxillary sinus mucosal cyst
b. Maxillary cancer
c. Chronic rhinogenous maxillary sinusitis
d. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
*e. Radicular cyst that invaded in the maxillary sinus

1593. A 26 year-old female patient suffers from bleeding gums. For 3 years she has been suffering from pancreatic diabetes. Objectively: gingival papillas of all her teeth are hyperemic, swollen and overlap with the teeth crowns by 1/3 of the crowns height. What method of examination must be conducted for differentiated diagnostics?
*a. X-ray radiography
b. Capillary fragility test
c. Stomatoscopy
d. Reoparodontography (Impedance phlebography of periodontium)
e. Schiller-Pysarev iodine test

1594. Parents of a 3-year-old child took the child to a pedodontist for oral sanitation. The child has cerebral palsy. Objectively: there is multiple dental caries, gingival mucosa is hyperemic, oral hygiene is inadequate. What method of dental health care may be appropriate in this case?
a. Without anesthesia
b. Giving sedatives
c. Under local anesthesia injection
d. Under local application anesthesia
*e. Under general anesthesia

1595. A prosthodontist plans to make a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for the 23 tooth. In order to correct its abnormal position in the dental arch the prosthododntist is going to use a cast post and core. What is the maximum permissible value (in degrees) of the core deviation from the tooth axis?
a. 20-25
*b. 15
c. 6-8
d. 10
e. 4

1596. What impression material is used to obtain impressions for making orthodontic appliances?
*a. Ypeen
b. Repin
c. Orthocor
d. Sielast
e. Stomaflex

1597. A 45-year-old woman consults a dentist for prosthetics. Objectively: the 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37 teeth are missing. There is dentoalveolar vertical displacement of the 17, 16, 26, 27 teeth; the alveolar process is hypertrophied, the cervical margins are not exposed. When the teeth are closed, the distance between the occlusal surfaces of the teeth and alveolar process is approximately 6 mm. Specify the most efficient method of treatment of secondary deformation in this patient:
a. Surgical treatment
b. Hardware-associated surgical treatment
c. Disocclusion
*d. Pulp removal and teeth grinding
e. Grinding

1598. A 35-year-old patient has made an appointment with a doctor to have oral cavity sanation. Objectively: the vestibular surface of the 22 tooth has a hard tissue defect localized in the mantle dentin; the dentin is hard, dark-coloured, the floor of the cavity is coarse. Cold stimulus and probing are painless. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Enamel erosion
*c. Chronic median caries
d. Dental fluorosis, destructive form
e. Hard tissue necrosis

1599. A 25-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about acute pain in the mandible on the right that occurs during eating. Objectively: the approximate distal surface of the 45 tooth exhibits a carious cavity filled with light softened dentin. Probing causes a minor pain response across the entire floor. Percussion causes no pain. Cold water causes transient pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute median caries

1600. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that aggravates during eating, body temperature rise up to 37, 6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
b. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area
c. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
d. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
e. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area

1601. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about fever up to 37, 6°C, soft tissue swelling, pain in the 47 tooth on the lower jaw on the left, the pain aggravates when the tooth is touched by its antagonist. Objectively: mucogingival fold of the alveolar process is hyperemic and flat on the vestibular side of the decayed 47 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Periodontal abscess

1602. A 12-year-old boy complains of a cavity in the tooth on the lower left jaw. Objectively: 1/3 of the 36 tooth is destroyed, the carious cavity opens into the dental cavity; reaction to cold stimulus is positive; probing and percussion are painless. X-ray imaging shows the periodontal fissure of the 36th tooth roots to be widened.What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic simple pulpitis
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

1603. A 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 85 tooth. What is the optimal material for the root canal filling?
*a. Zinc-eugenol cement
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Resorcinol-formalin paste
d. Calcium-containing paste
e. Zinc-phosphate cement

1604. A patient complaining of constant dull pain in the 38 tooth has made an appointment with a dentist. Mouth opening is restricted to 1 cm. The patient is prescribed extraction of the 38 tooth.What kind of anesthesia should be administered?
a. Mandibular
b. Extraoral administration of mandibular anaesthesia
c. Tuberal
*d. Веrcher-Dubov anaesthesia
e. Torusal

1605. A 67-year-old patient consulted an orthodontist about missing of the 34, 35, 36, 37, 45, 46 teeth. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows the alveolar bone resorption in the range of 1/3 of the interdental septa height. What construction should be offered to the patient?
a. Cap splint
b. Van Thiel splint
c. Bridges on the posterior teeth
d. Removable partial lamellar denture
*e. Clasp prosthesis with splinting elements

1606. A 22-year-old student complains of gingival hemorrhage during tooth brushing. Objectively: hyperemia and edema of marginal gingiva of the front teeth on both jaws, periodontal pockets are absent. X-ray reveals no pathological changes.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis
c. Localized periodontitis
d. Ulcerative gingivitis
*e. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis

1607. A 32-year-old male patient complains of dryness and burning pain in the back of the tongue. The symptoms have been lasting for 1 week. The pain increases when spicy food is taken. A day prior to that the patient had suffered from pneumonia and had been taking antibiotics. Objectively: the skin and mucosa of oral cavity are pale. The tongue mucosa is hyperemic and swollen; there is crumbling grey-and-white coating in the folds of the back of the tongue; the lateral surfaces of the tongue are desquamated. The saliva is thick and drags in threads after a spatula. Choose the most effective drug complex for topical treatment:
*a. Methylene blue + Pimafucin (Natamycin)
b. Decaminum (Dequalinium chloride) + Hydrocortisone
c. Furacilinum (Nitrofural) + Solcoseryl
d. Furacilinum (Nitrofural) + Methylene blue
e. Hydrocortisone ointment + Solcoseryl

1608. A 46-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 36 tooth. Its crown is decayed. The patient presented with edema of soft tissues adjacent to the mandible. Body temperature rose up to 39, 0°C, the patient has chill. Examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced edema of the left mandibular alveolar process on the vestibular and oral side (acute periostitis); the 35, 36, 37 teeth are mobile, subgingival pockets contain purulent exudate; their percussion causes acute pain. Positive Vincent’s symptom is present. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis from the 36 tooth
b. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
*d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible from the 36 tooth

1609. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic porcelain-fused-to-metal denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
a. Stomalgin
b. Stens
c. Repin
*d. Sielast
e. Orthocor

1610. A20-year-old patient addressed a dentist for treatment of the destroyed teeth. Examination revealed round painless papulae with hyperemic infiltrated crown 7 mm in diameter on the palatine arches, soft palate, tonsils, tongue. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, dense, elastic, painless and mobile. What tactics should a doctor choose?
*a. Refer for a consultation to a venereologist
b. Refer for a consultation to an ENT doctor
c. Perform cytological analysis
d. Perform oral cavity sanation
e. Perform bacteriological analysis

1611. A week ago an 18-year-old girl complained of pain in the 22 tooth which was treated and filled several years ago. Over the past two days the pain increased. Objectively: the 22 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, mucous membrane is hyperaemic and edematic. Spot-film roentgenograph of the 22 tooth shows an ill-defined periapical bone rarefaction 0,4x0,5 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Suppuration of the radicular cyst
b. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 22 tooth
c. Acute maxillary periostitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 22 tooth
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

1612. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient received a cheek abrasion that healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38, 6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region
b. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
*c. Acute lymphadenitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Epidemic parotitis

1613. A 3-year-old girl complains of pain and swelling in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5- 37,9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a swelling in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II grade of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
b. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
*d. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis
e. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis

1614. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of a false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect up to 1 cm large.What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Oxman’s bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilow’s pivot point
c. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxman’s pivot point
e. Clasp denture

1615. A 32-year-old patient has made an appointment with a dental surgeon to have oral cavity sanation performed prior to denture installation. During examination the doctor stated the following: the crown of the 25 tooth is destroyed. The tooth root is stable, and its percussion is painless. Mucosa of the alveolar process is unchanged. X-ray reveals slight widening of the periodontal fissure. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Chronic periodontitis of the 25th tooth
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 25th tooth
c. Cystogranuloma
*d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 25th tooth
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 25th tooth

1616. A 45-year-old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
*a. Minor saddle denture with clasp fixation
b. Common partial removable denture
c. Protective palatal bars
d. Common dental bridge
e. Clasp denture with obturating part

1617. A 25-year-old patient presents with fluorosis of vestibular surfaces of the upper incisors. Which of the following constructions will provide the maximum aesthetic result?
a. Plastic crown
b. Combined Kurylenko crown
c. Metal-plastic crown
*d. Veneers
e. Ceramic crown

1618. A 6-year-old child complains of pain in the mandibular tooth on the left during eating. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 36 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within the mantle dentin. The cavity is full of light softened dentin which can be easily removed with an excavator. Probing of the cavity walls causes pain response. The teeth are sensitive to thermal stimuli, the pain is of short-term nature. There is no response to percussion. Select the optimal filling material:
a. Zinc phosphate cement
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Polycarboxylate cement
*d. Silver amalgam
e. Silicate cement

1619. A 48-year-old patient complains of subfebrile temperature and a growing ulcer on the gingival mucosa around the molars; teeth mobility in the affected area, cough. Objectively: gingival mucosa in the region of the lower left molars has two superficial extremely painful ulcers with undermined edges. The ulcers floor is yellowish, granular, covered with yellowish and isolated pink granulations. The ulcers are surrounded by the tubercles. Dental cervices are exposed, there is a pathological tooth mobility. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and make dense matted together groups. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Syphilis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Decubital ulcer
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Acute aphthous stomatitis

1620. A 78-year-old patient is completely edentulous. He has been wearing dentures for 19 years. The patient complains of poor fixation of the upper denture. Objectively: the lower third of the face is shortened, the alveolar processes of both jaws aremarkedly atrophied, the palate is flat. Mucous membrane in the denture-supporting area is atrophied. How often should the dentures be remodelled or restored?
a. Every 7 years
b. Every 10-12 years
c. Every 6 months
d. Once a year
*e. Every 3-4 years

1621. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory region, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesn’t excrete saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cyst of the gland
b. Mixed tumour
*c. Adenocarcinoma
d. Glandular tuberculosis
e. Chronic lymphadenitis

1622. When a prosthodontist was preparing the patient’s tooth, the patient had epileptic seizure that was subsequently terminated. Whatmistake had beenmade by the doctor?
a. Did not decline the appointment
*b. No inquire into the patient anamnesis
c. No anesthesia
d. No inquire into the antecedent anamnesis
e. Crude preparation

1623. A 13-year-old child complains of having a cavity in the front maxillary teeth. Contact medial surfaces of the 11 and 21 teeth exhibit cavities found within the mantle dentin and filled with dense pigmented dentin. Probing of the cavity floor causes no pain response, neither does dental percussion. Select the best filling material for the permanent seals:
a. Zinc phosphate cement
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. Silicate cement
d. Silicophosphate cement
*e. Resin composite

1624. A 30-year-old patient complains of toothache caused by hot and cold stimuli. The pain irradiates to the ear and temple. Previously there was spontaneous nocturnal toothache. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity communicating at one point with the tooth cavity. Probing at the communication point, as well as cold stimulus, causes acute pain. The pain persists for a long time. Electric pulp test result is 55 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

1625. An 11-year-old boy complains of a carious cavity in the mandibular tooth on the right. Objectively: the 46 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within the mantle dentin. The dentin is dense, pigmented; there is pain response to the cold stimulus; probing and percussion cause no pain response. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic superficial caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Acute deep caries
*e. Chronic median caries

1626. During preventive examination an 11- year-old girl presents with slight hyperemy, cyanosis, swollen gums, gingival papilla are loose, not adjacent to teeth cervices. Fedorov-Volodkina dental hygiene index is 4 points. Schiller’s test is positive. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. -
d. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

1627. A 22-year-old medical student complains of the changed colour of his central upper incisor on the right. Two years ago the tooth became gray. Objectively: the 2 tooth is filled, changed in colour, stable, percussion is painless. The patient has closed bite. What is the absolute contraindication to making porcelain crowns for this patient?
a. Defects of pulpless teeth that cannot be restored with inlays
*b. Closed bite
c. Enamel hypoplasia with a change of tooth shape and colour
d. Defects of the anterior teeth that cannot be restored with fillings
e. Abnormal tooth colour

1628. A 25-year-old patient complains of pain caused by eating sweet, hot and cold food; pain ceases, when stimulation stops.Objectively: the adjoining surface of the 36th tooth has a deep carious cavity localised in the circumpulpar dentin. The dentin is softened. Probing of the carious cavity floor is painful. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*e. Acute deep caries

1629. A 27-year-old patient complains of the long-term pain in the 22 tooth caused by cold and hot food, as well as of spontaneous pain lasting for 30 minutes and occurring 3- 4 times per day, aggravating at night. Pain arose 3 days ago after preparation of the tooth for the acrylic crown. Objectively: the 22 tooth is intact, the thermal test causes acute long-lasting pain, percussion is painless. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Devital pulp extirpation
b. Vital pulp amputation
c. Application of fluorine lacquer
d. Biological treatment of pulpitis
*e. Vital pulp extirpation

1630. An 11-year-old boy complains of a shortterm pain from the cold in the left mandibular tooth. Objectively: the medial surface of the 36 tooth exhibits a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin. The cavity is filled with light, softened dentin and does not communicate with the cavity of the tooth. Probing the of the 36 tooth floor causes pain response, the tooth is not sensitive to percussion, the response to the cold stimulus does not remain long after its removal.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute focal pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute median caries
*d. Acute deep caries
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

1631. A 46-year-old patient after the recovery froma case of influenza has suddenly started suffering from pain in the 36 tooth, the crown of which had been destroyed. The soft tissues surrounding the lower jaw are swollen. There are high fever up to 39°C and chills. Objectively: there is prominent swelling of the left lower jaw alveolar mucosa (both oral and vestibular surfaces). The 34, 35 and 37 intact teeth are mobile. Percussion is painful. The gingival pockets produce purulent exudate. Vincent’s symptom is observed.What diagnosis can be suspected?
a. Periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 36th tooth
d. Acute suppurative mandibular periostitis starting from the 36th tooth
*e. Acute odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 36th tooth

1632. A doctor treating an AIDS-positive patient has accidentally pierced his own skin of the palm with a root needle.What should be the first course of actions?
a. Process the breach with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
*b. Squeeze out blood, process the breach with 70% alcohol solution
c. Apply tourniquet to the shoulder
d. Squeeze out blood, process the breach with strong solution of potassium permanganate
e. Process the breach with 5% iodine solution

1633. A 57-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility, inability to eat. Objectively: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 47 teeth exhibit II grade mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
*b. Removable cast splint
c. Kurlyandsky splint bar
d. Removable partial denture
e. Removable Bynin splint

1634. A 7-year-old boy complains of increased body temperature up to 38°C, headache, sore throat. Objectively: there are erosions on the slightly hyperemic mucosa of the soft palate, anterior pillars of the fauces, tonsils. The submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, painless. Name the causative agent of this disease:
a. Epstein-Barr virus
b. Herpes simplex virus
*c. Coxsackie virus
d. Klebs-Loeffler bacillus
e. Bordet-Gengou bacillus

1635. A patient complains of dull ache in the 16 tooth, which occurs during eating cold food. Anamnesis: the tooth had been filled due to deep caries, the filling was lost 1 year ago. Objectively: a deep carious cavity that does not penetrate the tooth cavity is present; percussion is painless, probing is painful along the whole floor of the carious cavity. Electric pulp test - 50 microamperes. Thermodiagnosis is painful. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

1636. A patient complains of acute short-term toothache caused by thermal and chemical irritants. The tooth has not been treated before, the pain arose about a month ago. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 36 tooth there is a deep carious cavity within circumpulpal dentin with overhanging chalky enamel. Probing of the cavity floor causes slight pain. There is also short-term pain from the cold stimulus. The result of electric pulp test is 8 microamperes.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulp hyperemia
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

1637. A 65-year-old patient needs complete removable dentures for both jaws. At the stage of ”testing the denture construction” the doctor checks the pronunciation of sounds ”S” and ”Z”. Which method of normalization of speech functions should be applied in this case?
a. Spectrographic
b. Acoustic
c. Graphic
d. Myogymnastics
*e. Phonetic tests

1638. A 7,5-year-old boy fell down on his face and damaged his front maxillary teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 11 and 12 teeth are destroyed by 1/4. The tooth cavity is closed. Probing causes pain along the break-off line, percussion of the 11 and 12 teeth causes no pain response. Mucosa around the 11 and 12 teeth is slightly hyperemic. Radiograph of the 11 and 12 teeth shows intactness of the dental tissues and alveolar process.What tactics of a dentist would be optimal in the first hours after the injury?
*a. Pulp monitoring
b. Photopolymer filling
c. Composite filling
d. Parapulpar pin reconstruction
e. Fabrication of an artificial crown

1639. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotid-masticatory area and progressing facial asymmetry first noticed one month ago. The diagnosis is the cancer of parotid gland - T2N2. What method of treatment is optimal in the given case?
a. Surgical extraction of neoplasm
b. Chemotherapy
c. Lymph nodes removal
*d. Combined method
e. Radiation therapy

1640. A 20-year-old male patient complains of acute pain during eating, bad breath, general weakness. Objectively: interdental papillae and marginal gingiva are covered with dirty gray film, any touch is painful. The body temperature is of 37, 5°C. Blood count: RBC- 4, 8 × 1012/l, Hb- 150 g/l, colour index - 0,9, WBC- 10, 5 × 109/l, JG- 2%, BASO- 1%, EOS- 5%, segmented neut. - 8%, stabs - 47%, LYM- 35%, PLT- 250 × 109/l. ESR- 20 mm/hour.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Agranulocytosis
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Chronic leukemia
*d. Vincent’s gingivitis
e. Acute leukemia

1641. A 68-year-old patient, having suffered from stroke, suffers from periodical bouts of retching, which lead to unilateral dislocation of the temporormandibular joint. Setting the joint was possible only with anesthesia. Objectively the following teeth are absent: from the 21 to the 28, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36, 37, 44, 46, 47.What kind of denture construction will be optimal for the duration of treatment?
a. Schroder appliance with sliding joint
b. Yadrova appliance
c. Khodorovych-Burgonska appliance with restrictor
*d. Removable laminar denture with mouth opening restrictor
e. Petrosov appliance with restrictor

1642. A 9-year-old child complains of pain in the left mandibular molar that occurs during eating. The masticatory surface of the 75 tooth exhibits a carious cavitiy filled with softened dentin and localized within parapulpar dentin. The cavity communicates with the tooth cavity. Probing at the site of communication causes acute pain and moderate bleeding. Percussion of the tooth causes no pain response. Radiography revaled no periodontal alterations in the 75 tooth. Select the method of treatment:
a. Devital extirpation
b. Vital amputation
c. Biological method
*d. Devital amputation
e. Vital extirpation

1643. A 40-year-old patient complains of fever up to 38°C, and a roundish infiltration on the upper lip. Objectively: the upper lip on the left exhibits a round infiltrate, the overlying skin is deep crimson. The infiltrate adheres to the surrounding tissues and has a necrotic core in the center. The upper lip is hyperemic, edematous. What diagnosis can be made?
*a. Upper lip furuncle
b. Retention cyst
c. Upper lip carbuncle
d. Acute lymphadenitis
e. Acute abscess of the upper lip

1644. A 25-year-old patient received a trauma to the chin region. On the basis of X-ray he was diagnosed with bilateral mental fracture of mandible. Specify the direction of displacement of the minor fragment:
a. Upward and forward
b. Downward and forward
c. There is no displacement
*d. Downward and backward
e. Upward and backward

1645. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred to orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are stable. What is the most aesthetic splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Ring adhesion splint
b. Cap splint
c. Brace
*d. Mamlok splint
e. Soldered combined crowns

1646. A 42-year-old patient has been hospitalized with Le Fort II fracture ofmaxilla. Select an appliance for the treatment of this patient:
a. Kulagin
b. Penn-Brown
c. Yadrova
*d. Zbarzh
e. Rudko

1647. A 25-year-old patient complains of brief pain attacks during eating sweet, hot or cold food. Objectively: on the contact surface of the 36 tooth there is a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin. The dentin is softened. Probing of the cavity is painful. Vertical and horizontal percussion is painless. Electric pulp test - 9 microamperes. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Chronic median caries
*b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic deep caries

1648. A 39-year-old patient suffers from microstomia. What impression tray should be used?
a. Custom plastic
b. Collapsible
c. Standard
d. Standard for edentulous jaw
*e. Demountable

1649. In a prostodontic clinic a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for a 53-year-old patient. Objectively: dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27. The teeth are firm, clinical crowns are tall with pronounced equator. X-ray shows no periapical changes in the periodontium of the abutment teeth. What clammer fixation is optimal for this patient?
a. Sagittal
b. Transversal
c. Point
*d. Planar
e. Diagonal

1650. An intradental splint for the 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43 teeth is being made for a 50- year-old patient. During its installation in the oral cavity hemorrhage occurred from the 41 tooth root canal. What caused the hemorrhage?
a. Pulp trauma
b. Damaged root bifurcation
c. Crown perforation
*d. Wall perforation of the root canal
e. Trauma of the gingival margin

1651. A 34-year-old male patient complains of acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is aggravating when affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache of the 37 tooth one year ago, but he did not consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 37 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 37 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis

1652. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Dentures with extended borders
b. Dentures with shortened borders
c. Implant-supported dentures
*d. Dentures with elastic lining
e. Dentures with metal bases

1653. A 56-year-old patient complains of frequent breakage of the basis of the partial laminar denture of the upper jaw. Objectively: only the 23 tooth is retained on the upper jaw. Cracks in the deture basis appear in the area of the 23 tooth. What should be done to reinforce the denture basis?
a. Make the basis out of Phtorax plastic
b. Make the basis out of Ethacryl-02 plastic
*c. Make a new denture with telescopic fixation on the 23rd tooth
d. Make the basis out of Prothacryl-Mplastic
e. Make the basis out of Redont plastic

1654. A patronage nurse visited a newborn baby. Examination revealed the shortened lower part of the face, the backward-sloping chin, missing teeth, the retroposed lower jaw. What is the number of dental follicles in each jaw of a newborn baby?
a. 16
b. 12
c. 10
*d. 18
e. 14

1655. A 47-year-old patient complains of a burning sensation and pain in the mouth. Objectively: on the mucous membrane of cheeks along the line of teeth contact and in the corners of mouth there are multiple polygonal bright red erosions 1,0-1,5 cm in diameter located on the hyperkeratinized plaque and opaque whitish mucosa. Cytological analysis revealed keratinizing epithelial cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Leukoplakia, erosive form
b. Erythema multiforme
c. Lupus erythematosus, erosive form
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Lichen planus, erosive form

1656. A 27-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about pain in the 35 tooth. The pain is caused by cold stimuli and quickly abates after the stimulus is removed. Objectively: in the cervical region of the 35 tooth there is a dental tissue defect within the enamel. The defect has white crumbling edges. Electroexcitability of the pulp was 5 mkA.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Local enamel hypoplasia
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Enamel erosion
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Acute initial caries

1657. A 27-year-old female patient has her 26 tooth cavity accidentially breached along the mesial buccal line angle during treatment of acute deep caries of the 26. Choose the optimal method of treatment:
*a. Biological method
b. Non-vital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Non-vital extirpation

1658. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumor-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the vermilion border, it is dense and grayish-red in color. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
*b. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion border of lip
c. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the vermilion border of lip
d. Abrasive precancerous Manganotti’s cheilitis
e. Bowen’s disease

1659. A 45-year-old man complains of dryness and painfulness of the lower lip. On examination: the lower lip is swollen, dry, covered in small scales and fissures. In the Klein area (wet-dry line) there are dilated openings of salivatory glands observed as red dots producing clear substance. The lower lip mucosa is lumpy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cheilitis glandularis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Cheilitis exfoliativa
d. Exematous cheilitis
e. Actinic cheilitis

1660. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
a. Conical
*b. Threaded
c. Plate-form
d. Endodontic-endoosseous
e. Subperiosteal

1661. A 40-year-old man, a chemical industry worker, notes the development of soreness of the mouth, pain response to thermal and chemical stimuli. On examination: on the vestibular surface and cutting edge of the front teeth there are enamel defects with uneven scalloped margins, chalk-like in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel hypoplasia (erosive form)
b. Superficial caries
*c. Acidic necrosis of enamel
d. Fluorosis (erosive form)
e. Median caries

1662. A 57-year-old female patient complains of burning pain, dry mouth, sensation of a foreign body on the tongue back and lateral surfaces, which disappears in the process of eating. The first case of such symptoms was noted a year ago after psychological trauma. The patient suffers from pancreatic diabetes and sleep disturbance. Examination revealed the following: the tongue mucosa is without significant changes, moderately moistened. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Candidal glossitis
b. Hunter-Moeller’s glossitis
c. Glossitis with fissured tongue
*d. Glossodynia
e. Glossitis areata exfoliativa

1663. A patient presented to a dental clinic for complex dental care. Objectively: the 37 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. There is no response to stimuli. Radiography reveals widening and deformation of the periodontal ligament space in the apical region.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

1664. An 18-year-old patient complaining of large diastem has made an appointment with a prosthodontics specialist. Objectively: there is full lateral displacement of the central incisors due to absence of the 12 and 22 teeth. What instrument is the most advisable for moving the central incisors closer together?
a. Simple cotton ligature
b. Vasylenko appliance
*c. Korkhaus appliance
d. Kalvelis appliance
e. Begg appliance

1665. An injured patient complains of limited opening of the mouth, nose bleeding, skin numbness in the infraorbital and lower eyelid region. Objectively: there is face deformation due to the depression of soft tissues in the left cheekbone region, step deformity in the middle part of the inferior margin of the left orbit and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest.What is themost likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone without displacement of fragments
b. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
c. Fracture of the malar arch
*d. Zygomatic bone fracture with displacement of bone fragments
e. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla

1666. A 60-year-old patient addressed a dentist with complaints of a conic protrusion appearing on the skin of his chin on the left. Height of the protrusion is 1,5 cm, width - 0,8 cm. Palpation is painless; there are clear margins; the protrusion is gray-brown in color; on palpation of the soft tissues near the protrusion base a thickening can be detected.What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Melanoma
c. Bowen’s disease
d. Papilloma
*e. Cutaneous horn

1667. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
b. Straight elevator
c. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

1668. A patient complains of restricted mouth opening, pain during swallowing, fever up to 38, 5°C, weakness, indisposition. Objectively: the mouth opens up to 1 cm. After Berchet anesthesia examination of the oral cavity revealed edema, hyperemia, tenderness of the pterygomandibular fold. Lateral and posterior pharyngeal walls are intact. The 38 tooth is semi-impacted. Palpation of the internal surface of the mandibular angle is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute tonsillitis
b. Acute pericoronitis of the 38 tooth region
c. Phlegmon of the peripharyngeal space
*d. Phlegmon of the pterygomandibular space
e. Phlegmon of the infratemporal region

1669. A 37-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums, bad breath, loose teeth, difficulties with chewing food. Objectively: gums are bluish-red in colour; periodontal pockets are 6 mm deep and contain serous substance; class II teeth mobility; moderate deposits of subgingival and supragingival dental calculus;OralHygiene Index equals 3 points; there is traumatical occlusuion along all the length of the dental arches. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, acute
b. Histiocytosis X
c. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, acute
*d. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, chronic
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

1670. A 3-year-old child suffers from extreme gingivitis with slight teeth mobility; the teeth are intact. The skin is dry, the hair is brittle, the skin of the palms and soles of the feet is rough and covered in small cracks. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
b. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
c. Letterer-Siwe disease
d. Eosinophilic granuloma (Taratynov’s disease)
e. Niemann-Pick disease

1671. A 49-year-old patient has a tooth removed from the left upper jaw under plexus anesthesia with articaine-forte (Articaine + Epinephrine). After the operation the tooth socket did not fill with blood clot. How to prevent alveolitis in this case?
a. Fill the socket with antibiotic dusting powder
*b. Loosely fill the socket with iodoform tampon
c. Lavage the socket with microcide solution
d. Fill the socket with hemostatic sponge
e. Lavage the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution

1672. A 24-year-old woman consulted a dentist about pain in the 26 tooth. After a physical examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth. During the tooth extraction the coronal part of the tooth was accidentally broken. Further manipulations with bayonet forceps failed to extract the tooth roots. What actions are to be taken for the successful root extraction?
a. To complete the tooth extraction during the next visit
b. To use angular elevator
c. To send the patient to the hospital
d. To use Lecluse elevator
*e. To disjoin the roots by using a drill and fissure burr

1673. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child revealed a habit of lower lip biting. What malocclusion may develop if the child keeps this habit?
a. Cross-bite
*b. Anterior bite
c. Open bite
d. Prognathic bite
e. Deep overbite

1674. A 7-year-old child has protruding chin, the lower lip overlaps the upper one. There are diastemas and tremas between the lower incisors, the lower incisors overlap the upper incisors by 2/3 of the crown height. First permanent molars demonstrate Angle’s class III relation. Sagittal gap is 3 mm. The correct doctor’s tactics will be to:
a. Use Angle’s apparatus
b. Recommend a complex of myogymnastic exercises
*c. Use Bruckl’s appliance
d. Use Bynin appliance
e. Use Schwartz appliance

1675. A 5-year-old child was found to have missing upper molars. Lower incisors are in contact with the mucous membrane of palate. Specify the doctor’s tactics:
*a. Fabricate a removable laminar denture
b. Examine the child once a year until the eruption of permanent teeth
c. Medical intervention is not needed
d. Fabricate an orthodontic appliance for the treatment of closed bite
e. Examine the child every six months until the eruption of permanent teeth

1676. A 14-year-old girl complains of indistinct pronunciation that showed up at the age of 14 after the acute respiratory viral disease. Examination revealed normal face and normal teeth alignment, occlusal disharmony was not found. Palpation did not reveal cleft palate. Uvula does not move during pronunciation of sounds, its palpation does not cause gag reflex. What is the cause of indistinct pronunciation of sounds?
a. Deformation of the bite
*b. Paresis of the soft palate and uvula muscles
c. Palatal slit
d. Adenoid vegetations
e. Hypertrophy of lingual tonsil

1677. A 42-year-old woman has made an appointment with a prosthodontic office to make a denture. Objectively the dental formula is as follows: 18 . . . . 13 12 11 21 22 23 . . . . 28 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . The patient has deep occlusion; clinical crowns are low; equator is not pronounced. The patient suffers from epileptic seizures. What kind of denture should be prescribed for this patient?
a. Bugel dental prosthesis
*b. Partial removable laminar metal-based denture
c. Partial removable laminar plastic denture with clasp-retainers
d. Dental bridge
e. Partial removable laminar denture with supporting-retaining clasps

1678. A 15-year-old girl complaining of moderate swelling of the left paroticmasticatory area is being examined by a dental surgeon. Palpation revealed the left parotid gland to be bulgy, dense, and painless. Turbid saliva is being secreted from the duct. The duct orifice is dilated, the surrounding mucosa is cyanotic, pastose, with teeth imprints.What disease is it?
*a. Chronic parenchymatous sialoadenitis
b. Sialolithiasis
c. Cyst
d. Mixed tumor
e. Chronic interstitial sialoadenitis

1679. A 39-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the history that the indicated tooth had been treated before for caries. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is edematic and hyperemic. Percussion of the tooth is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to remove the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anesthesia should be administered?
a. Application anaesthesia
b. Intraosseous anaesthesia
c. Infiltration anaesthesia
d. Intraligamentous anaesthesia
*e. Field block anaesthesia

1680. At a prosthetics dentistry clinic a 35- year-old patient received a porcelain-fusedto- metal crown for the 21 tooth. What is the minimum warranty period for porcelainfused- to-metal crowns under the current legislation?
a. 6 months
b. 3 months
c. 24 months
d. 36 months
*e. 12 months

1681. During the preparation of a tooth a patient had an epileptic seizure. The seizure was arrested.What mistake did the orthopaedist make?
a. Did not apply one of the types of local anesthesia
b. Skipped psychological preparation of the patient
c. Did not apply general anaesthesia
*d. Did not collect complete history data
e. Violated the rules of preparation

1682. During the surgical removal of a retention cyst of the lower lip a 14-year-old boy complained of sudden weakness, dizziness, nausea. Objectively: the skin is covered with cold sweat. Respiration is frequent, pulse is weak, BP is low (90/60 mm Hg), the hands are cold.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
c. Toxic shock
d. Traumatic shock
*e. Syncope

1683. A 56-year-old patient addressed a dental surgeon for extraction of the 27 tooth.What anesthesia should be applied?
a. Torusal
*b. Tuberal, palatal
c. Infiltration, incisive
d. Palatal, infraorbital
e. Mandibular

1684. A 28-year-old patient has been suffering from gum discomfort, gingival hemorrhages and pain, especially during eating, for a week. Objectively: the gums are swollen and markedly hyperemic, especially in the area of the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth, soft plaque and tartar are present, gingival sulcus is up to 2 mm deep. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Initial stage of chronic generalized periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of initial generalized periodontitis
c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Acute deep gingivitis

1685. An 18-year-old patient complains of chalky spot in the 23 tooth, which is slightly painful when cold stimulus is applied. Objectively: the vestibular surface near dental cervix of the 23 tooth has a white spot 2-3 mm in size. Probing is painless and reveals coarseness of the surface. Thermal stimulus causes slight pain.What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Fluorosis
*e. Acute initial caries

1686. A 12-year-old child presents with body temperature of 38°C, chills, nausea, vomiting, delirium, weakness. In the middle third of the face there is butterfly-shaped rash. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, slightly painful. Blood count: WBC- 12 × 109/l, lymphocytes - 8, 0 × 109/l, ESR- 26 mm/hour. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cutaneous actinomycosis
b. Facial vein phlebitis
*c. Erysipelas
d. Streptoderma. Submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute nonodontogenic sinusitis

1687. Objective examination of a 65-yearold patient with the completely edentulous mandible revealed a marked uniform atrophy of the alveolar bone; bony prominences on the lingual surface in the region where premolars had previously been. Mucosa was unevenly pliable; alveolar crest was mobile in the frontal region. The clinical condition of the mandible should be taken into consideration at the following stage of denture fabrication:
a. Measuring the centric relation of jaws
*b. Taking a differentiated impression
c. Taking a positive pressure impression
d. Taking an anatomical impression
e. Taking a decompression impression

1688. A 62-year-old patient diagnosed with TMJ arthritis presented to a clinic. The patient underwent radiography. Specify the radiological presentations of TMJ arthritis:
a. Compaction of the articular head cortex
*b. Changed shape of the bone elements of the joint
c. Joint space widening
d. Joint space narrowing
e. No joint space

1689. A 45-year-old patient has a bilateral mental mandibular fracture with a typical displacement of fragments. What actions should be taken to eliminate asphyxia?
a. Tracheostomy
*b. Pull out and pierce the tongue
c. Tracheal intubation through the nose
d. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
e. Tracheal intubation through the mouth

1690. A 53-year-old patient complains of absent 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. On examination it is decided to make a porcelainfused- to-metal bridge with the 13 and 23 as abutment teeth. During preparation ledges are created in abutment teeth. Ledge width can vary within the following range:
a. 0,1-0,2 mm
*b. 1,5-2,0 mm
c. 2,0-2,5 mm
d. 0,5-0,8 mm
e. 2,5-3,0 mm

1691. A 16-year-old girl complains of cosmetic defect of the front teeth - there are dark spots and hard tissue defects. The spots were detected in the process of teething, the defects developed later. The following diagnosis was made: erosive form of fluorosis of the 16, 11, 12, 22, 26, 31, 32, 36, 41, 42, 46 teeth. Choose the method of treatment:
*a. Restoration treatment
b. Prosthetics
c. Regular medical check-ups
d. Surgical treatment
e. Remineralization treatment

1692. Parents of a 6-year-old boy complain of his high body temperature, decrease of his general well-being, painful swelling of the right cheek. Objectively: the skin is pale, the face is asymmetric due to swelling of the soft tissues of the right cheek. The maxillary alveolar process is bilaterally thickened in the area of the 55, 54 and 53 teeth, painful on palpation, these teeth are partially destroyed by caries, mobile (II-III degree), their dentogingival pockets produce pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic albuminous maxillar periostitis from the 53, 54, 55
b. Odontogenic buccal phlegmon from the 53, 54, 55
c. Acute odontogenic purulent maxillar periostitis from the 53, 54, 55
d. Odontogenic buccal abscess from the 53, 54, 55
*e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis from the 53, 54, 55

1693. In the process of the 26th tooth extraction a 34-year-old patient suddenly developed the following symptoms: tinnitus, weakness, paleness of skin. Vertigo was diagnosed. What is the most advisable first aid approach?
a. Subcutaneous injection of cordiamin
b. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
c. Intramuscular injection of 50% analgin (mеtamisole sodium) solution
d. Intravenous injection of 0,1%adrenaline
*e. Put the patient in the Trendelenburg position

1694. A 53-year-old patient complains of an ulcer on the lateral surface of the tongue. The ulcer appeared 6 months ago in the result of a trauma caused by sharp tip of the 37 tooth metal crown. A dentist replaced the crown with the one of better quality and prescribed keratoplastic drugs. Despite these measures the ulcer continues to grow. Lately there has been pain during talking, chewing, swallowing; sometimes the pain irradiates to the pharynx. Objectively: on the lateral surface of the tongue there is a painful ulcer with uneven raised dense margins and lumpy floor covered with grayish necrotic coating. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
c. Tuberculous ulcer
*d. Cancer of the tongue lateral surface
e. Traumatic ulcer

1695. An 8-year-old child has been clinically diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth. The crown is decayed by 1/2.What is the dentist’s optimal tactics?
a. Opening along the mucogingival fold, drug thrapy
*b. Extraction
c. Endodontic treatment and drug therapy
d. Endodontic treatment
e. Drug therapy

1696. A laminar denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 54-year-old patient. Base plate wax is used during laboratory stage for wax templates. What group of accessory materials does such wax belong to?
*a. Modeling
b. Fixing
c. Forming
d. Impression
e. Abrasive

1697. A 28-year-old patient has been scheduled for the surgical resection of the root apex of the 12 tooth for chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What kind of anesthesia should be administered before the surgery?
*a. Bilateral infraorbital and incisive
b. Plexual and palatine
c. Terminal and incisive
d. Tuberal and palatine
e. Infraorbital and palatine

1698. A 11-year-old child complains of pain during eating food, especially hot, in the lower right lateral tooth. On the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth there is a large carious cavity filled with softened light-brown dentin. The cavity is located within parapulpar dentin. In the projection of medial buccal pulp horn the carious cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing is painful. Electric pulp test - 60 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute focal pulpitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

1699. A 34-year-old male patient complains of a cosmetic defect, a cavity on the vestibular surface in the cervical part of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the carious cavity is within the enamel, the floor and the walls are pigmented, probing and percussion and painless. There is no pain reaction to stimuli. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Acute surface caries
d. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
*e. Chronic surface caries

1700. A 12-year-old boy complains of dull ache in the upper right tooth. The pain aggravates during biting. Objectively: in the 16 tooth there is a deep carious cavity penetrating into the tooth cavity, cold test and probing are painless, mucosa is swollen, hyperemic. X-ray reveals areas of bone tissue destruction with blurred margins near root apices.What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

1701. To fill a medium depth carious cavity in the 37 tooth (Black class II) of a 35- year-old male patient a doctor has chosen a technique of layer-by-layer tooth restoration. What composite material should be applied for covering the carious cavity walls and floor to create the initial super adaptive layer?
a. Macrofilled
b. Condensable
*c. Flowable
d. Microhybrid
e. Microfilled

1702. A patient suffered a facial trauma. On examination and X-ray the patient was diagnosed with fracture of the maxillar alveolar process. What treatment would be most advisable in this case?
a. Zbarzh apparatus
*b. Smooth oral splint
c. Gunning splint
d. Weber splint
e. Intermaxillary ligature

1703. A 20-year-old male patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 24 tooth, which arose suddenly and persists for about 15 minutes at a time. Objectively: the distal surface of the 24 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity with overhanging walls. The cavity is filled with light-colored softened dentin and communicates with the tooth cavity. The cold stimulus causes acute, slowly abating pain. Percussion causes no pain response. Select the best method of treatment:
*a. Vital extirpation
b. Biological method
c. Devital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Vital amputation

1704. A 9-year-old girl has been suffering from gingival hemorrhages, cracks in the mouth angles for a month. She has a history of frequent nosebleeds, rapid fatigability. Objectively: the skin of the face and oral mucosa are pale. In the mouth angles there are cracks reaching the red border. Gingiva in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth is hyperemic and edematous, bleeds when touched.DMF/dmf = 10. Back of the tongue is bright red, smooth, glossy. Submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, mobile, painless. What specialist should be consulted in the first place?
a. Infectious disease specialist
b. Gastroenterologist
c. Neuropathist
d. Endocrinologist
*e. Hematologist

1705. A 25-year-old patient complains of pain when biting on the 15 tooth. The pain arose two days ago, has a constant aching nature and increased significantly over the last day. Objectively: the crown of the 15 tooth is gray, the medial contact surface exhibits a deep carious cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Percussion causes acute pain, the gingival mucosa in the projection of the 25 tooth root apex is hyperemic. The regional lymph node is tender. Radiograph shows an ill-defined zone of periapical bone destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis, intoxication stage
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative periodontitis

1706. A 27-year-old patient has been referred by a prosthodontist for endodontic treatment of the 45 tooth. Objectively: the 45 tooth crown is destroyed; the lateral surface of the tongue and the buccal mucosa have patches of grayish macerated epithelium slightly rising above the mucosa surface at the points of direct contact with the 45 tooth. The uvula and palatine arches are stagnant-red in color; hard palate has papulae surrounded with red margin and covered in grayish epithelium. The submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Soft leukoplakia (leucoplakia mollis)
b. Lichen ruber planus
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Lupus erythematosus, patch stage
*e. Secondary syphilis

1707. A 20-year-old male patient with insulindependent diabetes mellitus has been given anesthesia with Ultracain DS-forte for surgical oral sanitation. What complications may develop in this case?
a. Increased blood pressure
b. Atopic dermatitis
c. Toxic shock
*d. Abnormal levels of blood glucose
e. Clonus

1708. As a result of an injury the 51and 61 teeth of a 3-year-old child have completely cut into the alveolar bone. Medical history record: the teeth were partially decayed, changed in colour. Select an appropriate treatment tactics:
a. Treatment is not required
*b. Extraction of the injured teeth
c. Reposition of teeth, endodontic treatment
d. Follow-up as the teeth may erupt again
e. Extraction of teeth, endodontic treatment, reposition

1709. A 5-year-old girl complains of pain in the mouth angles occurring during mouth opening. She has a history of acute bronchitis and prolonged antibiotic therapy. Objectively: the red border is dry, the mouth angles are downturned. In the mouth angles there are cracks covered with white plaque and surrounded by slightly hyperemic elevation, painful on palpation and mouth opening. Oral mucosa exhibits no pathological changes, decay-missing-filled index - 2, hygiene index - 2,0. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meteorological cheilitis
b. Streptococcal cheilitis
*c. Mycotic cheilitis
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

1710. A 43-year-old patient complains of mobility and significant neck exposure of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale and cyanotic, non-bleeding. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit the I-II grade mobility. The overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth is present. The necks of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed by 1/2 of the root length, the necks of the 43, 33 teeth are exposed by 1/4. What kind of dental prosthesis should be applied in this case?
a. Half-ring splint
*b. Cast removable splint
c. Cap splint
d. Kurlyandsky splint bar
e. Portion crown

1711. A patient complains of fever up to 38°C, headache, pain in the joints anf muscles, vesicles in the oral cavity, mainly in the frontal part. Eating is sharply painful. For the last several years the disease recurred during wet anf windy weather. The patient often suffers from cases of URTI. Objectively: on the buccal, lingual, labial mucosa there are confluent erosions against the erythematous background, covered in graywhite coating. There are bloody scabs on the red border and in the angles of the mouth. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute aphthous stomatitis
b. Syphilis
*c. Erythema multiforme
d. Acute necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis

1712. A 14-year-old adolescent complains of bleeding and pain during eating occurring in the 36 tooth. Anamnesis states intense pain in the past. Objectively: the crown is severely damaged; carious cavity is large, penetrates into the tooth cavity, and is partially filled with overgrown pulp. The tissues demonstrate low sensitivity to touch, bleed upon touching. There are significant soft dental deposits on the 35 and 34 teeth.Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Chronic papillitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Chronic simple pulpitis

1713. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57-year-old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Ney’s clasp should be applied?
a. I-II type clasp
b. II type clasp
c. I type clasp
d. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
*e. V type clasp

1714. A 12-year-old boy due to trauma of the 44 and 45 teeth area suffers from the following: pathologic displacement of the mandibular alveolar process; rupture of the alveolar process mucosa. What additional examination is necessary to specify the diagnosis?
a. Tomography of the mandibula
b. -
c. X-ray of the cranium in axillary projection
d. X-ray of the mandibula in frontal and Parma projection
*e. X-ray of the mandibula in frontal and lateral projections

1715. A 5-year-old child has sustained a trauma. Objectively: the crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are shorter then the adjacent crowns. The mucosa surrounding the 51 and 61 teeth is hyperemic and swollen. Xray imaging shows the periodontal fissure to be absent in the apical area of the 51 and 61 roots, the 51 and 61 roots apexes are submerged in the spongy bone of the body of the lower jaw. Choose the optimal treatment:
a. Splinting of teeth
b. Anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Resection of the 51st and 61st teeth and their splinting
*d. Extraction of the 51st and 61st teeth
e. Regular medical check-ups

1716. During teeth preparation a patient developed an epileptic attack. What measures should a prostodontist take?
*a. To take measures to prevent tongue biting
b. To call in an emergency aid team
c. To introduse an anesthetic
d. To measure blood pressure
e. To continue working

1717. A 34-year-old dental patient has an indication for the extraction of the 38 tooth for chronic fibrous periodontitis. The dental surgeon used torusal (Weisbrem’s) anesthesia. What nerves are blocked by this anesthesia?
*a. Superior alveolar, lingual, buccal
b. Superior alveolar, buccal
c. Lingual, buccal, mental
d. Superior alveolar, lingual
e. Lingual, buccal

1718. A 26 year-old woman suffers from bleeding gums. For 3 years she has been suffering from pancreatic diabetes. Objectively: gingival papillas of all the teeth are hyperemic, swollen and overlap with the teeth crowns by 1/3 of the crowns height. What method of examination must be conducted for differentiated diagnostics?
a. Rheoparodontography
b. Stomatoscopy
c. Schiller-Pysarev iodine test
d. Capillary fragility test
*e. X-ray radiography

1719. An orthodontist has been addressed by parents of a 5-year-old child. The child has the 54 tooth extracted, all the other deciduous teeth are present. The doctor made a thin-wall crown for the 55 tooth with interdental wedge to the 53 tooth. What is the purpose of such treatment?
a. Restoration of masticatory efficiency
b. Aesthetical restoration
*c. Prevention of dentition malformation
d. Acceleration of permanent tooth eruption
e. Deceleration of permanent tooth eruption

1720. A 30-year-old patient, a lecturer, complains of periodical dislocations of the lower jaw. Objectively: direct occlusion, continuous dentition is retained. During mouth opening there is a clicking sound in the temporomandibular joint. What apparatus can prevent recurrent dislocation?
*a. Petrosov apparatus
b. Limberg apparatus
c. Zbarzh apparatus
d. Shur apparatus
e. Oxman apparatus

1721. A 37-year-old patient complains of severe pain in the gums, difficult chewing, smell of rot from the mouth, bleeding gums, along with general fatigue, headaches, body temperature up to 37, 9°C.Objectively: large amout of soft dental deposit, shape of the gingival margin is abnormal, the gingival margin is covered with gray coating, regional lymph nodes are painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpetic stomatitis
b. Thermal trauma
c. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
d. Chemical trauma
*e. Ulcerative gingivitis

1722. Parents of a 5-year-old boy addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of hemorrhage occurring from the boy’s mouth. According to the mother the boy had accidentally bit his tongue. Objectively: the tongue apex is damaged, the wound is 5 mm deep and is bleeding profusely. What aid should be provided?
a. Stop the hemorrhage by ligation of the lingual artery
b. Prescribe hemostatics intravenously
c. Prescribe antibacterial treatment and antiseptic oral rinsing
d. Perform antiseptic treatment of the wound and stop the hemorrhage by pressing the tissues
*e. Perform primary surgical treatment of the wound, apply blind sutures

1723. A 49-year-old patient was hospitalised to an oral surgery department with a gunshot wound of the left side of the face. There is a 3,5 cm long defect of the body of the mandible on the left. After the initial surgical d-bridement and stabilization of the patient’s general state it is planned to perform plastic correction of the defect. What treatment method is optimal in the given case?
a. Galmosh polyfunctional apparatus application
b. Substitution of the defect with an autograft
c. Osteosynthesis with titanium reconstruction plate
d. Rudko’s apparatus application
*e. Shvyrkov’s compression-distraction osteosynthesis

1724. Before performing a surgery a dental surgeon treats his hands according to Spasokukotsky-Kochergin method. What antiseptic is basic in this kind of treatment and how is it applied?
a. Two tissues with 5% liquid ammonia solution, 5 minutes each
b. Tissue with 0,5% chlorhexidine digluconate, 5 minutes
c. Tissue with 98%ethanol, 5 minutes
d. Two tissues with 96% ethanol, 5 minutes each
*e. 0,5% liquid ammonia solution in two washbasins, 3-5 minutes in each

1725. A 37-year-old patient addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of deteriorating welbeing, high fever up to 38, 1°C, headache, painful swelling on the chin. Objectively: there is a dense painful infiltration 3x4 cm in size on the skin of the chin. The skin over the infiltration is bluish in color. There are four necrosis areas in the focal center around the hair follicles. The submental lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Dermal actinomycosis
b. Festered atheroma
c. Furuncle
d. Erysipelas
*e. Carbuncle

1726. A 43-year-old woman complains of periodical facial assymetry and bursting stabbing pain in the submandibular area on the right, which increases after eating spicy and sour food. Eventually these clinical presentations disappear. The patient notes periodical exacerbations. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unrestricted, mucosa of the oral cavity floor is without pathologies. In the area of the sublingual fold a thickening of soft tissues can be palpated. Excretory duct of the submandibular gland produces no saliva. What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
a. Exacerbation of sialolithiasis of the submandibular gland on the right
b. Abscess of the submandibular region on the right
c. Acute serous lymphadenitis of the submandibular area on the right
d. Abscess of the mental region on the right
*e. Sialolithiasis of the submandibular gland on the right

1727. Parents complain of painfulness and mobility of the tooth of their 4-year-old child, which developed after the impact with a wooden object. Objectively: the face is asymmetrical due to swollen tissues of the upper lip. The 51 tooth is intact, with vestibular displacement and the II degreemobility, gums around the 51 tooth are hyperemic. What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
*a. Incomplete dislocation of the 51 tooth
b. Contusion of the 51 tooth
c. Acute purulent periostitis
d. Acute albuminous periostitis
e. Complete dislocation of the 51 tooth

1728. During preventive examination of a 19- year-old man it was revealed that there are carious lesions in the fissures of the 37 and 47 teeth, sealant is fully retained in the 16 and 26 but absent in the closed intact fissures of the 36. The 46 was extracted due to complicated caries. Determine the degree of caries in this patient:
a. 6
*b. 3
c. 4
d. 2
e. 5

1729. A dentist performs endodontic treatment of the 31 tooth of a 62-year-old patient. The root canal is narrow, extremely calcificated. Choose the optimal tool to pass through the root canal in this case:
a. Gates-glidden drill
b. K-File Nitiflex
c. H-File
*d. Pathfinder
e. K-Reamer

1730. A crown inlay for the patient’s 46 tooth is being prepared. At the first clinical stage the cavity preparation is completed with design of an incline. What material can be used for the inlay?
a. Pressed ceramics
*b. Metal alloy
c. Porcelain
d. Sinma M plastic
e. Composite

1731. A 54-year-old patient complains of frequent crunching sound in the right temporomandibular joint, which developed one month ago. In the morning the crunching is more frequent and decreases towards the evening. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the skin above the joint is without changes, the mouth opens at 2,9 mm. What diagnosis is most likely in this case?
*a. Arthrosis
b. Temporomandibular joint dislocation
c. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome
d. Chronic arthritis
e. Acute arthritis

1732. On examination of a 27-year-old patient the tip of the dental probe caught on the fissures of the 36, 37, 38 teeth. Margins of the enamel defect are dark, the surface is coarse. Teeth transillumination with photopolymer lamp revealed the defect to be limited to the enamel. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Chronic primary caries
b. Acute primary caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Chronic superficial caries

1733. A 21-year-old woman addressed a doctor with complaints of bleeding gums and foul smell from her mouth. Objectively: the gums are congestively hyperemic, with cyanotic color. X-ray revealed resorption of interalveolar septa up to 1/3 of their height. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic generalized periodontitis, II degree
b. Chronic generalized periodontitis, III degree
c. Acute generalized periodontitis, II degree
*d. Chronic generalized periodontitis, I degree
e. Acute generalized periodontitis, I degree

1734. A 68-year-old patient addressed a surgical department of a dental clinic for extraction of the 45 tooth. During procedure the patient developed burning retrosternal pain attack irradiating to the left shoulder, scapula, hand. The skin is pale, BP is 140/100 mm Hg, heart rate is rapid. Skin hyperplasia can be observed in the Zakharin-Head’s zones. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
*a. Angina pectoris attack
b. Bronchial asthma attack
c. -
d. Hypertensic crisis
e. Heart failure

1735. During administration of Ultracain solution for infiltration anesthesia the condition of a 22-year-old patient sharply deteriorated. The patient became inert, silent, developed cough attacks, expiratory dyspnea, wheezing. Viscous slimy sputum is expectorated.What urgent condition did the patient develop?
a. Asphyxia
b. Collapse
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Hypertensic crisis
*e. Bronchial asthma attack

1736. A 2,5-year-old boy has been delivered to an oral surgery. The patient has the upper lip cleft into three fragments, the palate is whole. Specify the period when cheiloplasty should be performed:
a. 15-19 months
b. 20-24 months
c. 3-5 months
d. 12-14 months
*e. 6-10 months

1737. A 7-year-old boy has hyperemic gums; bleeding can be detected. The teeth are mobile, with roots exposed and covered with a layer of coating. Periodontal pockets demonstrate granulation. The child is registered with a pediatrician for diabetes insipidus. The child’s mother states that her son’s condition has deteriorated lately. The child suffers from periodontal syndrome characteristic of:
*a. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
b. Gaucher’s disease
c. Letterer-Siwe disease
d. Cushing’s disease
e. Diabetes mellitus

1738. A 40-year-old patient addressed a prosthodontist with complaints of absent crown of the 24 tooth due to trauma. If the crown is broken off at the gum level, the tooth should be restored with:
a. Partial denture
b. Intradental inlay
c. Semi-crown
d. Equator crown
*e. Pivot crown

1739. During extraction of the 36 tooth the tooth crown was fractured.What tool should be applied to extract tooth roots?
a. S-shaped forceps right side
*b. Bayonet forceps
c. Beak-shaped straight forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps left side
e. S-shaped forceps left side

1740. A patient after the surgery for phlegmon of the pterygomandibular space was prescribed compresses with a membrane perforating drug. Which of the given below is a membrane perforating drug?
*a. Dimexid (Dimethyl sulfoxide)
b. Streptocid (Sulfidine)
c. Oflocain
d. Lincomycin
e. Ectericidum

1741. A 64-year-old patient complains of spots on the mucosa of the cheeks, mouth angles, palate. Objectively: on the oral cavity mucosa there are white growths that cannot be removed with spatula. The mucosa around the spots is pale pink in color. The patient has been smoking for 40 years.What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
*b. Leukoplakia
c. Bowen’s disease
d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Candidiasis

1742. An 8-year-old girl complains of burning pain in her tongue during eating spicy and sour food. Objectively: there are red irregular-shaped spots on the tongue apex and dorsum. Filiform papillae are absent in the affected areas. The girl states that the spots periodically grow and migrate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Raspberry tongue
*b. Benign migratory glossitis
c. Fissured tongue
d. Median rhomboid glossitis
e. Hairy tongue

1743. A 70-year-old patient addressed a hospital with complaints of poorly stabilized complete dentures of the upper and lower jaws. What method of artificial teeth arrangement is preferable in making of a new denture?
a. According to prothetic occlusion planes
*b. According to individual occlusion curves
c. According to standard occlusion curves
d. According to disocclusion planes
e. According to spherical occlusion curves

1744. A 2,5-year-old child has fever up to 38, 5°C, low appetite, rash inside the oral cavity. The disease onset was 3 days ago. Objectively: the skin of the perioral area is covered in scarce vesicles with clear content.Within the oral cavity on the buccal and lingual mucosa there are sharply painful erosions, 2-3 mm in size, with white coating and hyperemic crown. The gums are swollen, hyperemic. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Stomatitis with the background of chickenpox
*b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
e. Stomatitis with the background of infectious mononucleosis

1745. A 9-year-old girl complains of peeling lips and sensation of dryness, strain and burning in them. Objectively: on the red border from angle to angle of the mouth and from Klein area (wet-dry line) to the red border middle there are gray scales. The scales can be removed without erosions. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
*b. Exfoliative cheilitis, dry form
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Exfoliative cheilitis, exudative form
e. Atopic cheilitis

1746. A patient addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of increased body temperature up to 37, 6°C, swelling of the soft tissues, pain in the 65 tooth, which aggravates upon touching it with its antagonist tooth. On examination there are hyperemy and smoothing out of the mucogingival fold of the alveolar process in the area of the destroyed 65 tooth. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Parodontal abscess
*d. Acute odontogenic purulent periostitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

1747. A 17-year-old patient has been suffering for 2 years from periodical painful swelling and fistula appearing on the skin of gonial angle area. After cleaning the fistula of its purulent content pain and swelling disappear leaving a small concave scar. Objectively: there is a small scar on the skin in the gonial angle area. Palpation of the oral cavity floor reveals a dense band in the buccal soft tissues, which connects fistula with projection of the 47 tooth roots. Crown of the 47 is destroyed. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis of the left mandibular angle
*b. Migrating subcutaneous granuloma
c. Mandibular tuberculosis
d. Festered buccal atheroma
e. Actinomycosis of the parotid-masticatory area

1748. A 30-year-old woman addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of uncomfortable sensation of pressure in her upper right tooth, which aggravates due to hot stimulus, and foul smell from the mouth. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 17 tooth, which penetrates into the tooth cavity. Deep probing causes severe pain, percussion of the 17 tooth is painful. X-ray: there is slight widening of the periodontal fissure near the root apex. Electric pulp test - 70 microamperes. What final diagnosis can be made?
a. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
c. Acute purulent pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis

1749. A 20-year-old patient has made an appointment with a dentist. On external examination the patient is pale, complains of long-term fever, insomnia, weight loss of 13 kg within 5 months. The patient is homeless. The therapist’s consultation states: all groups of the lymph nodes are enlarged, hepatolienal syndrome. Blood test: leukocytes - 2, 2 × 109/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
*b. HIV infection
c. Tuberculosis
d. Chroniosepsis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

1750. A 45-year-old patient complains of itching gums, pain in the area of the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth caused by chemical and thermal stimuli. Objectively: the gums are pale, no bleeding, the roots of affected teeth are exposed by 0,4 mm. The 43 and 33 demonstrate cuneiform defect. The teeth are intact. X-ray: regular resorption of interalveolar septa at 1/4 of their height. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Parodontosis, I degree
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis, I degree

1751. An 18-year-old woman complains of gum growth, pain and bleeding during eating solid food. Objectively: hyperemy and swelling of the gums, gingival margin hypertrophy of the 12, 13, 14 teeth up to 1/2 of the crown height. Formalin test is painless. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Catarrhal gingivitis
b. Chronic generalized periodontitis, II degree
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Ulcerative gingivitis
e. Acute generalized periodontitis, I degree

1752. A 48-year-old patient has made an appointment for extraction of the 35 tooth due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Specify the most advisable method of peripheral conduction anesthesia in this case:
a. Mental
b. Plexus
c. Infiltration
d. Extraoral mandibular
*e. Torusal

1753. During application of an impression tray to the upper jaw of a 62-year-old patient the tray falls out when the patient opens his mouth wide. What edge of the tray should be shortened?
*a. In posterolateral area of the maxillary tuberosity
b. In the front area
c. In the buccal-alveolar fold area
d. In the palatine torus area
e. Along the A line

1754. During objective examination of the patient’s oral cavity the lower jaw is revealed to be toothless, in the front area there is a mobile band of mucosa, irregular atrophy of the alveolar process.What method of obtaining functional impression would be most advisable in the given case?
*a. Differentiated impression
b. Compression impression
c. Gradual pressure impression
d. Selective pressure impression during mastication
e. Decompression impression

1755. A 46-year-old man complains of constant losing of a filling in his lower right tooth. Objectively: in the 16 tooth on the approximal masticatory surface there is a defect of crown hard tissues at 1/3. The tooth has no discoloration, percussion is painless. What construction should be prescribed?
a. 3/4 crown
b. Plastic crown
c. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
d. Semi-crown
*e. Inlay

1756. A 37-year-old patient complains of an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the 13 tooth is destroyed by 2/3. The tooth is pulpless, the root canal is filled. How deep should be the root canal opened for pivot crown in this patient?
*a. 2/3 of the root canal
b. 3/4 of the root canal
c. Full length of the root canal
d. 1/2 of the root canal
e. 1/3 of the root canal

1757. A 7-year-old girl hit her forehead one day ago. Several hours after the sustained trauma a swelling developed in the left superciliary area. General condition of the child is not disrupted. Objectively: swelling of forehead tissues spreading towards the left eyelids; the swelling is soft, fluctuation sign is present. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Fracture of the temporal bone
b. Hemangioma of the right superciliary area
*c. Hematoma of the left superciliary area
d. Fracture of the frontal bone
e. Hematic abscess of the left superciliary area

1758. Mother of a 10-year-old girl complains of a cosmetic defect of the child’s 22 tooth that erupted with damaged enamel. Anamnesis states premature extraction of the 62 tooth due to caries complication. There is a white-yellow spot with clear margins on the vestibular surface of the 22 tooth. Enamel retains glossiness, no surface roughness can be detected on probing.Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
b. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
d. Acute superficial caries
*e. Local enamel hypoplasia

1759. A 2-year-old child has suffered a teeth trauma. Objectively: the crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are by 1/3 shorter than the others. Mucosa in the area of the 51 and 61 is hyperemic, swollen. X-ray reveals absence of the periodontal fissure in the root apex areas of the 51 and 61.What treatment tactics would be optimal?
*a. Regular medical check-ups
b. Reduction of the 51 and 61
c. Dental reimplantation
d. Ligature splint
e. Extraction of the 51 and 61

1760. A mother of a newborn complains that the child cannot be breastfed. After objective examination the child was diagnosed with complete submucous cleft palate. What surgical procedure should be prescribed and when is the optimal time for such a surgery?
*a. Uranostaphyloplasty, 4-6 years
b. Uranostaphyloplasty, 6-7 months
c. Uranoplasty, 1 year
d. Staphyloplasty, 10 years
e. Cheiloplasty, 4-6 months

1761. A 19-year-old girl addressed an oncologist with complaints of slowly growing tumor-like mass on the tip of her tongue. The mass was first noticed 5-6 years ago. The patient requested no medical help. Objectively: there is a pale pink round growth with wide pedicle on the tongue apex; the growth is painless, elastic; there are no changes of mucosa surrounding the pedicle. Submandibular lymph nodes cannot be palpated. What kind of tumor is it?
*a. Papilloma
b. Fibroma
c. Keratoma
d. Lipoma
e. Atheroma

1762. A 48-year-old patient has addressed a hospital with complaints of defects in the paragingival area and slight sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively: there are hard tissue defects that resemble a wedge with smooth polished walls on precervical vestibular surface of the 23 and 24 teeth. Thermal test is slightly positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Endemic fluorosis
c. Enamel necrosis
d. Acute deep caries
*e. Cuneiform defect

1763. Parents of a 7-year-old child addressed a hospital with complaints of the child having no permanent teeth in the front area of the mandible. Anamnesis states that the first deciduous teeth erupted at the age of 11 months. Objective clinical examination revealed the following: appearance is without changes; milk occlusion; there are physiological diastemas and tremas; edgeto- edge incisor contact. What preliminary diagnosis can be made according to Kalvelis classification?
*a. Retarded eruption
b. Adentia
c. Hypoplasia
d. Dystopia
e. Supernumerary tooth

1764. Parents of a 4-year-old child have made an appointment with an orthodontist for preventive examination of the child. In the oral cavity: scissor bite is observed in the front area in the place of inscisor contact; distal surfaces of the second temporary molars are situated in one plane. Teeth in the dental arch are placed tightly, without intervals. Determine, what period of occlusion development is described:
a. Involution of temporary occlusion
b. Formation of temporary occlusion
*c. Stability of temporary occlusion
d. Early stage of developing occlusion
e. Late stage of developing occlusion

1765. A 22-year-old patient addressed an orthodontist with complaints of incorrect teeth placement on the upper jaw. The appearance is without changes. Occlusion is permanent. The first molar relation is of the 1-st type according to Angle’s classification. Analysis of the control diagnostic models revealed the disturbance of the Andrews’ second key of optimal occlusion of the 12 and 22 teeth. The patient suffers from:
*a. Angulation of the maxillary teeth
b. Maxillary teeth contact
c. Spee curve concavity
d. Axial rotation of the teeth
e. Cusp-to-fissure contact between the first permanent maxillary and mandibular molars

1766. A 15-year-old girl complains of brief pain attacks in her teeth due to chemical stimuli. Objectively: on the contact surfaces of the 11, 21, 22 teeth there are enamel areas matt white in color, with lost shine, covered in large amount of dental deposit. Enamel is softened and can be easily chipped off with excavator. Probing of lesions is painless. Percussion is painless. No reaction to cold stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
*b. Acute superficial caries
c. Acute initial caries
d. Acute median caries
e. Chronic initial caries

1767. A 5,5-year-old child is undergoing preventive examination. No complaints from the patient. Objectively: in the precervical area of buccal surface of the 75 tooth there is an enamel patch with loss of natural glossiness. The enamel surface is coarse, painless on probing. Tooth percussion is painless. Thermodiagnosis is negative. Damaged enamel stains with 2% water solution of methylene blue. Make the diagnosis:
a. Fluorosis
b. Enamel hypoplasia
*c. Acute initial caries
d. Acute superficial caries
e. Chronic initial caries

1768. A 13-year-old girl undergoes preventive examination. No complaints from the patient. Objectively: on the 36 masticatory surface there is a carious cavity within enamel with wide inlet. Enamel of the cavity floor and walls is dense and pigmented. Probing of the carious lesion is painless. No reaction to thermal stimuli. Tooth percussion is painless. The girl belongs to the I group according to her health status. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute initial caries
b. Acute median caries
*c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Chronic initial caries
e. Acute superficial caries

1769. A 57-year-old patient adressed a prosthodontic clinic to have a denture made for him. After objective examination the patient was prescribed single-unit crowns for the 46, 47, 36, 37 teeth. What maximal angle of a tooth stump can be allowed during preparation?
*a. 3-5o
b. 10-12o
c. 7-8o
d. Stump walls should be parallel to each other
e. 5-6o

1770. A 25-year-old woman, a teacher, addressed a prosthodontics clinic with complaints of cosmetic defect, inability to take a bite, disrupted enunciation. The teeth are lost due to trauma. Dental formula: 87654300!00345678. 3!3 are firm, intact, percussion is painless. What anesthesia should be administered for this group of teeth in preparation for making a porcelainfused- to-metal bridge?
a. Application
b. Tuberal
c. Intraosseous (into spongy tissue)
*d. Infiltration
e. Central conduction anesthesia

1771. A 58-year-old patient after examination in a prostodontic clinic has been advised to make a full-arch prosthesis. The treatment plan was developed, the impressions of both jaws were obtained, central occlusion was determined with block method. What stage is next?
a. Frame design of a full-arch prosthesis
b. Preparation for model duplication
c. Model duplication
d. Restoration of the abutment crowns
*e. Parallelometry

1772. A 25-year-old patient addressed a hospital and upon examination was diagnosed with unilateral fracture of the body of the mandible in the area of 43, 44 teeth with persistent vertical displacement of the bone ends. Choose the functional type of prosthodontic apparatus required for the patient’s treatment:
a. Forming
b. Directing
*c. Reponating
d. Substituting
e. Fixing

1773. A 32-year-old patient addressed a dentist with complaints of inability to close his mouth. Objectively the mouth is half-open, the chin is protruding forwards and is displaced to the left. Such condition occurred after the mouth was opened wide. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Posterior left-sided mandibular dislocation
*b. Anterior right-sided mandibular dislocation
c. Anterior bilateral mandibular dislocation
d. Anterior left-sided mandibular dislocation
e. Posterior right-sided mandibular dislocation

1774. A 37-year-old patient has symmetrical face; the mucosa in the area of the 12 tooth root apex projection is pale pink; palpation is painless; the tooth crown is destroyed by 1/3; percussion is painless. X-ray: the root canal of the 12 tooth is filled to the apex; granuloma 4 mm in diameter surrounds the root apex. Choose the method of surgical treatment:
a. Root hemisection
b. Root amputation
c. Tooth extraction
*d. Granuloma removal with root apex resection
e. Coronary radicular tooth separation

1775. During preventive examination a patient was diagnosed with precancerous hyperkeratosis of the lower lip red border. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + chemotherapy
b. Palliative treatment
c. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + close-focus roentgenotherapy
d. No treatment is required
*e. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues

1776. In the district dispensary center for children with cleft lip and palate a child was diagnosed with congenital incomplete cleft upper lip on the left with malformed cutaneo-cartilaginous portion of the nose. What dispensary group does the child belong to?
a. Second
b. Fourth
c. Fifth
*d. First
e. Third

1777. Preventive examination of the oral cavity of a 9,5-year-old child revealed bilateral cross bite without displacement of the lower jaw. What biometric method of dentition model investigation should be applied in this case?
a. Korkhaus index
b. Tonn index
c. Gerlach index
d. Schwarz index
*e. Pont index

1778. For a 30-year-old patient a composite inlay for the 37 tooth is being made.Objectively: there is a carious cavity of medium size (Black’s classification I class) on the masticatory surface of the 37 tooth.What specifics are required for the tooth preparation in this case?
*a. Creating a flat floor
b. Creating an incline
c. Creating an auxiliary cavity
d. Widening of the cavity floor
e. Creating an auxiliary ledge

1779. A bugle denture for the lower jaw is planned to be made for a 53-year-old patient. Objectively: the 38, 37, 35, 34, 45, 46, 47 teeth are absent. The retained teeth are firm, with low clinical crowns. What fixation method of bugle denture would be optimal in this case?
*a. Telescopic system
b. Beam system
c. Ball joint attachment
d. Attachments
e. Supporting retentive clammers

1780. A 30-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain attacks in the lower left tooth, which occurred 2 hours ago during travel by plain. Objectively: there is pathological abrasion of the 36 tooth, tooth percussion is slightly painful. After additional investigation the diagnosis is made: chronic pulpitis. What investigation allows to make such a diagnosis?
a. Electric pulp test
*b. X-ray radiography
c. Thermal tests
d. Probing
e. Luminescence diagnostics

1781. A 22-year-old student arrived for an appointment with a dentist in the afternoon after his classes were over. The patient is registered for regular check-ups with an endocrinologist. During treatment the patient developed excited state followed by loss of consciousness. Objectively: tremor of the extremities, moist skin, heart rate - 100/min., BP- 100/60 mm Hg. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Epileptic attack
c. Syncope
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Hypoglycemic coma

1782. A 32-year-old patient consulted a dentist with complaints of tooth crown discoloration on the upper right jaw. Anamnesis: 3 weeks ago the patient suffered a trauma of the upper jaw. On examination: crown of the 11 tooth is intact, gray, painless on percussion, no changes of mucosa in the area of root apex projection of the 11 tooth. Electric pulp test - 100 microamperes. The patient was diagnosed with traumatic periodontitis of the 11 tooth. What method of removing tooth discoloration would be advisable after endodontic treatment?
a. External bleaching
b. Microabrasion method
c. Air-abrasive method
*d. Intracrown bleaching
e. Custom teeth whitening with a bleaching tray (kappa)

1783. A 39-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis, initial stage. After undergoing complex treatment the patient received instructions and was registered for regular check-ups. How often should the patient undergo these regular check-ups?
a. Once every 9 months
b. Once every 3 months
*c. Once every 6 months
d. Once every 12 months
e. Once every 18 months

1784. A 22-year-old patient is diagnosed with chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 46 tooth. During the first appointment the patient was prescribed a temporary filling made of antibacterial mateterial that stimulates osteo-, dentino- and cement genesis. Specify the material that satisfies this requirements:
a. Thymol
b. Camphor
c. Iodoform
d. Dexamethasone
*e. Calcium hydroxide

1785. A 24-year-old patient addressed a first-aid center with complaints of facial pain on the left, restricted mouth opening. Objectively: there is moderate swelling and hematoma in the left malar arch area. On palpation there is bone tissue retraction and moderate painfulness. Occlusion is intact. Mouth opening is 1-1,5 cm. Upon attempt to open the mouth further there are a sensation of mechanical obstructon and pain aggravation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. -
*b. Fracture of the left malar arch
c. Le Fort maxillary fracture, III grade
d. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone
e. Le Fort maxillary fracture, II grade

1786. A 22-year-old patient has suffered unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was provided with full dental brace with loops and intermaxillary elastic expansion. Recovery was uncomplicated. The brace should be removed after:
a. 2 weeks
b. 10 days
c. -
*d. 3 weeks
e. 1 week

1787. A 19-year-old woman complains of aesthetic defects, dry lips, unpleasant sensation of strain in the lower lip and its constant peeling. The patient often bites her lips, rips and bites off peeling flakes, which sometimes results in bleeding; she notes her increased irritability. On examination there are numerous transparent scales between the red border and mucosa. The scales are tightly adjacent in the center and loose at the periphery. They can be easily removed, produce no erosion. Regional lymph nodes cannot be palpated. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Actinic cheilitis
*b. Cheilitis exfoliativa
c. Meteorological cheilitis
d. Mycotic cheilitis
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

1788. A 73-year-old man is registered for regular check-ups in an oncological clinic after completion of the combined treatment for oral mucosa cancer stage II (radiation therapy and surgery). During one of the routine check-ups an area of exposed mandibular bone is detected. There are no inflammatory changes of surrounding mucosa. A sinus tract with weak granulation is observed. Mandibular X-ray shows sequestrum without clear margin between healthy and necrotic bone. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Relapse of oral mucosa cancer
b. Chronic mandibular periostitis
c. Acute purulent mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Posttraumatic mandibular osteomyelitis
*e. Mandibular osteoradionecrosis

1789. A patient with odontogenic phlegmon of the oral cavity floor and neck has been delivered into an oral surgery department. The patient’s general condition is severe, labored breating, inflammatory masticatory muscles contracture II degree, swallowing is impossible. There can be determined dense sharply painful infiltration of the lower face, oral cavity floor and neck; the skin is strained and cannot be pinched in a fold; fluctuation can be palpated in the oral cavity. After 30 minutes of the patient’s stay in the in-patient department the patient’s neck swelling significantly enlarged, breating deteriorated. What kind of asphyxia can develop in the patient?
a. Aspiration
b. Dislocational
*c. Stenotic
d. Valvular
e. Obturative

1790. A 16-year-old girl suffers from enlarged gums. Objectively: gingival margin of the vestibular surface of the gums is diffusely thickened, dense, pale pink in color. Gingival papilla cover crowns of all the teeth up to 1/2 of their height, hemorrhage is absent. Xray reveals no pathological changes of periodontal tissues. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
c. Gingival fibromatosis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Exacerbation of catarrhal gingivitis

1791. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the tragus area, clicking during mouth opening, stuffed ears. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening path is straight. Dentition defect can be estimated as the I class by Kennedy; the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are absent. In this case the load would be the most traumatizing for the following anatomical structure:
a. Distal slope of the articular tubercle
b. Socket floor of the temporal bone
c. Articular capsule
d. Articular head
*e. Interarticular disk

1792. A 34-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower right jaw, reduced mouth opening. Objectively: dentition is intact both on the upper and lower jaw, there is premature contact between the 46 and 47 teeth. Diagnosis: traumatic fracture of the mandible in the area of the 46 tooth with fragment displacement. What construction would be advisable for temporary immobilization of the mandible fragments?
a. Entin’s head-chin strap
b. Temporary plastic splint
*c. Tigerstedt’s splint
d. Plastic kappa
e. Weber’s splint

1793. A 55-year-old patient addressed a prostodontic clinic to have a denture made. During preparation of the 44 and 47 teeth for crown installation the patient became unwell: he developed vertigo, nausea, tinnitus, blurred vision, dyspnea. Unconsciousness followed, the pupils were dilated, heart rate was weak. After 1 minute the patient’s condition improved. What condition occurred in the patient?
a. Bronchial asthma
*b. Dizziness
c. Collapse
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Hypoglycemic coma

1794. A 23-year-old woman complains of carious cavity present in the 27 tooth, where food particles are retained. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 27 tooth filled with dense dark-brown dentin. Probing of the cavity floor and walls is painless, thermometry and percussion are painless. Electric pulp test - 10 microamperes. X-ray reveals no pathological changes. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic deep caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic median caries

1795. A 27-year-old man complains of teeth mobility in his upper and lower jaws. Objectively: dentition is intact. Central occlusion is determined. What examination methods should be applied?
a. X-ray
b. Electromyography
c. Gnathodynamometry
d. Masticatiography
*e. Analysis of diagnostic models of the jaws

1796. A 47-year-old man complains of mobility of the artificial crown on the 36 tooth, which was made 2 years ago. Objectively: the 36 tooth is covered with full metal swaged crown. Crown decementation and dentin demineralization are observed. What is the cause of such complication?
a. The crown edge is embedded into the gingival pocket
b. The crown contacts with antagonistic teeth
c. Useful life of the crown is exceeded
*d. The crown is loose at the tooth cervix
e. There are interdental contacts

1797. A 48-year-old man complains of itching gums. Objectively: the gums are firm; cold water causes short-time pain in the teeth. X-ray imaging shows osteosclerosis of the alveolar septum: close-meshed bone structure, the alveolar septum height and intactness of the cortical plates is retained. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontosis, stage I
*b. Initial periodontosis
c. Initial periodontitis
d. Atrophic gingivitis
e. Periodontitis, stage I

1798. A 60-year-old man complains of stabbing pain near the root of the tongue on the right, which develops during eating, especially sour food. Objectively: there is a swelling in the right submandibular area. On palpation the submandibular gland is dense and enlarged. Excretory duct orifice of the right submandibular gland is dilated and produces mucopurulent secretion. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Calculous sialadenitis of the sublingual gland
b. Acute sialodochitis
c. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular area
*d. Sialolithiasis of the submandibular gland
e. Acute suppurative lymphadenitis

1799. A 19-year-old woman, an actress, complains of discoloration of her left maxillary central incisor. One year ago the pulp of this tooth was removed and the tooth was filled. Gradually the tooth assumed grayish color. Objectively the 11 is filled, discolored, stable, painless on percussion. Deep occlusion is observed. What part of the clinical presentation contraindicates installation of an all-porcelain crown?
a. Devitalized teeth defects that cannot be corrected with dental inlays
*b. Deep occlusion
c. Enamel hypoplasia with tooth deformation and discoloration
d. Front teeth defects that cannot be corrected with fillings
e. Tooth discoloration

1800. A 18-year-old woman needs a denture. Objectively: the 21 tooth is dark gray in color, devitalized; orthognathic occlusion is observed. The tooth is to be covered with plastic crown. What plastic should be used to make the crown?
*a. Sinma-M
b. Protacryl-M
c. Etacryl
d. Bacryl
e. Phtorax

1801. A 58-year-old patient has made an appointment to make a denture. Objectively: the 22 tooth is firmand intact. The alveolar crest is atrophied; the palate is flat. Removable denture is to be made. What approach regarding the 22 tooth should be chosen by a dentist?
a. Tooth extraction
b. To make a stump crown
c. To retain the tooth
d. Removal of tooth pulp
*e. To make a telescopic crown

1802. A patient needs his 26 tooth extracted. After application of tuberal anaesthesia he developed general fatigue, nausea, and, later, severe itching and skin rashes. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Collapse
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Urticaria
d. Quincke’s edema
e. Unconsciousness

1803. For a 24-year-old woman a Richmond crown is being made to restore the crown of the central maxillar incisor. The cap is completed. What is the next step?
*a. To fit the cap on the tooth stump and place the post in the root canal
b. To fit the cap and the post to the tooth root
c. To fixate the tooth with cement
d. To make the combination dental crown
e. To solder the post with the cap

1804. A 25-year-old patient complains of profuse gingival hemorrhages, pain in the oral cavity, weakness, fatigue, fever up to 38°C. These presentations appeared a week ago. Objectively: the patient is pale, adynamic. Examination of the oral mucosa reveals multiple hemorrhages, friable gums, necrotic areas on the tops of gingival papillae, as well as enlarged, soft, painless lymph nodes. The oral mucosal lesion can be a symptom of the following disease:
a. Vincent’s stomatitis
b. Chronic leukemia
*c. Acute leukemia
d. Hypovitaminosis C
e. Intoxication with heavy metal salts

1805. A 67-year-old patient complains of recurrent erosion on the red border of the lower lip. Objectively: the erosion is oval in shape, 0,8х1,3 sm in size, covered in thin scabs that reveal glossy surface with punctate bleeding, when removed. There are atrophic areas of the red border detected. Infiltration elements are absent. The submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Cheilitis glandularis
*b. Manganotti’s abrasive precancerous cheilitis
c. Keratoacanthosis
d. Leukoplakia, erosive ulcerative form
e. Bowen’s disease

1806. A 53-year-old patient complains of pain and clicking in the left temporomandibular joint. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, palpation of the lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left side. Mouth opening is reduced. Tomography shows the bone outline of joint surfaces to be smooth. Which disease of those listed below corresponds with this clinical presentation?
a. Joint ankylosis
*b. Temporomandibular joint disfunction
c. Deforming arthrosis
d. Rheumatic arthritis
e. Acute posttraumatic arthritis

1807. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient received a cheek abrasion that healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had been observing progressing pain and fever up to 38, 6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained, without discoloration. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute lymphadenitis
b. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region
c. Epidemic parotitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis

1808. A 33-year-old woman has been admitted to the dentofacial department with complaints of pain and edema in the right submandibular region, body temperature rise up to 39, 5°C. Objectively: the patient has asymmetric face because of soft tissue edema of the right submandibular region, palpation reveals a dense infiltration, the skin over it is hyperemic, cannot make a fold. The 46 tooth has a deep carious cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute right-sided osteomyelitis of the mandible
*b. Submandibular phlegmon on the right
c. Acute suppurative periostitis of the mandible
d. Acute submandibular sialadenitis
e. Acute suppurative submandibular lymphadenitis

1809. Having recovered from acute respiratory disease, a patient has made an appointment with a dentist. The patient complains of pain in the gums, foul breath, inability to take food, general weakness. Objectively: the gums are hyperemic, swollen, covered with necrotic dirty-gray coating; the gums bleed when the coating is removed.Microbiological study of tissues revealed a great number of cocci, bacilli, fusobacteria, and spirochaete. Specify the drug for etiotropic treatment:
a. Galascorbinum
b. Tripsin
c. Carotolinum (Betacarotene)
*d. Metronidazole
e. Potassium permanganate

1810. A 35-year-old patient complains of itch, burning and edema of lips. These presentations occured a week ago.Objectively: there is reddening of the red border and skin, especially in the area of the mouth corners, there are also vesicles, scabs, small cracks against the background of erythematous affection of the red border. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic cheilitis
b. Multiform exudative erythema
*c. Acute eczematous cheilitis
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Exudative form of exfoliative cheilitis

1811. A 47-year-old patient presents with rounded bone protrusions 0,7-0,8 cm in size on the inner surface of the edentulous mandible in the premolar area. The denture for this patient should have:
a. Orifices for the exostoses
b. Dentogingival clasps
c. Kemeny clasps
d. Metal base
*e. Elastic liner

1812. A 78-year-old patient is completely edentulous. He has been wearing dentures for 19 years. The patient complains of poor fixation of the upper denture. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, the alveolar processes of both jaws aremarkedly atrophied, the palate is flat. Mucous membrane in the denture-supporting area is atrophied. How often should the dentures be remodelled or restored?
a. Every 6 months
b. Every 7 years
c. Every 10-12 years
*d. Every 3-4 years
e. Once a year

1813. A 12-year-old boy complains of painful and bleeding gums on his upper jaw. Objectively the gingival margin in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth is swollen, hyperemic, deformed due to overgrowths. Gingival papilla cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height, bleed on touch. Upper front teeth are overcrowded. X-ray shows no pathological changes of the periodontium. What drugs should be administered for topical treatment in the first place?
a. Sclerosants
b. Keratoplastic agents
c. Cytostatic agents
*d. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
e. Steroidal antiinflammatory drugs

1814. A girl is 8 years old. She complains of impaired mastication. Objectively: on examination of the oral cavity the cutting edges of her lower incisors touch the palatine mucosa in the frontal area; the upper frontal teeth overlap with the lower ones by full height of their crowns. On the lower jaw the occlusal curve of the front teeth is markedly concave. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. False prognathism
b. Open bite
*c. Deep overbite
d. True prognathism
e. Cross bite

1815. A 43-year-old woman complains of mobility and displacement of her upper front teeth. Objectively: dental formula is17 16 15 14 13 12 11 21 22 23 24 25 26 2747 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . Teeth 12 11 21 22 are slanted towards the vestibular side, diastema and tremata are observed, I-II degree teeth mobility is detected. Select the orthodontic appliance for correction of teeth misalignment as a part of complex treatment of periodontal disease:
a. Bynin appliance
b. Katz crown
c. Palatal plate with inclined plane
*d. Palatal plate with vestibular arch
e. Schwartz appliance

1816. A 44-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that aggravates during teeth joining. The pain appeared 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is not limited. The crown of the 26 tooth is half-decayed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperemic at the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth had been treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute suppurative periodontitis of the 26 tooth
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute suppurative periostitis of the left upper jaw extending from the 26 tooth
e. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, and 28 teeth

1817. When a prosthodontist was preparing the patient’s tooth, the patient had epileptic seizure that was subsequently terminated. Whatmistake had beenmade by the doctor?
a. No inquire into the antecedent anamnesis
b. Crude preparation
c. Did not decline the appointment
*d. No inquire into the patient anamnesis
e. No anaesthesia

1818. Parents of a 3-year-old child report that the child suffers from constant pain in the upper front teeth. Objectively: the coronal part of the 61 tooth is gray and decayed. Probing of the root canal orifice is painful and accompanied by bleeding. The tooth percussion provokes acute pain. Mucosa is hyperemic, edematic and painful. Palpation in the region of the 61 and 62 teeth reveals a fistula. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

1819. A 30-year-old patient complains of a toothache caused by hot and cold stimuli. The pain irradiates to the ear and temple. Previously this tooth presented with spontaneous nocturnal toothache. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity communicating at one point with the tooth cavity. Probing at the communication point, as well as cold stimulus, causes acute pain. The pain persists for a long time. Electric pulp test result is 5 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
d. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

1820. A 52-year-old woman complains of periodical appearance of a gingival fistula in the area of the 15 tooth. The tooth had been treated 1,5 years ago for caries. Objectively: the 15 tooth is filled. In the root apex projection there is a fistula; purulent exudate discharges on pressure. Tooth percussion is painless. On X-ray: the root canal is not filled, there is a destruction focus with blurred margins near the root.Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
*c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Periapical cyst
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

1821. A man was diagnosed with hard palate abscess. What approach should be chosen for abscess dissection?
a. Linear dissection parallel to the hard palate raphe
b. Pus aspiration with a syringe
c. Abscess puncture
*d. Triangular dissection of the hard palate area
e. Linear dissection perpendicular to the hard palate raphe

1822. A 32-year-old patient presents with body temperature of 38, 9°C, general fatigue, impaired speech, inability to eat. This condition has been recurring for the last 4 years in autumn and spring. There are vesicles and erosions covered in grayish fibrinous coating on the hyperemic and swollen labial and buccal mucosa. Nikolsky’s sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pemphigus vulgaris
b. Nonacantholytic pemphigus
c. Dermatitis herpetiformis (Duhring’s disease)
*d. Erythema multiforme
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

1823. A 56-year-old man complains of enlarged lower lip, pain induced by hot, sour, salty, and bitter foods, and lips gluing together in the morning. The lower lip has been gradually enlarging and developing lumps his whole life. On examination: the lower lip is enlarged. The middle third of the Klein’s zone presents with several small red dots with openings that discharge clear drops. The red border is dry and peeling, there are fissures and erosions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cheilitis exfoliativa
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
c. Atopic cheilitis
*d. Cheilitis glandularis
e. Cheilitis actinica

1824. A 57-year-old retired man complains of attacks of burning pain and rashes on the skin of his face and oral mucosa on the right. Anamnesis: a course of radiation therapy for treatment of the gastric disease, past case of chickenpox. Objectively: along the third branch of the trigeminal nerve the skin of the face presents with isolated erosions covered in fibrinous coating. There are multiple vesicles on the hyperemic and swollen oral mucosa. Rightsided lymphadenitis is observed. What diagnosis is the most likely?
a. Murrain
b. Neuralgia
*c. Herpes zoster
d. Acute recurrent herpes
e. Neuritis

1825. A 42-year-old woman complains of acute pain in her lower jaw, teeth mobility, high fever. The condition persists for 2 days. On clinical examination a doctor diagnosed her with acute mandibular osteomyelitis. What tactics regarding the mobile teeth should the doctor choose?
a. Conservative treatment of the causative tooth
b. Extraction of all mobile teeth
*c. Extraction of the causative tooth only
d. Conservative treatment of all mobile teeth
e. Extraction of the causative tooth, trepanation and treatment of all mobile teeth

1826. A 7-year-old boy complains of increased body temperature, up to 38°C, headache, sore throat. Objectively: there are erosions on the slightly hyperemic mucosa of the soft palate, anterior palatal bars, and tonsils. The submandibular lymph nodes are slightly enlarged, painless. Name the causative agent of this disease:
a. Epstein-Barr virus
b. Herpes simplex virus
*c. Coxsackie virus
d. Klebs-Loeffler bacillus
e. Bordet-Gengou bacillus

1827. A 6-year-old boy complains of a cavity in the prevoiusly treated tooth. Objectively: in the 85 tooth there is a carious cavity within mantle dentin; the dentin is dense and pigmented; probing of the cavilty floor and walls, thermal stimuli, and percussion are painless. Sensitivity of the dentinenamel junction is observed during the cavity preparation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic superficial caries
*b. Chronic median caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
e. Acute deep caries

1828. A patient consulted a dentist about a cosmetic defect in the cervical region of the upper and lower canines. Various stimuli cause no pain. Objectively: there are V-shaped defects on the vestibular surface in the cervical area of the upper and lower canines. Their surface is smooth, glossy, hard. There is no reaction to probing and cold stimuli. What treatment should be administered?
a. Applications with 10% solution of calcium gluconate
b. Metal crowns
*c. Filling of the defects
d. Application of fluorine lacquer
e. Medical intervention is unnecessary

1829. A boy is 10 years old. He complains of sloped chin and impaired mastication. Anamnesis states formula feeding. Objectively: corellation of the 6th teeth is of the Angle’s II class. Sagittal fissure is 7 mm. Eschler-Bittner test is positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Progenia, mandibular macrognathia
b. Protrusion of the upper jaw frontal area
c. Prognathism, maxillary macrognathia
d. Retrusion of the lower jaw frontal area
*e. Prognathism, distal mandibular displacement

1830. A 10-month-old child is fussy, refuses to eat. Disease onset was 2 days ago. The child is been treated by a pediatrician for pneumonia, receives antibiotics and sulfanilamides. Objectively: the oral mucosa is hyperemic, swollen; there is whitish coating on the mucosa of the cheeks, lips, soft and hard palate; coating removal can cause erosions. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Allergic contact stomatitis
c. Chronic candidal stomatitis
*d. Acute candidal stomatitis
e. Geographic tongue

1831. A 20-year-old man complains of sharp pain in the mouth, increase of body temeperature up to 38, 5°C, headache and aching joints, general weakness. The disease onset was 3 days ago due to overexposure to cold. Objectively: the red border is covered with hemorrhagic scabs, oral mucosa has large erosions and ulcers merging with each other and covered with grayish-white coating against the background of diffuse hyperemia. Conjunctivitis is observed. The skin of the forearms has erythematous spots 1,5 cm in diameter, with blisters in their center. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lyell’s syndrome
b. Behcet’s syndrome
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Drug-induced stomatitis
*e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

1832. Parents of a 12-year-old child are concerned about the child having white spots on the frontal teeth of the upper jaw; the spots appeared half a year ago. Objectively: there are chalky spots detected in the cervical zone vestibular surfaces of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 teeth. The enamel in those spots is dull; probing revealed it to be pliant and coarse. The anamnesis states short-time pain caused by chemical stimuli. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic initial caries
b. Systemic hypoplasia of enamel
c. Dental fluorosis
*d. Acute initial caries
e. Acute superficial caries

1833. A 22-year-old woman complains of pain caused by hot food and bursting sensation in the tooth. Half a year ago she presented with brief bouts of pain in the night, which over time increased in duration. Objectively: there is a large carious cavity in the 24 tooth, which opens to the dental cavity, deep probing is painful. Electric pulp test is 80 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
*c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Acute suppurative pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

1834. A 14-year-old girl complains of bleeding gums and foul smell from her mouth. Objectively: gingival mucosa is hyperemic, pastose, hemorrhaging. Schiller-Pisarev test is positive. Papillary marginal alveolar index is 70%. Fedorov-Volodkina Hygiene Index equals 3. X-ray of the frontal area of jaws demonstrates retained cortical plate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic generalized periodontitis
b. Chronic generalized hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic generalized periodontitis
*d. Chronic generalized catarrhal gingivitis
e. Acute generalized catarrhal gingivitis

1835. A 40-year-old man had his root canal of the 34 tooth filled due to chronic fibrous periodontitis. Soon the treated place became painful. On X-ray the root canal of the 34 tooth is filled to the root apex. What tactics should the dentist choose to manage the pain?
a. To rinse with antiseptic mouthwash
b. To provide conduction anesthesia
c. To provide infiltration anesthesia
*d. To prescribe physiotherapeutic procedures
e. To make insicion along the mucogingival fold

1836. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred for orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, and 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are firm. What is the most aesthetic dental splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Ring splint
b. Cap splint
c. Mouthguard
*d. Mamlok’s splint
e. Soldered combined crowns

1837. The 40-year-old woman complains of inability to properly masticate due to the loss of the following lateral teeth: 18, 16, 15, 25, 26, 28, 38, 35, 36, 44-46, and 48. The rest of her teeth present with the I-II degree of mobility. Generalized periodontitis is observed. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
*a. Removable dental splint
b. Removable laminar denture
c. Metal-based denture
d. Fixed dental bridge
e. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture

1838. A 55-year-old patient requires a denture. Objectively: Kennedy’s I class dentition defect; the 16, 17, 18, 26, 27, and 28 teeth are missing. The patient presents with fixed occlusion. The 15 and 25 teeth have low crowns with poor anatomic contours, intact. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture is being made for the patient. What fixation system would be optimal in this case?
a. Roach clasp (clammer)
b. Attachments
*c. Telescopic fixation
d. Aker-Roach combined clasp (clammer)
e. Continuous clasp (clammer)

1839. A patient needs a clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture. It is planned to study the jaw model by means of a parallelometer in order to determine the required depth of the undercuts on the abutment teeth. Specify the length of the measuring rods used for this purpose:
a. 0,35 0,60 0,85
*b. 0,25 0,50 0,75
c. 0,20 0,45 0,70
d. 0,15 0,40 0,65
e. 0,30 0,55 0,80

1840. In a prostodontic clinic a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for a 53-year-old patient. Objectively: dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27. The teeth are firm, clinical crowns are tall with pronounced equator. X-ray shows no periapical changes in the periodontium of the abutment teeth. What clasp fixation is optimal for this patient?
a. Diagonal
b. Sagittal
*c. Planar
d. Transversal
e. Point

1841. A 20-year-old man complains of missing tooth on the upper right jaw, aesthetic defect. Objectively: the 12 tooth is absent, adjacent teeth are intact, firm, with distinct anatomical shape and tall crowns. Direct occlusion is observed. During the interview the patient was found out to have congenital heart disease. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge with 14 and 13 abutment teeth
b. Plastic dental bridge
*c. Adgesive dental bridge
d. Plastic-fused-to-metal dental bridge
e. Swaged-soldered dental bridge

1842. The 15 tooth must be extracted. The tooth crown is retained. What instrument should be used in this case?
a. Left-sided forceps with S-shaped handles
b. Right-sided forceps with S-shaped handles
c. Straight forceps
d. Bayonet forceps
*e. Forceps with S-shaped handles

1843. A 7-year-old child complains of pain and swelling in the left submandibular region. The swelling in this region developed 2 days ago. Objectively: the child is in a satisfactory condition, body temperature is of 37, 3°C. Face is asymmetrical due to the soft tissue swelling in the left submandibular region. Palpation reveals a round formation 2x2 cm in size. The formation is mobile, painful, unattached to the skin. The 74 tooth is discolored, percussion is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute serous nonodontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
b. Phlegmonous adenitis of the right submandibular region
c. Lateral cervical cyst
*d. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
e. Acute suppurative odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region

1844. A 32-year-old woman complains of tumor-like growth in the mucosa of her left cheek. Locally: buccal mucosa is of normal color. In the distal area there is a rounded elongated growth, soft and elastic, attached to a pedicle sized 0,5х1,5 cm. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Fibroma
*b. Papilloma
c. Hemangioma
d. Lipoma
e. Pleomorphic adenoma

1845. A 52-year-old patient complains of pain and swelling in the right parotid region. These manifestations have been present for about 2 years. Over the last month the swelling has enlarged, pain has intensified. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the dense infiltrate in the right parotid region. The poorly circumscribed, painful formation infiltrates the surrounding tissues. At the right side of neck in front and behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle there are enlarged, dense, mobile lymph nodes. The right naso-buccal groove is flattened, the corner of the mouth is downturned. The mouth opens freely. The are pronounced symptoms of the right facial nerve paresis. What disease can be suspected?
a. Pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland
*b. Adenocarcinoma of the parotid salivary gland
c. Actinomycosis of the parotid-masseteric region
d. Chronic parotitis
e. Chronic lymphadenitis

1846. A 57-year-old woman came to a dentist for extraction of the 34 tooth due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. What instrument would be optimal for tooth extraction in the given case?
a. Straight elevator
b. Curved elevators
c. Beak-shaped crushing forceps
d. Beak-shaped curved forceps
*e. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps

1847. A 35-year-old patient has been diagnosed with chronic median caries of the 36 tooth. There is a Black’s class II cavity affecting masticatory surface. What material should be chosen for the tooth filling?
a. Light-cure fluid composite
b. Light-cure microfilled composite
c. Glass ionomer cement
d. Silicophosphate cement
*e. Light-cure microhybrid composite

1848. A cast clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture is being made for a 58-yearold patient. Impressions are made, centric jaw relation is determined, plaster casts are obtained. What is the next stage?
a. Wax modelling of the denture frame
b. Transfer of denture frame pattern to the working model
*c. Examination of the working model with a parallelometer
d. Duplication of the working model
e. Marking the border seal

1849. A 13-year-old boy complains of general weakness, high body temperature up to 39°C, lack of appetite, constant pain in the body of the lower jaw. Objectively: observed is significant asymmetry of the face caused by soft tissues swelling in the left buccal and submandibular areas. Mouth opening is reduced. Intraoral examination revealed the following: the 34, 35, 36, and 37 teeth are mobile; teeth percussion is painful. The crown of the 36 tooth is completely destroyed. The mucosa of those teeth is hyperemic and painful when palpated.Mufflike enlargement of the lower jaw alveolar process is detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the right submandibular area
*b. Acute mandibular odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Acute mandibular odontogenic suppurative periostitis
d. Acute mandibular hematogenous osteomyelitis
e. Ewing’s sarcoma

1850. What denture constructions should be chosen in the cases of multiple adentia during the initial period of occlusion change?
a. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
b. Dental bridge
*c. Removable partial denture
d. No denture is necessary
e. Removable complete denture

1851. On objective examination a 59-year-old man with the edentulous mandible presents with bone protrusions and mobile areas of the alveolar crest. To ensure proper fixation of the denture and even load distribution the following functional impression should be made:
a. Compression
b. Complete anatomical
*c. Differentiated
d. Decompression
e. Combined

1852. A 49-year-old woman complains of cosmetic defect of the 11, 21, and 22 teeth, which developed over a year ago. Objectively: on the vestibular surface at the equator of the 11, 21, and 22 teeth there are shallow cup-shaped enamel defects that are dense on probing. Cold water induces no pain. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Hypoplasia
c. Fluorosis
*d. Enamel erosion
e. Superficial caries

1853. A 47-year-old patient complains of a burning sensation and pain in the mouth. Objectively: on the mucous membrane of cheeks along the line of teeth contact and in the corners of the mouth there are multiple polygonal bright red erosions 1,0-1,5 cm in diameter located on the hyperkeratinized plaque and opaque whitish mucosa. Cytological analysis revealed keratinizing epithelial cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme
b. Lichen ruber planus, erosive form
*c. Leukoplakia, erosive form
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Lupus erythematosus, erosive form

1854. A 28-year-old man complains of pain in the infraorbital and parotid region on the left. On examination: hemorrhage occurs in the lower eyelid and conjunctiva of the left eye, there are signs of crepitation and step deformity of the eyesocket lower edge. The mouth opens by 1 cm. Make the diagnosis:
a. Left articular process fracture
b. Malar arch fracture
*c. Zygomatic bone fracture
d. Traumatic arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Hematoma of the infraorbital region

1855. A child is 8 years old. There are complaints of congested upper incisors. Objectively: the first molars closure is of Angle’s I class, frontal overbite is orthognathic. The 12 and 22 teeth erupt palatinally with space deficiency of 2/3 of the tooth crown. The 11 and 21 teeth are 10 mm each in cross-section. The child has inherited father’s facial type with prognathism and macrodontia of the central incisors. Choose the preventive treatment, considering this hereditary pathology:
a. Filing down of the 11 and 21 approximal surfaces to provide the space for the 12 and 22 teeth
*b. Hotz serial extraction to reduce the dental arch
c. Massage of the 12 and 21 teeth area to stimulate their eruption
d. Jaw expansion to provide the space for the 12 and 21 teeth
e. Extraction of the 12 and 21 teeth to reduce the dental arch

1856. A 65-year-old woman complains of a neoplasm in the area of the nasolabial fold on the left, which appeared one month ago. Objectively: there is a gray neoplasm on the skin of the nasolabial fold on the left, markedly keratotic, 3,0х0,5х0,3 cm in size. Neoplastic base is painless, dense, and elastic. What is the most likely pathology that results in such clinical presentation?
a. Senile keratosis of the left nasolabial fold
b. Common wart of the left nasolabial fold
*c. Cutaneous horn of the left nasolabial fold
d. Keratoacanthoma of the left nasolabial fold
e. Lupus

1857. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a rounded tumor-like formation about 1 cm in diameter located within the red border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumor-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the red border, is dense and grayishred. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Verrucous precancer of the red border
b. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the red border
c. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
d. Bowen’s disease
e. Manganotti’s abrasive precancerous cheilitis

1858. A 38-year-old woman complains of burning pain in her lips and angles of her mouth, their dryness. Anamnesis states that she has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for the last 8 years. Objectively: the red border is dry, congestively hyperemic, covered in scales of variable size. In the angles of the mouth there are fissures covered in white coating, the skin is macerated. What ointment should be prescribed for topical treatment in the given case?
a. Lanolin
b. Erythromycin
c. Interferon
d. Prednisolone
*e. Clotrimazol

1859. A 35-year-old woman complains of lips enlargement. The first incident occurred one year ago, when she developed lip edema that abated quickly, but the lips remained slightly enlarged. Three days ago after overexposure to cold her lips enlarged again. Objectively: ptosis, upper and lower lips are markedly enlarged, more on the left, soft, elastic, and painless on palpation; no impressions on the lip surface are left after pressing it with a finger. The tongue is swollen, with tuberous surface and folds on its back. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Achard’s syndrome
b. Meige’s trophedema
c. Miescher granulomatous cheilitis
d. Quincke’s edema
*e. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome

1860. A 5-year-old child has bad habit of sucking on his tongue. At the front area there is a small vertical fissure up to 2 mm in size. Neutral closure is observed in the lateral areas of the jaws. The child is diagnosed with open traumatic bite of the I degree. A vestibulo-buccal shield was prescribed for treatment. What is the function of the appliance in the given case?
a. Prevention
b. Passive
c. Treatment
*d. Treatment and prevention
e. Retention

1861. A 40-year-old man, a chemical industry worker, notes the development of sour taste of the mouth, pain response to thermal and chemical stimuli. On examination: on the vestibular surface and cutting edge of the front teeth there are enamel defects with uneven scalloped margins, chalk-like in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Superficial caries
b. Fluorosis (erosive form)
c. Median caries
*d. Acidic necrosis of enamel
e. Enamel hypoplasia (erosive form)

1862. A patient with post-resection upper jaw defect that invades the nasal cavity has come to a prosthodontic clinic. What denture is recommended in the given case?
*a. Replacement denture with obturating element
b. Mouthguard
c. Replacement denture
d. Forming denture
e. Floating obturator

1863. An injured patient complains of reduced opening of the mouth, nose bleeding, skin numbness in the infraorbital and lower eyelid region. Objectively: there is face deformation due to the depression of soft tissues in the left cheekbone region, step deformity in the middle part of the inferior margin of the left orbit and in the area of the zygomatic alveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone without displacement of the bone fragments
b. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
c. Fracture of the malar arch
*d. Zygomatic bone fracture with displacement of the bone fragments
e. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla

1864. A 30-year-old woman came to a dentist with complaints of a slightly bleeding ”sore” on her lower lip, which is located at its median and bisects the lip into two even parts.On palpation the lip is swollen and slightly painful. What diagnosis corresponds with the given clinical presentation?
a. Lichen ruber planus, erosive-ulcerative form
b. Meteorological cheilitis
c. Tappeiner’s leukoplakia
d. Erosive-ulcerative leukoplakia
*e. Chronic labial fissure

1865. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
*b. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
c. Straight forceps
d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
e. Straight elevator

1866. A 62-year-old patient came to a dental clinic with complaints of facial swelling, pain in the lower left jaw, and numb lower lip. On clinical examination he was diagnosed with fracture of the body of mandible on the left, edentulous jaws, microstomia. Choose the optimal construction:
a. Weber’s dental splint
b. Elbrecht’s dental splint
c. Vankevych dental splint
*d. Limberg’s dental splint
e. Guning-Port’s dental splint

1867. Prior to dental treatment a 13-year-old patient had been administered anaesthesia. The patient complained of itching, tingling skin of the face, vertigo, nausea, labored respiration, spontaneous vision impairment. Objectively: pale face, swollen eyelids and red border, dilated pupils, thready pulse, and rapid labored respiration with crackles. Make the diagnosis:
a. Collapse
b. Syncope
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Epileptic attack
e. Quincke’s edema

1868. A 48-year-old patient came to a dentist after the maxillectomy on one side conducted 3 days ago. Remaining teeth are firm. Treatment plan foresees making an Oxman’s denture for the patient. What part of the denture should be produced first?
a. Forming
b. Substituting
c. Obturating
d. Resection
*e. Fixating

1869. Parents of an 8-year-old child have made and appointment with an orthodontist. There are complaints of their child having traumas of oral mucosa. Objectively: decreased height of the lower face, everted lower lip, deep labiomental furrow, milk occlusion. The upper incisors fully cover the lower ones; cutting surface of the lower incisors make contact with the anterior third of the palate. Mesiodistal ratio of the canines and the first permanent molars is normal. Grouping of the upper and lower front teeth is dissimilar. Make the diagnosis according to the Kalvelis classification:
a. Deep incisor overbite
b. Deep prognatic (roof-shaped) occlusion
c. -
*d. Deep traumatic overbite
e. Deep neutral occlusion

1870. A 46-year-old patient complains of mastication disorder caused by the lack of the 34, 35, and 36 teeth. The antecedent anamnesis is as follows: the teeth were extracted 3 months ago due to complication of cariosity. The patient anamnesis: the history of tonsillitis, rheumatoid arthritis and Botkin’s disease. After the appointment with this patient the instruments should be sterilized in the following way:
a. Processing with 0,1% chloramine solution
b. General procedure
c. Dry-heat sterilizer
d. Processing with lysol
*e. Specialized procedure

1871. Preventive examination of a 5-year-old child revealed a habit of lower lip biting. What malocclusion may develop if the child keeps this habit?
*a. Anterior bite
b. Open bite
c. Cross-bite
d. Deep overbite
e. Prognathic bite

1872. A 7-year-old child has protruding chin, the lower lip overlaps the upper one. There are diastema and tremata between the lower incisors, the lower incisors overlap the upper incisors by 2/3 of the crown height. First permanent molars demonstrate Angle’s class III relation. Sagittal gap is 3 mm. The correct treatment tactics would be to:
a. Use Schwartz’s appliance
*b. Use Bruckl’s appliance
c. Use Angle’s slider appliance
d. Recommend a complex of myogymnastic exercises
e. Use Bynin’s appliance

1873. A 62-year-old man had been wearing a full removable upper jaw denture. He complains of inability to use this denture due to constant burning sensation in the hard palate and dryness of the oral cavity. Objectively: on the hard palate under the denture base there are an edema and marked hyperemia. What means of prevention would be optimal in the given case?
a. Strict indications for the choice of material
*b. Shielding of denture base
c. Careful selection of impression paste
d. Strict adherence to polymerization procedure
e. Determination of risk group during examination

1874. A 42-year-old woman has made an appointment with a prosthodontic office to make a denture. Objectively: dental formula is as follows: 18 . . . . 13 12 11 21 22 23 . . . . 28 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . The patient has deep occlusion; clinical crowns are low; equator is not pronounced. The patient suffers from epileptic seizures. What kind of denture should be prescribed for this patient?
a. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
*b. Removable partial laminar metal-based denture
c. Removable partial laminar plastic denture with retainers (clammers)
d. Dental bridge
e. Removable partial laminar denture with supporting-retaining clasps (clammers)

1875. A 27-year-old woman complains of painful and bleeding gums, with the signs aggravating during eating, and indisposition. One week ago she had a case of URTI. Within the last 5 years she periodicaly presents with gingival hemorrhages. Objectively: the gums are bright red, markedly swollen; gingival papillae are friable, bleed on the slightest touch. There is moderate accumulation of dental calculus, large amount of soft dental deposit. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. On X-ray: osteoporosis of alveolar septa is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of initial generalized periodontitis
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, fibrous form
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form

1876. A 30-year-old man complains of pain in his front lower teeth, which he attributes to a trauma to the mental region. Objectively: continuous dentition, orthognathic occlusion. X-ray shows a median mandibular fracture. What dental splint would be optimal?
a. Weber’s splint
b. Plastic mouthguard
c. Soldered splint on rings
d. Cap splint
*e. Flat occlusal splint

1877. The department of dentofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a post-traumatic nose wing defect up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
*a. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
b. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
c. Free grafting with dermal flap
d. Grafting with tubed pedicle flap (Filatov’s flap)
e. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions

1878. A 25-year-old woman consulted a dentist about acute pain in her upper jaw on the left. The pain occurs during eating. Objectively: on the distal approximal surface of the 26 tooth there is a cavity filled with light soft dentin. Probing causes slight pain along the dentin-enamel junction, percussion is painless. Cold water causes quickly abating pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Chronic median caries
d. Acute deep caries
*e. Acute median caries

1879. A 27-year-old woman complains of recurrent loss of a tooth filling in the lower right jaw. Objectively: in the 46 tooth on the masticatory approximal surface there is a defect of hard tooth tissues affecting 1/3 of the tooth crown, no tooth discoloration; positive, quickly abating reaction to cold stimulus is observed. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Combined crown
b. Plastic crown
c. Partial crown
*d. Dental inlay
e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown

1880. A 10,5-year-old child complains of painful rash on his lips. Objectively: the red border of the lips is swollen, hyperemic, covered in fissures and numerous scabs of dried blood. The skin of the upper lip has small blisters containing serous substance, which merge with each other in some places. Maceration and weeping skin also can be observed, especially in the corners of the mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
*c. Exematous cheilitis
d. Actinic cheilitis
e. Exfoliative cheilitis

1881. A 27-year-old man complains of aching long-lasting pain in the 15 tooth during eating, especially cold food. Sometimes the pain occurs when the temperature changes. Objectively: on the distal surface of the 15 tooth there is a cavity filled with softened dentin. Probing is painful. Electroexcitability of the pulp is 35 microamperes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute deep caries
b. Hyperemia of the pulp
c. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
*d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

1882. A 56-year-old patient suffering from exacerbation of schizophrenia has been hospitalised in an oral in-patient department with a diagnosis of the lower jaw displaced fracture in the area of the 34-35 teeth. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. One arch flat occlusal splint
b. Weber’s dental splint
c. Vankevych dental splint
*d. Osteosynthesis
e. Dual splint

1883. During preventive examination a 5-yearold child was found to have insufficient physiological attrition of tubercles of the deciduous canines. What treatment tactics should a doctor choose?
a. Medical examination every 6 months until the incisors are replaced
b. Medical examination once a month until the incisors are replaced
*c. To shave off the retained canine tubercles
d. Medical examination every 6 months until the canines are replaced
e. No medical intervention is necessary

1884. A 25-year-old HIV-infected patient came to a clinic of prosthetic dentistry to have a denture made for him. What aseptic and antiseptic precautions should be taken?
a. The patient should be refused appointment
b. The impressions should be desinfected under a quartz lamp
*c. According to the scheme
d. No special precautions are required
e. The orthopaedist should work in gloves and a mask

1885. A 3-year-old child received an injury of the upper teeth as a result of a fall. Objectively: crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are embedded deep into the surrounding tissues with only their cutting edge visible, the gingival margin is hyperemic, edematic. What is the treatment tactics?
*a. Tooth extraction
b. Reposition
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Endodontic treatment
e. Monitoring

1886. A 60-year-old patient has been undergoing the procedure of checking the complete removable dentures construction and fixing teeth on wax bases. The following flaws have been detected: fissure between the teeth in the frontal area and tubercule contact in the lateral area. What mistake had been made?
a. Lateral occlusion was determined instead of central one
b. Posterior occlusion was determined instead of central one
*c. Anterior occlusion was determined instead of central one
d. Models were plastered in a wrong way in an occluder
e. Swabs were crushed, when central occlusion was being determined

1887. Dental splint is being designed in a prosthodontics clinic for a 39-year-old patient with generalized periodontitis, II degree. Gnathodynamometer is used to measure the periodontium load resistance. What anatomico-functional data are obtained with this method?
a. Periodontium pliancy
b. Masticatory force
*c. Masticatory pressure
d. Masticatory muscles tone
e. Masticatory efficiency

1888. A 45-year-old man complains of impaired chewing due to pathologic lower jaw mobility. The patient was diagnosed with false joint in the area of absent 33 and 34 teeth. On X-ray: defect of the mandibular body is 0,8 cm in size. The teeth on the fragments on both sides of the defect are intact. What denture would be recommended in this case?
a. Weber’s dental splint
b. Tigerstedt’s flat occlusal splint
*c. Oxman’s fixed dental bridge
d. Entin’s stiff head-chin strap
e. Tigerstedt’s wire anchor splint

1889. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain and swelling in the area of the left parotid salivary gland, which occurred 7 days after he had undergone abdominal cavity surgery. Objectively: body temperature equals 39°C, reduced mouth opening; dry mouth; when the gland is massaged, there is purulent exudate being secreted from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with the following disease:
a. Acute epidemic parotitis
b. Parenchymatous parotitis
c. Phlegmon of parotid-masseteric region
*d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Phlegmon of submasseteric space

1890. A 53-year-old patient complains of an ulcer on the lateral surface of the tongue. The ulcer appeared 6 months ago in the result of a trauma caused by sharp tip of the 37 tooth metal crown. A dentist replaced the crown with the one of better quality and prescribed keratoplastic drugs. Despite these measures the ulcer continues to grow. Lately there has been pain during talking, chewing, and swallowing, with occasional irradiation to the pharynx. Objectively: on the lateral surface of the tongue there is a painful ulcer with uneven raised dense margins and lumpy floor covered with grayish necrotic coating. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer
*b. Cancer of the tongue lateral surface
c. Traumatic ulcer
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

1891. A 15-year-old girl complains of toothache that persists for a day and increases on biting. Objectively: in the 36 tooth there is a deep carious cavity noncommunicating with the dental cavity. No reaction to the thermal stimuli is observed, probing of the carious cavity floor is painless. Vertical percussion is markedly painful. Gingival mucosa in the area of the 36 tooth is unaltered. X-ray presents with no alterations. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
d. Acute suppurative pulpitis
e. Acute serous pulpitis

1892. A 35-year-old patient, a veterinarian, came to a dentist with complaints of chills, fatigue, fever up to 38°C, muscle pain, sensations of dryness, burning, and pain in the oral cavity, excessive salivation, vesicles in the interdigital folds, on the lips, oral and nasal mucosa. On examination of the oral cavity there were detected painful bright red erosions with polycyclic contours against the background of inflammation. The following was observed: scabs on the lips, enlarged tongue, impaired speech, salivation up to 4 liters per day. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Murrain
b. Chickenpox
c. Erythema multiforme
d. Measles
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

1893. During examination of a 5-year-old child the orthodontist revealed no wear of teeth, no tremata and diastemata, orthogenic occlusion. Which of the following symptoms detected in the 5-year old child is a sign of future teeth overcrowding?
*a. Absence of tremata and diastemata
b. Orthogenic occlusion
c. Absence of mesial step in the region of second temporary molars
d. Orthognathic bite
e. Absence of wear of teeth

1894. An 8-year-old child has been clinically diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth. The crown is decayed by 1/2. What is the optimal tactics of dental treatment?
*a. Extraction
b. Endodontic treatment and drug therapy
c. Opening along the mucogingival fold, drug thrapy
d. Drug therapy
e. Endodontic treatment

1895. A 7-year-old child is diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 55 tooth. Additionally accompanying diagnosis of rheumatic endocarditis is made. What treatment tactics should a dentist choose?
a. Case monitoring
b. Endodontic treatment and case monitoring
c. Endodontic treatment
d. Endodontic treatment and physical therapy
*e. Tooth extraction

1896. Parents of an 8-year-old child complain of rashes in the child’s oral cavity. Lately the child has been inert, refused to eat. On the oral mucosa there are small round erosions with clear margins. There are vesicles with turbid content on the child’s face and scalp. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Hypertensive-hydrocephalic syndrome
b. Measles
*c. Chickenpox
d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Scarlet fever

1897. A 45-year-old patient is prescribed a dental bridge supported with implants. In the process of preparation to the prosthodontic treatment there were intraosseous screw two-stage implants placed in the area of the 34 and 36 teeth. How long is the period necessary for implant integration in this case?
a. 6 months
b. 2 weeks
*c. 3 months
d. 10 months
e. 1 year

1898. A 1-month-old child has problems with breastfeeding, insufficiently gains weight. On examination a doctor made the diagnosis of abnormal attachment of the tongue frenulum. What method of surgical treatment should be chosen in this case?
*a. Transversal dissection of the frenulum
b. Vestibuloplasty
c. Dieffenbach’s frenuloplasty
d. Limberg’s relocation of triangular flaps
e. Lingual frenulectomy

1899. A 5-year-old child complains of spontaneous pain in an upper jaw tooth on the right that aggravates at night and during eating cold food. Objectively: the 65 tooth has a deep cavity communicating with the tooth cavity. Probing is painful, percussion is painless. Cold water causes long-term pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative pulpitis
d. Acute serous pulpitis
e. Acute periodontitis

1900. A 10-year-old girl complains of sensations of dryness and pain in her lips, which develop in the summer. On examination: the red border has areas of congestive hyperemia and infiltration, scales and scabs, that, when removed, result in hemorrhaging erosions. The skin surrounding lips is unaltered. No rashes are detected on the oral mucosa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Actinic cheilitis, exudative form
*c. Actinic cheilitis, dry form
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Meteorological cheilitis

1901. A laminar denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 54-year-old patient. Base plate wax is used during the laboratory stage for wax templates. What group of accessory materials does such wax belong to?
a. Forming
*b. Modeling
c. Fixing
d. Abrasive
e. Impression

1902. A man complains of short-term pain attacks caused by cold stimuli in the tooth on his upper left jaw, which have been observed for the last 3 weeks. Objective examination of the 25 revealed a Black’s I class carious cavity located within mantle dentin. The cavity has narrowopening, its walls and floor are covered with softened dentin. Probing is painful along the dentin-enamel border, percussion is painless, thermometry is painful, the pain quickly abates after removal of a stimulus. Electric pulp test is 6 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic median caries
*e. Acute median caries

1903. A 54-year-old man complains of tooth hard tissue defects on the upper and lower jaws. Objectively: in the precervical area of the upper and lower premolars within the external layer of dentin there are hard tissue defects with surfaces meeting under the angle. Surface of the defects is smooth, glossy, and dense. What measure should be taken to prevent further progression of the morbid process in the patient?
*a. To train him in efficient toothbrushing
b. To prescribe calcium preparations intake
c. To limit sweet foods in the diet
d. To limit sour foods in the diet
e. To perform functional examination of the thyroid

1904. A 35-year-old man has been hospitalized into a dentofacial unit with complaints of mobility of the 38, 37, and 36 teeth and a fistulous tract in the socket of the extracted 35 tooth. The condition has been persisting for 3 months. Insertion of a grooved probe into the fistulous tract palpated bared coarse bone fragment that easily moved under pressure. X-ray of the lower jaw demonstrates a focus of bone tissue destruction, with a spot of dense bone tissue 0,5х0,3 cm in size. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
b. Acute osteomyelitis
*c. Chronic osteomyelitis
d. Chronic periostitis
e. Actinomycosis

1905. After extreme overexposure to cold a 42-year-old patient complains of headache in the left frontal lobe and the left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical; left nasal meatus breathing is obstructed, and serous-purulent discharge is being produced; palpation of the suborbital area and further along the mucogingival fold in the 24 and 25 teeth projection reveals slight pain. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. The alveolar process mucosa has no visible alterations. X-ray imaging shows decreased pneumatization of the left maxillary sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis of the 24
b. Acute rhinogenous maxillary sinusitis
c. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left maxilla
*d. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24

1906. A 8,5-year-old child is mostly healthy. There is a complaint of pain in the upper left tooth, due to it having been physically damaged 3 hours ago. Objectively: 1/2 of the 21 tooth crown is destroyed, the pulp is significantly exposed, red, sharply painful and bleeding when probed. Percussion of the 21 tooth is sharply painful. Choose the optimal method of the 21 tooth treatment:
a. Devital amputation
b. Vital extirpation
*c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Biological method

1907. A 11-year-old child complains of pain during eating food, especially hot, in the lower right lateral tooth. On the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth there is a large carious cavity filled with softened light-brown dentin. The cavity is located within parapulpar dentin. In the projection of mesiobuccal pulp horn the carious cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing is painful. Electric pulp test — 60 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Acute focal pulpitis
*d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

1908. A 28-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding of gums in the frontal part of the upper jaw on the left. Two years ago, the 22 tooth was covered with a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown. Objectively: interdental papilla between the 21 and 22 tooth is hypertrophied, markedly hyperemic, overlaps the crown of the 22 by 1/3 of its height, bleeds when touched. Periodontal pocket between the 21 and 22 tooth is 4 mm deep. Artificial crown is located on the gingival margin. Radiography reveals resorption of the interalveolar septa between the 21 and 22 tooth by 1/3 of their height. Specify a priority action in the treatment of this patient:
a. Sclerotherapy
*b. Removal of the artificial crown
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Gingivectomy
e. Curettage of the periodontal pocket

1909. A 45-year-old patient came to a prosthodontics clinic. During the objective examination the doctor checked the sagittal movements of the lower jaw. What muscles are responsible for sagittal movements of the lower jaw?
a. Mentohyoid muscle
*b. Lateral pterygoid muscles
c. Mandibulohyoid muscle
d. Medial pterygoid muscles
e. Digastric muscle

1910. An 18-year-old patient complains of a white spot on the vestibular surface of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the white spot is located near the cutting edge. The spot surface is glossy, its size remains unaltered on drying. Make the diagnosis:
a. Fluorosis
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Amelogenesis imperfecta
*d. Local hypoplasia
e. Initial caries

1911. A 20-year-old man complains of spontaneous pain in the 24 tooth, which arose suddenly and persists for about 15 minutes. Objectively: the distal surface of the 24 tooth exhibits a deep carious cavity with overhanging walls. The cavity is filled with light softened dentin and communicates with the tooth cavity. The cold stimulus causes acute, slowly abating pain. Percussion causes no pain response. Select the best method of treatment:
a. Biological method
b. Vital amputation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

1912. A 27-year-old patient has been referred by a prosthodontist for endodontic treatment of the 45 tooth. Objectively: the 45 tooth crown is destroyed; the lateral surface of the tongue and the buccal mucosa have patches of grayish macerated epithelium slightly rising above the mucosa surface at the points of direct contact with the 45 tooth. The uvula and palatal bars are stagnant-red in color; hard palate presents with papulae surrounded with red margin and covered in grayish epithelium. The submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Soft leukoplakia (leucoplakia mollis)
c. Lichen ruber planus
*d. Secondary syphilis
e. Lupus erythematosus, patch stage

1913. A 43-year-old patient complains of mobility and significant neck exposure of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, and 34 teeth are pale and cyanotic, non-bleeding. The 42, 41, 31, and 32 teeth exhibit the I-II grade mobility. The overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, and 32 teeth is present. The necks of the 42, 41, 31, and 32 teeth are exposed by 1/2 of the root length, the necks of the 43 and 33 teeth are exposed by 1/4. What kind of denture should be applied in this case?
a. Kurlyandsky’s bar splint
b. Partial crown
c. Half-ring splint
*d. Cast removable splint
e. Cap splint

1914. A 35-year-old woman complains of toothache and thickened body of the mandible. Objectively: the lower left jaw is thickened, Dupuytren’s symptom is observed on the vestibular surface of the mucogingival fold in the area of the 36 and 37 teeth. X-ray of the lower left jaw demonstrates the rounded focus of bone tissue destruction with clear margins. The roots of the 36 and 37 teeth are resorbed. Puncture yielded brown liquid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sarcoma of the body of mandible
*b. Giant cell tumor of the body of mandible
c. Fibrous dysplasia of bone
d. Ameloblastoma of the body of mandible
e. Cancer of the body of mandible

1915. A patient complains of the alveolar process deformation on the left upper jaw. Objectively: the crown of the 25 tooth is destroyed with cariosity. X-ray image of the paranasal sinuses shows the left one to have veil-like shading with clear dome-shaped margin. X-ray image of the crown of the 25 tooth shows absence of the periodontal fissure at the the palatal root apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Radicular cyst that invaded in the maxillary sinus
b. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Maxillary cancer
d. Maxillary sinus mucosal cyst
e. Chronic rhinogenous maxillary sinusitis

1916. A patient with ischemic heart disease has developed ventricular fibrillation. What is the first-priority therapeutic action?
a. Lidocaine injection
b. Potassium chloride injection
c. Novocaine amide injection
*d. Electric defibrillation
e. Adrenaline injection

1917. A 7-year-old boy came to a dental surgeon with complaints of painful swelling of his right cheek and high body temperature. Objectively the body temperature is 38,2°C, facial asymmetry caused by the right cheek edema, no skin discoloration, skin can be pinched in a fold, no mouth opening reduction. In the oral cavity the mucogingival fold in the area of the 84 and 85 teeth is smoothed out, the fold is hyperemic, fluctuation is observed. The 85 tooth is destroyed by cariosity, painless on percussion.Make the diagnosis:
a. Odontogenic abscess of the buccal area originating from the 85 tooth
*b. Acute odontogenic suppurative mandibular periostitis originating from the 85 tooth
c. Acute odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis originating from the 85 tooth
d. Acute odontogenic albuminous mandibular periostitis originating from the 85 tooth
e. Suppuration of the periapical cyst of the 85 tooth

1918. A 15-year-old adolescent boy complains of pain in the lower right jaw, which increases during chewing, and impaired closure of the teeth. Anamnesis: 2 days ago a trauma was received. Based on objective examination results and X-ray data the patient was diagnosed with open fracture of the mandible between the 45 and 46 teeth. Choose the method of treatment:
a. Temporary immobilization
b. Rudko’s appliance
c. Ligature
*d. Removable braces
e. Port’s dental splint

1919. A woman came to a dentist for consultation. She is 4 months pregnant. Objectively: marginal gingiva presents with dense gingival papillae, torus-shaped, oval, enlarged up to 1/3 of the tooth crowns. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Periodontitis
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Periodontosis
e. Ulcerative gingivitis

1920. A 53-year-old man complains of increased teeth sensitivity to chemical stimuli. Objectively: the gums are pale pink, roots are bared by 1/3 of their length. Small amount of dental deposit is observed. The 15, 14, and 24 present with cuneiform defects. Probing of the bared cervices and defects is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Periodontosis, I degree
b. Periodontitis, II degree
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
d. Periodontitis, I degree
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

1921. A 24-year-old man complains of painful and bleeding gums. The condition onset was 3 days ago after the patient had a case of acute respiratory disease. Objectively the gingival mucosa is swollen, bright-red, bleeds on probing, painful on palpation; tips of the gingival papilla are rounded; soft dental deposit is observed. X-ray shows no changes in the bone. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ulcerative gingivitis
*b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Atrophic gingivitis
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Periodontitis

1922. A 22-year-old woman came to a dentist for preventive examination. During examination of the oral cavity the dentist detected a defect of hard tooth tissues in the cervical area of the 22 tooth within mantle dentin. The dentin is dense and pigmented. No reaction to percussion and probing is observed.Make the diagnosis:
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Acute median caries
c. Necrosis of hard tooth tissues
*d. Chronic median caries
e. Acute deep caries

1923. Spot X-ray is performed for a 12-yearold child. The X-ray film shows the 35 tooth root to be of nornal length, its walls are parallel to each other and gradually thin out towards the apex. At the entrance the root canal is slightly smaller in diameter than near the forming apex. The periodontal fissure is uniformly wide along the whole length of the formed part of the root. In the apical area of the root it merges with growth zone. What stages of root and periodontium development correspond with this X-ray image?
a. Fully formed root and periodontium
*b. Unformed apex
c. Open apical foramen
d. Lengthwise growth of a root
e. Unformed periodontium

1924. A 10-year-old boy complains of painful sore in the mouth, which has been persisting and increasing in size for 1,5 months. Objectively: on the buccal mucosa there is a soft shallow ulcer 2 cm in diameter with uneven undermined edges. The floor of the ulcer is tuberous, covered in yellowgray coating. The ulcer is surrounded with numerous yellowish tubercles. The regional lymph nodes are elastic, painful, and matted together. These symptoms are characteristic of the following disease:
a. Lichen ruber planus
b. Cancer
c. Syphilis
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

1925. A 47-year-old man complains of persisting dull pain in his upper right jaw. Anamnesis states that the 13 tooth has been treated repeatedly to no effect. Objectively: oral mucosa in the area of the 13 and 14 teeth is hyperemic and painless on palpation. The crown of the 13 tooth is destroyed to the gingival margin. Percussion is sharply painful. What conduction anaesthesia should be applied to extract the 13 tooth?
*a. Infraorbital, incisor, palatal
b. Infraorbital, palatal, tuberal
c. -
d. Infraorbital, palatal
e. Infraorbital, incisor

1926. A 29-year-old man came to an oral surgery department to extract the 38 tooth. There are complaints of pain and reduced mouth opening. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C, general condition is satisfactory, slight facial asymmetry is observed due to soft tissue swelling under the gonial angle on the left. Inflammatory contracture of the III degree is observed. In the oral cavity there are edema and hyperemia of mucosa along the pterygomandibular fold on the left. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation. What conduction anaesthesia should be applied prior to the extraction of the 38 tooth?
a. Tuberal
*b. Berchet-Dubov anaesthesia
c. Buccal, lingual
d. Mandibular, lingual
e. Infiltration

1927. A 52-year-old man was referred to an in-patient dentofacial department with complaints of pain in the submandibular area, aggravating during eating. Anamnesis states frequent exacerbations of inflammatory processes. Main and additional investigations resulted in provisional diagnosis of submandibular sialolithiasis. A concrement 1,5 cm in diameter is localized in the body of the gland. What tactics should a dental surgeon choose?
a. Physiotherapeutic procedures
b. Saliva-producing diet
*c. Gland extirpation
d. Puncture biopsy
e. Extract the concrement from the gland and place a blind suture

1928. A 70-year-old patient complains of impaired mastication. Objectively: the 33 and 43 teeth on the lower jaw are retained, firm, but have significantly destroyed crowns. Removable partial denture is required. Choose the optimal method of denture fixation:
a. Intracoronal attachments
*b. Extracoronal attachments
c. Wire clasps (clammers)
d. Telescopic crowns
e. Cast clasps (clammers)

1929. A patient diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis came to a dental surgeon complaining of painfulmouth opening characterized by pain on both sides of the jaw. The following is characteristic of rheumatoid arthritis of the temporomandibular joint:
a. Pain is observed on one side of the temporomandibular joint
b. Clicking is observed in the joint on the right
c. Clicking is observed in the joint on the left
*d. Pain is observed on both sides of the temporomandibular joint
e. Pain can be observed on one or both sides of the temporomandibular joint

1930. A 38-year-oldman after a domestic accident complains of pain and mobility of his upper teeth, problems with eating. Objectively: soft tissues edema. The 11 and 21 teeth are displaced towards the palate, mobile (II degree), painful on percussion. Mucosa surrounding the affected teeth is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray demonstrates widened periodontal fissure of the 11 and 21. Choose the treatment method:
a. Immobilization or mouthguard
b. Removal of tooth pulp in the 11 and 21 teeth
c. Extraction of the 11 and 21 teeth
d. Reimplantation of the 11 and 21 teeth
*e. Setting of the teeth and their fixation with a flat occlusal splint

1931. Parents complain of painfulness and mobility of the tooth of their 4-year-old child, which developed after the impact with a wooden object. Objectively: the face is asymmetrical due to swollen tissues of the upper lip. The 51 tooth is intact, with vestibular displacement and the II degreemobility, gums around the 51 tooth are hyperemic. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Contusion of the 51 tooth
b. Complete dislocation of the 51 tooth
*c. Incomplete dislocation of the 51 tooth
d. Acute albuminous periostitis
e. Acute suppurative periostitis

1932. A 7-year-old child is in a grave condition, teeth of the upper left jaw are painful, body temperature is 39, 3°C. The child is pale, adynamic; the face is asymmetrical due to infiltration in the upper left jaw. The 64 tooth is filled, painful on percussion. The 63 and 65 teeth are intact, painful on percussion. The I degree of tooth mobility is observed; pus is being discharged from under the marginal gingiva of the 64 tooth. The alveolar process is deformed at its vestibular and palatine surfaces. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative periostitis
b. Acute albuminous periostitis
*c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
d. Ossification periostitis
e. Ewing’s sarcoma

1933. A 4-year-old child has developed acute spontaneous pain in the tooth on the lower right jaw, which aggravates on biting. Objectively: in the 85 tooth there is a deep carious cavity non-penetrating to the dental cavity. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity floor. Painful reaction to cold water stimulus and percussion is observed; mucosa surrounding the 85 is hyperemic. Submandibular lymphadenitis is detected. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute albuminous periostitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
*e. Acute pulpitis complicated with periodontitis

1934. An 18-year-old girl came to a dentist to check the quality of fissure sealing that had been performed one year ago. Objectively: the sealant is completely retained in the 17, 16, 26, 27, 37, and 47. No sealant was detected in the 36 and 46, in the distal longitudinal fissures of these teeth there is softened enamel. Fedorov-Volodkina Hygiene Index is 2,5. What tactics regarding the 36 and 46 should the dentist choose in this case?
a. Invasive sealing
b. Repeated noninvasive sealing
*c. Preventive filling
d. Applications with fluorine-containing gel
e. Electrophoresis of calcium-containing solution

1935. A patient needs the 36 tooth extracted. After administering anaesthesia the doctor started applying the elevator. However, immediately after that the patient suddenly paled, complained of dizziness, ear noise, and blackout and slid down in the chair. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Shock
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Collapse
*e. Unconsciousness

1936. A 54-year-old patient complains of frequent crunching sound in the right temporomandibular joint, which developed one month ago. In the morning the crunching is more frequent and decreases towards the evening. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the skin above the joint is unaltered, the mouth opens by 2,9 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute arthritis
b. Chronic arthritis
c. Pain dysfunction syndrome of the temporomandibular joint
*d. Arthrosis
e. Temporomandibular joint dislocation

1937. A 34-year-old man came to a dental clinic for extraction of the 26 tooth. After application of 1,7 ml of Ultracain (Articaine) solution for local anaesthesia the patient developed general fatigue and nausea. Objectively: the skin is pale, cold, cyanotic, covered in clammy sweat; BP is 60/40 mm Hg. What urgent condition did the patient develop?
a. Loss of consciousness
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Collapse
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Urticaria

1938. Carious cavities of the 11 and 21 teeth were detected during the preventive examination of a 20-year-old patient. Whatmaterial should be used to fill the detected cavities?
a. Plastic
*b. Microhybrid composite
c. Amalgam
d. Macrofilled composite
e. Phosphate cement

1939. A 14-year-old boy complains of rapid wearing-off of tooth crowns. Objectively: tooth crowns are worn-off by 1/3. Enamel easily chips off and is pale gray in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Fluorosis
b. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
*c. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
d. Systemic hypoplasia
e. Focal hypoplasia

1940. A patient complains of periodical gingival hemorrhages during tooth brushing and increased teeth sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli, which persist for the last 6 years. On examination the gums are swollen and hyperemic. Periodontal pockets are 5mm deep with serous purulent content, tooth cervices are bared, I degree tooth mobility is observed. On X-ray: irregular resorption of of alveolar septa up to their 1/2. What diagnosis corresponds with the given clinical presentation?
*a. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis, II degree
b. Periodontosis, I degree
c. Exacerbation of severe catarrhal gingivitis
d. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis, I degree
e. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome

1941. A 63-year-old man complains of pain in the area of maxillary mucogingival fold caused by using a removable laminar denture. Objectively: in the area of the mucogingival fold there is a trophic ulcer with swollen margins and hemorrhaging floor. Make the diagnosis:
a. Toxic chemical stomatitis
b. Allergic contact stomatitis
c. Greenhouse effect
*d. Denture-related stomatitis
e. Toxic infectious stomatitis

1942. A 64-year-old man complains of pain and mobility of his front lower teeth. Objectively: the 43, 42, 41, and 31 teeth demonstrate the III degree mobility. These teeth are planned to be extracted and immediate-insertion denture is to be made. When should this denture be put in place?
a. In 3-6 days after the teeth extraction
b. In 1-2 days after the teeth extraction
c. In 2-4 days after the teeth extraction
d. In 6-8 days after the teeth extraction
*e. On the day of the teeth extraction

1943. During the oral cavity sanation on the vestibular surface of the 21 and 12 teeth in the cervical area there were detected chalky spots. Enamel surface is dull and coarse, no reaction to thermal stimuli. DecayedMissing-Filled Index (dmft/DMFT) is 6, Hygiene Index is 2. Mesial occlusion is observed. Within the first year of life the patient had been suffering from frequent cases of URTI and a case of chicken pox. What additional investigation methods would be useful for the diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Electric pulp test
b. Anamnesis data
*c. Vital staining
d. X-ray
e. Stomatoscopy

1944. Apatient complains of pain and sensation of heaviness in the left side of his face and mucous discharge from the nose. On examination: left cheek edema, destroyed 26 tooth. Tooth percussion is sharply painful. X-ray demonstrates shadowed left maxillary sinus. What disease corresponds with the given clinical presentation?
a. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
b. Acute rhinogenic maxillary sinusitis
*c. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Cyst of the maxillary sinus
e. Acute ethmoiditis

1945. During application of tuberal anaesthesia the patient developed rapidly increasing tissue edema and reduced mouth opening. What resulted in such a condition?
a. Anaphylactic shock
*b. Vascular trauma
c. Nerve trunk trauma
d. Muscle trauma during anaesthesia application
e. Intolerance to the anaesthetic

1946. During application of infraorbital anaesthesia the patient developed a postinjection hematoma. What vessel had been damaged?
a. Palatine artery
*b. Infraorbital artery
c. Pterygoid venous plexus
d. Maxillary artery
e. Temporal artery

1947. A patient came to a dental surgeon with complaint of periodical pains in the 22 tooth. On X-ray examination the patient was diagnosed with granulomatous periodontitis developed due to filling material penetrating the space behind the root apex. What further treatment tactics should be chosen?
a. Referral to an oncologist
b. Recurrent endodontic treatment
c. Extraction of the 22 tooth
d. Prescription of anaesthetics
*e. Resection of the root apex

1948. After the inflammatory process in the parotid area a woman developed frequent pain attacks resembling electric current in her face on the right. The attacks last for 15- 20 minutes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
*b. Trigeminal neuralgia
c. Trigeminal neuritis
d. Tympanic plexus neuralgia
e. Exacerbation of chronic maxillary sinusitis

1949. A 24-year-old woman came to a dentist to receive sanation. Objectively on the masticatory surface of the 37 tooth there is a deep carious cavity connected with the dental cavity. The cavity probing is painless, no reaction to thermal stimuli is observed in the tooth, percussion is painless. EOD is 108 microamperes. X-ray shows traces of filling material in the rooth canal of the 37 tooth, periodontal fissure is enlarged and deformed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 37 tooth
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 37 tooth
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 37 tooth
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 37 tooth
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis of the 37 tooth

1950. A 40-year-old man came to an admission room with an incised wound of the infraorbital region received 8 hours ago. On examination the wound underwent primary surgical treatment. In case of an incised wound its edges:
a. Should be cleaned and drained
*b. Should not be excised
c. Should be closed with primary delayed sutures
d. Should be closed with secondary sutures
e. Should be processed with antibiotic solution

1951. An ambulance has delivered an 8year-old child to an admission room. An oral surgeon has made the following diagnosis: odontogenic phlegmon of the right submandibular area. What surgical approach would be advicable for open treatment of this phlegmon?
a. Dissection along the lower neck fold
b. Dissection in the area of pterygomandibular fold
c. Dissection parallel to the torus mandibularis
d. Dissection around the mandibular angle
*e. Dissection in the submandibular area, parallel to the mandible

1952. A 14-year-old child complains of throbbing undulating pain in the lower left teeth, which aggravates due to hot stimuli. Objectively: on the masticatory surface of the 36 tooth there is a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin, which is non-communicating with the dental cavity. The cavity floor probing is painless, tooth percussion is painful. What treatment method would be optimal in the given case?
a. Devital amputation
b. Devital extirpation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Biological method

1953. An orthodontist has registered for regular check-ups a 3,5-year-old child, who has a bad habit of finger sucking and presents with infantile swallowing. On examination: milk occlusion, direct contact of incisors. What preventive appliance would be optimal in this case?
a. Frankel’s functional regulator
b. Schonherr’s standard vestibular plate
*c. Vestibulo-buccal shield
d. Janssen’s bionator
e. Rudolf’s plate with loops

1954. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and crepitation in the temporomandibular joint during the movements of the lower jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with slight displacement to the left. Dentition is intact. To clarify the diagnosis X-ray of the temporomandibular joint was performed. Where should the heads of the mandible be located normally during maximum mouth opening?
a. In front of the articular tubercle
b. In the center of the glenoid fossa
*c. At the top of the articular tubercle
d. In the center of the articular tubercle
e. Closer to the distal part of the glenoid fossa

1955. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and crepitation in the temporomandibular joint during the movements of the lower jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with slight displacement to the left. Dentition is intact. On occlusiography there were detected centric and eccentric supracontacts. What treatment methods should be applied in the first place?
a. Mouthguards that increase the height of central occlusion
b. Lower jaw immobilization
c. Mouthguard for muscle relaxation
d. Appliances that limit mouth opening
*e. Selective teeth shaving

1956. A 65-year-old man during the tooth extraction suddenly felt unwell, he developed severe pain irradiating to the left scapula and numbness of the left hand. Objectively: the patient is pale, beads of perspiration appeared on his forehead, BP is 170/90 mm Hg, heart rate is 86/min., rhythmical. The dentist stopped the manipulations in the oral cavity. What drug should be administered in this case?
a. Zelenin drops
b. Valocordin
c. Analgin (Metamizole)
*d. Nitroglycerine
e. Valerian tincture

1957. A 45-year-old patient after administration of local anaesthesia in preparation to oral surgery has suddenly felt unwell, developed increasing edema of laryngeal mucosa and respiration disorder. The dentist stopped the manipulations in the oral cavity. What type of asphyxia developed in the patient?
a. Valvular
b. Dislocational
*c. Stenotic
d. Obturative
e. Aspiration

1958. A 19-year-old young man complains of a fistula on the neck anterior surface, which periodically reappears at the same place. Objectively: at the neck midline between the hyoid bone and thyroid cartilage there is a fistula; the skin of the affected area is scarred, drawn-in, and macerated. In the surrounding tissues a dense band extending from the fistula opening to hyoid bone can be palpated. A doctor has made a provisional diagnosis of thyroglossal fistula. Specify the additional method of investigation:
a. -
*b. Contrast radiography
c. Computer tomography
d. Probing
e. Ultrasound

1959. Mother of an 8-month-old girl came to a clinic with complaints of the child’s anxiety, fussiness, high fever up to 38, 5°C, signs of alimentary canal irritation, vomiting and refusal to eat. On objective examination the child is pale, crying, presents with hyperemia, edema, gingival pain in the frontal area of the upper jaw, no erupted teeth can be detected. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Hindered tooth eruption
b. Food poisoning
c. Odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
d. Hematogenous osteomyelitis of the maxilla
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

1960. A 45-year-old patient complains of inability to properly masticate due to the loss of lateral teeth. The 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27, 37, 36, 35, 44, 45, and 46 teeth are missing. The retained teeth exhibit the I-II degree of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis. Kennedy class I dentition defects are observed. What construction would be optimal in the given case?
a. Cantilever dental bridge
*b. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture with splinting elements
c. Elbrecht’s dental splint
d. Partial laminar denture
e. Mamlok’s dental splint

1961. Removable complete laminar denture is being made for a 63-year-old edentulous man. At the stage of placing the artificial teeth in the dental articulator it is necessary to determine sagittal articular angle. This angle equals:
a. 5-15
b. 20-25
c. 40-50
*d. 20-40
e. 15-20

1962. In a new neighbourhood unit of a large city a dental clinic is being opened. The clinic will employ 3 prosthodontists. How many positions of dental technicians, dental nurses, and orderlies should be provided?
a. 6 dental technicians, 1 dental nurse, 0,5 position of an orderly
b. 1,5 position of a dental technician, dental nurse, and an orderly
c. 3 dental technicians, 1 dental nurse, 1 orderly
d. 3 dental technicians, 1,5 position of a dental nurse, 1 orderly
*e. 6 dental technicians, 1 dental nurse, 1 orderly

1963. A 25-year-old man complains of shortterm pain in the tooth on the lower right jaw during eating sweet, hot, and cold food. Objectively: in the 36 tooth on the distal surface there is a carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity, dentin is softened. Probing of the cavity floor is painful, percussion is painless. Electric pulp test is 16 microamperes. Make the final diagnosis:
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Hyperemia of the pulp
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute median caries

1964. A 30-year-old woman complains of a carious cavity in the 16 tooth, food retention in the gap between the 16 and 17 teeth. During examination there was detected a carious cavity within mantle dentin with wide opening on the approximal-medial surface of the 16 tooth. The cavity floor and walls are pigmented, dense, painless on probing. Percussion of the 16 tooth is painless. On thermodiagnostics a short-term reaction can be observed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
*c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic concrementous pulpitis

1965. A 40-year-old patient requires surgical sanation of the oral cavity. Objectively: the 36 tooth is completely destroyed.Mouth can be fully opened. What anaesthesia would be optimal for extraction of the 36 tooth?
a. Mental
b. Mandibular
*c. Torusal
d. Infiltration
e. Berchet-Dubov

1966. A 45-year-old woman needs a denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 12, 25, and 26 teeth are missing. Specify the Kennedy’s class of dentition defects in the given case:
*a. II class, 2 subclass
b. III class, 1 subclass
c. II class, 3 subclass
d. III class, 3 subclass
e. II class, 4 subclass

1967. A 37-year-old patient complains of an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the 13 tooth is destroyed by 2/3. The tooth is pulpless, the root canal is filled. How deep should the root canal be opened for pivot crown installation in this patient?
a. Full length of the root canal
*b. 2/3 of the root canal
c. 3/4 of the root canal
d. 1/3 of the root canal
e. 1/2 of the root canal

1968. A 10-year-old boy complains of acute pain attacks in the area of his upper left teeth. The toothache persisted for a night. Objective examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 26 tooth within parapulpar dentin. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity floor. Markedly positive reaction to cold water stimulus is observed. Select the most likely diagnosis:
a. Acute serous periodontitis
b. Acute suppurative periodontitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
*d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

1969. A 15-year-old patient complains of carious cavity and short-term ”lightning-fast” pain attacks in the 26 tooth. The pain attacks cease in 1-2 minutes after eating. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity filled with softened dentin. The cavity floor is painful on probing.Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute traumatic pulpitis
b. Acute local pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
*d. Pulpal hyperemia
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

1970. A 7-year-old girl hit her forehead one day ago. Several hours after the sustained trauma a swelling developed in the left superciliary area. General condition of the child is unaffected. Objectively: swelling of the forehead tissues spreading towards the left eyelids; the swelling is soft, fluctuation sign is present. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Hemangioma of the right superciliary area
b. Fracture of the frontal bone
c. Hematic abscess of the left superciliary area
*d. Hematoma of the left superciliary area
e. Fracture of the temporal bone

1971. A 48-year-old patient has come to a hospital with complaints of defects in the paragingival area and slight sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively: there are hard tissue defects that resemble a wedge with smooth polished walls on the precervical vestibular surface of the 23 and 24 teeth. Thermal test is slightly positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel necrosis
b. Enamel erosion
c. Endemic fluorosis
*d. Cuneiform defect
e. Acute deep caries

1972. Parents of a 3-year-old child complain that the child has a neck growth that developed 3 months after the birth. Objectively: in the upper lateral neck area there is a semicircular neoplasm with limited mobility, soft elastic consistency, no skin alterations, painless on palpation. Puncture yielded puslike clear yellow substance. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Lymphangioma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
*c. Branchial cleft cyst
d. Specific lymphadenitis
e. Hemangioma

1973. A 16-year-old adolescent girl complains of pain caused by cold stimuli and food particles retained in her upper jaw tooth. Objectively: on the contact surface of the 24 tooth there is a carious cavity within parapulpar dentin. The cavity floor and walls are covered with light softened dentin. The carious cavity floor is sensitive to probing, percussion of the 24 is painless. Cold water stimulus is painful, the pain quickly abates after the stimulus is removed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute median caries
*c. Acute deep caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Chronic deep caries

1974. A 15-year-old girl complains of brief pain attacks in her teeth due to chemical stimuli. Objectively: on the contact surfaces of the 11, 21, and 22 teeth there are enamel areas matt white in color, with lost shine, covered in large amount of dental deposit. Enamel is softened and can be easily chipped off with excavator. Probing of lesions is painless. Percussion is painless. No reaction to cold stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
*d. Acute superficial caries
e. Acute initial caries

1975. A 32-year-old patient addressed a dentist with complaints of inability to close his mouth. Objectively the mouth is halfopen, the chin is protruding forwards and is displaced to the left. Such condition occurred after the mouth was opened wide. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anterior left-sided mandibular dislocation
b. Posterior right-sided mandibular dislocation
c. Posterior left-sided mandibular dislocation
*d. Anterior right-sided mandibular dislocation
e. Anterior bilateral mandibular dislocation

1976. During preventive examination a patient was diagnosed with precancerous hyperkeratosis of the red border of the lower lip. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + chemotherapy
b. Palliative treatment
c. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + close-focus roentgenotherapy
d. No treatment is required
*e. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues

1977. A 23-year-old patient is hospitalized into a dentofacial unit with provisional diagnosis of the II degree thermal burns of the right buccal and parotid-masseter region. What scar tissue will develop in this case?
*a. Healing without a scar
b. Hypertrophic scar
c. Keloid scar
d. Hypotrophic scar
e. Atrophic scar

1978. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the gonial angle. Objectively: the 45, 46, 34, 35, and 36 teeth are missing; there are slight swelling and reduced mouth opening observed. X-ray: right-sided fracture of the body of mandible in the area of the 45 and 46 teeth without bone defect. What dental splint should be used for treatment?
a. Limberg
b. Zbarzh
c. Vankevych
*d. Weber
e. Tigerstedt

1979. A clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture for the lower jaw is to be made for a 53-year-old patient. Objectively: the 38, 37, 35, 34, 45, 46, and 47 teeth are missing. The retained teeth are firm, with low clinical crowns. What fixation method of the denture would be optimal in this case?
a. Bar system
b. Supporting-retaining clasps (clammers)
*c. Telescopic system
d. Attachments
e. Ball joint attachments

1980. A 28-year-old woman is diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis, II degree. The doctor prescribed her amouthwash with chlorhexidine gluconate as a part of complex therapy. This drug belongs to the following group of antiseptics:
a. Halogens
b. Dyes
*c. Detergents
d. Oxidants
e. Acids and alkalis

1981. A 22-year-old patient has suffered unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was provided with full dental brace with loops and intermaxillary elastic expansion. Recovery was uncomplicated. The brace should be removed after:
a. 1 week
b. 2 weeks
*c. 3 weeks
d. 10 days
e. -

1982. A 33-year-old man, a metalworker, complains of pain and itching in the gums, gingival hemorrhages intensifying during tooth brushing. The onset of the disease was 1 year ago. Objectively: the gums in the area of upper and lower frontal teeth are hyperemic, swollen, and cyanotic. There are significant mineralized deposits on the teeth; the periodontal sockets are 3 mm deep and produce small amount of serous discharge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic generalized periodontitis, I class
b. Exacerbation of chronic generalized periodontitis, II class
c. Generalized periodontosis, I class
d. Acute localized periodontitis, II class
e. Chronic localized periodontitis, I class

1983. A 34-year-old man complains of pain in the area of his right eye, headache, and body temperature rise up to 38,6°C. Two days ago the patient developed an infiltration in the lower eyelid of the right eye. Objectively the eyelids are markedly swollen, palpebral fissure is closed, conjunctiva is swollen. Exophthalmos is observed. The eyeball is immobile, vision is impaired. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Orbital phlegmon
b. Purulent maxillary sinusitis
c. Lower eyelid abscess
d. Angular vein trombophlebitis
e. Eyelid phlegmon

1984. A 35-year-old patient complains of burns of the face and neck, swelling and burning pain in the affected area. On examination: edema of the face and neck, palpebral fissure is narrowed due to swelling, affected skin is hyperemic and covered with strained thin-walled blisters filled with clear content. Where blisters are broken, there are pink wounds, sharply painful to touch. Determine the degree of the burns:
a. III B
b. IV
c. I
d. III A
*e. II

1985. A 19-year-old patient came to a dentofacial clinic with complaints of pain in the gonial angle on the right, impaired mouth opening and painful chewing. The signs had been persisting for 5 days, emerged spontaneously and had been aggravating gradually. Mandibular contracture is of the III degree. On examination of the oral cavity: hyperemia, edema of the retromolar space on the right, hood-shaped mucosa from under which pus is being discharged and 2 tooth tubercles can be detected. X-ray shows oblique medial tooth position. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute suppurative pericoronitis of the 48 tooth
b. Chronic local mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Acute submandibular sialadenitis
d. Fracture of the gonial angle
e. Acute suppurative periostitis from the 48 tooth

1986. A 45-year-old man came to a dentist with complaints of a massive and extremely dense (resembling wood) infiltration in the parotid and retromandibular areas, which persists for 1,5months. The patient’s general condition remains largely undisturbed, signs of inflammatory process are vague and indistinct. Periodically in the infiltration area the skin assumes cyanotic-purple color, a soft patch appears in the center, where 1-2 fistulae develop and discharge pus with white granules. Periodically fistulae close and reopen.Make the diagnosis:
a. Parotid erysipelas
b. Parotid tuberculosis
*c. Parotid actinomycosis
d. Chronic parotid sialadenitis
e. Adenocarcinoma of the parotid gland

1987. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain of their child having a gradually enlarging neoplasm in the left parotid-masticatory region. Skin over the tumor is without discoloration. The tumor is painless, but when the head bends down the tumor increases in size and assumes bluish coloring. What disease can be suspected in the child?
*a. Hemangioma
b. Atheroma
c. Cyst of the parotid gland
d. Lymphangioma
e. Fibroma

1988. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the tragus area, clicking sound during mouth opening, stuffed ears. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening path is straight.Dentition defect can be estimated as Kennedy I class; the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, and 28 teeth are missing. In this case the load would be the most traumatizing for the following anatomical structure:
a. Distal slope of the articular tubercle
b. Socket floor of the temporal bone
c. Articular capsule
d. Articular head
*e. Interarticular disk

1989. A 50-year-old man complains of bared dental cervices on his upper and lower jaws. Objectively: the teeth and dentition are intact, clinical crowns are elongated, the teeth have no pathologic mobility, are worn off within the physiological norm. To remove supracontacts it is planned to perform selective teeth shaving. What additional investigation is necessary in the given case?
a. X-ray
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Mastication tests
*d. Occlusiography
e. Masticatiography

1990. A 28-year-old man presents with profuse caseous coating on the posterior third of the back of his tongue, soft palate, tonsils, and posterior wall of the pharynx. Submandibular, submental and deep cervical lymph nodes have been enlarged for 4 months. Two weeks ago the patient developed intermittent fever and general fatigue. Select the correct sequence of HIV diagnosing:
a. Viral cultivation, enzymoimmunoassay
*b. Enzymoimmunoassay, immunoblotting (Western-Blot)
c. Complete blood count, viral load
d. CD4 cell count, enzymoimmunoassay
e. Complete blood count, enzymoimmunoassay

1991. A 38-year-old man complains of sensation of a foreign body on his tongue and development of gag reflex during talking. The signs appeared after the prolonged taking of antibiotics. Objective examination detected thickened and pigmented filiform papillae enlarged to 2-3 cm in size. Histologically papillar hyperplasia and marked keratinization without alteration of the surrounding tissues were detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Geographic tongue
*b. Black hairy tongue
c. Fissured tongue
d. Median rhomboid glossitis
e. Glossitis areata exfoliativa

1992. ?A removable full denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 75-year-old man. Objectively the alveolar process is slightly atrophied. Herbst tests are performed during ?tting of an impression tray. When lips are stretched forwards the tray slips off. Where should the tray edge be shortened in this case?
a. From behind the mandibular tuberosity to the mylohyoid line
b. From canine to canine on the lingual side
*c. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
d. Along the mylohyoid line
e. In the premolar area on the lingual side

1993. A 18-year-old boy complains of bleeding and pain in her gums. The disease onset was 4 days ago. Objectively the skin is pale, body temperature is 38.5°C. Her submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged, painful, non-fused with the surrounding tissues. The gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37 are hyperemic, ulcerated, and covered in necrotic deposit. Teeth present with soft dental plaque. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. —

1994. A 60-year-old man complains of stabbing pain near the root of the tongue on the right, which develops during eating, especially sour food. Objectively: there is a swelling in the right submandibular area. On palpation the submandibular gland is dense and enlarged. Excretory duct ori?ce of the right submandibular gland is dilated and produces mucopurulent secretion. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Sialolithiasis of the submandibular gland
b. Acute suppurative lymphadenitis
c. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular area
d. Acute sialodochitis
e. Calculous sialadenitis of the sublingual gland

1995. A 19-year-old woman, an actress, complains of discoloration of her left maxillary central incisor. One year ago the pulp of this tooth was removed and the tooth was ?lled. Gradually the tooth assumed grayish color. Objectively the 11 is ?lled, discolored, ?rm, painless on percussion. Deep occlusion is observed. What part of the clinical presentation contraindicates installation of an all-porcelain crown?
a. Devitalized teeth defects that cannot be correctedwithdentalinlays
*b. Deep occlusion
c. Enamel hypoplasia with tooth deformation and discoloration
d. Front teeth defects that cannot be corrected with ?llings
e. Tooth discoloration

1996. A 32-year-old woman needs a denture. On objective examination the decision was made in favor of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown. What material should be used in this case to obtain the impression?
a. Orthocor
*b. Stoma?ex
c. Stomalgin
d. Repin
e. Stens

1997. Parents of a 6-month-old child complain of their child having a large amount of dental deposit in the oral cavity. Objectively the oral mucosa is hyperemic, covered in white easily removed deposit that resembles curdled milk. What is the causative agent of this disease?
a. Herpes simplex virus
b. Coxsackie virus
c. Epstein-Barr virus
*d. Candida fungi
e. Klebs-Loef?er bacillus

1998. A 55-year-old man complains of heartburn and unpleasant sensations in his tongue. The patient has been suffering from gastritis with low acidity for approximately 5 years. What changes in the tongue are the most likely to be detected in this patient?
a. Erosions on the lateral surfaces of the tongue
b. Hypertrophic lingual papillae
*c. Atrophied and smoothed out lingual papillae
d. Coated tongue
e. Fissured tongue

1999. A 10-year-old child is referred by the orthodontist for extraction of tooth 53. Objectively the crown of 53 is retained, the tooth is immobile. X-ray of tooth 53 shows root resorption by less than 1/3. Choose the best instrument for extraction of tooth 53:
a. Straight elevator
b. Crown forceps with S-shaped handles
c. Beak-shaped root forceps
*d. Straight crown forceps
e. Root bayonet forceps

2000. A 24-year-old woman has Richmond crown being made to restore the crown of the central maxillar incisor. The cap is completed. What is the next step of prosthesis-making?
*a. To ?t the cap on the tooth stump and place the post in the root canal
b. To ?t the cap and the post to the tooth root
c. Tooth ?xation with cement
d. Making of combination dental crown
e. To solder the post with the cap

2001. Removable full dentures are being made for a 65-year-old man. Progenic occlusion is determined. What are the speci?cs of teeth placement in case of progenic occlusion of edentulous jaws?
a. Short-bite anterior teeth
*b. Superior dental arch is shortened by two premolars
c. Inferior dental arch is shortened by two premolars
d. Anterior teeth are placed in direct occlusion
e. Anterior teeth are placed in orthognathic occlusion

2002. A 53-year-old patient complains of pain and clicking in the left temporomandibular joint. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, palpation of the lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the left side. Mouth opening is reduced. Tomography shows smooth bone outline of joint surfaces. Which disease of those listed below corresponds with this clinical presentation?
a. Deforming arthrosis
b. Rheumatic arthritis
*c. Temporomandibular joint dysfunction
d. Acute posttraumatic arthritis
e. Joint ankylosis

2003. A 47-year-old man complains of partial loss of his upper teeth. The patient’s medical history states loss of teeth due to trauma sustained 3 months ago. 11 and 12 are lost. 13, 21, and 22 are destroyed by 2/3 and restored with ?llings. Occlusion is orthognathic. What denture construction would be optimal for this patient, considering his occupation as a lecturer?
a. Plastic dental bridge
b. Removable partial laminar denture for the upper jaw
c. Swaged-soldered metal dental bridge with faceted intermediate part
*d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridge
e. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture with attachments

2004. A 7-year-old boy is diagnosed with epidemic parotitis (mumps). Name the most likely complication of this disease:
*a. Orchitis
b. Dermatitis
c. Cholecystitis
d. Pneumonia
e. Colitis

2005. During preventive examination a 40-yearold man presents with the following changes: marginal gingiva is enlarged, torus-shaped, cyanotic, slightly bleeding when touched with a dental probe; there is no pain. Staining the gums with Lugol’s iodine solution results in light-brown coloring of mucosa. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
c. Generalized periodontitis
*d. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis

2006. A 4-year-old boy has been diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw originating from the 64 tooth. Choose the optimal treatment tactics:
*a. The 64 tooth extraction, periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
b. Endodontological treatment of the 64 tooth, anti-in?ammatory pharmacotherapy
c. Periosteotomy, anti-in?ammatory pharmacotherapy
d. Endodontological treatment of the 64 tooth, periosteotomy
e. The 64 tooth extraction, anti-in?ammatory pharmacotherapy

2007. An adolescent complains of reduced and painful mouth opening, dif?culties when eating, and swelling in the left mandibular angle that developed after tooth 37 was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue swelling in the area of the left mandibular angle. Mouth opening is painful and reduced to 2.0 cm. Disturbed occlusion is observed. Palpation of the left mandibular angle is painful, the tissues are soft, bone crepitus is detected. ”Indirect load to the chin” symptom is positive in the area of the left mandibular angle. The socket of the extracted tooth is packed with iodoform gauze. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Left mandibular angle fracture
b. Anterior mandibular fracture
c. Odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Mandibular periostitis on the left
e. Mandibular alveolar fracture

2008. A 32-year-old man has metallic inlay made for him. The denture is being made for tooth 36 with Black’s class I carious cavity. What surfaces of the inlay should be ?led down and polished before ?xing the denture?
a. Lateral surfaces
b. Inlay bottom
c. Lateral surfaces and inlay bottom
*d. Occlusal surface
e. All surfaces

2009. A 12-year-old boy complains of painful and bleeding gums on his upper jaw. Objectively the gingival margin in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 teeth is swollen, hyperemic, deformed due to gingival overgrowths. Gingival papillae cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height, bleed on touch. Upper front teeth are overcrowded. X-ray shows no pathological changes of the periodontium. What drugs should be administered for topical treatment in the ?rst place?
a. Steroidal anti-in?ammatory drugs
b. Sclerosants
*c. Nonsteroidal anti-in?ammatory drugs
d. Keratoplastic agents
e. Cytostatic agents

2010. A 43-year-old woman complains of mobility and displacement of her upper front teeth. Objectively: dental formula is 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37. Teeth 12 11 21 22 are slanted towards the vestibular side, diastema and tremata are observed, I-II degree teeth mobility is detected. Select the orthodontic appliance for correction of teeth misalignment as a part of complex treatment of periodontal disease:
*a. Palatal plate with vestibular arch
b. Schwartz appliance
c. Palatal plate with inclined plane
d. Katz crown
e. Bynin appliance

2011. A 45-year-old man complains of toothache and mobility of his upper front teeth. Objectively his dental formula is as follows: 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 . Dental cervices of 13 12 11 21 22 are exposed and demonstrate mobility of the III degree. Mobile teeth are to be extracted and immediate denture is to be made for the patient. How soon after the teeth extraction should such dentures be inserted?
a. In 5-6 days
b. In 6-7 days
c. In 1-2 days
d. In 3-4 days
*e. On the day of teeth extraction

2012. A 56-year-old man complains of swelling and pain in his right parotid area. The swelling was noticed 5-6 months ago. Objectively right-sided paresis of the facial muscles can be determined. Palpation reveals there a modrately painful tuberous tumor fused with surrounding tissues. In the center of the tumor there is an area of softening. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and dense. The mouth can be opened without restriction. There is no saliva out?ow from the opening of the right parotid gland. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Actinomycosis of the right parotid gland
*b. Adenocarcinoma of the right parotid gland
c. Chronic lymphadenitis of the right parotid area
d. Chronic non-epidemic parotitis
e. Mixed tumor of the right parotid gland

2013. Parents of a 3-year-old child report that the child suffers from constant pain in the upper front teeth. Objectively: the coronal part of the 61 tooth is gray and decayed. Probing of the root canal ori?ce is painful and accompanied by bleeding. The tooth percussion provokes acute pain. Mucosa is hyperemic, edematic and painful. Palpation in the region of the 61 and 62 teeth reveals a ?stula. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic pulpitis

2014. Puncture sample taken from a 13-yearold child contains giant Reed-Sternberg cells. What diagnosis can be con?rmed by the cell content of this puncture material?
a. Lymph node actinomycosis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Tuberculous lymphadenitis
d. Lymphocytic leukemia
*e. Lymphogranulomatosis

2015. A 25-year-old man complains of genelal malaise, high body temperature, acute gingival bleeding, and gingival enlargement. He has a history of nosebleeds. Objectively the patient presents with systemic lymphoid hyperplasia, pallor of skin and mucosa, II-III degree hyperplasia of the gingival mucosa, hemorrhages into the buccal mucosa, and ulcers covered with gray deposit. What examination method would be optimal for diagnosis-making in this case?
a. Immunoassay
b. Blood glucose test
c. Yasynsky test
d. Bacterioscopy
*e. Complete blood test panel

2016. A 19-year-old young man complains of constant pain in tooth 22, which intensi?es on biting with this tooth, sensation of ”protruding” tooth, and upper lip edema. The patient has history of upper jaw trauma. Objectively tooth 22 is intact. Vertical percussion is acutely painful. The upper lip is swollen, mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 22 is red and painful on palpation. What examination method is necessary for diagnosismaking in this case?
a. Thermometry
*b. X-ray
c. Rheodentography
d. Dental pulp test
e. Transillumination

2017. A patient complains of carious cavity in tooth 11. The ?lling was lost one week ago. The tooth crown is dark, there is residual ?lling material at the bottom of the carious cavity. Vertical percussion is painless. X-ray shows an oval area of bone tissue resorption with clear margins, 0.4х0.3 cm in size. The root canal is ?lled by 2/3 of its length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Radicular cyst
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis

2018. A 28-year-old man is referred for oral cavity sanation. On examination there is a ?lling on the masticatory surface of tooth 17, percussion is painless. Mucosa in the root apex projection of 17 is cyanotic, vasoparesis symptom is positive. X-ray shows foci of bone tissue destruction with fuzzy margins in the area of root apices, root canals are not ?lled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
*b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
d. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
e. Radicular cyst

2019. A 30-year-old woman complains of mild burning sensation in her lower lip and its dryness. She peels skin scales off with her teeth. She has been presenting with this condition for 10 years. On examination the skin scales are gray and located on the lip from the Klein’s line to the center of the vermillion border from angle to angle of the mouth. The scales are ?rmly attached in the center and are loose on the periphery. Their forcible removal does not result in erosions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
b. Eczematous cheilitis
c. Lupus erythematosus
d. Meteorological cheilitis
*e. Exfoliative cheilitis

2020. A 32-year-old patient presents with body temperature of 38.9°C, general fatigue, impaired speech, inability to eat. This condition has been recurring for the last 4 years in autumn and spring. There are vesicles and erosions with grayish ?brinous coating on the hyperemic and swollen labial and buccal mucosa. Nikolsky’s sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Pemphigus vulgaris
*c. Erythema multiforme exudativum
d. Nonacantholytic pemphigus
e. Dermatitis herpetiformis (Duhring’s disease)

2021. A 28-year-old woman complains of persisting pain in tooth 34, which intensi?es on biting. Four days ago arsenic paste was left in the 34. The patient missed her appointment with the dentist. Objective examination detected occlusive dressing on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 34, percussion is acutely painful. What treatment tactics would be the most advisable in this case?
a. The root canal is lavaged with antidote and ?lled
b. —
c. Dentin dressing is removed, electrophoresis with antidote along the mucogingival fold is prescribed
d. The root canal is lavaged with antidote, the tooth remains uncovered
*e. Arsenic antidote is placed into the root canal under occlusive dressing

2022. A 35-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic with complaints of teeth mobility on his lower jaw. What type of occlusion stabilization is recommended in this case?
a. Frontal
b. Sagittal
*c. Arch
d. Parasagittal
e. Frontosagittal

2023. A 57-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility and inability to eat. Objectively: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 47 teeth exhibit grade II mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
*b. Removable cast splint
c. Kurlyandsky splint bar
d. Removable partial denture
e. Bynin removable splint

2024. A 16-year-old young man complains of temperature increase up to 38.7°C, pain when eating and swallowing, foul acrid smell from his mouth. Lymph nodes, especially cervical ones, are enlarged, mobile, and painless. Objectively the patient presents with generalized hyperemia of the oral mucosa, multiple petechiae, necrotic spots, and profuse coating of the anterior pharynx. Blood test: increased ESR, marked leukocytosis, monocytosis, atypical mononuclear cells, thrombocytopenia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vincent stomatitis (acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis)
b. Monoblastic leukemia
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Herpetic angina

2025. A 57-year-old retired man complains of attacks of burning pain and rashes on the skin of his face and oral mucosa on the right. Anamnesis: a course of radiation therapy for treatment of gastric disease, past case of chickenpox. Objectively: along the third branch of the trigeminal nerve the skin of the face presents with isolated erosions covered in ?brinous coating. There are multiple vesicles on the hyperemic and swollen oral mucosa. Right-sided lymphadenitis is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuralgia
b. Acute recurrent herpes
c. Neuritis
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Murrain

2026. A 12-year-old girl has complaint of a carious cavity in her tooth. Objectively: there is Black’s class 1 carious cavity in the 36 tooth; it is localized in the parapulpar dentin; the mouth of the cavity is wide. The dentin is dense and pigmented. It is sensitive to cold stimulus, percussion is painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Acute median caries
c. —
*d. Chronic deep caries
e. Acute deep caries

2027. A 35-year-old woman has complaints of cosmetic defects of the front upper teeth crowns. The defects have been aggravating for the last 10 years. The patient suffers from unpleasant sensations when brushing her teeth, and when chemical stimuli are applied. Objective examination revealed defects localized in the enamel of the front upper teeth vestibular surface. The defects are oval, saucer-shaped, and have clear margins. Response to probing and cold stimuli was positive. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel hypoplasia
b. Chemical necrosis of the tooth
c. Hyperesthesia of tooth hard tissues
*d. Enamel erosion
e. Cuneiform defect

2028. A patient complains of dull ache in the 16 tooth, which occurs during eating cold food. Previously the tooth had been ?lled due to deep caries, the ?lling was lost 1 year ago. Objectively: a deep carious cavity that does not communicate with the tooth cavity is present; percussion is painless, probing is painful along the whole ?oor of the carious cavity. Electric pulp test - 50 microamperes. Thermodiagnosis is painful. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
b. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
c. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Acute deep caries
e. Chronic deep caries

2029. A 35-year-old man complains of thickening of his maxillary alveolar process. Preliminary diagnosis of maxillary radicular cyst was made. What substance will be obtained as the result of the puncture of the alveolar process in the area of buccal thickening?
*a. Yellowish liquid
b. Pus
c. Turbid in?ltration
d. Epithelium
e. Blood

2030. Six months ago a 40-year-old man had his tooth 26 extracted; afterwards his oral cavity and maxillary sinus became communicating and the patient developed the ?rst signs of maxillary sinusitis. What surgical procedure should be performed in this case?
a. Osteotomy of the alveolar process
*b. Maxillary sinusotomy with simultaneous plastic surgery for repair of the ?stula
c. Fistula plication
d. Caldwell-Luc surgery
e. Fistula packing with Iodoform gauze

2031. A 46-year-old woman complains of bleeding gums, suppuration, teeth mobility. She has been presenting with these signs for 10 years. On examination her upper and lower gums are hyperemic, swollen, bleed on touch. In the area of 42, 41, 31, and 32 periodontal pockets are up to 8 mm deep, contain purulent discharge; these teeth demonstrate mobility of the II degree, other teeth present with mobility of the I degree. In the area of 42, 41, 31, and 32 X-ray shows interalveolar septa resorption by 1/2 of the root length and signs of osteoporosis. What is the most advisable method of surgical treatment in this case?
a. Gingivectomy
b. Flap surgery
c. Curettage
d. Gingivotomy
*e. Osteoplasty

2032. A 40-year-old man had his root canal of the34tooth?lled due to chronic ?brous periodontitis. Soon the treated place became painful. On X-ray the root canal of the 34 tooth is ?lled to the root apex. What tactics should the dentist choose to manage the pain?
a. To provide conduction anesthesia
b. To provide in?ltration anesthesia
c. To rinse with antiseptic mouthwash
d. To make insicion along the mucogingival fold
*e. To prescribe physiotherapeutic procedures

2033. A 49-year-old man was diagnosed with recurrence of lower lip cancer two years after he had undergone radiation therapy. Objectively in the area of his lower right lip there is a neoplasm 1x2 cm in size with an ulcer in its center. In the right submandibular area there are 2 round, enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes. What approach to the treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Rectangular resection of the lower lip
b. Wedge resection of the lower lip
*c. Combined treatment
d. Trapezial resection of the lower lip
e. Vanakh’s operation

2034. During regular check-up a 6.5-year-old child presents with carious cavity on the distal proximal surface of 65 within mantle dentin. Cavity walls and bottom are pigmented, dense, painless on probing; there is no response to cold stimulus; percussion is painless. During tooth preparation there is tenderness at the level of dentinoenamel junction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Chronic median caries

2035. After adenotonsillectomia it is necessary to break the mouth breathing habit in a 4year-old child. The orthodontist recommends application of an oral vestibular shield (Kerbitz’ vestibular plate). Vestibular shield facilitates training of the following muscle:
a. Masseter muscle
b. Temporal muscle
*c. Orbicular muscle
d. Lateral pterygoid muscle
e. Medial pterygoid muscle

2036. A 30-year-old man presents with fresh median mandibular fracture without visible displacement of the fragments. What will be the function of the dental apparatus to be prescribed in this case?
a. Formation
*b. Fixation
c. Directing
d. Setting
e. Replacement

2037. A 43-year-old woman complains of her lower teeth mobility. Objectively the teeth mobility is of the I-II degree. It is planned to make a full-cast removable occlusal splint for her. What material would be optimal for this splint?
a. Stainless steel
b. ”EI-95” alloy
*c. Cobalt nickel chromium alloy
d. ”PD-250” alloy (silver palladium alloy)
e. Gold alloy of 900 millesimal ?neness

2038. A 4-year-old practically healthy child came for oral cavity sanation. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 75 there is a carious cavity within mantle dentin. The cavity is ?lled with softened dentin. Dentinoenamel junction is painful on probing. What material would be optimal for permanent ?lling?
a. Phosphate cement
b. Composite material
c. Silicate cement
*d. Glass ionomer cement
e. Silicophosphate cement

2039. A 7.5-year-old practically healthy child complains of crown fracture and pain in the upper right incisor. Objectively 2/3 of crown of 11 is absent, the pulp is exposed and red; on probing it is acutely painful and bleeding; tooth percussion is painful. The trauma occurred 2 hours ago. What would be the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
*c. Vital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Biological approach

2040. Parents of a 2.5-year-old child complain of gradual destruction of the upper front teeth of their child for the last several months. Objectively there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the contact and vestibular surfaces of 52, 51, 61, and 62. The cavities are ?lled with softened pigmented dentin that can be easily removed with dental excavator. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic deep caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Chronic super?cial caries
*d. Acute median caries
e. Acute deep caries

2041. A 49-year-old man complains of progressing reduction of mouth opening, pain on the left when swallowing, severe deterioration of his general well-being, temperature increase up to 39.3°C. Destroyed tooth 38 presents with acute pain. Objectively the face is symmetrical, the submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painful on palpation. Palpation under the left mandibular angle and in the the left retromandibular area provokes sharp pain. Mouth opening and movement of the mandible to the left are signi?cantly reduced. The left pterygomandibular fold is hyperemic and in?ltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the sublingual fossa
*b. Phlegmon of the pterygomandibular space
c. Phlegmon of the retromandibular area
d. Phlegmon of the parapharyngeal space
e. Phlegmon of the submandibular space

2042. A 40-year-old man presents with pathologic teeth grinding caused by their functional overload due to the loss of many antagonist teeth. With direct occlusion, vertical grinding of the front teeth resulted in protrusion of the patient’s lower jaw forwards. Interalveolar space is diminished, the lower third of the face is shortened. What would be the most advisable treatment in this case?
a. Teeth shortening
b. Prothetic treatment
*c. Prosthetics that increase interalveolar height
d. Prosthetic treatment
e. Instrumental surgical treatment

2043. A 7-year-old child complains of pain and swelling in the left submandibular region. The swelling in this region developed 2 days ago. Objectively: the child is in a satisfactory condition, body temperature is of 37.3°C. Face is asymmetrical due to the soft tissue swelling in the left submandibular region. Palpation reveals a round formation 2x2 cm in size. The formation is mobile, painful, nonfused with the skin. The 74 tooth is discolored, percussion is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Phlegmonous adenitis of the right submandibular region
b. Lateral cervical cyst
c. Acute serous nonodontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
d. Acute suppurative odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
*e. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region

2044. A 48-year-old patient complains of the lower jaw teeth mobility. Van Thiel dental splint is to be made for prosthodontic treatment. What construction elements are supposed to ?xitinplace?
*a. Whole piece proximal grip clasps
b. Wire clasps
c. Equator crowns
d. Parapulpar posts
e. Full metal crowns

2045. A 55-year-old man suffered a blow to the frontal mandibular area. He is diagnosed with mandibular fracture. Prior to trauma he was wearing removable dentures (partial laminar denture for the lower law and full denture for the upper jaw). What can be used for transport immobilization of the fracture?
a. Zbarzh apparatus
b. Vasiliev splint
c. Weber splint
d. Vankevych splint
*e. Patient’s dentures

2046. A 57-year-old woman came to a dentist for extraction of the 34 tooth due to exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. What instrument would be optimal for tooth extraction in the given case?
a. Beak-shaped curved forceps
b. Beak-shaped crushing forceps
*c. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. Curved elevators

2047. A cast clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture is being made for a 58-yearold patient. Impressions are made, centric jaw relation is determined, plaster casts are obtained. What is the next stage?
a. Marking the border seal
*b. Examination of the working model with a parallelometer
c. Wax modelling of the denture frame
d. Transfer of denture frame pattern to the working model
e. Duplication of the working model

2048. A 7-year-old boy underwent ?ssure sealing in teeth 36 and 46. Fissure sealing would be most effective:
a. In 3-4 years after tooth eruption
*b. Immediately after eruption of the permanent tooth
c. If permanent teeth are affected with caries
d. After permanent occlusion is formed
e. In 1-2 years after tooth eruption

2049. A 6-year-old girl took paracetamol to treat a case of URTI two days ago, which resulted in the development of her present condition. The disease onset was acute with temperature increase up to 39.8°C. Objectively there are cockade-shaped maculopapular rashes on her face. The vermilion border is swollen, hyperemic, covered in massive brown crusts, and presents with bleeding cracks. Conjunctivitis is detected. Swollen and hyperemic oral mucosa presents with numerous erosions covered with ?brinous incrustations; the erosions are sharply painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
b. Pemphigus
c. Erythema multiforme exudativum
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

2050. How often should the dentures be replaced in children during the period of milk occlusion according to Ilyina-Markosian?
a. Every 12-16 months
b. Every 16 months
c. Every 8-10 months
d. Every 10-12 months
*e. Every 6-8 months

2051. On objective examination a 59-year-old man with the edentulous mandible presents with bone protrusions and mobile areas of the alveolar crest. To ensure proper ?xation of the denture and even load distribution the following functional impression should be made:
a. Decompression
b. Combined
c. Complete anatomical
d. Compression
*e. Differentiated

2052. A 28-year-old man complains of pain in the infraorbital and parotid region on the left. On examination: hemorrhage occurs in the lower eyelid and conjunctiva of the left eye, there are signs of crepitation and step deformity of the eyesocket lower edge. The mouth opens by 1 cm. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Zygomatic bone fracture
b. Left articular process fracture
c. Hematoma of the infraorbital region
d. Traumatic arthritis of the temporo- mandibular joint
e. Malar arch fracture

2053. A child is 8 years old. There are complaints of congested upper incisors. Objectively: the ?rst molars closure is of Angle’s I class, frontal overbite is orthognathic. The 12 and 22 teeth erupt palatinally with space de?ciency of 2/3 of the tooth crown. The 11 and 21 teeth are 10 mm each in cross-section. The child has inherited father’s facial type with prognathism and macrodontia of the central incisors. Choose the preventive treatment, considering this hereditary pathology:
a. Massage of the 12 and 21 teeth area to stimulate their eruption
b. Jaw expansion to provide the space for the 12 and 21 teeth
*c. Hotz serial extraction to reduce the dental arch
d. Extraction of the 12 and 21 teeth to reduce the dental arch
e. Shave off the approximal surfaces of the 11 and 21 to provide the space for the 12 and 22 teeth

2054. A 38-year-old woman complains of burning pain in her lips and angles of her mouth, their dryness. Anamnesis states that she has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for the last 8 years. Objectively: the vermillion border is dry, congestively hyperemic, covered in scales of varying size. In the angles of the mouth there are ?ssures covered in white coating, the skin is macerated. What ointment should be prescribed for topical treatment in the given case?
a. Prednisolone
b. Interferon
*c. Clotrimazol
d. Lanolin
e. Erythromycin

2055. A 35-year-old woman complains of lips enlargement. The ?rst incident occurred one year ago, when she developed lip edema that abated quickly, but the lips remained slightly enlarged. Three days ago after overexposure to cold her lips enlarged again. Objectively: ptosis, upper and lower lips are markedly enlarged, more on the left, soft, elastic, and painless on palpation; no impressions on the lip surface are left after pressing it with a ?nger. The tongue is swollen, with tuberous surface and folds on its back. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
b. Quincke’s edema
c. Meige’s trophedema
d. Achard’s syndrome
e. Miescher’s granulomatous cheilitis

2056. A 45-year-old man complains of dryness and pain in the lower lip. On examination: the lower lip is swollen, dry, covered in small scales and ?ssures. In the Klein area (wet-dry line) there are dilated openings of salivatory glands observed as red dots producing clear substance. The lower lip mucosa is lumpy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Eczematous cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Actinic cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
*e. Glandular cheilitis

2057. A 23-year-old man complains of gum bleeding when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively: the gums of the front lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen and bleeding when palpated. Oral and gingival mucosa in other areas are not affected. The occlusion is deep. The teeth are ?rm, except for the 41 and 31 (degree 1 mobility). X-ray shows resorption of the alveolar septum in the area of the 41, 42, 32, and 31 teeth up to 1/3 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Catarrhal gingivitis
b. Parodontosis, stage I
c. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage
d. Generalized periodontitis, stage I
*e. Localized periodontitis

2058. A 40-year-old man, a chemical industry worker, notes the sour sensation in his mouth, pain response to thermal and chemical stimuli. On examination: on the vestibular surface and cutting edge of the front teeth there are chalky enamel defects with uneven scalloped margins. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acidic necrosis of enamel
b. Enamel hypoplasia (erosive form)
c. Median caries
d. Fluorosis (erosive form)
e. Super?cial caries

2059. A 42-year-old woman complains of acute lip enlargement, itching, and bursting sensation. She ascribes her condition to introduction of a new lipstick. On examination the lips are signi?cantly enlarged and turgid, on palpation they are ?rm, elastic, and painless. Regional lymph nodes are without changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exfoliative cheilitis
b. Meteorological cheilitis
*c. Allergic contact cheilitis
d. Glandular cheilitis
e. Actinic cheilitis

2060. A 50-year-old patient, an employee of the print shop, complains of foul smell from his mouth and excessive salivation. Objectively against the background of hyperemic and slightly swollen gums there is a blue-black border along the gum margin of the lower jaw and upper front teeth. There is a large amount of dental deposit observed. Name the type of stomatitis in this patient:
a. Necrotizing ulcerative
*b. Lead
c. Bismuth
d. Mercury
e. Catarrhal

2061. A 25-year-old man complains of incorrectly positioned maxillary left central incisor due to trauma sustained 2 months ago. Objectively tooth 21 is rotated around its axis into palatal position. What would be the most advisable treatment method for correction of this defect?
a. -
b. Splinting followed by prosthetic treatment
c. Surgical treatment
d. Instrumental surgical treatment
*e. Orthodontic treatment

2062. A 44-year-old woman complains of the face swelling in the right lower jaw area and teeth mobility. Objectively: soft tissues are without changes, the regional lymph nodes cannot be palpated. The alveolar process and the body of the lower jaw near the 46, 47, and 48 teeth are thickened, painless when palpated, and lumpy. The teeth in the thickened area are mobile. Puncture consists of brown ?uid without cholesterol crystals. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Adamantinoma
b. Follicular cyst
c. Odontoma
*d. Osteoclastoma
e. Osteoma

2063. A 6.5-year-old child has closed nonpigmented ?ssures in the ?rst permanent molar, which have been revealed during preventive examination. Enamel transparency is retained, its probing reveals no coarseness. Choose the optimal method of treatment in this case:
a. Regular medical check-ups
*b. Non-invasive sealing
c. Preventive ?lling
d. Invasive sealing
e. ART technique

2064. A man complains of gingival pain in his upper left jaw and bleeding that occurs when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively on the upper jaw he wears a swaged-soldered metal bridge with 14 and 16 as abutment teeth. The crown edge is pushed under the gingival margin by 0.3 mm. Intermediate part is closely ?tted to the gums. The mucosa is hyperemic, swollen, interdental papillae are smoothed out; touching mucosa with a dental instrument provokes bleeding. What medical tactics should the dentist choose in the ?rst place?
a. Refer the patient for clinical blood test
b. Make metal-fused-to-porcelain dental bridge
c. Refer the patient for cosultation with the dental therapist
d. Refer the patient for X-ray
*e. Remove the dental bridge

2065. When checking construction of the soldered dental bridge with the 35 and 38 abutment teeth the following was detected: pores in the place where abutment crowns and intermediate part are soldered together; masticatory cusps are sharply de?ned; there is early contact with antagonist teeth; the intermediate part makes tight contact with the alveolar process mucosa. How can those ?aws be corrected?
*a. Dental bridge should be remade
b. Masticatory surface should be corrected, and soldered places - polished
c. Tooth-antagonists should be shaved off
d. Masticatory surface should be corrected, and the height of the ?ushing part is to be increased up to 2 mm
e. Intermediate part should be corrected

2066. A 50-year-old man was diagnosed with sialolithiasis with the salivary gland stone located deep within the salivary gland. Choose the optimal treatment tactics:
a. Radiation therapy
b. Removal of the sialolith while retaining the gland
c. Conservative pharmacotherapy
*d. Submandibular gland excision
e. Sclerotherapy

2067. Due to lack of timely specialized treatment a 44-year-old man presents with incorrectly healed displaced mandibular fracture. Objectively the lower jaw narrows sharply, vestibular cusps of the lower teeth contact with oral cusps of the upper teeth. The patient declined surgical treatment. What treatment tactics should be chosen by the dentist in this case?
a. Make a non-removable dental bridge with movable joint
b. Correct the malocclusion via instrumental surgical method
c. Make a dentogingival laminar denture
*d. Make a prosthesis with double dentition
e. Correct the malocclusion by ?ling down the patient’s teeth

2068. A 57-year-old man presents with habitual mandibular dislocation. To reduce mouth opening, Yadrova apparatus was made. How long should the treatment last in this case?
*a. 3 months
b. 9 months
c. 18 months
d. 12 months
e. 6 months

2069. An HIV-infected patients needs a dental prosthesis. The dentist plans to make dental bridges for this patient. How should the instruments be processed after the appointment?
a. In a hot air sterilizer
b. According to the usual scheme
*c. According to the special scheme
d. With lysoformin
e. With 3% chloramine solution

2070. A 30-year-old man complains of pain in his front lower teeth, which he attributes to a trauma to the mental region. Objectively: continuous dentition, orthognathic occlusion. X-ray shows a median mandibular fracture. What dental splint would be optimal?
a. Plastic mouthguard
*b. Flat occlusal splint
c. Cap splint
d. Soldered splint on rings
e. Weber’s splint

2071. To make the external prosthesis for a 62year-old man it is necessary to obtain a Hippocrates facial moulage of this patient. What impression material should be used?
*a. Plaster
b. Stens
c. Repin
d. Stoma?ex
e. Dentafol

2072. A 19-year-old young man complains of cosmetic defect of all his teeth, which developed immediately after the teeth eruption. Objectively on the vestibular and masticatory surfaces of all patient’s teeth there are enamel defects, tooth crowns present with dark brown discoloration. Percussion and probing are painful. In this area ?uoride levels in water are 2.6 mg/L. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Enamel erosion
b. Chronic super?cial caries
c. Systemic hypoplasia
d. Chronic initial caries
*e. Fluorosis

2073. A 14-year-old teenager complains of dry and chapped lips especially in autumn and winter. Objetively the vermillion border is dry, in?ltrated, and covered in numerous scales. Skin of the lips is dense, pigmented, with pronounced pattern, peeling, and radial cracks. At the same time the skin of the face is dry, licheni?ed, and excoriated. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Actinic cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
*c. Atopic cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

2074. A 56-year-old patient suffering from exacerbation of schizophrenia has been hospitalized in an oral in-patient department with a diagnosis of the displaced mandibular fracture in the area of teeth 34 and 35. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. Onearchsmoothdentalbraces
b. Weber splint
c. Vankevych splint
*d. Osteosynthesis
e. Full dental splint

2075. During preventive examination a 5-yearold child was determined to have insuf?cient physiological attrition of the cusps of the deciduous canines. What treatment tactics should the doctor choose?
a. Medical examination every 6 months until the canines are replaced
b. No medical intervention is necessary
c. Medical examination once a month until the incisors are replaced
d. Medical examination every 6 months until the incisors are replaced
*e. To shave off the retained canine cusps

2076. A 60-year-old patient has been undergoing the procedure of checking the complete removable dentures construction and ?xing teeth on wax bases. The following ?aws have been detected: ?ssure between the teeth on the frontal area and cusp-to-cusp contact in the lateral area. What mistake had been made?
*a. Anterior occlusion had been determined instead of central one
b. Lateral occlusion had been determined instead of central one
c. Swabs had been crushed during determination of central occlusion
d. Models had been plastered in a wrong way in an occluder
e. Posterior occlusion had been determined instead of central one

2077. A 35-year-old man complains of sour sensation in his mouth and front teeth sensitivity to thermal and mechanical stimuli. Objective examination revealed visible changes in the enamel of 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23. The enamel is dull, rough, missing on the cutting edge. Probing of the vestibular surface of these teeth is painful, response to thermal stimuli is positive. The patient’s medical record states his occupation in industrial production of inorganic acids. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enamel erosion
b. Fluorosis
*c. Necrosis of dental hard tissues
d. Pathologic teeth grinding
e. Enamel hypoplasia

2078. A 55-year-old man was delivered into the hospital with bilateral mandibular fracture within the dentition. Objectively teeth 34, 35, 36, 45, and 46 are missing. Lower incisors are mobile (I-II degree). Fragment displacement is insigni?cant. What splint should be made forthispatient?
a. Flat occlusal splint
b. Gunning-Port
c. Vankevych
d. Tigerstedt
*e. Weber

2079. A 30-year-old patient is diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic periostitis of the upper left jaw originating from tooth 23. The crown of 23 on the left is destroyed with caries by 1/3. Teeth 22 and 24 are intact. Spot?lm X-ray shows widening of the periodontal ?ssure of 23. What treatment would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Extraction of the causative tooth, periosteotomy
*b. Periosteotomy and pharmacotherapy followed by treatment of the causative tooth
c. Extraction of the causative tooth, physiotherapy
d. -
e. Extraction of the causative tooth, pharmacotherapy

2080. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain and swelling in the area of the left parotid salivary gland, which occurred 7 days after he had undergone abdominal cavity surgery. Objectively: body temperature is 39°C, reduced mouth opening, dry mouth; when the gland is massaged, there is purulent exudate being secreted from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with the following disease:
a. Parenchymatous parotitis
b. Phlegmon of parotid-masticatory region
c. Acute epidemic parotitis
d. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
*e. Acute non-epidemic parotitis

2081. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated in?ltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the in?ltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the in?ltration there is a ?stula. In theoralcavitythecrownof46isdestroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the ?stula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Actinomycosis
*b. Migrating facial granuloma
c. Cheek furuncle
d. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Odontogenic lymphadenitis

2082. A 53-year-old patient complains of an ulcer on the lateral surface of the tongue. The ulcer appeared 6 months ago as the result of a trauma caused by sharp tip of the 37 tooth metal crown. A dentist replaced the crown with the one of better quality and prescribed keratoplastic drugs. Despite these measures the ulcer continues to grow. Lately there has been pain observed during talking, chewing, swallowing; sometimes the pain irradiates to the pharynx. Objectively on the lateral surface of the tongue there is a painful ulcer with uneven raised dense margins and lumpy ?oor with grayish necrotic coating. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic ulcer
b. Trophic ulcer
*c. Cancer of the lateral surface of the tongue
d. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Tuberculous ulcer

2083. A 13-year-old child complains of periodical gingival bleeding during teeth brushing, which has been observed for half a year. Objectively the gingival mucosa in the frontal mandibular area presents with congestive hyperemia and edema. Decay-missing-?lled (DMF) index equals 4. Oral cavity hygiene is unsatisfactory. In this case it is necessary to recommend the patient the toothpastes with:
a. Zinc citrate
b. Amine ?uorides
c. Salt additives
*d. Herbal extracts
e. Calcium glycerophosphate

2084. A 70-year-old man has edentulous maxilla. Objectively maxillary tuberosity and alveolar processes are completely atrophied; palatine vault is ?at, its mucosal layer is moderately pliant. In this case the patient’s atrophic edentulous maxilla can be classi?ed as:
a. Keller class II
b. —
c. Keller class III
d. Schroeder class II
*e. Schroeder class III

2085. Teeth 71 and 81 erupted in a 6-year-old child, the lower jaw is retrogenic, the palate is ?at with pronounced cross-folds. Determine the condition of the oral cavity:
*a. Physiologic
b. Abnormal
c. Decompensated
d. Subcompensated
e. Pathologic

2086. A 12-year-old girl complains of pain in her mouth that occurs during eating. According to her medical history these symptoms reemerge once or twice per year. Objectively on the mucogingival fold there are 3 aphthae 5-7 mm in size, they have yellowish coating and in?amed red border and are acutely painful on touch. Name the most likely diagnosis:
a. Toxic-allergic drug-induced stomatitis
*b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Chronic recurrent herpetic stomatitis
d. Acute herpetic stomatitis
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

2087. An 8-year-old girl complains of tooth 21 discoloration and pain response to hot stimulus. Several months ago tooth 21 was treated for acute diffuse pulpitis by means of vital amputation. Objectively tooth 21 is ?lled, percussion is painless. X-ray shows the rooth to be formed by 2/3, cortical plate of the tooth socket remains intact in the area of root radix. What material should be used for root canal ?lling in this case?
a. Zinc phosphate cement
b. Glass ionomer cement
c. —
*d. Calcium hydroxide paste
e. Resorcinol-formalin paste

2088. The medical station of a regiment received a patient with signs of bilateral mandibular fracture. What is the main task of ?rst aid in this case?
*a. To control shock, bleeding, and asphyxia and to provide transport immobilization
b. To administer analgesics and cardiac medications
c. To provide symptomatic therapy and care
d. To clean oral cavity from blood clots, tooth shards, and bone fragments
e. To check and correct previously applied bandages

2089. A 35-year-old man has been hospitalized into a dentofacial unit with complaints of mobility of the 38, 37, and 36 teeth and a ?stulous tract in the socket of the extracted 35 tooth. The condition has been persisting for 3 months. Insertion of a grooved probe into the ?stulous tract palpated a bared coarse bone fragment that easily moved under pressure. X-ray of the lower jaw demonstrates a focus of bone tissue destruction, with a spot of dense bone tissue 0.5х0.3 cm in size. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
b. Acute osteomyelitis
*c. Chronic osteomyelitis
d. Chronic periostitis
e. Actinomycosis

2090. A 10-year-old child complains of persisting throbbing pain in tooth 36, which appeared one day ago. Hot stimulus aggravates the pain, while cold mitigates it slightly. Objectively on the masticatory and medial surfaces of tooth 36 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity bottom and percussion are painful. X-ray shows no pathologic changes of the periodontium. What treatment method shold be chosen in this case?
a. Devital amputation
b. Conservative treatment
c. Devital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
*e. Vital extirpation

2091. A 11-year-old child complains of pain in the lower right lateral tooth, which occurs when eating, especially hot food. On the masticatory surface of the 46 tooth there is a large carious cavity ?lled with softened lightbrown dentin. The cavity is located within parapulpar dentin. In the projection of the medial buccal pulp horn the carious cavity communicates with the pulp chamber. Deep probing is painful. Electric pulp test - 60 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
b. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
c. Acute focal pulpitis
*d. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

2092. A 7-year-old practically healthy child was undergoing the carious cavity preparation of tooth 46 due to acute median caries. During this procedure the mesio-buccal pulp horn was accidentally exposed. What treatment would be optimal in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
*b. Biological approach
c. Devital extirpation
d. Devital amputation
e. Vital amputation

2093. A woman complains of pain in her gums, unpleasant smell from her mouth, dif?cult eating, general weakness, lowgrade fever. Objectively her gums are hyperemic, with areas of ulceration, covered in necrotic deposit. Microscopy revealed fusospirochetosis. Choose the medication for etiotropic treatment:
*a. Metronidazole
b. Galascorbin
c. Chymotrypsin
d. Chlorhexidine
e. Keratoline

2094. A man complains of gingival bleeding that has been persisting for the last 2 years. Objectively he presents with chronic diffuse catarrhal gingivitis, teeth mobility is of the I degree, periodontal pockets are 2-3 mm deep with small amount of serous exudate, occlusion is markedly traumatic. X-ray shows damaged cortical plate, enlarged periodontal ?ssure in the apical areas of the interalveolar septa, osteoporosis, and interalveolar septa resorption by 1/3 of their height. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, exacerbated development
c. Generalized periodontitis, early stage, chronic development
*d. Generalized periodontitis, stage I, chronic development
e. Parodontosis, stage I

2095. A 55-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic to have a denture made for him. Tooth 11 is missing in the patient. Two days ago he was released from the in-patient unit after a case of myocardial infarction. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Perform implantation
*b. Make a temporary removable denture
c. Make a dental bridge with 12 and 21 as abutment teeth
d. Make a clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
e. Temporarily refrain from making a denture

2096. A 23-year-old man complains of acute gingival bleeding and unpleasant smell from the mouth that appeared 5 days ago. Objectively gingival papillae and marginal gingiva are friable, bright red, swollen, painful, and bleed profusely on palpation. Gingival pockets are 3 mm deep. X-ray shows marked osteoporosis of the interalveolar septa, periodontal ?ssure in the apical areas of the interalveolar septa is enlarged. Cortical plate is intact. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute leukemia
b. Generalized periodontitis, stage II, exacerbated development
c. Hypovitaminosis C
*d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis

2097. A 27-year-old patient has been referred by a prosthodontist for endodontic treatment of the 45 tooth. Objectively: the 45 tooth crown is destroyed; the lateral surface of the tongue and the buccal mucosa have patches of grayish macerated epithelium slightly protruding above the mucosa surface at the points of direct contact with the 45 tooth. The uvula and palatal bars are stagnantred in colour; hard palate has papulae surrounded with red margin and covered in grayish epithelium. The submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and subclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Lichen ruber planus
*b. Secondary syphilis
c. Lupus erythematosus, patch stage
d. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
e. Soft leukoplakia (leucoplakia mollis)

2098. A 6-year-old boy with congenital heart disease (pulmonary artery stenosis) presents with suppurative periostitis of the maxilla. The child needs surgical treatment. What unit should he be referred to?
*a. The pediatric maxillofacial unit
b. The out-patient unit after preliminary cardiological treatment
c. The out-patient or in-patient unit at the discretion of the child’s parents
d. The cardiology unit
e. The out-patient unit, no precautions are necessary

2099. Parents of a 3-year-old child complain of food periodically getting into the child’s nasal cavity during feeding. Objectively there is a ?ssure in the area of the soft palate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Isolated nonunion of the hard and soft palate
b. Congenital hidden cleft palate
*c. Isolated partial nonunion of the soft palate
d. Cleft hard palate
e. Combined cleft palate

2100. A 9-year-old girl complains of persisting pain in tooth 11 that one month ago sustained a trauma resulting in broken crown. The tooth received no treatment. Objectively the 1/4 of the tooth crown of 11 is broken off, the remaining crown is grayish, the dental cavity is not exposed. Percussion is acutely painful. The mucogingival fold is hyperemic and acutely painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative periodontitis
b. Acute diffuse suppurative pulpitis
*c. Acute traumatic periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

2101. A patient complains of fever up to 38°C, headache, pain in the joints anf muscles, vesicles in the oral cavity, mainly in the frontal part. Eating is sharply painful. For the last several years the disease has been recurring during wet and windy weather. The patient often suffers from cases of URTI. Objectively: on the buccal, lingual, labial mucosa there are con?uent erosions against the erythematous background, with gray-white coating. There are bloody scabs on the vermillion border and in the angles of the mouth. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
c. Syphilis
d. Acute aphthous stomatitis
*e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

2102. A patient with complaints of toothache in the left upper jaw has made an appointment with a dental clinic. He was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth. What kind of anesthesia is necessary for painless extraction of the 24 tooth?
a. Tuberal and palatinal anesthesia
b. Tuberal and incisor anesthesia
c. Surface and tuberal anesthesia
*d. Infraorbital and palatinal anesthesia
e. Infraorbital and incisor anesthesia

2103. A 2.5-year-old child is registered for regular check-ups with the orthodontist. The I stage of physiogical occlusion development corresponds with eruption of the following group of temporary teeth:
a. Front teeth
*b. Temporary molars
c. Temporary lateral incisors
d. Temporary central incisors
e. Temporary canines

2104. Due to trauma of the area of teeth 44 and 45, a 12-year-old boy suffers from the pathologic displacement of the mandibular alveolar process and rupture of the alveolar process mucosa. What additional examination is necessary to specify the diagnosis?
a. —
*b. X-ray of the mandible in frontal and lateral projections
c. X-ray of the mandible in frontal and Parma projection
d. Skull X-ray in axillary projection
e. Computed tomography of the mandible

2105. A 12-year-old child presents with temperature 38°C, chills, nausea, vomiting, delirium, and weakness. On the middle third of the face there is hyperemia in a butter?y-shaped pattern. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and mildly painful. In blood: leukocytes - 12 × 109/L, lymphocytes 8.0×109/L, ESR- 26 mm/hour. What diagnosis should be made?
a. Streptoderma, submandibular lymphadenopathy
b. Acute non-odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
c. Facial vein thrombophlebitis
d. Cutaneous actinomycosis
*e. Erysipelatous in?ammation

2106. X-ray of the patient shows a focus of bone destruction 3x4 cm in size in the mandibular body. The focus is structured as numerous small cavities different in size and shape and separated by septa. Tumor puncture yielded brown liquid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Soft odontoma of the mandible
b. Mandibular ameloblastoma
c. Radicular cyst of the mandible
d. Carcinoma of the mandible
*e. Giant cell tumor of the mandible

2107. An orthodontist has been addressed by parents of a 5-year-old child. The child has the 54 tooth extracted, all the other deciduous teeth are present. The doctor made a thinwall crown for the 55 tooth with interdental wedge to the 53 tooth. What is the purpose of such treatment?
*a. Prevention of dentition malformation
b. Restoration of masticatory ef?ciency
c. Deceleration of permanent tooth eruption
d. Acceleration of permanent tooth eruption
e. Aesthetic restoration

2108. Removable partial dentures for upper and lower teeth are being made for a 45-yearold man. Complete anatomical impressions were made using ”Ypeen” alginate material. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
a. 0.1% desoxone solution
b. Phenol solution in proportion 1:20
c. 6% hydrogen peroxide solution
*d. 2.5% glutaraldehyde with рH- 7.0 - 8.7
e. -

2109. A 48-year-old man complains of gingival overgrowth (”gums cover the teeth”). The patient suffers from epilepsy and takes anticonvulsant agents. Objectively gingival papillae are of normal color, dense, with lumpy surface; they do not bleed on probing and cover the lower front teeth up to their incisal surfaces. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis, ?brous form, degree II
b. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form, degree II
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis, edematous form, degree III
d. Gingival ?bromatosis
*e. Hypertrophic gingivitis, ?brous form, degree III

2110. A 21-year-old man came to the dentist complaining of general weakness, muscle pain, body temperature up to 38.3°C, indigestion, excessive salivation, and rashes in the oral and nasal cavities, urethra, on the wings of the nose, and in the interdigital folds. These symptoms appeared after ingestion of milk during the patient’s stay in the village. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Behcet’s disease
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Herpetic stomatitis
d. Herpes zoster
*e. Murrain

2111. A 28-year-old man complains of painless sore in his mouth that persists despite the attempts at self-treatment. Objectively the regional lymph nodes on the left are enlarged and painless. Mucosa of the left cheek presents with round ulcer, 1 cm in diameter, with raised margins and cartilage-like in?ltration in its basis. The surface of the ulcer is colored meat red and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cancer
b. Lupus vulgaris
c. Decubitus ulcer
*d. Primary syphilis
e. Secondary syphilis

2112. A 25-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for oral cavity sanation. Objectively the crown of tooth 37 is destroyed by 2/3. Gingival mucosa around tooth 37 is without changes. What anesthesia should the dental surgeon give to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Mental nerve block
*b. Mandibular and buccal anesthesia
c. Tuberal anesthesia
d. Intraoral infraorbital nerve block
e. Mandibular anesthesia

2113. A 34-year-old man complains of soft tissues edema in his lower left jaw and ?stulae in the submandibular area. Teeth 36 and 37 are destroyed. Alveolar mucosa is swollen and hyperemic at the level of 36 and 37. X-ray detected sequestra in the mandibular body on the left. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Extraction of teeth 36 and 37
b. Puncture of the in?amed area
c. Antibacterial treatment
*d. Extraction of teeth 36 and 37 and mandibular sequestrectomy
e. Mandibular sequestrectomy

2114. A 42-year-old man was delivered to the hospital in the severe condition: inert, body temperature is 39.1°C, there is acutely painful in?ltration of the mouth ?oor and submandibular area on the right. The skin over the in?ltration is turgid and cyanotic. Palpation detects crepitus under the skin. What diagnosis can be made in this case?
*a. Ludwig’s angina (suppurative-necrotic phlegmon of the mouth ?oor)
b. Malignant tumor of the mouth ?oor
c. Odontogenic phlegmon of the mouth ?oor
d. Actinomycosis of the mouth ?oor
e. Adenophlegmon of the mouth ?oor

2115. After a blow to the temporomandibular joint the patient developed facial hematoma, the joint is dif?cult to move, mandibular mobility is reduced. Attempts to open the mouth wide are painful. What examination should be performed to make the diagnosis?
a. Rheoencephalography and consultation with the neurologist
b. Panoramic dental X-ray
c. Limit the joint mobility
d. X-ray and consultation with the neurologist
*e. Bilateral X-ray of the temporomandibular joint with mouth open and closed

2116. A 38-year-old man after a domestic accident complains of pain and mobility of his upper teeth, problems with eating. Objectively: soft tissues edema. The 11 and 21 teeth are displaced towards the palate, mobile (II degree), painful on percussion. Mucosa surrounding the affected teeth is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray demonstrates widened periodontal ?ssure of the 11 and 21. Choose the treatment method:
a. Extraction of the 11 and 21 teeth
b. Immobilization or mouthguard
c. Removal of tooth pulp in the 11 and 21 teeth
*d. Setting of the teeth and their ?xation with a ?at occlusal splint
e. Reimplantation of the 11 and 21 teeth

2117. A 4-year-old child has developed acute spontaneous pain in the tooth on the lower right jaw, which aggravates on biting. Objectively: in the 85 tooth there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity ?oor. Painful reaction to cold water stimulus and percussion is observed; mucosa surrounding the 85 is hyperemic. Submandibular lymphadenitis is detected. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
c. Acute serous periostitis
d. Acute serous periodontitis
*e. Acute pulpitis complicated with periodontitis

2118. During Eschler-Bittner test the pro?le of a 12-year-old girl with posterior occlusion has shown some improvement. Specify the condition that resulted in the development of posterior occlusion in this patient:
a. Mandibular underdevelopment and maxillary overdevelopment
b. Maxillary overdevelopment
*c. Mandibular underdevelopment
d. Mandibular overdevelopment
e. Maxillary underdevelopment

2119. Parents of an 8-year-old girl complain of their child having an aesthetic defect of her teeth. Objectively the patient’s lower face is shortened. Her chin protrudes forwards and her upper lip is sunken. During teeth closure the deep underbite becomes apparent. Mesio-occlusion is observed in the lateral areas. Choose the apparatus optimal for the treatment:
a. Andresen-Haupl activator
b. Frankel functional regulator - 1
c. Frankel functional regulator - 2
d. Osadchy apparatus
*e. Frankel functional regulator - 3

2120. During or immediately after an injection, certain local complications can develop. What is NOT one of those complications?
*a. Mucosal necrosis
b. Diplopia
c. Damage to a blood vessel by the needle
d. Functional paralysis or paresis of facial muscles
e. Dermal ischemia

2121. What manipulation of those listed below is NOT a part of typical procedure of tooth extraction with forceps?
a. Applying forceps jaw to the tooth
b. Closure of forceps handles
c. Tooth dislocation and extraction from the socket
*d. Applying tip of forceps jaw to the edge of alveolar process
e. Pushing forceps jaw to the cementoenamel junction

2122. A patient needs the 36 tooth extracted. After administering anesthesia the doctor started applying the elevator. However, immediately after that the patient suddenly paled, complained of dizziness, ear noise, and blackout and slid down in the chair. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
*b. Unconsciousness
c. Collapse
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Shock

2123. A child is diagnosed with congenital cleft in the soft palate and posterior part of the hard palate. What type of anesthesia should be given to the patient for uranostaphyloplasty?
*a. Intubation narcosis
b. Anesthesia mask
c. Conduction anesthesia
d. In?ltration anesthesia
e. Intravenous narcosis

2124. A 6-year-old child complains of pain and edema in the upper right jaw, body temperature up to 37.9°C, and deterioration of general well-being. Symptom onset was 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue edema of buccal and infraorbital regions on the right. The crown of 54 is destroyed by 1/2, percussion is painful; the tooth previously had been treated for complicated caries. On the palatine side of the affected tooth area there is a painful in?ltration with ?uctuation in its center; the tissues over the in?ltration are hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
b. Acute serous periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54
*c. Acute suppurative periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of 54
e. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla

2125. A 27-year-old man presents with missing crown of 11. Objectively teeth 21 and 12 are intact; intraoral spot ?lm X-ray shows the root of 11 to be ?lled to the apex, no changes in the periapical tissues, no pathologic mobility. What construction of the denture should be recommended for this patient?
a. Remove the root of 11 and perform implantation
*b. Metal stump inlay with overlaying porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
c. Stump inlay with overlaying plastic crown
d. Stump inlay with overlaying swaged crown
e. Stump inlay with overlaying full cast metal crown

2126. A 54-year-old patient complains of frequent crunching sound in the right temporomandibular joint, which developed one month ago. In the morning the crunching is more frequent and decreases towards the evening. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the skin over the joint is without changes, the mouth opens by 2.9 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic arthritis
b. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome
c. Acute arthritis
d. Temporomandibular joint dislocation
*e. Arthrosis

2127. On examination of a 27-year-old patient the tip of the dental probe caught on the ?ssures of the 36, 37, and 38 teeth. Margins of the enamel defect are dark, the surface is coarse. Teeth transillumination with photopolymer lamp revealed the defect to be limited to the enamel. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic median caries
b. Chronic initial caries
c. Acute initial caries
*d. Chronic super?cial caries
e. Acute super?cial caries

2128. A 68-year-old patient addressed a surgical department of a dental clinic for extraction of the 45 tooth. During procedure the patient developed burning retrosternal pain attack irradiating to the left shoulder, scapula, hand. The skin is pale, BP is 140/100 mm Hg, heart rate is rapid. Skin hyperplasia can be observed in the Zakharin-Head’s zones. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
a. Heart failure
b. Hypertensic crisis
c. —
*d. Angina pectoris attack
e. Bronchial asthma attack

2129. After sustained trauma a man developed nose bleeding, reduced mouth opening, sensation of paresthesia in the right infraorbital region and lower eyelid. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to concave right temporal region; step deformity symptom is observed in the middle of the lower right eye socket and in the area of zygomaticoalveolar crest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nondisplaced fracture of the temporal bone
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
*c. Displaced fracture of the temporal bone
d. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
e. Zygomatic arch fracture

2130. A 14-year-old boy complains of rapid wearing-off of tooth crowns. Objectively: tooth crowns are worn-off by 1/3. Enamel easily chips off and is pale gray in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Focal hypoplasia
*b. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome
c. Fluorosis
d. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
e. Systemic hypoplasia

2131. A 63-year-old man complains of pain in the area of maxillary mucogingival fold caused by using a removable laminar denture. Objectively: in the area of the mucogingival fold there is a trophic ulcer with swollen margins and hemorrhaging ?oor. Make the diagnosis:
a. Allergic contact stomatitis
b. Greenhouse effect
c. Toxic chemical stomatitis
d. Toxic infectious stomatitis
*e. Denture-related stomatitis

2132. Objective examination of a 10-year-old child revealed slight hyperemia, in?ltration, and dryness of the whole surface of the vermillion border. Architectonics of the lips is disturbed. Dryness and contracted sensation are observed in the lips, especially during cold seasons. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Cheilitis of microbial origin
*d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

2133. A 24-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for extraction of tooth 38. What anesthesia should be given to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Tuberal
b. Mandibular
*c. Torusal
d. In?ltration
e. Plexus

2134. During application of tuberal anesthesia the patient developed rapidly increasing tissue edema and reduced mouth opening. What resulted in such a condition?
a. Nerve trunk trauma
b. Muscle trauma during anesthesia application
*c. Vascular trauma
d. Intolerance to the anesthetic
e. Anaphylactic shock

2135. A woman came to the dental surgeon with complaints of teeth mobility. After objective examination and X-ray analysis she was diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of stages I and II. Which teeth of those affected by periodontitis should be extracted?
a. Carious teeth
*b. With degrees 2-3 of tooth mobility
c. Teeth with painful percussion
d. Intact teeth
e. With degree 1 of tooth mobility

2136. After the in?ammatory process in the parotid area a woman developed frequent pain attacks resembling electric current in her face on the right. The attacks last for 1520 minutes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Exacerbation of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
c. Tympanic plexus neuralgia
d. Trigeminal neuritis
*e. Trigeminal neuralgia

2137. Mother and her 11-year-old daughter came to the medical station. According to the mother her daughter has fallen when playing outdoors. The doctor determined the patient to have an isolated mechanical injury of soft tissues in her cheek with damaged skin. Make the diagnosis:
a. Wound
*b. Abrasion
c. Bruice
d. Contusion
e. Hematoma

2138. The patient with shallow vestibule of mouth and edentulous mandible underwent a surgery: a mucoperiosteal ?ap was relocated from the alveolar ridge to the body of the mandible and ?xed with denture acting as a bandage. What surgical procedure was used for vestibular deepening?
a. Rhermann
*b. Rumpel
c. Thiersch
d. Kazanjian
e. Trauner

2139. A 7-year-old girl received conduction anesthesia with 2% articaine solution for extraction of tooth 16. She has no history of allergies. After receiving anesthesia the patient complained of weakness, she developed skin pallor, cyanosis, and nausea. Her blood pressure dropped signi?cantly. The patient is conscious. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pain shock
b. Ver t i go
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Allergic response to the anesthetic
*e. Collapse

2140. An ambulance has delivered an 8year-old child to an admission room. An oral surgeon has made the following diagnosis: odontogenic phlegmon of the right submandibular area. What surgical approach would be advicable for surgical treatment of this phlegmon?
a. Dissection along the lower neck fold
b. Dissection in the area of pterygomandibular fold
c. Dissection parallel to the torus mandibularis
d. Dissection around the mandibular angle
*e. Dissection in the submandibular area, parallel to the mandible

2141. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontics clinic to have dental prosthesis made for him. Objectively teeth 34, 35, 36, 43, and 16 are absent in this patient. During examination alginate impressions for diagnostic models were obtained. What should be used for disinfection of obtained impressions?
a. Sterillium
b. 3% sodium hypochlorite solution
c. 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
d. 10% hydrogen peroxide solution
*e. 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution

2142. A 36-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Objectively there is a carious cavity on the mesial masticatory surface of tooth 46, interdental contact is disturbed. Dental inlay is to be made for this patient. According to Black’s classi?cation of dental caries this cavity is class:
a. 4
b. 3
*c. 2
d. 5
e. 1

2143. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and crepitation in the temporomandibular joint during the movements of the lower jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with slight displacement to the left. Dentition is intact. On occlusiography there were detected centric and eccentric supracontacts. What treatment methods should be applied in the ?rst place?
*a. Selective teeth shaving
b. Appliances that limit mouth opening
c. Lower jaw immobilization
d. Mouthguards that increase the height of central occlusion
e. Mouthguard for muscle relaxation

2144. A 45-year-old patient after administration of local anesthesia in preparation for oral surgery has suddenly felt unwell, developed increasing edema of laryngeal mucosa and respiration disorder. The dentist stopped the manipulations in the oral cavity. What type of asphyxia developed in the patient?
a. Obturative
b. Aspiration
c. Dislocational
d. Valvular
*e. Stenotic

2145. A 19-year-old young man, who was waiting for the appointed time at the dentist’s, suddenly developed an attack: his face became purple, bloody foam ?owed from his mouth (bitten tongue), pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light, the patient developed ?rst tonic then clonic convulsions that stopped spontaneously, after that he calmed down and fell asleep quickly. What happened with the patient?
a. Sympathoadrenal crisis
b. Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome
c. Pulmonary embolism
*d. Epileptic seizure
e. Spasmophilia

2146. A victim of a traf?c accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. How should this patient be transported?
*a. In the prone position on a soft stretcher
b. In the sitting position with the head thrown back
c. Positioned on the side on a soft stretcher
d. In the sitting position with air tube inserted into the upper airways
e. Positioned on the side on a rigid stretcher

2147. A victim of a traf?c accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. What measures should be taken to prevent complications in this case?
a. Fixation of the tongue to the patient’s collar
b. Removal of foreign bodies from the oral cavity
c. Excision of injured mucosal ?aps
*d. Fixation of the lower jaw and tongue with standard Entin’s head-chin strap
e. Tracheostomy and arti?cial pulmonary ventilation

2148. The hospital received a 19-year-old patient injured in a landmine explosion with an open displaced mandibular fracture in the area of the left mandibular angle and a contused lacerated wound of the left submandibular area. The patient is in moderately severe condition, pulse is 80/min., blood pressure is 110/80 mm Hg. What anesthesia should be given to the patient for initial surgical d-bridement?
a. Intravenous anesthesia
b. Conduction anesthesia with premedication
c. Conduction anesthesia
*d. Endotracheal anesthesia
e. Neuroleptanalgesia

2149. A 5-year-old child developed a hemorrhage after pulp extirpation of 74 due to exacerbated chronic pulpitis. The child suffers from Von Willebrand disease. What actions should be taken by the dental surgeon to stop bleeding?
a. To plug the cavity with hemostatic sponge
*b. To hospitalize the child to the hematological unit
c. To place sutures on the mucosa
d. To hospitalize the child to the maxillofacial unit
e. To plug the cavity with epsilonaminocaproic acid dressing

2150. Parents of a 9-year-old child came to the dentist complaining that their child presents with enlarged cervical lymph nodes on the right. During examination palpation revealed the lymph nodes in the right submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, and infraclavicular areas to be enlarged up to 2-2.5 cm in diameter, painless, non-matted together, and non-fused to the skin (resemble ”potatoes in a sack”). The parents note rapid fatigability and night sweats in their child. What additional examinations should the child be referred for?
*a. Puncture biopsy of the lymph nodes
b. Wassermann test
c. Clinical blood and urine tests
d. CT of the cervical spine
e. Pirquet and Mantoux tests

2151. A 45-year-old patient complains of inability to properly masticate due to the loss of lateral teeth. The 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27, 37, 36, 35, 44, 45, and 46 teeth are missing. The retained teeth exhibit the I-II degree of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis. Kennedy class I dentition defects are observed. What construction would be optimal in the given case?
a. Mamlok’s dental splint
b. Cantilever dental bridges
c. Partial laminar denture
d. Elbrecht’s dental splint
*e. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture with splinting elements

2152. A 70-year-old patient addressed a hospital with complaints of poorly stabilized complete removable dentures of the upper and lower jaws. What method of arti?cial teeth arrangement is preferable in making of a new complete removable denture?
*a. According to individual occlusal curves
b. According to standard occlusal curves
c. According to prothetic occlusal planes
d. According to spherical occlusal curves
e. According to disocclusal planes

2153. A 2.5-year-old child has fever up to 38.5°C, low appetite, rashes in the oral cavity. The disease onset was 3 days ago. Objectively: the skin of the perioral area is covered in scarce vesicles with clear content. Within the oral cavity on the buccal and lingual mucosa there are sharply painful erosions, 2-3 mm in size, with white coating and hyperemic crown. The gums are swollen, hyperemic. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute herpetic stomatitis
b. Erythema multiforme exudativum
c. Stomatitis with the background of chickenpox
d. Stomatitis with the background of infectious mononucleosis
e. Stevens-Johnson syndrome

2154. A 25-year-old man complains of shortterm pain in the tooth on the lower right jaw during eating sweet, hot, and cold food. Objectively: in the 36 tooth on the distal surface there is a carious cavity noncommunicating with the dental cavity, dentin is softened. Probing of the cavity ?oor is painful, percussion is painless. Electric pulp test is 16 microamperes. Make the ?nal diagnosis:
a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
c. Acute median caries
d. Pulpal hyperemia
*e. Acute deep caries

2155. A 30-year-old woman came to the dentist with complaints of uncomfortable sensation of pressure in her upper right tooth, which aggravates in response to hot stimulus, and foul smell from the mouth. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 17 tooth, which communicates with the tooth cavity. Deep probing causes severe pain, percussion of the 17 tooth is painful. X-ray: there is slight widening of the periodontal ?ssure near the root apex. Electric pulp test - 70 microamperes. What ?nal diagnosis can be made?
a. Chronic ?brous periodontitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic ?brous periodontitis
c. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
d. Acute purulent pulpitis
*e. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis

2156. Medical committee registers the patients, who for a long time lived in an area polluted with radiation. The patients are advised on the diet that will quickly purge the body from radionuclides. The portion of products rich in pectine should be increased in their diet. Name these products:
a. Meat products
b. Dairy products
c. Baked goods
*d. Fruits and vegetables
e. Pasta

2157. A 44-year-old man came to extract destroyed tooth 24. Objectively his face is symmetrical, the crown of 24 is destroyed by 2/3, percussion is painless. Gingival mucosa surrounding the tooth is unchanged. X-ray shows enlarged periodontal ?ssure in the area of the root apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulating periodontitis of 24
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of 24
c. Chronic gangrenous periodontitis of 24
*d. Chronic ?brous periodontitis of 24
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of 24

2158. A 46-year-old man complains of constant losing of a ?lling in his lower right tooth. Objectively: in the 16 tooth on the approximal masticatory surface there is a defect of crown hard tissues at 1/3. The tooth has no discoloration, percussion is painless. What construction should be prescribed?
a. Plastic crown
*b. Inlay
c. Semi-crown
d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. 3/4 crown

2159. A 10-year-old boy complains of acute pain attacks in the area of his upper left teeth. The toothache persisted for a night. Objective examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 26 tooth within parapulpar dentin. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity ?oor. Markedly positive reaction to cold water stimulus is observed. Select the most likely diagnosis:
*a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
e. Acute serous periodontitis

2160. In a state of inebriation a 36-year-old woman suffered a domestic accident 4 hours ago. She was delivered to the maxillofacial surgery unit. On examination she was provisionally diagnosed with a deep perforating incised wound of the lateral surface of her face with injured perioral area and parotid gland. The woung edges are gaping. This gaping is caused by:
a. Location of masticatory muscles
b. Depth of the wound
c. Wound communication with the oral cavity
d. Speci?cs of facial innervation
*e. Location of facial muscles

2161. The maxillofacial surgery unit received a patient with complaints of inability to close his mouth. This condition occurred when the patient was biting an apple. Objectively there is a frightened expression on the patient’s face, the mouth is open wide, the chin is displaced to the left, salivation is observed. Palpation through the external acoustic meatus detected no movements of the right articular head. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Right temporomandibular joint dislocation
b. Acute temporomandibular arthritis
c. Bilateral temporomandibular joint dislocation
d. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome
e. Fracture of the mandibular process

2162. A 19-year-old girl addressed an oncologist with complaints of slowly growing tumorlike mass on the tip of her tongue. The mass was ?rst noticed 5-6 years ago. The patient requested no medical help. Objectively: there is a pale pink round growth with wide pedicle on the tongue apex; the growth is painless, elastic; there are no changes of mucosa surrounding the pedicle. Submandibular lymph nodes cannot be palpated. What kind of tumor is it?
a. Keratoma
*b. Papilloma
c. Fibroma
d. Atheroma
e. Lipoma

2163. During carious cavity preparation in a 20-year-old man, the pulp-chamber ?oor was accidentally perforated and horn of the pulp was exposed. On the carious cavity ?oor there is a point-like puncture surrounded with white predentin. Pink pulp can be seen through the perforation, pulp probing is acutely painful. What treatment should be given to the patient?
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Biological approach
c. Vital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Devital amputation

2164. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist with complaints of brief attacks of toothache caused by eating sweets. Objectively there is a shallow carious cavity within enamel. On probing cavity walls and bottom are coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute median caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Endemic ?uorosis
d. Enamel hypoplasia
*e. Acute super?cial caries

2165. A 24-year-old patient came to the dentist complaining of chalky lesions on the front teeth. Objectively teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 present with chalky lesions separated by areas of healthy unchanged enamel. Lesion surface is coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Childhood years of the patient were spent in the area with ?uorine level of 1.8 mg/L in drinking water. Make the diagnosis:
a. Enamel hyperplasia
b. Enamel hypoplasia
*c. Endemic ?uorosis
d. Acute super?cial caries
e. Chronic super?cial caries

2166. A 48-year-old patient has addressed a hospital with complaints of defects in the paragingival area and slight sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively there are hard tissue defects that resemble a wedge with smooth polished walls on the precervical vestibular surface of the 23 and 24 teeth. Thermal test is slightly positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Endemic ?uorosis
*b. Cuneiform defect
c. Acute deep caries
d. Enamel necrosis
e. Enamel erosion

2167. Parents of a 7-year-old child addressed a hospital with complaints of their child having no permanent teeth in the front area of the mandible. Anamnesis states that the ?rst deciduous teeth erupted at the age of 11 months. Objective clinical examination revealed the following: appearance is without changes; milk occlusion; there are physiological diastema and tremata; edge-to-edge incisor contact. What preliminary diagnosis can be made according to Kalvelis classi?cation?
a. Adentia
b. Supernumerary tooth
*c. Retarded eruption
d. Dystopia
e. Hypoplasia

2168. A 5.5-year-old child is undergoing preventive examination. There are no complaints from the patient. Objectively: in the precervical area of buccal surface of the 75 tooth there is an enamel patch with loss of natural glossiness. The enamel surface is coarse, painless on probing. Tooth percussion is painless. Thermodiagnosis is negative. Damaged enamel stains with 2% water solution of methylene blue. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute initial caries
b. Fluorosis
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Acute super?cial caries
e. Enamel hypoplasia

2169. A 68-year-old man has removable partial dentures made for him. At the stage of checking the denture construction, occlusal contact in the lateral areas is cusp-to-cusp and frontal area has sagittal ?ssure. What mistake was made by the doctor?
a. Height of centric occlusion is overstated
*b. Anterior occlusion is ?xed
c. Prothetic plane is designed incorrectly
d. Lateral occlusion is ?xed
e. Height of centric occlusion is understated

2170. An 80-year-old man needs a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. How should the denture boder be located relative to the natural teeth?
a. Reaches dental cervices
b. Located below dental cervices
c. Covers the crowns by 1/3 of their height
d. Fully covers the crowns
*e. Covers the crowns by 2/3 of their height

2171. A 52-year-old woman needs a dental prosthesis. Upon objective examination a removable partial laminar denture is determined to be optimal denture construction in her case. What material should be applied to the impression tray edges?
a. Plaster
b. Silast
c. Stens
*d. Orthocor
e. Wax

2172. A 46-year-old man, a teacher, complains of lower teeth mobility that impedes the process of biting. Objectively the dentition is uninterrupted, front teeth demonstrate the II degree of mobility. X-ray shows straight and ?lled root canals of 32, 31, 41, and 42. What appliance will stabilize front teeth while retaining their aesthetic appearance?
a. Splint with embrasure clasps
b. Semicrown splint
c. Removable segmented splint for the front teeth
d. Cap splint
*e. Mamlok’s dental splint

2173. A woman complains of spontaneous attacks of acute pain, with practically no intermissions and irradiation into the temple; cold water slightly mitigates the pain. In tooth 26 examiantion revealed deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the cavity bottom is acutely painful, the tooth is tender on vertical percussion. Make the provisional diagnosis regarding tooth 26:
a. Chronic ?brous pulpitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Pulpal hyperemia
*e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

2174. A 78-year-old man complains of a painful sore in his mouth that has been persisting for 2 months already. The patient is a smoker. Objectively on the buccal mucosa on the right there is a shallow ulcer up to 1.5 cm in size with lumpy ?oor and uneven margins. There are yellowish granules on its periphery. Palpation is painful, the lesion is soft. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and matted together. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Hard chancre
c. Cancerous ulcer
d. Decubitus ulcer
*e. Tuberculous ulcer

2175. A 37-year-old patient has symmetrical face; the mucosa in the area of the 12 tooth root apex projection is pale pink; palpation is painless; the tooth crown is destroyed by 1/3; percussion is painless. X-ray: the root canal of the12toothis?lled to the apex; granuloma 4 mm in diameter is located near the root apex. Choose the method of surgical treatment:
*a. Granuloma removal with root apex resection
b. Coronary radicular tooth separation
c. Tooth extraction
d. Root amputation
e. Root hemisection

2176. A 48-year-old man presents with verruciform, dense, gray-white growths on the buccal mucosa. The growths protrude above the neighbouring tissues and are surrounded by keratinized gray-white spots that cannot be scraped off. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
b. Papillomatosis
c. Erosive leukoplakia
d. Bowen’s disease
*e. Verrucous leukoplakia

2177. During preventive examination a patient was diagnosed with precancerous hyperkeratosis of the lower lip vermillion border. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Palliative treatment
*b. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues
c. No treatment is necessary
d. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + close-focus roentgenotherapy
e. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + chemotherapy

2178. A 63-year-old man complains of fever and multiple painful rashes in his oral cavity and on his face and torso. 3-4 days before the rashes appeared he had noticed a burning sensation followed by sharp shooting pain resembling that which occurs during lumbago. The patient takes cytotoxic drugs for leukemia treatment. On examination there are multiple aphthae located in a row on the vermillion border and labial, lingual, and buccal mucosa on the right. The aphthae have hyperemic borders, they are not fused together and are sharply painful on palpation. The right side of the face presents with erythematous spots, vesicles, and erosions. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Secondary syphilis
b. Chronic recurrent herpes
c. Toxic allergic dermatostomatitis
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*e. Herpes zoster

2179. A 34-year-old man presents with persisting dull pain in his tooth, which aggravates on biting. One week ago the tooth was treated for deep caries. Objectively on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 there is a ?lling, percussion is painful, there is a supracontact observed in the area of 36. X-ray shows unchanged periodontium. What mistake was made when tooth 36 was ?lled?
a. Filling without medicinal substance sealed inside
*b. High ?lling
c. Gingival attachment is disturbed
d. Filling without insulation layer
e. Insulation layer exceeds borders of the dentinoenamel junction

2180. A 35-year-old man complains of persisting pain in tooth 24, which intensi?es on biting. Objectively on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 24 there is a deep carious cavity ?lled with food debris. Percussion of cavity bottom is painless, there is no pain response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of tooth 24 is acutely painful. X-ray shows no pathologic changes of periapical tissues in the area of root apices of 24. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. Acute suppurative pulpitis
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

2181. A 22-year-old man complains of tearing, throbbing, constant, intensifying pain in the tooth on the upper left jaw. The pain has been persisting for 4 days. Objectively tooth 26 has deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Probing is painless. Percussion is acutely painful. The tooth is mobile. Mucogingival fold in the area of tooth 26 is painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute local pulpitis

2182. A 22-year-old patient has suffered unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was provided with full dental brace with loops and intermaxillary elastic expansion. Recovery was uncomplicated. The brace should be removed after:
*a. 3 weeks
b. 1 week
c. —
d. 10 days
e. 2 weeks

2183. A 27-year-old patient was provisionally diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic maxillary sinusitis. What radiology method would be the most informative in this case?
a. Spot-?lm radiography
b. —
c. X-ray
d. Panoramic radiography
*e. Computed tomography

2184. A 22-year-old man presents with swollen and hyperemic mucosa of the retromolar area; tooth 38 is covered with hood-shaped gingival ?ap that discharges pus on palpation; body temperature is 37.5°C. What urgent aid should be given to the patient in this case?
a. Gingival ?ap excision
b. Antibiotic treatment
c. Gingival ?ap incision
*d. Gingival ?ap incision and antibacterial treatment
e. Extraction of tooth 38

2185. A 43-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgeon with complaints of aesthetic defect. Examination revealed excessive accumulation of adipose tissue in the patient’s neck and upper torso, which resembles collar with unclear magins; neck mobility is reduced. Family history shows the same symptoms to be present in the patient’s father. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Lymphangioma
*b. Madelung’s deformity
c. Neuro?bromatosis
d. Lipoma
e. Fibroma

2186. A 73-year-old man is registered for regular check-ups in an oncological clinic after completion of the combined treatment for oral mucosa cancer stage II (radiation therapy and surgery). During one of the routine check-ups an area of exposed mandibular bone is detected. There are no in?ammatory changes of surrounding mucosa. A ?stula tract with soft granulation is detected. Mandibular X-ray shows a sequestrum without clear margin between healthy and necrotic bone. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic mandibular periostitis
*b. Mandibular osteoradionecrosis
c. Posttraumatic mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Acute purulent mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Relapse of oral mucosa cancer

2187. A 19-year-old patient came to a dentofacial clinic with complaints of pain in the gonial angle on the right, impaired mouth opening and painful chewing. The signs had been persisting for 5 days, emerged spontaneously and had been aggravating gradually. Mandibular contracture is of the III degree. On examination of the oral cavity: hyperemia, edema of the retromolar space on the right, hood-shaped mucosa from under which pus is being discharged and 2 tooth tubercles can be detected. X-ray shows oblique medial tooth position. Make the diagnosis:
a. Mandibular angle fracture
b. Acute submandibular sialadenitis
c. Acute suppurative periostitis from the 48 tooth
d. Chronic local mandibular osteomyelitis
*e. Acute suppurative pericoronitis of the 48 tooth

2188. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain of their child having a gradually enlarging neoplasm in the left parotid-masticatory region. Skin over the tumor is without discoloration. The tumor is painless, but when the head bends down the tumor increases in size and assumes bluish coloring. What disease can be suspected in the child?
a. Lymphangioma
b. Cyst of the parotid gland
c. Fibroma
d. Atheroma
*e. Hemangioma

2189. An 11-year-old child presents with protrusion of the upper front teeth, there are tremata and diastema between the child’s teeth. What apparatus can be used for treatment of this pathology?
a. Frankel, type 3
b. Brukle
*c. Osadchy
d. Vasylenko
e. Mershon

2190. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the tragus area, clicking during mouth opening, stuffed ears. Objectively the face is symmetrical, mouth opening path is straight. Dentition defect can be estimated as the I class by Kennedy; the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. In this case the load would be the most traumatizing for the following anatomical structure:
a. Distal slope of the articular tubercle
b. Floor of the temporal bone socket
c. Articular capsule
d. Articular head
*e. Interarticular disk

2191. A 38-year-old man complains of sensation of a foreign body on his tongue and development of gag re?ex during talking. The signs appeared after the prolonged taking of antibiotics. Objective examination detected thickened and pigmented ?liform papillae enlarged to 2-3 cm in size. Histological analysis detected papillar hyperplasia and marked keratinization without alteration of the surrounding tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fissured tongue
b. Median rhomboid glossitis
*c. Black hairy tongue
d. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
e. Geographic tongue

2192. A 56-year-old patient suffering from exacerbation of schizophrenia has been hospitalised in an oral in-patient department with a diagnosis of the lower jaw displaced fracture in the area of the 34-35 teeth. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
*a. Osteosynthesis
b. Dual splint
c. One arch flat occlusal splint
d. Weber’s dental splint
e. Vankevych dental splint

2193. A 57-year-old man complains of pain and creaking in his right temporomandibular joint when eating. In the evening the signs diminish. The pain is observed for the last 2-3 years. Objectively the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is reduced to 2.5 cm. Molars are missing on both jaws. X-ray shows deformed articular surfaces of the right temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
*b. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint
c. Pain dysfunction syndrome of the right temporomandibular joint
d. Ankylosis of the right temporomandibular joint
e. Contracture of the right temporomandibular joint

2194. A 30-year-old woman complains of mild burning sensation in her lower lip and its dryness. She peels skin scales off with her teeth. She has been presenting with this condition for 10 years. On examination the skin scales are gray and located on the lip from the Klein’s line to the center of the vermillion border from angle to angle of the mouth. The scales are firmly attached in the center and are loose on the periphery. Their forcible removal does not result in erosions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Allergic contact cheilitis
*b. Exfoliative cheilitis
c. Eczematous cheilitis
d. Meteorological cheilitis
e. Lupus erythematosus

2195. A 25-year-old woman made an appointment with the dental surgeon for oral cavity sanation. Objectively the crown of tooth 37 is destroyed by 2/3. Gingival mucosa around tooth 37 is without changes. What anesthesia should the dental surgeon give to the patient for the procedure of tooth extraction?
a. Mandibular anesthesia
b. Intraoral infraorbital nerve block
c. Mental nerve block
d. Tuberal anesthesia
*e. Mandibular and buccal anesthesia

2196. The dental surgery department received a women with complaints of swollen right side of the fase and indisposition. According to her medical history, one week ago she sensed itching in the right side of her face and noticed there a small dense nodule. She started to apply various ointments. Swelling was gradually increasing, the woman developed pain and fever. Objectively her condition is of moderate severity, body temperature is 39°C. Her right buccal region is swollen, with hyperemic skin; in the center there is an oval edema elevated above the surrounding tissues with a black scab visible on its apex. Palpation detects a painful infiltration, 3.5 cm in diameter, and enlarged and painful submandibular lymph nodes. Mouth opening is slightly impaired, oral cavity is clean. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Furuncle
b. Acute lymphadenitis
c. Carbuncle
d. Acute lymphangitis
e. Phlebitis of the facial vein

2197. What shape does the upper dental arch have in the permanent dentition?
a. Semicircle
b. Parabola
c. Trapezoid
d. Saddle-shaped
*e. Semi-ellipse

2198. During examination the child presents with retracted mucosa on the soft palate and uvula. The child was diagnosed with congenital submucous cleft soft palate. What surgical operation is necessary in this case?
a. Uranostaphyloplasty
*b. Veloplasty
c. Uranoplasty
d. Cheiloplasty
e. Rhinocheiloplasty

2199. A patient was diagnosed with cancer of the right parotid gland, T2N2M0. What treatment method should be chosen in this case?
a. Radiation therapy
*b. Combined therapy
c. Surgical removal of the neoplasm
d. Surgical removal of the lymph node
e. Chemotherapy

2200. A 50-year-old man was diagnosed with recurrent sialolithiasis with the sialolith located deep within the submandibular salivary gland. Choose the optimal treatment tactics:
*a. Submandibular gland excision
b. Removal of the sialolith while retaining the gland
c. Sclerotherapy
d. Conservative pharmacotherapy
e. Radiation therapy

2201. During administration of ultracain solution for infiltration anesthesia the condition of a 22-year- old patient sharply deteriorated. The patient became inert, silent, developed cough attacks, expiratory dyspnea, wheezing. Viscous slimy sputum is being expectorated. What urgent condition did the patient develop?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Asphyxia
c. Hypertensic crisis
*d. Bronchial asthma attack
e. Collapse

2202. A 45-year-old man presents with facial asymmetry due to a dense isolated infiltration in his right buccal area; the skin over the infiltration is cyanotic, thinned out; in the center of the infiltration there is a fistula, fn the oral cavity the crown of 46 is destroyed by 2/3, along the mucogingival fold the band connecting the tooth with the fistula can be palpated. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cheek furuncle
b. Odontogenic lymphadenitis
*c. Migrating facial granuloma
d. Actinomycosis
e. Chronic mandibular osteomyelitis

2203. A 7-year-old boy was brought to the dentist. Objectively his gums are hyperemic and bleeding, the teeth are mobile and covered in plaque, their roots are exposed, periodontal pockets are pathologic and filled with granulations. The child is registered for regular check-ups with the pediatrician. According to the mother, lately the child’s condition has been deteriorating. The boy presents with diabetes insipidus and exophthalmos. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Gaucher disease
b. Letterer-Siwe disease
*c. Hand-Schuller-Christian disease
d. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
e. Taratinov disease (eosinophilic granuloma of bone)

2204. A 12.5-year-old child came to the dentist for oral cavity sanitation. Objectively caries progression in this child is severe: decay- missing- filled index is DMF=2+0+4=6. Green-Vermillion index is 1.7. Gingival mucosa is pale pink. What toothpastes should be prescribed in this case for oral hygiene?
a. Enzyme
b. Herbal extract
c. Salt supplement
d. Antiseptic
*e. Amine fluoride

2205. A 65-year-old man with fully edentulous upper jaw needs removable full laminar denture. To make the denture, anatomical impressions of the upper and lower jaws are necessary. The patient exhibits heightened gag reflex. What drug can be used to suppress the gag reflex in this patient?
a. 0.1 % atropin solution
b. 0.2% noradrenaline solution
*c. 10% lidocaine solution
d. 1% dimedrol (diphenhydramine) solution
e. 10% glucose solution

2206. A 50-year-old man complains of gum discoloration, pain when eating spicy food, weakness, and irritability. He notes that periodically spots and vesicles appear on his skin. For a long time he has been working in the galvanic workshop of a factory. On examination the patient is pale, he has a gray-black border on his gums, and on his oral mucosa there are single erosions that are painful on palpation. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
a. Mercury salt poisoning
b. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis (Vincent stomatitis)
*c. Lead salt poisoning
d. Acute leukemia
e. Erythema multiforme exudativum

2207. A 28-year-old patient complains of aesthetical defect. Objectively the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22, and 23 are destroyed by caries by over 2/3 of their heights. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. X- ray shows the root canals of these teeth to be completely filled; no pathologic changes detected in the periapical tissues. What approach to teeth restoration would be optimal in this case?
a. Combined swaged crowns, made in Borodiuk technique
*b. Stump inlays and porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns
c. Immediate denture with posts
d. Crown restoration with photopolymer fillings
e. Plastic-faced stump inlays

2208. A 44-year-old man came to the dental polyclinic to have a denture made for him. He complains of problematic chewing and aesthetical defects. Objectively teeth 14, 15, and 22 are missing. According to Agapov, the loss of masticatory efficiency in this case is:
a. 20%
*b. 18%
c. 16%
d. 12%
e. 9%

2209. A patient needs a removable full laminar denture for the upper jaw. Objectively on the mucosa of the denture bed there are numerous dense papillomas of varying size. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Removable dentures are contraindicated in this case
b. Make a 3D-model of the denture base
c. Make a denture base from metal
*d. Remove papillomas and make a denture with a double layered base lined with elastic material
e. Reduce the area of the denture base

2210. Biopsy material was obtained from the focus of a lesion in the retromolar space. Pathohistological findings: cellular polymorphism in the stratum spinosum, increased mitotic number, giant multinucleate cells, acanthosis, some cells in the stratum spinosum exhibit signs of parakeratosis, keratin pearls are detected. These pathohistological findings indicate the following disease:
a. Leukoplakia
*b. Bowen disease
c. Lichen ruber planus, verrucous form
d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Lupus erythematosus

2211. A 29-year-old man is diagnosed with medial maxillary fracture. The line of the fracture is symmetrical on both sides. In this case sensory perception in the teeth and mucosa is likely to be disturbed within the following interval:
a. From tooth 13 to tooth 23
b. Sensitivity of the teeth and mucosa will remain undisturbed
c. From tooth 11 to tooth 21
d. From tooth 18 to tooth 28
*e. From tooth 15 to tooth 25

2212. A 45-year-old patient complains of bleeding gums and bad breath. After examination the patient was provisionally diagnosed with chronic generalized periodontitis of the II degree. To make the final diagnosis, it is necessary to:
a. Measure the depth of the periodontal pockets
*b. Perform an X-ray
c. Perform Kulazhenko test (capillary resistance test)
d. Determine teeth mobility
e. Perform Kotzshke test (periodontal pocket suppuration test)

2213. A 10-year-old girl complains of an aesthetic flaw. The anamnesis states, that she had been sucking her right thumb up to the age of 7. Objectively: the face lower third is somewhat reduced. Tire sagittal fissure between the upper and lower incisors, is 9 mm wide, class 2 according to the Angle classification. Eshler-Bittner test leads to initial temporary improvement of the girl’s face, followed by renewed deterioration. What clinical malocclusion is the most likely in this case?
a. Maxillary macrognathia
b. Mandibular micrognathia
*c. Maxillary macrognathia and mandibular micrognathia
d. Maxillary prognathism with lateral compression
e. Mandibular retrognathia

2214. A 37-year-old patient complains of an aesthetic defect. Objectively: the 13 tooth is destroyed by 2/3. The tooth is pulpless, the root canal is filled. How deep should the root canal be opened for pivot crown in this patient?
a. Full length of the root canal
*b. 2/3 of the root canal
c. 1/2 of the root canal
d. 1/3 of the root canal
e. 3/4 of the root canal

2215. A 38-year-old man after a domestic accident complains of pain and mobility of his upper teeth, problems with eating. Objectively: soft tissues edema. The 11 and 21 teeth are displaced towards the palate, mobile (II degree), painful on percussion. Mucosa surrounding the affected teeth is hyperemic and swollen. X-ray demonstrates widened periodontal fissure of the 11 and 21. Choose the treatment method:
a. Immobilization with mouthguard
b. -
*c. Setting of the teeth and their fixation with a flat occlusal splint
d. Extraction of the 11 and 21 teeth
e. Removal of tooth pulp in the 11 and 21 teeth

2216. A 39-year-old woman complains of teeth mobility in her lower jaw. Objectively her dental formula is as follows: 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 / 21 22 23 24 25 26 27, 47 46 45 44 43 42 41/31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The teeth are intact, crowns are tall. Gingival pockets and mobility of the I and II degrees are observed in teeth 42 41/31 32. To immobilize the mobile teeth, a cap splint with fixed crowns was made for 43/33. What type of stabilization provides this splint?
a. Parasagittal
*b. Frontal
c. Sagittal
d. Frontal-sagittal
e. Circumferential

2217. One of the stages of making a removable full denture includes fitting of an impression tray and obtaining the functional impression. What material is applied to the edges of the impression tray?
a. Stomalgin
*b. Orthocor
c. Thiodent
d. Plaster
e. Kromopan

2218. A 28-year-old woman came to the dentist for oral cavity sanation. She was diagnosed with acute deep caries of tooth 24. She has a history of seasonal allergic rhinitis and drug allergy that manifests as a skin rash and Quincke edema. She does not remember whether she has been given local anesthesia at the dentist’s office previously. What tactics should the dentist choose regarding the anesthesia in this case?
*a. Referral to the allergologist for consultation and anesthetic allergy testing
b. Perform an anesthetic scratch test in the dental chair immediately before giving anesthesia
c. Perform a cutaneous anesthetic allergy test in the dental chair immediately before giving anesthesia
d. Use ether anesthetic
e. Use amide local anesthetic

2219. A 47-year-old man has lost his lower left premolars. After that the teeth at the edges of the defect have been gradually sliding inside the defect. At the same time the antagonist teeth started to protrude toward the edentulous segment of the alveolar bone. In the medical literature, such clinical presentation is called:
a. Phenomenon of relative tooth-alveolar lengthening
*b. Popov-Godon phenomenon
c. Castaigne syndrome
d. Papillon-Lefevre syndrome
e. Kourliandski phenomenon

2220. During preventive examination a 40-year- old man presents with the following changes: marginal gingiva is enlarged, torus-shaped, cyanotic, slightly bleeding when touched with a dental probe; there is no pain. Staining the gums with Lugol’s iodine solution results in light-brown coloring of mucosa. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
*c. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Generalized periodontitis

2221. A 48-year-old man complains of a lumor-like formation on the hard palate. Examination detected a semi-spherical protrusion with clear margins in the anterior portion of the palate. Teeth 11 and 21 are intact. X-ray shows a homogeneous focus of bone tissue rarefaction. The focus is 3.5x2.5 cm and has clear margins. Against the background of rarefied bone tissue there are projections of intact teeth 11 and 21; periodontal fissure is visible. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Nasopalatine duct cyst
b. Follicular cyst of the maxilla
c. Radicular cyst of the maxilla
d. Maxillary ameloblastoma
e. Giant-cell tumor of the maxilla

2222. After a tooth extraction, the patient developed a hemorrhage from the socket of the extracted tooth. What tactics should the dentist choose in this case?
a. Insert a gauze pack soaked in 3% hydrogen peroxide solution
b. Administer 5-10 mL of 10% calcium chloride solution intravenously
*c. Tightly pack the tooth socket with a strip of iodoform gauze
d. Administer vicasol (menadione) solution intramuscularly
e. Place sutures into the soft tissues

2223. A 42-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic. He complains of inability to chew his food due to partial loss of teeth. Objectively in the lateral regions teeth 18,16, 15, 25, 26, 28, 38, 35, 36, 44, 46, 48 are missing. Other teeth present with I-II degrees of mobility. The patient is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of the II degree. What type of denture would be optimal for this patient?
a. Metal-based dentures
b. -
c. Non-removable full cast dental bridges
d. Removable partial laminar denture
*e. Clasp-retained (bugel) dentures with splinting elements

2224. A man complains of destroyed crown of the 16 tooth. Objectively the crown portion of the 16 tooth is completely destroyed. The patient is diagnosed with chronic granulating periodontitis of the 16 tooth and this tooth needs to be extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used for this procedure?
a. Infraorbital and tuberal anesthesia
b. Tuberal anesthesia
*c. Tuberal and palatal anesthesia
d. Infraorbital anesthesia
e. Tuberal and incisor anesthesia

2225. A 25-year-old man was brought to the hospital for specialized medical care 48 hours after he received a shrapnel wound of the maxillofacial area. Examination shows a large gaping wound of irregular shape in the soft facial tissues. Wound edges are infected and swollen. What type of surgical wound treatment should be conducted at this stage?
a. Secondary
b. Delayed primary
*c. Late primary
d. Early primary
e. -

2226. During intraoral examination the dentist suspected that the patient has syphilis. What should the dentist do in this case?
a. Continue the examination and start the teeth preparation
b. Inform the patient of the suspected diagnosis and end the visit
*c. Complete the examination and refer the patient for necessary tests
d. Decline to provide dental services for this patient
e. Obtain the impressions to study the diagnostic models

2227. After extraction of tooth 46, a 41-year- old man noticed a dark defect on the distal contact surface of tooth 45. The defect is limited to the enamel, has blurred margins and dark brown color. The affected tissue crumbles when probed. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Chronic superficial caries, Black class II
b. Chronic superficial caries, Black class IV
c. Chronic initial caries, Black class IV
d. Chronic initial caries, Black class II
e. Chronic median caries, Black class IV

2228. A 35-year-old man complains of persisting pain in tooth 24, which intensifies on biting. Objectively on the distal masticatory surface of tooth 24 there is a deep carious cavity filled with food debris. Percussion of cavity bottom is painless, there is no pain response to thermal stimuli. Percussion of tooth 24 is acutely painful: X-ray shows no pathologic changes of periapical tissues in the area of root apices of 24. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute suppurative pulpitis
c. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*d. Acute serous periodontitis
e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

2229. Decay-missing-filled index of a 6.5-year- old child is DMF+df=7. Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.5. Fissures in the permanent molars are intact, deep, and open. What method of caries prevention would be advisable in this case?
a. Application of remineralization solution
b. Application of fluoride varnish
c. Invasive fissure sealing
*d. Noninvasive fissure sealing
e. Electrophoresis-aided application of remineralization solution

2230. A woman came to the dental surgeon with complaints of teeth mobility. After objective examination and X-ray analysis she was diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of the 1-2 degrees of severity. Which teeth of those affected by periodontitis should be extracted?
a. Intact teeth
b. With degree 1 of tooth mobility
*c. With degrees 2-3 of tooth mobility
d. Carious teeth
e. Teeth with painful percussion

2231. To extract tooth 27, the patient was given tuberal and palatal anesthesia. When the needle was being pulled out from the soft tissues after the palatal anesthesia, the patient developed bleeding. What should be done to stop the bleeding in this case?
a. Ligate the external carotid artery
*b. Press the place of injection with a tampon
c. Place sutures
d. Intramuscular administration of vicasol (menadione)
e. Intravenous administration of 10% calcium chloride solution

2232. A 24-year-old patient came to the dentist complaining of chalky lesions on the front teeth. Objectively teeth 11, 21, 31, 41 present with chalky lesions separated by areas of healthy unchanged enamel. Lesion surface is coarse; there is no response to thermal stimuli. Childhood years of the patient were spent in the area with fluorine level of 1.8 mg/L in drinking water. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute superficial caries
b. Enamel hyperplasia
*c. Endemic fluorosis
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Enamel hypoplasia

2233. During examination the child presents with micrognathia and open bite. X-ray shows no joint space, the right branch of the lower jaw immediately continues as the temporal bone. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic right-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
b. Right-sided sclerosing arthrosis of the temporomandibular joint
c. Right-sided fibrous ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
*d. Right-sided bony ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
e. First and second branchial arch syndrome

2234. A 10-year-old child is referred by the orthodontist for extraction of tooth 53. Objectively the crown of 53 is retained, the tooth is immobile. X-ray of tooth 53 shows root resorption by less than 1/3. Choose the best instrument for extraction of tooth 53:
a. Beak-shaped root forceps
b. Crown forceps with S-shaped handles
*c. Straight crown forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. Root bayonet forceps

2235. An 18-year-old patient with complaint of large diastem has made an appointment with prosthodontics specialist. Objectively: there is full lateral displacement of central incisors due to absence of the 12th and 22nd teeth. What instrument is the most advisable for moving the central incisors closer together?
a. Kalvelis appliance
b. Begg appliance
*c. Korkhaus appliance
d. Simple cotton ligature
e. Vasylenko appliance

2236. A 30-year-old patient is diagnosed with acute suppurative odontogenic periostitis of the upper left jaw originating from tooth 23. The crown of 23 on the left is destroyed with caries by 1/3. Teeth 22 and 24 are intact. Spot- film X-ray shows widening of the periodontal fissure of 23. What treatment would be the most advisable in this case?
a. Extraction of the causative tooth, periosteotomy
*b. Periosteotomy and pharmacotherapy followed by treatment of the causative tooth
c. -
d. Extraction of the causative tooth, physiotherapy
e. Extraction of the causative tooth, pharmacotherapy

2237. A patient is diagnosed with mandibular ameloblastoma. What type of surgery is recommended for this patient?
*a. Mandibular resection at the distance of 1.5 cm from the lesion focus
b. Cystectomy
c. Only conservative treatment
d. Tumor curettage within healthy tissue
e. I umor cryodestruction

2238. A 21-year-old man complains of difficult mouth opening and visible facial deformation throughout the last 2 years. He has a history of facial trauma several years ago. Examination shows the right side of the face to be flattened, the chin is displaced to the right. Palpation detects diminished excursion of the articular head in the left lower jaw. Mouth opening is reduced to 1 cm. Make the preliminary diagnosis:
a. Anterior dislocation of the lower jaw
b. Exacerbated chronic arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Acute arthritis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
*e. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint

2239. What prosthodontic appliance has mechanical type of action?
a. Bynin appliance
*b. Expansion plate with Coffin spring
c. Case obturator
d. Frankel functional regulator
e. Schonherr vestibular plate

2240. A 37-year-old patient has symmetrical face; the mucosa in the area of the 12 tooth root apex projection is pale pink; palpation is painless; the tooth crown is destroyed by 1/3; percussion is painless. X-ray: the root canal of the 12 tooth is filled to the apex; granuloma 4 mm in diameter surrounds the root apex. Choose the method of surgical treatment:
a. Tooth extraction
b. Coronary radicular tooth separation
*c. Granuloma removal with root apex resection
d. Root hemisection
e. Root amputation

2241. In the maxillofacial department a 6- month-old boy was hospitalized due to bleeding from a wound in the frenulum of his tongue. He has a medical history of frenulotomy the day before. The bleeding started 6 hours after the surgery. Suturing the wound was ineffective against the bleeding. The child was brought to the hematology department, where the bleeding was stopped by intravenous administration of coagulation factor IX concentrate. Make the diagnosis:
a. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Suppurated tongue wound
*c. Hemophilia B
d. Willebrand disease
e. Iron-deficiency anemia

2242. A 40-year-old man had his root canal of the 34 tooth filled due to chronic fibrous periodontitis. Soon the treated place became painful. On X-ray the root canal of the 34 tooth is filled to the root apex. What tactics should the dentist choose to manage the pain?
a. To make insicion along the mucogingival fold
b. To rinse with antiseptic mouthwash
c. To provide infiltration anesthesia
*d. To prescribe physiotherapeutic procedures
e. To provide conduction anesthesia

2243. A 50-year-old man complains of painful defect that manifests as a crack in his lower lip. The defect appeared one month ago. Objectively the lower lip is dry, intactness of the vermillion border of the lower lip is linearly disturbed by a lesion that is located in the middle of the lip, is covered in dried blood, and extends to the labial mucosa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Chronic lymphedema of lips
c. Miescher cheilitis granulomatosa
*d. Chronic lip fissure
e. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome

2244. A 34-year-old man presents with persisting dull pain in his tooth, which aggravates on biting. One week ago the tooth was treated for deep caries. Objectively on the masticatory surface of tooth 36 there is a filling, percussion is painful, there is a supracontact observed in the area of 36. X-ray shows unchanged periodontium. What mistake was made when tooth 36 was being filled?
a. Gingival attachment is disturbed
b. Filling without medicinal substance sealed inside
*c. High filling
d. Filling without insulation layer
e. Insulation layer exceeds borders of the dentinoenamel junction

2245. A 45-year-old man complains of persisting dull pain in 46 that occurs in response to thermal and chemical stimuli. Examination of 46 detected in the precervical area of its vestibular surace a deep carious cavity filled with soft pigmented dentin. Probing is sharply painful at one point. Cold water stimulus induces a dull pain that<'gradually intensifies. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
*c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Chronic deep caries

2246. A 35-year-old man has been hospitalized into a maxillofacial unit with complaints of mobility of the 38, 37, and 36 teeth and a fistulous tract in the socket of the extracted 35 tooth. The condition has been persisting for over 3 months. Insertion of a grooved probe into the fistulous tract palpated exposed coarse bone fragment that easily moved under pressure. X-ray of the lower jaw demonstrates a focus of bone tissue destruction, with a spot of dense bone tissue 0.5x0.3 cm in size. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis
b. Chronic periostitis
c. Actinomycosis
d. Acute osteomyelitis
*e. Chronic osteomyelitis

2247. An 18-year-old young man complains of a cavity in 27 and pain when eating solid food. He has a history of severe pain in 27 one year ago; he requested no medical help at the time. Objectively on the masticatory surface of 27 there is a deep carious cavity that communicates with the pulp chamber. The cavity is nearly completely filled with overgrown granulation tissue. Probing of the granulations leads to mild pain and bleeding. Percussion is painless. EPT is 45 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
b. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis
*e. Chronic hypertrophic pulpitis

2248. A patient received a chemical bum to the face. The burn was caused by sulfuric acid. What substance should be used in the wound processing to neutralize this acid?
a. Acid
b. Flowing water
*c. Alkali
d. Alcohol
e. Antiseptic

2249. A 6-year-old child for a 3rd day presents with body temperature up to 38-39°C and painful swallowing. Objectively on the mucosa of the palatine arches, tonsils and a part of the soft palate there are several erosions up to 2 mm in diameter. Tire erosions are situated on the hyperemic mucosa and covered in whitish plaque. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
b. Diphtheria
c. Acute herpetic stomatitis
d. Infectious mononucleosis
*e. Herpetic angina

2250. A 48-year-old man presents with verruciform, dense, gray-white growths on the buccal mucosa. The growths protrude above the neighbouring tissues and are surrounded by keratinized gray- white spots that cannot be scraped off. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Verrucous leukoplakia
b. Erosive leukoplakia
c. Papillomatosis
d. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
e. Bowen’s disease

2251. A 36-year-old man complains of an ulcer on his lower left lip. Three weeks ago a smal round red spot appeared on his lip. Eventually it became more dense and noticeable and 2- 3 days ago developed an ulcer in its center, while under the lower jaw appeared multiple painless nodules. Objectively on the mucosa of the lower left lip there is an oval ulcer, I. 2 cm in diameter, with smooth clear margins and bright-red glossy floor. Ulcer edges form a cushion that smoothly descends to the bottom of the ulcer. In the base of the ulcer there is a dense painless infiltration. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged and painless, the skin over them remains unchanged. This clinical presentation corresponds with the following disease:
*a. Syphilis (initial period)
b. Lip cancer
c. Ulcerative cheilitis
d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Trophic ulcer

2252. A 20-year-old pregnant woman with the term of 22 weeks complains of thermal sensitivity of her upper front teeth. The sensitivity developed one month ago. She was diagnosed with acute initial caries of teeth 12, 11, 21, 22, Black class V Fedorov-Volodkina hygiene index is 1.8. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Remineralization therapy and filling of teeth 12,11,21, and 22
b. Professional teeth cleaning, remineralization therapy, and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and
c. Postpone the treatment until 30 weeks of gestation
d. Professional teeth cleaning and filling of teeth 12, 11, 21, and 22
*e. Professional teeth cleaning and remineralization therapy

2253. A 66-year-old woman complains of dull pain in her left parotid-masseteric region and increasing facial assymetry that she first noticed 2-3 months ago. Objectively the patient is undernourished, pale, and suffers from the left-sided paresis of the mimic muscles. In front of her earlobe, there is a lumpy infiltration without clear margins. The infiltration is 4x5 cm in size. It is fused to the surrounding tissues and moderately painful. No saliva could be produced from the duct of the left parotid gland. Submandibular and cervical lymph nodes on the left are enlarged. Survey X-ray of the mandible shows no changes in the structure of the bone tissue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis
b. Mixed tumor of the left parotid gland
c. Actinomycosis of the left parotid-masseteric region
d. Exacerbated chronic parotitis
*e. Adenocarcinoma

2254. An 18-year-old girl needs consultation of the dentist regarding a neoplasm that appeared in the frontal area of her face. On the frontal area there is a pink-red semicircular spot on her skin 3-4 cm in size, with clear margins. When pressed, the skin in the affected area discolors and becomes pale. As soon as the pressing stops, the skin again assumes its pink-red color. When the patient bows her head, the spot darkens and enlarges in volume; when the patient lifts her head, the spot gradually returns to its initial pink-red color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cavernous hemangioma
b. Neurofibromatosis
*c. Capillary hemangioma
d. Lymphangioma
e. Birthmark (nevus)

2255. A 12-year-old boy complains of constant pain in the upper tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 26 there is a deep carious cavity non-communicating with the dental cavity. Thermal stimuli and probing of the cavity floor are painless. Percussion is sharply painful. Mucosa in the area of tooth 26 exhibits mild signs of inflammation. X- ray of tooth 26 shows no changes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
e. Acute suppurative pulpitis

2256. A 15-year-old girl complains of brief pain attacks in her teeth due to chemical stimuli. Objectively: on the contact surfaces of the 11, 21, 22 teeth there are enamel areas matt white in color, with lost shine, covered in large amount of dental deposit. Enamel is softened and can be easily chipped off with excavator. Probing of lesions is painless. Percussion is painless. No reaction to cold stimuli. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Acute superficial caries
b. Acute initial caries
c. Chronic initial caries
d. Chronic superficial caries
e. Acute median caries

2257. The 40-year-old woman complains of inability to properly masticate due to the loss of the following lateral teeth: 18,16,15,25,26,28, 38, 35, 36, 44-46, and 48. The rest of her teeth present with the 1-11 degree of mobility. Generalized periodontitis is observed. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Fixed dental bridge
b. -
c. Metal-based denture
*d. Removable dental splint
e. Removable laminar denture

2258. A 28-year-old man has received a hit to the chin. He complains of pain in the right side of his face. Examination shows asymmetrical face due to tissue swelling in the upper right parotid area, mouth opening is painful, limited, the jaw is displaced to the right, right-sided crossbite is observed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Displaced traumatic mental fracture of the mandible
b. Displaced traumatic unilateral fracture of the body of the mandible
c. Displaced traumatic double fracture of the body of the mandible
d. Displaced traumatic central fracture of the mandible
*e. Displaced traumatic fracture of the cervix of the mandibular articular process

2259. A 42-year-old woman after examination was diagnosed with closed medial mandibular fracture in the area of 31, 41, non-displaced. Crown portions of her other teeth are intact. Additionally she was diagnosed with chronic generalized parodontitis of moderate severity. What type of splint would be the most advisable for fracture treatment in this patient?
*a. Weber dentogingival splint
b. Vankevych dentogingival splint
c. Port gingival splint
d. Tigerstedt splint with anchor hooks
e. Tigerstedt splint

2260. A man complains of pain in his lower right jaw and impaired mouth opening. Objectively on visual examination his face is symmetrical, mouth opening is slightly impaired, trismus of the 1 degree is observed. Mucosa behind tooth 47 is swollen, hyperemic, and painful on palpation. Medial cusps of tooth 48 are visible, while the tooth itself has not fully erupted. What provisional diagnosis can be made?
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
*d. Pericoronitis
e. Abscess of the pterygomandibular space

2261. A 48-year-old woman complains of low-grade fever and a gradually enlarging ulcer on her gingival mucosa near the molars; the teeth in the affected area are mobile. Objectively on the gingival mucosa between the lower left molars there are two superficial sharply painful ulcers with undermining margins. Floor of the ulcers is granulated and covered in yellow-gray coating. Small tubercles surround the ulcers. Tooth cervices are exposed, pathologic tooth mobility is observed. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and matted together into dense clusters. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Trophic ulcer
b. Acute aphthous stomatitis
c. Syphilis
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Cancerous ulcer

2262. A 21-year-old man with facial furuncle was brought to the maxillofacial department. What facial localization of furuncles and carbuncles is often complicated by trombophlebitis of the angular vein?
a. Cheek and parotid-masseteric region
b. Lower lip and chin
c. Nose and external canthus of the eye
*d. Upper lip and infraorbital area
e. Lower lip and jaw angle

2263. A 20-year-old young woman complains of pain and marked bleeding in her gums when she brushes her teeth and eats even soft food. Objectively her gingival mucosa is swollen, hyperemic and bleeds even on the slightest touch. The teeth are covered with moderate amount of soft dental plaque. What toothpaste should be recommended to this patient as a part of complex treatment of her condition?
a. Gel toothpaste with microelements
*b. Herbal toothpaste
c. Antifungal toothpaste
d. Mineral-rich toothpaste
e. Fluoride toothpaste

2264. A 28-year-old man came to the maxillofacial surgery department. He complains of a cutaneous neoplasm in his right submandibular region. The neoplasm appeared approximately 2 years ago. In the process of shaving, the neoplasm was frequently injured. He was diagnosed with papilloma. In the neoplastic area, examination shows an ulcer against the background of hyperemic skin. What tactics should the dental surgeon choose?
a. Antibacterial and anti-inflammatory therapy, observation
b. Removal of the papilloma and postoperative radiation therapy
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy followed by removal of the papilloma
*d. Prevention of malignant transformation of the papilloma. Removal of the papilloma
e. Anti-inflammatory therapy followed by observation

2265. A 10-year-old child complains of pain, dryness, enlargement, and peeling of the lips. Exaination detected hyperemic labial mucosa and enlarged lips; when the lips are pulled taut, secretion resembling ’’dewdrops” is being produced from minor salivary glands. What is the most likely provisional diagnosis?
*a. Cheilitis glandularis
b. Actinic cheilitis
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
d. Allergic contact cheilitis
e. Meteorological cheilitis

2266. One week ago a patient received removable dentures for the upper and lower jaws. During a follow-up visit to the dentist the patient complains of accidental cheek- biting and pain. Objectively he presents with hyperemia, edema, ulceration of the buccal mucosa along the line of teeth closure in the area of the artificial molars. What is the likely cause of this condition?
a. Toxic-allergic reaction to the plastic components of denture base
b. Due to diabetes mellitus, mucosa is more susceptible to trauma
c. Fixed anterior occlusion
*d. Cusps of the molars on the upper and lower jaw are closing in one vertical plane
e. Incorrectly measured height of the occlusion

2267. An 18-year-old girl in her childhood underwent a surgery for complete bilateral cleft upper lip. Examination detects multiple scars on the markedly flat upper lip. There is no visible asymmetry, but the upper lip is slightly deformed. Wide bases of the wings of her nose are symmetrically displaced laterally and posteriorly. Her nasal septum is shortened. The tip of the nose is bifurcated and drawn to the upper lip. Her nasal dorsum is arcuate. What changes occurred in the patient’s jaws?
*a. The upper jaw is underdeveloped, the intermaxilla is frontally displaced due to interrupted labial muscle layer
b. The lower jaw is underdeveloped due to reduced masticatory load, the upper jaw is flattened
c. Both upper and lower jaws are flattened in their lateral areas due to disturbed nasal breathig
d. Both upper and lower jaws are underdeveloped due to reduced masticatory load and flattened in their frontal areas
e. The upper jaw is underdeveloped in its frontal area, while its lateral areas remain without pathologic changes

2268. A woman complains of pain response to thermal stimuli in her lower right jaw. The pain quickly abates after the stimulus is withdrawn. Objectively on the masticatory surface of the 26 there is a carious cavity with narrow “entrance” located within the mantle dentin. The dentin is soft and light-colored. Percussion of the 26 is painless. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic median caries
c. Chronic superficial caries
d. Chronic deep caries
*e. Acute median caries

2269. A 7-year-old girl complains of a neoplasm on her lower lip. The neoplasm appeared 3 months ago and has been slowly growing since then. Objectively on the mucosa of the lower right lip there is a round neoplasm 0.5-1 cm in diameter. It protrudes from the mucosa, has smooth surface, and its clear bluish content is visible through its walls. On palpation it is painless and elastic. Make the clinical diagnosis:
a. Papilloma of the lower lip
b. Lymphangioma of the lower lip
c. Fibroma of the lower lip
*d. Retention cyst of the lower lip
e. Hemangioma of the lower lip

2270. A 32-year-old woman needs a denture. After objective examination the decision was made in favor of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown. What material should be used in this case to obtain the impression?
a. Repin
b. Stens
*c. Stomaflex
d. Orthocor
e. Stomalgin

2271. A 64-year-old man undergoes fixation of a removable partial denture for the lower jaw. The dentist examined the denture base and noticed there a clearly visible ’’marble pattern’.’ This net of white lines runs through the whole plastic base. What is the most likely cause of this defect?
a. Fractures in the denture base caused by mechanical damage
*b. Disturbed process of acrylic resin polymerization
c. Disturbed process of denture base polishing
d. Uneven moistening of acrylic resin with a monomer
e. 1 7oreign admixtures in the denture base

2272. To make the external prosthesis for a 62-year- old man it is necessary to obtain a Hippocrates facial moulage of this patient. What impression material should be used?
a. Stens
*b. Plaster
c. Dentafol
d. Repin
e. Stomaflex

2273. A 29-year-old man needs to replace a number of dentition defects on his upper jaw. The defects can be replaced with dental bridges with aesthetical coating. ”Sinma-M” plastic coating is securely attached to the frame of the full cast metal-plastic dental bridges with:
a. Sandblasting
b. Thorough polishing of the frame
c. EDA varnish
*d. Retention spheres
e. “Conalor” dental resin

2274. A 38-year-old man complains of sensation of a foreign body on his tongue and development of gag reflex during talking. The signs appeared after the prolonged taking of antibiotics. Objective examination detected thickened and pigmented filiform papillae enlarged to 2-3 cm in size. Histologically papillar hyperplasia and marked keratinization without changes in the surrounding tissues were detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Median rhomboid glossitis
b. Glossitis areata exfoliativa
c. Fissured tongue
d. Geographic tongue
*e. Black hairy tongue

2275. A 30-year-old woman addressed a dental surgeon with complaints of uncomfortable sensation of pressure in her upper right tooth, which aggravates due to hot stimulus, and foul smell from the mouth. Objectively: there is a deep carious cavity in the 17 tooth, which penetrates into the tooth cavity. Deep probing causes severe pain, percussion of the 17 tooth is painful. X-ray: there is slight widening of the periodontal fissure near the root apex. Electric pulp test - 70 microamperes. What final diagnosis can be made?
*a. Chronic gangrenous pulpitis
b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Acute purulent pulpitis

2276. A 16-year-old girl complains of constant dull pain in her lower tooth. The pain aggravates on biting. Objectively in 46 there is a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Comparative percussion is sharply painful. Thermal stimuli and probing are painless. Mucosa in the area of tooth 46 is markedly hyperemic, swollen, painful on palpation. X-ray shows an irregularly shaped focus of bone tissue destruction with blurred margins. Make the diagnosis:
a. Exacerbation of chronic granulomatous periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis

2277. A 27-year-old woman complains of general weakness and pain in her lower jaw during swallowing. Two days ago she developed pain in tooth 38. Mouth opening is impossible. What anesthesia should be given to the patient before examination of the oral cavity and extraction of 38?
a. Mental
b. Infilti ation
c. Verlotsky
*d. Berchet-Dubov
e. Tuberal

2278. A 22-year-old patient has suffered unilateral linear fracture in the area of the gonial angle. Immobilization was provided with full dental brace with loops and intermaxillary elastic expansion. Recovery was uncomplicated. The brace should be removed after:
a. 1 week
b. -
*c. 3 weeks
d. 2 weeks
e. 10 days

2279. A 38-year-old woman complains of burning pain in her lips and angles of her mouth, their dryness. She has an 8-year- long history of diabetes mellitus. Objectively: the vermillion border is dry, congestively hyperemic, covered in scales of variable size. In the angles of the mouth there are fissures covered in white coating, the skin is macerated. What ointment should be prescribed for topical treatment in the given case?
a. Interferon
b. Lanolin
*c. Clotrimazol
d. Eryth romycin
e. Prednisolone

2280. A 32-year-old patient presents with body temperature of 38.9°C, general fatigue, impaired speech, inability to eat. This condition has been recurring for the last 4 years in autumn and spring. There are vesicles and erosions covered in grayish fibrinous coating on the hyperemic and swollen labial and buccal mucosa. Nikolsky’s sign is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nonacantholytic pemphigus
b. Acute herpetic stomatitis
*c. Erythema multiforme exudativum
d. -
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

2281. A 50-year-old woman complains of pain and creaking in her temporomandibular joint. Objectively there are multiple premature occlusal contacts and localized pathologic tooth wear. The teeth are stable, with exposed cervices; the gingival margin is hyperemic. Selective teeth shaving is planned. How many visits to the dentist are necessary for the full procedure?
a. 2-3 visits at one-day intervals
b. 2-3 visits at one-month intervals
*c. 3-4 visits at one-week intervals
d. 1-2 visits within a year
e. A single visit

2282. A 28-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding of gums in the frontal part of the upper jaw on the left. Two years ago, the 22 tooth was covered with a porcelain-fused-to- metal crown. Objectively: interdental papilla between the 21 and 22 tooth is hypertrophied, markedly hyperemic, overlaps the crown of the 22 by 1/3 of its height, bleeds when touched. Periodontal pocket between the 21 and 22 tooth is 4 mm deep. Artificial crown is placed on the gingival margin. X-ray reveals resorption of the interalveolar septa between the 21 and 22 tooth by 1/3 of their height. Specify a priority action in the treatment of this patient:
a. Anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Gingivectomy
c. Sclerotherapy
*d. Removal of the artificial crown
e. Curettage of the periodontal pocket

2283. A 55-year-old patient requires a denture. Objectively: Kennedy’s I class dentition defect; the 16, 17, 18, 26, 27, and 28 leeth are missing. The patient presents with fixed occlusion. The 15 and 25 teeth have low crowns with poor anatomic contours, intact. Clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture is being made for the patient. What fixation system would be optimal in this case?
a. Attachments
b. Continuous clasp (clammer)
c. Aker-Roach combined clasp (clammer)
d. Roach clasp (clammer)
*e. Telescopic fixation

2284. To clarify the diagnosis, the orthodontist performed Eschler-Bittner clinical diagnostic test. As the result the facial signs became more marked. What jaw abnormality is the most likely in this case?
a. Mandibular micrognathia
b. Combined pathology of both jaws
c. Maxillary micrognathia
*d. Maxillary macrognathia
e. Mandibular macrognathia

2285. A 21-year-old man 3 hours ago received a knife wound to the right cheek; the wound was initially bleeding, but by the time of examination the bleeding has already stopped. Objectively in the area of the right cheek there was a wound 4x1 cm with even margins that does not penetrate into the oral cavity and is filled with clotted blood. What sutures should be applied to the wound in this case?
a. Late secondary suture
b. Primary approximation suture
c. Primary apposition suture
*d. Primary blind suture
e. Early secondary suture

2286. A 38-year-old man came to the dentist. After history-taking and examination he was found to have exacerbated generalized periodontitis of the II degree with periodontal pockets 3-5 mm deep. After the local factors were removed and anti- inflammatory treatment was provided to the patient, it is necessary to remove the periodontal pockets. What method should be applied in this case?
a. Vestibuloplasty
b. Gingivotomy
c. Flap surgery
*d. Curettage
e. Gingivectomy

2287. A 28-year-old woman complains of dull pain when biting on tooth 16. Upon examination she was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. She is prescribed extaction of tooth 16. What forceps should be used for tooth extraction in this case?
a. Beak-shaped curved forceps
b. Straight forceps
*c. S-shaped right forceps
d. Beak-shaped non-crushing forceps
e. S-shaped left forceps

2288. A 40-year-old patient complains of pain in the tragus area, clicking during mouth opening, stuffed ears. Objectively; the face is symmetrical, mouth opening path is straight. Dentition defect can be estimated as the I class by Kennedy; the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are absent. In this case the load would be the most traumatizing for the following anatomical structure:
a. Articular capsule
b. Socket floor of the temporal bone
c. Distal slope of the articular tubercle
d. Articular head
*e. Interarticular disk

2289. A 2-year-old child received a dental trauma. Objectively the crowns of 51 and 61 are shorter than the crowns of adjacent teeth by 1/3. Mucosa in the area of 51 and 61 is hyperemic and swollen. X- ray shows no periodontal fissure in the apical area of the roots of 51 and 61. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Extraction of teeth 51, 61
b. Reposition of teeth 51, 61
*c. Dispensary observation
d. Reimplantation
e. Ligature splinting

2290. A 45-year-old man complains of pain and crepitation in the temporomandibular joint during the movements. of the lower jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens with slight displacement to the left. Dentition is intact. On occlusiography there were detected centric and eccentric supracontacts. What treatment methods should be applied in the first place?
a. Lower jaw immobilization
b. Mouthguards that increase the height of central occlusion
*c. Selective teeth shaving
d. Mouthguard for muscle relaxation
e. Appliances that limit mouth opening

2291. During preventive examination, a 20- year-old man was found to have enamel defects that look like irregularly shaped coarse white spots in the vestibular precervical area of teeth 11 and 12. The spots stain with 2% methylene blue solution. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute superficial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class III
b. Acute initial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class III
c. Focal enamel hypoplasia of teeth 11 and 12
*d. Acute initial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class V
e. Acute superficial caries of teeth 11 and 12, Black class V

2292. A patient complains of carious cavity in tooth 11. The filling was lost one week ago. The tooth crown is dark, there is residual filling material at the bottom of the carious cavity. Vertical percussion is painless. X-ray shows an oval area of bone tissue resorption with clear margins, 0.4x0.3 cm in size. The root canal is filled by 2/3 of its length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Radicular cyst
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

2293. The medical station of a regiment received a patient with signs of bilateral mandibular fracture. What is the main task of first aid in this case?
*a. To control shock, bleeding, and asphyxia and to provide transport immobilization
b. To check and correct previously applied bandages
c. To provide symptomatic therapy and care
d. To clean the oral cavity from blood clots, tooth shards, and bone fragments
e. To administer analgesics and cardiac medications

2294. In the epicenter of a natural disaster, a man with a lacerated wound of soft facial tissues was found. The wound cuts open the patient’s lower lip and chin; external bleeding is observed. The patient is conscious. What first aid should be provided for this man?
a. Use a syrette from the personal medical kit to provide anesthesia with 2% promedol (trimeperidine) solution
b. Position the flaps correctly and place the U- shaped mattress sutures
c. Provide primary surgical processing of the wound, place the sutures
d. Thoroughly ligate the vessel in the wound, position the flaps correctly, place the U-shaped mattress sutures, apply sterile bandage
*e. Stop the external bleeding, pack the wound, apply sterile bandage, provide transport immobilization

2295. A 67-year-old woman complains of an ulcer on her oral mucosa and pain when eating. She has a history of decompensated valvular heart diseases. Examination detected in the posterior portion of her left buccal region an irregularly shaped ulcer with white- gray coating. Surrounding mucosa is not inflamed. Make the provisional diagnosis:
*a. Trophic ulcer
b. Decubitus ulcer
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
e. Cancerous ulcer

2296. A 40-year-old man presents with a medial defect of the hard palate 2x3 cm in size. Dentition is intact. What type of obturator would be optimal in this case?
*a. Palatal plate
b. Pomerantseva-Urbanska obturator
c. Ilina-Markosian obturator
d. Floating obturator
e. Plate prosthesis with obturator

2297. A 53-year-old man complains of increased teeth sensitivity to chemical stimuli. Objectively: the gums are pale pink, roots are exposed by 1/3 of their length. Small amount of dental deposit is observed. The 15, 14, and 24 present with cuneiform defects. Probing of the exposed cervices and defects is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis, I degree
b. Catarrhal gingivitis
c. Ulcerative gingivitis
d. Periodontitis, II degree
*e. Periodontosis, I degree

2298. During preventive examination a 5- year-old child was found to have insufficient physiological attrition of cusps of the deciduous canines. What treatment tactics should a doctor choose?
a. Medical examination every 6 months until the canines are replaced
b. Medical examination every 6 months until the incisors are replaced
*c. To file down the retained canine cusps
d. No medical intervention is necessary
e. Medical examination once a month until the incisors are replaced

2299. A 34-year-old man complains of acute spasmodic pain in the region of his upper jaw on the left that is aggravating when affected by cold stimuli. Toothache irradiates to the ear and temple. He had acute toothache in the 27 tooth one year ago, but he did not consult a dentist. Pain recurred three days ago. Objectively: the 27 tooth has a carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Probing of the opened carious cavity is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure at the root apex of the 27 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Exacerbation of chronic fibrous pulpitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic gangrenous pulpitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic granulating periodontitis

2300. Parents of a 5-year-old girl brought her to the pediatric dentist for oral cavity sanation. After clinical examination she was diagnosed with chronic deep caries in 54. What filling material would be optimal for the treatment of tooth 54 in this case?
a. Silicate cement
b. Silicophosphate cement
c. Zinc phosphate cement
d. Composite
*e. Glass ionomer cement

2301. A 57-year-old man presents with habitual mandibular dislocation. To reduce mouth opening, Yadrova apparatus was made. How long should the treatment last in this case?
a. 12 months
b. 6 months
c. 9 months
d. 18 months
*e. 3 months

2302. What medical establishment provides dental and prosthodontic (making of splints, appliances, and dentures) treatment for those who received maxillofacial injuries on the battlefield?
a. Separate medical battalion
*b. Specialized surgical field hospital
c. Separate medical platoon
d. Evacuation hospital
e. Civilian medical establishment

2303. A patient needs endodontic treatment of tooth 21. The canal is being processed with manually operated endodontic instruments. Name one such instrument made by means of conical spiral threading (turning) of a steel wire with round cross-section (milling):
a. Spreader
b. Plugger
c. K-file
*d. H-file
e. K-reamer

2304. A patient is prescribed mandibular vestibuloplasty. What pathology is likely to occur if the vestibule of the mouth is too shallow?
a. Delayed growth of the jaw
*b. Diseases of periodontal tissues
c. Parafunction of mimic muscles
d. Overcrowding of the front teeth
e. Deep occlusion

2305. A 27-year-old woman complains of recurrent loss of a tooth filling in the lower right jaw. Objectively: in the 46 tooth on the masticatory approximal surface there is a defect of hard tooth tissues affecting 1/3 of the tooth crown, no tooth discoloration; positive, quickly abating reaction to cold stimulus is observed. What denture construction would be optimal in this case?
a. Partial crown
b. Plastic crown
c. Combined crown
*d. Dental inlay
e. Porcelain-fused-to-metal crown

2306. A new dental polyclinic is being opened in the city There are to be 38 doctors in the dental surgery department. How many department heads should supervise this number of personnel according to the normatives?
a. 5
b. 1
c. 2
d. 4
*e. 3

2307. A 6-year-old child complains of pain and edema in the upper right jaw, body temperature up to 37.9°C, and deterioration of general well-being. Symptom onset was 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue edema of buccal and infraorbital regions on the right. The crown of 54 is destroyed by 1/2, percussion is painful; the tooth previously had been treated for complicated caries. On the palatine side of the affected tooth area there is a painful infiltration with fluctuation in its center; the tissues over the infiltration are hyperemic. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Acute serous periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54
b. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of 54
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of the maxilla
*e. Acute suppurative periostitis of the maxilla originating from tooth 54

2308. After extraction of tooth 27 the dental surgeon suspected that the maxillary sinus was perforated. To clarify this provisional diagnosis the doctor desided to conduct an oronasal communication test (Valsalva maneuver). What manipulations are necessary for this test?
a. Ask the patient to blow through the mouth, while observing the socket of 27
b. Ask the patient to inhale through the nose, pinch the nostrils together, and exhale through the mouth
c. Pinch the nostrils together to occlude the patient’s nose and ask the patient to blow through the mouth, while observing the socket of 27"""
*d. Pinch the nostrils together to occlude the patient’s nose and ask the patient to blow through the nose, while observing the socket of 27
e. Ask the patient to blow through the nose, while observing the socket of 27

2309. A 38-year-old man needs to have his 12 tooth extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Infraorbital, palatal and incisor
b. Infraorbital
c. Infraorbital and palatal
d. Incisor
*e. Infraorbital and incisor

2310. A 45-year-old patient after administration of local anaesthesia in preparation for oral surgery has suddenly felt unwell, developed increasing edema of laryngeal mucosa and respiration disorder. The dentist stopped the manipulations in the oral cavity. What type of asphyxia developed in the patient?
a. Dislocational
b. Asp iration
c. Obturative
*d. Stenotic
e. Valvular

2311. What period of bite formation in a child can be normally characterized by physiological tremata and diastemata?
*a. Preparation for the change of dentition (4.5-6 years)
b. Changing occlusion
c. Permanent occlusion
d. It is always a sign of pathology
e. Formation of milk occlusion (6 months - 3 years)

2312. A 6-year-old child was referred for extraction of the temporary lower central incisors due to changes in the occlusion. The teeth exhibit the 111 degree of mobility. What type of anesthesia would be optimal in this case?
a. Inhalation narcosis
b. Conduction anesthesia
*c. Application anesthesia
d. Intraosseous anesthesia
e. Infiltration anesthesia

2313. A woman complains of a neoplasm in her sublingual area. The neoplasm makes eating and speaking difficult. In the sublingual area examination detects a soft-elastic neoplasm lcm in diameter with smooth surface and clear margins. The sign of fluctuation is noticeable on palpation. Oral mucosa is stretched tightly over the neoplasm and is blue-tinged and semi-transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mixed tumor of the submandibular gland
b. Hemangioma of the submandibular region
*c. Ranula of the sublingual gland
d. Calculous sialoadenitis
e. Adenolymphoma

2314. A 45-year-old man came to the prosthodontic department to have a denture made for him. Before the preparation of the hard tissues of the intact teeth, the patient was given an infiltration anesthesia with 0.5% lidocaine solution. Several minutes later he developed depressed level of consciousness, his blood pressure dropped, convulsions started, and involuntary urination occurred. What emergency condition did the patient develop?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Pain shock
c. Heart failure
d. Syncope
e. Collapse

2315. During examination of schoolchildren, the orthodontist noticed that some of them present with strained orbicularis oris muscle. What dental appliance can be used for exercising of the orbicularis oris muscle?
a. Frankel functional regulator 111
b. Bruckl appliance
*c. Dass activator appliance
d. Andresen-Haupl activator appliance
e. Angle appliance

2316. A 28-year-old man complains of pain in the infraorbital and parotid region on the left. On examination: hemorrhage occurs in the lower eyelid and conjunctiva of the left eye, there are signs of crepitation and step deformity of the eyesocket lower edge. The mouth opens by 1 cm. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Zygomatic bone fracture
b. Malar arch fracture
c. Left articular process fracture
d. Traumatic arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Hematoma of the infraorbital region

2317. A 23-year-old man complains of gum bleeding when he brushes his teeth or eats solid food. Objectively: the gums of the front lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen and bleeding when palpated. Oral and gingival mucosa in other areas are not affected. The occlusion is deep. The teeth are firm, except for the 41 and 31 (degree 1 mobility). X-ray shows resorption of the alveolar septum in the area of the 41, 42, 32, and 31 teeth up to 1/3 of the root length. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Generalized periodontitis, initial stage
*b. Localized periodontitis
c. Parodontosis, stage I
d. Generalized periodontitis, stage I
e. Catarrhal gingivitis

2318. A child is 8 years old. There are complaints of overcrowded upper incisors. Objectively: the first molars closure is of Angle’s I class, frontal overbite is orthognathic. The 12 and 22 teeth erupt palatinally with space deficiency of 2/3 of the tooth crown. The 11 and 21 teeth are 10 mm each in cross-section. The child has inherited father’s facial type with prognathism and macrodontia of the central incisors. Choose the preventive treatment, considering this hereditary pathology:
a. Extraction of the 12 and 21 teeth to reduce the dental arch
b. Filing down of the 11 and 21 approximal surfaces to provide the space for the 12 and 22 teeth
c. Massage of the 12 and 21 teeth area to stimulate their eruption
d. Jaw expansion to provide the space for the 12 and 21 teeth
*e. Hotz serial extraction to reduce the dental arch

2319. During preventive examination a 10- year-old child was found to have matt white spots on the vestibular surface of the 11 and 21 teeth. The spots are located in the area of tooth cervix. Enamel surface in the affected area is undamaged and can be stained with methylene blue. Subjectively the child has no complaints. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Teeth sealing
b. ART technique
c. Preparation and filling
*d. Remineralization therapy
e. Impregnation method

2320. After the inflammatory process in the parotid area a woman developed frequent pain attacks resembling electric current in her face on the right. The attacks last for 15-20 minutes. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Tympanic plexus neuralgia
b. Exacerbation of chronic maxillary sinusitis
*c. Trigeminal neuralgia
d. Trigeminal neuritis
e. Exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis

2321. A 26-year-old woman needs dental prosthetics. Objectively the crown of 16 is destroyed by 1/3. Its anatomical shape will be restored with a porcelain inlay. Direct method is chosen for inlay-making. What should be used to obtain the impression of the formed inlay cavity?
a. Thermoplastic materials
b. Solid crystal materials
*c. Gold or platinum foil
d. Silicone materials
e. Wax

2322. A 36-year-old woman complains of dryness and peeling of her lower lip vermillion border. Both dryness and peeling have been observed for a month. Application of indifferent ointments was ineffective. Objectively the vermillion border of the lower lip is bright red, moderately infiltrated, and densely covered in white-gray scales, that cannot be removed without pain and bleeding. The lesion focus contains concave areas, while on the periphery there are patches of dull epithelium that look like irregular white stripes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Candidal cheilitis
b. Leukoplakia
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Exfoliative cheilitis
*e. Lupus erythematosus

2323. A 43-year-old man came to the admission room. He complains of facial edema and enlarged upper lip and tongue. This condition developed approximately 40 minutes ago, when he took aspirin. Objectively the patient is anxious, his skin is of normal color, respiration is partially disturbed. The upper lip, eyelids, cheeks, tongue, and soft palate are swollen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lymphedema of the lips
b. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
c. Cheilitis glandularis
*d. Quincke edema
e. Allergic contact cheilitis

2324. A 6-month-old child was diagnosed with bilateral bronchopneumonia and prescribed broad- spectrum antibiotics. The child is formula-fed and presents with maldigestion (dyspepsia). What pathologic changes can occur in the hard dental tissues in this case?
a. Local hypoplasia
b. Hutchinson teeth
*c. Systemic enamel hypoplasia
d. Fournier teeth
e. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome

2325. A 12-year-old girl complains of spontaneous pain in tooth 16 with short periods of remission (10-20 minutes) that developed 4 days ago. The pain increases at night and irradiates to the upper right jaw. Examination revealed a deep carious cavity in 16, the dentin is soft, the probing is painful at all points of the cavity floor, vertical percussion is slightly tender, the pain increases in response to thermal stimuli. EPT is 25 microamperes. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute apical periodontitis
b. Chronic concrementous pulpitis
c. Acute local pulpitis
*d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Chronic fibrous pulpitis

2326. During the treatment of acute deep caries in 16 in an 18-year-old girl, the pulp chamber was accidentally perforated. Perforation is punctate and located in the area of a pulp horn. What treatment tactics would be advisable in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
*b. Biological approach
c. Devital amputation
d. Devital extirpation
e. Insulating inlay and permanent filling

2327. A 7.5-year-old practically healthy child complains of crown fracture and pain in the upper right incisor. Objectively 2/3 of crown of 11 is absent, the pulp is exposed and red; on probing it is acutely painful and bleeding; tooth percussion is painful. Tire trauma occurred 2 hours ago. What would be the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Devital extirpation
b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Biological approach
*e. Vital amputation

2328. A 35-year-old patient undergoes treatment of chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth. The canal is to be filled using the warm gutta-percha vertical condensation technique. What instrument is needed for gutta-percha condensation?
a. Root needle
b. Spreader
*c. Plugger
d. Endodontic probe
e. K-file

2329. An adolescent complains of reduced and painful mouth opening, difficulties when eating, and swelling in the left mandibular angle that developed after tooth 37 was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively the face is asymmetric due to soft tissue swelling in the area of the left mandibular angle. Mouth opening is painful and reduced to 2.0 cm. Disturbed occlusion is observed. Palpation of the left mandibular angle is painful, the tissues are soft, bone crepitus is detected. ’’Indirect load to the chin” symptom is positive in the area of the left mandibular angle. The socket of the extracted tooth is packed with iodoform gauze. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Left mandibular angle fracture
b. Odontogenic mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Mandibular periostitis on the left
d. Mandibular alveolar fracture
e. Anterior mandibular fracture

2330. A 7-year-old child complains of pain and swelling in the left submandibular region. The swelling in this region developed 2 days ago. Objectively: the child is in a satisfactory condition, body temperature is of 37.3°C. The face is asymmetrical due to the soft tissue swelling in the left submandibular region. Palpation reveals a round formation 2x2 cm in size. The formation is mobile, painful, unattached to the skin. The 74 tooth is discolored, percussion is painful. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Lateral cervical cyst
b. Acute suppurative odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
*c. Acute serous odontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region
d. Phlegmonous adenitis of the right submandibular region
e. Acute serous nonodontogenic lymphadenitis of the left submandibular region

2331. A 37-year-old woman came to the dentist to have her 25 tooth extracted. What type of anesthesia should be used in this case?
a. Unilateral infraorbital and palatal anesthesia
b. Unilateral tuberal and palatal anesthesia
c. Unilateral central anesthesia
*d. Unilateral tuberal, infraorbital, and palatal anesthesia
e. Unilateral infraorbital and incisor anesthesia

2332. A 25-year-old man complains of incorrectly positioned maxillary left central incisor due to trauma sustained 2 months ago. Objectively tooth 21 is rotated around its axis into palatal position. What would be the most advisable treatment method for correction of this defect?
*a. Orthodontic treatment
b. Surgical treatment
c. Splinting followed by prosthetic treatment
d. Instrumental surgical treatment
e. -

2333. A victim of a traffic accident was delivered into the admission room. The patient is supine and unconscious. His skin is cyanotic, respiration is extremely labored, mucosa is pale, blood clots are accumulated in the oral cavity. The patient is diagnosed with displaced bilateral mandibular fracture. What measures should be taken to prevent complications in this case?
a. Excision of injured mucosal flaps
b. Fixation of the tongue to the patient’s collar
c. Removal of foreign bodies from the oral cavity
d. Tracheostomy and artificial pulmonary ventilation
*e. Fixation of the lower jaw and tongue with standard Entin’s head-chin strap

2334. A 60-year-old man needs a removable partial denture for the upper jaw. Arrangement of the artificial teeth on the wax base was checked in the oral cavity of the patient. What is the next stage in the making of a removable partial denture?
a. Placing the plaster casts in an articulator
b. Measurement and fixation of the centric jaw relation
*c. Fitting and fixation of the removable partial dentures in the oral cavity
d. Final modelling of the denture base
e. Final polishing of the denture

2335. A 55-year-old man came to the prosthodontic clinic to have a denture made for him. Tooth 11 is missing in the patient. Two days ago he was released from the inpatient unit after a case of myocardial infarction. What tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Make a clasp-retained (bugel) removable partial denture
b. Temporarily refrain from making a denture
*c. Make a temporary removable denture
d. Perform implantation
e. Make a dental bridge with 12 and 21 as abutment teeth

2336. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with ulcerative gingivitis. After processing the patient’s oral cavity with an antiseptic, the doctor applied anesthesia and removed dental plaque and necrotic coating. Final part of the medical appointment is the application of gingival dressing. What etiotropic drug should this dressing contain?
a. Contrykal (Aprotinin)
b. Methyluracil
*c. Metronidazole
d. Pimafucin (Natamycin)
e. Terrilytin

2337. A 25-year-old man complains of a cavity in his lower left tooth, pain after eating sweet, sour, or solid food. Objectively in tooth 16 there is a deep carious cavity filled with light- colored softened dentin. Probing of the cavity floor is painful, pain stimulus is painful, but cold abates immediately after the stimulus is removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute deep caries
b. Chronic deep caries
c. Acute median caries
d. Chronic fibrous pulpitis
e. Acute focal pulpitis

2338. Parents of a 2.5-year-old child complain of gradual destruction of the upper front teeth of their child for the last several months. Objectively there are carious cavities within mantle dentin on the contact and vestibular surfaces of 52, 51, 61, and 62. The cavities are filled with softened pigmented dentin that can be easily removed with dental excavator. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries
b. Acute deep caries
c. Chronic deep caries
d. Chronic superficial caries
*e. Acute median caries

2339. A 29-year-old man came to the surgery department of a dental hospital. He complains of painful facial swelling on the right that appeared 1.5-2 months ago and has been gradually increasing since then. Objectively mouth opening is unrestricted, the face is asymmetrical due to a swelling in the right parotid-masseteric region. The skin over the edema is hyperemic and swollen; palpation detects a painful infiltration 3 cm in size. Massage in this region results in discharge of clear saliva from the excretory duct of the right parotid salivary gland. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Acute suppurative parotitis on the right
b. Submasseteric abscess on the right
c. Furuncle of the right parotid-masseteric region
*d. Chronic suppurative lymphadenitis of the right parotid-masseteric region
e. Chronic interstitial parotitis on the right

2340. An 18-year-old girl complains of pain in her parotid regions and general indisposition. Examination shows bilateral swelling of the parotid regions, painful mouth opening. In the oral cavity, mucosa near the openings of parotid salivary glands is hyperemic and swollen. There are signs of general intoxication: body temperature of 38°C and myalgia. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Phlegmon of the parotid-masseteric region
b. Acute suppurative lymphadenitis
*c. Acute epidemic parotitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis

2341. A 20-year-old man complains of spontaneous pain attacks (5-7 minutes) in the area of 36 that occur for the last 24 hours. Objectively in 36 there is a deep carious cavity on the masticatory surface. Probing is painful at one point, response to cold stimulus is painful, with an aftereffect that lasts for 5 minutes. Percussion is painless. X-ray shows root canals to be slightly curved, canal lumen is clearly visible. The tooth is planned to be used as an abutment for a dental bridge. What is the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Biological approach
b. Devital amputation
*c. Vital extirpation
d. Filling of the carious cavity
e. Vital amputation

2342. A 60-year-old patient came to the maxillofacial inpatient department. He complains of pain, bleeding, and chewing problems. He has a history of mandibular trauma at the level of the central incisors. Objectively the traumatized place is swollen, mouth opening is unrestricted. He was diagnosed with medial mandibular fracture. Both jaws are edentulous. What splint would be optimal in tljis case?
a. Limberg gingival splint
b. Vankevych dentogingival splint
c. Gunning gingival splint
*d. Port gingival splint
e. Rudko appliance

2343. A group of experts conducts epidemiologic investigation of certain age groups by severity of signs of periodontal damage and their need for treatment. What index allows to study these criteria?
a. PDI (Ramfjord)
b. PM A (Parma)
c. PI (Russel)
*d. CPITN (WHO)
e. OHI-S (Green-Vermillion)

2344. A 18-year-old young man complains of bleeding and pain in his gums. The disease onset was 4 days ago. Objectively the skin is pale, body temperature is 38.5°C. Submandibular lymph nodes on the left are enlarged, painful, non-fused with the surrounding tissues. The gingival papillae and gingival margin in the area of 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37 are hyperemic, ulcerated, and covered in necrotic deposit. Teeth are covered with soft dental plaque. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
b. -
c. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
*d. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
e. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis

2345. A 48-year-old patient has come to the hospital with complaints of defects in the paragingival area and slight sensitivity to thermal stimuli. Objectively: there are hard tissue defects that resemble a wedge with smooth polished walls on precervical vestibular surface of the 23 and 24 teeth. Thermal test is slightly positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Endemic fluorosis
b. Enamel necrosis
c. Acute deep caries
d. Enamel erosion
*e. Cuneiform defect

2346. A 7-year-old boy during primary examination was found to have a habit of sleeping with his fist under the cheek. What bite anomaly can develop due to this habit?
*a. Crossbite
b. Mesial bite
c. Deep bite
d. Open bite
e. Prognathism

2347. During planned sanation of a 3-year- old child, a deep carious cavity filled with food debris and softened dentin is detected in tooth 54. After tooth preparation the pulp of 54 is bleeding, probing is sharply painful. To treat pulpitis by means of devital amputation, during the first visit it is necessary to use:
a. Iodoform paste
b. Calcium-containing paste
c. Dentin paste
d. Zinc-eugenol paste
*e. Paraformaldehyde paste

2348. After adenotonsillectomia it is necessary to break the mouth breathing habit in a 4- year-old child. The orthodontist recommends application of an oral vestibular shield (Kerbitz’ vestibular plate). Vestibular shield facilitates training of the following muscle:
a. Medial pterygoid muscle
b. Masseter muscle
c. Temporal muscle
*d. Orbicular muscle
e. Lateral pterygoid muscle

2349. A hit to the face has forced the upper central incisors of a 15-year-old boy to sink into the jaw to the half of their crown height . What treatment tactics should the dentist choose?
a. Transplantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, endodontic treatment
b. Dynamic observation, endodontic treatment of 11 and 21 if necessary
c. Extraction of 11 and 21, their replacement with dentures
d. Replantation of 11 and 21 into the dentition, ligation
*e. Surgical repositioning of 11 and 21, teeth immobilization, endodontic treatment if necessary

2350. An 11-year-old girl was diagnosed with chronic parenchymatous parotitis. What X- ray sign indicates this disease?
a. Fluctuation sign
b. Filling defect
*c. "Bunch of grapes" sign"
d. "String of pearls" sign"
e. "Leafless tree"sign"

2351. A 6-year-old girl took paracetamol to treat a case of URTI two days ago, which resulted in the development of her present condition. The disease onset was acute with temperature increase up to 39.8°C. Objectively there are cockade-shaped maculopapular rashes on her face. The vermillion border is swollen, hyperemic, covered in massive brown crusts, and presents with bleeding cracks. Conjunctivitis is detected. Swollen and hyperemic oral mucosa presents with numerous erosions covered with fibrinous incrustations; the erosions are sharply painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythema multiforme exudativum
b. Chronic recurrent aphthous stomatitis
*c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Pemphigus
e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

2352. During preventive examination a patient was diagnosed with precancerous hyperkeratosis of the lower lip vermillion border. What treatment should be prescribed?
a. Palliative treatment
b. No treatment is required
c. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + chemotherapy
*d. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues
e. Surgical removal of the focus within healthy tissues + close-focus roentgenotherapy

2353. A removable partial laminar denture for the upper jaw is being made for the patient. The central occlusion is determined and fixed. What stage is next?
a. Arrangement of artificial teeth
b. Determining the edges of the base
*c. Fitting the wax model of the denture in the oral cavity
d. Measuring the interalveolar height
e. Replacing wax with plastic

2354. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with chronic fibrous pulpitis of tooth 27. Vital extirpation is chosen as the treatment method. Amide anesthetic is to be used for tuberal and palatal anesthesia. What anesthetic solution needs to be administered in this case?
a. 10% lidocaine
b. 5% anaesthesin (benzocaine)
*c. 3% mepivastesin (mepivacaine)
d. 2% novocaine (procaine)
e. 2% dicain (tetracaine)

2355. A removable full denture for the lower jaw is being made for a 75-year-old man. Objectively the alveolar process is slightly atrophied. Herbst tests are performed during fitting of an impression tray. When lips are stretched forwards the tray slips off. Where should the tray edge be shortened in this case?
a. From canine to canine on the lingual side
b. Along the mylohyoid line
*c. From canine to canine on the vestibular side
d. In the premolar area on the lingual side
e. From behind the mandibular tuberosity to the mylohyoid line

2356. A 12-year-old boy is in the dental office to complete the treatment of chronic periodontitis exacerbation in the 36 tooth. There are no complaints. Objectively: occlusive dressing of the 36 tooth is intact; tooth percussion is painless; there are no pathologies of the mucosa surrounding the 36: palpation is painless. What material is the most advisable for root canal filling in this case?
a. Resorcinol-formalin paste
*b. Sealer with gutta-percha post
c. Phosphate cement
d. Zinc oxide eugenol paste
e. Calcium-containing paste

2357. A 35-year-old man needs an adhesive dental bridge. Objectively tooth 15 is missing. Abutment teeth 14 and 16 are firm. Teeth crowns are of medium height. Dental equator is markedly visible. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. What will most likely be an abutment part of this adhesive denture?
a. Equator crowns
b. Stump inlays
c. Combined crowns
*d. Whole or perforated cast overlays
e. Full cast crowns

2358. A 30-year-old man complains of lost dental filling on his upper right jaw. Objectively in tooth 16 there is a deep carious cavity filled with dense pigmented dentin. What dentin layer forms as the result of tooth irritation in the course of caries process?
a. Hybrid
b. Predentin
c. Primary
*d. Tertiary
e. Secondary

2359. A 70-year-old man has edentulous maxilla. Objectively maxillary tuberosity and alveolar processes are completely atrophied; palatine vault is flat, its mucosal layer is moderately pliant. In this case the patient’s atrophic edentulous maxilla can be classified as:
a. Keller class III
b. Keller class II
c. Schroeder class II
d. -
*e. Schroeder class III

2360. An 8-year-old boy complains of a dull pain in his lower right tooth. The pain appears in response to thermal stimuli and slowly abates after the stimuli are removed. Objectively on the approximal surface of tooth 46 there is a deep carious cavity. During necrectomy with a dental excavator, communication between the carious and dental cavities is detected. Probing of the communication area results in sharp pain and bleeding. What method of pulpitis treatment is recommended in this case?
a. Devital amputation
b. Vital extirpation
c. Biological approach
*d. Vital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

2361. A 25-year-old man was diagnosed with acute deep caries of tooth 13, Black class V Photopolymer composite material is planned to be used for aesthetical restoration of tooth. What material should be used as a lining for the floor of the carious cavity in this case?
a. Dentin paste
b. Iodoform paste
*c. Calcium-containing paste
d. Devitalizing paste
e. Resorcin-formalin paste

2362. A 10-year-old boy complains of acute pain attacks in the area of his upper left teeth. The toothache persisted for a night. Objective examination revealed a carious cavity on the masticatory surface of the 26 tooth within parapulpar dentin. Probing is sharply painful at all points of the cavity floor. Markedly positive reaction to cold water stimulus is observed. Select the most likely diagnosis:
a. Acute suppurative pulpitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
c. -
d. Acute suppurative periodontitis
*e. Acute diffuse pulpitis

2363. A 46-year-old man needs a classic 2-stage surgical installation of implants into the upper jaw. How long should be the interval between stages 1 and 2?
a. 3 months
*b. 3-6 months
c. 1 month
d. 0.5 months
e. 1.5 months

2364. The maxillofacial surgery unit received a patient with complaints of inability to close his mouth. This condition occurred when the patient was biting an apple. Objectively there is a frightened expression on the patient’s face, the mouth is open wide, the chin is displaced to the left, salivation is observed. Palpation through the external acoustic meatus detected no movements of the right articular head. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Right temporomandibular joint dislocation
b. Bilateral temporomandibular joint dislocation
c. Fracture of the mandibular process
d. Acute temporomandibular arthritis
e. Temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome

2365. A 46-year-old man, a teacher, complains of lower teeth mobility that impedes the process of biting. Objectively the dentition is uninterrupted, front teeth demonstrate the II degree of mobility. X-ray shows straight and filled root canals of 32, 31. 41, and 42. What appliance will stabilize front teeth while retaining their aesthetic appearance?
a. Removable segmented splint for the front teeth
b. Semicrown splint
c. Splint with embrasure clasps
d. Cap splint
*e. Mamlok’s dental splint

2366. A 14-year-old boy complains of rapid wearing-off of tooth crowns. Objectively: tooth crowns are worn-off by 1/3. Enamel easily chips off and is pale gray in color. Make the diagnosis:
a. Dentinogenesis imperfecta
b. Systemic hypoplasia
c. Focal hypoplasia
d. Fluorosis
*e. Stainton-Capdepont syndrome

2367. During his shift a dentist of the prosthodontics unit has consulted and examined the patient, checked the crowns, installed dental bridges, measured centric jaw relation, and made necessary corrections to the removable dentures. What is the normal workload of a dentist per shift and per month measured in arbitrary units of labor intensity (AU) in a five-day work week and according to the normatives for provision of healthcare to the adults?
a. 5 AU -105 AU
*b. 6 AU-126 AU
c. 9 AU - 189 AU
d. 8 AU - 168 AU
e. 7 AU- 147 AU

2368. Parents of a 5-year-old child came to the dentist for sanation of the child’s oral cavity. Objectively on the masticatory surfaces of teeth 54, 64, 74, 75, and 85 there are carious cavities within the softened mantle dentin. The child is anxious and misbehaves. What treatment tactics would be optimal in this case?
a. Deep fluoridation
b. Impregnation treatment
c. Preventive filling
*d. ART technique
e. Invasive sealing

2369. A 22-year-old man is referred for extraction of tooth 36. In the office of the dental surgeon before the anestehesia was given to him he felt weakness and developed tinnitus and visual blackout. Objectively the face is pale and covered in cold sweat, blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg. For several seconds the patient was unconscious. What complication occurred during the visit to the dentist?
a. Collapse
b. Angina pectoris
*c. Fainting (Syncope)
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Epileptic seizure

2370. A 35-year-old man suffers from localized periodontitis of the front teeth on his lower jaw. Objectively on the upper jaw his dentition is uninterrupted, while on the lower jaw teeth 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 are missing, other teeth present with mobility of the II degree, tremata, and diastema. What tactics should a prosthodontist choose in this case?
a. Temporary splinting of the teeth on the lower jaw
b. Restore the height of the occlusion with a partial removable laminar denture
*c. Orthodontic treatment followed by splinting and prosthesis-making
d. Restore the height of the occlusion with a clasp- retained (bugel) denture
e. Splinting of the mobile teeth followed by prosthesis-making

2371. A 53-year-old patient complains of an ulcer on the lateral surface of the tongue. The ulcer appeared 6 months ago in the result of a trauma caused by sharp tip of the 37 tooth metal crown. A dentist replaced the crown with the one of better quality and prescribed keratoplastic drugs. Despite these measures the ulcer continues to grow. Lately there has been pain during talking, chewing, swallowing; sometimes the pain irradiates to the pharynx. Objectively: on the lateral surface of the tongue there is a painful ulcer with uneven raised dense margins and lumpy floor covered with grayish necrotic coating. What diagnosis is most likely?
a. Traumatic ulcer
*b. Cancer of the tongue lateral surface
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Trophic ulcer
e. Vincent’s necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

2372. A 43-year-old woman complains of mobility and displacement of her upper front teeth. Objectively: dental formula is 17 16 15 14 13 12 11|21 22 23 24 25 26 27|47 46 45 44 43 42 41|31 32 33 34 35 36 37.Teeth 12 11 | 21 22 are slanted towards the vestibular side, diastema and tremata are observed, I-II degree teeth mobility is detected. Select the orthodontic appliance for correction of teeth misalignment as a part of complex treatment of periodontal disease:
a. Schwartz appliance
b. Katz crown
c. Bynin appliance
*d. Palatal plate with vestibular arch
e. Palatal plate with inclined plane

2373. A 13.5-year-old girl complains of swollen gums that bleed when she brushes her teeth. This condition has been observed for the last half a year. Objectively gingival mucosa surrounding the front teeth of the upper jaw is swollen and cyanotic. Interdental papillae are round, dense, and enlarged, they cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height. Teeth 13 and 23 are positioned vestibularly. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Generalized periodontitis, degree 1
b. Chronic catarrhal gingivitis
*c. Chronic hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Acute catarrhal gingivitis
e. Localized periodontitis, degree I

2374. The parents of a 3-year-old child came to the orthodontist. They complain of an aesthetical defect in the teeth of their child. The child has a history of tongue sucking habit. In the front region there is a vertical fissure 5 mm. What orthodontic appliance is indicated for the treatment of this pathology?
a. Friel plate
b. Kerbitz plate
c. Schonherr plate
d. Dass activator appliance
*e. Kraus plate

2375. After a clasp-retained (bugel) maxillary denture is made, it is necessary to assess the quality of the newly-made construction. Width of the denture arch should be:
a. 10-12 mm
b. 1.5-2 mm
c. 3-5 mm
*d. 5-8 mm
e. 12-15 mm

2376. A 35-year-old woman has complaints of cosmetic defects of the front upper teeth crowns. The defects have been aggravating for the last 10 years. The patient suffers from unpleasant sensations when brushing her teeth, and when chemical stimuli are applied. Objective examination revealed defects localized in the enamel of the front upper teeth vestibular surface. The defects are oval, saucer-shaped, and have clear margins. Response to probing and cold stimuli was positive. Make the diagnosis:
a. Cuneiform defect
b. Enamel hypoplasia
c. Chemical necrosis of the tooth
d. Hyperesthesia of tooth hard tissues
*e. Enamel erosion

2377. Objective examination of a 10-year-old child revealed slight hyperemia, infiltration, and dryness of the whole surface of the vermillion border. Architectonics of the lips is disturbed. Dryness and contracted sensation are observed in the lips, especially during cold seasons. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Atopic cheilitis
b. Allergic contact cheilitis
c. Exfoliative cheilitis
d. Cheilitis of microbial origin
*e. Meteorological cheilitis

2378. A non-removable porcelain-fused-to- metal dental bridge is being made for a 35- year-old woman. Two-layer impressions were obtained using ’’Silafex” silicone material. The impression were sent for disinfection. What antiseptic should be used to process the impressions?
a. 0.5% hydrogen peroxide solution
b. 1.5% sodium bicarbonate solution
c. 70% alcohol solution
d. 3% chloramine solution
*e. 0.5% hypochlorite sodium solution

2379. A 38-year-old man, an arc welder, is a chain smoker. He came to the dentist to have a denture made for him. Howerver, in the middle of his lower lip against the background of unchanged vermillion border there is a gray-white polygonal lesion 6x4 mm with clear margins. The lesion is covered with tightly attached small scales and is level with the vermillion border (neither protruding nor retracted). Palpation of the lesion focus is painless, the lesion has no thickened base; lateral palpation detects thickened surface of the lesion. Regional lymph nodes are unchanged. Make the provisional diagnosis:
a. Lichen ruber planus, hyperkeratotic form
b. Cancer of the lower lip
*c. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis
d. Lupus erythematosus
e. Verrucous precancer

2380. A 2.5-year-old child has fever up to 38.5°C, low appetite, rashes in the oral cavity. The disease onset was 3 days ago. Objectively: the skin of the perioral area is covered in scarce vesicles with clear content. Within the oral cavity on the buccal and lingual mucosa there are sharply painful erosions, 2-3 mm in size, with white coating and hyperemic crown. The gums are swollen, hyperemic. The submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Make the diagnosis:
a. Stomatitis with the background of chicken- pox
b. Stomatitis with the background of infectious mononucleosis
c. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
d. Erythema multiforme exudativum
*e. Acute herpetic stomatitis

2381. The 15 tooth must be extracted. Tire tooth crown is retained. What instrument should be used in this case?
a. Right-sided forceps with S-shaped handles
b. Bayonet forceps
c. Left-sided forceps with S-shaped handles
*d. Forceps with S-shaped handles
e. Straight forceps

2382. A 27-year-old woman complains of an aesthetical defect in the area of her upper centra] incisors. She was diagnosed with chronic deep caries, Black class IV Aesthetic restoration of teeth 11 and 21 is planned. What material has optimal combination of strength and aesthetical properties?
a. Liquid composites
b. Microfilled composites
c. Compomers
d. Macrofilled composites
*e. Hybrid composites

2383. An 18-year-old young man complains of tooth sensitivity in his lower left jaw when eating sweet food. Examination shows enamel defects in the fissures on the masticatory surface of tooth 37. The enamel there is dull white and fragile when (chips off) probed. Make the diagnosis:
a. Chronic median caries of tooth 37
b. Chronic initial caries of tooth 37
c. Acute initial caries of tooth 38
*d. Acute superficial caries of tooth 37
e. Chronic superficial caries of tooth 37

2384. On objective examination a 59-year-old man with the edentulous mandible presents with bone protrusions and mobile areas of the alveolar crest. To ensure proper fixation of the denture and even load distribution the following functional impression should be made:
*a. Differentiated
b. Combined
c. Complete anatomical
d. Compression
e. Decompression

2385. A 54-year-old patient is prescribed full cast porcelain-fused-to-metal dental bridges for the upper and lower jaws. What type of impression material should be chosen in this case?
a. Thermoplastic
b. Alginate
c. Plaster
*d. Silicone
e. Zinc oxide eugenol

2386. How often should a dentist’s office be thoroughly cleaned?
a. No less than once a year
b. No less than once a month
c. No less than twice a week
d. No less than once every 2 weeks
*e. No less than once a week

2387. A porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for tooth 11 is being made for the patient. The tooth will be left vital. What measures should be taken during treatment to prevent pulpitis in this tooth?
a. Physical therapy
b. Calcium preparations
c. Anti-inflammatory preparations
*d. Pharmaceutical crown
e. Fluorine preparations

2388. An 8-year-old girl complains of bleeding gums. The child has diabetes mellitus. Objectively the interdental papillae between the teeth of the upper and lower jaw are hyperemic, swollen, and cover the crowns by 1/3 of their height. The teeth exhibit mobility of the I degree. What investigation technique is necessary for diagnosis-making in this case?
*a. X-ray
b. Vacuum test
c. Rheoparodontography
d. Stomatoscopy
e. PMA index

2389. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with acute odontogenic mandibular periostitis on the right originating from tooth 74. What treatment method would be optimal in this case?
a. Endodontic treatment of 74, pharmacotherapy
*b. Extraction of 74, periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
c. Endodontic treatment of 74, periosteotomy
d. Periosteotomy, pharmacotherapy
e. -

2390. A 12-year-old boy, due to trauma of the 44-th and 45-th teeth area, suffers from the following: pathologic displacement of the mandibular alveolar process; rupture of the alveolar process mucosa. What additional examination is necessary to specify the diagnosis?
*a. X-ray radiography of mandibula in frontal and lateral projections
b. X-ray radiography of cranium in axillary projection
c. -
d. 1 omography of mandibula
e. X-ray radiography of mandibula in frontal and Parma projection

