1. A 4-year-old girl presents with body temperature rise, aggravation of general condition. The symptoms has been observed for 3 days. Objectively: general condition is grave, body temperature is 38,6°C, the girl is anxious and pale. She presents also with halitosis, hyperaemia and edema of gingival mucous membrane in the region of the 83, 84, 85 teeth on both sides from the alveolar process. The mentioned teeth are mobile, their percussion causes acute pain; the 84 tooth is filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis beginning from the 84 tooth
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis beginning from the 84 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radiculodental mandibular cyst beginning from the 84 tooth
e. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland

2. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with granulating periodontitis of the 55 tooth. The crown is completely destroyed. X-ray picture shows separated tooth roots. Choose an optimal tool for operative intervention:
a. Crown S-shaped forceps
*b. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Root beak-shaped forceps
d. Root straight forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

3. A 3-year-old girl complains about pain and tumescence in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5-37,9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a tumescence in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II degree of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis
b. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
d. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
e. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis

4. A 6-year-old boy hit his forehead one day ago. A few hours later a swelling appeared in the right superciliary region. Objectively: there is a considerable edema of forehead tissues spreading to eyelids of the right eye, the skin over the swelling is cyanotic, the swelling is of soft consistency. Fluctuation is also present. General condition of the boy is normal. Make a provisional diagnosis:
*a. Hematoma of the right superciliary region
b. Fracture of frontal bone
c. Inflammatory infiltration of tissues of the right superciliary region
d. Hematic abscess of the right superciliary region
e. Postraumatic edema of tissues of the right superciliary region

5. Parents of a 4-year-old child complain about speech defect, namely lallation. Examination shows limited tongue movements, when the tongue is moved forward it turns down, the lower edge of tongue frenulum is positioned in front of the submandibular salivary ducts. The frenulum is thin and transparent. Specify the terms of operative intervention:
*a. After making the diagnosis
b. After eruption of permanent incisors
c. After eruption of permanent molars
d. After formation of permanent occlusion
e. After complete development of maxillofacial bones

6. An 8 year old boy was referred to the oral surgery for extraction of his 64 tooth because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. Tooth crown is intact. What instrument should be applied?
a. Straight forceps
b. Beak-shaped forceps with non-converging beaks
*c. S-shaped forceps without thorns
d. Broad-beaked forceps
e. S-shaped forceps with thorns

7. A 5 year old child was diagnosed with congenital complete nonclosure of soft and hard palate. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for uranostaphyloplasty?
a. Intravenous narcosis
b. Mask narcosis
*c. Nasotracheal narcosis
d. Orotracheal narcosis
e. Endotracheal narcosis through tracheostome

8. A 4-year-old child got a face trauma 2 hours ago. A stomatologist on duty made a diagnosis: intrusive luxation of the 61 tooth. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Reposition of the 61 tooth
b. Observation
*c. Extraction of the 61 tooth
d. Splinting of the 61 tooth
e. Removal of pulp of the 61 tooth

9. A 2 year old girl has body temperature 38,5°C, a swelling below her jaw on the right. On the 5th day of illness there apeared rhinitis, cough, a small movable globule under her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: general condition of the child is moderately severe. The face is asymmetric due to the swelling in the right submaxillary area. The skin is hyperemic, glossy, there is a diffuse infiltrate in the right submaxillary area spreading to the upper neck parts on the right, it is dense and painful; the skin doesnt make folds. Teeth are healthy. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute sialoadenitis of the right submandibular salivary gland
b. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible on the right
c. Acute nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis on the right
d. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible on the right
*e. Adenophlegmon of the right submaxillary area

10. A 12 year old boy complains about pain and swelling in the parotidomasticatory area on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. He has been suffering from this for 5 years. Objectively: palpation reveals a dense painful nonmobile formation 3,5х5 large in the parotidomasticatory area on the left. Skin colour is unchanged. Orifice of the left salivary gland duct excretes transparent secretion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Mixed tumour of parotid gland
b. Acute condition of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
c. Buccal abscess
*d. Herzenbergs pseudoparotitis
e. Epidemic parotitis

11. A 5-year-old child sustained a dental injury. Objectively: the crowns of the 51, 61 teeth are shorter than neighbouring teeth by ½. Mucous membrane is edematic and hyperemic in theregion of the 51, 61 teeth. X-ray picture shows that there is no periodontal fissure in the apical parts of roots of the 51, 61 teeth, apexes of the 51, 61 teeth are imbedded into the spongy substance of body of maxilla. What treatment tactics would be the most efficient?
a. Reposition of the 51, 61 teeth
b. Regular medical check-up
*c. Extraction of the 51, 61 teeth
d. Ligature splinting of the 51, 61 teeth
e. Reimplantation

12. An 8-year-old child presents with an edema of the submandibular region, the mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm, further opening is difficult, body temperature is 37,6°C, mucogingival fold is vestibularly flattened, hyperaemic and swollen. The 84 and 85 teeth have fillings, their percussion is painless. The 84 tooth exhibits I degree mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenic periostitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*c. Acute odontogenic periostitis
d. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

13. Parents of a 7-year-old boy complain about missing of the 11 tooth. Objectively: there is enlargement of alveolar process in projection of the 11, 12 teeth. X-ray picture shows multiple shades of different size. They have dentate shape and look like hard tooth tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Odontoma of maxilla
b. Cementoma of maxilla
c. Odontogenic fibroma of maxilla
d. Adamantinoma of maxilla
e. Follicular cyst of maxilla starting from the 11 tooth

14. After preventive examination a 10-year-old child was diagnosed with osteoporosis circumscripta of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. The patient was administered electrophoresis with remineralizing solutions. What preparations and in what order are to be applied in this case?
*a. Calcium and posphorus preparations with the following application of fluorine praparation
b. Calcium preparations only
c. Fluorine preparations only
d. Phosphorus preparations only
e. Fluorine preparations with the following application of calcium and phosphorus preparations

15. A child was brought to the traumatology centre of oral surgery department with complaints about changed position of the 21 tooth that was inclined towards palate. The day before the child was hit in the face. Make a diagnosis:
a. Complete dislocation of the 21 tooth
b. Contusion of the 21 tooth
c. Break-off of the crown part of the 21 tooth
*d. Subluxation of the 21 tooth
e. Fracture of crown part of the 21 tooth

16. Parents of a 1,5-year-old child complain about the childs tongue enlargement and ingestion disorder. The child has been suffering from this since birthday. Objectively: general condition has no peculiarities. The tongue is enlarged (macroglossia). Its mucous membrane exhibits granular vesicular outgrowths. The tongue is dense, painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemangioma of tongue
b. Cyst of tongue
c. Cancer of tongue
*d. Lymphangioma of tongue
e. Fibroma of tongue

17. A 14-year-old child has orthodontic indication for extraction of the 14 tooth. What forceps should be applied for extraction of the 14 tooth?
*a. S-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Curved on flat forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps
e. Straight forceps

18. A 14-year-old child was undergoing extraction of the 16 tooth on account of chronic periodontitis. During the tooth extraction it came to perforation of maxillary sinus along with penetration of the distal buccal root into the maxillary sinus. What is the further dentists tactics?
*a. The patient should be directed to the hospital for a surgical procedure
b. The dentist should form a clottage without informing the patient
c. The dentist should perform maxillary sinusotomy in the outpatient setting
d. The dentist should close the perforation with mucoperiosteal graft
e. The dentist himself should try to extract the root

19. A 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with dental cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed some months ago and wasnt treated. What treatment method is efficient in this case?
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Biological method
e. Vital amputation

20. A boy is 1 month old. At the medial edge of the inferior eyelid on the right there is a wound with purulent discharge. The boy fell ill suddenly, body temperature rose up to 40°C. The general condition is grave. On the second day of disease there appeared an infiltration at the internal edge of eye socket and right cheek. The skin above it is hyperemic, fluctuation cannot be determined. Palpebral fissure is narrowed. The right nasal meatus discharges pus. There is an infiltration on the vestibular surface of alveolar process and on the right palate. Mucous membrane above it is hyperemic along the mucogingival fold, fluctuation can be determined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of the right eye socket
b. Acute dacryocystitis
*c. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
d. Acute right-sided highmoritis
e. Acute serous periostitis

21. During the removal of dermoid cyst of the nose bridge a 14-year-old boy complained about giddiness, sickness, weakness. Objectively: the skin is pale, covered with cold sweat. Tachypnoe is present. The pulse is weak, the arterial pressure is low (80/60 mm Hg), hands feel cold. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic shock
b. Collapse
c. Toxic shock
*d. Syncope
e. Anaphylactic shock

22. A 9 year old child complains about pain and swelling of soft tissues beneath his mandible on the right. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory; there is face asymmetry due to the inflammatory infiltration and collateral tissue edema in the right submandibular area. Crown of the 85 tooth is decayed, mucous membrane of gums in the area of the 84, 85, 46 teeth is hyperemic, edematic; mucogingival fold is flattened. What treatment should be administered?
a. Extraction of the 85 tooth and incision along the mucogingival fold
b. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth
*c. Extraction of the 85 tooth
d. Periosteotomy
e. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth and periosteotomy

23. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the childs submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. Objectively: the childs face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
*c. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
d. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Submandibular adenophlegmon

24. An oral surgeon attended a 3 day old child staying in the newborn pathology department. Objectively: bilateral hypogenesis of zygomatic bones and orbits, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures, nonclosure of inferior eyelids, hypogenesis of mandible (bird face), deformity of auricles with a preauricular fistula on the right. What congenital disease does the child have?
*a. Mandibulofacial dysostosis
b. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia
c. Oculodentodigital syndrome
d. Oculomandibulofacial syndrome
e. Oculocerebrorenal syndrome

25. During local anesthetization (with 2 ml of 10% solution of lidocaine) a 9 year old girl cried out, lost consciousness, there appeared generalized convulsions. Objectively: the childs skin is pale and cyanotic. It is impossible to feel the pulse because of convulsions. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Bronchial obstruction
b. Febrile convulsions
c. Quinckes edema
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Lidocaine intoxication

26. A childs mother had acute purulent mastitis. Now the 2-month-old child experiences an edema of his left infraorbital and malar regions, dermahemia of the left face side, temperature rise up to 39-40°C, purulent discharges from the nose. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Phlegmon of infraorbital region
d. Acute maxillary sinusitis
*e. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis

27. According to the parents of a 7-year-old child, the child complains about weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, toothache in the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: condition is grave, the child is pale and adynamic, the face is asymmetric because of infiltration of the upper jaw on the left. The 64 tooth has a carious cavity. Percussion is painful, I degree of teeth mobility is also present. There are purulent discharges from the subgingival edge of the 64 tooth. Mucogingival fold of the 63, 64, 65 teeth is smoothed. Vestibular and palatine mucous membrane is edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
*b. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis starting from the 64 tooth
c. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis starting from the 64 tooth
d. Acute serous maxillary periostitis
e. Suppurative radicular cyst of maxilla

28. A 3-month-old child has an inborn tissue defect in the oral cavity. Objectively: the lip is intact, the oral cavity exhibits a cleft defect of soft palate and median part of hard palate. The child was diagnosed with complete schistasis of soft palate and partial schistasis of hard palate. Specify the dispensary group according to A.A.Kolesov:
a. Second
b. Fourth
c. Fifth
*d. First
e. Third

29. A 5-year-old child was bitten by a dog 2 days ago. The child is diagnosed with a bite wound of cheek. The parent’s didn’t appeal for medical aid in proper time. The wound exhibits pyoinflammatory process. What kind of surgical d-bridement should be performed?
*a. Secondary
b. Initial delayed
c. Surgical procedure is not required
d. Initial late
e. Initial early

30. A 7-year-old child sustained a sport injury. He complains about pain in the region of mandible, inability to join his teeth. Pressing against the chin causes intensification of pain in the region of mandible on the right. The child is diagnosed with a fracture of mandible body without fragment displacement. What therapeutic tactics should be chosen in order to prevent the displacement of bone fragments in the transitional dentition?
a. Fixation by means of Tigerstedt splints
b. Osteosynthesis
c. Administration of anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Application of sling bandage
*e. Fragment immobilization by means of an intraoral splint

31. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boy’s mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
c. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
d. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation
e. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation

32. A 4-year-old girl was bitten by a dog in her upper lip. Which of the following solutions should be primarily used for the wound d-bridement?
a. 3% soda solution
*b. 10% solution of laundry soap
c. 1% solution of hydrogen oxide
d. 0,002% solution of chlorhexidine
e. 1: 5000 solution of potassium permanganate

33. A 3 year old child was burnt with boiling water. Face skin is hyperemic and edematic, there are blisters of different sizes filled with transparent liquid. Define a degree of face skin burn:
a. III degree - A
b. I degree
*c. II degree
d. III degree - B
e. IV degree

34. A 13 year old patient got a trauma in the area of median face zone. She complains about pain, swelling of soft tissues in the area of her upper jaw, pain during mouth closing. Examination revealed mobility of nose bones, significant swelling of soft tissues in the left zygomatic area, haemorrage in the eye sclera, "step" sign along the inferior edge of both orbits and zygomaticomaxillary sutures, nasal haemorrhage, open bite, lengthening of median face part. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
b. Fracture of nose bones
c. Fracture of skull base
*d. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
e. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw

35. A 15-year-old child presents with puffiness in the region of the mandible branch; enlarged, dense and painless lymph nodes adhering to the surrounding tissues. X-ray picture of mandible branch shows a well-defined bone resorption area containing small sequestra. After Mantoux test a 12 mm papule was noted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ewings sarcoma
*b. Tuberculosis of mandible branch
c. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible branch
d. Mandibular actinomycosis
e. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis

36. A 12-year-old girl complains about intense pain in the region of the 46 tooth socket that was extracted 3 days ago. The pain is irradiating along the branches of trigeminus. Objectively: lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation, tissues around the tooth socket are edematic and hyperaemic. The socket walls are covered with grey-and-green deposition with putrid smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteomyelitis
*b. Alveolitis
c. Ostitis
d. Pericoronaritis
e. Periostitis

37. A 4-year-old girl presents with body temperature rise, aggravation of general condition. The symptoms has been observed for 3 days. Objectively: general condition is grave, body temperature is 38,6°C, the girl is anxious and pale. She presents also with halitosis, hyperaemia and edema of gingival mucous membrane in the region of the 83, 84, 85 teeth on both sides from the alveolar process. The mentioned teeth are mobile, their percussion causes acute pain; the 84 tooth is filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Suppuration of the radiculodental mandibular cyst beginning from the 84 tooth
b. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis beginning from the 84 tooth
c. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth
*e. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis beginning from the 84 tooth

38. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with granulating periodontitis of the 55 tooth. The crown is completely destroyed. X-ray picture shows separated tooth roots. Choose an optimal tool for operative intervention:
a. Root straight forceps
b. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Crown S-shaped forceps
*d. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
e. Root beak-shaped forceps

39. A 3-year-old girl complains about pain and tumescence in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5-37,9 degrees. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a tumescence in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II degree of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
*b. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis
c. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
d. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
e. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region

40. A 6-year-old boy hit his forehead one day ago. A few hours later a swelling appeared in the right superciliary region. Objectively: there is a considerable edema of forehead tissues spreading to eyelids of the right eye, the skin over the swelling is cyanotic, the swelling is of soft consistency. Fluctuation is also present. General condition of the boy is normal. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Inflammatory infiltration of tissues of the right superciliary region
*b. Hematoma of the right superciliary region
c. Fracture of frontal bone
d. Postraumatic edema of tissues of the right superciliary region
e. Hematic abscess of the right superciliary region

41. Parents of a 4-year-old child complain about speech defect, namely lallation. Examination shows limited tongue movements, when the tongue is moved forward it turns down, the lower edge of tongue frenulum is positioned in front of the submandibular salivary ducts. The frenulum is thin and transparent. Specify the terms of operative intervention:
a. After complete development of maxillofacial bones
b. After formation of permanent occlusion
c. After eruption of permanent molars
*d. After making the diagnosis
e. After eruption of permanent incisors

42. The child is 13 years old. The disease began suddenly with a body temperature rise up to 39°C, swelling of the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the left cheek edema. The skin over the swollen area is hyperemic and tense. The 26 tooth exhibits a large carious cavity, percussion of the 26 tooth causes pain reaction. The 25, 26, 27 teeth are mobile. Mucogingival junction in the region of the 24, 25, 26, 27 tooth is indistinct, alveolar mucosa is hyperemic and bilaterally swollen in the region of the 25, 26. 27 teeth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Odontogenous maxillary osteomyelitis to the left of the 26 tooth
b. Chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
c. Odontogenous purulent maxillary sinusitis induced by the 26 tooth
d. Suppuration of the radicular cyst induced by the 26 tooth
e. Odontogenous maxillary periostitis to the left of the 26 tooth

43. A 5 year old child was diagnosed with congenital complete nonclosure of soft and hard palate. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for uranostaphyloplasty?
*a. Nasotracheal narcosis
b. Intravenous narcosis
c. Endotracheal narcosis through tracheostome
d. Orotracheal narcosis
e. Mask narcosis

44. A 4-year-old child got a face trauma 2 hours ago. A stomatologist on duty made a diagnosis: intrusive luxation of the 61 tooth. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Observation
b. Splinting of the 61 tooth
c. Removal of pulp of the 61 tooth
*d. Extraction of the 61 tooth
e. Reposition of the 61 tooth

45. A 2 year old girl has body temperature 38,5°C, a swelling below her jaw on the right. On the 5th day of illness there apeared rhinitis, cough, a small movable globule under her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: general condition of the child is moderately severe. The face is asymmetric due to the swelling in the right submaxillary area. The skin is hyperemic, glossy, there is a diffuse infiltrate in the right submaxillary area spreading to the upper neck parts on the right, it is dense and painful; the skin doesnt make folds. Teeth are healthy. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible on the right
*b. Adenophlegmon of the right submaxillary area
c. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible on the right
d. Acute nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis on the right
e. Acute sialoadenitis of the right submandibular salivary gland

46. A 12 year old boy complains about pain and swelling in the parotidomasticatory area on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. He has been suffering from this for 5 years. Objectively: palpation reveals a dense painful nonmobile formation 3,5х5 large in the parotidomasticatory area on the left. Skin colour is unchanged. Orifice of the left salivary gland duct excretes transparent secretion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Herzenbergs pseudoparotitis
b. Epidemic parotitis
c. Buccal abscess
d. Acute condition of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
e. Mixed tumour of parotid gland

47. A 3-year-old girl has been diagnosed with acute odontogenous periostitis of mandible starting from the 74 tooth. It is required to perform periostomy and extract the 74 tooth. The child is excited. Choose the best type of anesthesia for the surgery:
a. Mandibular anaesthesia
b. Intubation anaesthesia
c. Central anaesthesia
*d. Intravenous anaesthesia
e. Infiltration anaesthesia

48. A 5-year-old child sustained a dental injury. Objectively: the crowns of the 51, 61 teeth are shorter than neighbouring teeth by 1/2. Mucous membrane is edematic and hyperemic in theregion of the 51, 61 teeth. X-ray picture shows that there is no periodontal fissure in the apical parts of roots of the 51, 61 teeth, apexes of the 51, 61 teeth are imbedded into the spongy substance of body of maxilla. What treatment tactics would be the most efficient?
a. Ligature splinting of the 51, 61 teeth
b. Reimplantation
c. Regular medical check-up
d. Reposition of the 51, 61 teeth
*e. Extraction of the 51, 61 teeth

49. After preventive examination a 10-year-old child was diagnosed with osteoporosis circumscripta of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth. The patient was administered electrophoresis with remineralizing solutions. What preparations and in what order are to be applied in this case?
a. Fluorine preparations only
*b. Calcium and posphorus preparations with the following application of fluorine praparation
c. Calcium preparations only
d. Fluorine preparations with the following application of calcium and phosphorus preparations
e. Phosphorus preparations only

50. A child was brought to the traumatology centre of oral surgery department with complaints about changed position of the 21 tooth that was inclined towards palate. The day before the child was hit in the face. Make a diagnosis:
a. Break-off of the crown part of the 21 tooth
*b. Subluxation of the 21 tooth
c. Fracture of crown part of the 21 tooth
d. Complete dislocation of the 21 tooth
e. Contusion of the 21 tooth

51. Parents of a 1,5-year-old child complain about the childs tongue enlargement and ingestion disorder. The child has been suffering from this since birthday. Objectively: general condition has no peculiarities. The tongue is enlarged (macroglossia). Its mucous membrane exhibits granular vesicular outgrowths. The tongue is dense, painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cancer of tongue
*b. Lymphangioma of tongue
c. Fibroma of tongue
d. Hemangioma of tongue
e. Cyst of tongue

52. A 14-year-old child has orthodontic indication for extraction of the 14 tooth. What forceps should be applied for extraction of the 14 tooth?
a. Bayonet-shaped forceps
b. Straight forceps
*c. S-shaped forceps
d. Beak-shaped forceps
e. Curved on flat forceps

53. A 14-year-old child was undergoing extraction of the 16 tooth on account of chronic periodontitis. During the tooth extraction it came to perforation of maxillary sinus along with penetration of the distal buccal root into the maxillary sinus. What is the further dentists tactics?
a. The dentist himself should try to extract the root
b. The dentist should close the perforation with mucoperiosteal graft
c. The dentist should perform maxillary sinusotomy in the outpatient setting
*d. The patient should be directed to the hospital for a surgical procedure
e. The dentist should form a clottage without informing the patient

54. A 13-year-old boy complains of pain in the region of the extracted 46 tooth, irradiating to the ear and temple, halitosis. The tooth was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Mucosa around the extracted tooth is hyperemic, edematous. The socket of the 46 tooth is filled with a gray clot. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuralgia of the III branch of trigeminus
*b. Alveolitis of the extracted 46 tooth
c. Acute odontogenous lymphadenitis of the right submandibular region
d. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 46 tooth
e. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis starting from the 46 tooth

55. A 15-year-old girl consulted a dental surgeon about a moderate swelling of the parotid-masticatory region on the left. Objectively: on palpation, the left parotid gland is nodular, dense, painless. The duct exudes somewhat turbid saliva. The duct mouth is dilated, the surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, pasty, with imprints of teeth. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Chronic parenchymatous sialoadenitis
b. Sialolithiasis
c. Cyst
d. Pleomorphic adenoma
e. Chronic interstitial sialoadenitis

56. A 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with dental cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed some months ago and wasnt treated. What treatment method is efficient in this case?
*a. Devital amputation
b. Vital extirpation
c. Devital extirpation
d. Vital amputation
e. Biological method

57. A 7-year-old child has been diagnosed with a complete dislocation of the 11 tooth caused by a trauma that occurred 24 hours ago. The tooth has been taken along with the patient to the dentists. Objectively: the alveolar socket edges are slightly hyperemic, the socket bone walls are intact, the socket itself is filled with a blood clot. What is the optimal way of treatment?
*a. Replantation of the 11th tooth with a prior filling of the channel
b. Extraction of the 11th tooth
c. Socket suturing with catgut
d. Reposition and fixation of the 11th tooth
e. Replantation of the 11th tooth before the filling of the channel

58. A boy is 1 month old. At the medial edge of the inferior eyelid on the right there is a wound with purulent discharge. The boy fell ill suddenly, body temperature rose up to 40°C. The general condition is grave. On the second day of disease there appeared an infiltration at the internal edge of eye socket and right cheek. The skin above it is hyperemic, fluctuation cannot be determined. Palpebral fissure is narrowed. The right nasal meatus discharges pus. There is an infiltration on the vestibular surface of alveolar process and on the right palate. Mucous membrane above it is hyperemic along the mucogingival fold, fluctuation can be determined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute dacryocystitis
b. Acute right-sided highmoritis
c. Acute serous periostitis
*d. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
e. Phlegmon of the right eye socket

59. During the removal of dermoid cyst of the nose bridge a 14-year-old boy complained about giddiness, sickness, weakness. Objectively: the skin is pale, covered with cold sweat. Tachypnoe is present. The pulse is weak, the arterial pressure is low (80/60 mm Hg), hands feel cold. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Collapse
b. Toxic shock
c. Traumatic shock
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Syncope

60. A 9 year old child complains about pain and swelling of soft tissues beneath his mandible on the right. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory; there is face asymmetry due to the inflammatory infiltration and collateral tissue edema in the right submandibular area. Crown of the 85 tooth is decayed, mucous membrane of gums in the area of the 84, 85, 46 teeth is hyperemic, edematic; mucogingival fold is flattened. What treatment should be administered?
*a. Extraction of the 85 tooth
b. Extraction of the 85 tooth and incision along the mucogingival fold
c. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth and periosteotomy
d. Periosteotomy
e. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth

61. An 8-year-old child complains of a painless round formation under the tongue on the left which was noticed by accident about a month ago. Objectively: there is a roundish formation up to 2,0 cm in diameter in the sublingual region deep in the soft tissues of mouth floor. It is soft, painless to palpation, the mucous membrane over it is of grayish-blue color. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Ranula of the left sublingual salivary gland
b. Epidermoid cyst of the mouth floor
c. Hemangioma of the mouth floor
d. Lymphangioma of the mouth floor
e. Dermoid cyst of the mouth floor

62. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the child’s submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5°C. Objectively: the child’s face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2х2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Submandibular adenophlegmon
d. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

63. During local anesthetization (with 2 ml of 10% solution of lidocaine) a 9 year old girl cried out, lost consciousness, there appeared generalized convulsions. Objectively: the childs skin is pale and cyanotic. It is impossible to feel the pulse because of convulsions. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Quinckes edema
b. Bronchial obstruction
c. Febrile convulsions
*d. Lidocaine intoxication
e. Anaphylactic shock

64. According to the parents of a 7-year-old child, the child complains about weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, toothache in the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: condition is grave, the child is pale and adynamic, the face is asymmetric because of infiltration of the upper jaw on the left. The 64 tooth has a carious cavity. Percussion is painful, I degree of teeth mobility is also present. There are purulent discharges from the subgingival edge of the 64 tooth. Mucogingival fold of the 63, 64, 65 teeth is smoothed. Vestibular and palatine mucous membrane is edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute albuminous maxillary periostitis
b. Suppurative radicular cyst of maxilla
c. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
*d. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis starting from the 64 tooth
e. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis starting from the 64 tooth

65. A 3-month-old child has an inborn tissue defect in the oral cavity. Objectively: the lip is intact, the oral cavity exhibits a cleft defect of soft palate and median part of hard palate. The child was diagnosed with complete schistasis of soft palate and partial schistasis of hard palate. Specify the dispensary group according to A.A.Kolesov:
a. Second
b. Fourth
c. Fith
*d. First
e. Third

66. A 7-year-old child sustained a sport injury. He complains about pain in the region of mandible, inability to join his teeth. Pressing against the chin causes intensification of pain in the region of mandible on the right. The child is diagnosed with a fracture of mandible body without fragment displacement. What therapeutic tactics should be chosen in order to prevent the displacement of bone fragments in the transitional dentition?
a. Administration of anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Fixation by means of Tigerstedt splints
c. Osteosynthesis
*d. Fragment immobilization by means of an intraoral splint
e. Application of sling bandage

67. At the end of the reception hours a dental surgeon has to fill in the stomatological forms. Name the form of everyday reporting on children dental reception:
a. Form 49
*b. Form 39
c. Form 19
d. Form 9
e. Form 29

68. A child was born with schistasis of alveolar process, hard and soft palate. The optimal way to feed the child before the surgery will be through:
a. Spoon
b. -
c. Enteric feeding tube
d. Baby bottle nipple
*e. Obturator

69. A 7-year-old child presents withf facial asymmetry, severe pain in the lower jaw on the left, body temperature rise up to 39,0°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the massive swelling of soft tissues in the mandibular region on the left. The skin over the infiltration is hyperemic and cannot be plicated. Mouth opening is limited, painful. The crown of the 75 tooth is destroyed by 2/3, the tooth exhibits the grade II mobility. Percussion of the 36 tooth is painful, the 75 tooth - painless. Edema and fluctuation of soft tissues on the buccal and lingual sides of these teeth are present. What measures are to be taken in the first place?
*a. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on both sides
b. To extract the 75, 36 teeth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
c. To lance the inflammation focus in the submandibular region
d. To lance the inflammation focus on the lingual and buccal sides
e. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side

70. A 4-year-old girl was bitten by a dog in her upper lip. Which of the following solutions should be primarily used for the wound d-bridement?
a. 1: 5000 solution of potassium permanganate
b. 3% soda solution
c. 0,002% solution of chlorhexidine
d. 1% solution of hydrogen oxide
*e. 10% solution of laundry soap

71. A 3 year old child was burnt with boiling water. Face skin is hyperemic and edematic, there are blisters of different sizes filled with transparent liquid. Define a degree of face skin burn:
a. I degree
b. III degree - B
c. IV degree
*d. II degree
e. III degree - A

72. A 13 year old patient got a trauma in the area of median face zone. She complains about pain, swelling of soft tissues in the area of her upper jaw, pain during mouth closing. Examination revealed mobility of nose bones, significant swelling of soft tissues in the left zygomatic area, haemorrage in the eye sclera, "step" sign along the inferior edge of both orbits and zygomaticomaxillary sutures, nasal haemorrhage, open bite, lengthening of median face part. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Fracture of nose bones
b. Fracture of skull base
c. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
d. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
*e. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw

73. A 12-year-old girl complains about intense pain in the region of the 46 tooth socket that was extracted 3 days ago. The pain is irradiating along the branches of trigeminus. Objectively: lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation, tissues around the tooth socket are edematic and hyperaemic. The socket walls are covered with grey-and-green deposition with putrid smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Alveolitis
b. Ostitis
c. Osteomyelitis
d. Periostitis
e. Pericoronaritis

74. A 3-year-old girl complains of pain and swelling in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5-37,9°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a swelling in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II grade of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
b. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
*d. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis
e. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis

75. A 6-year-old boy hit his forehead one day ago. A few hours later a swelling appeared in the right superciliary region. Objectively: there is a considerable edema of forehead tissues spreading to eyelids of the right eye, the skin over the swelling is cyanotic, the swelling is of soft consistency. Fluctuation is also present. General condition of the boy is normal. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Hematic abscess of the right superciliary region
b. Inflammatory infiltration of tissues of the right superciliary region
c. Postraumatic edema of tissues of the right superciliary region
d. Fracture of frontal bone
*e. Hematoma of the right superciliary region

76. An 8 year old boy was referred to the oral surgery for extraction of his 64 tooth because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. Tooth crown is intact. What instrument should be applied?
a. Beak-shaped forceps with non-converging beaks
b. Broad-beaked forceps
c. S-shaped forceps with thorns
*d. S-shaped forceps without thorns
e. Straight forceps

77. The child is 13 years old. The disease began suddenly with a body temperature rise up to 39°C, swelling of the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the left cheek edema. The skin over the swollen area is hyperemic and tense. The 26 tooth exhibits a large carious cavity, percussion of the 26 tooth causes pain reaction. The 25, 26, 27 teeth are mobile. Mucogingival junction in the region of the 24, 25, 26, 27 tooth is indistinct, alveolar mucosa is hyperemic and bilaterally swollen in the region of the 25, 26. 27 teeth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Suppuration of the radicular cyst induced by the 26 tooth
b. Odontogenous purulent maxillary sinusitis induced by the 26 tooth
c. Odontogenous maxillary periostitis to the left of the 26 tooth
d. Chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
*e. Odontogenous maxillary osteomyelitis to the left of the 26 tooth

78. A 5-year-old child has been diagnosed with congenital complete nonclosure of soft and hard palate. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for uranostaphyloplasty?
a. Orotracheal narcosis
b. Endotracheal narcosis through tracheostome
c. Mask narcosis
d. Intravenous narcosis
*e. Nasotracheal narcosis

79. A 15-month-old child diagnosed with intrusive luxation of the 51 tooth has been referred to a childrens dental surgeon. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
*a. Monitoring the independent eruption of the affected tooth
b. 51 tooth reposition
c. 51 tooth replantation
d. 51 tooth splinting
e. 51 tooth extraction

80. A child has been admitted to a hospital with a maxillofacial trauma. It is probable that the wound has been contaminated with tetanus infection. How soon after the injury should the tetanus serum be given?
a. Within a week
*b. Immediately at the time of seeking medical help
c. Within 24 hours
d. Within 12 hours
e. Within 2 days

81. A 2 year old girl has body temperature 38,5°C, a swelling below her jaw on the right. On the 5th day of illness there apeared rhinitis, cough, a small movable globule under her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: general condition of the child is moderately severe. The face is asymmetric due to the swelling in the right submaxillary area. The skin is hyperemic, glossy, there is a diffuse infiltrate in the right submaxillary area spreading to the upper neck parts on the right, it is dense and painful; the skin doesnt make folds. Teeth are healthy. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible on the right
b. Acute nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis on the right
*c. Adenophlegmon of the right submaxillary area
d. Acute sialoadenitis of the right submandibular salivary gland
e. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible on the right

82. Parents of a 6-year-old child consulted a doctor about a swelling in his right parotid-masseteric region, dry mouth, fever up to 37,7°C. Similar presentations turned up about 6 months ago. Examination revealed a tuberous, slightly painful infiltrate in the right parotid-masseteric region. Saliva is viscous, the right salivary gland duct discharges some secretion with whitish inclusions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent parotitis
b. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of parotid gland
c. Parotitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
e. Mixed tumor, salivary gland type

83. A 3-year-old girl has been diagnosed with acute odontogenous periostitis of mandible starting from the 74 tooth. It is required to perform periostomy and extract the 74 tooth. The child is excited. Choose the best type of anesthesia for the surgery:
*a. Intravenous anaesthesia
b. Infiltration anaesthesia
c. Central anaesthesia
d. Intubation anaesthesia
e. Mandibular anaesthesia

84. A 5-year-old child sustained a dental injury. Objectively: the crowns of the 51, 61 teeth are shorter than neighbouring teeth by ½. Mucous membrane is edematic and hyperemic in theregion of the 51, 61 teeth. X-ray picture shows that there is no periodontal fissure in the apical parts of roots of the 51, 61 teeth, apexes of the 51, 61 teeth are imbedded into the spongy substance of body of maxilla. What treatment tactics would be the most efficient?
a. Regular medical check-up
b. Ligature splinting of the 51, 61 teeth
c. Reimplantation
*d. Extraction of the 51, 61 teeth
e. Reposition of the 51, 61 teeth

85. An 8-year-old child presents with an edema of the submandibular region, the mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm, further opening is difficult, body temperature is 37,6°C, mucogingival fold is vestibularly flattened, hyperaemic and swollen. The 84 and 85 teeth have fillings, their percussion is painless. The 84 tooth exhibits I degree mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*d. Acute odontogenic periostitis
e. Chronic odontogenic periostitis

86. A 6-year-old girl has unrestricted opening of the mouth. The alveolar process of the upper jaw is intact. Soft and hard palate are of a triangular shape and have a cleft up to the level of the 13 and 23 teeth. Soft palate is shortened. Speech is indistinct. The child was born with this defect. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Isolated partial uranoschisis
b. -
c. Isolated complete cleft palate
d. Submucous cleft palate
*e. Natural partial cleft palate

87. Parents of a 7-year-old boy complain about missing of the 11 tooth. Objectively: there is enlargement of alveolar process in projection of the 11, 12 teeth. X-ray picture shows multiple shades of different size. They have dentate shape and look like hard tooth tissues. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Odontogenic fibroma of maxilla
*b. Odontoma of maxilla
c. Cementoma of maxilla
d. Follicular cyst of maxilla starting from the 11 tooth
e. Adamantinoma of maxilla

88. A child was brought to the traumatology centre of oral surgery department with complaints about changed position of the 21 tooth that was inclined towards palate. The day before the child was hit in the face. Make a diagnosis:
a. Contusion of the 21 tooth
b. Break-off of the crown part of the 21 tooth
c. Complete dislocation of the 21 tooth
d. Fracture of crown part of the 21 tooth
*e. Subluxation of the 21 tooth

89. Parents of a 1,5-year-old child complain about the childs tongue enlargement and ingestion disorder. The child has been suffering from this since birthday. Objectively: general condition has no peculiarities. The tongue is enlarged (macroglossia). Its mucous membrane exhibits granular vesicular outgrowths. The tongue is dense, painless on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibroma of tongue
b. Hemangioma of tongue
*c. Lymphangioma of tongue
d. Cyst of tongue
e. Cancer of tongue

90. Parents of an 8-year-old child with Down syndrome took the child to a doctor for oral cavity sanitation. After the examination entailing great difficulties the child was found to have four teeth decayed as a result of chronic periodontitis. What kind of anesthesia should be chosen for surgical sanitation in one visit?
a. Conduction anesthesia
b. Endotracheal anesthesia
c. Endotracheal anesthesia through a tracheostoma
*d. Phlebonarcosis
e. Mask anesthesia

91. A 13-year-old boy complains of pain in the region of the extracted 46 tooth, irradiating to the ear and temple, halitosis. The tooth was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Mucosa around the extracted tooth is hyperemic, edematous. The socket of the 46 tooth is filled with a gray clot. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Alveolitis of the extracted 46 tooth
b. Acute odontogenous lymphadenitis of the right submandibular region
c. Neuralgia of the III branch of trigeminus
d. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis starting from the 46 tooth
e. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 46 tooth

92. A 15-year-old girl consulted a dental surgeon about a moderate swelling of the parotid-masticatory region on the left. Objectively: on palpation, the left parotid gland is nodular, dense, painless. The duct exudes somewhat turbid saliva. The duct mouth is dilated, the surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, pasty, with imprints of teeth. Make a diagnosis:
a. Sialolithiasis
b. Chronic interstitial sialoadenitis
*c. Chronic parenchymatous sialoadenitis
d. Pleomorphic adenoma
e. Cyst

93. An 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with tooth cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed several months ago and wasnt treated. What treatment method would be efficient in this case?
a. Devital extirpation
*b. Devital amputation
c. Vital extirpation
d. Biological method
e. Vital amputation

94. A 7-year-old child has been diagnosed with a complete dislocation of the 11 tooth caused by a trauma that occurred 24 hours ago. The tooth has been taken along with the patient to the dentists. Objectively: the alveolar socket edges are slightly hyperemic, the socket bone walls are intact, the socket itself is filled with a blood clot. What is the optimal way of treatment?
a. Extraction of the 11th tooth
b. Replantation of the 11th tooth before the filling of the channel
*c. Replantation of the 11th tooth with a prior filling of the channel
d. Reposition and fixation of the 11th tooth
e. Socket suturing with catgut

95. A 3-year-old child got an injury of the upper teeth as a result of a fall. Objectively: crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are deep in the surrounding tissues with only their cutting edge visible, the gingival margin is hyperaemia, edematic. What is the treatment tactics?
*a. Tooth extraction
b. Reposition
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Endodontic treatment
e. Monitoring

96. A 9 year old child complains about pain and swelling of soft tissues beneath his mandible on the right. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory; there is face asymmetry due to the inflammatory infiltration and collateral tissue edema in the right submandibular area. Crown of the 85 tooth is decayed, mucous membrane of gums in the area of the 84, 85, 46 teeth is hyperemic, edematic; mucogingival fold is flattened. What treatment should be administered?
a. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth
b. Periosteotomy
c. Endodontic treatment of the 85 tooth and periosteotomy
*d. Extraction of the 85 tooth
e. Extraction of the 85 tooth and incision along the mucogingival fold

97. An 8-year-old child complains of a painless round formation under the tongue on the left which was noticed by accident about a month ago. Objectively: there is a roundish formation up to 2,0 cm in diameter in the sublingual region deep in the soft tissues of mouth floor. It is soft, painless to palpation, the mucous membrane over it is of grayish-blue color. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidermoid cyst of the mouth floor
b. Dermoid cyst of the mouth floor
*c. Ranula of the left sublingual salivary gland
d. Lymphangioma of the mouth floor
e. Hemangioma of the mouth floor

98. An oral surgeon attended a 3-day-old child staying in the newborn pathology department. Objectively: bilateral hypogenesis of zygomatic bones and orbits, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures, nonclosure of inferior eyelids, hypogenesis of mandible (bird face), deformity of auricles with a preauricular fistula on the right. What congenital disease does the child have?
a. Oculodentodigital syndrome
*b. Mandibulofacial dysostosis
c. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia
d. Oculocerebrorenal syndrome
e. Oculomandibulofacial syndrome

99. During local anesthetization (with 2 ml of 10% solution of lidocaine) a 9 year old girl cried out, lost consciousness, there appeared generalized convulsions. Objectively: the childs skin is pale and cyanotic. It is impossible to feel the pulse because of convulsions. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Febrile convulsions
*b. Lidocaine intoxication
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Quinckes edema
e. Bronchial obstruction

100. A childs mother had acute purulent mastitis. Now the 2-month-old child experiences an edema of his left infraorbital and malar regions, dermahemia of the left face side, temperature rise up to 39-40°C, purulent discharges from the nose. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
b. Acute maxillary sinusitis
c. Acute purulent periostitis
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Phlegmon of infraorbital region

101. According to the parents of a 7-year-old child, the child complains about weakness, body temperature rise up to 39°C, toothache in the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: condition is grave, the child is pale and adynamic, the face is asymmetric because of infiltration of the upper jaw on the left. The 64 tooth has a carious cavity. Percussion is painful, I degree of teeth mobility is also present. There are purulent discharges from the subgingival edge of the 64 tooth. Mucogingival fold of the 63, 64, 65 teeth is smoothed. Vestibular and palatine mucous membrane is edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis starting from the 64 tooth
b. Acute albuminous maxillary periostitis
*c. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis starting from the 64 tooth
d. Suppurative radicular cyst of maxilla
e. Acute odontogenic maxillary sinusitis

102. A 3-month-old child has an inborn tissue defect in the oral cavity. Objectively: the lip is intact, the oral cavity exhibits a cleft defect of soft palate and median part of hard palate. The child was diagnosed with complete schistasis of soft palate and partial schistasis of hard palate. Specify the dispensary group according to A.A.Kolesov:
*a. First
b. Third
c. Fith
d. Fourth
e. Second

103. A 5-year-old child was bitten by a dog 2 days ago. The child is diagnosed with a bite wound of cheek. The parent’s didn’t appeal for medical aid in proper time. The wound exhibits pyoinflammatory process. What kind of surgical d-bridement should be performed?
a. Surgical procedure is not required
*b. Secondary
c. Initial delayed
d. Initial early
e. Initial late

104. At the end of the reception hours a dental surgeon has to fill in the stomatological forms. Name the form of everyday reporting on children dental reception:
a. Form 9
b. Form 29
c. Form 49
*d. Form 39
e. Form 19

105. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boys mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
*a. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
b. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation
c. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
d. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation
e. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation

106. A 12-year-old girl undergoes treatment at the maxillofacial department for nonodontogenic abscess of the left submandibular region. Postoperative wound in the stage of granulation and epithelialization. What medications speed up these processes?
a. 0,5-1% dioxydin solution, 0,1-0,2% chlorhexidine solution
*b. Vishnevsky ointment, methyluracil ointment, solcoseryl gel
c. Levomecol, laevosin ointments etc
d. Laevosin, luronitum, trypsin ointments
e. Trypisin, chymotrypsin, terrilytin etc

107. A child was born with schistasis of alveolar process, hard and soft palate. The optimal way to feed the child before the surgery will be through:
a. Enteric feeding tube
b. Spoon
c. -
*d. Obturator
e. Baby bottle nipple

108. A 7-year-old child presents withf facial asymmetry, severe pain in the lower jaw on the left, body temperature rise up to 39°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the massive swelling of soft tissues in the mandibular region on the left. The skin over the infiltration is hyperemic and cannot be plicated. Mouth opening is limited, painful. The crown of the 75 tooth is destroyed by &frac32, the tooth exhibits the grade II mobility. Percussion of the 36 tooth is painful, the 75 tooth - painless. Edema and fluctuation of soft tissues on the buccal and lingual sides of these teeth are present. What measures are to be taken in the first place?
a. To extract the 75, 36 teeth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
b. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
*c. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on both sides
d. To lance the inflammation focus on the lingual and buccal sides
e. To lance the inflammation focus in the submandibular region

109. A 4-year-old girl was bitten by a dog in her upper lip. Which of the following solutions should be primarily used for the wound d-bridement?
a. 1% solution of hydrogen oxide
b. 0,002% solution of chlorhexidine
*c. 10% solution of laundry soap
d. 1 : 5000 solution of potassium permanganate
e. 3% soda solution

110. While conducting experiments in chemistry lesson a 14 year-old child got a traumatic shock of face. Objectively: the skin dehydrated in the affected region. It is covered with thick dry crust with clear boundaries and peripheral hyperaemia, the crust is recessed into the skin. What is the most likely traumatic agent?
*a. Acid
b. Radiation
c. Saline
d. Thermal
e. Alkaline

111. A 7-year-old child has to undergo plastic surgery of the upper lip frenulum. What operation should be performed to lengthen the frenulum of the upper lip?
a. Szymanowsky grafting with local flaps
*b. Dieffenbach grafting
c. Relaxing incisions of the mucosa
d. Thiersch grafting with local flaps
e. Grafting with a pedicle flap

112. A 13 year old patient got a trauma in the area of median face zone. She complains about pain, swelling of soft tissues in the area of her upper jaw, pain during mouth closing. Examination revealed mobility of nose bones, significant swelling of soft tissues in the left zygomatic area, haemorrage in the eye sclera, "step" sign along the inferior edge of both orbits and zygomaticomaxillary sutures, nasal haemorrhage, open bite, lengthening of median face part. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Fracture of skull base
*b. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
c. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
d. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
e. Fracture of nose bones

113. A 15-year-old patient has got a trauma. He complains of mandibular pain getting worse during swallowing, chewing, especially mouth opening. Objectively: face configuration isabnormal, there is a large haematoma in the region of the right mandibular angle. Palpation of this region is painful. The mouth is half open, lower lip frenulum is shifted to the right of the central line. Pressing upon the chin causes pain in the part of mandible on the right. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Posterior unilateral dislocation of mandible
b. Bilateral fracture of mandibular branches
*c. Fracture of mandibular angle on the right
d. Anterior unilateral dislocation of mandible
e. Bilateral fracture of articular processes

114. A 12-year-old boy has been injured. In the region of the 44 and 45 teeth there is pathological displacement of the alveolar process and the body of the mandible, rupture of the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What additional tests should be done to specify the diagnosis?
a. Radiography of skull in axillary projection
b. Tomogram of mandible
c. Radiography of skull in the axillary projection
*d. Radiography of mandible in the frontal and lateral projections
e. Radiography of skull in the frontal projection and of mandible in Parma projection

115. A 15-year-old child presents with puffiness in the region of the mandible branch; enlarged, dense and painless lymph nodes adhering to the surrounding tissues. X-ray picture of mandible branch shows a well-defined bone resorption area containing small sequestra. After Mantoux test a 12 mm papule was noted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible branch
b. Mandibular actinomycosis
*c. Tuberculosis of mandible branch
d. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
e. Ewings sarcoma

116. A 4-year-old girl presents with body temperature rise, aggravation of general condition. The symptoms has been observed for 3 days. Objectively: general condition is grave, body temperature is 38,6°C, the girl is anxious and pale. She presents also with halitosis, hyperaemia and edema of gingival mucous membrane in the region of the 83, 84, 85 teeth on both sides from the alveolar process. The mentioned teeth are mobile, their percussion causes acute pain; the 84 tooth is filled. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
b. Suppuration of the radiculodental mandibular cyst beginning from the 84 tooth
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis beginning from the 84 tooth
*d. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis beginning from the 84 tooth
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 84 tooth

117. An 8-year-old child was diagnosed with granulating periodontitis of the 55 tooth. The crown is completely destroyed. X-ray picture shows separated tooth roots. Choose an optimal tool for operative intervention:
*a. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
b. Root beak-shaped forceps
c. Crown S-shaped forceps
d. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
e. Root straight forceps

118. A 3-year-old girl complains of pain and swelling in the region of the decayed 51, 52 teeth, body temperature rise up to 37,5-37,9 degrees. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of a swelling in the upper lip region and right infraorbital region. The crown of the 51 tooth is completely decayed. Mucous membrane in the region of the 52, 51, 1 teeth is edematic, mucogingival fold is smoothed, palpation provokes pain, mobility of I-II grade of the 51, 52 teeth is also present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Odontogenic abscess of infraorbital region
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 51 tooth
c. Acute albuminous odontogenic maxillary periostitis
d. Acute odontogenic maxillary osteomyelitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic maxillary periostitis

119. Parents of a 4-year-old child complain about speech defect, namely lallation. Examination shows limited tongue movements, when the tongue is moved forward it turns down, the lower edge of tongue frenulum is positioned in front of the submandibular salivary ducts. The frenulum is thin and transparent. Specify the terms of operative intervention:
a. After eruption of permanent incisors
b. After complete development of maxillofacial bones
*c. After making the diagnosis
d. After formation of permanent occlusion
e. After eruption of permanent molars

120. An 8 year old boy was referred to the oral surgery for extraction of his 64 tooth because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. Tooth crown is intact. What instrument should be applied?
a. Broad-beaked forceps
b. S-shaped forceps with thorns
c. Beak-shaped forceps with non-converging beaks
d. Straight forceps
*e. S-shaped forceps without thorns

121. The child is 13 years old. The disease began suddenly with a body temperature rise up to 39°C, swelling of the upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the left cheek edema. The skin over the swollen area is hyperemic and tense. The 26 tooth exhibits a large carious cavity, percussion of the 26 tooth causes pain reaction. The 25, 26, 27 teeth are mobile. Mucogingival junction in the region of the 24, 25, 26, 27 tooth is indistinct, alveolar mucosa is hyperemic and bilaterally swollen in the region of the 25, 26. 27 teeth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Odontogenous maxillary periostitis to the left of the 26 tooth
b. Suppuration of the radicular cyst induced by the 26 tooth
c. Odontogenous purulent maxillary sinusitis induced by the 26 tooth
*d. Odontogenous maxillary osteomyelitis to the left of the 26 tooth
e. Chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth

122. A 15-month-old child diagnosed with intrusive luxation of the 51 tooth has been referred to a childrens dental surgeon. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. 51 tooth replantation
*b. Monitoring the independent eruption of the affected tooth
c. 51 tooth reposition
d. 51 tooth extraction
e. 51 tooth splinting

123. A 4-year-old child got a face trauma 2 hours ago. A stomatologist on duty made a diagnosis: intrusive luxation of the 61 tooth. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Removal of pulp of the 61 tooth
*b. Extraction of the 61 tooth
c. Reposition of the 61 tooth
d. Observation
e. Splinting of the 61 tooth

124. A child has been admitted to a hospital with a maxillofacial trauma. It is probable that the wound has been contaminated with tetanus infection. How soon after the injury should the tetanus serum be given?
a. Within 2 days
b. Within a week
c. Within 12 hours
d. Within 24 hours
*e. Immediately at the time of seeking medical help

125. A 2 year old girl has body temperature 38,5 degrees, a swelling below her jaw on the right. On the 5th day of illness there apeared rhinitis, cough, a small movable globule under her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: general condition of the child is moderately severe. The face is asymmetric due to the swelling in the right submaxillary area. The skin is hyperemic, glossy, there is a diffuse infiltrate in the right submaxillary area spreading to the upper neck parts on the right, it is dense and painful; the skin doesnt make folds. Teeth are healthy. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute sialoadenitis of the right submandibular salivary gland
b. Chronic osteomyelitis of mandible on the right
c. Acute nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis on the right
d. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible on the right
*e. Adenophlegmon of the right submaxillary area

126. Parents of a 6-year-old child consulted a doctor about a swelling in his right parotid-masseteric region, dry mouth, fever up to 37,70С. Similar presentations turned up about 6 months ago. Examination revealed a tuberous, slightly painful infiltrate in the right parotid-masseteric region. Saliva is viscous, the right salivary gland duct discharges some secretion with whitish inclusions. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent parotitis
b. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of parotid gland
c. Parotitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic parenchymatous parotitis
e. Mixed tumor, salivary gland type

127. A 5-year-old child sustained a dental injury. Objectively: the crowns of the 51, 61 teeth are shorter than neighbouring teeth by 1/2. Mucous membrane is edematic and hyperemic in the region of the 51, 61 teeth. X-ray picture shows that there is no periodontal fissure in the apical parts of roots of the 51, 61 teeth, apexes of the 51, 61 teeth are imbedded into the spongy substance of body of maxilla. What treatment tactics would be the most efficient?
a. Reimplantation
*b. Extraction of the 51, 61 teeth
c. Reposition of the 51, 61 teeth
d. Regular medical check-up
e. Ligature splinting of the 51, 61 teeth

128. An 8-year-old child presents with an edema of the submandibular region, the mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm, further opening is difficult, body temperature is 37,6 degrees, mucogingival fold is vestibularly flattened, hyperaemic and swollen. The 84 and 85 teeth have fillings, their percussion is painless. The 84 tooth exhibits I degree mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute odontogenic periostitis
b. Chronic odontogenic periostitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

129. Parents of an 8-year-old child with Down syndrome took the child to a doctor for oral cavity sanitation. After the examination entailing great difficulties the child was found to have four teeth decayed as a result of chronic periodontitis. What kind of anesthesia should be chosen for surgical sanitation in one visit?
*a. Phlebonarcosis
b. Mask anesthesia
c. Endotracheal anesthesia through a tracheostoma
d. Endotracheal anesthesia
e. Conduction anesthesia

130. A 14-year-old child has orthodontic indication for extraction of the 14 tooth. What forceps should be applied for extraction of the 14 tooth?
a. Beak-shaped forceps
b. Curved on flat forceps
c. Straight forceps
d. Bayonet-shaped forceps
*e. S-shaped forceps

131. A 14-year-old child was undergoing extraction of the 16 tooth on account of chronic periodontitis. During the tooth extraction it came to perforation of maxillary sinus along with penetration of the distal buccal root into the maxillary sinus. What is the further dentists tactics?
a. The dentist should form a clottage without informing the patient
b. The dentist himself should try to extract the root
*c. The patient should be directed to the hospital for a surgical procedure
d. The dentist should close the perforation with mucoperiosteal graft
e. The dentist should perform maxillary sinusotomy in the outpatient setting

132. A 13-year-old boy complains of pain in the region of the extracted 46 tooth, irradiating to the ear and temple, halitosis. The tooth was extracted 3 days ago. Objectively: submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painful on palpation. Mucosa around the extracted tooth is hyperemic, edematous. The socket of the 46 tooth is filled with a gray clot. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenous mandibular periostitis starting from the 46 tooth
b. Neuralgia of the III branch of trigeminus
c. Acute odontogenous mandibular osteomyelitis starting from the 46 tooth
d. Acute odontogenous lymphadenitis of the right submandibular region
*e. Alveolitis of the extracted 46 tooth

133. An 8-year-old child has a deep carious cavity communicating with tooth cavity on the distal-approximal masticatory surface of the 75 tooth. Probing causes pain. Percussion is painless. Cold water causes slowly abating pain. The tooth decayed several months ago and wasnt treated. What treatment method would be efficient in this case?
a. Vital extirpation
b. Biological method
*c. Devital amputation
d. Vital amputation
e. Devital extirpation

134. A boy is 1 month old. At the medial edge of the inferior eyelid on the right there is a wound with purulent discharge. The boy fell ill suddenly, body temperature rose up to 40°C. The general condition is grave. On the second day of disease there appeared an infiltration at the internal edge of eye socket and right cheek. The skin above it is hyperemic, fluctuation cannot be determined. Palpebral fissure is narrowed. The right nasal meatus discharges pus. There is an infiltration on the vestibular surface of alveolar process and on the right palate. Mucous membrane above it is hyperemic along the mucogingival fold, fluctuation can be determined. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous periostitis
*b. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
c. Phlegmon of the right eye socket
d. Acute dacryocystitis
e. Acute right-sided highmoritis

135. A 3-year-old child got an injury of the upper teeth as a result of a fall. Objectively: crowns of the 51 and 61 teeth are deep in the surrounding tissues with only their cutting edge visible, the gingival margin is hyperaemia, edematic. What is the treatment tactics?
a. Reposition
b. Monitoring
*c. Tooth extraction
d. Endodontic treatment
e. Anti-inflammatory therapy

136. Parents of a 6-year-old child complain about pain in the childs submandibular region on the left, body temperature rise up to 37,5 degrees. Objectively: the childs face is asymmetric due to the infiltration of the submandibular region on the left. The infiltration is soft and elastic, mobile, 2*2,5 cm large; its palpation is slightly painful, the skin is unchanged. The teeth are intact. Pharynx is hyperaemic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute serous nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
b. Acute purulent nonodontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Submandibular adenophlegmon
d. Acute purulent odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute serous odontogenic submandibular lymphadenitis

137. An oral surgeon attended a 3-day-old child staying in the newborn pathology department. Objectively: bilateral hypogenesis of zygomatic bones and orbits, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures, nonclosure of inferior eyelids, hypogenesis of mandible (bird face), deformity of auricles with a preauricular fistula on the right. What congenital disease does the child have?
a. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia
b. Oculocerebrorenal syndrome
*c. Mandibulofacial dysostosis
d. Oculomandibulofacial syndrome
e. Oculodentodigital syndrome

138. A childs mother had acute purulent mastitis. Now the 2-month-old child experiences an edema of his left infraorbital and malar regions, dermahemia of the left face side, temperature rise up to 39-40 degrees, purulent discharges from the nose. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis
*b. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis
c. Acute maxillary sinusitis
d. Phlegmon of infraorbital region
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

139. A 3-month-old child has an inborn tissue defect in the oral cavity. Objectively: the lip is intact, the oral cavity exhibits a cleft defect of soft palate and median part of hard palate. The child was diagnosed with complete schistasis of soft palate and partial schistasis of hard palate. Specify the dispensary group according to A.A.Kolesov:
a. Third
b. Second
*c. First
d. Fourth
e. Fith

140. A 5-year-old child was bitten by a dog 2 days ago. The child is diagnosed with a bite wound of cheek. The parent’s didn’t appeal for medical aid in proper time. The wound exhibits pyoinflammatory process. What kind of surgical d-bridement should be performed?
a. Initial early
b. Initial late
c. Surgical procedure is not required
*d. Secondary
e. Initial delayed

141. A 7-year-old child sustained a sport injury. He complains about pain in the region of mandible, inability to join his teeth. Pressing against the chin causes intensification of pain in the region of mandible on the right. The child is diagnosed with a fracture of mandible body without fragment displacement. What therapeutic tactics should be chosen in order to prevent the displacement of bone fragments in the transitional dentition?
a. Application of sling bandage
b. Administration of anti-inflammatory therapy
*c. Fragment immobilization by means of an intraoral splint
d. Fixation by means of Tigerstedt splints
e. Osteosynthesis

142. At the end of the reception hours a dental surgeon has to fill in the stomatological forms. Name the form of everyday reporting on children dental reception:
a. Form 29
b. Form 49
c. Form 9
d. Form 19
*e. Form 39

143. Examination of a 6-year-old boy revealed enlarged lymph nodes in both submandibular and cervical regions. Objectively: the 75, 84 and 85 teeth are decayed, there are presentations of commissural cheilitis. According to the boys mother, he has been quickly getting tired, sweating from the least physical exercise, complaining about weakness throughout the last 2-3 months. He also gave up training in a sports class. What plan of additional examination should be adopted?
a. Biochemical blood test, endocrinologist consultation
b. Magnetic resonance tomography, immunologist consultation
c. Pulmonary roentgenography, pulmonologist consultation
*d. Complete blood count, haematologist consultation
e. Puncture biopsy, oncologist consultation

144. A 12-year-old girl undergoes treatment at the maxillofacial department for nonodontogenic abscess of the left submandibular region. Postoperative wound in the stage of granulation and epithelialization. What medications speed up these processes?
a. Levomecol, laevosin ointments etc.
b. Laevosin, luronitum, trypsin ointments
*c. Vishnevsky ointment, methyluracil ointment, solcoseryl gel
d. Trypisin, chymotrypsin, terrilytin etc.
e. 0,5-1% dioxydin solution, 0,1-0,2% chlorhexidine solution

145. A child was born with schistasis of alveolar process, hard and soft palate. The optimal way to feed the child before the surgery will be through:
*a. Obturator
b. Baby bottle nipple
c. -
d. Spoon
e. Enteric feeding tube

146. A 7-year-old child presents withf facial asymmetry, severe pain in the lower jaw on the left, body temperature rise up to 39°C. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the massive swelling of soft tissues in the mandibular region on the left. The skin over the infiltration is hyperemic and cannot be plicated. Mouth opening is limited, painful. The crown of the 75 tooth is destroyed by 2/3, the tooth exhibits the grade II mobility. Percussion of the 36 tooth is painful, the 75 tooth - painless. Edema and fluctuation of soft tissues on the buccal and lingual sides of these teeth are present. What measures are to be taken in the first place?
a. To lance the inflammation focus on the lingual and buccal sides
b. To lance the inflammation focus in the submandibular region
c. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
d. To extract the 75, 36 teeth, to lance the inflammation focus on the buccal side
*e. To extract the 75 tooth, to lance the inflammation focus on both sides

147. A 4-year-old girl was bitten by a dog in her upper lip. Which of the following solutions should be primarily used for the wound d-bridement?
a. 3% soda solution
*b. 10% solution of laundry soap
c. 1% solution of hydrogen oxide
d. 0,002% solution of chlorhexidine
e. 1 : 5000 solution of potassium permanganate

148. While conducting experiments in chemistry lesson a 14 year-old child got a traumatic shock of face. Objectively: the skin dehydrated in the affected region. It is covered with thick dry crust with clear boundaries and peripheral hyperaemia, the crust is recessed into the skin. What is the most likely traumatic agent?
a. Thermal
b. Saline
c. Alkaline
d. Radiation
*e. Acid

149. A 7-year-old child has to undergo plastic surgery of the upper lip frenulum. What operation should be performed to lengthen the frenulum of the upper lip?
*a. Dieffenbach grafting
b. Relaxing incisions of the mucosa
c. Szymanowsky grafting with local flaps
d. Grafting with a pedicle flap
e. Thiersch grafting with local flaps

150. A 13 year old patient got a trauma in the area of median face zone. She complains about pain, swelling of soft tissues in the area of her upper jaw, pain during mouth closing. Examination revealed mobility of nose bones, significant swelling of soft tissues in the left zygomatic area, haemorrage in the eye sclera, "step" sign along the inferior edge of both orbits and zygomaticomaxillary sutures, nasal haemorrhage, open bite, lengthening of median face part. Make a clinical diagnosis:
*a. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
b. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
c. Fracture of skull base
d. Fracture of nose bones
e. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw

151. A 15-year-old patient has got a trauma. He complains of mandibular pain getting worse during swallowing, chewing, especially mouth opening. Objectively: face configuration is abnormal, there is a large haematoma in the region of the right mandibular angle. Palpation of this region is painful. The mouth is half open, lower lip frenulum is shifted to the right of the central line. Pressing upon the chin causes pain in the part of mandible on the right. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Fracture of mandibular angle on the right
b. Posterior unilateral dislocation of mandible
c. Bilateral fracture of articular processes
d. Anterior unilateral dislocation of mandible
e. Bilateral fracture of mandibular branches

152. A 12-year-old boy has been injured. In the region of the 44 and 45 teeth there is pathological displacement of the alveolar process and the body of the mandible, rupture of the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What additional tests should be done to specify the diagnosis?
a. Radiography of skull in the frontal projection and of mandible in Parma projection
b. Radiography of skull in axillary projection
*c. Radiography of mandible in the frontal and lateral projections
d. Tomogram of mandible
e. Radiography of skull in the axillary projection

153. A 12-year-old girl complains about intense pain in the region of the 46 tooth socket that was extracted 3 days ago. The pain is irradiating along the branches of trigeminus. Objectively: lymph nodes are enlarged and painful on palpation, tissues around the tooth socket are edematic and hyperaemic. The socket walls are covered with grey-and-green deposition with putrid smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periostitis
b. Osteomyelitis
c. Pericoronaritis
d. Ostitis
*e. Alveolitis

