1. A 38-year-old patient complains of tension and enlargement of her lower lip and eyelids occuring after taking aspirin for headache. The edema resolves soon after taking antihistaminic drugs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Quinckes edema
b. Erysipelas of lips
c. Meige trophedema
d. Lymphadenic macrocheilitis
e. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome

2. One minute after perfoming torus anaesthesia with 2% novocaine solution (4ml) during extraction of the 17 tooth the patient complained about respiration obstruction. Objectively: upper and lower lips are edematic, mucous membrane of larynx and oral cavity is edematic and extremely hyperemic. What complication turned up in this patient?
a. Collapse
b. Acute pulmonary insufficiency
c. Anesthetic intoxication
d. Anaphylactic shock
*e. Quinckes edema

3. A soldier was delivered to the regiment medical station with dislocation asphyxia caused by a gunshot wound. What actions should be taken for asphyxia suppression?
*a. Pul the tongue forwards and sew it through
b. Tracheostoma establishment
c. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
d. Artificial airway
e. Intubation of trachea

4. During pulpitis treatment of the 25 tooth a 30-year-old patient received an injection of 2% lidocaine as anaesthetic. A few minutes after the injection th patient presented with numb tongue, asphyxia, dry cough, cyanosis, anxiety, convulsions. Arterial pressure fell down to 90/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Syncope
b. Acute heart failure
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Quinckes edema
e. Epilepsy

5. A 35-year-old woman was admitetd to the oral surgery department two hours after a road accident. Objectively: cutaneous integuments are pale, there are beads of sweat on her face. Respiration is heavy and obstructed. Pulse rate is 120 bmp, AP is 70/60 mm Hg. There is wound penetrating to the oral cavity on the left cheek. During transportation the woman was in supine position with her head thrown backwards. What kind of asphyxia is likely to develop in this patient?
a. Stenotic
b. Valvular
*c. Aspirating
d. Obturative
e. Dislocational

6. A 66-year-old male patient suffers from coronary heart disease (CHD) and atherosclerosis. During stomatological treatment the patient complained about acute retrosternal pain with irradiation to the left scapula, that was accompanied by stupor of the left hand. Objectively: the skin was pale, the sweat stood out on his forehead. The arterial pressure was 140/90 mm Hg, pulse was rhythmic 75 bpm. The pain wasnt relieved by Validol but it started to abate after nitroglycerin intake. What disease provoked the attack in this patient?
a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Myocardial infarction
*c. Stenocardia
d. Tachycardia
e. Paroxysmal tachycardia

7. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on both jaws by means of fullcast combined dental bridges. The patient has a history of essential hypertension. Which haemostatic drug textbfSHOULD NOT be used for the gums retraction?
*a. Noradrenaline
b. Aluminium chloride
c. Tetrahydrozoline
d. Iron sulphate
e. Hydrogen peroxide

8. A 5-year-old child had to undergo an operated for ankyloglossya. There were no external symptoms of preoperative anxiety. Aafter injection of 1,5 ml of 0,5% novocaine solution the child presented with motor anxiety, vomiturition, stomachache. Objectively: the child is conscious, face and neck skin is hyperemic, tachypnoe is present, pulse is rapid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pain shock
b. Giddiness
c. Overdosage of anesthetics
*d. Allergic reaction to novocaine
e. Cardiovascular collapse

9. A 7-year-old child was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 64, 85 teeth. The child suffers from hemophilia A. Specify the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of teeth is possible in both in-patient and out-patient hospitals
b. Extraction of teeth can be performed in the oral surgery department
c. Extraction of teeth is contra-indicated because of high risk of haemorrhage
*d. Extraction of teeth in hematological department after due pretreatment
e. Extraction of teeth can be performed in an out-patient hospital with the following socket tamponade by means of haemostatic sponge

10. A 42-year-old woman came to prosthetic dentistry to make dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 18 . . . . 13 12 11&21 22 23 . . . . 2848 47 46 45 44 43 42 41&31 32 33 34 35 36 37endtabular. The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
b. Dental bridges
*c. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base
d. Partial removable lamelalr prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps
e. Clasp denture

11. A 53-year-old patient presented to a dental clinic for the orthopaedic treatment of the 27 tooth. During preparation for local anesthesia, the patient felt sick (weakness, pallor, hyperperspiration), and lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Syncope
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Cardiogenic shock
d. Traumatic shock
e. Collapse

12. A 62-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about orthopaedic treatment of the 12, 21, 22 teeth. The arterial pressure was 165/110 mm Hg before prosthetic procedure. Because of emotional stress arterial pressure rose up to 220/130 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory failure
b. Syncope
c. Collapse
*d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Acute heart failure

13. A 25-year-old got a polytrauma as a result of a road accident. On examination, he was diagnosed with dislocation asphyxia. What kind of first aid should be rendered?
*a. Tongue fixation
b. Artificial ventilation of lungs
c. Removal of mucus and foreign bodies from the upper airways
d. Medicamental management of laryngeal stenosis
e. Tracheotomy

14. An injured man was hospitalized to the oral surgery department with rupture of soft tissues of palate and pharynx. In process of respiration the dangling flap from the wound partially or completely blocks the larynx aperture. What kind of asphyxia may develop in this patient?
a. Stenotic
*b. Valvular
c. Obturative
d. Aspirating
e. Dislocational

15. A 27-year-old female patient is pregnant, duration of gestation is 21 weeks. She has indication for extraction of the 28 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis after ineffective therapeutic treatment. What kind of anaesthesia should be used for tooth extraction?
a. Mandibular
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Infraorbital and palatinal
d. Tuberal and incisor
e. Torus

16. During extration of the 26 tooth a 34-year-old patient developed tinnitus, skin pallor, weakness. She was diagnosed with vertigo. What is the most appropriate tactics of emergency care?
a. Intravenous injection of cordiamin
b. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
c. Intravenous injection of 50% analgin
d. Intravenous injection of 0,1% adrenalin
*e. Placing the patient in Trendelenburg position

17. A patient with haemophilia consulted a dental surgeon about decay of a right lower tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 46 tooth is completely decayed below the gum level. Percussion causes minor pain reaction. It is planned to extract the 46 tooth. The extraction procedure should be performed in:
a. Stomatological clinic
b. Stomatological clinic and following administration of haemostatic drugs
c. Maxillofacial surgery department
*d. Haematological department
e. Maxillofacial surgery department after the consultation with a haematologist

18. A 40-year-old patient has been given anesthesia, immediately after which he developed severe weakness, heart palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, skin is markedly hyperemic, there is acute headache, AP is 180/100 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. What state is it?
*a. Hypertensic crisis
b. An attack of stenocardia
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Cardial pain
e. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock

19. A 32-year-old 3-month pregnant patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic for the prosthetics. Objectively: the 16 tooth is missing. It is planned to fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 15 and 17 teeth. The patient was given an anaesthetic of articaine group Ultracain DS. The orthopaedist chose this anaesthetic because:
a. It is most commonly used in the stomatological practice
b. It doesnt contain sulphites
c. It is low-toxic
d. It reduces the volume of uteroplacental circulation
*e. It is low-toxic, is not capable of crossing the hemato-placental barrier

20. A 3-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic for the traumatic loss of an upper central incisor. The patient hasnt undergone prosthetics before. He has a history of asthma. What are the first-priority measures of bronchospasm prevention?
*a. Tests for plastic and metal allergy
b. Teeth treatment with a remineralizing solution
c. Administration of sedative drugs
d. Fabrication of a temporary construction
e. Preparation following the anaesthetization

21. A 38-year-old patient complains of tension and enlargement of her lower lip and eyelids occuring after taking aspirin for headache. The edema resolves soon after taking antihistaminic drugs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lymphadenic macrocheilitis
b. Meige trophedema
c. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
d. Erysipelas of lips
*e. Quinckes edema

22. One minute after perfoming torus anaesthesia with 2% novocaine solution (4ml) during extraction of the 17 tooth the patient complained about respiration obstruction. Objectively: upper and lower lips are edematic, mucous membrane of larynx and oral cavity is edematic and extremely hyperemic. What complication turned up in this patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Anesthetic intoxication
*c. Quinckes edema
d. Collapse
e. Acute pulmonary insufficiency

23. A soldier was delivered to the regiment medical station with dislocation asphyxia caused by a gunshot wound. What actions should be taken for asphyxia suppression?
a. Artificial airway
b. Artificial pulmonary ventilation
c. Intubation of trachea
d. Tracheostoma establishment
*e. Pul the tongue forwards and sew it through

24. During pulpitis treatment of the 25 tooth a 30-year-old patient received an injection of 2% lidocaine as anaesthetic. A few minutes after the injection th patient presented with numb tongue, asphyxia, dry cough, cyanosis, anxiety, convulsions. Arterial pressure fell down to 90/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Syncope
c. Epilepsy
d. Quinckes edema
e. Acute heart failure

25. A 35-year-old woman was admitetd to the oral surgery department two hours after a road accident. Objectively: cutaneous integuments are pale, there are beads of sweat on her face. Respiration is heavy and obstructed. Pulse rate is 120 bmp, AP is 70/60 mm Hg. There is wound penetrating to the oral cavity on the left cheek. During transportation the woman was in supine position with her head thrown backwards. What kind of asphyxia is likely to develop in this patient?
a. Obturative
b. Dislocational
c. Valvular
d. Stenotic
*e. Aspirating

26. A 66-year-old male patient suffers from coronary heart disease (CHD) and atherosclerosis. During stomatological treatment the patient complained about acute retrosternal pain with irradiation to the left scapula, that was accompanied by stupor of the left hand. Objectively: the skin was pale, the sweat stood out on his forehead. The arterial pressure was 140/90 mm Hg, pulse was rhythmic 75 bpm. The pain wasnt relieved by Validol but it started to abate after nitroglycerin intake. What disease provoked the attack in this patient?
*a. Stenocardia
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Paroxysmal tachycardia
d. Tachycardia
e. Myocardial infarction

27. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on both jaws by means of fullcast combined dental bridges. The patient has a history of essential hypertension. Which haemostatic drug SHOULD NOT be used for the gums retraction?
a. Hydrogen peroxide
b. Iron sulphate
c. Tetrahydrozoline
*d. Noradrenaline
e. Aluminium chloride

28. A 30-year-old patient has a cut wound of the upper lateral surface of tongue. The wound was given with a separating disk. Bood penetrated into the airways causing asphyxia. What form of asphyxia occurred in the patient?
a. Dislocation
*b. Aspiration
c. Valvular
d. Stenotic
e. Obstructive

29. A 5-year-old child had to undergo an operated for ankyloglossya. There were no external symptoms of preoperative anxiety. Aafter injection of 1,5 ml of 0,5% novocaine solution the child presented with motor anxiety, vomiturition, stomachache. Objectively: the child is conscious, face and neck skin is hyperemic, tachypnoe is present, pulse is rapid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cardiovascular collapse
b. Pain shock
*c. Allergic reaction to novocaine
d. Giddiness
e. Overdosage of anesthetics

30. During tooth extraction a 32-year-old patient presented with sudden weakness, pale skin, cold sweat, weak pulse, a significant AP drop (diastolic pressure - 40 mm Hg). What complication developed in the patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Attack of stenocardia
c. Syncope
d. Traumatic shock
*e. Collapse

31. A 7-year-old child was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 64, 85 teeth. The child suffers from hemophilia A. Specify the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of teeth can be performed in the oral surgery department
b. Extraction of teeth is contra-indicated because of high risk of haemorrhage
c. Extraction of teeth is possible in both in-patient and out-patient hospitals
d. Extraction of teeth can be performed in an out-patient hospital with the following socket tamponade by means of haemostatic sponge
*e. Extraction of teeth in hematological department after due pretreatment

32. During orthopaedic treatment a 47-year-old patient was given anaesthesia (with Ultracain DS forte). 20 minutes after the injection the patient presented with hyperaemia of skin, headache, dizziness, increased heart rate. The patient had previously undergone dental treatment with the use of this anaesthetic. What complication developed in this patient?
a. Collapse
b. Attack of stenocardia
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Syncope
*e. AP rise

33. A 42-year-old woman prsented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic seeking dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 18 13 12 11 |	21 22 23 28 & 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 |	31 32 33 34 35 36 37 The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Clasp denture
*b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base
c. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
d. Dental bridges
e. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps

34. At a dentists appointment a 12-year-old child inhaled a cotton turunda: he developed noisy respiration with a whistling sound, sudden dyspnea, pallor along with pronounced cyanosis, sweating. What kind of urgent condition developed in this patient?
a. Valvular asphyxia
b. Dislocation asphyxia
*c. Obstructive asphyxia
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Collapse

35. A 53-year-old patient presented to a dental clinic for the orthopaedic treatment of the 27 tooth. During preparation for local anesthesia, the patient felt sick (weakness, pallor, hyperperspiration), and lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
*c. Syncope
d. Traumatic shock
e. Cardiogenic shock

36. A 25-year-old patient consulted a dentist about orthopedic treatment of the 17 tooth. After the patient had been given local anesthesia, his condition suddenly deteriorated (he developed anxiety, general weakness, acute headache, nausea, loss of consciousness, poor pupillary reaction to light, abrupt drop of arterial pressure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Septic shock
c. Toxic shock
d. Traumatic shock
e. Cardiogenic shock

37. A 62-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about orthopaedic treatment of the 12, 21, 22 teeth. The arterial pressure was 165/110 mm Hg before prosthetic procedure. Because of emotional stress arterial pressure rose up to 220/130 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Syncope
b. Collapse
c. Acute respiratory failure
d. Acute heart failure
*e. Hypertensive crisis

38. During taking of impressions at a dentists appointment a patient presented with the following symptoms: paroxysmal cough, cyanosis, vomiting, clapping sound during inspiration. Make the diagnosis:
a. Tracheitis
b. Hypersensitive gag reflex
c. Attack of bronchial asthma
d. Acute bronchitis
*e. Aspiration of a foreign body

39. At a dentists appointment a patient complained of weakness, nausea, blackout, and then he lost consciousness. Make a diagnosis:
a. Collapse
b. Shock
*c. Syncope
d. Coma
e. Insult

40. A 25-year-old got a polytrauma as a result of a road accident. On examination, he was diagnosed with dislocation asphyxia. What kind of first aid should be rendered?
a. Artificial ventilation of lungs
b. Tracheotomy
*c. Tongue fixation
d. Medicamental management of laryngeal stenosis
e. Removal of mucus and foreign bodies from the upper airways

41. A 9-year-old boy has been diagnosed with a complete dislocation of the 21 tooth. The child got injured 20 hours ago. He has diabetes. Select a treatment tactics:
a. Filling of the root canal with amalgam, reimplantation
b. Filling of the root canal with paste containing calcium, reimplantation, fixation of the tooth
c. Reimplantation, fixation of the tooth and further follow-up
d. Root apex resection, reimplantation, fixation of the tooth
*e. The tooth cannot be preserved or reimplanted

42. An injured man was hospitalized to the oral surgery department with rupture of soft tissues of palate and pharynx. In process of respiration the dangling flap from the wound partially or completely blocks the larynx aperture. What kind of asphyxia may develop in this patient?
a. Obturative
b. Aspirating
*c. Valvular
d. Dislocational
e. Stenotic

43. A 35-year-old patient complains of a significant enlargement of the upper lip and eyelids, which developed within a few minutes (during cleaning the house with a detergent). Objectively: there is an edema of the upper part of face, upper lip and eyelids. Palpation is painless. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Angioneurotic Quinckes edema
b. Lymphedema
c. Glandular cheilitis
d. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
e. Macrocheilitis

44. A 27-year-old female patient is pregnant, duration of gestation is 21 weeks. She has indication for extraction of the 28 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis after ineffective therapeutic treatment. What kind of anaesthesia should be used for tooth extraction?
a. Torus
b. Mandibular
c. Tuberal and incisor
d. Infraorbital and palatinal
*e. Tuberal and palatinal

45. A 25-year-old HIV-infected patient presented to a clinic of prosthetic dentistry seeking prosthetic services. What aseptic and antiseptic precautions should be taken?
a. The patient should be refused appointment
b. The impressions should be desinfected by means of a quartz lamp
*c. According to the scheme
d. No special precautions are required
e. The orthopaedist should work in gloves and a mask

46. During extration of the 26 tooth a 34-year-old patient developed tinnitus, skin pallor, weakness. She was diagnosed with vertigo. What is the most appropriate tactics of emergency care?
*a. Placing the patient in Trendelenburg position
b. Intravenous injection of 0,1% adrenalin
c. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
d. Intravenous injection of cordiamin
e. Intravenous injection of 50% analgin

47. A patient with haemophilia consulted a dental surgeon about decay of a right lower tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 46 tooth is completely decayed below the gum level. Percussion causes minor pain reaction. It is planned to extract the 46 tooth. The extraction procedure should be performed in:
a. Stomatological clinic and following administration of haemostatic drugs
b. Maxillofacial surgery department
c. Stomatological clinic
d. Maxillofacial surgery department after the consultation with a haematologist
*e. Haematological department

48. A 40-year-old patient has been given anesthesia, immediately after which he developed severe weakness, heart palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, skin is markedly hyperemic, there is acute headache, AP is 180/100 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. What state is it?
a. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
b. Cardial pain
c. Myocardial infarction
*d. Hypertensic crisis
e. An attack of stenocardia

49. A 45-year-old patient undergoes teeth preparation. 15 minutes after anesthetization with 4% solution of Ubistesin forte the patient developed hyperemia of skin, increased heart rate, headache, syncope. Previously the patient had not exhibited such reaction to this anesthetic. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Collapse
c. Myocardial infarction
*d. Arterial pressure rise
e. Syncope

50. A 32-year-old 3-month pregnant patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic for the prosthetics. Objectively: the 16 tooth is missing. It is planned to fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 15 and 17 teeth. The patient was given an anaesthetic of articaine group Ultracain DS. The orthopaedist chose this anaesthetic because:
a. It is low-toxic
b. It is most commonly used in the stomatological practice
c. It doesnt contain sulphites
*d. It is low-toxic, is not capable of crossing the hemato-placental barrier
e. It reduces the volume of uteroplacental circulation

51. A 38-year-old patient complains of tension and enlargement of her lower lip and eyelids occuring after taking aspirin for headache. The edema resolves soon after taking antihistaminic drugs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas of lips
b. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
*c. Quinckes edema
d. Lymphadenic macrocheilitis
e. Meige trophedema

52. One minute after perfoming torus anaesthesia with 2% novocaine solution (4ml) during extraction of the 17 tooth the patient complained about respiration obstruction. Objectively: upper and lower lips are edematic, mucous membrane of larynx and oral cavity is edematic and extremely hyperemic. What complication turned up in this patient?
a. Acute pulmonary insufficiency
*b. Quinckes edema
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Anesthetic intoxication
e. Collapse

53. A 35-year-old woman was admitted to the oral surgery department two hours after a road accident. Objectively: cutaneous integuments are pale, there are beads of sweat on her face. Respiration is heavy and obstructed. Pulse rate is 120 bpm, AP is 70/60 mm Hg. There is wound penetrating to the oral cavity on the left cheek. During transportation the woman was in supine position with her head thrown backwards. What kind of asphyxia is likely to develop in this patient?
a. Valvular
b. Obturative
c. Dislocational
*d. Aspirating
e. Stenotic

54. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on both jaws by means of fullcast combined dental bridges. The patient has a history of essential hypertension. Which haemostatic drug SHOULD NOT be used for the gums retraction?
a. Aluminium chloride
b. Hydrogen peroxide
*c. Noradrenaline
d. Iron sulphate
e. Tetrahydrozoline

55. A 30-year-old patient has a cut wound of the upper lateral surface of tongue. The wound was given with a separating disk. Bood penetrated into the airways causing asphyxia. What form of asphyxia occurred in the patient?
a. Stenotic
b. Obstructive
c. Dislocation
*d. Aspiration
e. Valvular

56. A 5-year-old child had to undergo an operated for ankyloglossya. There were no external symptoms of preoperative anxiety. After injection of 1,5 ml of 0,5% novocaine solution the child presented with motor anxiety, vomiturition, stomachache. Objectively: the child is conscious, face and neck skin is hyperemic, tachypnoe is present, pulse is rapid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Allergic reaction to novocaine
b. Cardiovascular collapse
c. Overdosage of anaesthetics
d. Giddiness
e. Pain shock

57. During tooth extraction a 32-year-old patient presented with sudden weakness, pale skin, cold sweat, weak pulse, a significant AP drop (diastolic pressure - 40 mm Hg). What complication developed in the patient?
a. Attack of stenocardia
*b. Collapse
c. Traumatic shock
d. Syncope
e. Anaphylactic shock

58. A 7-year-old child was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the 64, 85 teeth. The child suffers from hemophilia A. Specify the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of teeth can be performed in an out-patient hospital with the following socket tamponade by means of haemostatic sponge
b. Extraction of teeth is possible in both in-patient and out-patient hospitals
*c. Extraction of teeth in hematological department after due pretreatment
d. Extraction of teeth can be performed in the oral surgery department
e. Extraction of teeth is contra-indicated because of high risk of haemorrhage

59. A 42-year-old woman prsented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic seeking dental prosthetics. Objectively: dental formula is 18 13 12 11 | 21 22 23 28 _ 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 | 31 32 33 34 35 36 37. The bite is deep, clinical crowns are low, survey line is not marked. The patient suffers from epileptiform attacks. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Clasp denture
*b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with metal base
c. Partial removable lamellar plastic prosthesis with retaining clasps
d. Dental bridges
e. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis with supporting-retaining clasps

60. At a dentists appointment a 12-year-old child inhaled a cotton turunda: he developed noisy respiration with a whistling sound, sudden dyspnea, pallor along with pronounced cyanosis, sweating. What kind of urgent condition developed in this patient?
a. Collapse
*b. Obstructive asphyxia
c. Valvular asphyxia
d. Dislocation asphyxia
e. Anaphylactic shock

61. A 53-year-old patient presented to a dental clinic for the orthopaedic treatment of the 27 tooth. During preparation for local anesthesia, the patient felt sick (weakness, pallor, hyperperspiration), and lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Collapse
b. Traumatic shock
c. Cardiogenic shock
*d. Syncope
e. Anaphylactic shock

62. A 25-year-old patient consulted a dentist about orthopedic treatment of the 17 tooth. After the patient had been given local anesthesia, his condition suddenly deteriorated (he developed anxiety, general weakness, acute headache, nausea, loss of consciousness, poor pupillary reaction to light, abrupt drop of arterial pressure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Septic shock
b. Cardiogenic shock
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Traumatic shock
e. Toxic shock

63. A 62-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about orthopaedic treatment of the 12, 21, 22 teeth. The arterial pressure was 165/110 mm Hg before prosthetic procedure. Because of emotional stress arterial pressure rose up to 220/130 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute heart failure
b. Acute respiratory failure
*c. Hypertensive crisis
d. Syncope
e. Collapse

64. During taking of impressions at a dentists appointment a patient presented with the following symptoms: paroxysmal cough, cyanosis, vomiting, clapping sound during inspiration. Make the diagnosis:
*a. Aspiration of a foreign body
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Hypersensitive gag reflex
d. Tracheitis
e. Attack of bronchial asthma

65. At a dentists appointment a patient complained of weakness, nausea, blackout, and then he lost consciousness. Make a diagnosis:
a. Insult
*b. Syncope
c. Collapse
d. Shock
e. Coma

66. A 25-year-old got a polytrauma as a result of a road accident. On examination, he was diagnosed with dislocation asphyxia. What kind of first aid should be rendered?
a. Tracheotomy
b. Medicamental management of laryngeal stenosis
c. Removal of mucus and foreign bodies from the upper airways
*d. Tongue fixation
e. Artificial ventilation of lungs

67. A 9-year-old boy has been diagnosed with a complete dislocation of the 21 tooth. The child got injured 20 hours ago. He has diabetes. Select a treatment tactics:
a. Root apex resection, reimplantation, fixation of the tooth
b. Reimplantation, fixation of the tooth and further follow-up
*c. The tooth cannot be preserved or reimplanted
d. Filling of the root canal with amalgam, reimplantation
e. Filling of the root canal with paste containing calcium, reimplantation, fixation of the tooth

68. A 35-year-old patient complains of a significant enlargement of the upper lip and eyelids, which developed within a few minutes (during cleaning the house with a detergent). Objectively: there is an edema of the upper part of face, upper lip and eyelids. Palpation is painless. What disease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Lymphedema
b. Macrocheilitis
*c. Angioneurotic Quinckes edema
d. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
e. Glandular cheilitis

69. A 25-year-old HIV-infected patient presented to a clinic of prosthetic dentistry seeking prosthetic services. What aseptic and antiseptic precautions should be taken?
a. No special precautions are required
b. The orthopaedist should work in gloves and a mask
c. The impressions should be desinfected by means of a quartz lamp
d. The patient should be refused appointment
*e. According to the scheme

70. During extration of the 26 tooth a 34-year-old patient developed tinnitus, skin pallor, weakness. She was diagnosed with vertigo. What is the most appropriate tactics of emergency care?
a. Intravenous injection of 50% analgin
b. Intravenous injection of cordiamin
c. Intravenous injection of prednisolone
*d. Placing the patient in Trendelenburg position
e. Intravenous injection of 0,1% adrenalin

71. A patient with haemophilia consulted a dental surgeon about decay of a right lower tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 46 tooth is completely decayed below the gum level. Percussion causes minor pain reaction. It is planned to extract the 46 tooth. The extraction procedure should be performed in:
a. Maxillofacial surgery department after the consultation with a haematologist
b. Stomatological clinic
*c. Haematological department
d. Stomatological clinic and following administration of haemostatic drugs
e. Maxillofacial surgery department

72. A 40-year-old patient has been given anesthesia, immediately after which he developed severe weakness, heart palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, skin is markedly hyperemic, there is acute headache, AP is 180/100 mm Hg, heart sounds are muffled. What state is it?
a. Myocardial infarction
*b. Hypertensic crisis
c. An attack of stenocardia
d. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
e. Cardial pain

73. A 45-year-old patient undergoes teeth preparation. 15 minutes after anesthetization with 4% solution of Ubistesin forte the patient developed hyperemia of skin, increased heart rate, headache, syncope. Previously the patient had not exhibited such reaction to this anesthetic. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Syncope
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Arterial pressure rise
d. Collapse
e. Myocardial infarction

74. A 32-year-old 3-month pregnant patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic for the prosthetics. Objectively: the 16 tooth is missing. It is planned to fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 15 and 17 teeth. The patient was given an anaesthetic of articaine group Ultracain DS. The orthopaedist chose this anaesthetic because:
a. It reduces the volume of uteroplacental circulation
b. It is low-toxic
*c. It is low-toxic, is not capable of crossing the hemato-placental barrier
d. It is most commonly used in the stomatological practice
e. It doesnt contain sulphites

