1. A 26-year-old patient needs an inlay for a class V cavity of the 35 tooth. During the cavity preparation a prosthodontist has accidentally opened the pulp. What might be the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Absence of an additional cavity
*b. Forming a flat floor
c. Forming convergent walls
d. Forming divergent walls
e. Forming a bevel

2. A 29 year old patient complains that the crown of his 26 tooth broke off. Objectively: tooth decay index is 0,9, root tissues are hard, roentgenography revealed that the canal was filled to the top, no chronic inflammations of periodontium were revealed. What construction should be used for prosthetics of the 26 tooth?
a. Pin tooth with a ring
b. Pin tooth with protective bar
c. Simplified pin tooth
*d. Pin stump inlay and a crown
e. Pin tooth with an inlay

3. A 32-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhages during eating and tooth brushing. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 weeks ago the patient got a cast metal crown. Objectively: the 27 tooth has a cast metal crown going beyond the gingival edge by 1-1,5 mm, touching causes haemorrhage. Percussion is slightly painful. What tactics is the most appropriate in this case?
a. To give the patient time to get used to the prosthesis
b. To remove the crown and administer treatment for marginal periodontitis
c. To administer gargling with Rotocan
d. To open the crown through the masticatory surface
*e. To remove the crown and fabricate a splint

4. A 38 year old patient was admitted to the orthopaedic department after a therapeutic treatment on account of periodontitis. His anamnesis contains data about frequent recurrences of this disease, acute attacks are accompanied by periodontal abscesses. Objectively: the 42, 41,31, 32 teeth manifest mobility of I-II degree, the 43 and 33 are stable, tooth cervices are dehisced by ?, hyperesthesia of hard tooth tissues is not observed. What rational construction of permanent splint should be recommended?
a. Halfcrown splint
b. Crown-shell splint
c. Girder Kurliandkys splint
*d. Fullcast circle removable splint
e. Mamlocks splint

5. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth. What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
*a. Acker clasp
b. Jackson clasp
c. Bent wire clasp
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Roach clasp

6. A 55-year-old woman complains about liquid pouring through her nose during eating of fluid food. Objectively: there is a perforating defect of alveolar process 3x2,8 cm deep in the lateral part of the upper jaw at level with the extracted 16 tooth. The patient refused operative intervention. What construction should be offered?
*a. Minor saddle prosthesis with clasp fixation
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
c. Celluloid mouth protector
d. Fixed dental bridge
e. Clasp dental prosthesis with obturating element made of elastic plastic

7. A 25-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the 23 tooth is pulpless. The filling restores vestibular-approximal surface of the tooth crown by ⅓, it is stable, closely fits within cavity walls, its colour doesn’t match the colour of the tooth. The tooth itself has changed its colour, its percussion is painless. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for this patient?
a. Inlay
*b. Metal-ceramic crown
c. Metal swaged crown
d. Elastic crown
e. Portion crown

8. A 24-year-old female patient complains about hard tissues defect of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is destroyed by ⅓ along the cutting edge, it is changed in color. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled to the top. It was decided to fabricate a plastic crown. Where should the crown edge be situated against the marginal gingiva?
a. 0,5 mm below the gingiva
b. 1,0 mm below the gingiva
c. 0,5 mm away of gingiva
d. 1,0 mm away of gingiva
*e. At a level with gingiva

9. A 52 year old patient complains of gum inflammation, tooth mobility. Objectively: dentitions are intact, all teeth have the 1-2 degree of mobility. What type of teeth stabilization should be applied in this case?
a. Frontal
b. Sagittal
c. Frontosagittal
*d. Arch-directed stabilization
e. Parasagittal

10. A 70-year-old male patient ordered complete removable dentures for both jaws. In the clinical stage he came for "identification of central relationship". For verification of interalveolar height the patient underwent speaking test. The patient was asked to pronounce the sounds "O", "E", "M". What distance should be between the occlusal rims for correct identification of interalveolar height?
a. 7-8 mm
*b. 5-6 mm
c. 3-4 mm
d. 9-10 mm
e. 1-2 mm

11. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
a. Combined method of compression molding
b. In water under pressure
c. Direct method of compression molding
d. Inverse method of compression molding
*e. Method of transfer molding

12. A 47-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dental cervix exposure on both jaws. Objectively: the dentitions are intact, the dental cervixes are exposed. Untimely teeth contacts are present. It is planned to perform selective grinding. What controlling method should be chosen?
a. Chewing test
b. Masticatiography
*c. Occlusiography
d. Roentgenography
e. Gnathodynamometry

13. A 70-year-old male patient complains about total teeth missing on both jaws. It is planned to fabricate a complete removable lower jaw prosthesis. Objectively: alveolar process of the lower jaw is atrophied only in the frontal aspect. Identify the type of lower jaw atrophy according to Kellers classification:
a. І
b. ІІ
*c. ІV
d. ІІІ
e. -

14. A 18-year-old female patient ordered a metal-ceramic crown for the 24 tooth. It is necessary to choose an optimal impression material for combined impression of the upper jaw. What material should be used for a preliminary impression?
a. Orthocar
b. Dentafol
*c. Stens
d. Wax
e. Protacryl

15. A 54 year old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by ⅓ of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
a. Metal stamped
b. Combined Belkins
*c. Fullcast
d. Plastic
e. Metal-ceramic

16. A 38-year-old female patient complains about pain in projection of the external acoustic meatus, clicking during mouth opening, ear stuffiness. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth is opened in staright path. There is Kennedy I type dentition defect, the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. What anatomical formation carries the maximum load?
*a. Articular disk (meniscus)
b. Distal clivus of medial articular tubercle
c. Joint capsule
d. Glenoid fossa floor of temporal bone
e. Articular head

17. Objective examination of a patient revealed hard tissue defect of the 24 tooth. Tooth decay index is 0,8. The defect is partly restored by a filling that doesnt meet the requirements. The tooth has pink colouring. X-ray picture shows no pathological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
a. Halfcrown
b. Equator crown
c. Artificial crown
d. Inlay
*e. Pin construction

18. Physical examination of a patient revealed a hard tissues defect of the 24 tooth. Index of occlusal surface destruction was 0,8. The defect was restored by filling that doesnt meet the requirements. The tooth is of rose colouring. X-ray picture shows no patological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
a. Portion crown
b. Equator crown
c. Artificial crown
d. Inlay
*e. Pivot crown

19. A 38 year old patient got a blow that resulted in upper jaw fracture. Objectively: flattening and impression of face, mobility and dangling of broken jaw with cartilage of nose and eyeballs, nasal haemorrhage, tissue edema, "glasses" symptom; palpation reveals crepitation, subcutaneous emphysema, liquorrhea, loss of sensitivity in the area of half the upper jaw, nose wing and frontal teeth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
b. Upper jaw cancer on the right
c. Upper jaw ostemia
d. Upper jaw odontoma
*e. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw

20. A 58-year-old male patient has considerable microstomia as a result of a face trauma and burn. The patient has indication for fabrication of a partial removable prosthesis. What construction of prosthesis should be used in this case?
*a. Collapsible prosthesis
b. Clasp dental prosthesis with attachments
c. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
d. Pivot-point removable prosthesis
e. Clasp dental prosthesis

21. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect caused by partial teeth missing. Objectively: the 15, 14, 24, 25 teeth are missing, the central group of upper jaw teeth is in protrusion and presents with diasthemas. What orthodontic appliance should be used to prepare the oral cavity for prosthetics?
*a. Palatine plate with vestibular bow
b. Palatine plate with oblique plane and vestibular bow
c. Expansion plate for the upper jaw with orthodontic lock
d. Brueckls appliance
e. Schwarz guard

22. A 35-year-old patient has teeth mobility of І degree, the teeth have apparent dental cusps. The dentist recommends to do occlusive teeth grinding. What method is the most objective for determining the grinding topography?
*a. Occlusiography
b. Roentgenography
c. Rubinovs masticatory test
d. Gnathodynamometry
e. Masticatiography

23. It is planned to organize a dental room with three universal dental sets. The total area of the room must be:
a. No less than 18 square metres
*b. No less than 28 square metres
c. No less than 30 square metres
d. No less than 21 square metres
e. No less than 42 square metres

24. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect 1 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
b. Clasp denture
*c. Oxmans bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
e. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point

25. A 60-year-old male patient has an extensive defect of nose caused by an injury. The patient temporarily refused operative intervention, it was suggested to fabricate an external nasal prosthesis fixed by eyeglass frame. What impression material should be used?
a. Gypseous impression
*b. Gypseous impression of the whole face
c. Impression of the defect with elastic material
d. Impression of the whole face with thermoplastic material
e. Impression of the defect with thermoplastic mass

26. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
a. Fixed crown splint
b. Equator crown splint
c. Intradental splint
*d. Inlay splint
e. Crown cap splint

27. A 28-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 13 tooth is decayed by ⅔ of its height, the stump sticks out above the gum line by 2 mm. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled up to the top. What construction should be fabricated for the patient?
a. Inlay
b. Crown
*c. Pivot tooth
d. Equator crown
e. The crown should be restored with photopolymer

28. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
a. On the saddle
b. On the base
c. On the clasps
*d. On the arch
e. On the artificial teeth

29. A 40-year-old patient complains about frequent falling out of a filling. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious (Black’s class II) cavity. It is planned to restore the anatomic form of the tooth by means of a metal inlay. What is the peculiarity of the cavity preparation for the inlay in this case?
a. Forming an additional shoulder
b. Preparation for parapulpar posts
c. Cavity deepening
*d. Forming a bevel
e. Cavity floor widening

30. A 43-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, as well as significant cervixes exposure. Objectively: gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale with cyanotic tint. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth present with I-II degree mobility. The 42, 41, 31, 31 teeth are overcrowded. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have cervix exposure by ? and the 43, 33 teeth have cervix exposure by ?. What orthopaedic construction should be used in this situation?
a. Cast bar Kurliandsky splint
b. Portion crown splint
c. -
*d. One-piece guard
e. Cap splint

31. A 45 year old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
*a. Lesser saddle denture with clasps fixation
b. Common partial removable denture
c. Protective palatal bars
d. Common dental bridge
e. Clasp denture with obturating part

32. 3 months after the immediate prosthetics a patient complained about the prosthesis balancing. Objectively: there is a gap between the prosthesis edge and vestibular surface of alveolar process. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Correction of prosthesis edges
b. Dentition buildup with quick-setting plastic
c. Correction of dentitions
*d. Fabrication of a new prosthesis
e. Prosthesis relocation with quick-setting plastic

33. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed full-cast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. Visually by means of models in the articulator
b. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
c. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
*d. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials
e. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper

34. An 18-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 21 tooth is pulpless, of dark-grey colour. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. It is planned to crown the tooth with a plastic crown. Choose the plastic mass for its fabrication:
a. Ethacryl
b. Ftorax
c. Bakril
*d. Sinma
e. Acrel

35. A 43 year old man applied to the dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 37th tooth is decayed by ⅔, buccal and lingual walls are thin. Occlusion picture shows strong contact with antagonists. How thick should be the layer of tooth surface that must be ground off during preparation for metallic stamped crown?
a. 0,6-0,7 mm
b. 0,7-0,8 mm
c. 0,1-0,2 mm
d. 0,5-0,6 mm
*e. 0,28-0,3 mm

36. A 68 year old patient has a defect in the lower third of his nose as a result of malignant tumour removal. Objectively: dorsum of nose up to the middle third and external nostril outlines are intact. Skin at the base of nose is thinned and erosive. The patient strongly objects to any plastic operation. What method of fixation of nose ectoprosthesis is the most acceptable?
a. By means of lace
b. Anatomic retention
c. Head cap
*d. On the glasses frame
e. Transparent adhesive tape

37. A 12 year old girl complained about a crown defect in the frontal part of her upper jaw. Anamnesis data: the tooth was filled more than once but the fillings fell out. Objectively: the 12 tooth is filled. There is IV class defect according to Blacks classification. Devitalization has never been performed, percussion of the 12 tooth is painless. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Ceramic crown
b. Metal crown
c. Metal-ceramic crown
d. Halfcrown
*e. Circumpulpar pin inlay

38. A 48-year-old male patient has been wearing partial removable dentures for 3 months. According to the patient, results of physical examination and additional methods of testing, the patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis provoked by dyes of the acrylic resin of his prosthesis. Allergic effects of dyes can be eliminated in the following way:
a. Fabrication of bilayer bases
b. Fabrication of cast metal prosthetic bases
c. Fabrication of swaged metal bases
*d. Ffabrication of a denture out of colorless plastic
e. Moulding of plastic by method of casting

39. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
a. Dentafol
*b. Gelin
c. Stomalgin
d. Stomatoplast
e. Orthocor

40. A 23 year old woman came to a dental clinic for restoration of the 11th tooths crown. Objectively: root of the 11th tooth is at a level with gingival edge, its walls are thick enough. A dentist made and adjusted a stump inlay upon which a metal-plastic crown will be fixed. What plastic will be used for veneering?
a. Noracryl
b. Protacryl
c. Acryloxide
d. Carbodent
*e. Sinma-M

41. A patient ordered soldered stainless-steel bridge prostheses. Their fabrication involves calibration of crown sleeves. Which device is used for this purpose?
a. Copes
b. Bromshtrom
c. Parkers
d. Larins
*e. Samson

42. A 35-year-old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37th tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the peculiarity of tooth preparation?
a. Forming additional cavity
*b. Forming a bevel
c. Widening of cavity floor
d. Forming an additional shoulder
e. Forming flat floor

43. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edge. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Stump fixing
*b. Impression taking
c. Casting
d. Wax construction making
e. Stump fitting

44. A 23 year old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment in a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each side. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
a. 3 cm
b. 2 cm
*c. 1 cm
d. 3,5 cm
e. 4 cm

45. A 56-year-old patient complains about missing lateral teeth on both sides of mandible. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Kennedy I denttion defect
b. Kennedy II denttion defect
c. Betelman II denttion defect
d. Kennedy III denttion defect
e. Kennedy IV denttion defect

46. A 48-year-old female patient complains about some discomfort induced by wearing an upper jaw clasp denture with elastic attachments. The patient notes the denture mobility during mastication and articulation. The patient asks to fabricate a new denture with consideration of the indicated defects. Clinical crowns of abutment teeth are low. What fixation should be the most efficient in this case?
*a. Telescopic
b. Locking
c. Clasp
d. Saddle-type
e. Arch-bar

47. A 75-year-old patient ordered a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. While adjusting the individual tray by Herbsts method the orthodontist revealed that the tray could be thrown off when the patient rounded his lips. What part of the tray requires correction?
*a. Vestibular part between the canines
b. In the region of buccal cords
c. Behind the maxillary tuber
d. Along the whole vestibular edge
e. Distal part along the A line

48. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaws. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic. What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity
b. Locate and fix central occlusion
*c. Adjust individual trays
d. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
e. Fabricate occlusal rims

49. A 57 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about dull pain in the area of his right temporomandibular joint that is getting worse during eating. The disease developed gradually, it began with constrained mandibular motion in the morning that sometimes grew more intensive, sometimes less. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the mouth can be opened up to 3 cm. Opening of mouth is accompanied by articular noise and clicking (step-like dislocation of mandible). Skin above the joint is intact. Muscle tone is palpatory unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
b. Occlusive articulation syndrome
c. Subluxation of mandible
*d. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint
e. Neuromuscular syndrome

50. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Objectively: the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are destroyed by caries by ⅔ of their height. The occlusion is orthognathic. X-ray picture shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no patological changes in periapical tissues. What construction should be the most efficient in this situation?
a. Artificial metal swaged crowns
b. Fabrication of plastic inlays
c. Richmonds pivot crowns
*d. Stump inlays and metal-ceramic crowns
e. Restoration of tooth crowns with composite materials

51. The patient is 75 years old. The inspection of construction of complete removable dentures revealed that only lateral artificial teeth were in contact, there was a gap between frontal teeth. In the lateral part on one side cusp-to-cusp contact was present, on the other side there was a horizontal gap; the central line was deviated. What mistake was made?
a. The patient was thought to have anterior occlusion
b. Occlusal rims were irregularly softened
*c. The patient was thought to have lateral occlusion
d. Interalveolar height was increased
e. Wax moulds were deformed while determining central occlusion

52. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II degree. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
a. Sagittal
b. Transversal
c. Frontal
d. Frontal-lateral
*e. Circle

53. A 25-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible without evident displacement of fragments. All the teeth are intact. What kind of wire splint is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Splint with hooks
b. Smooth splint with a spreading curve
*c. Smooth splint
d. Splint with guide plane
e. Pomerantseva-Urbanskayas splint

54. A 65-year-old patient complains about unsatisfactory fixation of complete removable lamellar denture of his upper jaw. The denture was fabricated 6 years ago. Objectively: balancing and poor fixation of complete removable denture is present. What is the reason of such condition?
*a. Atrophy of osseous base of the prosthetic bed tissues
b. Bad hygiene of removable denture
c. Loss of certain antagonists
d. Discoloration of basic plastic
e. Wear of artificial teeth

55. A female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the patients face is shortened, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of lower and upper jaw teeth is missing, the crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn off by ⅔ of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented. The alveolar process isnt hypertrophied. Interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological tooth wear in this patient:
a. Horizontal, compensated, II grade severity
b. Vertical, compensated, III grade severity
c. Combined, noncompensated, III grade severity
*d. Horizontal, noncompensated, III grade severity
e. Vertical, noncompensated, III grade severity

56. A 30-year-old saxophonist complains about wearing of the occlusal surface of his frontal teeth along with separation between the upper and lower teeth (apertognathia). Height of the lower third of the patient’s face remains unchanged. What method should be applied for elimination of this deformity?
*a. Protetic
b. Shortening of teeth
c. Instrumental-and-surgical
d. Orthodontic
e. Increase of the interalveolar height

57. A 68 year old patient underwent full jaw removal. Before the operation an impression of the patients upper and lower jaws was taken and a substitutive denture was made. What are the means of the denture fixation in the oral cavity?
a. Anchors
b. Magnets
c. Attachments
*d. Spiral Fosher springs
e. Clasps

58. A 69-year-old patient underwent an operation for complete removal of his lower jaw. They took impressions of both jaws and fabricated a lower jaw replacement prosthesis before operation. What elements will provide fixation of this prosthesis in the oral cavity?
a. Attachments
*b. Foshars spiral springs
c. Clasps
d. Wire loops
e. Magnets

59. A 47-year-old patient complains about discolouration of the 11, 12 teeth. Objectively: the 12, 12 are changed in colour, canals are filled to the top. It was decided to make metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of approximal surfaces of abutment teeth?
a. 30-35 degrees
*b. 5-8 degrees
c. 10-15 degrees
d. 15-20 degrees
e. 20-25 degrees

60. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Dentures with extended borders
b. Dentures with shortened borders
c. Implant-supported dentures
*d. Dentures with elastic lining
e. Dentures with metal bases

61. A 48-year-old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervixes of the 42, 41, 31, 32 are exposed by ⅔, there is pathological III degree mobility. It is indicated to extract the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be used for the direct prosthetics?
a. Adhesive
b. Clasp denture
*c. Removable partial lamellar denture
d. Metal-ceramic bridge-like denture
e. Swaged-and-soldered bridge-like denture

62. A month after cementing the metal-ceramic crown on the 23 tooth a patient complained of its decementing. Examination revealed that the tooth stump was of sufficient height, stump walls were convergent to the vertical tooth axis at an angle of approximately 30 degrees. What angle of convergence had to be formed?
a. 22-25 degrees
b. 10-12 degrees
c. 12-15 degrees
d. 15-18 degrees
*e. Up to 8 degrees

63. A 57 year old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by ⅔ in the area of the 33, and by ½ of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
*a. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress
b. Devitalization of supporting teeth
c. Garland modelling in the precervical area
d. Massive grinding off of hard tissues
e. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges

64. During lateral movements of mandible the frontal teeth are displaced sidewards. Deviation of incisor point from the central position is measured by an angle of 100-110o. What is characterized by such a value of incisor point deviation?
a. Bennetts angle
*b. Lateral incisor path
c. Sagittal incisor path
d. Lateral joint path
e. Sagittal joint path

65. A 52-year-old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: in the lateral parts of mandible teeth are worn down to the gums, in the frontal parts teeth are worn by ⅓. Treatment includes two stages. What prosthetic construction should be applied for bite disjoining and myotatic reflex change?
*a. Periodontal splint for the lateral parts
b. Plastic splint for the frontal part
c. Elastic plastic splint
d. Crown splint for the lateral parts
e. Plastic splint for the whole dentition

66. A 47 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11th tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
*a. Partial removable lamellar denture
b. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth
c. Implant
d. Clasp denture
e. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth

67. A 53 year old patient has to undergo resection of the left half of mandible together with its ramus. It is indicated to make an immediate Oxmans denture. What denture element keeps the remaining mandible fragment from deviation towards the defect?
a. Artificial teeth
*b. Removable or non-removable inclined plane
c. Multiclasp system
d. The whole fixing part
e. Resection part

68. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 13 and 24 teeth remain as well as all the teeth on the lower jaw. The lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, crowns of the 13, 24 teeth are worn off by ⅔. What constructional element will provide optimal fixation of the partial removable prosthesis on the upper jaw?
a. Compound clasps
b. Bars
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
*d. Telescopic crowns
e. Retaining clasps

69. A 70 year old patient is awaiting complete removable dentures for both upper and lower jaws. Teeth placement will be made by Vasilyevs method. What teeth in the upper denture must not touch glass?
a. Second premolars and first molars
*b. Lateral incisors and second molars
c. First and second premolars
d. Central incisors and first molars
e. Canines and first molars

70. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
a. Subperiosteal
b. Conical
c. Endodontic-endoosseous
d. Plate-form
*e. Threaded

71. A 25-year-old male patient got bilateral fracture of the lower jaw. A fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Kurlyandskys appliance with levers
b. One-jaw bite-guard splint
*c. Posts appliance
d. Webers appliance
e. Shurs appliance

72. A 36 year old patient applied to a dentist 1,5 month after a mandibular trauma with complaints about difficult food mastication, esthetic face defect. Objectively: the face is proportional, asymmetric as a result of oral displacement of a lateral fragment of the left lower jaw. When the jaws are closed the 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are not in contact with their antagonists. The patient strongly objects to surgical operation. What orthopaedic treatment should be administered?
a. Mechanotherapy
b. Crowns with occlusal applications
c. Levelling of occlusal surface
*d. A denture with double dentition
e. Interjaw traction

73. A 43 year old patient complains of tooth mobility and considerable dehiscence of dental cervices of the lower jaw in its frontal part. Objectively: gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale, slightly cyanotic, without haemorrhage. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have mobility of the I-II degree. There is also overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced by ½ of root length, of the 43, 33 - by ¼. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Cap splint
b. Kurlandskys girder splint
*c. Fullcast removable kappa
d. Halfcrown splint
e. Semicircle splint

74. A 48 year old patient complained about posttraumatic pain in the area of his chin. Examination revealed median fracture of lower jaw with I class dentition defect (according to Kennedy classification). It is indicated to make a Vankevich splint in Stepanovs modification. What will determine the height of directing planes of this splint?
a. Height of molar teeth of the upper jaw
*b. Extent of mouth opening
c. Height of central jaw correlation
d. It will be determined arbitrary
e. Form of edentulous alveolar crests of the lower jaw

75. A 24-year-old soldier was injured by a shell splinter. He was diagnosed with a mandibular fracture with a bone defect in the mental region over 2 cm long. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Tigerstedts splints
b. Gunning-Ports splint
c. Direct osteosynthesis
*d. Fragments fixation by means of Rudkos apparatus
e. Intermandibular Ivy ligature

76. A 40-year-old patient is hospitalized with Le Fort II maxillary fracture. The teeth are intact. Choose the most appropriate apparatus for this patient:
a. Yermolaev-Kulagovs apparatus
b. Gunning-Ports splint
c. Yadrovas apparatus
d. Rudkos apparatus
*e. Standard Zbarzh construction

77. A patient ordered partial removable lamellar dentures for the upper and lower jaw. An orthodontist took elastic alginate impressions of both jaws. What is his next step?
a. To put the impressions into the microten bag for 90 minutes
*b. To send the impressions for disinfection
c. To invite a dental mechanic for joint analysis of the impressions
d. To let the impressions dry out in the open air
e. To send the impressions immediately to the laboratory

78. A patient is waiting for a partial removable laminar denture. Anatomic models of both jaws were made by means of elastic alginate material "Ipin" and referred for disinfection. What disinfection method should be applied?
a. Desoxone 0,1%
b. Sodium hypochloride 0,5%
*c. Glutaraldehyde 2,5% рH 7,0-8,7
d. Hydrogen peroxide solution 6%
e. Alcohol solution 70%

79. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
*a. Fixed Oxmans prosthesis with pivot point
b. Gavrilows prosthesis with pivot point
c. Oxmans double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
d. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp
e. Oxmans single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point

80. A 39-year-old patient complains about experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the anamnesis that the indicated tooth was treated for carious. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is sharply painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to take off the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anesthesia should be applied?
a. Intraligamentous anesthesia
b. Infiltration anesthesia
*c. Field block anesthesia
d. Application anesthesia
e. Intraosseous anesthesia

81. An orthodontist was treating a patient infected with AIDS virus. Accidentally he injured skin of one of his fingers with a dental disk during tooth preparation. What actions should the orthodontist take in this case?
a. To apply a tourniquet on the shoulder
b. To treat the skin with 5% iodine solution
c. To press blood out and treat the skin with strong solution of KMnO4
*d. To press blood out and treat the skin with 70% alcohol solution
e. To perform diathermo-coagulation

82. A patient consults a prosthodontist about a dentition defect of the 14, 15, 16 teetht. It is necessary to prepare teth for crowning. Before the preparation the handpiece must be processed with:
a. With 3% solution of chloramine once
b. With 3% solution of hydrogen oxide
*c. With 3% solution of chloramine (two times with 15 minute interval)
d. With solution of potassium permanganate
e. With furacilin solution

83. A 36-year-old female patient complains about acute pain, clicking in the right temporomandibular joint, burning pain in the region of the right external acoustic meatus. Movements of lower jaw are step-like with short-standing disabling moments and acute pain in the joint. Objectively: the face is symmetric. Occlusion is orthognathic. Palpation of lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the right. Tomogram shows that bone structure circuits of joints are smooth and slick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatic arthritis of TMJ
b. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
c. Ankylosis of TMJ
*d. Dysfunction of TMJ
e. Acute posttraumatic arthritis of TMJ

84. A 45-year-old teacher consulted a prosthodontist about choosing efficient prosthetic tactics. Objectively: the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth present with III degree mobility. What orthopaedic care is the most efficient?
a. Early prosthetics
b. Delayed prosthetics
c. Clasp denture
*d. Immediate prosthetics
e. Fixed prosthesis

85. A 40 year old patient complains about difficult mastication as a result of lower jaw deviation. Anamnesis data: mental fracture 2 months ago. Objectively: the 35; 36; 38 ... 45; 46 teeth are missing. Remaining teeth are intact. The 43; 44; 47; 48 teeth have no contact with antagonists and their oral deviation makes up 1 cm. What is the optimal construction of lower jaw denture?
a. Removable lamellar denture
b. Adhesive denture
c. Metal-ceramic dental bridge
d. Soldered splint on rings
*e. A denture with double dentition

86. A patient is 24 years old. Artificial crown of his 22 tooth broke off. The tooth was devitalized 8 years ago and its crown is totally decayed. What microprosthesis should be made for restoration of tooth crown?
a. Inlay
b. Filling
*c. Stump-root inlay
d. Application
e. Stamped crown

87. Examination of a 25-year-old male patient revealed maximal number of occlusional contacts of opposing teeth during denture joining. X-ray picture shows that the articular head of the lower jaw is near the base of the slope of articular tubercle. What type of occlusion is present?
a. Posterior occlusion
*b. Central occlusion
c. Right lateral occlusion
d. Anterior occlusion
e. Left lateral occlusion

88. One of the methods to define central occlusion is to construct a flat that will go through cutting edges of central incisors and distalobuccal tubercles of last molar teeth providing that there is sufficient quantity of teeth. What flat should be constructed?
a. Transversal
b. Frankfort
c. Sagittal
d. Vertical
*e. Occlusal flat

89. A 49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to ⅓ of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Kopeinin
*b. Novotny
c. Treuman
d. Mamlock
e. Kogan

90. A 65-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about fabrication of an external prosthesis of orbit that was lost as a result of a trauma. What is the fixing element of the orbit prosthesis?
*a. Spectacle frame
b. Swivel devices
c. Magnets
d. Clamps
e. Watch spring

91. A 56-year-old patient needs a partial removable lamellar denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 25, 26, 27, 28 teeth on the upper jaw are missing. In order to provide transversal line of clasps the clasp arms should be placed upon the following teeth:
a. 13 and 18
b. 24, 13 and 18
c. -
*d. 13 and 24
e. 24 and 18

92. A 56-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain underneath the bar of her clasp prosthesis. It is known from the anamnesis that the clasp was placed in another city a week ago. Examination revealed a mechanic injury of mucous membrane of the palatine vault caused by the bar of the clasp prosthesis. What distance should exist between the palate and the bar of the clasp prosthesis in order to prevent this complication?
*a. 0,5 mm
b. 0,2-0,3 mm
c. 5-6 mm
d. 1,5-2,0 mm
e. 2-3 mm

93. For fabrication of an external prosthesis a 62-year-old male patient needs "Hippocratic facies". What impression material should be applied?
a. Repin
*b. Gypsum
c. Stens
d. Dentafol
e. Stomaflex

94. A 32-year-old female patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 14, 25 teeth. It is planned to make metal-ceramic crowns. What impression material should be used for making these crowns?
a. Alginate
b. Zinc oxide eugenol
c. Hardening
d. Wax
*e. Silicone

95. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patients chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth are missing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get special medical aid?
*a. Specialized army surgical hospital
b. Regimental aid station
c. Separate medical battalion
d. Separate medical detachment
e. Battalion aid station

96. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a free-end edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
a. Ney clasps
b. Telescopic crowns
*c. Attachments and bar system
d. Jackson clasps
e. Dentoalveolar clasps

97. A 34-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain and clicking in the final stage of mouth opening. The patient has a history of a dislocation. Amplitude of maximal mouth opening is 58 mm. Mouth opening should be limited down to the following amplitude:
a. Up to 50-60 mm
b. Up to 25-30 mm
*c. Up to 40-50 mm
d. Up to 10-15 mm
e. Up to 90-100 mm

98. A 60-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication due to the mandible displacement that resulted from an untreated fracture. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38, 45, 46 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with the upper lateral teeth, and exhibit oral deviation up to 1 cm. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for the manible?
a. Vankevich splint
*b. Prosthesis with double dentition
c. Arch bar prosthesis
d. Whole-piece bridge
e. Adhesive prosthesis

99. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed by 80%, the root is stable, the canal is filled up to the top. After examination it was decided to restore the decayed tooth with a cast stump inlay. The root canal of the 23 tooth should be broadened by:
a. ⅓ of canal length
b. ½ of canal length
*c. ⅔ of canal length
d. ¼ of canal length
e. By the total canal length

100. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain in the left parotid-masticatory region, disorder of mandible movements. Objectively: skin over the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is reddened, the surrounding tissues are edematic. Disfunction of the left temporomandibular joint is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
b. Ankylosis of the left TMJ
c. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of TMJ
d. Arthrosis of the left TMJ
*e. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of TMJ

101. A patient complains about limited mouth opening. She has a history of intra-articular disorders in the left temporomandibular joint. Roentgenological examination revealed subchondral sclerosis of articular plates, regular narrowing of articular cavity, limited excursion of condylar process of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
b. Deforming arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
*c. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
e. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint

102. A 46-year-old patient complains of difficult opening of her mouth, body temperature rise, tissue edema around both temporomandibular joints (TMJ). It is known from the anamnesis that the patient had short-term non-intense bilateral pain in the parotid-masticatory region, limited mouth opening, tension and discomfort in the region of both temporomandibular joints that had been observed for a couple of days. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibrous ankylosis
b. Deforming atrhrosis
c. Infectional arthritis
d. Arthrosis
*e. Rheumatic arthritis

103. A 40-year-old patient suffers from chronic generalized periodontitis. Objectively: both dentitions are intact, the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit I degree mobility. What splint would be aesthetically acceptable for this group of teeth?
a. Guard splint
b. Cap splint
c. Ring splint
*d. Glass Span and photopolymer splinting
e. Splint of soldered combined crowns

104. A 64 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: there is a sharp bony prominence in the area of the missing 15 tooth. It is planned to make a partial removable denture with two-layer base. What plastic should be used for elastic backing?
a. Ftorax
b. Protacryl
c. Bacryl
*d. Plastic PM-01
e. Acryl

105. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Examination revealed that the 21 tooth was missing, the crowns of the 11 and the 22 tooth are intact, high, relatively parallel. The patient refused teeth preparation as well as implantation or fabrication of a removable denture. What orthopedic construction should be fabricated?
a. Lamellar denture
b. Clasp denture
*c. Adhesive denture
d. Immediate denture
e. Polypropylene denture

106. A 40-year-old patient underwent selective grinding of teeth on account of TMJ disease provoked by functional occlusal disorder. 3 days later the patient consulted the orthopaedist about injuring buccal mucosa because of its getting in between dentitions on the right. What mistake was made during teeth grinding?
a. Lingual tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
b. Tops of the buccal tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
*c. Tops of the support palatal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
d. Buccal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
e. Upper teeth tubercles were ground off

107. A 51 year old lecturer came to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced, III degree mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
*a. On the day of dental extraction
b. In 2-3 months
c. In 5-6 days
d. In 4-6 months
e. In 16-30 days

108. A 32 year old patient lost his 41 and 31 teeth as a result of a sporting accident. Replantation is impossible because these teeth have cracks and splits both on crown and root surfaces. Clinical and roentgenological examination proved the possibility of immediate implantation. What implant materials should be preferred?
a. Sapphire
*b. Titanium
c. Ceramic
d. Carbon
e. Platinum

109. A 38-year-old patient consulted an orthopedist about metal taste, dry mouth and tongue burning. Objectively: defects of the lower dental arch were replaced with soldered stainless steel bridges. What examination method would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Electroodontometry
*b. Galvanometry
c. Occlusiography
d. Masticatiography
e. Myography

110. A 28-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw. Objectively: the crown part of the 11 tooth is decayed below the gum level. The root is stable, percussion is painless. It is planned to restore the tooth with a stump inlay and cover it with a metal-ceramic crown. What additional method of diagnostics should be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Masticatiography
b. Electromyography
*c. X-ray diagnostics
d. Gnathodynamometry
e. Electroodontodiagnostics

111. A patient came to a dental clinic for dental prosthetics. Objectively: total lack of teeth on the mandible. Sharp and regular atrophy of alveolar part. Frenula attachment and fold position is high. Name the type of atrophy of edentulous mandible using Kellers classification:
a. III type
b. I type
*c. II type
d. IV type
e. V type

112. During military operations the head of the Army Medical Department gave the order to deploy a stomatological aid unit on the territory of the Army Hospital Base. A patient with missile wound of face was admitted to the unit. What kind of aid can be rendered in the stomatological unit?
a. Stomatological aid
b. Prosthodontic aid
c. Qualified aid
d. Consultation aid
*e. Specialized (secondary) aid

113. A patient with a missile wound of his face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
*a. Secondary care
b. Consultancy
c. Dental orthopaedic service
d. Dental health service
e. Professional care

114. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinsteins pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point

115. A 68-year-old patient complains about pain in the palate that occurs during wearing a complete removable denture the patient got 3 months ago. Objectively: palatine torus is strongly marked, mucous membrane around it is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. It was made anatomic teeth arrangement
b. Prosthesis base is made of acrylic plastic
c. Previous impression was made in plaster
d. Functional impression was taken by means of a rigid individual tray
*e. Torus wasnt isolated

116. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 7 cm
b. 5 cm
*c. 9 cm
d. 12 cm
e. 18 cm

117. A 40-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about upper jaw teeth mobility that turned up after therapeutic treatment. Objectively: the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless, exhibit II degree mobility, unchanged colour. What prosthetic construction should be applied?
a. Crown soldered splint
b. Cast bar splint
c. Wire-band splint
*d. Mamlock splint
e. Elastic crown splint

118. Tooth replacement with complete removable dentures involves adjustment of occlusal relations by different movements of the lower jaw. Transversal movements of the lower jaw are initiated by the following muscle:
a. Mastication muscle
b. Digastric muscle
c. Internal (medial) pterygoid muscle
d. Temporal muscle
*e. External (lateral) pterygoid muscle

119. At the stage of adjustment of an individual tray the Herbst test should be done. What muscles cause the shift of the individual tray during functional testing - alternate touching right or left cheek with the tip of tongue?
*a. Mylohyoid
b. Mentalis and orbicular muscle of mouth
c. Mastication muscles
d. Mimic muscles
e. Digastric, geniohyoid

120. A 37 year old patient was diagnosed with arthrosis of mandibulotemporal joint. During auscultation the doctor heard pathological rustle in the area of the joint, namely "clicking" that was caused by a load. What is the mechanism of this pathological rustle?
*a. Asynchronous movement of disc and articulation head
b. Loosening of mandibulotemporal joint ligaments
c. Inflammation of cartilaginous tissue of the disc
d. Calcification of mandibulotemporal joint disc
e. Friction of bone surfaces in the joint

121. A 65-year-old male patient complains about crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, angular fissures and cracks are also present. Palpation reveals crepitatnt rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Costens syndrome
b. Temporomandibular arthrosis
c. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
d. Temporomandibular dislocation
e. Temporomandibular arthritis

122. A 50-year-old patient complains about pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mouth opening. Dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44. While opening the mouth the lower jaw moves in a zigzag manner towards the affected joint. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Habitual TMJ dislocation
b. Chronic arthritis of TMJ
c. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
*d. Musculoarticular dysfunction
e. Sclerosing arthrosis of TMJ

123. A 35-year-old patient is at a dentist. He is anxious, complains of being afraid of the dentist, is unwilling to let the dentist examine him. Drugs of which group should be given the patient before stomatological manipulations?
a. Cardiac glycosides
b. Desensitizing
c. Analgetics
d. Hypotensive
*e. Sedative

124. A 52-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. There is gingival edema, parodontal pouches are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by ½ of root length. A dentist made a diagnosis: generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is the most efficient in this situation?
*a. Elbrecht splint
b. Murrays splint
c. Temporary Novotny splint
d. Mamlock splint
e. Plastic mouthguard

125. A 20 year old man got a blow to the chin. He remained conscious. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. He has an edema and haematoma in the area of his lower jaw on both sides. Jaw palpation causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited. There is also a rupture of mucous membrane of oral cavity in the area of the 44, 43 and 34, 35 teeth. Occlusion is deviated. What asphyxia type can be developed?
a. Obturation
b. Valve
c. Aspiration
*d. Dislocation
e. Stenotic

126. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57 year old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Neja clasp should be applied?
a. II type clasp
*b. V type clasp
c. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
d. I type clasp
e. I-II type clasp

127. A patient ordered metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. Block anaesthesia was performed before preparation. In a few minutes the patient felt anxiety, tinnitus, abdominal pain, giddiness. Breathing is hurried, pulse is rapid, AP is 60/40 mm Hg. What aid should be rendered to the patient in the first place?
*a. Intravenous introduction of 0,5 ml of 0,1% adrenaline solution, prednisolone
b. To soak a cotton web with some liquid ammonia and give it for the patient to inhale
c. Make an injection of aminophylline
d. To bring the patient into horizontal position
e. Promedol, suprastin

128. A 43 year old patient applied to a prosthetic dentistry for the purpose of prosthetics. In anamnesis: has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. The patient has been very anxious before the appointment with a doctor. Suddenly the patients condition grew worse, he felt limb weakness. The patient became covered with cold clammy sweat and lost consciousness. What critical state is it?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Syncope
*c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Myocardium infarction

129. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous areas is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
a. Consumption of solid food
b. Wear of artificial teeth
c. Improper care of denture
d. Denture using during sleep
*e. Alveolar process atrophy

130. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lower jaw subluxation
b. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
c. Meniscus tresis
d. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
e. Lower jaw dislocation

131. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Kellers classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
a. Third
b. Second
c. Fourth
*d. First
e. Fifth

132. A 22-year-old patient is afraid of pain from conduction anaesthesia. A dentist decided that this anaesthesia should be preceded by applicational anaesthesia of mucous membrane on the spot of injection. What drug should be used for this purpose?
a. 3% doxycyclin ointment
*b. 5% lidocaine ointment
c. 5% oxacillin ointment
d. 1% synthomycin ointment
e. 3% sinaflan ointment

133. A 26-year-old patient needs an inlay for a class V cavity of the 35 tooth. During the cavity preparation a prosthodontist has accidentally opened the pulp. What might be the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Forming divergent walls
b. Forming a bevel
c. Absence of an additional cavity
*d. Forming a flat floor
e. Forming convergent walls

134. A 32-year-old patient complains about gingival haemorrhages during eating and tooth brushing. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 weeks ago the patient got a cast metal crown. Objectively: the 27 tooth has a cast metal crown going beyond the gingival edge by 1-1,5 mm, touching causes haemorrhage. Percussion is slightly painful. What tactics is the most appropriate in this case?
*a. To remove the crown and fabricate a splint
b. To open the crown through the masticatory surface
c. To remove the crown and administer treatment for marginal periodontitis
d. To give the patient time to get used to the prosthesis
e. To administer gargling with Rotocan

135. A 38 year old patient was admitted to the orthopaedic department after a therapeutic treatment on account of periodontitis. His anamnesis contains data about frequent recurrences of this disease, acute attacks are accompanied by periodontal abscesses. Objectively: the 42, 41,31, 32 teeth manifest mobility of I-II degree, the 43 and 33 are stable, tooth cervices are dehisced by 1/4, hyperesthesia of hard tooth tissues is not observed. What rational construction of permanent splint should be recommended?
a. Girder Kurliandkys splint
*b. Fullcast circle removable splint
c. Mamlocks splint
d. Halfcrown splint
e. Crown-shell splint

136. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth. What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Telescopic fixation
b. Bent wire clasp
c. Roach clasp
d. Jackson clasp
*e. Acker clasp

137. A 55-year-old woman complains about liquid pouring through her nose during eating of fluid food. Objectively: there is a perforating defect of alveolar process 3x2,8 cm deep in the lateral part of the upper jaw at level with the extracted 16 tooth. The patient refused operative intervention. What construction should be offered?
a. Celluloid mouth protector
*b. Minor saddle prosthesis with clasp fixation
c. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
d. Clasp dental prosthesis with obturating element made of elastic plastic
e. Fixed dental bridge

138. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joint. The dentures were fabricated a month ago. Objectively: face configuration is abnormal, the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can only be closed with difficulty, the speech is indistinct. When smiling, the base of the complete removable denture is exposed. What mistakes were made during the fabrication of complete removable dentures for the upper jaw?
*a. The vertical occlusal dimension was overrated
b. Misidentified posterior occlusion
c. Misplacement of maxillary teeth
d. Misidentified anterior occlusion
e. The vertical occlusal dimension was underrated

139. A 25-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the 23 tooth is pulpless. The filling restores vestibular-approximal surface of the tooth crown by 1/3, it is stable, closely fits within cavity walls, its colour doesn’t match the colour of the tooth. The tooth itself has changed its colour, its percussion is painless. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for this patient?
a. Elastic crown
b. Portion crown
c. Inlay
*d. Metal-ceramic crown
e. Metal swaged crown

140. A 24-year-old female patient complains about hard tissues defect of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/3 along the cutting edge, it is changed in color. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled to the top. It was decided to fabricate a plastic crown. Where should the crown edge be situated against the marginal gingiva?
a. 1,0 mm away of gingiva
b. 0,5 mm away of gingiva
*c. At a level with gingiva
d. 0,5 mm below the gingiva
e. 1,0 mm below the gingiva

141. A 52 year old patient complains of gum inflammation, tooth mobility. Objectively: dentitions are intact, all teeth have the 1-2 degree of mobility. What type of teeth stabilization should be applied in this case?
a. Parasagittal
b. Frontal
*c. Arch-directed stabilization
d. Sagittal
e. Frontosagittal

142. A 58-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 22 tooth is stable, intact. The atrophy of the alveolar crest is present, the palate is flat. It is planned to fabricate a removable denture. What tactics should be chosen in respect of the 22 tooth?
a. It should be depulped
b. There is no need of any intervention
*c. It is required to fabricate a telescopic crown
d. It should be extracted
e. It is required to fabricate a stump crown

143. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
a. In water under pressure
*b. Method of transfer molding
c. Inverse method of compression molding
d. Direct method of compression molding
e. Combined method of compression molding

144. A 47-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dental cervix exposure on both jaws. Objectively: the dentitions are intact, the dental cervixes are exposed. Untimely teeth contacts are present. It is planned to perform selective grinding. What controlling method should be chosen?
*a. Occlusiography
b. Chewing test
c. Gnathodynamometry
d. Roentgenography
e. Masticatiography

145. A 70-year-old male patient complains about total teeth missing on both jaws. It is planned to fabricate a complete removable lower jaw prosthesis. Objectively: alveolar process of the lower jaw is atrophied only in the frontal aspect. Identify the type of lower jaw atrophy according to Kellers classification:
*a. ІV
b. І
c. -
d. ІІІ
e. ІІ

146. A 62-year-old patient has a median mandibular fracture complicated by pseudoarthrosis. Objectively: the dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. There is minor mobility of fragments without displacement. What is the most appropriate type of denture for this patient?
a. Lamellar denture with Gavrilows pivot point
b. Lamellar denture without a pivot point
*c. Dental bridge without a pivot point
d. Lamellar denture with Oksmans pivot point
e. Lamellar denture with Weinsteins pivot point

147. A 18-year-old female patient ordered a metal-ceramic crown for the 24 tooth. It is necessary to choose an optimal impression material for combined impression of the upper jaw. What material should be used for a preliminary impression?
*a. Stens
b. Orthocar
c. Protacryl
d. Wax
e. Dentafol

148. A 67-year-old patient needs a complete removable denture for his lower jaw. The adjustment of custom tray is done by method of Herbst. It is required to specify the boundary of tray for the sublingual region, 1 cm away from the midline. What Herbst test should be applied for this purpose?
a. Slow mouth opening
*b. Alternate touching the cheeks with the tongue
c. Active movements of mimic muscled
d. Touching the red border of the upper lip with the toungue
e. Swallowing

149. A 40-year-old patient has an open occlusion resulting from the bilateral fracture of his upper jaw and following malunion of fragments. The occlusal vertical dimension is maintained only by molar teeth. There is a gap of about 1-1,5 mm between the rest of teeth. The dentitions are without gaps. What kind of treatment would be most appropriate in this situation?
a. Orthodontic treatment
b. Open reposition
c. Prosthetics with combined crowns
*d. The molar teeth should be ground off and covered with crowns
e. Combined apparatus and surgical treatment

150. A 54 year old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by 1/3 of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
*a. Fullcast
b. Metal stamped
c. Metal-ceramic
d. Plastic
e. Combined Belkins

151. An 80-year-old patient presented to a clinic for the adjustment of the impression tray for the upper jaw. Objectively: alveolar process exhibits marked homogenous atrophy, maxillary tubers are absent, torus is weakly expressed. Buccal muscles and frenulum of the upper lip are attached almost at the top of the alveolar process, the palatal slope is not steep. How to adjust the impression tray in order to make a close-fitting valve?
a. To extend the external borders
b. To extend the borders in the region of maxillary tubers
c. To overlay buccal muscles and frenulum with the impression tray
*d. To extend the borders along the A line
e. To extend the borders in the frontal region

152. A 32-year-old male complains of constant mandibular movements simulating chewing that take place when he is excited. Besides that, the patient complains of teeth grinding. Objectively: the lateral surfaces of teeth have signs of abrasion, the tubercles are absent. What is the most rational method of treatment?
a. Consultation with a dental surgeon
b. Teeth alignment (selective tubercle removal)
c. Restoration with opposite-directed dentures
d. Medicamental and machine treatment with further consultation with a dental surgeon
*e. Night guard, myogymnastics, self-massage

153. A 38-year-old female patient complains about pain in projection of the external acoustic meatus, clicking during mouth opening, ear stuffiness. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth is opened in staright path. There is Kennedy I type dentition defect, the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. What anatomical formation carries the maximum load?
a. Distal clivus of medial articular tubercle
b. Articular head
*c. Articular disk (meniscus)
d. Glenoid fossa floor of temporal bone
e. Joint capsule

154. A 45-year-old patient presented to aclinic for prosthetics. Objectively: Kennedy III type, I subtype dentition defect is present, the 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, teeth are missing. The bite is fixed. Che Crowns of the 47, 43, 33, 37 teeth are high, of a well-defined anatomical shape, intact. It is planned to fabricate a clasp denture. What system of the clasp denture fixation is the most appropriate in this case?
*a. Rumpels bar system
b. Roach clasp
c. Telescopic system
d. Continuous clasp
e. Attachments

155. Physical examination of a patient revealed a hard tissues defect of the 24 tooth. Index of occlusal surface destruction was 0,8. The defect was restored by filling that doesnt meet the requirements. The tooth is of rose colouring. X-ray picture shows no patological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
*a. Pivot crown
b. Inlay
c. Equator crown
d. Portion crown
e. Artificial crown

156. A 38 year old patient got a blow that resulted in upper jaw fracture. Objectively: flattening and impression of face, mobility and dangling of broken jaw with cartilage of nose and eyeballs, nasal haemorrhage, tissue edema, "glasses" symptom; palpation reveals crepitation, subcutaneous emphysema, liquorrhea, loss of sensitivity in the area of half the upper jaw, nose wing and frontal teeth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Upper jaw odontoma
b. Upper jaw ostemia
*c. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
d. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
e. Upper jaw cancer on the right

157. A 59-year-old patient has a bilateral fracture of mandible in the region of the 44, 34 teeth, other masticatory teeth are missing, toothless fragments are not displaced but mobile. Which orthosis should be used for the immobilization of bone fragments?
a. Rudkos apparatus
b. Petrosovs apparatus
c. Zbarzh apparatus
*d. Vankevich splint with orthodontic elastics
e. Limbergs splint

158. A 58-year-old male patient has considerable microstomia as a result of a face trauma and burn. The patient has indication for fabrication of a partial removable prosthesis. What construction of prosthesis should be used in this case?
a. Pivot-point removable prosthesis
b. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
c. Clasp dental prosthesis
d. Clasp dental prosthesis with attachments
*e. Collapsible prosthesis

159. A 50-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing. The state of the abutment teeth is satisfactory. What type of fixation will provide the best conditions for the stabilization of a removable denture?
*a. Planar
b. Transversal
c. Point
d. Linear
e. Sagittal

160. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect caused by partial teeth missing. Objectively: the 15, 14, 24, 25 teeth are missing, the central group of upper jaw teeth is in protrusion and presents with diasthemas. What orthodontic appliance should be used to prepare the oral cavity for prosthetics?
a. Schwarz guard
b. Brueckls appliance
c. Expansion plate for the upper jaw with orthodontic lock
*d. Palatine plate with vestibular bow
e. Palatine plate with oblique plane and vestibular bow

161. It is planned to organize a dental room with three universal dental sets. The total area of the room must be:
a. No less than 30 square metres
b. No less than 21 square metres
*c. No less than 28 square metres
d. No less than 42 square metres
e. No less than 18 square metres

162. A 29-year-old patient undergoes a procedure of a metal inlay fabrication by the direct method. The inlay is intended for the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth presents a Black class I carious cavity. Electroodontometry results - 6 mA. Examination of the ready inlay revealed a casting defect in the region of the external angle. The dentists further actions will be:
*a. Fabrication of a new inlay
b. Plastic fixation of the inlay
c. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with amalgam
d. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with a composite
e. Cement fixation of the inlay

163. A 53-year-old patient complains of missing of mandibular teeth. He has a history of microstomy. Objectively: the 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47 and 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are stable, immobile. What kind of denture construction is recommended for this patient?
*a. Collapsible removable partial lamellar denture
b. Dental bridge supported by the 43, 33 teeth and removable denture
c. Splint-denture
d. Clasp denture
e. Removable partial lamellar denture

164. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect 1 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Oxmans bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
c. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
e. Clasp denture

165. A 60-year-old male patient has an extensive defect of nose caused by an injury. The patient temporarily refused operative intervention, it was suggested to fabricate an external nasal prosthesis fixed by eyeglass frame. What impression material should be used?
*a. Gypseous impression of the whole face
b. Impression of the defect with elastic material
c. Gypseous impression
d. Impression of the defect with thermoplastic mass
e. Impression of the whole face with thermoplastic material

166. During the examinations and everyday orthopedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. How to sterilize dental mirrors?
a. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
b. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes
*c. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
d. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
e. in the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes

167. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
a. Intradental splint
*b. Inlay splint
c. Crown cap splint
d. Fixed crown splint
e. Equator crown splint

168. A 28-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 13 tooth is decayed by 2/3 of its height, the stump sticks out above the gum line by 2 mm. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled up to the top. What construction should be fabricated for the patient?
a. Crown
b. Equator crown
c. The crown should be restored with photopolymer
*d. Pivot tooth
e. Inlay

169. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
a. On the artificial teeth
b. On the saddle
*c. On the arch
d. On the base
e. On the clasps

170. A 40-year-old patient complains about frequent falling out of a filling. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious (Black’s class II) cavity. It is planned to restore the anatomic form of the tooth by means of a metal inlay. What is the peculiarity of the cavity preparation for the inlay in this case?
a. Cavity deepening
*b. Forming a bevel
c. Cavity floor widening
d. Forming an additional shoulder
e. Preparation for parapulpar posts

171. A 43-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, as well as significant cervixes exposure. Objectively: gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale with cyanotic tint. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth present with I-II degree mobility. The 42, 41, 31, 31 teeth are overcrowded. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have cervix exposure by 1/2 and the 43, 33 teeth have cervix exposure by 1/4. What orthopaedic construction should be used in this situation?
a. Cast bar Kurliandsky splint
b. Portion crown splint
c. -
*d. One-piece guard
e. Cap splint

172. A 45 year old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
a. Clasp denture with obturating part
b. Common dental bridge
c. Protective palatal bars
*d. Lesser saddle denture with clasps fixation
e. Common partial removable denture

173. 3 months after the immediate prosthetics a patient complained about the prosthesis balancing. Objectively: there is a gap between the prosthesis edge and vestibular surface of alveolar process. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Dentition buildup with quick-setting plastic
b. Correction of dentitions
c. Correction of prosthesis edges
d. Prosthesis relocation with quick-setting plastic
*e. Fabrication of a new prosthesis

174. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed full-cast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper
b. Visually by means of models in the articulator
*c. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials
d. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
e. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method

175. A 36-year-old patient requires a full coverage swaged metal crown for the 37 tooth. The patient presented to a clinic for the crown adjustment. During the adjustment it was revealed that the crown was to loose to fit the tooth cervix properly. How to eliminate this defect?
a. To bend in the crown edges by using beak-shaped forceps
b. To swage a new crown using the same matrix
*c. To get an impression and swage the crown anew
d. To anneal the crown
e. To bend in the crown edges by using clamp forceps

176. An 18-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 21 tooth is pulpless, of dark-grey colour. The patient has orthognathic occlusion. It is planned to crown the tooth with a plastic crown. Choose the plastic mass for its fabrication:
a. Acrel
b. Ethacryl
*c. Sinma
d. Ftorax
e. Bakril

177. A 43 year old man applied to the dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 37th tooth is decayed by 2/3, buccal and lingual walls are thin. Occlusion picture shows strong contact with antagonists. How thick should be the layer of tooth surface that must be ground off during preparation for metallic stamped crown?
a. 0,6-0,7 mm
b. 0,7-0,8 mm
c. 0,1-0,2 mm
d. 0,5-0,6 mm
*e. 0,28-0,3 mm

178. A 68 year old patient has a defect in the lower third of his nose as a result of malignant tumour removal. Objectively: dorsum of nose up to the middle third and external nostril outlines are intact. Skin at the base of nose is thinned and erosive. The patient strongly objects to any plastic operation. What method of fixation of nose ectoprosthesis is the most acceptable?
a. Transparent adhesive tape
b. By means of lace
*c. On the glasses frame
d. Anatomic retention
e. Head cap

179. A 12 year old girl complained about a crown defect in the frontal part of her upper jaw. Anamnesis data: the tooth was filled more than once but the fillings fell out. Objectively: the 12 tooth is filled. There is IV class defect according to Blacks classification. Devitalization has never been performed, percussion of the 12 tooth is painless. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Halfcrown
b. Metal-ceramic crown
*c. Circumpulpar pin inlay
d. Ceramic crown
e. Metal crown

180. A 48-year-old male patient has been wearing partial removable dentures for 3 months. According to the patient, results of physical examination and additional methods of testing, the patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis provoked by dyes of the acrylic resin of his prosthesis. Allergic effects of dyes can be eliminated in the following way:
a. Fabrication of swaged metal bases
*b. Ffabrication of a denture out of colorless plastic
c. Moulding of plastic by method of casting
d. Fabrication of bilayer bases
e. Fabrication of cast metal prosthetic bases

181. A 23 year old woman came to a dental clinic for restoration of the 11th tooths crown. Objectively: root of the 11th tooth is at a level with gingival edge, its walls are thick enough. A dentist made and adjusted a stump inlay upon which a metal-plastic crown will be fixed. What plastic will be used for veneering?
*a. Sinma-M
b. Carbodent
c. Protacryl
d. Noracryl
e. Acryloxide

182. A patient ordered soldered stainless-steel bridge prostheses. Their fabrication involves calibration of crown sleeves. Which device is used for this purpose?
a. Parkers
b. Copes
c. Bromshtrom
*d. Samson
e. Larins

183. A 35-year-old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37th tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the peculiarity of tooth preparation?
a. Widening of cavity floor
b. Forming an additional shoulder
*c. Forming a bevel
d. Forming flat floor
e. Forming additional cavity

184. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edge. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Wax construction making
b. Stump fitting
c. Stump fixing
*d. Impression taking
e. Casting

185. A 23 year old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment in a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each side. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
a. 3,5 cm
b. 4 cm
c. 2 cm
d. 3 cm
*e. 1 cm

186. A 56-year-old patient complains about missing lateral teeth on both sides of mandible. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. Make a diagnosis:
a. Betelman II denttion defect
*b. Kennedy I denttion defect
c. Kennedy II denttion defect
d. Kennedy IV denttion defect
e. Kennedy III denttion defect

187. A 48-year-old female patient complains about some discomfort induced by wearing an upper jaw clasp denture with elastic attachments. The patient notes the denture mobility during mastication and articulation. The patient asks to fabricate a new denture with consideration of the indicated defects. Clinical crowns of abutment teeth are low. What fixation should be the most efficient in this case?
a. Clasp
*b. Telescopic
c. Locking
d. Arch-bar
e. Saddle-type

188. A 75-year-old patient ordered a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. While adjusting the individual tray by Herbsts method the orthodontist revealed that the tray could be thrown off when the patient rounded his lips. What part of the tray requires correction?
a. Behind the maxillary tuber
*b. Vestibular part between the canines
c. In the region of buccal cords
d. Distal part along the A line
e. Along the whole vestibular edge

189. A 68-year-old patient had a stroke, after which she now often experiences urges to vomit causing unilateral TMJ dislocations. The dislocations could only be reduced under anesthesia. The 21-28, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36, 37, 44, 46, 47 teeth are missing. What denture construction is optimal for this patient for the treatment period?
a. Khodorovich-Burgonskaya appliance with a stopper
*b. Removable lamellar denture with a mouth opening stopper
c. Petrosovs appliance with a stopper
d. Schroeder appliance with sliding pivot
e. Yadrovas appliance

190. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaws. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic. What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
b. Fabricate occlusal rims
c. Locate and fix central occlusion
d. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity
*e. Adjust individual trays

191. A 57 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about dull pain in the area of his right temporomandibular joint that is getting worse during eating. The disease developed gradually, it began with constrained mandibular motion in the morning that sometimes grew more intensive, sometimes less. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the mouth can be opened up to 3 cm. Opening of mouth is accompanied by articular noise and clicking (step-like dislocation of mandible). Skin above the joint is intact. Muscle tone is palpatory unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subluxation of mandible
*b. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint
c. Neuromuscular syndrome
d. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
e. Occlusive articulation syndrome

192. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Objectively: the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are destroyed by caries by 2/3 of their height. The occlusion is orthognathic. X-ray picture shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no patological changes in periapical tissues. What construction should be the most efficient in this situation?
a. Artificial metal swaged crowns
b. Fabrication of plastic inlays
c. Richmonds pivot crowns
*d. Stump inlays and metal-ceramic crowns
e. Restoration of tooth crowns with composite materials

193. The patient is 75 years old. The inspection of construction of complete removable dentures revealed that only lateral artificial teeth were in contact, there was a gap between frontal teeth. In the lateral part on one side cusp-to-cusp contact was present, on the other side there was a horizontal gap; the central line was deviated. What mistake was made?
a. Interalveolar height was increased
b. Wax moulds were deformed while determining central occlusion
c. Occlusal rims were irregularly softened
d. The patient was thought to have anterior occlusion
*e. The patient was thought to have lateral occlusion

194. A 48-year-old patient complains of pain in the 32, 38 teeth which arose 3 months after installing a dental bridge upon them. Objectively: the gums around the abutment teeth are hyperemic, edematous, mobile in the vestibular-oral direction. What is the most likely cause of this complication?
*a. Functional overload of abutment teeth paradontium
b. The form of the intermediate denture part
c. Solid food consumption
d. Contact of the denture with opposing teeth
e. Improper preparation of abutment teeth

195. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II degree. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
a. Frontal
b. Sagittal
c. Transversal
*d. Circle
e. Frontal-lateral

196. A 25-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible without evident displacement of fragments. All the teeth are intact. What kind of wire splint is the most appropriate in this case?
*a. Smooth splint
b. Splint with hooks
c. Pomerantseva-Urbanskayas splint
d. Splint with guide plane
e. Smooth splint with a spreading curve

197. A 65-year-old patient complains about unsatisfactory fixation of complete removable lamellar denture of his upper jaw. The denture was fabricated 6 years ago. Objectively: balancing and poor fixation of complete removable denture is present. What is the reason of such condition?
a. Bad hygiene of removable denture
b. Wear of artificial teeth
*c. Atrophy of osseous base of the prosthetic bed tissues
d. Discoloration of basic plastic
e. Loss of certain antagonists

198. A female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the patients face is shortened, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of lower and upper jaw teeth is missing, the crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn off by 2/3 of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented. The alveolar process isnt hypertrophied. Interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological tooth wear in this patient:
a. Vertical, compensated, III grade severity
b. Combined, noncompensated, III grade severity
c. Horizontal, compensated, II grade severity
d. Vertical, noncompensated, III grade severity
*e. Horizontal, noncompensated, III grade severity

199. A 30-year-old saxophonist complains about wearing of the occlusal surface of his frontal teeth along with separation between the upper and lower teeth (apertognathia). Height of the lower third of the patient’s face remains unchanged. What method should be applied for elimination of this deformity?
a. Increase of the interalveolar height
b. Orthodontic
c. Instrumental-and-surgical
*d. Protetic
e. Shortening of teeth

200. A 50-year-old patient needs a splint for the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43 teeth present I-II class mobility and are devitalized. Which splint would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Elbrechts splint
b. Murrays splint
c. Van Thiel splint
*d. Mamlok-type splint
e. Kurliandsky splint

201. A 57-year-old patient complains of mobility of all mandibular teeth. Objectively: the 34, 35, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth are missing. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows resorption of the alveolar process within 1/3 of interdental septa height. What construction should be offered to the patient?
a. Bridge dentures in the region of masticatory teeth
b. Cap splint
c. Van-Thiel splint
*d. Clasp denture with splinting appliances
e. Partial removable lamellar denture

202. A 69-year-old patient underwent an operation for complete removal of his lower jaw. They took impressions of both jaws and fabricated a lower jaw replacement prosthesis before operation. What elements will provide fixation of this prosthesis in the oral cavity?
*a. Foshars spiral springs
b. Clasps
c. Attachments
d. Magnets
e. Wire loops

203. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Dentures with shortened borders
b. Implant-supported dentures
c. Dentures with extended borders
d. Dentures with metal bases
*e. Dentures with elastic lining

204. A 48-year-old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervixes of the 42, 41, 31, 32 are exposed by 2/3, there is pathological III degree mobility. It is indicated to extract the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be used for the direct prosthetics?
a. Clasp denture
b. Metal-ceramic bridge-like denture
c. Swaged-and-soldered bridge-like denture
*d. Removable partial lamellar denture
e. Adhesive

205. A month after cementing the metal-ceramic crown on the 23 tooth a patient complained of its decementing. Examination revealed that the tooth stump was of sufficient height, stump walls were convergent to the vertical tooth axis at an angle of approximately 30 degrees. What angle of convergence had to be formed?
a. 12-15 degrees
b. 22-25 degrees
c. 10-12 degrees
*d. Up to 8 degrees
e. 15-18 degrees

206. A 57 year old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by 2/3 in the area of the 33, and by 1/2 of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
a. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges
b. Massive grinding off of hard tissues
c. Garland modelling in the precervical area
*d. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress
e. Devitalization of supporting teeth

207. During lateral movements of mandible the frontal teeth are displaced sidewards. Deviation of incisor point from the central position is measured by an angle of 100-110°. What is characterized by such a value of incisor point deviation?
a. Lateral joint path
b. Sagittal joint path
c. Bennetts angle
*d. Lateral incisor path
e. Sagittal incisor path

208. Following the upper jaw examination (according to Schroeder) a 65-year-old patient was found to have atrophied maxillary tubers, alveolar processes covered with atrophic, thin and pale mucous membrane. What kind of functional impression technique should be applied?
a. Differentiated
*b. Decompressive
c. Dosated
d. Compressive
e. Pressure-free

209. A 52-year-old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: in the lateral parts of mandible teeth are worn down to the gums, in the frontal parts teeth are worn by 1/3. Treatment includes two stages. What prosthetic construction should be applied for bite disjoining and myotatic reflex change?
a. Plastic splint for the whole dentition
b. Crown splint for the lateral parts
c. Elastic plastic splint
*d. Periodontal splint for the lateral parts
e. Plastic splint for the frontal part

210. A 47 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11th tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
a. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth
b. Clasp denture
c. Implant
*d. Partial removable lamellar denture
e. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth

211. A 53 year old patient has to undergo resection of the left half of mandible together with its ramus. It is indicated to make an immediate Oxmans denture. What denture element keeps the remaining mandible fragment from deviation towards the defect?
a. The whole fixing part
b. Resection part
c. Artificial teeth
*d. Removable or non-removable inclined plane
e. Multiclasp system

212. A 62-year-old patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic with complaints about poor fixation of complete removable lamellar dentures that shows up during talking and wide mouth opening. The dentures were fabricated 5 days ago. In course of denture fabrication process a mistake was made during:
a. Plastic polymerization
*b. Obtaining the functional impression
c. Interalveolar dimension measurement
d. Occlusal plane orientation
e. Wax reproduction check

213. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 13 and 24 teeth remain as well as all the teeth on the lower jaw. The lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, crowns of the 13, 24 teeth are worn off by 2/3. What constructional element will provide optimal fixation of the partial removable prosthesis on the upper jaw?
*a. Telescopic crowns
b. Retaining clasps
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
d. Bars
e. Compound clasps

214. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
a. Plate-form
b. Endodontic-endoosseous
*c. Threaded
d. Subperiosteal
e. Conical

215. A 47-year-old patient with completely edentulous upper jaw underwent delayed implantation with cylindrical implants. Prosthetics is recommended in:
a. 2 weeks
b. 24 hours
*c. 5-6 months
d. 1 month
e. 3 months

216. A 28-year-old male patient presented to a clinic on the 2nd day after the face trauma and complained of bilateral mandibular pain, difficult swallowing and obstructed breathing. Objectively: there was a slight swelling in the region of the molars on both sides, the teeth were intact but the jaw fragment with the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth deviated downward and backward. Manual reposition didnt produce any positive result. Which appliance should be used for treatment?
a. Betelman appliance
*b. Posts appliance
c. One-jaw Kurliandsky appliance
d. One-jaw Katz appliance
e. Brun appliance

217. An 18-year-old patient presented to the orthopedic department with complaint of a large diastema. Objectively: bodily lateral movement of central incisors induced by the missing 12, 22 teeth. What is the optimal appliance for moving the central incisors together?
*a. Korkhaus apparatus
b. Cotton ligature
c. Begg appliance
d. Kalvelis apparatus
e. Vasilenko apparatus

218. A 25-year-old male patient got bilateral fracture of the lower jaw. A fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
*a. Posts appliance
b. Kurlyandskys appliance with levers
c. Shurs appliance
d. Webers appliance
e. One-jaw bite-guard splint

219. A 20-year-old patient is to be given applicative anaesthesia in the frontal region of the upper jaw prior to the conduction anesthesia. What concentration of lidocaine solution is required for applicative anesthesia?
a. 15%
*b. 10%
c. 2%
d. 0,5%
e. 3%

220. A 43 year old patient complains of tooth mobility and considerable dehiscence of dental cervices of the lower jaw in its frontal part. Objectively: gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale, slightly cyanotic, without haemorrhage. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have mobility of the I-II degree. There is also overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced by 1/2 of root length, of the 43, 33 - by 1/4. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
*a. Fullcast removable kappa
b. Cap splint
c. Semicircle splint
d. Halfcrown splint
e. Kurlandskys girder splint

221. A 48 year old patient complained about posttraumatic pain in the area of his chin. Examination revealed median fracture of lower jaw with I class dentition defect (according to Kennedy classification). It is indicated to make a Vankevich splint in Stepanovs modification. What will determine the height of directing planes of this splint?
a. Height of central jaw correlation
b. It will be determined arbitrary
*c. Extent of mouth opening
d. Form of edentulous alveolar crests of the lower jaw
e. Height of molar teeth of the upper jaw

222. A 24-year-old soldier was injured by a shell splinter. He was diagnosed with a mandibular fracture with a bone defect in the mental region over 2 cm long. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
b. Tigerstedts splints
*c. Fragments fixation by means of Rudkos apparatus
d. Gunning-Ports splint
e. Direct osteosynthesis

223. A 40-year-old patient is hospitalized with Le Fort II maxillary fracture. The teeth are intact. Choose the most appropriate apparatus for this patient:
a. Gunning-Ports splint
*b. Standard Zbarzh construction
c. Rudkos apparatus
d. Yadrovas apparatus
e. Yermolaev-Kulagovs apparatus

224. During the examination of a soldered dental bridge supported by the 35 and 38 teeth the following flaws were revealed: the pores in the soldered joints between the intermediate part and supporting crowns, strongly expressed masticatory tubercles, early contact with the opposing teeth, the intermediate part is tightly adjacent to the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What is the way to eliminate these defects?
a. To correct the masticatory surface and increase the height of the intermediate saddle part up to 2 mm
b. To remove the tubercles of opposing teeth
c. To correct the intermediate part
d. To correct the masticatory surface and polish the joints
*e. To remake the dental bridge

225. A patient ordered partial removable lamellar dentures for the upper and lower jaw. An orthodontist took elastic alginate impressions of both jaws. What is his next step?
a. To invite a dental mechanic for joint analysis of the impressions
b. To let the impressions dry out in the open air
*c. To send the impressions for disinfection
d. To send the impressions immediately to the laboratory
e. To put the impressions into the microten bag for 90 minutes

226. A patient is waiting for a partial removable laminar denture. Anatomic models of both jaws were made by means of elastic alginate material "Ipin" and referred for disinfection. What disinfection method should be applied?
*a. Glutaraldehyde 2,5% рH 7,0-8,7
b. Desoxone 0,1%
c. Alcohol solution 70%
d. Hydrogen peroxide solution 6%
e. Sodium hypochloride 0,5%

227. A 43-year-old female patient complains of mobility of the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. The 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit grade II mobility, the mucous membrane around them is swollen and cyanotic. What splinting construction is optimal for this patient?
*a. Composite splint reinforced with fiberglass
b. Clasp denture with multilink clasp and claw-like processes
c. Clasp denture-splint in the frontal part
d. Clasp denture with antithrowers
e. Partial removable denture with a vestibular bar

228. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
a. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp
b. Oxmans double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
c. Oxmans single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
d. Gavrilows prosthesis with pivot point
*e. Fixed Oxmans prosthesis with pivot point

229. A 39-year-old patient complains about experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the anamnesis that the indicated tooth was treated for carious. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is sharply painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to take off the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anesthesia should be applied?
a. Intraosseous anesthesia
*b. Field block anesthesia
c. Intraligamentous anesthesia
d. Infiltration anesthesia
e. Application anesthesia

230. An orthodontist was treating a patient infected with AIDS virus. Accidentally he injured skin of one of his fingers with a dental disk during tooth preparation. What actions should the orthodontist take in this case?
a. To apply a tourniquet on the shoulder
b. To treat the skin with 5% iodine solution
c. To press blood out and treat the skin with strong solution of KMnO_4
*d. To press blood out and treat the skin with 70% alcohol solution
e. To perform diathermo-coagulation

231. A patient consults a prosthodontist about a dentition defect of the 14, 15, 16 teetht. It is necessary to prepare teth for crowning. Before the preparation the handpiece must be processed with:
a. With furacilin solution
*b. With 3% solution of chloramine (two times with 15 minute interval)
c. With 3% solution of chloramine once
d. With 3% solution of hydrogen oxide
e. With solution of potassium permanganate

232. A 36-year-old female patient complains about acute pain, clicking in the right temporomandibular joint, burning pain in the region of the right external acoustic meatus. Movements of lower jaw are step-like with short-standing disabling moments and acute pain in the joint. Objectively: the face is symmetric. Occlusion is orthognathic. Palpation of lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the right. Tomogram shows that bone structure circuits of joints are smooth and slick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Dysfunction of TMJ
b. Acute posttraumatic arthritis of TMJ
c. Ankylosis of TMJ
d. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
e. Rheumatic arthritis of TMJ

233. A 40 year old patient complains about difficult mastication as a result of lower jaw deviation. Anamnesis data: mental fracture 2 months ago. Objectively: the 35; 36; 38 ... 45; 46 teeth are missing. Remaining teeth are intact. The 43; 44; 47; 48 teeth have no contact with antagonists and their oral deviation makes up 1 cm. What is the optimal construction of lower jaw denture?
*a. A denture with double dentition
b. Soldered splint on rings
c. Adhesive denture
d. Removable lamellar denture
e. Metal-ceramic dental bridge

234. A patient is 24 years old. Artificial crown of his 22 tooth broke off. The tooth was devitalized 8 years ago and its crown is totally decayed. What microprosthesis should be made for restoration of tooth crown?
*a. Stump-root inlay
b. Inlay
c. Stamped crown
d. Application
e. Filling

235. Examination of a 25-year-old male patient revealed maximal number of occlusional contacts of opposing teeth during denture joining. X-ray picture shows that the articular head of the lower jaw is near the base of the slope of articular tubercle. What type of occlusion is present?
a. Right lateral occlusion
b. Anterior occlusion
*c. Central occlusion
d. Left lateral occlusion
e. Posterior occlusion

236. A 49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to 1/3 of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Treuman
b. Mamlock
*c. Novotny
d. Kogan
e. Kopeinin

237. A 65-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about fabrication of an external prosthesis of orbit that was lost as a result of a trauma. What is the fixing element of the orbit prosthesis?
a. Magnets
*b. Spectacle frame
c. Swivel devices
d. Watch spring
e. Clamps

238. A 32-year-old patient needs to be provided with metal-ceramic crowns for the 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. During the dental visit he is given infiltration anaesthesia with Ultracain DS anaesthetic. What elements enter into its composition?
a. 2% mepivacaine with adrenaline
b. 3% mepivacaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
c. 2% articaine with epinephrine
*d. 4% articaine with adrenaline
e. 4% articaine without a vasoconstrictor agent

239. A 56-year-old patient needs a partial removable lamellar denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 25, 26, 27, 28 teeth on the upper jaw are missing. In order to provide transversal line of clasps the clasp arms should be placed upon the following teeth:
*a. 13 and 24
b. 24 and 18
c. -
d. 24, 13 and 18
e. 13 and 18

240. A 56-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain underneath the bar of her clasp prosthesis. It is known from the anamnesis that the clasp was placed in another city a week ago. Examination revealed a mechanic injury of mucous membrane of the palatine vault caused by the bar of the clasp prosthesis. What distance should exist between the palate and the bar of the clasp prosthesis in order to prevent this complication?
a. 1,5-2,0 mm
b. 5-6 mm
c. 2-3 mm
d. 0,2-0,3 mm
*e. 0,5 mm

241. For fabrication of an external prosthesis a 62-year-old male patient needs "Hippocratic facies". What impression material should be applied?
a. Dentafol
b. Stomaflex
c. Repin
*d. Gypsum
e. Stens

242. A 32-year-old female patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 14, 25 teeth. It is planned to make metal-ceramic crowns. What impression material should be used for making these crowns?
*a. Silicone
b. Wax
c. Zinc oxide eugenol
d. Alginate
e. Hardening

243. A 60-year-old patient presented to a clinic for checking her complete removable denture. During the teeth placement on the wax bases a gap between the front teeth and cuspal interference of the lateral teeth was revealed. What mistake was made?
a. During establishing the centric occlusion, the occlusal rims were overpressed
*b. The patient was found to have anterior occlusion instead of centric one
c. The patient was found to have lateral occlusion instead of centric one
d. The patient was found to have posterior occlusion instead of centric one
e. The models were improperly plastered in the occludator

244. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a free-end edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
a. Dentoalveolar clasps
*b. Attachments and bar system
c. Ney clasps
d. Telescopic crowns
e. Jackson clasps

245. A 34-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain and clicking in the final stage of mouth opening. The patient has a history of a dislocation. Amplitude of maximal mouth opening is 58 mm. Mouth opening should be limited down to the following amplitude:
a. Up to 10-15 mm
b. Up to 90-100 mm
c. Up to 25-30 mm
d. Up to 50-60 mm
*e. Up to 40-50 mm

246. A 53-year-old patient with generalized periodontitis presented to a prosthodontics clinic for fabrication of fixed splints for his both jaws intended to stabilize the dentitions along the entire dental arch. Which of the upper jaw buttresses will be functionally significant for the distribution of masticatory pressure?
a. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine
b. Frontonasal, pterygopalatine, palatine
c. Frontonasal, zygomatic, palatine
*d. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
e. Zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine

247. A 60-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication due to the mandible displacement that resulted from an untreated fracture. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38, 45, 46 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with the upper lateral teeth, and exhibit oral deviation up to 1 cm. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for the manible?
*a. Prosthesis with double dentition
b. Arch bar prosthesis
c. Vankevich splint
d. Adhesive prosthesis
e. Whole-piece bridge

248. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed by 80%, the root is stable, the canal is filled up to the top. After examination it was decided to restore the decayed tooth with a cast stump inlay. The root canal of the 23 tooth should be broadened by:
*a. 2/3 of canal length
b. 1/3 of canal length
c. By the total canal length
d. 1/4 of canal length
e. 1/2 of canal length

249. A 50-year-old patient complains of a traumatic break-off in the front teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 12, 21 teeth are broken off by 3/4, X-ray picture shows that the channels of the 11, 21 teeth are properly filled, the other teeth are intact. What actions should the dentist take?
*a. Fabricate fullcast metal stumps with a post and restorative metal-ceramic crowns
b. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a partial removable lamellar denture for the upper jaw
c. Fabricate a dentogingival plastic splint
d. Fabricate restorative swaged metal crowns for the 11 and 21 teeth
e. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 12 and 22 teeth

250. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain in the left parotid-masticatory region, disorder of mandible movements. Objectively: skin over the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is reddened, the surrounding tissues are edematic. Disfunction of the left temporomandibular joint is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ankylosis of the left TMJ
*b. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of TMJ
c. Arthrosis of the left TMJ
d. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of TMJ
e. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ

251. A patient complains about limited mouth opening. She has a history of intra-articular disorders in the left temporomandibular joint. Roentgenological examination revealed subchondral sclerosis of articular plates, regular narrowing of articular cavity, limited excursion of condylar process of the left temporomandibular joint. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint
*b. Arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
c. Ankylosis of the left temporomandibular joint
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left temporomandibular joint
e. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of the temporomandibular joint

252. A 46-year-old patient complains of difficult opening of her mouth, body temperature rise, tissue edema around both temporomandibular joints (TMJ). It is known from the anamnesis that the patient had short-term non-intense bilateral pain in the parotid-masticatory region, limited mouth opening, tension and discomfort in the region of both temporomandibular joints that had been observed for a couple of days. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Arthrosis
b. Infectional arthritis
*c. Rheumatic arthritis
d. Fibrous ankylosis
e. Deforming atrhrosis

253. A 40-year-old patient suffers from chronic generalized periodontitis. Objectively: both dentitions are intact, the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit I degree mobility. What splint would be aesthetically acceptable for this group of teeth?
a. Ring splint
*b. Glass Span and photopolymer splinting
c. Splint of soldered combined crowns
d. Guard splint
e. Cap splint

254. A 64 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: there is a sharp bony prominence in the area of the missing 15 tooth. It is planned to make a partial removable denture with two-layer base. What plastic should be used for elastic backing?
a. Protacryl
b. Bacryl
c. Ftorax
d. Acryl
*e. Plastic PM-01

255. A 40-year-old patient underwent selective grinding of teeth on account of TMJ disease provoked by functional occlusal disorder. 3 days later the patient consulted the orthopaedist about injuring buccal mucosa because of its getting in between dentitions on the right. What mistake was made during teeth grinding?
a. Buccal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
b. Upper teeth tubercles were ground off
c. Tops of the buccal tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
d. Lingual tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
*e. Tops of the support palatal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off

256. A 51 year old lecturer came to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced, III degree mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
a. In 2-3 months
b. In 16-30 days
*c. On the day of dental extraction
d. In 4-6 months
e. In 5-6 days

257. A 32 year old patient lost his 41 and 31 teeth as a result of a sporting accident. Replantation is impossible because these teeth have cracks and splits both on crown and root surfaces. Clinical and roentgenological examination proved the possibility of immediate implantation. What implant materials should be preferred?
a. Platinum
b. Sapphire
c. Carbon
d. Ceramic
*e. Titanium

258. A 28-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw. Objectively: the crown part of the 11 tooth is decayed below the gum level. The root is stable, percussion is painless. It is planned to restore the tooth with a stump inlay and cover it with a metal-ceramic crown. What additional method of diagnostics should be applied in this clinical situation?
*a. X-ray diagnostics
b. Masticatiography
c. Electroodontodiagnostics
d. Gnathodynamometry
e. Electromyography

259. A patient came to a dental clinic for dental prosthetics. Objectively: total lack of teeth on the mandible. Sharp and regular atrophy of alveolar part. Frenula attachment and fold position is high. Name the type of atrophy of edentulous mandible using Kellers classification:
a. IV type
b. V type
c. I type
d. III type
*e. II type

260. During military operations the head of the Army Medical Department gave the order to deploy a stomatological aid unit on the territory of the Army Hospital Base. A patient with missile wound of face was admitted to the unit. What kind of aid can be rendered in the stomatological unit?
a. Consultation aid
b. Qualified aid
*c. Specialized (secondary) aid
d. Stomatological aid
e. Prosthodontic aid

261. A patient with a missile wound of his face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
a. Consultancy
b. Professional care
*c. Secondary care
d. Dental health service
e. Dental orthopaedic service

262. A 26-year-old patient presented at a clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 16 tooth is destroyed by 1/3. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of cavity preparation?
a. Completing the cavity floor
b. Completing the cavity walls
c. Making additional cavities
d. Beveling
*e. Cavity widening and necrosectomy

263. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinsteins pivot point
*d. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point

264. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 5 cm
b. 12 cm
c. 18 cm
*d. 9 cm
e. 7 cm

265. A 65-year-old patient complains of a break off of three front artificial porcelain teeth of the removable denture fabricated 2 months ago. In what way are the porcelain teeth linked with the plastic denture base?
*a. By means of crampon-fixing wire elements
b. Due to physicochemical connection
c. By means of diatoric cavities
d. By means of clasps
e. By means of glue

266. Tooth replacement with complete removable dentures involves adjustment of occlusal relations by different movements of the lower jaw. Transversal movements of the lower jaw are initiated by the following muscle:
a. Digastric muscle
*b. External (lateral) pterygoid muscle
c. Temporal muscle
d. Internal (medial) pterygoid muscle
e. Mastication muscle

267. A patient complains of "clicking" in the TMJ. On auscultation, the sounds can be heard in the middle and at the beginning of mouth opening. These signs give evidence of:
a. Joint capsule distension
b. Joint subluxation
c. Increase in occlusal vertical dimension
d. TMJ dislocation
*e. Reduction in occlusal vertical dimension

268. A 37 year old patient was diagnosed with arthrosis of mandibulotemporal joint. During auscultation the doctor heard pathological rustle in the area of the joint, namely "clicking" that was caused by a load. What is the mechanism of this pathological rustle?
a. Friction of bone surfaces in the joint
b. Calcification of mandibulotemporal joint disc
c. Inflammation of cartilaginous tissue of the disc
*d. Asynchronous movement of disc and articulation head
e. Loosening of mandibulotemporal joint ligaments

269. A 65-year-old male patient complains about crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, angular fissures and cracks are also present. Palpation reveals crepitatnt rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
*b. Costens syndrome
c. Temporomandibular arthrosis
d. Temporomandibular arthritis
e. Temporomandibular dislocation

270. A 50-year-old patient complains about pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mouth opening. Dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44. While opening the mouth the lower jaw moves in a zigzag manner towards the affected joint. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical for?
*a. Musculoarticular dysfunction
b. Sclerosing arthrosis of TMJ
c. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
d. Chronic arthritis of TMJ
e. Habitual TMJ dislocation

271. A 32-year-old patient presented to a clinic for takingof an upper jaw impression. During this procedure she choked with a piece of impression material, there was risk of asphyxia. What are the first-priority actions within emergency care?
a. Closed-chest cardiac massage
b. Tracheotomy
c. Artificial ventilation of lungs
d. Plaster removal from the airways
*e. Abrupt push-like compressions of the lower thorax

272. A 52-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. There is gingival edema, parodontal pouches are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by 1/2 of root length. A dentist made a diagnosis: generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is the most efficient in this situation?
a. Plastic mouthguard
b. Mamlock splint
c. Temporary Novotny splint
*d. Elbrecht splint
e. Murrays splint

273. A 20 year old man got a blow to the chin. He remained conscious. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. He has an edema and haematoma in the area of his lower jaw on both sides. Jaw palpation causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited. There is also a rupture of mucous membrane of oral cavity in the area of the 44, 43 and 34, 35 teeth. Occlusion is deviated. What asphyxia type can be developed?
*a. Dislocation
b. Stenotic
c. Aspiration
d. Valve
e. Obturation

274. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57 year old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Neja clasp should be applied?
a. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
b. I type clasp
*c. V type clasp
d. I-II type clasp
e. II type clasp

275. A 63-year-old patient requires a full-arch denture for the upper jaw. Objectively: the 18, 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing, the gag reflex is not marked, the torus is of average size. In order to avoid possible inconvenience while using the denture, the arch should be located at the following distance from the palatine fossae:
a. 23-25 mm
b. 4-8 mm
*c. 10-12 mm
d. 2-3 mm
e. 16-22 mm

276. A patient ordered metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. Block anaesthesia was performed before preparation. In a few minutes the patient felt anxiety, tinnitus, abdominal pain, giddiness. Breathing is hurried, pulse is rapid, AP is 60/40 mm Hg. What aid should be rendered to the patient in the first place?
a. Make an injection of aminophylline
*b. Intravenous introduction of 0,5 ml of 0,1% adrenaline solution, prednisolone
c. To soak a cotton web with some liquid ammonia and give it for the patient to inhale
d. Promedol, suprastin
e. To bring the patient into horizontal position

277. A 47-year-old patient complains of pain in the lateral part of mandible to the left of the toungue edge, which is caused by tongue movements. Two days ago the patient was provided with claspps fixation a partial removable clasp denture for the 47, 42, 33 teeth. Retroalveolar region of the mucous membraneis exhibits a localized hyperemic area matching the edge of the denture. Which muscle contractions demarcate the boundary in this region?
a. Masticatory
*b. Mandibulohyoid
c. Hyoglossal
d. Geniohyoid
e. Medial wing muscle

278. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous areas is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
a. Wear of artificial teeth
*b. Alveolar process atrophy
c. Denture using during sleep
d. Improper care of denture
e. Consumption of solid food

279. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
b. Lower jaw dislocation
*c. Lower jaw subluxation
d. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
e. Meniscus tresis

280. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Kellers classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
a. Fourth
*b. First
c. Fifth
d. Third
e. Second

281. A 68-year-old patient with compensated insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus had to spend 8 hours at a hospital. Within this time he didnt eat and was nervous. The patient became aggressive, pale and sweaty, then he lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Collapse
*b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Hypertensic crisis
d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Acute respiratory failure

282. A 22-year-old patient is afraid of pain from conduction anaesthesia. A dentist decided that this anaesthesia should be preceded by applicational anaesthesia of mucous membrane on the spot of injection. What drug should be used for this purpose?
a. 3% sinaflan ointment
b. 3% doxycyclin ointment
c. 1% synthomycin ointment
d. 5% oxacillin ointment
*e. 5% lidocaine ointment

283. A 26-year-old patient needs an inlay for a class V cavity of the 35 tooth. During the cavity preparation a prosthodontist has accidentally opened the pulp. What might be the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Forming convergent walls
b. Forming divergent walls
*c. Forming a flat floor
d. Forming a bevel
e. Absence of an additional cavity

284. A 29 year old patient complains that the crown of his 26 tooth broke off. Objectively: tooth decay index is 0,9, root tissues are hard, roentgenography revealed that the canal was filled to the top, no chronic inflammations of periodontium were revealed. What construction should be used for prosthetics of the 26 tooth?
*a. Pin stump inlay and a crown
b. Pin tooth with an inlay
c. Simplified pin tooth
d. Pin tooth with protective bar
e. Pin tooth with a ring

285. An orthopedist plans to fabricate a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for the 23 tooth. In order to correct its abnormal position in the dental arch the orthopedist is going to use a cast post and core. What is the maximum permissible value (in degrees) of the core deviation from the tooth axis?
a. 20-25
*b. 15
c. 6-8
d. 10
e. 4

286. A 38 year old patient was admitted to the orthopaedic department after a therapeutic treatment on account of periodontitis. His anamnesis contains data about frequent recurrences of this disease, acute attacks are accompanied by periodontal abscesses. Objectively: the 42, 41,31, 32 teeth manifest mobility of I-II degree, the 43 and 33 are stable, tooth cervices are dehisced by ¼, hyperesthesia of hard tooth tissues is not observed. What rational construction of permanent splint should be recommended?
*a. Fullcast circle removable splint
b. Mamlocks splint
c. Girder Kurliandkys splint
d. Crown-shell splint
e. Halfcrown splint

287. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth. What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Roach clasp
b. Telescopic fixation
c. Bent wire clasp
*d. Acker clasp
e. Jackson clasp

288. A 55-year-old woman complains about liquid pouring through her nose during eating of fluid food. Objectively: there is a perforating defect of alveolar process 3x2,8 cm deep in the lateral part of the upper jaw at level with the extracted 16 tooth. The patient refused operative intervention. What construction should be offered?
a. Fixed dental bridge
b. Celluloid mouth protector
c. Clasp dental prosthesis with obturating element made of elastic plastic
d. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
*e. Minor saddle prosthesis with clasp fixation

289. A 25-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the 23 tooth is pulpless. The filling restores vestibular-approximal surface of the tooth crown by ⅓, it is stable, closely fits within cavity walls, its colour doesn’t match the colour of the tooth. The tooth itself has changed its colour, its percussion is painless. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for this patient?
a. Metal swaged crown
b. Elastic crown
*c. Metal-ceramic crown
d. Portion crown
e. Inlay

290. A 45-year-old female patient complains of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of her partial removable laminar denture for the lower jaw, which she has used for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar process in edentulous areas is considerably atrophied, the denture keeps balance. What is the most likely cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture in this case?
*a. Atrophy of the alveolar process
b. Improper keeping of the denture
c. Eating solid food
d. Using the denture during sleep
e. Wear of artificial teeth

291. A 24-year-old female patient complains about hard tissues defect of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is destroyed by ⅓ along the cutting edge, it is changed in color. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled to the top. It was decided to fabricate a plastic crown. Where should the crown edge be situated against the marginal gingiva?
*a. At a level with gingiva
b. 1,0 mm away of gingiva
c. 1,0 mm below the gingiva
d. 0,5 mm below the gingiva
e. 0,5 mm away of gingiva

292. A 52 year old patient complains of gum inflammation, tooth mobility. Objectively: dentitions are intact, all teeth have the 1-2 degree of mobility. What type of teeth stabilization should be applied in this case?
*a. Arch-directed stabilization
b. Parasagittal
c. Frontosagittal
d. Sagittal
e. Frontal

293. A 42-year-old female patient complains of tooth mobility, difficult mastication. Objectively: face configuration is unchanged. The 35, 36, 38, 44, 46, 48 teeth are missing. The 31, 32, 41, 42 teeth exhibit 1-2 grade mobility. What is the most efficient denture construction in this case?
a. Whole-piece splint with Roach clasps and a multijoint clasp
b. Removable plastic splint
c. Interdental splint
*d. Whole-piece splint with vestibular clowlike hooks
e. Mamlok splint

294. A 65-year-old patient needs prosthetic services. Objectively: the 43, 33 teeth are decayed by &frac32. EPT result is 6 mA. Other teeth in the lower jaw are missing. What crowns should be fabricated for fixing the removable denture?
a. Equator crowns
b. Plastic crowns
c. Portion crowns
*d. Telescopic crowns
e. Full cast crowns

295. A 58-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 22 tooth is stable, intact. The atrophy of the alveolar crest is present, the palate is flat. It is planned to fabricate a removable denture. What tactics should be chosen in respect of the 22 tooth?
a. It is required to fabricate a stump crown
*b. It is required to fabricate a telescopic crown
c. It should be depulped
d. There is no need of any intervention
e. It should be extracted

296. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
*a. Method of transfer molding
b. Inverse method of compression molding
c. In water under pressure
d. Combined method of compression molding
e. Direct method of compression molding

297. A 29-year-old patient complains of decay of the 21 tooth, an aesthetic defect. Objectively: on the medial surface of the 21 tooth there is a carious cavity, the cutting edge is partly decayed. Specify the class of this cavity according to Blacks classification:
a. Class III
b. Class V
c. Class I
d. Class II
*e. Class IV

298. A 20-year-old patient seeks dental prosthetics. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 16 tooth there is a cavity, two walls of the tooth crown are intact. Method of orthopedic treatment is determined by the degree of destruction of the occlusal surface of teeth (IROPZ-index). Who suggested its definition?
a. Kurlyandsky
b. Gavrilov
c. Kopeikin
d. Shcherbakov
*e. Milikevich

299. A 26-year-old patient needs prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 16 tooth is decayed by 1/3. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of making a cavity for the inlay?
*a. Removal of affected tissues
b. Making a bevel
c. Making the cavity walls
d. Making the cavity floor
e. Making additional cavities

300. A 19-year-old patient needs a plastic crown for the 22 tooth. The orthopedist has already taken working and auxiliary impressions. What technological process should be next?
a. Processing, polishing of the crown
*b. Moulding of a plaster model
c. Investment of plastered model into a cuvette
d. Making a wax crown model
e. Making a plastic crown model

301. A 47-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dental cervix exposure on both jaws. Objectively: the dentitions are intact, the dental cervixes are exposed. Untimely teeth contacts are present. It is planned to perform selective grinding. What controlling method should be chosen?
a. Masticatiography
b. Roentgenography
c. Gnathodynamometry
*d. Occlusiography
e. Chewing test

302. A 70-year-old male patient complains about total teeth missing on both jaws. It is planned to fabricate a complete removable lower jaw prosthesis. Objectively: alveolar process of the lower jaw is atrophied only in the frontal aspect. Identify the type of lower jaw atrophy according to Kellers classification:
a. ІІ
b. ІІІ
c. -
*d. ІV
e. І

303. A 62-year-old patient has a median mandibular fracture complicated by pseudoarthrosis. Objectively: the dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. There is minor mobility of fragments without displacement. What is the most appropriate type of denture for this patient?
a. Lamellar denture without a pivot point
b. Lamellar denture with Oksmans pivot point
c. Lamellar denture with Weinsteins pivot point
*d. Dental bridge without a pivot point
e. Lamellar denture with Gavrilows pivot point

304. A 18-year-old female patient ordered a metal-ceramic crown for the 24 tooth. It is necessary to choose an optimal impression material for combined impression of the upper jaw. What material should be used for a preliminary impression?
a. Dentafol
b. Wax
c. Protacryl
*d. Stens
e. Orthocar

305. A 67-year-old patient consulted an orthodontist about missing of the 34, 35, 36, 37, 45, 46 teeth. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows the alveolar bone resorption in the range of 1/3 of the interdental septa height. What construction should be offered the patient?
*a. Clasp prosthesis with splinting elements
b. Removable partial lamellar denture
c. Van Thiel splint
d. Cap splint
e. Bridges on the posterior teeth

306. A 67-year-old patient needs a complete removable denture for his lower jaw. The adjustment of custom tray is done by method of Herbst. It is required to specify the boundary of tray for the sublingual region, 1 cm away from the midline. What Herbst test should be applied for this purpose?
*a. Alternate touching the cheeks with the tongue
b. Active movements of mimic muscled
c. Slow mouth opening
d. Swallowing
e. Touching the red border of the upper lip with the toungue

307. A 40-year-old patient has an open occlusion resulting from the bilateral fracture of his upper jaw and following malunion of fragments. The occlusal vertical dimension is maintained only by molar teeth. There is a gap of about 1-1,5 mm between the rest of teeth. The dentitions are without gaps. What kind of treatment would be most appropriate in this situation?
a. Combined apparatus and surgical treatment
b. Orthodontic treatment
*c. The molar teeth should be ground off and covered with crowns
d. Open reposition
e. Prosthetics with combined crowns

308. A 54-year-old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by ⅓ of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
*a. Fullcast
b. Metal stamped
c. Metal-ceramic
d. Plastic
e. Combined Belkins

309. An 80-year-old patient presented to a clinic for the adjustment of the impression tray for the upper jaw. Objectively: alveolar process exhibits marked homogenous atrophy, maxillary tubers are absent, torus is weakly expressed. Buccal muscles and frenulum of the upper lip are attached almost at the top of the alveolar process, the palatal slope is not steep. How to adjust the impression tray in order to make a close-fitting valve?
a. To extend the borders in the frontal region
b. To extend the external borders
*c. To extend the borders along the A line
d. To extend the borders in the region of maxillary tubers
e. To overlay buccal muscles and frenulum with the impression tray

310. A 32-year-old male complains of constant mandibular movements simulating chewing that take place when he is excited. Besides that, the patient complains of teeth grinding. Objectively: the lateral surfaces of teeth have signs of abrasion, the tubercles are absent. What is the most rational method of treatment?
a. Medicamental and machine treatment with further consultation with a dental surgeon
b. Restoration with opposite-directed dentures
*c. Night guard, myogymnastics, self-massage
d. Consultation with a dental surgeon
e. Teeth alignment (selective tubercle removal)

311. A 38-year-old female patient complains about pain in projection of the external acoustic meatus, clicking during mouth opening, ear stuffiness. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth is opened in staright path. There is Kennedy I type dentition defect, the 18, 17, 16, 26, 27, 28 teeth are missing. What anatomical formation carries the maximum load?
a. Articular head
b. Glenoid fossa floor of temporal bone
c. Joint capsule
*d. Articular disk (meniscus)
e. Distal clivus of medial articular tubercle

312. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic porcelain-fused-to-metal denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
a. Orthocor
b. Stomalgin
*c. Sielast
d. Stens
e. Repin

313. A 40-year-old patient complains of experiencing eating difficulties for 3 days due to the injury of the alveolar process mucosa of maxilla. Objectively: at a level of the mucogingival fold of the 14, 15 teeth on the vestibular side there is a decubital ulcer sized 1x3 mm with smooth pink edges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Candidiasis
b. Tuberculous ulcer
c. Syphilitic ulcer
*d. Traumatic stomatitis
e. Allergic stomatitis

314. A 45-year-old patient presented to aclinic for prosthetics. Objectively: Kennedy III type, I subtype dentition defect is present, the 46, 45, 44, 34, 35, teeth are missing. The bite is fixed. Che Crowns of the 47, 43, 33, 37 teeth are high, of a well-defined anatomical shape, intact. It is planned to fabricate a clasp denture. What system of the clasp denture fixation is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Roach clasp
b. Attachments
*c. Rumpels bar system
d. Continuous clasp
e. Telescopic system

315. A 50-year-old patient complains of missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact, stable, with anatomically shaped crowns, rather high, relatively parallel to each other. Boundary line has a typical direction along the 35, 44 abutment teeth. What fixation element should be used in a clasp prosthesis supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Telescopic fixation
b. Wrought wire clasp
c. Roach clasp
d. Jackson clasp
*e. Akers clasp

316. A 23-year-old serviceman needs orthopedic treatment in a specialized hospital. The patient has been diagnosed with false joint in the anterior lower jaw. The teeth are intact, stable, 3 on each side. Orthopedic treatment can be carried out using a bridge prosthesis, if the jaw defect is no bigger than:
a. 3 cm
b. 2 cm
c. 2,5 cm
*d. 1 cm
e. 3,5 cm

317. A 38 year old patient got a blow that resulted in upper jaw fracture. Objectively: flattening and impression of face, mobility and dangling of broken jaw with cartilage of nose and eyeballs, nasal haemorrhage, tissue edema, "glasses" symptom; palpation reveals crepitation, subcutaneous emphysema, liquorrhea, loss of sensitivity in the area of half the upper jaw, nose wing and frontal teeth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
b. Upper jaw odontoma
c. Upper jaw cancer on the right
d. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw
e. Upper jaw ostemia

318. A 59-year-old patient has a bilateral fracture of mandible in the region of the 44, 34 teeth, other masticatory teeth are missing, toothless fragments are not displaced but mobile. Which orthosis should be used for the immobilization of bone fragments?
a. Zbarzh apparatus
*b. Vankevich splint with orthodontic elastics
c. Limbergs splint
d. Rudkos apparatus
e. Petrosovs apparatus

319. A 50-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing. The state of the abutment teeth is satisfactory. What type of fixation will provide the best conditions for the stabilization of a removable denture?
a. Sagittal
b. Linear
c. Point
*d. Planar
e. Transversal

320. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect caused by partial teeth missing. Objectively: the 15, 14, 24, 25 teeth are missing, the central group of upper jaw teeth is in protrusion and presents with diasthemas. What orthodontic appliance should be used to prepare the oral cavity for prosthetics?
a. Expansion plate for the upper jaw with orthodontic lock
*b. Palatine plate with vestibular bow
c. Palatine plate with oblique plane and vestibular bow
d. Schwarz guard
e. Brueckls appliance

321. A 35-year-old patient has teeth mobility of І degree, the teeth have apparent dental cusps. The dentist recommends to do occlusive teeth grinding. What method is the most objective for determining the grinding topography?
a. Roentgenography
b. Masticatiography
*c. Occlusiography
d. Gnathodynamometry
e. Rubinovs masticatory test

322. It is planned to organize a dental room with three universal dental sets. The total area of the room must be:
a. No less than 42 square metres
b. No less than 18 square metres
c. No less than 21 square metres
d. No less than 30 square metres
*e. No less than 28 square metres

323. A 29-year-old patient undergoes a procedure of a metal inlay fabrication by the direct method. The inlay is intended for the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth presents a Black class I carious cavity. Electroodontometry results - 6 mA. Examination of the ready inlay revealed a casting defect in the region of the external angle. The dentists further actions will be:
a. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with a composite
b. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with amalgam
c. Cement fixation of the inlay
d. Plastic fixation of the inlay
*e. Fabrication of a new inlay

324. A 53-year-old patient complains of missing of mandibular teeth. He has a history of microstomy. Objectively: the 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47 and 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are stable, immobile. What kind of denture construction is recommended for this patient?
a. Splint-denture
*b. Collapsible removable partial lamellar denture
c. Dental bridge supported by the 43, 33 teeth and removable denture
d. Removable partial lamellar denture
e. Clasp denture

325. A 50-year-old patient has median lower jaw fracture with formation of a false joint. The 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect up to 1 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
*a. Oxmans bridge-like prosthesis with pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
c. Bridge-like prosthesis without a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
e. Clasp denture

326. A 60-year-old male patient has an extensive defect of nose caused by an injury. The patient temporarily refused operative intervention, it was suggested to fabricate an external nasal prosthesis fixed by eyeglass frame. What impression material should be used?
a. Impression of the defect with thermoplastic mass
b. Gypseous impression
c. Impression of the whole face with thermoplastic material
d. Impression of the defect with elastic material
*e. Gypseous impression of the whole face

327. During the examinations and everyday orthopaedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. What is the way of its sterilization?
a. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
b. In the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes
c. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes
d. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
*e. In the triple solution for 30 minutes

328. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
a. Crown cap splint
b. Fixed crown splint
*c. Inlay splint
d. Equator crown splint
e. Intradental splint

329. A 28-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 13 tooth is decayed by &frac32 of its height, the stump sticks out above the gum line by 2 mm. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled up to the top. What construction should be fabricated for the patient?
a. Crown
b. Equator crown
c. The crown should be restored with photopolymer
*d. Pivot tooth
e. Inlay

330. A 65-year-old patient complains about partially missing teeth on his upper jaw, difficult mastication, rhinolalia. Objectively: the 18, 16, 15, 11, 23, 28, 35, 38, 48, 47 teeth are missing; there is postoperative midline defect of hard palate. It was decided to make a clasp dental prosthesis with obturating part. The obturating part should be placed on the following element of the clasp dental prosthesis:
*a. On the arch
b. On the artificial teeth
c. On the clasps
d. On the base
e. On the saddle

331. A 59-year-old patient presented to a clinic for prosthetics. Three months ago he was treated for the fracture of the body of mandible on the left. The 18, 27, 28, 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48 teeth are missing. The patient has left-sided cross-bite with lateral occlusal contact. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Orthopedic treatment
b. Selective teeth grinding followed by fixed prosthetics
*c. Removable denture with double dentition
d. Implant-supported fixed denture
e. Removable denture with Kemeny clasps

332. A 32-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic with a diagnosis of maxillary fracture.The fracture can be treated by means of standard maxillo-mandibular Zbarzh set. Which construction provides the intra-oral fixation?
a. Plastic biteplate
b. Aluminium arch bar
*c. Standard double arch
d. Webers splint
e. Crown-supported soldered splint

333. A 43-year-old patient complains about teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, as well as significant cervixes exposure. Objectively: gums in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale with cyanotic tint. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth present with I-II degree mobility. The 42, 41, 31, 31 teeth are overcrowded. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have cervix exposure by ½ and the 43, 33 teeth have cervix exposure by ¼. What orthopaedic construction should be used in this situation?
*a. One-piece guard
b. Cap splint
c. -
d. Portion crown splint
e. Cast bar Kurliandsky splint

334. A 45-year-old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
a. Common partial removable denture
b. Clasp denture with obturating part
*c. Minor saddle denture with clasp fixation
d. Common dental bridge
e. Protective palatal bars

335. A 25-year-old patient presents with fluorosis of vestibular surfaces of the upper incisors. Which of the following constructions will provide the maximum aesthetic result?
*a. Veneers
b. Ceramic crown
c. Metal-plastic crown
d. Combined Kurylenko crown
e. Plastic crown

336. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed full-cast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
*a. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials
b. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper
c. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
d. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
e. Visually by means of models in the articulator

337. A 36-year-old patient requires a full coverage swaged metal crown for the 37 tooth. The patient presented to a clinic for the crown adjustment. During the adjustment it was revealed that the crown was to loose to fit the tooth cervix properly. How to eliminate this defect?
a. To anneal the crown
b. To bend in the crown edges by using clamp forceps
c. To swage a new crown using the same matrix
d. To bend in the crown edges by using beak-shaped forceps
*e. To get an impression and swage the crown anew

338. A 43 year old man applied to the dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 37th tooth is decayed by &frac32, buccal and lingual walls are thin. Occlusion picture shows strong contact with antagonists. How thick should be the layer of tooth surface that must be ground off during preparation for metallic stamped crown?
a. 0,5-0,6 mm
b. 0,1-0,2 mm
*c. 0,28-0,3 mm
d. 0,6-0,7 mm
e. 0,7-0,8 mm

339. A 22-year-old medical student complains of the changed colour of his central upper incisor on the right. Two years ago the tooth was gray. Objectively: the 2 tooth is filled, changed in colour, stable, percussion is painless. The patient has closed bite. What is the absolute contraindication to making porcelain crowns for this patient?
*a. Closed bite
b. Enamel hypoplasia with a change of tooth shape and colour
c. Defects of pulpless teeth that can not be restored by inlays
d. Abnormal tooth colour
e. Defects of the anterior teeth that cannot be restored by fillings

340. A 48-year-old male patient has been wearing partial removable dentures for 3 months. According to the patient, results of physical examination and additional methods of testing, the patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis provoked by dyes of the acrylic resin of his prosthesis. Allergic effects of dyes can be eliminated in the following way:
a. Moulding of plastic by method of casting
b. Fabrication of bilayer bases
*c. Ffabrication of a denture out of colorless plastic
d. Fabrication of cast metal prosthetic bases
e. Fabrication of swaged metal bases

341. A 43-year-old patient was found to have no crown of the 13 tooth. The root protrudes above the gum by 0,5-1 mm. The apical part is filled. History: coronal part of the tooth broke off three weeks ago. Prior to this the tooth had been treated for chronic periodontitis. Percussion is painless. The root edges are surrounded with hard moist mucous membrane of pale pink colour. Specify the dentists tactics:
a. Fabricate a pivot Richmond crown
*b. Fabricate a crown-root inlay and porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
c. Fabricate a simple pivot crown
d. Extract the tooth root
e. Restore the tooth by means of an anchor and photopolymer material

342. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
*a. Gelin
b. Stomalgin
c. Dentafol
d. Orthocor
e. Stomatoplast

343. A 23 year old woman came to a dental clinic for restoration of the 11th tooths crown. Objectively: root of the 11th tooth is at a level with gingival edge, its walls are thick enough. A dentist made and adjusted a stump inlay upon which a metal-plastic crown will be fixed. What plastic will be used for veneering?
a. Carbodent
b. Acryloxide
*c. Sinma-M
d. Noracryl
e. Protacryl

344. A 35-year-old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37th tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the peculiarity of tooth preparation?
*a. Forming a bevel
b. Widening of cavity floor
c. Forming additional cavity
d. Forming flat floor
e. Forming an additional shoulder

345. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay for the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edge. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Casting
b. Wax construction making
*c. Impression taking
d. Stump fitting
e. Stump fixing

346. A 23-year-old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment at a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each side. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
*a. 1 cm
b. 3 cm
c. 4 cm
d. 3,5 cm
e. 2 cm

347. A 56-year-old patient complains about missing lateral teeth on both sides of mandible. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. Make a diagnosis:
a. Kennedy III denttion defect
b. Betelman II denttion defect
c. Kennedy IV denttion defect
d. Kennedy II denttion defect
*e. Kennedy I denttion defect

348. A 45-year-old patient complains of missing teeth in the lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the 46, 45, 38, 48 teeth are missing. The 47 tooth is mobile (1 grade mobility), the crown of the 44 tooth is decayed by ½. What orthopedic construction should be recommended for restoration of masticatory efficiency and prevention of periodontal overload of the 47, 44 teeth?
a. Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge supported by the 47, 46 teeth
b. Soldered bridge supported by the 48, 44 teeth
*c. Bugel denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44, 34 teeth
d. Bridge supported by the 47 tooth
e. Small saddle denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44 teeth

349. A 57-year patient complains of tooth mobility, impossibility to eat. Objectively: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 47 teeth exhibit II grade mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable Bynin splint
b. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
c. Removable partial denture
d. Kurlyandsky splint bar
*e. Removable cast splint

350. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joints. The pain occurs when she uses complete removable dentures fabricated a month ago. Objectively: the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can be closed with difficulty, smiling causes exposure of the denture base, the articulation is impaired. A mistake must have been made at the following stage of denture fabrication:
*a. Determination and fixation of the central occlusion
b. Taking functional impressions
c. Fitting the dentures and their correction
d. Testing the denture construction
e. Taking anatomic impressions

351. A 48-year-old female patient complains about some discomfort induced by wearing an upper jaw clasp denture with elastic attachments. The patient notes the denture mobility during mastication and articulation. The patient asks to fabricate a new denture with consideration of the indicated defects. Clinical crowns of abutment teeth are low. What fixation should be the most efficient in this case?
a. Locking
b. Arch-bar
*c. Telescopic
d. Saddle-type
e. Clasp

352. A 65-year-old patient needs complete removable dentures for both jaws. At the stage of "testing the denture construction" the doctor checks the pronunciation of sounds "S" and "Z". Which method of normalization of speech functions should be applied in this case?
a. Spectrographic
b. Acoustic
c. Graphic
d. Myogymnastics
*e. Phonetic tests

353. A 75-year-old patient ordered a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. While adjusting the individual tray by Herbsts method the orthodontist revealed that the tray could be thrown off when the patient rounded his lips. What part of the tray requires correction?
a. Distal part along the A line
b. Along the whole vestibular edge
c. Behind the maxillary tuber
*d. Vestibular part between the canines
e. In the region of buccal cords

354. A 68-year-old patient had a stroke, after which she now often experiences urges to vomit causing unilateral TMJ dislocations. The dislocations could only be reduced under anesthesia. The 21-28, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36, 37, 44, 46, 47 teeth are missing. What denture construction is optimal for this patient for the treatment period?
a. Schroeder appliance with sliding pivot
b. Yadrovas appliance
c. Khodorovich-Burgonskaya appliance with a stopper
*d. Removable lamellar denture with a mouth opening stopper
e. Petrosovs appliance with a stopper

355. A 32-year-old female patient needs dental prosthetics. After the objective examination it was decided to use ceramic-metal crown. What impression material should be used for taking impressions for this construction?
a. Plaster
b. Stens
c. Orthocor
*d. Stomaflex
e. Stomalgin

356. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaws. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic. What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
*a. Adjust individual trays
b. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity
c. Fabricate occlusal rims
d. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
e. Locate and fix central occlusion

357. A 52-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic complaining of missing upper jaw teeth and difficult mastication. The patient has an indication for a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw with retaining clamps on the 14, 23 teeth. What kind of denture stabilization will enable such positioning of the clasps?
*a. Transversal
b. Diagonal
c. Diagonally-sagittal
d. Sagitally-transversal
e. Sagittal

358. A 57 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about dull pain in the area of his right temporomandibular joint that is getting worse during eating. The disease developed gradually, it began with constrained mandibular motion in the morning that sometimes grew more intensive, sometimes less. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the mouth can be opened up to 3 cm. Opening of mouth is accompanied by articular noise and clicking (step-like dislocation of mandible). Skin above the joint is intact. Muscle tone is palpatory unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Occlusive articulation syndrome
b. Subluxation of mandible
c. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
d. Neuromuscular syndrome
*e. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint

359. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Objectively: the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are destroyed by caries by &frac32 of their height. The occlusion is orthognathic. X-ray picture shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no patological changes in periapical tissues. What construction should be the most efficient in this situation?
a. Fabrication of plastic inlays
b. Richmonds pivot crowns
c. Artificial metal swaged crowns
d. Restoration of tooth crowns with composite materials
*e. Stump inlays and metal-ceramic crowns

360. A 38-year-old patient with chronic generalized periodontitis has been referred to orthopedic treatment. Objectively: dentitions are without gaps, the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless and exhibit I grade mobility. The other teeth are stable. What is the most aesthetic splint for the anterior teeth?
a. Cap splint
b. Brace
c. Ring adhesion splint
d. Soldered combined crowns
*e. Mamlok splint

361. The patient is 75 years old. The inspection of construction of complete removable dentures revealed that only lateral artificial teeth were in contact, there was a gap between frontal teeth. In the lateral part on one side cusp-to-cusp contact was present, on the other side there was a horizontal gap; the central line was deviated. What mistake was made?
a. Occlusal rims were irregularly softened
b. Interalveolar height was increased
c. Wax moulds were deformed while determining central occlusion
*d. The patient was thought to have lateral occlusion
e. The patient was thought to have anterior occlusion

362. A 48-year-old patient complains of pain in the 32, 38 teeth which arose 3 months after installing a dental bridge upon them. Objectively: the gums around the abutment teeth are hyperemic, edematous, mobile in the vestibular-oral direction. What is the most likely cause of this complication?
a. Solid food consumption
*b. Functional overload of abutment teeth paradontium
c. The form of the intermediate denture part
d. Improper preparation of abutment teeth
e. Contact of the denture with opposing teeth

363. A 43-year-old patient complains about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II grade. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
*a. Circle
b. Frontal-lateral
c. Transversal
d. Sagittal
e. Frontal

364. A patient needs a clasp denture for the lower jaw. Objectively: dental formula is 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 44. The 44 totoh is inclined toward the cheek. What type of Neys clasp should be used?
a. First
b. Third
c. Fifth
*d. Fourth
e. Second

365. A female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the patients face is shortened, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of lower and upper jaw teeth is missing, the crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn off by &frac32 of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented. The alveolar process isnt hypertrophied. Interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological tooth wear in this patient:
*a. Horizontal, noncompensated, III grade severity
b. Vertical, noncompensated, III grade severity
c. Combined, noncompensated, III grade severity
d. Vertical, compensated, III grade severity
e. Horizontal, compensated, II grade severity

366. A 30-year-old saxophonist complains about wearing of the occlusal surface of his frontal teeth along with separation between the upper and lower teeth (apertognathia). Height of the lower third of the patient’s face remains unchanged. What method should be applied for elimination of this deformity?
a. Shortening of teeth
b. Increase of the interalveolar height
*c. Protetic
d. Orthodontic
e. Instrumental-and-surgical

367. A 57-year-old patient complains of mobility of all mandibular teeth. Objectively: the 34, 35, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth are missing. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows resorption of the alveolar process within one third of interdental septa height. What construction should be offered to the patient?
a. Partial removable lamellar denture
b. Bridge dentures in the region of masticatory teeth
*c. Clasp denture with splinting appliances
d. Cap splint
e. Van-Thiel splint

368. A 69-year-old patient underwent an operation for complete removal of his lower jaw. They took impressions of both jaws and fabricated a lower jaw replacement prosthesis before operation. What elements will provide fixation of this prosthesis in the oral cavity?
a. Clasps
b. Wire loops
*c. Foshars spiral springs
d. Magnets
e. Attachments

369. A 47-year-old patient complains about discolouration of the 11, 12 teeth. Objectively: the 12, 12 are changed in colour, canals are filled to the top. It was decided to make metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of approximal surfaces of abutment teeth?
*a. 5-8 degrees
b. 10-15 degrees
c. 30-35 degrees
d. 20-25 degrees
e. 15-20 degrees

370. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
*a. Dentures with elastic lining
b. Dentures with metal bases
c. Implant-supported dentures
d. Dentures with shortened borders
e. Dentures with extended borders

371. A 48-year-old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervixes of the 42, 41, 31, 32 are exposed by &frac32, there is pathological III degree mobility. It is indicated to extract the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be used for the direct prosthetics?
a. Metal-ceramic bridge-like denture
b. Swaged-and-soldered bridge-like denture
c. Clasp denture
d. Adhesive
*e. Removable partial lamellar denture

372. A 57-year-old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by &frac32 in the area of the 33, and by ½ of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
a. Massive grinding off of hard tissues
b. Garland modelling in the precervical region
c. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges
d. Devitalization of supporting teeth
*e. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress

373. During lateral movements of mandible the frontal teeth are displaced sidewards. Deviation of incisor point from the central position is measured by an angle of 100-110o. What is characterized by such a value of incisor point deviation?
a. Sagittal joint path
b. Bennetts angle
c. Lateral joint path
d. Sagittal incisor path
*e. Lateral incisor path

374. Following the upper jaw examination (according to Schroeder) a 65-year-old patient was found to have atrophied maxillary tubers, alveolar processes covered with atrophic, thin and pale mucous membrane. What kind of functional impression technique should be applied?
a. Compressive
b. Pressure-free
c. Differentiated
*d. Decompressive
e. Dosated

375. A 52-year-old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: in the lateral parts of mandible teeth are worn down to the gums, in the frontal parts teeth are worn by ⅓. Treatment includes two stages. What prosthetic construction should be applied for bite disjoining and myotatic reflex change?
a. Plastic splint for the frontal part
b. Plastic splint for the whole dentition
*c. Periodontal splint for the lateral parts
d. Crown splint for the lateral parts
e. Elastic plastic splint

376. A 47-year-old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11 tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
a. Implant
*b. Partial removable lamellar denture
c. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth
d. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth
e. Clasp denture

377. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 13 and 24 teeth remain as well as all the teeth on the lower jaw. The lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, crowns of the 13, 24 teeth are worn off by &frac32. What constructional element will provide optimal fixation of the partial removable prosthesis on the upper jaw?
a. Dentoalveolar clasps
*b. Telescopic crowns
c. Retaining clasps
d. Compound clasps
e. Bars

378. A 70-year-old patient is awaiting complete removable dentures for both upper and lower jaws. Teeth placement will be made by Vasilyevs method. What teeth in the upper denture must not touch glass?
*a. Lateral incisors and second molars
b. First and second premolars
c. Second premolars and first molars
d. Canines and first molars
e. Central incisors and first molars

379. A 50-year-old patient has a defect of the lower dental arch. It is planned to make an implant-supported bridge for its restoration. X-ray picture shows that the height of the bone mass from projection of mandibular canal up to the top of alveolar crest is 2 cm. What type of implant should be applied?
a. Endodontic-endoosseous
b. Subperiosteal
c. Conical
*d. Threaded
e. Plate-form

380. A 47-year-old patient with completely edentulous upper jaw underwent delayed implantation with cylindrical implants. Prosthetics is recommended in:
a. 24 hours
b. 1 month
c. 3 months
*d. 5-6 months
e. 2 weeks

381. An 18-year-old patient presented to the orthopedic department with complaint of a large diastema. Objectively: bodily lateral movement of central incisors induced by the missing 12, 22 teeth. What is the optimal appliance for moving the central incisors together?
a. Cotton ligature
b. Vasilenko apparatus
*c. Korkhaus apparatus
d. Kalvelis apparatus
e. Begg appliance

382. A 25-year-old male patient has bilateral fracture of the lower jaw. A fragment in the region of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth is displaced downward and backward. What appliance should be used for the fragment reposition?
a. Webers appliance
b. Shurs appliance
c. One-jaw bite-guard splint
d. Kurlyandskys appliance with levers
*e. Posts appliance

383. A 36 year old patient applied to a dentist 1,5 month after a mandibular trauma with complaints about difficult food mastication, esthetic face defect. Objectively: the face is proportional, asymmetric as a result of oral displacement of a lateral fragment of the left lower jaw. When the jaws are closed the 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are not in contact with their antagonists. The patient strongly objects to surgical operation. What orthopaedic treatment should be administered?
*a. A denture with double dentition
b. Interjaw traction
c. Levelling of occlusal surface
d. Crowns with occlusal applications
e. Mechanotherapy

384. A 20-year-old patient is to be given applicative anaesthesia in the frontal region of the upper jaw prior to the conduction anesthesia. What concentration of lidocaine solution is required for applicative anesthesia?
*a. 10%
b. 2%
c. 15%
d. 3%
e. 0,5%

385. A 43 year old patient complains of tooth mobility and considerable dehiscence of dental cervices of the lower jaw in its frontal part. Objectively: gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale, slightly cyanotic, without haemorrhage. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have mobility of the I-II degree. There is also overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced by ½ of root length, of the 43, 33 - by ¼. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Halfcrown splint
b. Semicircle splint
c. Kurlandskys girder splint
d. Cap splint
*e. Fullcast removable kappa

386. A 48 year old patient complained about posttraumatic pain in the area of his chin. Examination revealed median fracture of lower jaw with I class dentition defect (according to Kennedy classification). It is indicated to make a Vankevich splint in Stepanovs modification. What will determine the height of directing planes of this splint?
a. It will be determined arbitrary
b. Form of edentulous alveolar crests of the lower jaw
c. Height of molar teeth of the upper jaw
*d. Extent of mouth opening
e. Height of central jaw correlation

387. A 24-year-old soldier was injured by a shell splinter. He was diagnosed with a mandibular fracture with a bone defect in the mental region over 2 cm long. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
*a. Fragments fixation by means of Rudkos apparatus
b. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
c. Direct osteosynthesis
d. Gunning-Ports splint
e. Tigerstedts splints

388. During the examination of a soldered dental bridge supported by the 35 and 38 teeth the following flaws were revealed: the pores in the soldered joints between the intermediate part and supporting crowns, strongly expressed masticatory tubercles, early contact with the opposing teeth, the intermediate part is tightly adjacent to the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What is the way to eliminate these defects?
a. To remove the tubercles of opposing teeth
*b. To remake the dental bridge
c. To correct the masticatory surface and polish the joints
d. To correct the intermediate part
e. To correct the masticatory surface and increase the height of the intermediate saddle part up to 2 mm

389. A 35-year-old female patient seeks prosthetic dentistry. Objectively: the 18, 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28 teeth need restoration. The crowns confining the defect are high and stable. To restore the integrity of the dentition it is planned to fabricate a cast clasp denture. What kind of mechanical fixator should be used?
a. Retaining clasps
b. Supporting-retaining clasps
*c. Bar fixation
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Dentoalveolar clasps

390. A 22-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic because of missing of the 21 tooth, the 11 and 22 teeth are intact. The 21 tooth was extracted 2 months ago. What construction is most suitable in this case?
a. Metal-plastic denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth
*b. Two-stage implantation
c. Partial removable denture
d. One-stage implantation with simultaneous fabrication of porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
e. Swaged and soldered denture supported by the 11 and 22 teeth

391. A 48-year-old patient has undergone unilateral resection of the upper jaw. He needs a resection prosthesis. Objectively: the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 teeth are stable, hard palate is broad, flat. What connection of clasps with the base will reduce the instability of the resection prosthesis?
a. Does not matter
*b. Articular
c. Elastic
d. Stable
e. Fixed

392. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed with fracture of lower jaw with formation of a false joint. Objectively: the 38, 36, 32, 41, 43, 48 teeth are missing. Preserved teeth are intact, stable. There is no displacement of lower jaw fragments. X-ray picture shows a bone tissue defect to up 2 cm large. What construction of prosthesis is indicated in this situation?
a. Gavrilows prosthesis with pivot point
b. Oxmans single-jointed prosthesis with pivot point
*c. Fixed Oxmans prosthesis with pivot point
d. Kurlyandsky prosthesis with roller damper clasp
e. Oxmans double-jointed prosthesis with pivot point

393. A 39-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the history that the indicated tooth had been treated before for caries. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is edematic and hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to remove the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anaesthesia should be given?
a. Infiltration anaesthesia
b. Application anaesthesia
c. Intraosseous anaesthesia
*d. Field block anaesthesia
e. Intraligamentous anaesthesia

394. A patient consults a prosthodontist about a dentition defect of the 14, 15, 16 teetht. It is necessary to prepare teth for crowning. Before the preparation the handpiece must be processed with:
a. With solution of potassium permanganate
b. With furacilin solution
c. With 3% solution of hydrogen oxide
d. With 3% solution of chloramine once
*e. With 3% solution of chloramine (two times with 15 minute interval)

395. A 36-year-old female patient complains about acute pain, clicking in the right temporomandibular joint, burning pain in the region of the right external acoustic meatus. Movements of lower jaw are step-like with short-standing disabling moments and acute pain in the joint. Objectively: the face is symmetric. Occlusion is orthognathic. Palpation of lateral pterygoid muscles is painful on the right. Tomogram shows that bone structure circuits of joints are smooth and slick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ankylosis of TMJ
*b. Dysfunction of TMJ
c. Acute posttraumatic arthritis of TMJ
d. Rheumatic arthritis of TMJ
e. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ

396. A 45-year-old teacher consulted a prosthodontist about choosing efficient prosthetic tactics. Objectively: the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth present with III degree mobility. What orthopaedic care is the most efficient?
*a. Immediate prosthetics
b. Fixed prosthesis
c. Clasp denture
d. Delayed prosthetics
e. Early prosthetics

397. A 40-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication as a result of lower jaw displacement. He has a history of mental fracture 2 months ago. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38 ... 45, 46 teeth are missing. Remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with antagonists and their oral deviation makes up 1 cm. What is the optimal construction of lower jaw denture?
a. Soldered splint on rings
b. Metal-ceramic dental bridge
*c. Denture with double dentition
d. Removable lamellar denture
e. Adhesive denture

398. A patient is 24 years old. Artificial crown of his 22 tooth broke off. The tooth was devitalized 8 years ago and its crown is totally decayed. What microprosthesis should be made for restoration of tooth crown?
a. Stamped crown
*b. Stump-root inlay
c. Inlay
d. Filling
e. Application

399. Examination of a 25-year-old male patient revealed maximal number of occlusional contacts of opposing teeth during denture joining. X-ray picture shows that the articular head of the lower jaw is near the base of the slope of articular tubercle. What type of occlusion is present?
a. Left lateral occlusion
b. Posterior occlusion
c. Anterior occlusion
d. Right lateral occlusion
*e. Central occlusion

400. One of the methods to define central occlusion is to construct a flat that will go through cutting edges of central incisors and distalobuccal tubercles of last molar teeth providing that there is sufficient quantity of teeth. What flat should be constructed?
a. Frankfort
*b. Occlusal flat
c. Vertical
d. Sagittal
e. Transversal

401. A 65-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about fabrication of an external prosthesis of orbit that was lost as a result of a trauma. What is the fixing element of the orbit prosthesis?
a. Watch spring
b. Clamps
c. Magnets
*d. Spectacle frame
e. Swivel devices

402. During the preparation of a tooth a patient had an epileptic seizure. The seizure was arrested. What mistake did the orthopaedist make?
a. Didnt apply general anaesthesia
*b. Didnt collect complete history data
c. Violated the rules of preparation
d. Did not apply one of the types of local anesthesia
e. Skipped psychological preparation of the patient

403. A 32-year-old patient needs to be provided with metal-ceramic crowns for the 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. During the dental visit he is given infiltration anaesthesia with Ultracain DS anaesthetic. What elements enter into its composition?
a. 4% articaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
b. 2% mepivacaine with adrenaline
*c. 4% articaine with adrenaline
d. 3% mepivacaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
e. 2% articaine with epinephrine

404. A 56-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain underneath the bar of her clasp prosthesis. It is known from the anamnesis that the clasp was placed in another city a week ago. Examination revealed a mechanic injury of mucous membrane of the palatine vault caused by the bar of the clasp prosthesis. What distance should exist between the palate and the bar of the clasp prosthesis in order to prevent this complication?
a. 5-6 mm
*b. 0,5 mm
c. 0,2-0,3 mm
d. 2-3 mm
e. 1,5-2,0 mm

405. For fabrication of an external prosthesis a 62-year-old male patient needs "Hippocratic facies". What impression material should be applied?
a. Stens
b. Dentafol
*c. Gypsum
d. Stomaflex
e. Repin

406. A 32-year-old female patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 14, 25 teeth. It is planned to make metal-ceramic crowns. What impression material should be used for making these crowns?
a. Wax
b. Hardening
*c. Silicone
d. Alginate
e. Zinc oxide eugenol

407. A 20-year-old patient got an injury. Objectively: the patients chin and lower jaw up to the 34 and 45 teeth are missing. The 45, 46, 47, 48, 34, 35, 36, 37 teeth are stable. At what stage of medical evacuation the patient will get special medical aid?
a. Separate medical detachment
b. Separate medical battalion
c. Battalion aid station
d. Regimental aid station
*e. Specialized army surgical hospital

408. A 45-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. She works as TV announcer. Objectively: the lower jaw dentition is without spaces, the upper jaw has a free-end edentulous space and a boundary edentulous space in the lateral parts. The remaining 18, 17, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24 teeth are stable. What fixing elements should be used in a clasp denture for cosmetic purposes?
*a. Attachments and bar system
b. Ney clasps
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
d. Jackson clasps
e. Telescopic crowns

409. A 34-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain and clicking in the final stage of mouth opening. The patient has a history of a dislocation. Amplitude of maximal mouth opening is 58 mm. Mouth opening should be limited down to the following amplitude:
a. Up to 25-30 mm
b. Up to 10-15 mm
c. Up to 90-100 mm
*d. Up to 40-50 mm
e. Up to 50-60 mm

410. A 53-year-old patient with generalized periodontitis presented to a prosthodontics clinic for fabrication of fixed splints for his both jaws intended to stabilize the dentitions along the entire dental arch. Which of the upper jaw buttresses will be functionally significant for the distribution of masticatory pressure?
a. Frontonasal, zygomatic, palatine
*b. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
c. Zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
d. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine
e. Frontonasal, pterygopalatine, palatine

411. A 62-year-old patient diagnosed with TMJ arthritis presented to a clinic. The patient underwent radiography. Specify the radiological presentations of TMJ arthritis:
*a. Changed shape of the bone elements of the joint
b. Joint space widening
c. Compaction of the articular head cortex
d. No joint space
e. Joint space narrowing

412. A 60-year-old patient complains about difficult mastication due to the mandible displacement that resulted from an untreated fracture. Objectively: the 35, 36, 38, 45, 46 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are intact. The 43, 44, 47, 48 teeth have no contact with the upper lateral teeth, and exhibit oral deviation up to 1 cm. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for the manible?
a. Adhesive prosthesis
b. Vankevich splint
c. Whole-piece bridge
d. Arch bar prosthesis
*e. Prosthesis with double dentition

413. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed by 80%, the root is stable, the canal is filled up to the top. After examination it was decided to restore the decayed tooth with a cast stump inlay. The root canal of the 23 tooth should be broadened by:
*a. &frac32 of canal length
b. ⅓ of canal length
c. By the total canal length
d. ¼ of canal length
e. ½ of canal length

414. A 50-year-old patient complains of a traumatic break-off in the front teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 12, 21 teeth are broken off by ¾, X-ray picture shows that the channels of the 11, 21 teeth are properly filled, the other teeth are intact. What actions should the dentist take?
a. Fabricate restorative swaged metal crowns for the 11 and 21 teeth
b. Fabricate a dentogingival plastic splint
c. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 12 and 22 teeth
d. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a partial removable lamellar denture for the upper jaw
*e. Fabricate fullcast metal stumps with a post and restorative metal-ceramic crowns

415. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain in the left parotid-masticatory region, disorder of mandible movements. Objectively: skin over the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is reddened, the surrounding tissues are edematic. Disfunction of the left temporomandibular joint is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of TMJ
b. Arthrosis of the left TMJ
c. Ankylosis of the left TMJ
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
e. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of TMJ

416. A 64 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: there is a sharp bony prominence in the area of the missing 15 tooth. It is planned to make a partial removable denture with two-layer base. What plastic should be used for elastic backing?
a. Bacryl
*b. Plastic PM-01
c. Acryl
d. Ftorax
e. Protacryl

417. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Examination revealed that the 21 tooth was missing, the crowns of the 11 and the 22 tooth are intact, high, relatively parallel. The patient refused teeth preparation as well as implantation or fabrication of a removable denture. What orthopedic construction should be fabricated?
*a. Adhesive denture
b. Lamellar denture
c. Polypropylene denture
d. Immediate denture
e. Clasp denture

418. A 40-year-old patient underwent selective grinding of teeth on account of TMJ disease provoked by functional occlusal disorder. 3 days later the patient consulted the orthopaedist about injuring buccal mucosa because of its getting in between dentitions on the right. What mistake was made during teeth grinding?
*a. Tops of the support palatal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
b. Lingual tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off
c. Upper teeth tubercles were ground off
d. Buccal tubercles of the upper teeth were ground off
e. Tops of the buccal tubercles of the lower teeth were ground off

419. A 51-year-old lecturer presented to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed, III grade mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
a. In 4-6 months
b. In 5-6 days
c. In 16-30 days
d. In 2-3 months
*e. On the day of dental extraction

420. A 38-year-old patient consulted an orthopedist about metal taste, dry mouth and tongue burning. Objectively: defects of the lower dental arch were replaced with soldered stainless steel bridges. What examination method would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Myography
b. Electroodontometry
c. Masticatiography
d. Occlusiography
*e. Galvanometry

421. A 28-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw. Objectively: the crown part of the 11 tooth is decayed below the gum level. The root is stable, percussion is painless. It is planned to restore the tooth with a stump inlay and cover it with a metal-ceramic crown. What additional method of diagnostics should be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Electromyography
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Electroodontodiagnostics
*d. X-ray diagnostics
e. Masticatiography

422. A patient with a missile wound of face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
a. Dental health service
b. Dental orthopaedic service
c. Professional care
d. Consultancy
*e. Secondary care

423. A 26-year-old patient presented at a clinic for prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 16 tooth is destroyed by ⅓. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of cavity preparation?
a. Beveling
b. Making additional cavities
*c. Cavity widening and necrosectomy
d. Completing the cavity floor
e. Completing the cavity walls

424. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
b. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point
*c. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinsteins pivot point

425. A 68-year-old patient complains about pain in the palate that occurs during wearing a complete removable denture the patient got 3 months ago. Objectively: palatine torus is strongly marked, mucous membrane around it is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Previous impression was made in plaster
b. It was made anatomic teeth arrangement
c. Prosthesis base is made of acrylic plastic
*d. Torus wasnt isolated
e. Functional impression was taken by means of a rigid individual tray

426. A completely edentulous 70-year-old patient has ordered complete removable dentures. Artificial teeth are placed upon the spherical surface. Close teeth contact by movements of the lower jaw will be guaranteed by the following average radius of the spherical surface:
a. 18 cm
*b. 9 cm
c. 7 cm
d. 5 cm
e. 12 cm

427. A 40-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about upper jaw teeth mobility that turned up after therapeutic treatment. Objectively: the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless, exhibit II degree mobility, unchanged colour. What prosthetic construction should be applied?
a. Elastic crown splint
b. Crown soldered splint
*c. Mamlock splint
d. Cast bar splint
e. Wire-band splint

428. A 65-year-old patient complains of a break off of three front artificial porcelain teeth of the removable denture fabricated 2 months ago. In what way are the porcelain teeth linked with the plastic denture base?
a. By means of diatoric cavities
*b. By means of crampon-fixing wire elements
c. Due to physicochemical connection
d. By means of glue
e. By means of clasps

429. Tooth replacement with complete removable dentures involves adjustment of occlusal relations by different movements of the lower jaw. Transversal movements of the lower jaw are initiated by the following muscle:
*a. External (lateral) pterygoid muscle
b. Temporal muscle
c. Digastric muscle
d. Mastication muscle
e. Internal (medial) pterygoid muscle

430. At the stage of adjustment of an individual tray the Herbst test should be done. What muscles cause the shift of the individual tray during functional testing - alternate touching right or left cheek with the tip of tongue?
a. Mentalis and orbicular muscle of mouth
b. Digastric, geniohyoid
*c. Mylohyoid
d. Mimic muscles
e. Mastication muscles

431. A 37 year old patient was diagnosed with arthrosis of mandibulotemporal joint. During auscultation the doctor heard pathological rustle in the area of the joint, namely "clicking" that was caused by a load. What is the mechanism of this pathological rustle?
a. Calcification of mandibulotemporal joint disc
b. Inflammation of cartilaginous tissue of the disc
c. Friction of bone surfaces in the joint
d. Loosening of mandibulotemporal joint ligaments
*e. Asynchronous movement of disc and articulation head

432. A 65-year-old male patient complains of crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies having rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, there are angular fissures and cracks. Palpation reveals crepitatnt rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular arthrosis
b. Temporomandibular arthritis
*c. Costens syndrome
d. Temporomandibular dislocation
e. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis

433. A 50-year-old patient complains about pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mouth opening. Dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44. While opening the mouth the lower jaw moves in a zigzag manner towards the affected joint. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Chronic arthritis of TMJ
b. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ
c. Habitual TMJ dislocation
d. Sclerosing arthrosis of TMJ
*e. Musculoarticular dysfunction

434. A 32-year-old patient presented to a clinic for takingof an upper jaw impression. During this procedure she choked with a piece of impression material, there was risk of asphyxia. What are the first-priority actions within emergency care?
*a. Abrupt push-like compressions of the lower thorax
b. Plaster removal from the airways
c. Tracheotomy
d. Closed-chest cardiac massage
e. Artificial ventilation of lungs

435. A 52-year-old patient complains of teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth exhibit I grade mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit II grade mobility. There is gingival edema, peridontal pockets are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by ½ of root length. The patient has been diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is most efficient in this situation?
a. Murrays splint
b. Plastic mouthguard
*c. Elbrecht splint
d. Mamlock splint
e. Temporary Novotny splint

436. A 20 year old man got a blow to the chin. He remained conscious. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. He has an edema and haematoma in the area of his lower jaw on both sides. Jaw palpation causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited. There is also a rupture of mucous membrane of oral cavity in the area of the 44, 43 and 34, 35 teeth. Occlusion is deviated. What asphyxia type can be developed?
a. Valve
b. Aspiration
c. Obturation
d. Stenotic
*e. Dislocation

437. A patient with a relevant history of allergic reactions had undergone tests for allergic sensitivity to metals. According to indications, the bridges of precious metal (gold) were fabricated. Specify the warranty period starting from the day of finishing the prosthetic procedures?
a. 9 months
b. 18 months
c. 3 months
d. 6 months
*e. 12 months

438. The 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth of a 57-year-old patient are missing. It is planned to make a clasp denture. The 48 tooth inclines to the lingual side and forwards. On the lingual side of the 48 tooth the border line is diagonal, on the buccal side it runs on a level with gingival edge. What type of Neys clasp should be applied?
a. IV type clasp (reverse back-action)
b. I type clasp
*c. V type clasp
d. I-II type clasp
e. II type clasp

439. A 63-year-old patient requires a full-arch denture for the upper jaw. Objectively: the 18, 17, 16, 15, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing, the gag reflex is not marked, the torus is of average size. In order to avoid possible inconvenience while using the denture, the arch should be located at the following distance from the palatine fossae:
*a. 10-12 mm
b. 23-25 mm
c. 16-22 mm
d. 2-3 mm
e. 4-8 mm

440. A patient ordered metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. Block anaesthesia was performed before preparation. In a few minutes the patient felt anxiety, tinnitus, abdominal pain, giddiness. Breathing is hurried, pulse is rapid, AP is 60/40 mm Hg. What aid should be rendered to the patient in the first place?
a. To bring the patient into horizontal position
b. Make an injection of aminophylline
c. Promedol, suprastin
d. To soak a cotton web with some liquid ammonia and give it for the patient to inhale
*e. Intravenous introduction of 0,5 ml of 0,1% adrenaline solution, prednisolone

441. A 43 year old patient applied to a prosthetic dentistry for the purpose of prosthetics. In anamnesis: has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. The patient has been very anxious before the appointment with a doctor. Suddenly the patients condition grew worse, he felt limb weakness. The patient became covered with cold clammy sweat and lost consciousness. What critical state is it?
a. Myocardium infarction
*b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Hyperglycemic coma
d. Syncope
e. Anaphylactic shock

442. A 47-year-old patient complains of pain in the lateral part of mandible to the left of the toungue edge, which is caused by tongue movements. Two days ago the patient was provided with claspps fixation a partial removable clasp denture for the 47, 42, 33 teeth. Retroalveolar region of the mucous membraneis exhibits a localized hyperemic area matching the edge of the denture. Which muscle contractions demarcate the boundary in this region?
*a. Mandibulohyoid
b. Hyoglossal
c. Masticatory
d. Medial wing muscle
e. Geniohyoid

443. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous regions is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
*a. Alveolar process atrophy
b. Denture using during sleep
c. Wear of artificial teeth
d. Consumption of solid food
e. Improper care of denture

444. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meniscus tresis
*b. Lower jaw subluxation
c. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
d. Lower jaw dislocation
e. Posterior dislocation of articular disk

445. A 68-year-old patient with compensated insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus had to spend 8 hours at a hospital. Within this time he didnt eat and was nervous. The patient became aggressive, pale and sweaty, then he lost consciousness. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertensic crisis
b. Anaphylactic shock
*c. Hypoglycemic coma
d. Acute respiratory failure
e. Collapse

446. A 29 year old patient complains that the crown of his 26 tooth broke off. Objectively: tooth decay index is 0,9, root tissues are hard, roentgenography revealed that the canal was filled to the top, no chronic inflammations of periodontium were revealed. What construction should be used for prosthetics of the 26 tooth?
a. Simplified pin tooth
*b. Pin stump inlay and a crown
c. Pin tooth with an inlay
d. Pin tooth with a ring
e. Pin tooth with protective bar

447. An orthopedist plans to fabricate a porcelain-fused-to-metal crown for the 23 tooth. In order to correct its abnormal position in the dental arch the orthopedist is going to use a cast post and core. What is the maximum permissible value (in degrees) of the core deviation from the tooth axis?
*a. 15
b. 6-8
c. 20-25
d. 4
e. 10

448. A 38 year old patient was admitted to the orthopaedic department after a therapeutic treatment on account of periodontitis. His anamnesis contains data about frequent recurrences of this disease, acute attacks are accompanied by periodontal abscesses. Objectively: the 42, 41,31, 32 teeth manifest mobility of I-II degree, the 43 and 33 are stable, tooth cervices are dehisced by 1/4, hyperesthesia of hard tooth tissues is not observed. What rational construction of permanent splint should be recommended?
*a. Fullcast circle removable splint
b. Mamlocks splint
c. Girder Kurliandkys splint
d. Crown-shell splint
e. Halfcrown splint

449. A 50-year-old patient complains about missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact and stable, their crowns exhibit anatomic form, sufficient height, relative parallelism. Fulcrum line typically goes through the 35 and 44 abutment teeth. What fixing element should be used in a clasp denture supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Bent wire clasp
*b. Acker clasp
c. Jackson clasp
d. Roach clasp
e. Telescopic fixation

450. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joint. The dentures were fabricated a month ago. Objectively: face configuration is abnormal, the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can only be closed with difficulty, the speech is indistinct. When smiling, the base of the complete removable denture is exposed. What mistakes were made during the fabrication of complete removable dentures for the upper jaw?
a. The vertical occlusal dimension was underrated
b. Misidentified anterior occlusion
c. Misplacement of maxillary teeth
*d. The vertical occlusal dimension was overrated
e. Misidentified posterior occlusion

451. A 25-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw on the left. Objectively: the 23 tooth is pulpless. The filling restores vestibular-approximal surface of the tooth crown by 1/3, it is stable, closely fits within cavity walls, its colour doesn’t match the colour of the tooth. The tooth itself has changed its colour, its percussion is painless. What is the optimal prosthetic construction for this patient?
a. Inlay
*b. Metal-ceramic crown
c. Metal swaged crown
d. Elastic crown
e. Portion crown

452. A 45-year-old female patient complains of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of her partial removable laminar denture for the lower jaw, which she has used for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar process in edentulous areas is considerably atrophied, the denture keeps balance. What is the most likely cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture in this case?
a. Wear of artificial teeth
b. Using the denture during sleep
c. Eating solid food
*d. Atrophy of the alveolar process
e. Improper keeping of the denture

453. A 24-year-old female patient complains about hard tissues defect of the 21 tooth. Objectively: the 21 tooth is destroyed by 1/3 along the cutting edge, it is changed in color. X-ray picture shows that the root canal is filled to the top. It was decided to fabricate a plastic crown. Where should the crown edge be situated against the marginal gingiva?
*a. At a level with gingiva
b. 1,0 mm away of gingiva
c. 1,0 mm below the gingiva
d. 0,5 mm below the gingiva
e. 0,5 mm away of gingiva

454. A 52 year old patient complains of gum inflammation, tooth mobility. Objectively: dentitions are intact, all teeth have the 1-2 degree of mobility. What type of teeth stabilization should be applied in this case?
a. Frontosagittal
*b. Arch-directed stabilization
c. Parasagittal
d. Frontal
e. Sagittal

455. A 70-year-old male patient ordered complete removable dentures for both jaws. In the clinical stage he came for "identification of central relationship". For verification of interalveolar height the patient underwent speaking test. The patient was asked to pronounce the sounds "O", "E", "M". What distance should be between the occlusal rims for correct identification of interalveolar height?
*a. 5-6 mm
b. 3-4 mm
c. 7-8 mm
d. 1-2 mm
e. 9-10 mm

456. A 65-year-old patient needs prosthetic services. Objectively: the 43, 33 teeth are decayed by 2/3. EPT result is 6 mA. Other teeth in the lower jaw are missing. What crowns should be fabricated for fixing the removable denture?
a. Full cast crowns
b. Equator crowns
*c. Telescopic crowns
d. Plastic crowns
e. Portion crowns

457. A 58-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 22 tooth is stable, intact. The atrophy of the alveolar crest is present, the palate is flat. It is planned to fabricate a removable denture. What tactics should be chosen in respect of the 22 tooth?
a. There is no need of any intervention
b. It should be extracted
c. It is required to fabricate a stump crown
*d. It is required to fabricate a telescopic crown
e. It should be depulped

458. A 39-year-old patient needs a clasp denture with porcelain teeth for the lower jaw. What method should be applied while substituting wax with plastic in order to avoid mold flash that may cause bite opening?
a. Inverse method of compression molding
b. Direct method of compression molding
*c. Method of transfer molding
d. Combined method of compression molding
e. In water under pressure

459. A 29-year-old patient complains of decay of the 21 tooth, an aesthetic defect. Objectively: on the medial surface of the 21 tooth there is a carious cavity, the cutting edge is partly decayed. Specify the class of this cavity according to Blacks classification:
a. Class II
b. Class I
*c. Class IV
d. Class III
e. Class V

460. A 20-year-old patient seeks dental prosthetics. Objectively: on the occlusal surface of the 16 tooth there is a cavity, two walls of the tooth crown are intact. Method of orthopedic treatment is determined by the degree of destruction of the occlusal surface of teeth (IROPZ-index). Who suggested its definition?
a. Gavrilov
*b. Milikevich
c. Shcherbakov
d. Kopeikin
e. Kurlyandsky

461. A 26-year-old patient needs prosthetics. Objectively: crown of the 16 tooth is decayed by 1/3. It is planned to restore its anatomical shape with a metal inlay. What is the first stage of making a cavity for the inlay?
a. Making the cavity floor
b. Making the cavity walls
c. Making additional cavities
d. Making a bevel
*e. Removal of affected tissues

462. A 70-year-old male patient complains about total teeth missing on both jaws. It is planned to fabricate a complete removable lower jaw prosthesis. Objectively: alveolar process of the lower jaw is atrophied only in the frontal aspect. Identify the type of lower jaw atrophy according to Kellers classification:
a. ІІІ
b. -
c. ІІ
d. І
*e. ІV

463. A 62-year-old patient has a median mandibular fracture complicated by pseudoarthrosis. Objectively: the dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. There is minor mobility of fragments without displacement. What is the most appropriate type of denture for this patient?
a. Lamellar denture with Oksmans pivot point
b. Lamellar denture with Weinsteins pivot point
c. Lamellar denture without a pivot point
d. Lamellar denture with Gavrilows pivot point
*e. Dental bridge without a pivot point

464. A 40-year-old patient has an open occlusion resulting from the bilateral fracture of his upper jaw and following malunion of fragments. The occlusal vertical dimension is maintained only by molar teeth. There is a gap of about 1-1,5 mm between the rest of teeth. The dentitions are without gaps. What kind of treatment would be most appropriate in this situation?
*a. The molar teeth should be ground off and covered with crowns
b. Combined apparatus and surgical treatment
c. Prosthetics with combined crowns
d. Open reposition
e. Orthodontic treatment

465. A 54-year-old woman complains about wear of the 35 and 36 teeth and pain caused by thermal and chemical stimuli. Objectively: crowns of the 35 and 36 teeth are worn by 1/3 of their height (horizontal type), the 24, 25 26 teeth have fullcast crowns. What crowns should be made for the 35 and 36 teeth?
a. Metal-ceramic
*b. Fullcast
c. Metal stamped
d. Combined Belkins
e. Plastic

466. An 80-year-old patient presented to a clinic for the adjustment of the impression tray for the upper jaw. Objectively: alveolar process exhibits marked homogenous atrophy, maxillary tubers are absent, torus is weakly expressed. Buccal muscles and frenulum of the upper lip are attached almost at the top of the alveolar process, the palatal slope is not steep. How to adjust the impression tray in order to make a close-fitting valve?
a. To overlay buccal muscles and frenulum with the impression tray
*b. To extend the borders along the A line
c. To extend the borders in the frontal region
d. To extend the external borders
e. To extend the borders in the region of maxillary tubers

467. A 32-year-old male complains of constant mandibular movements simulating chewing that take place when he is excited. Besides that, the patient complains of teeth grinding. Objectively: the lateral surfaces of teeth have signs of abrasion, the tubercles are absent. What is the most rational method of treatment?
a. Restoration with opposite-directed dentures
b. Consultation with a dental surgeon
c. Teeth alignment (selective tubercle removal)
*d. Night guard, myogymnastics, self-massage
e. Medicamental and machine treatment with further consultation with a dental surgeon

468. An 18-year-old student needs prosthetic porcelain-fused-to-metal denture for the 11, 21 teeth. There are no contraindications for the use of such construction. What is the most appropriate material for taking impressions?
a. Stens
b. Repin
c. Stomalgin
d. Orthocor
*e. Sielast

469. A 40-year-old patient complains of experiencing eating difficulties for 3 days due to the injury of the alveolar process mucosa of maxilla. Objectively: at a level of the mucogingival fold of the 14, 15 teeth on the vestibular side there is a decubital ulcer sized 1x3 mm with smooth pink edges. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Traumatic stomatitis
b. Allergic stomatitis
c. Syphilitic ulcer
d. Tuberculous ulcer
e. Candidiasis

470. A 50-year-old patient complains of missing of the 37, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth. The 35, 38, 44, 48 teeth are intact, stable, with anatomically shaped crowns, rather high, relatively parallel to each other. Boundary line has a typical direction along the 35, 44 abutment teeth. What fixation element should be used in a clasp prosthesis supported by the 35, 44 teeth?
a. Jackson clasp
b. Roach clasp
*c. Akers clasp
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Wrought wire clasp

471. Physical examination of a patient revealed a hard tissues defect of the 24 tooth. Index of occlusal surface destruction was 0,8. The defect was restored by filling that doesnt meet the requirements. The tooth is of rose colouring. X-ray picture shows no patological processes. What construction is indicated in this case?
a. Artificial crown
b. Portion crown
c. Equator crown
*d. Pivot crown
e. Inlay

472. A 38 year old patient got a blow that resulted in upper jaw fracture. Objectively: flattening and impression of face, mobility and dangling of broken jaw with cartilage of nose and eyeballs, nasal haemorrhage, tissue edema, "glasses" symptom; palpation reveals crepitation, subcutaneous emphysema, liquorrhea, loss of sensitivity in the area of half the upper jaw, nose wing and frontal teeth. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Upper jaw cancer on the right
*b. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw
c. Upper jaw odontoma
d. Upper jaw ostemia
e. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw

473. A 59-year-old patient has a bilateral fracture of mandible in the region of the 44, 34 teeth, other masticatory teeth are missing, toothless fragments are not displaced but mobile. Which orthosis should be used for the immobilization of bone fragments?
a. Petrosovs apparatus
b. Zbarzh apparatus
c. Rudkos apparatus
d. Limbergs splint
*e. Vankevich splint with orthodontic elastics

474. A 58-year-old male patient has considerable microstomia as a result of a face trauma and burn. The patient has indication for fabrication of a partial removable prosthesis. What construction of prosthesis should be used in this case?
a. Partial removable lamellar prosthesis
*b. Collapsible prosthesis
c. Clasp dental prosthesis with attachments
d. Clasp dental prosthesis
e. Pivot-point removable prosthesis

475. A 50-year-old patient needs dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27 teeth are missing. The state of the abutment teeth is satisfactory. What type of fixation will provide the best conditions for the stabilization of a removable denture?
a. Transversal
b. Sagittal
*c. Planar
d. Linear
e. Point

476. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect caused by partial teeth missing. Objectively: the 15, 14, 24, 25 teeth are missing, the central group of upper jaw teeth is in protrusion and presents with diasthemas. What orthodontic appliance should be used to prepare the oral cavity for prosthetics?
a. Palatine plate with oblique plane and vestibular bow
b. Schwarz guard
*c. Palatine plate with vestibular bow
d. Brueckls appliance
e. Expansion plate for the upper jaw with orthodontic lock

477. A 35-year-old patient has teeth mobility of І degree, the teeth have apparent dental cusps. The dentist recommends to do occlusive teeth grinding. What method is the most objective for determining the grinding topography?
a. Masticatiography
b. Gnathodynamometry
c. Rubinovs masticatory test
*d. Occlusiography
e. Roentgenography

478. It is planned to organize a dental room with three universal dental sets. The total area of the room must be:
*a. No less than 28 square metres
b. No less than 30 square metres
c. No less than 18 square metres
d. No less than 42 square metres
e. No less than 21 square metres

479. A 29-year-old patient undergoes a procedure of a metal inlay fabrication by the direct method. The inlay is intended for the 26 tooth. Objectively: the 26 tooth presents a Black class I carious cavity. Electroodontometry results - 6 mA. Examination of the ready inlay revealed a casting defect in the region of the external angle. The dentists further actions will be:
a. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with amalgam
*b. Fabrication of a new inlay
c. Plastic fixation of the inlay
d. Cement fixation of the inlay
e. Inlay fixation and restoration of the defect with a composite

480. A 53-year-old patient complains of missing of mandibular teeth. He has a history of microstomy. Objectively: the 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47 and 48 teeth are missing. The remaining teeth are stable, immobile. What kind of denture construction is recommended for this patient?
a. Removable partial lamellar denture
b. Clasp denture
c. Splint-denture
*d. Collapsible removable partial lamellar denture
e. Dental bridge supported by the 43, 33 teeth and removable denture

481. A 60-year-old male patient has an extensive defect of nose caused by an injury. The patient temporarily refused operative intervention, it was suggested to fabricate an external nasal prosthesis fixed by eyeglass frame. What impression material should be used?
a. Impression of the whole face with thermoplastic material
b. Impression of the defect with thermoplastic mass
c. Gypseous impression
*d. Gypseous impression of the whole face
e. Impression of the defect with elastic material

482. During the examinations and everyday orthopaedic manipulations a dentist uses a dental mirror. What is the way of its sterilization?
*a. In the triple solution for 30 minutes
b. In the 6% hydrogen peroxide solution for 6 hours
c. In the 0,01% chloramine solution for 10 minutes
d. In the dry heat sterilizer at 180°C for 10 minutes
e. In the 0,5% ethyl chloride solution for 20 minutes

483. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about lateral teeth mobility, frequent falling out of fillings. Objectively: all the molars and premolars of the lower jaw exhibit I degree mobility. Approximal masticatory surfaces have fillings. What splint construction should be applied in this case?
*a. Inlay splint
b. Crown cap splint
c. Intradental splint
d. Equator crown splint
e. Fixed crown splint

484. A 59-year-old patient presented to a clinic for prosthetics. Three months ago he was treated for the fracture of the body of mandible on the left. The 18, 27, 28, 38, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48 teeth are missing. The patient has left-sided cross-bite with lateral occlusal contact. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Selective teeth grinding followed by fixed prosthetics
b. Implant-supported fixed denture
c. Removable denture with Kemeny clasps
*d. Removable denture with double dentition
e. Orthopedic treatment

485. A 32-year-old patient presented to a prosthetic dentistry clinic with a diagnosis of maxillary fracture.The fracture can be treated by means of standard maxillo-mandibular Zbarzh set. Which construction provides the intra-oral fixation?
a. Crown-supported soldered splint
*b. Standard double arch
c. Plastic biteplate
d. Aluminium arch bar
e. Webers splint

486. A 40-year-old patient complains about frequent falling out of a filling. Objectively: the 46 tooth has a carious (Black’s class II) cavity. It is planned to restore the anatomic form of the tooth by means of a metal inlay. What is the peculiarity of the cavity preparation for the inlay in this case?
*a. Forming a bevel
b. Cavity floor widening
c. Cavity deepening
d. Preparation for parapulpar posts
e. Forming an additional shoulder

487. A 45-year-old man complains about liquid outpouring from his nose, inability to blow his nose, inflated cheeks. Objectively: there is a perforating defect (1х1,5 cm) of alveolar process at a level of the extracted 26th tooth in the lateral part of his upper jaw. Air inhalation through the nose with held nostrils is accompanied by generation of bubbles in the area of perforation. What denture construction should be recommended?
a. Protective palatal bars
*b. Minor saddle denture with clasp fixation
c. Common partial removable denture
d. Clasp denture with obturating part
e. Common dental bridge

488. A 25-year-old patient presents with fluorosis of vestibular surfaces of the upper incisors. Which of the following constructions will provide the maximum aesthetic result?
a. Plastic crown
b. Combined Kurylenko crown
c. Metal-plastic crown
*d. Veneers
e. Ceramic crown

489. A patient undergoes orthopaedic treatment of bounded edentulous spaces on the upper jaw. He needs fixed full-cast dentures. During his second visit it is required to check whether the internal surface of the metal framework of the future metal-ceramic denture matches the surfaces of the prepared teeth. In what way could this be done?
a. In the oral cavity by means of a wax plate
b. In the oral cavity by means of stomatoscopic method
c. Visually by means of models in the articulator
d. In the oral cavity by means of tracing paper
*e. In the oral cavity by means of silicone materials

490. A 36-year-old patient requires a full coverage swaged metal crown for the 37 tooth. The patient presented to a clinic for the crown adjustment. During the adjustment it was revealed that the crown was to loose to fit the tooth cervix properly. How to eliminate this defect?
a. To swage a new crown using the same matrix
b. To anneal the crown
c. To bend in the crown edges by using clamp forceps
*d. To get an impression and swage the crown anew
e. To bend in the crown edges by using beak-shaped forceps

491. A 43 year old man applied to the dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: the crown of the 37th tooth is decayed by 2/3, buccal and lingual walls are thin. Occlusion picture shows strong contact with antagonists. How thick should be the layer of tooth surface that must be ground off during preparation for metallic stamped crown?
a. 0,1-0,2 mm
b. 0,6-0,7 mm
c. 0,7-0,8 mm
*d. 0,28-0,3 mm
e. 0,5-0,6 mm

492. A 68 year old patient has a defect in the lower third of his nose as a result of malignant tumour removal. Objectively: dorsum of nose up to the middle third and external nostril outlines are intact. Skin at the base of nose is thinned and erosive. The patient strongly objects to any plastic operation. What method of fixation of nose ectoprosthesis is the most acceptable?
a. Head cap
*b. On the glasses frame
c. Transparent adhesive tape
d. By means of lace
e. Anatomic retention

493. A 12 year old girl complained about a crown defect in the frontal part of her upper jaw. Anamnesis data: the tooth was filled more than once but the fillings fell out. Objectively: the 12 tooth is filled. There is IV class defect according to Blacks classification. Devitalization has never been performed, percussion of the 12 tooth is painless. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Metal crown
*b. Circumpulpar pin inlay
c. Halfcrown
d. Metal-ceramic crown
e. Ceramic crown

494. A 48-year-old male patient has been wearing partial removable dentures for 3 months. According to the patient, results of physical examination and additional methods of testing, the patient was diagnosed with allergic stomatitis provoked by dyes of the acrylic resin of his prosthesis. Allergic effects of dyes can be eliminated in the following way:
a. Moulding of plastic by method of casting
b. Fabrication of bilayer bases
*c. Fabrication of a denture out of colorless plastic
d. Fabrication of cast metal prosthetic bases
e. Fabrication of swaged metal bases

495. A 43-year-old patient was found to have no crown of the 13 tooth. The root protrudes above the gum by 0,5-1 mm. The apical part is filled. History: coronal part of the tooth broke off three weeks ago. Prior to this the tooth had been treated for chronic periodontitis. Percussion is painless. The root edges are surrounded with hard moist mucous membrane of pale pink colour. Specify the dentists tactics:
a. Fabricate a simple pivot crown
b. Extract the tooth root
*c. Fabricate a crown-root inlay and porcelain-fused-to-metal crown
d. Restore the tooth by means of an anchor and photopolymer material
e. Fabricate a pivot Richmond crown

496. A 38-year-old patient ordered a clasp upper jaw prosthesis. Its fabrication involves forming of a fireproof model. What material should be applied for duplication?
a. Orthocor
b. Dentafol
c. Stomatoplast
d. Stomalgin
*e. Gelin

497. A patient ordered soldered stainless-steel bridge prostheses. Their fabrication involves calibration of crown sleeves. Which device is used for this purpose?
*a. Samson
b. Larins
c. Bromshtrom
d. Copes
e. Parkers

498. A 35-year-old patient needs a metal inlay for the 37th tooth. Objectively: masticatory surface of the 37 tooth has a carious cavity. What is the peculiarity of tooth preparation?
a. Forming flat floor
b. Forming additional cavity
c. Forming an additional shoulder
d. Widening of cavity floor
*e. Forming a bevel

499. It is planned to make a metal-ceramic crown supported by stump inlay for the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed down to the gingival edge. Root canal is filled to the top. The dentist made a wax stump model with a pin, cast it in metal, fitted it to the tooth, fixed it by means of visphat-cement and got a working plaster impression. At what stage did he make an error?
a. Stump fitting
b. Stump fixing
c. Wax construction making
d. Casting
*e. Impression taking

500. A 23-year-old military servant needs orthopaedic treatment at a specialized hospital. He was diagnosed with false joint of mandible in its frontal part. The teeth are intact, stable, in threes on each side. Orthopaedic treatment by means of a bridge denture will be possible only if the jaw defect is no more than:
a. 3,5 cm
b. 4 cm
c. 2 cm
d. 3 cm
*e. 1 cm

501. A 56-year-old patient complains about missing lateral teeth on both sides of mandible. Objectively: the 48, 47, 46, 45, 35, 36, 37, 38 teeth are missing. Make a diagnosis:
a. Kennedy II denttion defect
b. Kennedy IV denttion defect
*c. Kennedy I denttion defect
d. Kennedy III denttion defect
e. Betelman II denttion defect

502. A 45-year-old patient complains of missing teeth in the lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the 46, 45, 38, 48 teeth are missing. The 47 tooth is mobile (1 grade mobility), the crown of the 44 tooth is decayed by 1/2. What orthopedic construction should be recommended for restoration of masticatory efficiency and prevention of periodontal overload of the 47, 44 teeth?
a. Bridge supported by the 47 tooth
b. Small saddle denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44 teeth
c. Soldered bridge supported by the 48, 44 teeth
d. Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge supported by the 47, 46 teeth
*e. Bugel denture with clasp fixation for the 47, 44, 34 teeth

503. A 59-year-old patient complains of tooth mobility, inability to eat. Inspection results: the lower 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 47 and 48 teeth are missing; the 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 46 teeth exhibit II grade mobility, their clinical crowns are low, tooth equator is not pronounced. What is the optimal denture construction in this case?
a. Removable partial denture
b. Removable Bynin splint
c. Removable splint with vestibulo-oral clasp
*d. Removable cast splint
e. Kurlyandsky splint bar

504. A 60-year-old patient complains of pain in the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joints. The pain occurs when she uses complete removable dentures fabricated a month ago. Objectively: the lower third of the face is elongated, the lips can be closed with difficulty, smiling causes exposure of the denture base, the articulation is impaired. A mistake must have been made at the following stage of denture fabrication:
a. Taking functional impressions
b. Taking anatomic impressions
*c. Determination and fixation of the central occlusion
d. Testing the denture construction
e. Fitting the dentures and their correction

505. A 48-year-old female patient complains about some discomfort induced by wearing an upper jaw clasp denture with elastic attachments. The patient notes the denture mobility during mastication and articulation. The patient asks to fabricate a new denture with consideration of the indicated defects. Clinical crowns of abutment teeth are low. What fixation should be the most efficient in this case?
a. Arch-bar
b. Saddle-type
c. Clasp
*d. Telescopic
e. Locking

506. A 65-year-old patient needs complete removable dentures for both jaws. At the stage of "testing the denture construction" the doctor checks the pronunciation of sounds "S" and "Z". Which method of normalization of speech functions should be applied in this case?
a. Myogymnastics
b. Graphic
*c. Phonetic tests
d. Spectrographic
e. Acoustic

507. A 75-year-old patient ordered a complete removable denture for the upper jaw. While adjusting the individual tray by Herbsts method the orthodontist revealed that the tray could be thrown off when the patient rounded his lips. What part of the tray requires correction?
a. Along the whole vestibular edge
b. Behind the maxillary tuber
c. Distal part along the A line
d. In the region of buccal cords
*e. Vestibular part between the canines

508. A 68-year-old patient had a stroke, after which she now experiences  often urges to vomit causing unilateral TMJ dislocations. The dislocations could only be reduced under anesthesia. The 21-28, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36, 37, 44, 46, 47 teeth are missing. What denture construction is optimal for this patient for the treatment period?
a. Petrosovs appliance with a stopper
b. Schroeder appliance with sliding pivot
*c. Removable lamellar denture with a mouth opening stopper
d. Yadrovas appliance
e. Khodorovich-Burgonskaya appliance with a stopper

509. A 32-year-old female patient needs dental prosthetics. After the objective examination it was decided to use ceramic-metal crown. What impression material should be used for taking impressions for this construction?
*a. Stomaflex
b. Stomalgin
c. Orthocor
d. Stens
e. Plaster

510. A 55-year-old patient has a repeated appointment with a dentist. He has ordered complete removable lamellar dentures for both upper and lower jaws. During his previous visit the dentist took complete anatomic impressions of both jaws and sent them to the dental mechanic. What manipulations should the dentist perform at the next clinical stage?
a. Locate and fix central occlusion
b. Correct the prosthesis and give the patient necessary instructions
c. Fabricate occlusal rims
*d. Adjust individual trays
e. Check the prosthesis construction within the oral cavity

511. A 52-year-old patient presented to the prosthetic dentistry clinic complaining of missing upper jaw teeth and difficult mastication. The patient has an indication for a partial laminar denture for the upper jaw with retaining clamps on the 14, 23 teeth. What kind of denture stabilization will enable such positioning of the clasps?
a. Sagittal
b. Sagitally-transversal
c. Diagonally-sagittal
*d. Transversal
e. Diagonal

512. A 57 year old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about dull pain in the area of his right temporomandibular joint that is getting worse during eating. The disease developed gradually, it began with constrained mandibular motion in the morning that sometimes grew more intensive, sometimes less. Objectively: the face is symmetric, the mouth can be opened up to 3 cm. Opening of mouth is accompanied by articular noise and clicking (step-like dislocation of mandible). Skin above the joint is intact. Muscle tone is palpatory unchanged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Neuromuscular syndrome
b. Acute arthritis of the right temporomandibular joint
*c. Arthrosis of the right temporomandibular joint
d. Occlusive articulation syndrome
e. Subluxation of mandible

513. A 32-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Objectively: the crowns of 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are destroyed by caries by 2/3 of their height. The occlusion is orthognathic. X-ray picture shows that root canals are filled to the top. There are no patological changes in periapical tissues. What construction should be the most efficient in this situation?
a. Restoration of tooth crowns with composite materials
b. Artificial metal swaged crowns
*c. Stump inlays and metal-ceramic crowns
d. Fabrication of plastic inlays
e. Richmonds pivot crowns

514. A 43-year-old patient complains about mobility of lower jaw teeth. Objectively: the dentition is intact. Tooth mobility is of I-II grade. It is planned to immobilize teeth by means of a removable splint common for the whole dentition. What stabilization will be provided by means of this splint?
a. Frontal
b. Sagittal
c. Transversal
*d. Circle
e. Frontal-lateral

515. A patient needs a clasp denture for the lower jaw. Objectively: dental formula is 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 44. The 44 totoh is inclined toward the cheek. What type of Neys clasp should be used?
a. Third
b. Fifth
c. First
d. Second
*e. Fourth

516. A female patient consulted a dentist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the lower third of the patients face is shortened, nasolabial folds are deepened, frontal group of lower and upper jaw teeth is missing, the crowns of the 17, 15, 26, 27, 36, 37, 45, 47 teeth are worn off by 2/3 of their height, masticatory surfaces of these teeth are smooth and pigmented. The alveolar process isnt hypertrophied. Interalveolar height is decreased. Specify the form of pathological tooth wear in this patient:
a. Combined, noncompensated, III grade severity
*b. Horizontal, noncompensated, III grade severity
c. Vertical, noncompensated, III grade severity
d. Horizontal, compensated, II grade severity
e. Vertical, compensated, III grade severity

517. A 50-year-old patient needs a splint for the lower front teeth. Objectively: the 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43 teeth present I-II class mobility and are devitalized. Which splint would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Kurliandsky splint
b. Elbrechts splint
*c. Mamlok-type splint
d. Murrays splint
e. Van Thiel splint

518. A 57-year-old patient complains of mobility of all mandibular teeth. Objectively: the 34, 35, 36, 45, 46, 47 teeth are missing. Orthopantomogram of the remaining teeth shows resorption of the alveolar process within 1/3 of interdental septa height. What construction should be offered to the patient?
a. Van-Thiel splint
*b. Clasp denture with splinting appliances
c. Partial removable lamellar denture
d. Bridge dentures in the region of masticatory teeth
e. Cap splint

519. A 69-year-old patient underwent an operation for complete removal of his lower jaw. They took impressions of both jaws and fabricated a lower jaw replacement prosthesis before operation. What elements will provide fixation of this prosthesis in the oral cavity?
a. Magnets
b. Attachments
c. Wire loops
d. Clasps
*e. Foshars spiral springs

520. A 47-year-old patient complains about discolouration of the 11, 12 teeth. Objectively: the 12, 12 are changed in colour, canals are filled to the top. It was decided to make metal-ceramic crowns for the 11, 12 teeth. What is the optimal angle for the preparation of approximal surfaces of abutment teeth?
a. 10-15 degrees
b. 15-20 degrees
*c. 5-8 degrees
d. 20-25 degrees
e. 30-35 degrees

521. A 79-year-old female patient consulted a prosthodontist about denture replacement. The patient has a history of a stroke. Objectively: acute irregular atrophy of the alveolar processes of both jaws is present; mucous membrane of the oral cavity is dry and nonmobile. The previous dentures cannot be fixed. What is the most appropriate prosthetic construction?
a. Dentures with metal bases
b. Dentures with extended borders
*c. Dentures with elastic lining
d. Dentures with shortened borders
e. Implant-supported dentures

522. A 48-year-old teacher complained about considerable mobility of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Objectively: cervixes of the 42, 41, 31, 32 are exposed by 2/3, there is pathological III degree mobility. It is indicated to extract the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. What type of denture should be used for the direct prosthetics?
a. Swaged-and-soldered bridge-like denture
*b. Removable partial lamellar denture
c. Adhesive
d. Clasp denture
e. Metal-ceramic bridge-like denture

523. A month after cementing the metal-ceramic crown on the 23 tooth a patient complained of its decementing. Examination revealed that the tooth stump was of sufficient height, stump walls were convergent to the vertical tooth axis at an angle of approximately 30 degrees. What angle of convergence had to be formed?
a. 15-18 degrees
b. 12-15 degrees
*c. Up to 8 degrees
d. 22-25 degrees
e. 10-12 degrees

524. A 57-year-old patient complains about mobility of his metal-ceramic dental bridge supported by the 33, 37 teeth. The bridge has been in use for 9 months. Objectively: X-ray picture shows alveolar process atrophy by 2/3 in the area of the 33, and by 1/2 of root length in the area of the 37; there are pathological pockets, gingivitis. What is the cause of pathological mobility of supporting teeth?
a. Garland modelling in the precervical region
*b. Functional shifting of supporting teeth under stress
c. Devitalization of supporting teeth
d. Injuring of circle ligament by crown edges
e. Massive grinding off of hard tissues

525. During lateral movements of mandible the frontal teeth are displaced sidewards. Deviation of incisor point from the central position is measured by an angle of 100-110o. What is characterized by such a value of incisor point deviation?
a. Lateral joint path
b. Sagittal joint path
c. Bennetts angle
*d. Lateral incisor path
e. Sagittal incisor path

526. A 52-year-old patient complains of significant tooth wear on both jaws. Objectively: in the lateral parts of mandible teeth are worn down to the gums, in the frontal parts teeth are worn by one third. Treatment includes two stages. What prosthetic construction should be applied for bite disjoining and myotatic reflex change?
a. Plastic splint for the whole dentition
b. Crown splint for the lateral parts
c. Elastic plastic splint
*d. Periodontal splint for the lateral parts
e. Plastic splint for the frontal part

527. A 47-year-old patient came to an orthopaedic stomatology center with complaints about missing tooth in the frontal part of his upper jaw, cosmetic defect. Objectively: the occlusion is orthogenic, the 11 tooth is missing. Anamnesis data: the patient had myocardial infarction 3 months ago. What denture should be applied for the time being?
*a. Partial removable lamellar denture
b. Bridge denture suported by the 21 tooth
c. Implant
d. Clasp denture
e. Bridge denture suported by the 21 and 12 teeth

528. A 62-year-old patient presented to the prosthodontics clinic with complaints about poor fixation of complete removable lamellar dentures that shows up during talking and wide mouth opening. The dentures were fabricated 5 days ago. In course of denture fabrication process a mistake was made during:
*a. Obtaining the functional impression
b. Interalveolar dimension measurement
c. Plastic polymerization
d. Wax reproduction check
e. Occlusal plane orientation

529. A 53-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about dental prosthetics. Objectively: the 13 and 24 teeth remain as well as all the teeth on the lower jaw. The lower third of the patient’s face is shortened, crowns of the 13, 24 teeth are worn off by 2/3. What constructional element will provide optimal fixation of the partial removable prosthesis on the upper jaw?
a. Compound clasps
b. Bars
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
*d. Telescopic crowns
e. Retaining clasps

530. A 70-year-old patient is awaiting complete removable dentures for both upper and lower jaws. Teeth placement will be made by Vasilyevs method. What teeth in the upper denture must not touch glass?
a. First and second premolars
b. Central incisors and first molars
*c. Lateral incisors and second molars
d. Canines and first molars
e. Second premolars and first molars

531. A 47-year-old patient with completely edentulous upper jaw underwent delayed implantation with cylindrical implants. Prosthetics is recommended in:
a. 3 months
*b. 5-6 months
c. 2 weeks
d. 24 hours
e. 1 month

532. A 28-year-old male patient presented to a clinic on the 2nd day after the face trauma and complained of bilateral mandibular pain, difficult swallowing and obstructed breathing. Objectively: there was a slight swelling in the region of the molars on both sides, the teeth were intact but the jaw fragment with the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth deviated downward and backward. Manual reposition didnt produce any positive result. Which appliance should be used for treatment?
a. One-jaw Katz appliance
b. Brun appliance
c. Betelman appliance
*d. Posts appliance
e. One-jaw Kurliandsky appliance

533. An 18-year-old patient presented to the orthopedic department with complaint of a large diastema. Objectively: bodily lateral movement of central incisors induced by the missing 12, 22 teeth. What is the optimal appliance for moving the central incisors together?
a. Vasilenko apparatus
b. Kalvelis apparatus
c. Begg appliance
*d. Korkhaus apparatus
e. Cotton ligature

534. A 43 year old patient complains of tooth mobility and considerable dehiscence of dental cervices of the lower jaw in its frontal part. Objectively: gums in the area of the 44, 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33, 34 teeth are pale, slightly cyanotic, without haemorrhage. The 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth have mobility of the I-II degree. There is also overcrowding of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are dehisced by 1/2 of root length, of the 43, 33 - by 1/4. What orthopaedic construction should be applied in this case?
a. Kurlandskys girder splint
b. Halfcrown splint
c. Semicircle splint
*d. Fullcast removable kappa
e. Cap splint

535. A 40-year-old patient is hospitalized with Le Fort II maxillary fracture. The teeth are intact. Choose the most appropriate apparatus for this patient:
*a. Standard Zbarzh construction
b. Rudkos apparatus
c. Gunning-Ports splint
d. Yermolaev-Kulagovs apparatus
e. Yadrovas apparatus

536. During the examination of a soldered dental bridge supported by the 35 and 38 teeth the following flaws were revealed: the pores in the soldered joints between the intermediate part and supporting crowns, strongly expressed masticatory tubercles, early contact with the opposing teeth, the intermediate part is tightly adjacent to the mucous membrane of the alveolar process. What is the way to eliminate these defects?
a. To correct the intermediate part
b. To correct the masticatory surface and increase the height of the intermediate saddle part up to 2 mm
c. To remove the tubercles of opposing teeth
*d. To remake the dental bridge
e. To correct the masticatory surface and polish the joints

537. A patient is waiting for a partial removable laminar denture. Anatomic models of both jaws were made by means of elastic alginate material "Ipin" and referred for disinfection. What disinfection method should be applied?
a. Hydrogen peroxide solution 6%
b. Alcohol solution 70%
c. Sodium hypochloride 0,5%
d. Desoxone 0,1%
*e. Glutaraldehyde 2,5% рH 7,0-8,7

538. A 35-year-old female patient seeks prosthetic dentistry. Objectively: the 18, 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28 teeth need restoration. The crowns confining the defect are high and stable. To restore the integrity of the dentition it is planned to fabricate a cast clasp denture. What kind of mechanical fixator should be used?
*a. Bar fixation
b. Retaining clasps
c. Dentoalveolar clasps
d. Telescopic fixation
e. Supporting-retaining clasps

539. A 48-year-old patient has undergone unilateral resection of the upper jaw. He needs a resection prosthesis. Objectively: the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 teeth are stable, hard palate is broad, flat. What connection of clasps with the base will reduce the instability of the resection prosthesis?
a. Elastic
b. Stable
*c. Articular
d. Fixed
e. Does not matter

540. A 39-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the region of the 21 tooth for 2 days. It is known from the history that the indicated tooth had been treated before for caries. Objectively: the 21 tooth is covered with metal-ceramic crown, mucous membrane in apex projection is edematic and hyperaemic. Percussion of the tooth is extremely painful. X-ray picture shows improperly filled root canal. It is planned to remove the 21 tooth crown. What kind of anaesthesia should be given?
a. Intraosseous anaesthesia
*b. Field block anaesthesia
c. Intraligamentous anaesthesia
d. Infiltration anaesthesia
e. Application anaesthesia

541. An orthodontist was treating a patient infected with AIDS virus. Accidentally he injured skin of one of his fingers with a dental disk during tooth preparation. What actions should the orthodontist take in this case?
a. To treat the skin with 5% iodine solution
b. To press blood out and treat the skin with strong solution of KMnO4
c. To apply a tourniquet on the shoulder
d. To perform diathermo-coagulation
*e. To press blood out and treat the skin with 70% alcohol solution

542. A 45-year-old teacher consulted a prosthodontist about choosing efficient prosthetic tactics. Objectively: the 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth present with III degree mobility. What orthopaedic care is the most efficient?
a. Clasp denture
*b. Immediate prosthetics
c. Fixed prosthesis
d. Early prosthetics
e. Delayed prosthetics

543. A patient is 24 years old. Artificial crown of his 22 tooth broke off. The tooth was devitalized 8 years ago and its crown is totally decayed. What microprosthesis should be made for restoration of tooth crown?
a. Filling
b. Application
c. Stamped crown
*d. Stump-root inlay
e. Inlay

544. One of the methods to define central occlusion is to construct a flat that will go through cutting edges of central incisors and distalobuccal tubercles of last molar teeth providing that there is sufficient quantity of teeth. What flat should be constructed?
*a. Occlusal flat
b. Vertical
c. Frankfort
d. Transversal
e. Sagittal

545. A 49-year-old male patient complains about gingival haemorrhage, teeth mobility in the frontal region of his lower jaw, hypersensitivity of dental cervixes. X-ray picture shows widening of periodontal fissure in the region of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth, as well as resorption of alveolar process tissue to 1/3 of root length. The 42, 32 teeth present with I degree mobility, the 41, 31 teeth present with II degree of teeth mobility. What temporary splint should be used for frontal stabilization of dentition?
a. Kogan
b. Kopeinin
c. Mamlock
d. Treuman
*e. Novotny

546. During the preparation of a tooth a patient had an epileptic seizure. The seizure was arrested. What mistake did the orthopaedist make?
a. Skipped psychological preparation of the patient
b. Didnt apply general anaesthesia
c. Did not apply one of the types of local anesthesia
d. Violated the rules of preparation
*e. Didnt collect complete history data

547. A 32-year-old patient needs to be provided with metal-ceramic crowns for the 12, 11, 21 and 22 teeth. During the dental visit he is given infiltration anaesthesia with Ultracain DS anaesthetic. What elements enter into its composition?
*a. 4% articaine with adrenaline
b. 4% articaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
c. 2% articaine with epinephrine
d. 3% mepivacaine without a vasoconstrictor agent
e. 2% mepivacaine with adrenaline

548. A 56-year-old patient needs a partial removable lamellar denture. Objectively: the 17, 16, 15, 14, 25, 26, 27, 28 teeth on the upper jaw are missing. In order to provide transversal line of clasps the clasp arms should be placed upon the following teeth:
a. -
*b. 13 and 24
c. 24 and 18
d. 13 and 18
e. 24, 13 and 18

549. A 60-year-old patient presented to a clinic for checking her complete removable denture. During the teeth placement on the wax bases a gap between the front teeth and cuspal interference of the lateral teeth was revealed. What mistake was made?
a. The patient was found to have posterior occlusion instead of centric one
b. The models were improperly plastered in the occludator
c. During establishing the centric occlusion, the occlusal rims were overpressed
*d. The patient was found to have anterior occlusion instead of centric one
e. The patient was found to have lateral occlusion instead of centric one

550. A 34-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about pain and clicking in the final stage of mouth opening. The patient has a history of a dislocation. Amplitude of maximal mouth opening is 58 mm. Mouth opening should be limited down to the following amplitude:
*a. Up to 40-50 mm
b. Up to 50-60 mm
c. Up to 90-100 mm
d. Up to 10-15 mm
e. Up to 25-30 mm

551. A 53-year-old patient with generalized periodontitis presented to a prosthodontics clinic for fabrication of fixed splints for his both jaws intended to stabilize the dentitions along the entire dental arch. Which of the upper jaw buttresses will be functionally significant for the distribution of masticatory pressure?
*a. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
b. Zygomatic, pterygopalatine, palatine
c. Frontonasal, zygomatic, palatine
d. Frontonasal, pterygopalatine, palatine
e. Frontonasal, zygomatic, pterygopalatine

552. A 62-year-old patient diagnosed with TMJ arthritis presented to a clinic. The patient underwent radiography. Specify the radiological presentations of TMJ arthritis:
a. No joint space
b. Compaction of the articular head cortex
c. Joint space narrowing
d. Joint space widening
*e. Changed shape of the bone elements of the joint

553. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect of the 23 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 23 tooth is decayed by 80%, the root is stable, the canal is filled up to the top. After examination it was decided to restore the decayed tooth with a cast stump inlay. The root canal of the 23 tooth should be broadened by:
a. 1/2 of canal length
b. 1/4 of canal length
c. By the total canal length
*d. 2/3 of canal length
e. 1/3 of canal length

554. A 50-year-old patient complains of a traumatic break-off in the front teeth. Objectively: the crowns of the 12, 21 teeth are broken off by 3/4, X-ray picture shows that the channels of the 11, 21 teeth are properly filled, the other teeth are intact. What actions should the dentist take?
a. Fabricate restorative swaged metal crowns for the 11 and 21 teeth
b. Fabricate a dentogingival plastic splint
c. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a dental bridge supported by the 12 and 22 teeth
d. Remove the 11 and 21 teeth and fabricate a partial removable lamellar denture for the upper jaw
*e. Fabricate fullcast metal stumps with a post and restorative metal-ceramic crowns

555. A 46-year-old patient complains about pain in the left parotid-masticatory region, disorder of mandible movements. Objectively: skin over the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is reddened, the surrounding tissues are edematic. Disfunction of the left temporomandibular joint is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Arthrosis of the left TMJ
b. Acute serous left-sided arthritis of TMJ
*c. Acute purulent left-sided arthritis of TMJ
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
e. Ankylosis of the left TMJ

556. A 46-year-old patient complains of difficult opening of her mouth, body temperature rise, tissue edema around both temporomandibular joints (TMJ). It is known from the anamnesis that the patient had short-term non-intense bilateral pain in the parotid-masticatory region, limited mouth opening, tension and discomfort in the region of both temporomandibular joints that had been observed for a couple of days. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Infectional arthritis
b. Fibrous ankylosis
c. Deforming atrhrosis
*d. Rheumatic arthritis
e. Arthrosis

557. A 40-year-old patient suffers from chronic generalized periodontitis. Objectively: both dentitions are intact, the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth exhibit I degree mobility. What splint would be aesthetically acceptable for this group of teeth?
a. Cap splint
b. Ring splint
c. Guard splint
d. Splint of soldered combined crowns
*e. Glass Span and photopolymer splinting

558. A 64 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for tooth prosthetics. Objectively: there is a sharp bony prominence in the area of the missing 15 tooth. It is planned to make a partial removable denture with two-layer base. What plastic should be used for elastic backing?
a. Acryl
b. Ftorax
*c. Plastic PM-01
d. Protacryl
e. Bacryl

559. A patient complains about a cosmetic defect. Examination revealed that the 21 tooth was missing, the crowns of the 11 and the 22 tooth are intact, high, relatively parallel. The patient refused teeth preparation as well as implantation or fabrication of a removable denture. What orthopedic construction should be fabricated?
a. Clasp denture
b. Immediate denture
c. Polypropylene denture
*d. Adhesive denture
e. Lamellar denture

560. A 51-year-old lecturer presented to the orthopaedic department and complained about painfullness and mobility of his frontal teeth of the lower jaw. Cervices of the 42, 41, 31, 32 teeth are exposed, III grade mobility with deep pathological pockets is present. When would it be reasonable to fix dentures after dental extraction?
a. In 2-3 months
b. In 16-30 days
*c. On the day of dental extraction
d. In 4-6 months
e. In 5-6 days

561. A 32 year old patient lost his 41 and 31 teeth as a result of a sporting accident. Replantation is impossible because these teeth have cracks and splits both on crown and root surfaces. Clinical and roentgenological examination proved the possibility of immediate implantation. What implant materials should be preferred?
a. Carbon
b. Platinum
c. Sapphire
*d. Titanium
e. Ceramic

562. A 28-year-old patient complains about a cosmetic defect in the frontal part of his upper jaw. Objectively: the crown part of the 11 tooth is decayed below the gum level. The root is stable, percussion is painless. It is planned to restore the tooth with a stump inlay and cover it with a metal-ceramic crown. What additional method of diagnostics should be applied in this clinical situation?
a. Electroodontodiagnostics
*b. X-ray diagnostics
c. Masticatiography
d. Electromyography
e. Gnathodynamometry

563. A patient came to a dental clinic for dental prosthetics. Objectively: total lack of teeth on the mandible. Sharp and regular atrophy of alveolar part. Frenula attachment and fold position is high. Name the type of atrophy of edentulous mandible using Kellers classification:
a. I type
b. IV type
c. V type
*d. II type
e. III type

564. During military operations the head of the Army Medical Department gave the order to deploy a stomatological aid unit on the territory of the Army Hospital Base. A patient with missile wound of face was admitted to the unit. What kind of aid can be rendered in the stomatological unit?
a. Prosthodontic aid
*b. Specialized (secondary) aid
c. Consultation aid
d. Qualified aid
e. Stomatological aid

565. A patient with a missile wound of face was delivered to the station of dental aid group that was organized by order of medical corps commander. What kind of aid can be rendered by the dental aid group?
a. Dental orthopaedic service
*b. Secondary care
c. Consultancy
d. Professional care
e. Dental health service

566. A 62-year-old patient has a median fracture of mandible along with formation of a false joint. Objectively: dental formula is 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 47, 46, 45, 44, 43. The teeth are intact, stable, with high crowns. Fragment mobility is insignificant, there is no displacement. X-ray picture shows a bone defect 0,8 cm large. What prosthesis is indicated?
a. Lamellar prosthesis with Weinsteins pivot point
*b. Bridge-like prosthesis with a pivot point
c. Lamellar prosthesis with Gavrilows pivot point
d. Lamellar prosthesis without a pivot point
e. Lamellar prosthesis with Oxmans pivot point

567. A 68-year-old patient complains about pain in the palate that occurs during wearing a complete removable denture the patient got 3 months ago. Objectively: palatine torus is strongly marked, mucous membrane around it is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most probable cause of this complication?
a. Prosthesis base is made of acrylic plastic
*b. Torus wasnt isolated
c. Functional impression was taken by means of a rigid individual tray
d. Previous impression was made in plaster
e. It was made anatomic teeth arrangement

568. A 40-year-old patient consulted a prosthodontist about upper jaw teeth mobility that turned up after therapeutic treatment. Objectively: the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 teeth are pulpless, exhibit II degree mobility, unchanged colour. What prosthetic construction should be applied?
*a. Mamlock splint
b. Elastic crown splint
c. Wire-band splint
d. Cast bar splint
e. Crown soldered splint

569. Tooth replacement with complete removable dentures involves adjustment of occlusal relations by different movements of the lower jaw. Transversal movements of the lower jaw are initiated by the following muscle:
a. Internal (medial) pterygoid muscle
b. Mastication muscle
c. Digastric muscle
*d. External (lateral) pterygoid muscle
e. Temporal muscle

570. A patient complains of clicking in the TMJ. On auscultation, the sounds can be heard in the middle and at the beginning of mouth opening. These signs give evidence of:
a. Joint capsule distension
b. Joint subluxation
c. Increase in occlusal vertical dimension
d. TMJ dislocation
*e. Reduction in occlusal vertical dimension

571. At the stage of adjustment of an individual tray the Herbst test should be done. What muscles cause the shift of the individual tray during functional testing - alternate touching right or left cheek with the tip of tongue?
a. Mimic muscles
b. Mastication muscles
c. Digastric, geniohyoid
d. Mentalis and orbicular muscle of mouth
*e. Mylohyoid

572. A 37 year old patient was diagnosed with arthrosis of mandibulotemporal joint. During auscultation the doctor heard pathological rustle in the area of the joint, namely "clicking" that was caused by a load. What is the mechanism of this pathological rustle?
a. Loosening of mandibulotemporal joint ligaments
b. Friction of bone surfaces in the joint
*c. Asynchronous movement of disc and articulation head
d. Calcification of mandibulotemporal joint disc
e. Inflammation of cartilaginous tissue of the disc

573. A 65-year-old male patient complains of crepitation and clicking in both temporomandibular joints, pain induced by displacement of the lower jaw to the right, ear noise, dry mouth, glossalgia. He has been using complete removable prosthesis of the lower jaw for 6 months. The patient denies having rheumatosis. Objectively: the lower third of face is shortened, mental fold is strongly pronounced, mouth corners are lowered, there are angular fissures and cracks. Palpation reveals crepitatnt rale observed during TMJ moving. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Temporomandibular arthritis
b. Temporomandibular dislocation
c. Temporomandibular osteoarthritis
*d. Costens syndrome
e. Temporomandibular arthrosis

574. A 50-year-old patient complains about pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mouth opening. Dental formula is 14, 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 33, 32, 31, 41, 42, 43, 44. While opening the mouth the lower jaw moves in a zigzag manner towards the affected joint. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical for?
a. Sclerosing arthrosis of TMJ
b. Habitual TMJ dislocation
*c. Musculoarticular dysfunction
d. Chronic arthritis of TMJ
e. Deforming arthrosis of TMJ

575. A 35-year-old patient is at a dentist. He is anxious, complains of being afraid of the dentist, is unwilling to let the dentist examine him. Drugs of which group should be given the patient before stomatological manipulations?
a. Hypotensive
b. Analgetics
*c. Sedative
d. Cardiac glycosides
e. Desensitizing

576. A 32-year-old patient presented to a clinic for takingof an upper jaw impression. During this procedure she choked with a piece of impression material, there was risk of asphyxia. What are the first-priority actions within emergency care?
a. Artificial ventilation of lungs
b. Closed-chest cardiac massage
c. Tracheotomy
*d. Abrupt push-like compressions of the lower thorax
e. Plaster removal from the airways

577. A 52-year-old patient complains of teeth mobility, gingival haemorrhage. The 44, 45, 34, 35 teeth exhibit I grade mobility, the 43, 42, 41, 31, 32, 33 teeth exhibit II grade mobility. There is gingival oedema, peridontal pockets are 5-6 mm deep. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone tissue by one second of root length. The patient has been diagnosed with generalized periodontitis of median severity. What orthopaedic construction is most efficient in this situation?
a. Mamlock splint
b. Temporary Novotny splint
c. Plastic mouthguard
d. Murrays splint
*e. Elbrecht splint

578. A 20 year old man got a blow to the chin. He remained conscious. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. He has an oedema and haematoma in the area of his lower jaw on both sides. Jaw palpation causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited. There is also a rupture of mucous membrane of oral cavity in the area of the 44, 43 and 34, 35 teeth. Occlusion is deviated. What type of asphyxia  can be developed?
a. Valve
b. Aspirative
c. Obturative
d. Stenotic
*e. Dislocative

579. A patient with a relevant history of allergic reactions had undergone tests for allergic sensitivity to metals. According to indications, the bridges of precious metal (gold) were fabricated. Specify the warranty period starting from the day of finishing the prosthetic procedures?
a. 18 months
*b. 12 months
c. 6 months
d. 3 months
e. 9 months

580. A 43 year old patient applied to a prosthetic dentistry for the purpose of prosthetics. In anamnesis: has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. The patient has been very anxious before the appointment with a doctor. Suddenly the patients condition grew worse, he felt limb weakness. The patient became covered with cold clammy sweat and lost consciousness. What critical state is it?
a. Syncope
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Myocardium infarction
*d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Hyperglycemic coma

581. A 47-year-old patient complains of pain in the lateral part of mandible to the left of the toungue edge, which is caused by tongue movements. Two days ago the patient was provided with claspps fixation a partial removable clasp denture for the 47, 42, 33 teeth. Retroalveolar region of the mucous membraneis exhibits a localized hyperemic area matching the edge of the denture. Which muscle contractions demarcate the boundary in this region?
a. Geniohyoid
b. Medial wing muscle
c. Masticatory
*d. Mandibulohyoid
e. Hyoglossal

582. A patient complains about worsened fixation and frequent breakages of partial removable lamellar denture for the lower jaw that has been in use for 5 years. Objectively: alveolar part in edentulous regions is significantly atrophied, the denture balances. What is the most probable cause of worsened fixation and frequent breakages of the denture?
a. Improper care of denture
b. Consumption of solid food
c. Wear of artificial teeth
*d. Alveolar process atrophy
e. Denture using during sleep

583. A 40-year-old female patient complains about crepitation and pain in the region of TMJ projection on the right, that arise in the final stage of mouth opening. Articular sounds turned up after dental prosthetics. Mouth opening is unlimited, mouth is opened in a straight path, amplitude of mouth opening is 5 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Posterior dislocation of articular disk
b. Meniscus tresis
c. Lower jaw dislocation
d. Anterior dislocation of articular disk
*e. Lower jaw subluxation

584. A 73-year-old patient consults a dental orthopaedist about total edentia. Objectively: there is insignificant regular atrophy of the alveolar process of mandible, the process is covered with mucous membrane of moderate elasticity. According to Kellers classification, such manifestations are characteristic for the folowing type of edentulous jaw:
a. Fifth
b. Third
*c. First
d. Second
e. Fourth

585. A 22-year-old patient is afraid of pain from conduction anaesthesia. A dentist decided that this anaesthesia should be preceded by applicational anaesthesia of mucous membrane on the spot of injection. What drug should be used for this purpose?
a. 5% oxacillin ointment
b. 1% synthomycin ointment
*c. 5% lidocaine ointment
d. 3% sinaflan ointment
e. 3% doxycyclin ointment

