1. A 42-year-old patient complains about general weakness. Body temperature is 41°C, he presents with sickness, emesis, dyspnea. There is evident well-defined skin redness in form of flame tips on her face. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anthrax
*b. Erysipelas
c. Phlebitis of facial vein
d. Streptococcal impetigo
e. Lupus

2. A victim got a perforating wound of the left cheek contaminated with radioactive materials on the battlefield. The wound was dressed with aseptic bandage from the individual first-aid pack and processed with anaesthetic and antibacterial medicaments. The dressing should be changed at the following station of medical evacuation:
a. At the battalion aid station
b. At the station of the separate medical battalion
c. Only when the dressing is unsatisfactory
*d. At each station of evacuation
e. At the regimental aid station

3. A 43-year-old man complains about painful swallowing, limited mouth opening. Destroyed 37 tooth caused pain 3 days ago. Painful swallowing appeared the next day. Limited mouth opening was present a day later. Objectively: there is a small soft swelling in the left submaxillary area. An enlarged lymph node is palpated. The mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm. Edema of left palatine arch and pharynx lateral wall is present. The 37 tooth is destroyed. Mucous membrane around the tooth is edematic. Percussion is slightly painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Odontogenic submaxillary phlegmon
b. Odontogenic pterygomandibular phlegmon
*c. Odontogenic peripharyngeal phlegmon
d. Peritonsillar abscess
e. Acute submaxillary lymphadenitis

4. A 27-year-old male patient underwent extraction of the medial root of the 36 tooth, but the distal tooth root was broken in its middle third. What tools should be applied for root extraction?
a. Right angled elevator
b. Broad-beaked forceps
c. Close-beaked forceps
*d. Left angled elevator
e. Straight elevator

5. A 42-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) that irradiates to the ear; headache, general indisposition, impossible mastication and limited mouth opening. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric due to the edema in the region of the left temporomandibular joint. The skin in this region is hyperemic. The pain is made worse by the smallest movements of mandible. Palpation of the joint causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited down to 15-20 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mandible subluxation
b. Acute purulent parotitis
*c. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
e. Myogenous osteoarthrosis

6. A 42 year old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that is getting worse during eating, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area
b. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
c. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
*d. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
e. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area

7. A 42-year-old patient complains about pain in the submandibular and sublingual region that is getting worse during eating; body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. The patient has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: along the right sublingual plica there is infiltration, hyperaemia, edema of soft tisues, acute pain on palpation. The duct of the right submandibular salivary gland discharges turbid saliva with pus admixtures. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of alveololingual groove
b. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
c. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submandibular region
d. Adenophlegmon of submandibular region
*e. Exacerbation of urolithiasis

8. A 38-year-old female patient came to a hospital and complained about a wound on her left cheek. She got this trauma 16-18 hours ago, didnt loose consciousness. Objectively: a 3 cm long injury of skin, subcutaneous fat and muscle. The wound is bleeding. What kind of initial surgical d-bridement should be performed?
*a. Early surgical d-bridement
b. Secondary surgical d-bridement
c. -
d. Initial surgical d-bridement along with plasty
e. Delayed surgical d-bridement

9. A patient consulted a dentist about constant dull pain in the 38 tooth. Mouth opening is limited down to 1 cm. It is necessary to extract the 38 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for operation?
a. Mandibular
b. Extraoral mandibular technique
c. Tuberal
*d. Bercher-Dubov
e. Torus

10. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Right angled elevator
b. Straight elevator
c. Broad-beaked forceps
d. Close-beaked forceps
*e. Left angled elevator

11. A 67 year old patient complains about frequently recurring erosion in the area of vermilion border of his lower lip. The erosion is oval, 0,8х1,3 cm large, covered with thin crusts. After their removal some petechial haemorrhages on glossy surface can be seen. There are also some atrophied areas of the vermilion border. Infiltration is absent. Submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
*a. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
b. Keratoacanthosis
c. Glandular cheilitis
d. Bowens disease
e. Erosive-ulcerous form of leukoplakia

12. A 58 year old patient complains about clicking in the mandibulotemporal joint during eating. Periodically as a result of wide mouth opening the mandible takes up such a position that makes mouth closing impossible. The mandible can be easily placed into its initial position by pressing with fingers upon its coronoid processes. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
*a. Habitual dislocation of mandible
b. Subluxation of mandible
c. Posterior dislocation
d. Anterior dislocation
e. Acute dislocation of mandible

13. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a dental surgeon about an enlarging "mothers mark", itch and desquamation. According to patient, changed in color and size skin area appeared a year ago after a shaving trauma. Objectively: there is an intensely pigmented brown spot up to 2 cm large with small oval protruding nodules on its surface in the infraorbital region on the left. Desquamation factors are present. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are matted together with skin and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pigmented nevus
b. Epidermoid cancer
c. Papillomatosis
*d. Melanoma
e. Verrucous nevus

14. A female patient consulted a stomatologist about inability to close her mouth, speech difficulty. Objectively: the oral cavity is half-open, there is drooling, central line deviates to the right. There is a depression in front of the tragus, and above the malar arch the mandibular condyle bulges inward the infratemporal fossa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bilateral anterior dislocation
*b. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the left
c. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the left
d. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the right
e. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the right

15. A patient applied to a dentist complaining about inability to close her mouth, laboured speech. Objectively: oral cavity is half-open with saliva outpouring from it, central line is deviated to the right. There is a cavity in front of antilobium; below the malar arch there is a protrusion of mandible head into the infratemporal fossa. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the right
b. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the right
c. Bilateral anterior dislocation
*d. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the left
e. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the left

16. A 36 year old man complains about acute headache, body temperature rise up to 39,1°C, indisposition. Objectively: a slight face asymmetry because of soft tissue edema of the left infraorbital area. Crown of the 26 tooth is partly decayed. Percussion is acutely painful. Mucous membrane on the vestibular side in the area of the 25, 26 teeth is edematic, hyperemic. Breathing through the left part of nose is laboured, there are purulent discharges. X-ray picture showed a homogeneous shadow of the left part of maxillary sinus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Suppuration of maxillary cyst
b. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
c. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute periostitis of upper jaw
*e. Acute purulent odontogenous maxillary sinusitis

17. A 32-year-old patient complains of a fistula in the submandibular region. Objectively: cheek is swollen in the region of mandible on the left, palpation revealed induration of soft tissues. In projection of the 35, 36 teeth there is a fistula containing pus and granulations. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone, sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteoma
*b. Chronic osteomyelitis
c. Syphilis
d. Actinomycosis
e. Sarcoma

18. X-ray picture depicts a circular well-defined area of bone tissue destruction 0,7х 0,7 cm large in the projection of root apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Odontoma
b. Osteoma
c. Cyst
d. Granuloma
*e. Cystogranuloma

19. A 24 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for root removal of her upper wisdom tooth. Tuberal anesthesia caused a postinjection haematoma. What was injured during anesthetization?
a. Maxillary artery
b. Zygomatic artery
c. Palatine artery
*d. Pterygoid venous plexus
e. Infraorbital artery

20. A 45-year-old patient complains about pain in his mandible that arose after extraction of the 36 tooth. Objectively: alveolar socket is covered with bloody clot. X-ray picture shows unextracted root of the 36 tooth. What tools are necessary for extraction of this root?
*a. Angled elevator curved right
b. Straight elevator
c. Bayonet-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped forceps
e. Angled elevator curved left

21. A 70-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the central upper jaw incisors with ІІІ degree mobility. What tools should be applied?
a. Beak-shaped forceps
b. Straight elevator
*c. Straight forceps
d. Bayonet-shaped forceps
e. S-shaped forceps

22. A patient complains of pain and swelling in the right submandibular area. She has been treating the 45 tooth for a week. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. There is a painful tense infiltration in the right submandibular region. The skin doesn’t make a fold, its hyperemic and glossy. The mouth can be opened by 3 cm. Deglutition is painless. These clinical findings correspond with the following disease:
a. Abscess of the right alveololingual groove
b. Acute odontogenous sialoadenitis
c. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
*d. Odontogenous phlegmon of the right submandibular region
e. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular region

23. During endodontic treatment of periodontitis a tool was broken in the middle third of the medial root. Choose the treatment method:
a. Tooth extraction
*b. Medial root hemisection
c. Crown radicular separation
d. Medial root amputation
e. Resection of medial root apex

24. A 65 year old patient complains about pain during eating, reduced tongue mobility, an ulcer in the posterior part of mouth floor on the left, weight loss. Objectively: the patient uses a partial removable denture for the lower jaw. In the area of the left mylohyoid duct there is an ulcer in form of a cleft up to 1,6 cm long with everted edges, covered with grey-yellowish deposit, closely adhering to an infiltrate that can be detected during bimanual palpation. In the left submandibular and superolateral areas of neck several enlarged nonmobile lymph nodes can be palpated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Decubital ulcer of mouth floor
b. Tuberculous ulcer of mouth floor
*c. Cancer of mucous membrane of mouth floor
d. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous ulcer)
e. Actinomycosis of mouth floor

25. A patient consulted an oral surgeon about pain in the region of his left upper jaw that appeared 3 days ago. After examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 17 tooth. It is indicated to extract the 17 tooth. What nerves should be blocked for painless extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Nasopalatine nerve
*b. Posterior alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
c. Anterior alveolar nerves and incisor nerve
d. Greater palatine nerve
e. Median alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve

26. A 32 year old patient applied to a dental surgeon for oral cavity sanitation before prosthetics. During examination of oral cavity the dentist revealed that crown of the 35 tooth was decayed. The root is stable, its percussion is painless. Mucous membrane of alveolar process was unchanged. X-ray picture showed a slight broadening of periodontal fissure. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Chronic periodontitis of the 25 tooth
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 25 tooth
c. Cystogranuloma
*d. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
e. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 25 tooth

27. A patient has indication for removal of his medial incisor of the right upper jaw on account of chronic periodontitis. What types of anaesthesia should be applied for tooth removal?
a. Infraorbital, palatine and incisive
b. Plexual and incisive
c. Infraorbital and palatine
d. Terminal and incisive
*e. Infraborbital and incisive

28. A 56 year old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory area, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic lymphadenitis
*b. Adenocarcinoma
c. Cyst of the gland
d. Mixed tumour
e. Glandular tuberculosis

29. A 43-year-old patient complains about constant pain in the upper jaw region on the right, that irradiate to the temple. The pain was noted one month ago. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of the swollen right cheek. Mucous membrane has no changes. The breathing through the right nasal meatus is obstructed, there are foul-smelling saniopurulent discharges. Plan X-ray film of facial skeleton in the semi-axial projection shows intensive opacity of the right maxillary sinus and violated intactness of its interior and superior walls. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
b. Upper jaw osteoma
c. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
*e. Upper jaw cancer

30. A 47-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the 27 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, skin is of normal colouring, the mouth can be fully opened, mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic and hyperemic at a level of the 27 tooth. The 27 tooth has a deep carious cavity interconnecting with pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
b. Acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw beginning from the 27 tooth
c. Chronic left-sided odontogenous highmoritis
*d. Exacerbated chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
e. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth

31. A 44-year-old patient consulted a surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain was noted 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetrical, mouth opening is unlimited. The crown fof the 26 tooth is half-destroyed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperemic on the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth was treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
c. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
d. Acute purulent periostitis of upper jaw of the 26 tooth on the left
e. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth

32. A patient complains about acute constant pain that is getting worse when biting down on food, sensation of a recently erupted tooth on the right upper jaw. Examination of the 15 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Tooth percussion causes acute pain. Probing is painless. Mucous membrane in projection of the root apex is hyperemic, painful on palpation. X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute diffuse pulpitis
b. Acute albuminous periostitis
c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

33. A patient complains about acute intense pain and a slight swelling in the area of a decayed tooth of the lower jaw on the right, ill health, body temperature rise up to 38,3°C, lack of appetite, insomnia. Objectively: there is collateral edema of soft tissues of submandibular area and lower part of right cheek. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged on the right, palpatory painful. Crown of the 46 tooth is half decayed, the 45, 46, 47 teeth are mobile, there is also a cuff infiltrate in the area of these teeth. Vincents symptom is positive on the right. Make a diagnosis:
*a. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
d. Acute condition of chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
e. Acute purulent odontogenuos periostitis

34. A 40 year old patient with mandible fracture applied to a doctor 3 weeks after immobilization of breaks because of pain and body temperature rise. Objectively: a slight swelling in the chin area, mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 2 1 | 1 2 teeth is hyperemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Overtooth splint on 5 4 3 2 1 | 1 2 3 4 5 teeth is in satisfactory condition, no occlusion abnormalities were detected. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of mandible. What surgical action is indicated?
a. Intraoral novocaine block
b. Trepanation of the 2 1 and 1 2 teeth
c. Supervision of patient
*d. Lancing of abscess to the bone
e. Removal and replacement of the overtooth splint by a new one

35. A 43-year-old patient complains about a neoplasm in the right submandibular region that appeared a month ago after angina. The patient underwent anti-inflammatory therapy but it led to no reduction of the neoplasm. Objectively: body temperature is up to 37,2°C. Palpation reveals a slightly painful, spherical, freely movable, well-defined neoplasm of dense and elastic consistency in the right submandibular region. The duct of submandibular salivary gland discharges transparent saliva. The sublingual plica is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atheroma
*b. Chronic lymphadenitis
c. Sialolithiasis
d. Chronic sialoadenitis
e. Adenoma of salivary gland

36. A 37 year old man complained about pain and a slight swelling emerging during eating in the left submaxillary area. Objectively: a painful elastic infiltration in the left submaxillary area. Mouth opening is not limited. Bimanual palpation in the area of mylohyoid groove revealed a compact movable oblong induration. Mucous membrane is unchanged. Duct of the left submandibular gland doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic lymphadenitis
b. Retention cyst
c. Submaxillary lipoma
*d. Salivolithiasis
e. Pleomorphic adenoma

37. A 45-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 13 tooth. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps
*b. Straight forceps
c. Bayonet-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped forceps curved right
e. Straight elevator

38. A 19 year old patient came to traumatology centre and complained about face asymmetry, right-sided paresthesia of his upper lip, nasal haemorrhage. Objectively: evident face asymmetry due to an edema and haematoma of the right inferior eyelid and infraorbital area. Opening of mouth is slightly limited, occlusion is normal. Palpation reveals a symptom of "step" in the area of the right zygomaticomaxillary suture, deformity in the area of external edge of the right orbit and zygomaticoalveolar crest, gaseous crepitation in the right infraorbital area; percussion reveals a "bursted nut" symptom. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
b. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw (inferior)
*c. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
d. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw (superior)
e. Fracture of nose bones

39. A patient is 48 year old, according to the results of clinicoroentgenological examination it is indicated to remove the 26 tooth because of acute condition of chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What conduction anesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Infraorbital and incisive
b. Torus
*c. Tuberal and palatinal
d. Plexus
e. Infraorbital and palatinal

40. A 64-year-old patient complains about a slightly painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue that appeared over 2 months ago. Objectively: lateral surface of tongue has an ulcer with raised edges, tissues around it are infiltrated. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, adhering to each other and surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Lingual cancer
b. Tuberculous ulcer
c. Ulcero-necrotic lesion associated with blood disorders
d. Decubital ulcer
e. Syphilis (hard chancre)

41. A patient complained about painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. Several days ago the 47 tooth was removed because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. The patients condition kept worsening. Body temperature is 37,9°C. Results of external examination: the face is symmetric, face skin is slightly pale. Right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, palpatory painful. Examination of oral cavity is impossible because of evident contracture of lower jaw (the mouth opens up to 0,5 cm between central incisors). What anesthesia will provide mouth opening?
a. Mandibular anesthesia
*b. Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
c. Torus
d. Plexus
e. Block of upper cervical plexus

42. A 55 year old patient has a painless, tuberous, cyanotic pedunculated formation 2х1х1,5 cm large that appeared on the spot of the removed 46th tooth. Opening of mouth is not limited. Intra-oral X-ray picture of alveolar process in the area of the removed 46th tooth shows a focus of bone tissue destruction. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Ameloblastoma of the lower jaw
*b. Giant-cell epulis
c. Hypertrophic gingivitis
d. Hard odontoma of lower jaw
e. Papilloma of mucous membrane in the area of the removed 46th tooth

43. A patient complains about destroyed crown of the 27 tooth. The patient was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the indicated tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 27 tooth is destroyed completely. It is necessary to extract this tooth. What field block anesthesia should be applied for operation?
a. Tuberal
b. Infraorbital
*c. Tuberal and palatinal
d. Infraorbital and tuberal
e. Tuberal and incisor

44. A 40-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 38°C, and of a roundish infiltration on his upper lip. Objectively: there is a roundish infiltration on the upper lip on the left, the skin above it is wine red, the infiltration adheres to the surrounding tissues and has a seapus necroticus in the middle. The upper lip is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphadenitis
b. Upper lip carbuncle
c. Acute periostitis of the upper lip
d. Retention cyst
*e. Upper lip furuncle

45. A soldier injured by a shell splinter was diagnosed with gunshot fracture of mandible accompanied by an over 3 cm long bone defect in the chin area. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
*b. Machine osteosynthesis (Rudko, Bernadsky)
c. Direct osteosynthesis
d. Tigerstedts splints
e. Gunning-Ports splint

46. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of his 24, 26, 27 teeth, pus excretion from alveolus of the the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 month ago dissection along the mucogingival fold was performed and the 25 tooth was extracted. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of soft tissues in the right infraorbital area, lymph nodes of the right submaxillary area are enlarged, slightly painful, nasal breathing is normal. Mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is edematic and cyanotic. There is also a fistula with bulging granulations along the mucogingival fold. Alveolus of the extracted 25 tooth excretes purulent granulations. What disease does this clinical presentation correspond with?
*a. Chronic localized osteomyelitis
b. Acute condition of localized periodontitis
c. Chronic alveolitis
d. Acute condition of chronic maxillary sinusitis
e. Acute osteomyelitis

47. A 25-year-old male patient came to the traumatology. He complains about pain in the right half of his face, limited mouth opening. Objectively: there is a moderate edema and haematoma in the region of the right malar arch. Palpation shows a slightly painful impaction of bone tissue in the region of the right malar arch. The bite isnt disturbed. Amplitude of mouth opening is 1,5 cm. At making an attempt to open the mouth wider the patient feels a mechanical obstacle and pain intensification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic arthritis of TMJ
b. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
*c. Fracture of the right malar arch
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
e. Le Fort II maxillary fracture

48. A 69-year-old patient needs extraction of the 12, 11 teeth. He is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis, the 12 and 11 teeth exhibit II degree mobility. Choose a proper instrument for extraction:
a. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
b. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
c. S-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped forceps curved right
*e. Straight forceps

49. During opening a phlegmon of mouth floor a doctor revealed greyish necrotic masses in purulent foci, gas vesicles and fat droplets, sharp unpleasant smell of exudate. The tissues are of dark-brown colour, muscles resemble of boiled meat. What medications should be administered in order to prevent further spreading of this process?
a. Immunomodulators
*b. Polyvalent antigangrenous serum
c. Glucocorticoid medications
d. Challenging dose of broad spectrum antibiotics
e. Hyposensitizing medications

50. A 19-year-old patient complains about pain in the submental part of mandible. The day before he got a trauma. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of tissues in the mental area. The mouth can be opened widely enough. All the teeth are intact. Mucous membrane is edematic in the region of central incisors, it bleeds slightly. In this region mobility of mandible fragments is present. Occlusion is undisturbed. What splint should be chosen by the dentist?
*a. Smooth brace
b. Splint with guide plane
c. Ivy loops for 31, 32, 42, 41
d. Anchor splint with intermandibular fixation
e. Splint with spacer bar

51. A 25-year-old man complains of itching and reddening of skin in the buccal area, general weakness, inertness. He associates origin of the disease with a skin injury he got during shaving. Objectively: body temperature is 39,0°C. A well-defined section of skin in the buccal area is hyperemic, it slightly protrudes above the surface. Hyperemic surface has some vesicles containing serous fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Streptococcal impetigo
*b. Erysipelatous inflammation of skin
c. Furuncle
d. Phlegmon of buccal area
e. Anthrax

52. A 28 year old man applied to a dental surgeon for removal of the 38 tooth. What forceps should be chosen for this tooth?
a. Broad-beaked forceps (with non-converging beaks)
b. Beak-shaped forceps with thorns
c. Root bayonets
*d. Beak-shaped curved forceps
e. Beak-shaped forceps with converging beaks

53. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 14 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis following ineffective therapeutic treatment. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. Straight forceps
b. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped forceps curved right
*e. S-shaped forceps

54. After complex extraction of the 37 tooth a patient experienced anaesthesia of the left half of his lower lip and chin. Electroodontodiagnos showed reduction of lower jaw teeth electroexcitability on the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Neuritis of the left inferior alveolar nerve
b. Alveolitis in the region of socket of the 37 tooth
c. Acute osteomyelitis of mandible body
d. Herpes Zoster n.Trigemini
e. Neuralgia of the left inferior alveolar nerve

55. Examination of a patient revealed a roundish neoplasm in the submental area. Skin above it is unchanged, makes a fold easily. Puncture sample contains strow-yellow liquid with cholesterol admixture. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermoid cyst
*b. Inborn median cyst
c. Lymphadenitis
d. Lipoma
e. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland

56. A 25-year-old man consulted a dentist about extraction of the 18 tooth, its crown is destroyed by ½. The tooth was treated more than once. During tooth extraction the maxillary tuber was accidentally torn off. What actions should be taken?
a. To restore the fragment to its place and fix it there
b. To try to restore the fragment to its place
*c. To remove the fragment and stitch up the wound
d. To remove the fragment
e. To remove the fragment and tampon the wound

57. A 20 year old patient complains of a tumour-like formation on the lateral surface of his neck on the right. He revealed this tumour a year ago. Objectively: there is a semi-oval well-defined tumour 3х2 cm large on the lateral neck surface. The tumour doesnt hold together with skin, it is painless, dense and elastic, upwardly and sidewardly movable. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. After the tumour puncture some light yellow liquid was obtained that consisted of cast-off epithelium, cholesterol crystals, lymphocytes, erythrocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Neck chemodectoma
b. Chronic neck lymphadenitis
c. Median neck cyst
d. Dermoid neck cyst
*e. Lateral neck cyst

58. A 48-year-old patient got a pustule on his chin that quickly developed into a dense and acutely painful infiltration 3x5 cm large. The skin above it is of blue-red colour. In the centre one can see three zones of necrosis around the hair follicles. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Suppurated atheroma
b. Chin furuncle
c. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin
d. Dermal actinomycosis of chin
*e. Chin carbuncle

59. A 20 year old patient got a trauma in the area of his upper jaw. He applied to a dentist and complained about mobility of his frontal upper teeth, pain during cutting and joining of teeth. Objectively: the 11 and 21 teeth have II-III degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact but have oral position. Complete joining of teeth is impossible because the teeth are situated beyond the dental arch. X-ray picture shows a slight broadening of periodontal fissure of the 11 tooth up to 0,5-2 mm. The roots are intact. Make a correct diagnosis:
a. Traumatic complete dislocation of the 11, 21 teeth
b. Traumatic periodontitis of the 11, 21 teeth
*c. Traumatic subluxation of the 11, 21 teeth
d. Fracture of alveolar process in the area of the 11, 21 teeth
e. Traumatic extraction of the 11, 21 teeth

60. A patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about pain and edema in the right infraorbital region and right zygomatic region, skin numbness in the area of the right half of his upper lip; nasal haemorrhage. These symptoms turned up after a trauma. What disease should be suspected?
a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
*c. Fracture of zygomatic bone
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
e. Fracture of nose bones

61. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
a. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border
b. Verrucous precancer of red border
*c. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
d. Bowens disease
e. Erythroplasia

62. Examination of a male patient revealed that a tumour occupied the major part of his tongue; tongue mobility was limited, there were solitary regional nodes in the region of affection. After the cytological analysis the patient was diagnosed with cancer of tongue T2N1M0. What treatment should be chosen for this patient?
*a. Combined method
b. Surgical removal of tumor
c. Removal of lymph nodes
d. Chemotherapy
e. Radiation therapy

63. A 30-year-old patient has got an edema and hyperemia of nose wing skin spreading to the skin of his upper lip and cheek. Examination revealed a fissure along the infra-external edge of the left nostril. The skin is tense, dense, red-and-cyanotic, skin line pattern is smoothed; rise of local temperature is present. The zone of affection is well-defined and irregularly shaped. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Thrombophlebitis of the facial vein
*b. Erysipelatous inflammation
c. Dermal tuberculosis
d. Dermal actinomycosis
e. Dermal cancer

64. On the second day after tooth extraction a 35-year-old woman applied to a facial surgeon and complained about pain in the parotid-masticatory region and sensation of lacking contact between the upper and lower jaw teeth on the right. Examination revealed chin deviation to the left, half-open mouth, closed lips, disturbed occlusion. There is also limitation of lateral mandible movements. In front of the right ear tragus soft tissues sink down. What examination is expected to be the most informative in this case?
a. TMJ ultrasound
b. Bimanual TMJ investigation
c. -
*d. TMJ roentgenography
e. Mandible roentgenography

65. A patient has got a traumatic fracture of mandible in the area of the missing 34, 35 teeth with a slight displacement and a defect of alveolar part in the area of the 34, 35 teeth. Other teeth on both lower and upper jaws are intact. What splint would be optimal in this case?
*a. Tigerstedts splint with a spreading curve
b. Ports splint
c. Vankevich splint
d. Vasilyevs splint
e. Plain splint cramp

66. A 50 year old woman complains about a neoplasm on her lower lip on the side of oral cavity that appeared a month ago and has been slowly growing since that. Objectively: there is a roundish, elastic, painless neoplasm inside the lower lip. Mucous membrane hasnt changed its colour. Make a diagnosis:
a. Lip papilloma
b. Lip abscess
*c. Retention cyst of lower lip
d. Lip fibroma
e. Lip lipoma

67. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the area of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flattened, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the regiob of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
a. Pregnancy epulis
b. -
c. Angiomatous
d. Giant-cell
*e. Fibrous

68. As a result of a road accident a 45 year old patient got an injury of his upper jaw. Examination revealed elongated and flattened face, profuse nasal haemorrhage, liquorrhea from the nose and ears. These clinical presentations are typical for the following fracture of upper jaw:
a. -
*b. Subbasal (Le Fort III)
c. Suborbital (Le Fort II)
d. Subnasal (Le Fort I)
e. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones

69. A 57-year-old patient complains about a slowly growing swelling in the sublingual region. She noted it 3 months ago. Objectively: there is an elastic swelling in the sublingual region. The swelling is painless, mucous membrane over it is with tints of blue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermoid cyst of oral cavity floor
b. Salivolithiasis
*c. Ranula
d. Lipoma of sublingual area
e. Hemangioma of sublingual area

70. A 38-year-old patient consulted dental surgery about extraction of the 36 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction?
a. Tuberal
b. Mandibular
*c. Torus
d. Infiltration
e. Voino-Yasenetsky truncal

71. A 49-year-old patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about permanent intense dull pain in the region of the right upper jaw. It is known from the anamnesis that the 17 tooth has been repeatedly treated for exacerbation of chronic periodontitis but the treatment appeared to be ineffective. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Tuberal and incisor
b. Incisor and paltinal
c. Torus
*d. Tuberal and palatinal
e. Tuberal, incisor and palatinal

72. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the right condyle of mandible
b. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible
c. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ
d. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ
*e. Arthrosis of the right TMJ

73. A 60 year old man has got a pustule on his chin skin that quickly developed into a hard, strongly painful infiltrate 3х3 cm large. In the epicentre three necrosis zones around hair follicles are present. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged, painful. Body temperature is 38,5°C. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Suppurated atheroma
b. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin
*c. Chin carbuncle
d. Chin furuncle
e. Allergic chin dermatitis

74. A 34-year-old patient got a trauma (fall) that resulted in mobility of alveolar process and all the upper jaw teeth, occlusion was also changed. X-ray picture depicts the fracture line that runs in both directions from the piriform opening along the floor of maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
b. Partial fracture of the alveolar process
*c. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
e. Unilateral maxillary fracture

75. A 35 year old man complains about pain in the area of the 38 tooth, painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. What anesthesia method will be optimal during operation on account of pericoronaritis?
a. Infiltration anesthesia
b. Stem anesthesia
c. Application anesthesia
*d. Conduction Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
e. General anesthesia

76. A 23-year-old patient complains about periodical pain in the region of the 11 tooth, protrusion of the alveolar process. The patient got a trauma 4 years ago. Objectively: crown of the 11 tooth is dark, percussion is painless. X-ray picture shows roundish well-defined area of bone tissue rarefication by the root apex of the 11 tooth. The area is 2,0 cm in diameter. Puncture results: yellow fluid with cholesterol crystals. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Maxillary ameloblastoma
b. Chronic maxillary osteomyelitis
*c. Maxillary radicular cyst
d. Soft maxillary odontoma
e. Maxillary osteoclastoma

77. A 33-year-old patient complains about an ulcer of oral cavity floor, that is located under his tongue on a level between the 43 to the 33 tooth. Examination reveales that ulcer edges are undermined and scalloped. Its grey-yellow floor is shallow and it is covered with small, easily bleeding granulations. There is no ulcer infiltration. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Cancerous ulcer of oral cavity floor
b. Decubital ulcer of oral cavity floor
*c. Tubercular ulcer of oral cavity floor
d. Gummatous ulcer of oral cavity floor
e. Migratory granuloma of oral cavity floor

78. A female patient applied to the oral surgery department and underwent radical maxillary sinusotomy with plastic repair of fistula through the alveolar socket of the extrated 27 tooth. Infiltration and all the peripheral block anaesthesias of the left upper jaw were performed with 6,0 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. 3 minutes later the patient registered double vision in her left eye, inability to close it. Which of the performed anaesthesias is the reason for the above-mentioned presentations?
a. Palatinal
b. Tuberal
*c. Infraorbital
d. Incisor
e. Infiltration

79. Regimental Aid Station (RAS) admitted a soldier with an injury in the maxillofacial region. Dosimetric control revealed radiation affection in this patient. The injured should be referred to the following functional unit of RAS:
a. Admission and sorting pavilion
*b. Decontamination station
c. Evacuation pavilion
d. Dressing pavilion
e. Isolator

80. On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
b. Acute epidemic parotiditis
*c. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis
d. Parenchymatous parotiditis
e. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region

81. A 56-year-old patient complains about a painless neoplasm on the alveolar crest of the right upper jaw. Objectively: there is a bright-red wide-based tumour in the region of premolars. It is localized on both sides from the alveolar crest. The tumour is dense and elastic, painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gingival fibromatosis
b. Central osteoclastoma
*c. Peripheral osteoclastoma
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Papilloma

82. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a swelling in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of upper lip edema, nasolabial fold is smoothed. Mucogingival fold of the upper jaw vestibular surface in the region of the 11, 12, 21 teeth is smoothed, hyperemic. Palpation is painful. Fluctuation is present. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw satrting from the 21 tooth. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy
b. Extraction of the 12, 21, 22 teeth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Preservation of the 21 tooth, anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, ant-inflammatory therapy
*e. Preservation of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy

83. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and "hurt" her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and doesn’t make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Suppurated cheek haematoma
b. Cheek haematoma
c. Acute lymphadenitis
d. Cheek phlegmon
e. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible

84. A 33-year-old officer delivered from a battlefield has shoot off mental part of mandible, drooling, insignificant haemorrhage from the oral cavity, asphyxia that occurs periodically because of head repositioning. What actions should be taken to prevent the asphyxia development?
*a. Fixation of tongue, transportation in prone position
b. Fixation of jaws with a mental sling
c. Transportation in prone position
d. Surgical d-bridement, tracheostome construction
e. Thacheostome construction

85. During extraction of the 14 tooth a 64-year-old patient complained about retrosternal pain irradiating to his back. There is paleness of membrane and skin integument as well as pulse assymetry on the carotid arteries. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory failure
b. Hypertensic crisis
*c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Angioneurotic Quinckes edema
e. Collapse

86. A 47-year-old patient consulted a doctor about an itching tumour in the right buccal area that has significantly enlarged lately. Examination revealed an irregularly shaped tumour up to 1,5 cm large, the tumour is black and glossy. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Dermal melanoma
b. Dermal basalioma
c. Cutaneous horn
d. Dermal cancer
e. Pigmented nevus

87. A 24-year-old victim consulted a doctor about a face burn. He was injured by the open flame. He complains about pain and burning of face skin. Objectively: hyperemia of face skin; in the region of chin, nose, forehead, eyebrows, cheekbones there are burn blisters containing transparent liquid. These presentations correspond with the following degree of burn severity:
a. III B-IV degree
b. II-IV degree
c. II-III A degree
d. II-III B degree
*e. I-II degree

88. A 20-year-old patient complains about inability to move with his lower jaw, speech difficulty and problems during eating. He associates his condition with a trauma he got when biting on apple. Examination revealed half-open mouth, open bite due to the solitary contacts of distal tubercles of the last molars, salivation, indistinct speech. Articular heads of mandible can be felt anterior to both tragi. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibrous ankylosis of temporomandibular joint
b. Traumatic bilateral fracture of articular processes of mandible
c. Fracture of articular processes of mandible
*d. Acute anterior bilateral mandible luxation
e. Exacerbation of osteoarthritis of temporomandibular joint

89. A 30-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39,0°C, a roundish infiltrate on his upper lip, general weakness. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 days. Objectively: a roundish infiltrate in the region of the upper lip 2,5 cm in diameter, the skin over the infiltrate is red with a necrotic core in the centre. The upper lip is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute glandular abscess
*b. Furuncle of the upper lip
c. Retention cyst of the upper lip
d. Carbuncle of the upper lip
e. Acute periostitis of the upper jaw

90. A 48-year-old woman complains about aching dull pain in the region of the left TJM, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ
b. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
c. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
d. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
*e. Arthrosis of the TMJ

91. After anesthetization a 55 year old patient felt sudden attack of weakness, pain behind his breastbone irradiating to his left arm and scapular area, palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, his forehead is covered with cold sweat, the skin is pale, AP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart tones are dull, pulse is thready and arrhythmic. What state is developing?
*a. Myocardium infarction
b. Stenocardia attack
c. -
d. Collapse
e. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock

92. During tooth extraction a 55 year old patient felt dull pain behind her breastbone, got a sense of compression. A dental surgeon diagnosed her with a stenocardia attack. What medication should be given this patient in order to arrest this state?
a. Baralgin
b. Analgin
*c. Nitroglycerine, validol
d. Dimedrol
e. Ketanov

93. A 58 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon and complained about painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue. Objectively: left lateral surface of tongue has a roundish ulcer with undermined soft overhanging edges, palpatory painful, ulcer floor is slightly bleeding and covered with yellowish nodules. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Actinomycosis
b. Trophic ulcer
c. Syphilis
d. Traumatic ulcer
*e. Tuberculosis

94. A 30-year-old patient was diagnosed with posttraumatic osteomyelitis of mandible in the region of mandible body on the right. The patient got the trauma 1,5 month ago. X-ray picture shows the fracture line and the shadow of osseous sequestre along the fracture line. There is a fistula with purulent discharge on skin. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Physiotherapy
b. Fistulectomy
c. Fistulectomy, antibacterial therapy
*d. Fistulectomy, sequestrectomy
e. Sequestrectomy

95. A 27-year-old victim was delivered to to the facial surgery department with a cut wound of right cheek. The trauma is civilian, the patient got it in a fight. The deadline for early surgical d-bridement without preliminary antibiotic injection is no more than:
a. 1 hour
*b. 24 hours
c. 72 hours
d. 48 hours
e. 12 hours

96. After the unproblematic extraction of the 37 tooth a 60-year-old patient presents with profuse haemorrhage from the tooth socket. The patient has a 6-year history of essential hypertension. Now his AP is 180/110 mm Hg. What emergency aid should be rendered?
a. Injection of haemostatic drugs
*b. Injection of hypotensive drugs and tight pack of the tooth socket
c. Pack of the tooth socket with iodoform tampon
d. Pack of the tooth socket with haemostatic sponge
e. Suture ligature of the tooth socket

97. A 48-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the region of the 38 tooth. She has been suffering from this for 3 days. Crown of the 28 tooth is completely decayed. What forceps should be applied for extraction of roots of the 28 tooth?
a. Straight root forceps
b. S-shaped forceps curved left
*c. Bayonet-shaped forceps
d. S-shaped close-beak forceps
e. S-shaped broad-beak forceps

98. After supercooling a 42-year-old patient presented with headache in the left frontal region and left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetric, breathing through the left nasal meatus is obstructed, seropurulent discharges are present. Palpation is slightly painful in the infraorbital region as well as along the mucogingival fold in projection of the 24, 25 teeth. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. Mucuous membrane of alveolar process has no visible changes. X-ray picture shows reduced pneumatization of the left upper jaw sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute periodontitis of the 24 tooth
b. Acute rhinogenous maxillitis
c. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left upper jaw
*d. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth

99. A 27-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the region of her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the patients face is slightly asymmetric due to thickening of mandibular body on the right. Adjacent soft tissues are of unchanged colour and normal consistency. Mouth opening is not limited. Mucous membrane of oral cavity presents no changes. In the right lower dentition the 45 tooth is missing. X-ray picture of the right half of the mandible in its lateral view shows an oval well-defined 2x3 cm large radiolucency in the bone tissue. The coronal portion of the retinated horizontally positioned 45 tooth is turned inward the radiolucent area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Adamantinoma of mandible
b. Odontoma of mandible
c. Osteoclastoma of mandible
*d. Follicular cyst of mandible
e. Sarcoma of mandible

100. A 52-year-old patient complains about a nonhealing ulcer on his lower lip. The patient is smoker. He hasn’t ever consulted a doctor about it. In the region of red border of the lower lip a roundish ulcer is present. It is up to 2,0 cm in diameter. The ulcer edges are thickened and a little bit raised in form of a whitish swelling. In the left submandibular region palpation revealed enlarged, painless, dense lymph nodes with limited mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erosive verrucous leukoplakia
b. Fibroma of the lower lip
c. Syphilitic ulcer
*d. Cancer of the lower lip
e. Keratoacanthoma

101. A 62 year patient was at a dentists and suddenly there appeared dyspnea and hacking cough, sense of progressing asphyxia. The patients condition is getting progressively worse; number of respiratory movements reached 30/min, acrocyanosis became more evident, there appeared gargling breathing, oral cavity excretes a lot of albuminoid sputum. Psychomotor agitation and arterial hypertension are present. What pathological state is it?
a. Spontaneous pneumothorax
*b. Pulmonary edema
c. Epileptic attack
d. An attack of bronchial asthma
e. Anaphylactic shock

102. A 32-year-old male patient was delivered to traumatology. He complains about nosebleed, severe cephalalgia, giddiness, face deformation, heavy breathing, mastication inability. He sustained an injury in the mine over three hours ago. He was conscious. Objectively: the middle third of his face is elongated, there are considerable hematomas and there is an edema in the region of nose root and eyelids of both eyes. The upper jaw is displaced downwards, it is mobile together with nasal bones, cheek bones and eyeballs. Palpation reveals deformation, pain and pathological mobility in the region of the nose bridge, external socket edges, pterygoid processes of basilar bone. Nosebleed is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Fracture of nasal bone
d. Fracture of zygomatic bone
e. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (lower)

103. A patient was delivered to an admission room after a road accident. Examination of the patient revealed in the area of oral floor a large haematoma spreading to the neck area as well as a significant edema of soft tissues of oral floor and neck. There are signs of asphyxia. What type of emergency care is indicated?
a. Opening and draining of haematoma
b. Symptomatic medicamental treatment
c. Lobeline introduction
d. Tongue fixation
*e. Tracheotomy performing

104. A 42 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. After anesthetization the patient felt sudden attack of nausea, weakness, he got the sense of compression behind his breastbone, heart pain; he began vomiting. The patient lost consciousness, there appeared convulsions. Objectively: the patients skin is pale, covered with cold clammy sweat, pupils dont react to the light. The pulse is thready, arterial pressure cannot be detected. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Traumatic shock
b. Epileptic attack
c. Collapse
d. Syncope
*e. Anaphylactic shock

105. A 42 year old patient complains about a neoplasm in the anterior palatal part that has been forming for 10 years. The 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth are intact. Intraoral X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows a single focus of bony tissue destruction, well-defined, 2,5 by 1,5 cm large. Periodontal fissure in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth can be well seen. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Follicular cyst
*b. Nasopalatine canal cyst
c. Globulomaxillary cyst
d. Radicular cyst
e. Residual cyst

106. A 76-year-old patient has a roundish ulcer in the area of the right nasolabial sulcus. The ulcer has dense, rough floor covered with yellowish-grey crusts, and resembles of a cone. The ulcer edges are dense, crater-like; the ulcer grows both sidewards and deepwards. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Actinomycotic ulcer
b. Tuberculous ulcer
*c. Basalioma
d. Syphilitic ulcer
e. Squamous cell carcinoma of skin

107. A 40-year-old patient complains about a long-existing fissure in the central part of red border of his lower lip. He has been smoking since he was 16. Objectively: there is a deep 1,0 cm long fissure along the median line of red border of the lower lip, the fissure edges are bulging. Characteristic quality of the fissure is its spontaneous healing, but after epithelization the fissure recurs. The patient was diagnosed with chronic fissure of the lower lip. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Choose the most appropriate treatment method in this situation:
a. Cryodestruction
b. Excision 0,5 cm off the neoplasm limits
c. Close-focus roentgenotherapy
*d. Excision within evidently healthy tissues
e. Diathermo-coagulation

108. A victim got a face and temporal region trauma. A doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
a. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone
b. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
c. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
d. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone
*e. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone

109. It is planned to lance an abscess of hard palate (it is localized close to the 23, 24, 25 teeth) and to extract the causative 24 tooth that had caused abscess development. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Tuberal, infraorbital and incisor
b. Tuberal and incisor
c. Tuberal and palatinal
*d. Infraorbital, palatinal and incisor
e. Tuberal, infraorbital and palatinal

110. A 28-year-old patient had to undergo extraction of the 46 tooth under Weisbrems apodactylic mandibular anaesthesia. What is the target site of the anaesthetic solution injection?
a. A segment of temporal crest of mandible
b. Retromandibular fossa
c. A segment of maxillary tuber
d. Retromolar fossa
*e. A segment of mandibular torus

111. A 36-year-old patient consulted a dentist about permanent acute pain in the upper jaw teeth, body temperature rise. The dentist found out that the 26 tooth had been repeatedly treated, the rest of teeth were intact. After roentgenological examination the patient was diagnosed with acute highmoritis. What is the most effective way of treatment?
a. Puncture of the maxillary sinus and medicamentous therapy
b. Caldwell-Luc maxillary sinusotomy
*c. Extraction of the causative tooth and medicamentous therapy
d. Medicamentous therapy
e. Medicamentous and physiotherapeutic treatment

112. A 23 year old patient complained about unpleasant sensations in the area of the 12 tooth, X-ray picture shows a well-defined low-density area up to 8-10 mm in diameter around the root apex of the 12 tooth. What method of surgery will be the most reasonable?
a. Root amputation
b. Tooth removal
c. Cystotomy
*d. Root apex resection
e. Hemisection

113. A 32-year-old patient complains about pain and swelling in the region of his mandible and left cheek. He has been suffering from this for 2 days. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 37,5°C. There is an edema of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes are bilaterally enlarged, painful on palpation. Crown of the 37 tooth is partially decayed, the tooth is immobile, percussion is slightly painful. Mucogingival fold in the region of the 37 tooth is edematic, hyperaemic, flattened, its palpation causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
b. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
c. Abscess of alveololingual groove on the left
*d. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
e. Chronic productive periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth

114. A 38-year-old patient consulted a dentist about aching pain in the region of the 48 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Body temperature rise up to 37,6°C and aggravation of general condition is present. Objectively: insignificant swelling of retromolar region as well as hyperaemia of mucous membrane. The 48 tooth is covered with occlusal pad. It is painful on palpation. Purulent discharges are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Aphthous stomatitis
b. Acute purulent periostitis
c. Acute pulpitis
d. Acute periodontitis of the 48 tooth
*e. Acute purulent pericoronitis

115. A patient was admitted to the oral surgery department with a diagnosis "odontogenous phlegmon of mouth floor". Objectively: general condition of the patient is grave, abed position is forced, the patient is sitting with lowered head. He complains about pain behind his breastbone that is getting worse during backward flexion of head; cough, dyspnea. What complication has developed?
*a. Mediastinitis
b. Cervical phlegmon
c. Phlegmon of peripharyngeal space
d. Phlegmon of tongue root
e. Phlegmon of retropharyngeal space

116. A 34-year-old patient has indication for extraction of the 38 tooth because of chronic fibrous periodontitis. Oral surgeon performed torus anaesthesia. This anaesthesia blocked transmission of pain information from the following nerves:
*a. Infraalveolar, lingual, buccal
b. Infraalveolar, buccal
c. Lingual, buccal, mental
d. Infraalveolar, lingual
e. Lingual, buccal

117. A patient with unilateral dislocation of mandibulotemporal joint was delivered to the maxillofacial department. What type of local anesthesia is indicated for relaxation of masticatory muscles during diaplasis?
a. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia, retromandibular way
b. Torus anesthesia
c. Intraoral mandibular anesthesia
d. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia, submandibular way
*e. Subzygomatic Bersche-Dubov-Uvarovs anesthesia

118. A patient got a trauma that resulted in limited mouth opening, nasal haemorrhage, numbness of inferior eyelid as well as skin in the infraorbital area. Objectively: there is face deformation caused by depression of soft tissues in the malar region on the left; there is also a step-off deformity in the median part of the infraorbital rim and in the region of zygomatico-alveolar crest. What method of examination will be the most effective for the diagnostics?
*a. X-ray study of facial skull in the axial projection
b. X-ray study of facial skull in the lateral projection
c. Orthopantomogram
d. X-ray study of facial skull and paranasal sinuses
e. X-ray study of facial skull in the frontal projection

119. A 64 year old patient was waiting to see an oral surgeon. Suddenly she fell, there appeared coarse breathing, spasmatic twitching of upper and lower extremities. Face and neck became cyanotic, pupils became mydriatic, reaction to the light was absent, arterial pressure and pulse could not be detected, heart tones could not be heard, involuntary urination was observed. What state are these symptoms typical for?
a. Collapse
*b. Clinical death
c. Stroke
d. Loss of consciousness
e. Myocardium infarction

120. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about intense lancinating paroxysmal pain accompanied by a sensation of current passage in the region of her upper lip on the right. Pain attacks occur spontaneously and last 3-5 minutes. The patient usually has 2-3 attacks a day. The patient is unable to establish the cause of this disease. Examination of her oral cavity revealed no pathological changes. Oral cavity is sanitated. Test orthopantomogram shows an impacted supernumerary 13 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Central neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
b. Right-sided upper jaw pulpitis
c. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
d. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
*e. Peripheral neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus

121. A 42-year-old patient complains about general weakness. Body temperature is 41°C, he presents with sickness, emesis, dyspnea. There is evident well-defined skin redness in form of flame tips on her face. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlebitis of facial vein
b. Streptococcal impetigo
*c. Erysipelas
d. Lupus
e. Anthrax

122. A 35-year-old male consulted a dentist about the 26 tooth extraction. After the patient had been given tuberal anaesthesia, he presented with progressing tissue edema and limited mouth opening. This condition was caused by:
a. Anaphylactic shock
*b. Vessel trauma
c. Nerve trunk trauma
d. Muscle trauma during anaesthetization
e. Hypersensitivity to the anaesthetic

123. A victim got a perforating wound of the left cheek contaminated with radioactive materials on the battlefield. The wound was dressed with aseptic bandage from the individual first-aid pack and processed with anaesthetic and antibacterial medicaments. The dressing should be changed at the following station of medical evacuation:
a. Only when the dressing is unsatisfactory
*b. At each station of evacuation
c. At the regimental aid station
d. At the battalion aid station
e. At the station of the separate medical battalion

124. A 27-year-old male patient underwent extraction of the medial root of the 36 tooth, but the distal tooth root was broken in its middle third. What tools should be applied for root extraction?
*a. Left angled elevator
b. Straight elevator
c. Close-beaked forceps
d. Broad-beaked forceps
e. Right angled elevator

125. A 42 year old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that is getting worse during eating, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
b. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area
c. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
d. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
e. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area

126. A 42-year-old patient complains about pain in the submandibular and sublingual region that is getting worse during eating; body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. The patient has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: along the right sublingual plica there is infiltration, hyperaemia, edema of soft tisues, acute pain on palpation. The duct of the right submandibular salivary gland discharges turbid saliva with pus admixtures. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenophlegmon of submandibular region
b. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submandibular region
*c. Exacerbation of urolithiasis
d. Abscess of alveololingual groove
e. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland

127. A 38-year-old female patient came to a hospital and complained about a wound on her left cheek. She got this trauma 16-18 hours ago, didnt loose consciousness. Objectively: a 3 cm long injury of skin, subcutaneous fat and muscle. The wound is bleeding. What kind of initial surgical d-bridement should be performed?
a. -
*b. Early surgical d-bridement
c. Secondary surgical d-bridement
d. Delayed surgical d-bridement
e. Initial surgical d-bridement along with plasty

128. A patient complains about mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth, periodic pain, sensation of heaviness in the corresponding half of the upper jaw, haemorrhagic discharges from the left side of nose. These presentations have been observed for 4 months, within the last month the pain has become worse, the patient presents now with general weakness. Examination of the oral cavity reveals the grade II mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth. On palpation of the maxillary tuber, the bone wall was found to be absent. X-ray picture shows a homogeneous shadowing of maxillary sinus; bone structures have unclear contours. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
b. Upper jaw osteoclastoma
c. Upper jaw adamantinoma
d. Upper jaw sarcoma
*e. Upper jaw cancer

129. A patient consulted a dentist about constant dull pain in the 38 tooth. Mouth opening is limited down to 1 cm. It is necessary to extract the 38 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for operation?
*a. Bercher-Dubov
b. Torus
c. Tuberal
d. Extraoral mandibular technique
e. Mandibular

130. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Straight elevator
*b. Left angled elevator
c. Close-beaked forceps
d. Broad-beaked forceps
e. Right angled elevator

131. A patient consulted a doctor about recurrent pain in the frontal part of his upper jaw. He has history of previous treatment for pulpitis. Objectively: the crown of the 12 tooth is restored with a filling. X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows an area of bone tissue destruction (up to 1 cm in diameter) at the root apex of the 12 tooth. The root channel of the 12 tooth is filled up to the top. The patient was diagnosed with cystogranuloma of the 12 tooth. Choose the best method of treatment:
a. Replantation of the 12 tooth
*b. Root apex resection
c. Conservative treatment
d. Extraction of the 12 tooth
e. Dissection along the mucogingival junction

132. A 67 year old patient complains about frequently recurring erosion in the area of vermilion border of his lower lip. The erosion is oval, 0,8х1,3 cm large, covered with thin crusts. After their removal some petechial haemorrhages on glossy surface can be seen. There are also some atrophied areas of the vermilion border. Infiltration is absent. Submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Keratoacanthosis
b. Erosive-ulcerous form of leukoplakia
*c. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
d. Bowens disease
e. Glandular cheilitis

133. After a fall a 28-year-old patient visited the clinic of maxillofacial surgery and complained of restricted mouth opening, skin numbness in the left infraorbital region, upper lip, wing of the nose, pain in the left zygomatic region that gets worse when he opens his mouth. Palpation revealed step deformity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone without a displacement
b. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort I (top type)
c. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone
*d. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone with a displacement
e. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort II (medium type)

134. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a dental surgeon about an enlarging "mothers mark", itch and desquamation. According to patient, changed in color and size skin area appeared a year ago after a shaving trauma. Objectively: there is an intensely pigmented brown spot up to 2 cm large with small oval protruding nodules on its surface in the infraorbital region on the left. Desquamation factors are present. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are matted together with skin and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Verrucous nevus
b. Pigmented nevus
*c. Melanoma
d. Epidermoid cancer
e. Papillomatosis

135. A 75-year-old patient has been admitted to the dental department for the right-angle mandibular fracture with a displacement. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the post-traumatic swelling, palpation reveals the mobility of fragments and pain. The patient has a lifelong history of epilepsy. What is the best method of treatment?
*a. Osteosynthesis
b. Immobilization with Tigerstedt splints
c. Immobilization with Vankevich splint
d. Immobilization with Port splint
e. Immobilization with Vasilyev splints

136. A female patient consulted a stomatologist about inability to close her mouth, speech difficulty. Objectively: the oral cavity is half-open, there is drooling, central line deviates to the right. There is a depression in front of the tragus, and above the malar arch the mandibular condyle bulges inward the infratemporal fossa. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the left
b. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the right
*c. Unilateral anterior dislocation of mandible on the left
d. Unilateral posterior dislocation of mandible on the right
e. Bilateral anterior dislocation

137. A 36 year old man complains about acute headache, body temperature rise up to 39,1°C, indisposition. Objectively: a slight face asymmetry because of soft tissue edema of the left infraorbital area. Crown of the 26 tooth is partly decayed. Percussion is acutely painful. Mucous membrane on the vestibular side in the area of the 25, 26 teeth is edematic, hyperemic. Breathing through the left part of nose is laboured, there are purulent discharges. X-ray picture showed a homogeneous shadow of the left part of maxillary sinus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
*b. Acute purulent odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
c. Acute periostitis of upper jaw
d. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
e. Suppuration of maxillary cyst

138. A 32-year-old patient complains of a fistula in the submandibular region. Objectively: cheek is swollen in the region of mandible on the left, palpation revealed induration of soft tissues. In projection of the 35, 36 teeth there is a fistula containing pus and granulations. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone, sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Actinomycosis
b. Sarcoma
c. Osteoma
*d. Chronic osteomyelitis
e. Syphilis

139. A patient has been diagnosed with traumatic open angular fracture of mandible with a fragments displacement. Which of the following should be applied for transport immobilization of the fragments?
a. Standard Vasyliev splints
b. Tigerstedt splints
*c. Entin head-chin strap
d. Gunning splints
e. Weber splints

140. A 24 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for root removal of her upper wisdom tooth. Tuberal anesthesia caused a postinjection haematoma. What was injured during anesthetization?
a. Palatine artery
*b. Pterygoid venous plexus
c. Infraorbital artery
d. Maxillary artery
e. Zygomatic artery

141. A 45-year-old patient complains about pain in his mandible that arose after extraction of the 36 tooth. Objectively: alveolar socket is covered with bloody clot. X-ray picture shows unextracted root of the 36 tooth. What tools are necessary for extraction of this root?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Bayonet-shaped forceps
c. Angled elevator curved left
d. Straight elevator
*e. Angled elevator curved right

142. A patient complains of pain and swelling in the right submandibular area. She has been treating the 45 tooth for a week. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. There is a painful tense infiltration in the right submandibular region. The skin doesn’t make a fold, its hyperemic and glossy. The mouth can be opened by 3 cm. Deglutition is painless. These clinical findings correspond with the following disease:
a. Acute odontogenous sialoadenitis
b. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
c. Abscess of the right alveololingual groove
d. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular region
*e. Odontogenous phlegmon of the right submandibular region

143. During endodontic treatment of periodontitis a tool was broken in the middle third of the medial root. Choose the treatment method:
*a. Medial root hemisection
b. Crown radicular separation
c. Tooth extraction
d. Resection of medial root apex
e. Medial root amputation

144. A patient consulted an oral surgeon about pain in the region of his left upper jaw that appeared 3 days ago. After examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 17 tooth. It is indicated to extract the 17 tooth. What nerves should be blocked for painless extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Greater palatine nerve
b. Median alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
c. Nasopalatine nerve
*d. Posterior alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
e. Anterior alveolar nerves and incisor nerve

145. A 32 year old patient applied to a dental surgeon for oral cavity sanitation before prosthetics. During examination of oral cavity the dentist revealed that crown of the 35 tooth was decayed. The root is stable, its percussion is painless. Mucous membrane of alveolar process was unchanged. X-ray picture showed a slight broadening of periodontal fissure. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
b. Chronic periodontitis of the 25 tooth
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
d. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 25 tooth
e. Cystogranuloma

146. A patient has indication for removal of his medial incisor of the right upper jaw on account of chronic periodontitis. What types of anaesthesia should be applied for tooth removal?
a. Infraorbital and palatine
b. Infraorbital, palatine and incisive
c. Plexual and incisive
*d. Infraborbital and incisive
e. Terminal and incisive

147. A 31-year-old patient complains of experiencing recurrent pain in the 48 tooth for 4 years. Objectively: right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. Mucous membrane around the partialy erupted 48 tooth is hyperemic. On probing the subgingival pocket of the 48 tooth exudes pus mixed with blood. What additional study will be most informative for diagnosing this pathology?
*a. Radiography
b. Electroodontometry
c. Contrast radiography
d. Blood and urine tests
e. Blood count

148. A 56 year old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory area, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Adenocarcinoma
b. Cyst of the gland
c. Chronic lymphadenitis
d. Glandular tuberculosis
e. Mixed tumour

149. A 43-year-old patient complains about constant pain in the upper jaw region on the right, that irradiate to the temple. The pain was noted one month ago. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of the swollen right cheek. Mucous membrane has no changes. The breathing through the right nasal meatus is obstructed, there are foul-smelling saniopurulent discharges. Plan X-ray film of facial skeleton in the semi-axial projection shows intensive opacity of the right maxillary sinus and violated intactness of its interior and superior walls. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
*c. Upper jaw cancer
d. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
e. Upper jaw osteoma

150. A 47-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the 27 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, skin is of normal colouring, the mouth can be fully opened, mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic and hyperemic at a level of the 27 tooth. The 27 tooth has a deep carious cavity interconnecting with pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw beginning from the 27 tooth
b. Chronic left-sided odontogenous highmoritis
c. Chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
d. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
*e. Exacerbated chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth

151. A patient complains about acute constant pain that is getting worse when biting down on food, sensation of a recently erupted tooth on the right upper jaw. Examination of the 15 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Tooth percussion causes acute pain. Probing is painless. Mucous membrane in projection of the root apex is hyperemic, painful on palpation. X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
*b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
d. Acute diffuse pulpitis
e. Acute albuminous periostitis

152. A patient complains about acute intense pain and a slight swelling in the area of a decayed tooth of the lower jaw on the right, ill health, body temperature rise up to 38,3°C, lack of appetite, insomnia. Objectively: there is collateral edema of soft tissues of submandibular area and lower part of right cheek. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged on the right, palpatory painful. Crown of the 46 tooth is half decayed, the 45, 46, 47 teeth are mobile, there is also a cuff infiltrate in the area of these teeth. Vincents symptom is positive on the right. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute purulent periodontitis
b. Acute purulent odontogenuos periostitis
*c. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
d. Acute condition of chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
e. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis

153. A 40 year old patient with mandible fracture applied to a doctor 3 weeks after immobilization of breaks because of pain and body temperature rise. Objectively: a slight swelling in the chin area, mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 2 1 | 1 2 teeth is hyperemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Overtooth splint on 5 4 3 2 1 | 1 2 3 4 5 teeth is in satisfactory condition, no occlusion abnormalities were detected. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of mandible. What surgical action is indicated?
*a. Lancing of abscess to the bone
b. Removal and replacement of the overtooth splint by a new one
c. Supervision of patient
d. Trepanation of the 2 1 and 1 2 teeth
e. Intraoral novocaine block

154. A 43-year-old patient complains about a neoplasm in the right submandibular region that appeared a month ago after angina. The patient underwent anti-inflammatory therapy but it led to no reduction of the neoplasm. Objectively: body temperature is up to 37,2°C. Palpation reveals a slightly painful, spherical, freely movable, well-defined neoplasm of dense and elastic consistency in the right submandibular region. The duct of submandibular salivary gland discharges transparent saliva. The sublingual plica is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic sialoadenitis
b. Adenoma of salivary gland
c. Atheroma
*d. Chronic lymphadenitis
e. Sialolithiasis

155. A 37 year old man complained about pain and a slight swelling emerging during eating in the left submaxillary area. Objectively: a painful elastic infiltration in the left submaxillary area. Mouth opening is not limited. Bimanual palpation in the area of mylohyoid groove revealed a compact movable oblong induration. Mucous membrane is unchanged. Duct of the left submandibular gland doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pleomorphic adenoma
b. Chronic lymphadenitis
*c. Salivolithiasis
d. Retention cyst
e. Submaxillary lipoma

156. Two years after radiation therapy a 49-year-old patient has been diagnosed with recurrence of the lower lip carcinoma. Objectively: there is a 1x2 cm large neoplasm with an ulcer in the centre in the region of the right half of the lower lip. Palpation of the right submandibular region reveals two enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes of round shape. Specify the stage of the disease:
a. T1N0 M0
*b. T2 N1M0
c. T1N1M0
d. T2 N0 M0
e. T1N2 M0

157. A 45-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 13 tooth. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. Straight elevator
b. S-shaped forceps
c. S-shaped forceps curved right
d. Bayonet-shaped forceps
*e. Straight forceps

158. A 64-year-old patient complains about a slightly painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue that appeared over 2 months ago. Objectively: lateral surface of tongue has an ulcer with raised edges, tissues around it are infiltrated. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, adhering to each other and surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Syphilis (hard chancre)
b. Decubital ulcer
c. Ulcero-necrotic lesion associated with blood disorders
*d. Lingual cancer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

159. A patient complained about painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. Several days ago the 47 tooth was removed because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. The patients condition kept worsening. Body temperature is 37,9°C. Results of external examination: the face is symmetric, face skin is slightly pale. Right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, palpatory painful. Examination of oral cavity is impossible because of evident contracture of lower jaw (the mouth opens up to 0,5 cm between central incisors). What anesthesia will provide mouth opening?
*a. Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
b. Torus
c. Mandibular anesthesia
d. Block of upper cervical plexus
e. Plexus

160. A 55 year old patient has a painless, tuberous, cyanotic pedunculated formation 2х1х1,5 cm large that appeared on the spot of the removed 46th tooth. Opening of mouth is not limited. Intra-oral X-ray picture of alveolar process in the area of the removed 46th tooth shows a focus of bone tissue destruction. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Hard odontoma of lower jaw
b. Papilloma of mucous membrane in the area of the removed 46th tooth
c. Ameloblastoma of the lower jaw
*d. Giant-cell epulis
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

161. A patient complains about destroyed crown of the 27 tooth. The patient was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis of the indicated tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 27 tooth is destroyed completely. It is necessary to extract this tooth. What field block anesthesia should be applied for operation?
*a. Tuberal and palatinal
b. Tuberal
c. Tuberal and incisor
d. Infraorbital and tuberal
e. Infraorbital

162. A 40-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 38°C, and of a roundish infiltration on his upper lip. Objectively: there is a roundish infiltration on the upper lip on the left, the skin above it is wine red, the infiltration adheres to the surrounding tissues and has a seapus necroticus in the middle. The upper lip is hyperaemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Upper lip carbuncle
*b. Upper lip furuncle
c. Retention cyst
d. Acute periostitis of the upper lip
e. Acute lymphadenitis

163. A soldier injured by a shell splinter was diagnosed with gunshot fracture of mandible accompanied by an over 3 cm long bone defect in the chin area. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Tigerstedts splints
b. Gunning-Ports splint
c. Intermandibular Ivy ligature
*d. Machine osteosynthesis (Rudko, Bernadsky)
e. Direct osteosynthesis

164. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of his 24, 26, 27 teeth, pus excretion from alveolus of the the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 month ago dissection along the mucogingival fold was performed and the 25 tooth was extracted. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of soft tissues in the right infraorbital area, lymph nodes of the right submaxillary area are enlarged, slightly painful, nasal breathing is normal. Mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is edematic and cyanotic. There is also a fistula with bulging granulations along the mucogingival fold. Alveolus of the extracted 25 tooth excretes purulent granulations. What disease does this clinical presentation correspond with?
a. Acute condition of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Chronic alveolitis
c. Acute osteomyelitis
d. Acute condition of localized periodontitis
*e. Chronic localized osteomyelitis

165. A 69-year-old patient needs extraction of the 12, 11 teeth. He is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis, the 12 and 11 teeth exhibit II degree mobility. Choose a proper instrument for extraction:
*a. Straight forceps
b. S-shaped forceps curved right
c. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
d. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
e. S-shaped forceps

166. A 19-year-old patient complains about pain in the submental part of mandible. The day before he got a trauma. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of tissues in the mental area. The mouth can be opened widely enough. All the teeth are intact. Mucous membrane is edematic in the region of central incisors, it bleeds slightly. In this region mobility of mandible fragments is present. Occlusion is undisturbed. What splint should be chosen by the dentist?
a. Splint with guide plane
b. Splint with spacer bar
*c. Smooth brace
d. Anchor splint with intermandibular fixation
e. Ivy loops for 31, 32, 42, 41

167. A 25-year-old man complains of itching and reddening of skin in the buccal area, general weakness, inertness. He associates origin of the disease with a skin injury he got during shaving. Objectively: body temperature is 39,0°C. A well-defined section of skin in the buccal area is hyperemic, it slightly protrudes above the surface. Hyperemic surface has some vesicles containing serous fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Erysipelatous inflammation of skin
b. Furuncle
c. Streptococcal impetigo
d. Anthrax
e. Phlegmon of buccal area

168. A 28 year old man applied to a dental surgeon for removal of the 38 tooth. What forceps should be chosen for this tooth?
a. Beak-shaped forceps with thorns
b. Root bayonets
c. Broad-beaked forceps (with non-converging beaks)
d. Beak-shaped forceps with converging beaks
*e. Beak-shaped curved forceps

169. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 14 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis following ineffective therapeutic treatment. What tools should be applied for extraction?
*a. S-shaped forceps
b. S-shaped forceps curved right
c. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
d. Straight forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

170. After complex extraction of the 37 tooth a patient experienced anaesthesia of the left half of his lower lip and chin. Electroodontodiagnos showed reduction of lower jaw teeth electroexcitability on the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Herpes Zoster n.Trigemini
b. Acute osteomyelitis of mandible body
c. Neuralgia of the left inferior alveolar nerve
d. Alveolitis in the region of socket of the 37 tooth
*e. Neuritis of the left inferior alveolar nerve

171. Examination of a patient revealed a roundish neoplasm in the submental area. Skin above it is unchanged, makes a fold easily. Puncture sample contains strow-yellow liquid with cholesterol admixture. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
b. Dermoid cyst
c. Lipoma
d. Lymphadenitis
*e. Inborn median cyst

172. A 25-year-old man consulted a dentist about extraction of the 18 tooth, its crown is destroyed by 1/2. The tooth was treated more than once. During tooth extraction the maxillary tuber was accidentally torn off. What actions should be taken?
a. To remove the fragment
b. To remove the fragment and tampon the wound
c. To try to restore the fragment to its place
d. To restore the fragment to its place and fix it there
*e. To remove the fragment and stitch up the wound

173. A 20 year old patient complains of a tumour-like formation on the lateral surface of his neck on the right. He revealed this tumour a year ago. Objectively: there is a semi-oval well-defined tumour 3х2 cm large on the lateral neck surface. The tumour doesnt hold together with skin, it is painless, dense and elastic, upwardly and sidewardly movable. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. After the tumour puncture some light yellow liquid was obtained that consisted of cast-off epithelium, cholesterol crystals, lymphocytes, erythrocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Median neck cyst
b. Neck chemodectoma
c. Chronic neck lymphadenitis
*d. Lateral neck cyst
e. Dermoid neck cyst

174. A 30-year-old patient complains of a painless tumour-like formation in the region of the left mandibular alveolar process. Objectively: there is a pale pink 1x1,5 cm large tumour-like formation on the vestibular surface of the alveolar process at the 34 and 35 teeth. The formation has a broad base, it does not bleed. Crowns of the 34, 35 teeth are intact, the teeth are non-mobile. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows no changes in bone structure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Fibrous epulis
b. Mucosa papilloma
c. Hypertrophic epulis
d. Giant-cell epulis
e. Pleomorphic adenoma

175. A 48-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the 37 tooths roots. What tool should be chosen?
a. Broad-beak forceps
b. Bayonet forceps
c. Curved beak-shaped forceps
*d. Closed-beak forceps
e. S-shaped forceps

176. After the extraction of the 26 tooth a 43-year-old patient presents with a communication between the oral cavity and the maxillary sinus. X-ray picture shows no changes in the maxillary sinuses. What tactics should be chosen by a dental surgeon to prevent maxillary sinusitis?
a. Sinus rinsing with an antibiotic solution
b. Socket filling with a blood clot
c. Socket tamponade with a iodoform turunda
d. Socket filling with a hemostatic sponge
*e. Plastic restoring of the communication

177. A 70-year-old patient complains about the mobility of the 21 tooth. The tooth has not been treated before. Objectively: there is II class mobility of the 21 tooth, the root is exposed by 1/2. What tool should be used to extract the tooth?
*a. Straight forceps
b. Bayonet forceps
c. Beak-shaped forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. S-shaped forceps

178. A 48-year-old patient got a pustule on his chin that quickly developed into a dense and acutely painful infiltration 3x5 cm large. The skin above it is of blue-red colour. In the centre one can see three zones of necrosis around the hair follicles. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chin furuncle
*b. Chin carbuncle
c. Dermal actinomycosis of chin
d. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin
e. Suppurated atheroma

179. A 20 year old patient got a trauma in the area of his upper jaw. He applied to a dentist and complained about mobility of his frontal upper teeth, pain during cutting and joining of teeth. Objectively: the 11 and 21 teeth have II-III degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact but have oral position. Complete joining of teeth is impossible because the teeth are situated beyond the dental arch. X-ray picture shows a slight broadening of periodontal fissure of the 11 tooth up to 0,5-2 mm. The roots are intact. Make a correct diagnosis:
a. Traumatic extraction of the 11, 21 teeth
*b. Traumatic subluxation of the 11, 21 teeth
c. Traumatic complete dislocation of the 11, 21 teeth
d. Traumatic periodontitis of the 11, 21 teeth
e. Fracture of alveolar process in the area of the 11, 21 teeth

180. A patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about pain and edema in the right infraorbital region and right zygomatic region, skin numbness in the area of the right half of his upper lip; nasal haemorrhage. These symptoms turned up after a trauma. What disease should be suspected?
a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
b. Fracture of nose bones
c. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
*e. Fracture of zygomatic bone

181. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
a. Bowens disease
b. Erythroplasia
c. Verrucous precancer of red border
d. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border
*e. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis

182. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the red border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumor-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the red border, it is dense and grayish-red. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can be hardly removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
*b. Verrucous precancer of the red border of lip
c. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the red border of lip
d. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
e. Bowens disease

183. Examination of a male patient revealed that a tumour occupied the major part of his tongue; tongue mobility was limited, there were solitary regional nodes in the region of affection. After the cytological analysis the patient was diagnosed with cancer of tongue T2N1M0. What treatment should be chosen for this patient?
a. Chemotherapy
b. Removal of lymph nodes
c. Radiation therapy
d. Surgical removal of tumor
*e. Combined method

184. A patient has got a traumatic fracture of mandible in the area of the missing 34, 35 teeth with a slight displacement and a defect of alveolar part in the area of the 34, 35 teeth. Other teeth on both lower and upper jaws are intact. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Ports splint
b. Plain splint cramp
*c. Tigerstedts splint with a spreading curve
d. Vasilyevs splint
e. Vankevich splint

185. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by 1/3. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
b. Straight elevator
c. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

186. A 26-year-old patient consulted a dentist about the 24 tooth extraction because of chronic periodontitis exacerbation. The crown of the 24 tooth is intact. Choose the right tool for the tooth exraction:
a. Straight forceps
b. Straight elevator
c. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
*e. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips

187. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. Anamnesis: the tooth hasnt been treated before, decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is destroyed by over 2/3, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped closed-beak forceps
b. Crown bayonet forceps
c. S-shaped forceps (right)
d. Straight elevator
*e. Bayonet root forceps

188. A 25-year-old patient has a face trauma. Objectively: there is a significant soft tissue swelling of the left half face, haemorrhage into the left eye sclera, crepitation in the region of nose bones. Palpation reveals the mobility of the upper jaw, its percussion reveals tympanitis. X-ray picture shows the fracture line running through the lower margin of the orbit on both sides of the sphenozygomatic suture and reaching behind the maxillary tuber. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
*c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
d. Fracture of the left articular bone
e. Fracture of nose bones

189. A 50 year old woman complains about a neoplasm on her lower lip on the side of oral cavity that appeared a month ago and has been slowly growing since that. Objectively: there is a roundish, elastic, painless neoplasm inside the lower lip. Mucous membrane hasnt changed its colour. Make a diagnosis:
a. Lip lipoma
*b. Retention cyst of lower lip
c. Lip papilloma
d. Lip abscess
e. Lip fibroma

190. A 57-year-old patient complains of a tumor in the left parotid region, which appeared 3 years ago. Over the past six months, the tumor has increased significantly. Objectively: there is a non-mobile lobulated tumour in the left parotid region, palpation causes minor pain reaction. The skin over the tumour plicates easily, its upper part has well-defined margins, the bottom part grows into the depth of gland. The tumour is 3x2,5 cm large. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Cyst
b. Parotid gland carcinoma
c. Chronic parotitis
d. Fibroma
*e. Pleomorphic adenoma

191. A 53-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right parotid region. The tumour was revealed six months ago, within this period it doubled in size. Objectively: the right parotid region has a dense 1,5 x 2 cm large neoplasm, the duct of the right parotid gland secretes transparent saliva. The gland puncture gave no results. What disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Fibroma of parotid-masticatory region
b. Lipoma of parotid-masticatory region
c. Chronic lymphadenitis of parotid-masticatory region
d. Retention cyst of parotid gland
*e. Pleomorphic adenoma of parotid gland

192. A 41-year-old patient complains of mobility of the 24, 26, 27 teeth, purulent discharges from the socket of the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 months ago the patient underwent a dissection along the mucogingival junction and extraction of the 25 tooth. Objectively: alveolar mucosa in the region of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is cyanotic and edematic. Along the mucogingival junction there is a fistula with protruding granulations. There are also purulent granulation discharges from the socket of the extracted 25 tooth. In the right infraorbital region some soft tissue swelling is present. Which disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Exacermation of chronic maxillary sinusitis
b. Chronic diffuse osteomyelitis
c. Chronic alveolitis
d. Maxillary actinomycosis
*e. Chronic limited osteomyelitis

193. Before extraction of a left upper tooth a 49-year-old patient had been given plexus anaesthesia with Ultracaine Forte. After the operation the socket didnt get filled with a blod clot. What is the way to prevent alveolitis development in this patient?
a. To fill the socket with antibiotic powder
*b. To fill the socket with a loose iodoform tampon
c. To rinse the socket with microcide solution
d. To fill the socket with a hemostatic sponge
e. To rinse the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution

194. Examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed some white patches on the buccal mucosa along the teeth closure line that didnt protrude above the inflamed and edematous surrounding tissues. The patches could not be removed on scraping. A patient has smoken an average of 3 packs of cigarettes a day for 20 years. Specify the disease of buccal mucosa:
*a. Leukoplakia plana
b. Pemphigus
c. Lichen ruber planus
d. Tappeiners leukoplakia (leukoplakia nicotinica)
e. Erosive leukoplakia

195. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the area of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flattened, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the regiob of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
*a. Fibrous
b. Giant-cell
c. -
d. Pregnancy epulis
e. Angiomatous

196. X-ray examination of the maxillary alveolar process of a 35-year-old patient reveals a root fracture of the 11 tooth in its apical region. The tooth has been treated before, the canal is filled. The patient has a history of the tooth trauma. What method of treatment is indicated for this case?
a. Tooth extraction
b. Tooth replantation
c. -
*d. Root apex resection
e. Tooth crowning

197. As a result of a road accident a 45 year old patient got an injury of his upper jaw. Examination revealed elongated and flattened face, profuse nasal haemorrhage, liquorrhea from the nose and ears. These clinical presentations are typical for the following fracture of upper jaw:
a. Suborbital (Le Fort II)
b. Subnasal (Le Fort I)
*c. Subbasal (Le Fort III)
d. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
e. -

198. A 57-year-old patient complains about a slowly growing swelling in the sublingual region. She noted it 3 months ago. Objectively: there is an elastic swelling in the sublingual region. The swelling is painless, mucous membrane over it is with tints of blue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Ranula
b. Dermoid cyst of oral cavity floor
c. Hemangioma of sublingual area
d. Lipoma of sublingual area
e. Salivolithiasis

199. A 49-year-old patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about permanent intense dull pain in the region of the right upper jaw. It is known from the anamnesis that the 17 tooth has been repeatedly treated for exacerbation of chronic periodontitis but the treatment appeared to be ineffective. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction of the 17 tooth?
*a. Tuberal and palatinal
b. Tuberal, incisor and palatinal
c. Torus
d. Incisor and paltinal
e. Tuberal and incisor

200. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible
*b. Arthrosis of the right TMJ
c. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ
d. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ
e. Fracture of the right condyle of mandible

201. A 60 year old man has got a pustule on his chin skin that quickly developed into a hard, strongly painful infiltrate 3х3 cm large. In the epicentre three necrosis zones around hair follicles are present. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged, painful. Body temperature is 38,5°C. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chin carbuncle
b. Suppurated atheroma
c. Allergic chin dermatitis
d. Chin furuncle
e. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin

202. A 34-year-old patient got a trauma (fall) that resulted in mobility of alveolar process and all the upper jaw teeth, occlusion was also changed. X-ray picture depicts the fracture line that runs in both directions from the piriform opening along the floor of maxillary sinus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Unilateral maxillary fracture
*b. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
d. Partial fracture of the alveolar process
e. Le Fort III maxillary fracture

203. A 35 year old man complains about pain in the area of the 38 tooth, painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. What anesthesia method will be optimal during operation on account of pericoronaritis?
*a. Conduction Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
b. General anesthesia
c. Application anesthesia
d. Stem anesthesia
e. Infiltration anesthesia

204. A 23-year-old patient complains about periodical pain in the region of the 11 tooth, protrusion of the alveolar process. The patient got a trauma 4 years ago. Objectively: crown of the 11 tooth is dark, percussion is painless. X-ray picture shows roundish well-defined area of bone tissue rarefication by the root apex of the 11 tooth. The area is 2,0 cm in diameter. Puncture results: yellow fluid with cholesterol crystals. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Maxillary osteoclastoma
*b. Maxillary radicular cyst
c. Maxillary ameloblastoma
d. Chronic maxillary osteomyelitis
e. Soft maxillary odontoma

205. A 33-year-old patient complains about an ulcer of oral cavity floor, that is located under his tongue on a level between the 43 to the 33 tooth. Examination reveales that ulcer edges are undermined and scalloped. Its grey-yellow floor is shallow and it is covered with small, easily bleeding granulations. There is no ulcer infiltration. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Migratory granuloma of oral cavity floor
*b. Tubercular ulcer of oral cavity floor
c. Cancerous ulcer of oral cavity floor
d. Decubital ulcer of oral cavity floor
e. Gummatous ulcer of oral cavity floor

206. A female patient applied to the oral surgery department and underwent radical maxillary sinusotomy with plastic repair of fistula through the alveolar socket of the extrated 27 tooth. Infiltration and all the peripheral block anaesthesias of the left upper jaw were performed with 6,0 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. 3 minutes later the patient registered double vision in her left eye, inability to close it. Which of the performed anaesthesias is the reason for the above-mentioned presentations?
a. Incisor
b. Infiltration
c. Tuberal
d. Palatinal
*e. Infraorbital

207. Regimental Aid Station (RAS) admitted a soldier with an injury in the maxillofacial region. Dosimetric control revealed radiation affection in this patient. The injured should be referred to the following functional unit of RAS:
a. Isolator
b. Admission and sorting pavilion
c. Dressing pavilion
d. Evacuation pavilion
*e. Decontamination station

208. On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Acute epidemic parotiditis
b. Parenchymatous parotiditis
c. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region
*d. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis
e. Phlegmon of submasseteric space

209. A 56-year-old patient complains about a painless neoplasm on the alveolar crest of the right upper jaw. Objectively: there is a bright-red wide-based tumour in the region of premolars. It is localized on both sides from the alveolar crest. The tumour is dense and elastic, painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Peripheral osteoclastoma
b. Gingival fibromatosis
c. Papilloma
d. Fibrous epulis
e. Central osteoclastoma

210. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a swelling in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of upper lip edema, nasolabial fold is smoothed. Mucogingival fold of the upper jaw vestibular surface in the region of the 11, 12, 21 teeth is smoothed, hyperemic. Palpation is painful. Fluctuation is present. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw satrting from the 21 tooth. Choose the treatment tactics:
*a. Preservation of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
b. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of the 12, 21, 22 teeth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy
e. Preservation of the 21 tooth, anti-inflammatory therapy

211. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and "hurt" her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and doesn’t make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cheek phlegmon
b. Acute lymphadenitis
c. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible
d. Cheek haematoma
*e. Suppurated cheek haematoma

212. A 33-year-old officer delivered from a battlefield has shoot off mental part o fmandible, drooling, insignificant haemorrhage from the oral cavity, asphyxia that occurs periodically because of head repositioning. What actions should be taken to prevent the asphyxia development?
*a. Fixation of tongue, transportation in prone position
b. Fixation of jaws with a mental sling
c. Transportation in prone position
d. Surgical d-bridement, tracheostome construction
e. Thacheostome construction

213. During extraction of the 14 tooth a 64-year-old patient complained about retrosternal pain irradiating to his back. There is paleness of membrane and skin integument as well as pulse assymetry on the carotid arteries. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertensic crisis
b. Angioneurotic Quinckes edema
c. Collapse
*d. Acute myocardial infarction
e. Acute respiratory failure

214. A 47-year-old patient consulted a doctor about an itching tumour in the right buccal area that has significantly enlarged lately. Examination revealed an irregularly shaped tumour up to 1,5 cm large, the tumour is black and glossy. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Dermal basalioma
b. Pigmented nevus
*c. Dermal melanoma
d. Dermal cancer
e. Cutaneous horn

215. A 24-year-old victim consulted a doctor about a face burn. He was injured by the open flame. He complains about pain and burning of face skin. Objectively: hyperemia of face skin; in the region of chin, nose, forehead, eyebrows, cheekbones there are burn blisters containing transparent liquid. These presentations correspond with the following degree of burn severity:
*a. I-II degree
b. II-III B degree
c. II-IV degree
d. III B-IV degree
e. II-III A degree

216. A 20-year-old patient complains about inability to move with his lower jaw, speech difficulty and problems during eating. He associates his condition with a trauma he got when biting on apple. Examination revealed half-open mouth, open bite due to the solitary contacts of distal tubercles of the last molars, salivation, indistinct speech. Articular heads of mandible can be felt anterior to both tragi. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Traumatic bilateral fracture of articular processes of mandible
b. Fracture of articular processes of mandible
c. Fibrous ankylosis of temporomandibular joint
d. Exacerbation of osteoarthritis of temporomandibular joint
*e. Acute anterior bilateral mandible luxation

217. A 48-year-old woman complains about aching dull pain in the region of the left TJM, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Arthrosis of the TMJ
b. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
c. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
d. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ
e. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ

218. During tooth extraction a 55 year old patient felt dull pain behind her breastbone, got a sense of compression. A dental surgeon diagnosed her with a stenocardia attack. What medication should be given this patient in order to arrest this state?
a. Dimedrol
b. Ketanov
c. Analgin
d. Baralgin
*e. Nitroglycerine, validol

219. A 30-year-old patient was diagnosed with posttraumatic osteomyelitis of mandible in the region of mandible body on the right. The patient got the trauma 1,5 month ago. X-ray picture shows the fracture line and the shadow of osseous sequestre along the fracture line. There is a fistula with purulent discharge on skin. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Fistulectomy
b. Fistulectomy, antibacterial therapy
c. Physiotherapy
d. Sequestrectomy
*e. Fistulectomy, sequestrectomy

220. A 28-year-old patient has been admitted to the oral and maxillofacial surgery for a carbuncle of face. Objectively: the patient is in a critical condition, face, mucous membranes of lips and conjunctiva are edematous and cyanotic. Body temperature is 40°C. The patient presents with delirium, hallucinations. The carbuncle is located on the upper lip, the surrounding soft tissues are swollen. Palpebral fissures are closed due to the edema of eyelids. What is the most likely complication of carbuncle?
a. Cerebral abscess
b. Meningitis
*c. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
d. Sepsis
e. Orbit phlegmon

221. A 37-year-old patient has been diagnosed with abscessed furuncle of the upper lip. After dissection of the inflammation focus the exudate has been sent for bacteriological analysis. Which causative agent for furuncle is most likely to be found?
a. Proteus monoculture
b. Colibacillus monoculture
*c. Staphylococcus monoculture
d. Staphylococcus and protozoa association
e. Streptococcus monoculture

222. After the unproblematic extraction of the 37 tooth a 60-year-old patient presents with profuse haemorrhage from the tooth socket. The patient has a 6-year history of essential hypertension. Now his AP is 180/110 mm Hg. What emergency aid should be rendered?
a. Pack of the tooth socket with haemostatic sponge
b. Suture ligature of the tooth socket
c. Injection of haemostatic drugs
*d. Injection of hypotensive drugs and tight pack of the tooth socket
e. Pack of the tooth socket with iodoform tampon

223. A 48-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the region of the 38 tooth. She has been suffering from this for 3 days. Crown of the 28 tooth is completely decayed. What forceps should be applied for extraction of roots of the 28 tooth?
a. S-shaped close-beak forceps
b. S-shaped broad-beak forceps
c. S-shaped forceps curved left
d. Straight root forceps
*e. Bayonet-shaped forceps

224. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumor-like formation in the region of his lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: there is a round tumour-like formation up to 1cm in diameter on the red border of the lower lip on the right. Roll-like edges of the formation protrude above the level of the red border. In the centre of the formation a brown crust is visible. After its removal a crateriform hole can be seen. There is no bleeding or pain. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Lower lip papilloma
c. Verrucous carcinoma
d. Lower lip fibroma
e. Lower lip carcinoma

225. After supercooling a 42-year-old patient presented with headache in the left frontal region and left upper jaw. Objectively: the face is symmetric, breathing through the left nasal meatus is obstructed, seropurulent discharges are present. Palpation is slightly painful in the infraorbital region as well as along the mucogingival fold in projection of the 24, 25 teeth. Percussion of these teeth is painless. The 24 tooth is filled. Mucuous membrane of alveolar process has no visible changes. X-ray picture shows reduced pneumatization of the left upper jaw sinus. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 24 tooth
b. Acute periodontitis of the 24 tooth
*c. Exacerbation of chronic odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
d. Acute rhinogenous maxillitis
e. Acute albuminous periostitis of the left upper jaw

226. A 52-year-old female patient complains of severe paroxysmal pain in the region of the 34 tooth. Throughout the year the 35, 36, 37 teeth were sequentially extracted because of pain complaints. Percussion of the 34 tooth causes acute paroxysmal pain. The same pain arises when talking and washing the projection area of the mental foramen. Clinical and roentgenologic examination revealed no signs of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. 34 tooth pulpitis
b. Ganglionitis of pterygopalatine ganglion
c. Neuritis of the 3 branch of trigeminus
*d. Neuralgia of the 3 branch of trigeminus
e. Facial nerve neuritis

227. A 27-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the region of her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the patients face is slightly asymmetric due to thickening of mandibular body on the right. Adjacent soft tissues are of unchanged colour and normal consistency. Mouth opening is not limited. Mucous membrane of oral cavity presents no changes. In the right lower dentition the 45 tooth is missing. X-ray picture of the right half of the mandible in its lateral view shows an oval well-defined 2x3 cm large radiolucency in the bone tissue. The coronal portion of the retinated horizontally positioned 45 tooth is turned inward the radiolucent area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Follicular cyst of mandible
b. Sarcoma of mandible
c. Osteoclastoma of mandible
d. Odontoma of mandible
e. Adamantinoma of mandible

228. A 45-year-old female patient complains of a slightly painful, tumour-like formation in the right parotid region that appeared two months ago for no apparent reason. The patient notes weakness, occasional body temperature rise up to 37,2°C-37,6°C. Two weeks ago she underwent the anti-inflammatory therapy which did not have positive effect. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to a minor swelling in the right parotid region. Palpation reveals a roundish dense and elastic formation with even contours, it is slightly painful, not adherent to the skin. Incisive canal exudes a small amount of transparent saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidemic parotitis
b. Sjogrens syndrome
c. Parotid atheroma
d. Acute infectious parotitis
*e. Hertsenbergs pseudoparotitis

229. A 62 year patient was at a dentists and suddenly there appeared dyspnea and hacking cough, sense of progressing asphyxia. The patients condition is getting progressively worse; number of respiratory movements reached 30/min, acrocyanosis became more evident, there appeared gargling breathing, oral cavity excretes a lot of albuminoid sputum. Psychomotor agitation and arterial hypertension are present. What pathological state is it?
a. An attack of bronchial asthma
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Spontaneous pneumothorax
*d. Pulmonary edema
e. Epileptic attack

230. A 32-year-old male patient was delivered to traumatology. He complains about nosebleed, severe cephalalgia, giddiness, face deformation, heavy breathing, mastication inability. He sustained an injury in the mine over three hours ago. He was conscious. Objectively: the middle third of his face is elongated, there are considerable hematomas and there is an edema in the region of nose root and eyelids of both eyes. The upper jaw is displaced downwards, it is mobile together with nasal bones, cheek bones and eyeballs. Palpation reveals deformation, pain and pathological mobility in the region of the nose bridge, external socket edges, pterygoid processes of basilar bone. Nosebleed is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (lower)
b. Fracture of zygomatic bone
c. Fracture of nasal bone
*d. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
e. Le Fort II maxillary fracture

231. A patient was delivered to an admission room after a road accident. Examination of the patient revealed in the area of oral floor a large haematoma spreading to the neck area as well as a significant edema of soft tissues of oral floor and neck. There are signs of asphyxia. What type of emergency care is indicated?
a. Symptomatic medicamental treatment
*b. Tracheotomy performing
c. Tongue fixation
d. Lobeline introduction
e. Opening and draining of haematoma

232. A 42 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. After anesthetization the patient felt sudden attack of nausea, weakness, he got the sense of compression behind his breastbone, heart pain; he began vomiting. The patient lost consciousness, there appeared convulsions. Objectively: the patients skin is pale, covered with cold clammy sweat, pupils dont react to the light. The pulse is thready, arterial pressure cannot be detected. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Syncope
b. Collapse
*c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Traumatic shock
e. Epileptic attack

233. A 47-year-old patient complains of persistent ache in the 27 tooth, that gets worse when biting. Objectively: skin colour is normal, the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens without any difficulties, alveolar mucosa at the level of 27 tooth is edematous and hyperemic. The 27 tooth presents a deep carious cavity communicating with the pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 27 tooh
b. Acute purulent maxillary periostitis in the region of the 27 tooth
*c. Exacerbation of acute periodontitis of the 27 tooth
d. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
e. Chronic odontogenic left-sided maxillary sinusitis

234. A 42 year old patient complains about a neoplasm in the anterior palatal part that has been forming for 10 years. The 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth are intact. Intraoral X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows a single focus of bony tissue destruction, well-defined, 2,5 by 1,5 cm large. Periodontal fissure in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth can be well seen. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Globulomaxillary cyst
b. Radicular cyst
*c. Nasopalatine canal cyst
d. Residual cyst
e. Follicular cyst

235. A 76-year-old patient has a roundish ulcer in the area of the right nasolabial sulcus. The ulcer has dense, rough floor covered with yellowish-grey crusts, and resembles of a cone. The ulcer edges are dense, crater-like; the ulcer grows both sidewards and deepwards. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer
b. Syphilitic ulcer
c. Squamous cell carcinoma of skin
*d. Basalioma
e. Actinomycotic ulcer

236. A 40-year-old patient complains about a long-existing fissure in the central part of red border of his lower lip. He has been smoking since he was 16. Objectively: there is a deep 1,0 cm long fissure along the median line of red border of the lower lip, the fissure edges are bulging. Characteristic quality of the fissure is its spontaneous healing, but after epithelization the fissure recurs. The patient was diagnosed with chronic fissure of the lower lip. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Choose the most appropriate treatment method in this situation:
*a. Excision within evidently healthy tissues
b. Diathermo-coagulation
c. Close-focus roentgenotherapy
d. Excision 0,5 cm off the neoplasm limits
e. Cryodestruction

237. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the roots of the 36 tooth. The tooth decayed long ago. Objectively: the crown of the 36 is destroyed by 2/3, percussion is painless, mucosa around the 36 tooth exhibits no evident pathological changes. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows a roundish well-defined radiolucency near the apex of the medial root. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute purulent periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis

238. A victim got a face and temporal region trauma. A doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
a. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
b. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone
c. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
*d. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
e. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone

239. A 23 year old patient complained about unpleasant sensations in the area of the 12 tooth, X-ray picture shows a well-defined low-density area up to 8-10 mm in diameter around the root apex of the 12 tooth. What method of surgery will be the most reasonable?
*a. Root apex resection
b. Hemisection
c. Cystotomy
d. Tooth removal
e. Root amputation

240. A patient has orthopaedic indications for the 37 tooth extraction. What kind of anaesthesia should be given to this patient before the extraction?
a. Mandibular
*b. Mandibular torus anaesthesia
c. Mental + buccal anaesthesia
d. Infraorbital + buccal anaesthesia
e. Tuberal + buccal anaesthesia

241. A 32-year-old patient complains about pain and swelling in the region of his mandible and left cheek. He has been suffering from this for 2 days. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 37,5°C. There is an edema of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes are bilaterally enlarged, painful on palpation. Crown of the 37 tooth is partially decayed, the tooth is immobile, percussion is slightly painful. Mucogingival fold in the region of the 37 tooth is edematic, hyperaemic, flattened, its palpation causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of alveololingual groove on the left
*b. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
c. Chronic productive periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
d. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
e. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible

242. A 38-year-old patient consulted a dentist about aching pain in the region of the 48 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Body temperature rise up to 37,6°C and aggravation of general condition is present. Objectively: insignificant swelling of retromolar region as well as hyperaemia of mucous membrane. The 48 tooth is covered with occlusal pad. It is painful on palpation. Purulent discharges are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute pulpitis
b. Aphthous stomatitis
c. Acute purulent periostitis
*d. Acute purulent pericoronitis
e. Acute periodontitis of the 48 tooth

243. A patient was admitted to the oral surgery department with a diagnosis "odontogenous phlegmon of mouth floor". Objectively: general condition of the patient is grave, abed position is forced, the patient is sitting with lowered head. He complains about pain behind his breastbone that is getting worse during backward flexion of head; cough, dyspnea. What complication has developed?
a. Phlegmon of tongue root
b. Phlegmon of peripharyngeal space
c. Phlegmon of retropharyngeal space
d. Cervical phlegmon
*e. Mediastinitis

244. A 40-year-old patient needs the oral cavity sanation, which involves extraction of the upper central incisors. What nerve structure will be blocked as a result of incisor anaesthesia?
a. Median superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
b. Anterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
*c. Nasopalatine nerve
d. Posterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
e. Dental nerve plexus

245. A patient with unilateral dislocation of mandibulotemporal joint was delivered to the maxillofacial department. What type of local anesthesia is indicated for relaxation of masticatory muscles during diaplasis?
*a. Subzygomatic Bersche-Dubov-Uvarovs anesthesia
b. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia, submandibular way
c. Torus anesthesia
d. Extraoral mandibular anesthesia, retromandibular way
e. Intraoral mandibular anesthesia

246. A maxillofacial surgery department admitted a patient with a half-open mouth, his chin was put forward and deviated to the right. On palpation, the left mandibular fossa was found to be empty. Internal palpation failed to detect the left articular head. Mandibular movements were possible but restricted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ
*b. Unilateral dislocation of the left TMJ
c. Bilateral dislocation of the TMJ
d. Unilateral dislocation of the right TMJ
e. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ

247. A patient got a trauma that resulted in limited mouth opening, nasal haemorrhage, numbness of inferior eyelid as well as skin in the infraorbital area. Objectively: there is face deformation caused by depression of soft tissues in the malar region on the left; there is also a step-off deformity in the median part of the infraorbital rim and in the region of zygomatico-alveolar crest. What method of examination will be the most effective for the diagnostics?
a. X-ray study of facial skull in the lateral projection
b. X-ray study of facial skull in the frontal projection
*c. X-ray study of facial skull in the axial projection
d. X-ray study of facial skull and paranasal sinuses
e. Orthopantomogram

248. A 64 year old patient was waiting to see an oral surgeon. Suddenly she fell, there appeared coarse breathing, spasmatic twitching of upper and lower extremities. Face and neck became cyanotic, pupils became mydriatic, reaction to the light was absent, arterial pressure and pulse could not be detected, heart tones could not be heard, involuntary urination was observed. What state are these symptoms typical for?
a. Loss of consciousness
b. Myocardium infarction
c. Collapse
*d. Clinical death
e. Stroke

249. During the cystectomy involving resection of the root apices of the 11, 21 and 22 teeth a 45-year-old patient developed skin pallor and cyanosis, a cold sweat, a sharp drop in blood pressure (70/40 mmHg). The patient is conscious but complains of weakness. What state has been developed?
a. Quinckes edema
b. Syncope
c. Haematoma
d. Epileptic seizure
*e. Collapse

250. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumour-like formation in the region of the lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: on the vermilion border of the lower lip on the right there is a roundish tumour up to 1 cm in diameter with raised rolled edges. The tumour is painless, the regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
*a. Keratoacanthoma
b. Papilloma of the lower lip
c. Verrucous precancer
d. Fibroma of the lower lip
e. Carcinoma of the lower lip

251. A 34-year-old patient had got in a car accident. The patient stayed conscious. He complains of headache, dizziness, general weakness, nausea. 12 hours after the injury the patient got "raccoon eyes" (periorbital haematomas) within the limits of the circular muscle of eye. What fracture does the victim have?
*a. Fracture of skull base
b. Fracture of nasal bones
c. Fracture of frontal bones
d. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
e. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla

252. After a car accident a patient consulted a dentist about pain at the base of the nose. Palpation reveals tenderness of the nose wall, mobility of the nasal bones. Nasal passages are filled with blood clots. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Fracture of nasal bones
b. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
c. Fracture of cheekbone
d. Le Fort III fracture of maxilla
e. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla

253. A 49-year-old patient complains of constant mandibular pain irradiating to the ear, soft tissue edema, body temperature rise up to 39°C. Objectively: there is an edema in the submandibular region, the skin has not changed in colour. Alveolar mucosa around the 45, 46 teeth is hyperemic and edematic on the oral and vestibular side. Crowns of the 45, 46 teeth are completely destroyed, the teeth are mobile. Vincents symptom is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
b. Abscess of submandibular region
*c. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
d. Acute serous periostitis of mandible
e. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible

254. A 43-year-old man complains about painful swallowing, limited mouth opening. Destroyed 37 tooth caused pain 3 days ago. Painful swallowing appeared the next day. Limited mouth opening was present a day later. Objectively: there is a small soft swelling in the left submaxillary area. An enlarged lymph node is palpated. The mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm. Edema of left palatine arch and pharynx lateral wall is present. The 37 tooth is destroyed. Mucous membrane around the tooth is edematic. Percussion is slightly painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute submaxillary lymphadenitis
*b. Odontogenic peripharyngeal phlegmon
c. Odontogenic submaxillary phlegmon
d. Odontogenic pterygomandibular phlegmon
e. Peritonsillar abscess

255. A 43-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right submandibular region which appeared two months ago after having flu. Objectively: palpation of the right submandibular region reveals a painful spherical neoplasm of dense elastic consistency with regular outlines which is not attached to the skin. Submandibular salivary gland secretes transparent saliva. Sublingual plica is unchanged. Which disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
a. Chronic sialoadenitis
b. Adenoma of the salivary gland
c. Lipoma
*d. Chronic lymphadenitis
e. Sialolithiasis

256. A 27-year-old male patient underwent extraction of the medial root of the 36 tooth, but the distal tooth root was broken in its middle third. What tools should be applied for root extraction?
a. Straight elevator
b. Right angled elevator
*c. Left angled elevator
d. Broad-beaked forceps
e. Close-beaked forceps

257. A 64-year-old patient presents with bleeding from the left nostril, mobility of the upper left teeth. For the last 2 years the patient has had dull pain in the left side of maxilla. On the left side of neck there is a dense tumour-like formation. The patient is exhausted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Left-sided maxillary carcinoma
b. Left-sided maxillary cyst
c. Osteoclastoma of the left upper jaw
d. Chronic osteomyelitis of the left upper jaw
e. Left-sided sinusitis

258. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that is getting worse during eating, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
b. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
c. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area
d. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area
*e. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis

259. A 42-year-old patient complains about pain in the submandibular and sublingual region that is getting worse during eating; body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. The patient has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: along the right sublingual plica there is infiltration, hyperaemia, edema of soft tisues, acute pain on palpation. The duct of the right submandibular salivary gland discharges turbid saliva with pus admixtures. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submandibular region
b. Abscess of alveololingual groove
c. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
*d. Exacerbation of urolithiasis
e. Adenophlegmon of submandibular region

260. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about fever up to 37,60C, soft tissue swelling, pain in the 47 tooth on the lower jaw on the left, the pain is getting worse when the tooth is touched by the antagonist. Objectively: mucogingival fold of the alveolar process is hyperemic and flat on the vestibular side of the decayed 47 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
b. Acute serous periodontitis
*c. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis
d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
e. Periodontal abscess

261. A 48-year-old female patient had been delivered to a hospital with a cheek wound and severe headache, nausea, dizziness. It is known from the history that the patient had got a trauma as a result of a fall. After examination she was diagnosed with a contused lacerated wound of cheek, closed craniocerebral injury, brain concussion. This trauma can be qualified as:
a. Polytrauma
b. Single
c. Isolated trauma
d. Combined trauma
*e. Concominant trauma

262. A 38-year-old female patient came to a hospital and complained about a wound on her left cheek. She got this trauma 16-18 hours ago, didnt loose consciousness. Objectively: a 3 cm long injury of skin, subcutaneous fat and muscle. The wound is bleeding. What kind of initial surgical d-bridement should be performed?
a. Initial surgical d-bridement along with plasty
b. -
c. Delayed surgical d-bridement
d. Secondary surgical d-bridement
*e. Early surgical d-bridement

263. A patient complains about mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth, periodic pain, sensation of heaviness in the corresponding half of the upper jaw, haemorrhagic discharges from the left side of nose. These presentations have been observed for 4 months, within the last month the pain has become worse, the patient presents now with general weakness. Examination of the oral cavity reveals the grade II mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth. On palpation of the maxillary tuber, the bone wall was found to be absent. X-ray picture shows a homogeneous shadowing of maxillary sinus; bone structures have unclear contours. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Upper jaw adamantinoma
b. Chronic odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
c. Upper jaw osteoclastoma
*d. Upper jaw cancer
e. Upper jaw sarcoma

264. A patient consulted a dentist about constant dull pain in the 38 tooth. Mouth opening is limited down to 1 cm. It is necessary to extract the 38 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for operation?
a. Tuberal
*b. Bercher-Dubov
c. Torus
d. Mandibular
e. Extraoral mandibular technique

265. During extraction of the 47 tooth its distal root was broken halfway along its length. What tool should be chosen for extraction of the residual root fragments?
a. Close-beaked forceps
b. Broad-beaked forceps
*c. Left angled elevator
d. Right angled elevator
e. Straight elevator

266. A patient consulted a doctor about recurrent pain in the frontal part of his upper jaw. He has history of previous treatment for pulpitis. Objectively: the crown of the 12 tooth is restored with a filling. X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows an area of bone tissue destruction (up to 1 cm in diameter) at the root apex of the 12 tooth. The root channel of the 12 tooth is filled up to the top. The patient was diagnosed with cystogranuloma of the 12 tooth. Choose the best method of treatment:
a. Conservative treatment
b. Extraction of the 12 tooth
*c. Root apex resection
d. Dissection along the mucogingival junction
e. Replantation of the 12 tooth

267. A 67 year old patient complains about frequently recurring erosion in the area of vermilion border of his lower lip. The erosion is oval, 0,8х1,3 cm large, covered with thin crusts. After their removal some petechial haemorrhages on glossy surface can be seen. There are also some atrophied areas of the vermilion border. Infiltration is absent. Submandibular lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Glandular cheilitis
*b. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
c. Keratoacanthosis
d. Erosive-ulcerous form of leukoplakia
e. Bowens disease

268. During an armed conflict soldier K. was injured and delivered to the station of the separate medical battalion. The patient has a gunshot wound of his right cheek, splintered fracture of the body of mandible, arterial bleeding from the wound. A brigade of the separate medical battalion performed surgical debridement and final bleeding arrest. Specify the scope of further medical and evacuation actions for this patient:
a. Therapeutic immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
b. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, no need of further evacuation
c. No need of fragment immobilization, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
*d. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation of the patient to the military field surgical hospital
e. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties

269. A 46-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 36 tooth. Its crown is decayed. The patient presented with edema of soft tissues adjacent to the mandible. Body temperature rose up to 39,0°C, the patient has chill. Examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced edema of the left mandibular alveolar process on the vestibular and oral side (acute periostitis); the 35, 36, 37 teeth are mobile, subgingival pockets contain purulent exudate; their percussion causes acute pain. Positive Vincents symptom is present. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis from the 36 tooth
*c. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
d. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis

270. A 58 year old patient complains about clicking in the mandibulotemporal joint during eating. Periodically as a result of wide mouth opening the mandible takes up such a position that makes mouth closing impossible. The mandible can be easily placed into its initial position by pressing with fingers upon its coronoid processes. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Acute dislocation of mandible
b. Anterior dislocation
c. Posterior dislocation
*d. Habitual dislocation of mandible
e. Subluxation of mandible

271. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a dental surgeon about an enlarging "mothers mark", itch and desquamation. According to patient, changed in color and size skin area appeared a year ago after a shaving trauma. Objectively: there is an intensely pigmented brown spot up to 2 cm large with small oval protruding nodules on its surface in the infraorbital region on the left. Desquamation factors are present. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are matted together with skin and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Melanoma
b. Verrucous nevus
c. Papillomatosis
d. Epidermoid cancer
e. Pigmented nevus

272. A 75-year-old patient has been admitted to the dental department for the right-angle mandibular fracture with a displacement. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the post-traumatic swelling, palpation reveals the mobility of fragments and pain. The patient has a lifelong history of epilepsy. What is the best method of treatment?
a. Immobilization with Vankevich splint
*b. Osteosynthesis
c. Immobilization with Tigerstedt splints
d. Immobilization with Vasilyev splints
e. Immobilization with Port splint

273. A week ago an 18-year-old girl complained of pain in the 22 tooth which was treated and filled several years ago. Over the past two days the pain got worse. Objectively: the 22 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, mucous membrane is hyperaemic and edematic. Spot-film roentgenograph of the 22 tooth shows an ill-defined pariapical bone rarefaction 0,4x0,5 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Suppuration of the radicular cyst
b. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 22 tooth
c. Acute maxillary periostitis
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 22 tooth
e. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis

274. A 36 year old man complains about acute headache, body temperature rise up to 39,1°C, indisposition. Objectively: a slight face asymmetry because of soft tissue edema of the left infraorbital area. Crown of the 26 tooth is partly decayed. Percussion is acutely painful. Mucous membrane on the vestibular side in the area of the 25, 26 teeth is edematic, hyperemic. Breathing through the left part of nose is laboured, there are purulent discharges. X-ray picture showed a homogeneous shadow of the left part of maxillary sinus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute periostitis of upper jaw
b. Acute condition of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
*c. Acute purulent odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
d. Suppuration of maxillary cyst
e. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis

275. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient got a cheek abrasion which healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38,6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region
b. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
*c. Acute lymphadenitis
d. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
e. Epidemic parotitis

276. A 33-year-old female patient has been admitted to the maxillofacial department for pain and edema of the right submandibular region, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C. Objectively: the patient has asymmetric face because of soft tissue edema of the right submandibular region, palpation reveals a dense infiltration, the skin over it is hyperemic, does not make a fold. The 46 tooth has a deep carious cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute submandibular sialoadenitis
b. Acute purulent submandibular lymphadenitis
c. Acute right-sided osteomyelitis of mandible
*d. Submandibular phlegmon on the right
e. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible

277. Biopsy material obtained by puncture of a maxillary tumour looks like a foul-smelling mush. What kind of tumour is it typical for?
a. Atheroma
*b. Cholesteatoma
c. Osteoclastoma
d. Radicular cyst
e. Ameloblastoma

278. X-ray picture depicts a circular well-defined area of bone tissue destruction 0,7х 0,7 cm large in the projection of root apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteoma
*b. Cystogranuloma
c. Granuloma
d. Cyst
e. Odontoma

279. A patient has been diagnosed with traumatic open angular fracture of mandible with a fragments displacement. Which of the following should be applied for transport immobilization of the fragments?
a. Tigerstedt splints
b. Gunning splints
c. Weber splints
*d. Entin head-chin strap
e. Standard Vasyliev splints

280. A 20-year-old patient has asymmetric face due to an upper lip edema on the left. The skin over it is bluish, there are positive symptoms of "compression" and "filling in". What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lymphangioma
b. Lentigo
c. Branched hemangioma
d. Capillary hemangioma
*e. Cavernous hemangioma

281. A 24 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for root removal of her upper wisdom tooth. Tuberal anesthesia caused a postinjection haematoma. What was injured during anesthetization?
a. Zygomatic artery
b. Palatine artery
c. Maxillary artery
d. Infraorbital artery
*e. Pterygoid venous plexus

282. A patient complains of pain and swelling in the right submandibular area. She has been treating the 45 tooth for a week. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. There is a painful tense infiltration in the right submandibular region. The skin doesn’t make a fold, its hyperemic and glossy. The mouth can be opened by 3 cm. Deglutition is painless. These clinical findings correspond with the following disease:
a. Phlegmon of pterygomandibular space
*b. Odontogenous phlegmon of the right submandibular region
c. Adenophlegmon of the right submandibular region
d. Abscess of the right alveololingual groove
e. Acute odontogenous sialoadenitis

283. During endodontic treatment of periodontitis a tool was broken in the middle third of the medial root. Choose the treatment method:
a. Medial root amputation
b. Resection of medial root apex
c. Tooth extraction
*d. Medial root hemisection
e. Crown radicular separation

284. A 70-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower jaw region on the right. He has been using complete removable dentures for the upper and lower jaw for 12 years. He is smoker. Objectively: the right retromolar region exhibits a 1,5х1,2 cm large proliferation of mucous membrane in form of cauliflower, here and there there are dense fissure-like ulcers. The surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, infiltrated. When the teeth are closed, the mentioned formation contacts with the posterior edges of the dentures. What is the provisional diagnosis:
a. Papillomatosis
*b. Cancer of the mucous membrane
c. Decubital ulcer
d. Leukoplakia
e. Hypertrophic gingivitis

285. A patient consulted an oral surgeon about pain in the region of his left upper jaw that appeared 3 days ago. After examination the patient was diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 17 tooth. It is indicated to extract the 17 tooth. What nerves should be blocked for painless extraction of the 17 tooth?
*a. Posterior alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
b. Anterior alveolar nerves and incisor nerve
c. Nasopalatine nerve
d. Median alveolar nerves and greater palatine nerve
e. Greater palatine nerve

286. A patient has indication for removal of his medial incisor of the right upper jaw on account of chronic periodontitis. What types of anaesthesia should be applied for tooth removal?
*a. Infraborbital and incisive
b. Terminal and incisive
c. Plexual and incisive
d. Infraorbital, palatine and incisive
e. Infraorbital and palatine

287. A 48-year-old patient complains of subfebrile temperature and a growing ulcer on the gingival mucosa around the molars; looseness of teeth in the affected area, cough. Objectively: gingival mucosa in the region of the lower left molars has two superficial, extremely painful ulcers with undermined edges. The ulcers floor is yellowish, granular, covered with yellowish, and sometimes pink granulations. The ulcers are surrounded by the tubercles. Dental cervices are exposed, there is a pathological tooth mobility. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and make dense matted together groups. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Syphilis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Decubital ulcer
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Acute aphthous stomatitis

288. A 31-year-old patient complains of experiencing recurrent pain in the 48 tooth for 4 years. Objectively: right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, painless. Mucous membrane around the partialy erupted 48 tooth is hyperemic. On probing the subgingival pocket of the 48 tooth exudes pus mixed with blood. What additional study will be most informative for diagnosing this pathology?
a. Blood count
b. Blood and urine tests
c. Contrast radiography
*d. Radiography
e. Electroodontometry

289. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory region, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mixed tumour
b. Glandular tuberculosis
c. Chronic lymphadenitis
*d. Adenocarcinoma
e. Cyst of the gland

290. A 47-year-old patient complains about permanent pain in the 27 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, skin is of normal colouring, the mouth can be fully opened, mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic and hyperemic at a level of the 27 tooth. The 27 tooth has a deep carious cavity interconnecting with pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic left-sided odontogenous highmoritis
*b. Exacerbated chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
c. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth
d. Chronic periodontitis of the 27 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw beginning from the 27 tooth

291. A 28-year-old patient hadan appointment with a dental surgeon to prepare the oral cavity for a prosthesis. Examination revealed that the 11 tooth crown was decayed, the root was stable, its percussion was painless. The mucous membrane of the alveolar process was not changed. Ro-gram of the alveolar process shows widening of periodontal ligament space in the region of the 11 tooth. Alveolar process structure is not changed. The root canal was passable all through. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis of the 11 tooth
b. Chronic periodontitis of the 11 tooth, hypercementosis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 11 tooth
d. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 11 tooth
*e. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 11 tooth

292. A 44-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain appeared 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is not limited. The crown of the 26 tooth is half-decayed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperaemic at the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth had been treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
*b. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
c. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth
d. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of the left upper jaw extending from the 26 tooth

293. A patient complains about acute constant pain that is getting worse when biting down on food, sensation of a recently erupted tooth on the right upper jaw. Examination of the 15 tooth revealed a deep carious cavity communicating with the dental cavity. Tooth percussion causes acute pain. Probing is painless. Mucous membrane in projection of the root apex is hyperemic, painful on palpation. X-ray picture shows no changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute albuminous periostitis
b. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
c. Acute diffuse pulpitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Acute purulent periodontitis

294. A patient complains about acute intense pain and a slight swelling in the area of a decayed tooth of the lower jaw on the right, ill health, body temperature rise up to 38,3°C, lack of appetite, insomnia. Objectively: there is collateral edema of soft tissues of submandibular area and lower part of right cheek. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged on the right, palpatory painful. Crown of the 46 tooth is half decayed, the 45, 46, 47 teeth are mobile, there is also a cuff infiltrate in the area of these teeth. Vincents symptom is positive on the right. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute purulent odontogenuos periostitis
b. Acute condition of chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
c. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
*d. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

295. A 40-year-old patient with mandible fracture consulted a doctor 3 weeks after immobilization of fragments because of pain and body temperature rise. Objectively: a slight swelling in the mental region, mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 21|12 teeth is hyperaemic, edematic, palpatory painful. Overtooth splint on 54321|12345 teeth is in satisfactory condition, no occlusion abnormalities were detected. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of mandible. What surgical action is indicated?
a. Removal and replacement of the overtooth splint by a new one
b. Intraoral novocaine block
*c. Lancing of abscess to the bone
d. Trepanation of the 21 and 12 teeth
e. Surveillance of patient

296. A 43-year-old patient complains about a neoplasm in the right submandibular region that appeared a month ago after angina. The patient underwent anti-inflammatory therapy but it led to no reduction of the neoplasm. Objectively: body temperature is up to 37,2°C. Palpation reveals a slightly painful, spherical, freely movable, well-defined neoplasm of dense and elastic consistency in the right submandibular region. The duct of submandibular salivary gland discharges transparent saliva. The sublingual plica is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenoma of salivary gland
b. Atheroma
c. Chronic sialoadenitis
d. Sialolithiasis
*e. Chronic lymphadenitis

297. Two years after radiation therapy a 49-year-old patient has been diagnosed with recurrence of the lower lip carcinoma. Objectively: there is a 1x2 cm large neoplasm with an ulcer in the centre in the region of the right half of the lower lip. Palpation of the right submandibular region reveals two enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes of round shape. Specify the stage of the disease:
a. T1 N2 M0
b. T1 N0 M0
c. T2 N0 M0
d. T1 N1 M0
*e. T2 N1 M0

298. A 19 year old patient came to traumatology centre and complained about face asymmetry, right-sided paresthesia of his upper lip, nasal haemorrhage. Objectively: evident face asymmetry due to an edema and haematoma of the right inferior eyelid and infraorbital area. Opening of mouth is slightly limited, occlusion is normal. Palpation reveals a symptom of "step" in the area of the right zygomaticomaxillary suture, deformity in the area of external edge of the right orbit and zygomaticoalveolar crest, gaseous crepitation in the right infraorbital area; percussion reveals a "bursted nut" symptom. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Fracture of nose bones
*b. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
c. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
d. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw (inferior)
e. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw (superior)

299. A patient is 48 year old, according to the results of clinicoroentgenological examination it is indicated to remove the 26 tooth because of acute condition of chronic granulomatous periodontitis. What kind of conduction anesthesia is indicated for this operation?
*a. Tuberal and palatinal
b. Infraorbital and incisive
c. Infraorbital and palatinal
d. Plexus
e. Torus

300. After the clinical and radiographic examination a 32-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic odontogenic sinusitis, fistula between sinus and oral cavity through the socket of the 27 tooth. Specify the optimal method of surgical treatment of this disease:
a. Fistula suturing, sinus lavage
*b. Radical maxillary sinusotomy and local tissue plasty of fistula
c. Radical maxillary sinusotomy
d. Local tissue plasty of fistula, anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Fistula plasty with a hard palate graft

301. A 64-year-old patient complains about a slightly painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue that appeared over 2 months ago. Objectively: lateral surface of tongue has an ulcer with raised edges, tissues around it are infiltrated. Submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, adhering to each other and surrounding tissues. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Ulcero-necrotic lesion associated with blood disorders
*b. Lingual cancer
c. Tuberculous ulcer
d. Syphilis (hard chancre)
e. Decubital ulcer

302. A patient complained about painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. Several days ago the 47 tooth was removed because of acute condition of chronic periodontitis. The patients condition kept worsening. Body temperature is 37,9°C. Results of external examination: the face is symmetric, face skin is slightly pale. Right submandibular lymph nodes are enlarged, palpatory painful. Examination of oral cavity is impossible because of evident contracture of lower jaw (the mouth opens up to 0,5 cm between central incisors). What anesthesia will provide mouth opening?
a. Plexus
b. Block of upper cervical plexus
c. Mandibular anesthesia
*d. Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
e. Torus

303. A 55-year-old patient has a painless, tuberous, cyanotic pedunculated formation 2х1х1,5 cm large that appeared on the site of the extracted 46 tooth. Opening of mouth is not limited. Intra-oral X-ray picture of alveolar process in the region of the removed 46 tooth shows a focus of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Papilloma of mucous membrane in the area of the extracted 46th tooth
b. Ameloblastoma of mandible
c. Hard odontoma of mandible
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
*e. Giant-cell epulis

304. A 56-year-old patient presents to a dental clinic. He has an indication for the extraction of the 22 tooth. Examination revealed periosteal abscess in the projection of the 21, 22, 23 teeth, flattening of the mucogingival junction. What kind of peripheral conduction anaesthesia is most advisable?
a. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia
b. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + incisor anaesthesia
c. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + palatinal anaesthesia
*d. Extraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia
e. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + palatinal anaesthesia

305. A 43-year-old patient consulted a maxillofacial surgeon about a cosmetic defect in the right half of his nose. It is known from the history that 7 months ago he got a gunshot wound. Objectively: there is a perforating defect 1,5x2 cm large in the right half of the nose. The skin around the defect has not changed in colour. It was decided to use the "Indian" method of rhinoplasty. What tissue should be taken for the defect correction?
a. Shoulder flap
b. Scapulohumeral flap
c. Cheek flap
d. Infraorbital flap
*e. Forehead flap

306. A soldier injured by a shell splinter was diagnosed with gunshot fracture of mandible accompanied by an over 3 cm long bone defect in the chin area. What method of fixation of mandible fragments is indicated?
a. Direct osteosynthesis
b. Tigerstedts splints
*c. Machine osteosynthesis (Rudko, Bernadsky)
d. Gunning-Ports splint
e. Intermandibular Ivy ligature

307. A 43 year old patient complained about mobility of his 24, 26, 27 teeth, pus excretion from alveolus of the the extracted 25 tooth. 1,5 month ago dissection along the mucogingival fold was performed and the 25 tooth was extracted. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of soft tissues in the right infraorbital area, lymph nodes of the right submaxillary area are enlarged, slightly painful, nasal breathing is normal. Mucous membrane of alveolar process in the area of the 24, 26, 27 teeth is edematic and cyanotic. There is also a fistula with bulging granulations along the mucogingival fold. Alveolus of the extracted 25 tooth excretes purulent granulations. What disease does this clinical presentation correspond with?
a. Acute osteomyelitis
b. Acute condition of chronic maxillary sinusitis
c. Chronic alveolitis
*d. Chronic localized osteomyelitis
e. Acute condition of localized periodontitis

308. A 24-year-old patient complains of acute pain and swelling in the submandibular triangle that is getting worse when he eats spicy food. He has been diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic calculous sialoadenitis with the concrement localized in the median part of the salivary duct. Which method is most rational in this case?
a. Ptyalalogue diet
b. Physiotherapy
c. Gland extirpation
d. Duct bougienage
*e. Duct dissection and concrement removal

309. A 25-year-old patient got a trauma in the chin region. On the basis of X-ray he was diagnosed with bilateral mental fracture of mandible. Specify the direction of displacement of the minor fragment:
a. Upward and backward
b. Upward and forward
*c. Downward and backward
d. Downward and forward
e. There is no displacement

310. 2 days ago a 12-year-old patient prsented with body temperature rise up to 38°C, on the second day he developed a bilateral edema in the parotid region. The skin over the edema was tense, of normal color. Palpation revealed soft, enlarged, painful parotid salivary glands. Salivation from the parotid ducts was abnormal, the duct orifices were hyperaemic. Palpation caused pain in the angle of mandible, at the top of mastoid bone, in front of the antilobium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Mumps
b. Acute bacterial parotitis
c. Sjogrens syndrome
d. Purulent-necrotic parotitis
e. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis

311. A 25-year-old male patient came to the traumatology. He complains about pain in the right half of his face, limited mouth opening. Objectively: there is a moderate edema and haematoma in the region of the right malar arch. Palpation shows a slightly painful impaction of bone tissue in the region of the right malar arch. The bite isnt disturbed. Amplitude of mouth opening is 1,5 cm. At making an attempt to open the mouth wider the patient feels a mechanical obstacle and pain intensification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
d. Traumatic arthritis of TMJ
*e. Fracture of the right malar arch

312. A 42-year-old patient has been hospitalized with Le Fort II fracture of maxilla. Select an appliance for the treatment of this patient:
a. Penn-Brown
b. Yadrova
c. Kulagin
d. Rudko
*e. Zbarzh

313. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the right side of her head, restricted movements of the lower jaw, clicking sound, periodic spasms of chewing muscles. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is restricted. On palpation of the right temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ) there are crepitation and clicking accompanying mandible movements. Examination of the oral cavity revealed also a Kennedys class II defect on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Pain dysfunction of the right TMJ
b. Sclerosing osteoarthritis of the right TMJ
c. Myositis ossificans
d. Contracture of the right TMJ
e. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ

314. During opening a phlegmon of mouth floor a doctor revealed greyish necrotic masses in purulent foci, gas vesicles and fat droplets, sharp unpleasant smell of exudate. The tissues are of dark-brown colour, muscles resemble of boiled meat. What medications should be administered in order to prevent further spreading of this process?
a. Challenging dose of broad spectrum antibiotics
b. Hyposensitizing medications
c. Immunomodulators
*d. Polyvalent antigangrenous serum
e. Glucocorticoid medications

315. A 19-year-old patient complains about pain in the submental part of mandible. The day before he got a trauma. Objectively: there is a slight swelling of tissues in the mental area. The mouth can be opened widely enough. All the teeth are intact. Mucous membrane is edematic in the region of central incisors, it bleeds slightly. In this region mobility of mandible fragments is present. Occlusion is undisturbed. What splint should be chosen by the dentist?
a. Splint with spacer bar
b. Anchor splint with intermandibular fixation
c. Ivy loops for 31, 32, 42, 41
*d. Smooth brace
e. Splint with guide plane

316. A 25-year-old man complains of itching and reddening of skin in the buccal area, general weakness, inertness. He associates origin of the disease with a skin injury he got during shaving. Objectively: body temperature is 39,0°C. A well-defined section of skin in the buccal area is hyperemic, it slightly protrudes above the surface. Hyperemic surface has some vesicles containing serous fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Furuncle
b. Phlegmon of buccal area
*c. Erysipelatous inflammation of skin
d. Anthrax
e. Streptococcal impetigo

317. A patient complains of heaviness in the left section of his head, pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is destroyed by &frac32 by caries, the tooth percussion is weakly positive. X-ray picture of paranasal sinuses shows definite unilateral dome-shaped veiling of the upper left maxillary sinus. On the X-ray picture of the 26 tooth the periodontal fissure at the root apex is missing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Radicular cyst ingrown into the maxillary sinus
b. Odontogenic sinusitis
c. Malignant maxillary tumour
d. Cyst of the maxillary sinus mucosa
e. Rhinoantritis

318. A 28 year old man applied to a dental surgeon for removal of the 38 tooth. What forceps should be chosen for this tooth?
a. Root bayonets
*b. Beak-shaped curved forceps
c. Beak-shaped forceps with converging beaks
d. Broad-beaked forceps (with non-converging beaks)
e. Beak-shaped forceps with thorns

319. A 35-year-old patient consulted a dentist about extraction of the 14 tooth because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis following ineffective therapeutic treatment. What tools should be applied for extraction?
a. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps
b. Straight forceps
c. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
*d. S-shaped forceps
e. S-shaped forceps curved right

320. After complex extraction of the 37 tooth a patient experienced anaesthesia of the left half of his lower lip and chin. Electroodontodiagnos showed reduction of lower jaw teeth electroexcitability on the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Neuralgia of the left inferior alveolar nerve
b. Herpes Zoster n.Trigemini
c. Acute osteomyelitis of mandible body
*d. Neuritis of the left inferior alveolar nerve
e. Alveolitis in the region of socket of the 37 tooth

321. Examination of a patient revealed a roundish neoplasm in the submental area. Skin above it is unchanged, makes a fold easily. Puncture sample contains strow-yellow liquid with cholesterol admixture. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lymphadenitis
b. Lipoma
*c. Inborn median cyst
d. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
e. Dermoid cyst

322. A 25-year-old man consulted a dentist about extraction of the 18 tooth, its crown is destroyed by ½. The tooth was treated more than once. During tooth extraction the maxillary tuber was accidentally torn off. What actions should be taken?
a. To remove the fragment and tampon the wound
*b. To remove the fragment and stitch up the wound
c. To restore the fragment to its place and fix it there
d. To try to restore the fragment to its place
e. To remove the fragment

323. A 53-year-old patient consulted a dentist about pain and an ulcer that turned up in the region of hard palate under his partial removable denture. He hasnt used the denture for three weeks, but the ulcer does not heal or reduce in size. Examination reveals a 2x1,5 cm large ulcer in the region of the alveolar process and hard palate at the level of the missing 14 tooth. The ulcer has everted rolled edges and necrotic floor, it is dense and painful. Gingival and palatal tissues around the ulcer are infiltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Maxillary carcinoma
b. Maxillary tuberculosis
c. Decubital ulcer
d. Maxillary actinomycosis
e. Maxillary syphilis

324. A 20 year old patient complains of a tumour-like formation on the lateral surface of his neck on the right. He revealed this tumour a year ago. Objectively: there is a semi-oval well-defined tumour 3х2 cm large on the lateral neck surface. The tumour doesnt hold together with skin, it is painless, dense and elastic, upwardly and sidewardly movable. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. After the tumour puncture some light yellow liquid was obtained that consisted of cast-off epithelium, cholesterol crystals, lymphocytes, erythrocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dermoid neck cyst
b. Median neck cyst
*c. Lateral neck cyst
d. Neck chemodectoma
e. Chronic neck lymphadenitis

325. A 30-year-old patient complains of a painless tumour-like formation in the region of the left mandibular alveolar process. Objectively: there is a pale pink 1x1,5 cm large tumour-like formation on the vestibular surface of the alveolar process at the 34 and 35 teeth. The formation has a broad base, it does not bleed. Crowns of the 34, 35 teeth are intact, the teeth are non-mobile. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows no changes in bone structure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pleomorphic adenoma
b. Giant-cell epulis
c. Hypertrophic epulis
*d. Fibrous epulis
e. Mucosa papilloma

326. A 48-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the 37 tooths roots. What tool should be chosen?
*a. Closed-beak forceps
b. S-shaped forceps
c. Curved beak-shaped forceps
d. Bayonet forceps
e. Broad-beak forceps

327. A 70-year-old patient complains about the mobility of the 21 tooth. The tooth has not been treated before. Objectively: there is II class mobility of the 21 tooth, the root is exposed by ½. What tool should be used to extract the tooth?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Straight elevator
c. Beak-shaped forceps
*d. Straight forceps
e. Bayonet forceps

328. A 56-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the root extraction of the 17 toot. What kind of anaesthesia should be applied?
a. Palatinal, infraorbital anaesthesia
b. Mandibular anaesthesia
c. Torus anaesthesia
*d. Palatinal, tuberal anaesthesia
e. Infiltration, inscisor anaesthesia

329. A 23-year-old female patient complains of a pronounced limitation of mouth opening, throat pain irradiating to the ear. Objectively: body temperature is 37,9°C. The face is symmetrical, the colour of skin has not changed. Palpation of the jaw causes acute pain, mouth opens by 1 cm. The patient had been given anasthesia by Berchet-Dubov. After it oral examination revealed an edema and hyperemia of the mucous membrane of the pterygomaxillary fold, there was an infiltration painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Parapharyngeal space phlegmon
b. Abscess of alveololingual groove
*c. Abscess of pterygomaxillary space
d. Peritonsillar space abscess
e. Submandibular phlegmon

330. A 20 year old patient got a trauma in the area of his upper jaw. He applied to a dentist and complained about mobility of his frontal upper teeth, pain during cutting and joining of teeth. Objectively: the 11 and 21 teeth have II-III degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact but have oral position. Complete joining of teeth is impossible because the teeth are situated beyond the dental arch. X-ray picture shows a slight broadening of periodontal fissure of the 11 tooth up to 0,5-2 mm. The roots are intact. Make a correct diagnosis:
*a. Traumatic subluxation of the 11, 21 teeth
b. Traumatic complete dislocation of the 11, 21 teeth
c. Traumatic extraction of the 11, 21 teeth
d. Fracture of alveolar process in the area of the 11, 21 teeth
e. Traumatic periodontitis of the 11, 21 teeth

331. A patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about pain and edema in the right infraorbital region and right zygomatic region, skin numbness in the area of the right half of his upper lip; nasal haemorrhage. These symptoms turned up after a trauma. What disease should be suspected?
a. Fracture of nose bones
*b. Fracture of zygomatic bone
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
e. Le Fort III maxillary fracture

332. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
*a. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
b. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border
c. Erythroplasia
d. Bowens disease
e. Verrucous precancer of red border

333. A 55-year-old patient consulted a dentist about a roundish tumour-like formation of about 1 cm in diameter located within the vermilion border of his lower lip. Objectively: the tumour-like formation protrudes about 5 mm above the vermilion border, it is dense and grayish-red. The surface of the formation is covered with thin scales that can hardly be removed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
b. Bowens disease
c. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
*d. Verrucous precancer of the vermilion border of lip
e. Precancerous limited hyperkeratosis of the vermilion border of lip

334. Examination of a male patient revealed that a tumour occupied the major part of his tongue; tongue mobility was limited, there were solitary regional nodes in the region of affection. After the cytological analysis the patient was diagnosed with cancer of tongue T2N1M0. What treatment should be chosen for this patient?
a. Surgical removal of tumor
b. Radiation therapy
*c. Combined method
d. Chemotherapy
e. Removal of lymph nodes

335. A 30-year-old patient has got an edema and hyperemia of nose wing skin spreading to the skin of his upper lip and cheek. Examination revealed a fissure along the infra-external edge of the left nostril. The skin is tense, dense, red-and-cyanotic, skin line pattern is smoothed; rise of local temperature is present. The zone of affection is well-defined and irregularly shaped. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermal actinomycosis
b. Dermal cancer
c. Thrombophlebitis of the facial vein
*d. Erysipelatous inflammation
e. Dermal tuberculosis

336. On the second day after tooth extraction a 35-year-old woman applied to a facial surgeon and complained about pain in the parotid-masticatory region and sensation of lacking contact between the upper and lower jaw teeth on the right. Examination revealed chin deviation to the left, half-open mouth, closed lips, disturbed occlusion. There is also limitation of lateral mandible movements. In front of the right ear tragus soft tissues sink down. What examination is expected to be the most informative in this case?
a. Bimanual TMJ investigation
b. -
c. TMJ ultrasound
d. Mandible roentgenography
*e. TMJ roentgenography

337. A patient has got a traumatic fracture of mandible in the area of the missing 34, 35 teeth with a slight displacement and a defect of alveolar part in the area of the 34, 35 teeth. Other teeth on both lower and upper jaws are intact. What splint would be optimal in this case?
a. Vasilyevs splint
b. Vankevich splint
c. Plain splint cramp
d. Ports splint
*e. Tigerstedts splint with a spreading curve

338. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by ⅓. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. Straight forceps
b. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
*c. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
d. Straight elevator
e. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips

339. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanitation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. History: the tooth hasnt been treated before, it has decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is decayed by over 2/3, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
*a. Bayonet root forceps
b. Straight elevator
c. Crown bayonet forceps
d. S-shaped closed-beak forceps
e. S-shaped forceps (right)

340. A 50-year-old woman complains about a neoplasm on her lower lip on the side of oral cavity that appeared a month ago and has been slowly growing since that. Objectively: there is a roundish, elastic, painless neoplasm inside the lower lip. Mucous membrane hasnt changed its colour. Make a diagnosis:
a. Lip abscess
b. Lip fibroma
c. Lip lipoma
*d. Retention cyst of lower lip
e. Lip papilloma

341. A 35-year-old patient complains of a neoplasm on the tip of his tongue which he injures with his teeth. The neoplasm sometimes increases, and sometimes decreases in size. Objectively: on the tip of tongue there is a roundish well-defined neoplasm 0,5 cm in diameter with broad base. The neoplasm is the same colour as the mucosa of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibroma of tongue
*b. Papilloma of tongue
c. Lipoma of tongue
d. Abscess of tongue
e. Hemangiofibroma of tongue

342. A 57-year-old patient complains of a tumor in the left parotid region, which appeared 3 years ago. Over the past six months, the tumor has increased significantly. Objectively: there is a non-mobile lobulated tumour in the left parotid region, palpation causes minor pain reaction. The skin over the tumour plicates easily, its upper part has well-defined margins, the bottom part grows into the depth of gland. The tumour is 3x2,5 cm large. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Parotid gland carcinoma
*b. Pleomorphic adenoma
c. Fibroma
d. Chronic parotitis
e. Cyst

343. A 53-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right parotid region. The tumour was revealed six months ago, within this period it doubled in size. Objectively: the right parotid region has a dense 1,5 x 2 cm large neoplasm, the duct of the right parotid gland secretes transparent saliva. The gland puncture gave no results. What disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Retention cyst of parotid gland
b. Chronic lymphadenitis of parotid-masticatory region
*c. Pleomorphic adenoma of parotid gland
d. Fibroma of parotid-masticatory region
e. Lipoma of parotid-masticatory region

344. Before extraction of a left upper tooth a 49-year-old patient had been given plexus anaesthesia with Ultracaine Forte. After the operation the socket didnt get filled with a blod clot. What is the way to prevent alveolitis development in this patient?
a. To fill the socket with a hemostatic sponge
b. To rinse the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution
c. To fill the socket with antibiotic powder
*d. To fill the socket with a loose iodoform tampon
e. To rinse the socket with microcide solution

345. Examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed some white patches on the buccal mucosa along the teeth closure line that didnt protrude above the inflamed and edematous surrounding tissues. The patches could not be removed on scraping. A patient has smoken an average of 3 packs of cigarettes a day for 20 years. Specify the disease of buccal mucosa:
a. Pemphigus
b. Erosive leukoplakia
*c. Leukoplakia plana
d. Tappeiners leukoplakia (leukoplakia nicotinica)
e. Lichen ruber planus

346. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flat, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
a. Pregnancy epulis
b. -
c. Angiomatous
d. Giant-cell
*e. Fibrous

347. X-ray examination of the maxillary alveolar process of a 35-year-old patient reveals a root fracture of the 11 tooth in its apical region. The tooth has been treated before, the canal is filled. The patient has a history of the tooth trauma. What method of treatment is indicated for this case?
a. Tooth crowning
b. Tooth extraction
*c. Root apex resection
d. Tooth replantation
e. -

348. As a result of a car accident a 45-year-old patient got an injury of his upper jaw. Examination revealed elongated and flattened face, profuse nasal haemorrhage, liquorrhea from the nose and ears. These clinical presentations are typical for the following fracture of upper jaw:
*a. Subbasal (Le Fort III)
b. Suborbital (Le Fort II)
c. -
d. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
e. Subnasal (Le Fort I)

349. A 57-year-old patient complains about a slowly growing swelling in the sublingual region. She noted it 3 months ago. Objectively: there is an elastic swelling in the sublingual region. The swelling is painless, mucous membrane over it is with tints of blue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemangioma of sublingual area
*b. Ranula
c. Dermoid cyst of oral cavity floor
d. Salivolithiasis
e. Lipoma of sublingual area

350. A 38-year-old patient consulted dental surgery about extraction of the 36 tooth. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction?
a. Infiltration
b. Voino-Yasenetsky truncal
c. Mandibular
d. Tuberal
*e. Torus

351. A 49-year-old patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about permanent intense dull pain in the region of the right upper jaw. It is known from the anamnesis that the 17 tooth has been repeatedly treated for exacerbation of chronic periodontitis but the treatment appeared to be ineffective. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Torus
*b. Tuberal and palatinal
c. Tuberal, incisor and palatinal
d. Tuberal and incisor
e. Incisor and paltinal

352. A 35-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the sublingual region which impairs speech and causes discomfort during eating. The swelling turned up about a week ago. Objectively: there is a roundish bulge up to 3 cm in diameter in the right sublingual region. Mucous membrane over it is not hyperaemic, there is fluctuation symptom in the center. Which disease do these symptoms correspond with?
a. Chronic sialoadenitis of sublingual salivary gland
b. Sjogrens disease
c. Retention cyst of the right submandibular salivary gland
d. Acute sialoadenitis of submandibular salivary gland
*e. Retention cyst of the right sublingual salivary gland

353. The department of maxillofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a post-traumatic defect of nose wing up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
*a. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
b. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
c. Free grafting with dermal flap
d. Grafting with tubed pedicle (Filatovs) flap
e. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions

354. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ
b. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ
*c. Arthrosis of the right TMJ
d. Fracture of the right condyle of mandible
e. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible

355. A 35-year-old man complains about pain in the region of the 38 tooth, painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. What anaesthesia method will be optimal during operation on account of pericoronaritis?
*a. Conduction Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia
b. General anaesthesia
c. Application anaesthesia
d. Stem anaesthesia
e. Infiltration anaesthesia

356. A 23-year-old patient complains about periodical pain in the region of the 11 tooth, protrusion of the alveolar process. The patient got a trauma 4 years ago. Objectively: crown of the 11 tooth is dark, percussion is painless. X-ray picture shows roundish well-defined area of bone tissue rarefication by the root apex of the 11 tooth. The area is 2,0 cm in diameter. Puncture results: yellow fluid with cholesterol crystals. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic maxillary osteomyelitis
b. Soft maxillary odontoma
c. Maxillary osteoclastoma
*d. Maxillary radicular cyst
e. Maxillary ameloblastoma

357. A 33-year-old patient complains about an ulcer of oral cavity floor, that is located under his tongue on a level between the 43 to the 33 tooth. Examination reveales that ulcer edges are undermined and scalloped. Its grey-yellow floor is shallow and it is covered with small, easily bleeding granulations. There is no ulcer infiltration. Make a clinical diagnosis:
a. Gummatous ulcer of oral cavity floor
b. Migratory granuloma of oral cavity floor
c. Decubital ulcer of oral cavity floor
d. Cancerous ulcer of oral cavity floor
*e. Tubercular ulcer of oral cavity floor

358. A female patient applied to the oral surgery department and underwent radical maxillary sinusotomy with plastic repair of fistula through the alveolar socket of the extrated 27 tooth. Infiltration and all the peripheral block anaesthesias of the left upper jaw were performed with 6,0 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. 3 minutes later the patient registered double vision in her left eye, inability to close it. Which of the performed anaesthesias is the reason for the above-mentioned presentations?
a. Tuberal
b. Incisor
c. Infiltration
*d. Infraorbital
e. Palatinal

359. On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region
*b. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis
c. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
d. Acute epidemic parotiditis
e. Parenchymatous parotiditis

360. A 56-year-old patient complains about a painless neoplasm on the alveolar crest of the right upper jaw. Objectively: there is a bright-red wide-based tumour in the region of premolars. It is localized on both sides from the alveolar crest. The tumour is dense and elastic, painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fibrous epulis
b. Papilloma
c. Central osteoclastoma
d. Gingival fibromatosis
*e. Peripheral osteoclastoma

361. A 30-year-old male patient consulted a dentist about a swelling in the region of his upper lip. Objectively: the face is asymmetric because of upper lip edema, nasolabial fold is smoothed. Mucogingival fold of the upper jaw vestibular surface in the region of the 11, 12, 21 teeth is smoothed, hyperemic. Palpation is painful. Fluctuation is present. The patient was diagnosed with acute purulent periostitis of the upper jaw satrting from the 21 tooth. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Extraction of the 12, 21, 22 teeth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
*b. Preservation of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
c. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy, anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Preservation of the 21 tooth, anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Extraction of the 21 tooth, periosteotomy

362. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and "hurt" her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and doesn’t make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphadenitis
*b. Suppurated cheek haematoma
c. Cheek haematoma
d. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible
e. Cheek phlegmon

363. A 33-year-old officer delivered from a battlefield has shoot off mental part o fmandible, drooling, insignificant haemorrhage from the oral cavity, asphyxia that occurs periodically because of head repositioning. What actions should be taken to prevent the asphyxia development?
a. Transportation in prone position
*b. Fixation of tongue, transportation in prone position
c. Fixation of jaws with a mental sling
d. Thacheostome construction
e. Surgical d-bridement, tracheostome construction

364. A 47-year-old patient consulted a doctor about an itching tumour in the right buccal area that has significantly enlarged lately. Examination revealed an irregularly shaped tumour up to 1,5 cm large, the tumour is black and glossy. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Cutaneous horn
*b. Dermal melanoma
c. Dermal basalioma
d. Pigmented nevus
e. Dermal cancer

365. A 24-year-old victim consulted a doctor about a face burn. He was injured by the open flame. He complains about pain and burning of face skin. Objectively: hyperemia of face skin; in the region of chin, nose, forehead, eyebrows, cheekbones there are burn blisters containing transparent liquid. These presentations correspond with the following degree of burn severity:
a. II-IV degree
*b. I-II degree
c. II-III B degree
d. II-III A degree
e. III B-IV degree

366. A 20-year-old patient complains about inability to move with his lower jaw, speech difficulty and problems during eating. He associates his condition with a trauma he got when biting on apple. Examination revealed half-open mouth, open bite due to the solitary contacts of distal tubercles of the last molars, salivation, indistinct speech. Articular heads of mandible can be felt anterior to both tragi. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of osteoarthritis of temporomandibular joint
b. Fibrous ankylosis of temporomandibular joint
*c. Acute anterior bilateral mandible luxation
d. Traumatic bilateral fracture of articular processes of mandible
e. Fracture of articular processes of mandible

367. A 30-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39°C, a roundish infiltrate on his upper lip, general weakness. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 days. Objectively: a roundish infiltrate in the region of the upper lip 2,5 cm in diameter, the skin over the infiltrate is red with a necrotic core in the centre. The upper lip is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst of the upper lip
b. Carbuncle of the upper lip
*c. Furuncle of the upper lip
d. Acute periostitis of the upper jaw
e. Acute glandular abscess

368. A 48-year-old woman complains of aching dull pain in the region of the left TMJ, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
*b. Arthrosis of the TMJ
c. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
d. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
e. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ

369. A 30-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dull pain, numbness in the lower teeth, the lower lip and chin on the right. Anamnesis data: the problems arose a week ago after the extraction of an impacted wisdom tooth on the right lower jaw. The patient developed the following disease:
a. Neuritis of the trigeminal nerve
*b. Neuritis of the inferior alveolar nerve
c. Neuritis of the facial nerve
d. Neuralgia of the third branch of the trigeminal nerve
e. Neuralgia of the auriculotemporal nerve

370. After anesthetization a 55 year old patient felt sudden attack of weakness, pain behind his breastbone irradiating to his left arm and scapular area, palpitation. Objectively: the patient is conscious, inert, his forehead is covered with cold sweat, the skin is pale, AP is 90/60 mm Hg, heart tones are dull, pulse is thready and arrhythmic. What state is developing?
a. Collapse
b. -
c. Cardiogenic form of anaphylactic shock
d. Stenocardia attack
*e. Myocardium infarction

371. A 58 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon and complained about painful ulcer on the lateral surface of his tongue. Objectively: left lateral surface of tongue has a roundish ulcer with undermined soft overhanging edges, palpatory painful, ulcer floor is slightly bleeding and covered with yellowish nodules. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Syphilis
b. Actinomycosis
c. Trophic ulcer
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Traumatic ulcer

372. A 28-year-old patient has been admitted to the oral and maxillofacial surgery for a carbuncle of face. Objectively: the patient is in a critical condition, face, mucous membranes of lips and conjunctiva are edematous and cyanotic. Body temperature is 40°C. The patient presents with delirium, hallucinations. The carbuncle is located on the upper lip, the surrounding soft tissues are swollen. Palpebral fissures are closed due to the edema of eyelids. What is the most likely complication of carbuncle?
*a. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
b. Cerebral abscess
c. Orbit phlegmon
d. Sepsis
e. Meningitis

373. A 37-year-old patient has been diagnosed with abscessed furuncle of the upper lip. After dissection of the inflammation focus the exudate has been sent for bacteriological analysis. Which causative agent for furuncle is most likely to be found?
a. Streptococcus monoculture
*b. Staphylococcus monoculture
c. Proteus monoculture
d. Colibacillus monoculture
e. Staphylococcus and protozoa association

374. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumor-like formation in the region of his lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: there is a round tumour-like formation up to 1cm in diameter on the red border of the lower lip on the right. Roll-like edges of the formation protrude above the level of the red border. In the centre of the formation a brown crust is visible. After its removal a crateriform hole can be seen. There is no bleeding or pain. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lower lip fibroma
b. Verrucous carcinoma
c. Lower lip carcinoma
d. Lower lip papilloma
*e. Keratoacanthoma

375. A 52-year-old female patient complains of severe paroxysmal pain in the region of the 34 tooth. Throughout the year the 35, 36, 37 teeth were sequentially extracted because of pain complaints. Percussion of the 34 tooth causes acute paroxysmal pain. The same pain arises when talking and washing the projection area of the mental foramen. Clinical and roentgenologic examination revealed no signs of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ganglionitis of pterygopalatine ganglion
b. Neuritis of the 3 branch of trigeminus
c. 34 tooth pulpitis
d. Facial nerve neuritis
*e. Neuralgia of the 3 branch of trigeminus

376. A 27-year-old patient complains of a swelling in the region of her lower jaw on the right. Objectively: the patients face is slightly asymmetric due to thickening of mandibular body on the right. Adjacent soft tissues are of unchanged colour and normal consistency. Mouth opening is not limited. Mucous membrane of oral cavity presents no changes. In the right lower dentition the 45 tooth is missing. X-ray picture of the right half of the mandible in its lateral view shows an oval well-defined 2x3 cm large radiolucency in the bone tissue. The coronal portion of the retinated horizontally positioned 45 tooth is turned inward the radiolucent area. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Osteoclastoma of mandible
*b. Follicular cyst of mandible
c. Sarcoma of mandible
d. Adamantinoma of mandible
e. Odontoma of mandible

377. A 52-year-old patient complains about a nonhealing ulcer on his lower lip. The patient is smoker. He hasn’t ever consulted a doctor about it. In the region of red border of the lower lip a roundish ulcer is present. It is up to 2,0 cm in diameter. The ulcer edges are thickened and a little bit raised in form of a whitish swelling. In the left submandibular region palpation revealed enlarged, painless, dense lymph nodes with limited mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Syphilitic ulcer
*b. Cancer of the lower lip
c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Erosive verrucous leukoplakia
e. Fibroma of the lower lip

378. A 45-year-old female patient complains of a slightly painful, tumour-like formation in the right parotid region that appeared two months ago for no apparent reason. The patient notes weakness, occasional body temperature rise up to 37,2°C-37,6°C. Two weeks ago she underwent the anti-inflammatory therapy which did not have positive effect. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to a minor swelling in the right parotid region. Palpation reveals a roundish dense and elastic formation with even contours, it is slightly painful, not adherent to the skin. Incisive canal exudes a small amount of transparent saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute infectious parotitis
b. Parotid atheroma
*c. Hertsenbergs pseudoparotitis
d. Epidemic parotitis
e. Sjogrens syndrome

379. A 32-year-old male patient was delivered to traumatology. He complains about nosebleed, severe cephalalgia, giddiness, face deformation, heavy breathing, mastication inability. He sustained an injury in the mine over three hours ago. He was conscious. Objectively: the middle third of his face is elongated, there are considerable hematomas and there is an edema in the region of nose root and eyelids of both eyes. The upper jaw is displaced downwards, it is mobile together with nasal bones, cheek bones and eyeballs. Palpation reveals deformation, pain and pathological mobility in the region of the nose bridge, external socket edges, pterygoid processes of basilar bone. Nosebleed is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of nasal bone
*b. Le Fort III maxillary fracture (upper)
c. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort I maxillary fracture (lower)
e. Fracture of zygomatic bone

380. A patient was delivered to an admission room after a road accident. Examination of the patient revealed in the area of oral floor a large haematoma spreading to the neck area as well as a significant edema of soft tissues of oral floor and neck. There are signs of asphyxia. What type of emergency care is indicated?
*a. Tracheotomy performing
b. Tongue fixation
c. Symptomatic medicamental treatment
d. Opening and draining of haematoma
e. Lobeline introduction

381. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the roots of the 36 tooth. The tooth decayed long ago. Objectively: the crown of the 36 is destroyed by &frac32, percussion is painless, mucosa around the 36 tooth exhibits no evident pathological changes. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows a roundish well-defined radiolucency near the apex of the medial root. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis
c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
d. Acute purulent periodontitis
e. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis

382. A victim got a face and temporal region trauma. A doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
a. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
*b. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
c. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone
d. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
e. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone

383. It is planned to lance an abscess of hard palate (it is localized close to the 23, 24, 25 teeth) and to extract the causative 24 tooth that had caused abscess development. What type of anaesthesia is indicated for this operation?
a. Tuberal and palatinal
*b. Infraorbital, palatinal and incisor
c. Tuberal, infraorbital and palatinal
d. Tuberal, infraorbital and incisor
e. Tuberal and incisor

384. A 28-year-old patient had to undergo extraction of the 46 tooth under Weisbrems apodactylic mandibular anaesthesia. What is the target site of the anaesthetic solution injection?
*a. A segment of mandibular torus
b. Retromolar fossa
c. Retromandibular fossa
d. A segment of temporal crest of mandible
e. A segment of maxillary tuber

385. A 36-year-old patient consulted a dentist about permanent acute pain in the upper jaw teeth, body temperature rise. The dentist found out that the 26 tooth had been repeatedly treated, the rest of teeth were intact. After roentgenological examination the patient was diagnosed with acute highmoritis. What is the most effective way of treatment?
a. Medicamentous and physiotherapeutic treatment
*b. Extraction of the causative tooth and medicamentous therapy
c. Puncture of the maxillary sinus and medicamentous therapy
d. Caldwell-Luc maxillary sinusotomy
e. Medicamentous therapy

386. A 23-year-old patient complains about unpleasant sensations in the region of the 12 tooth, X-ray picture shows a well-defined low-density area up to 8-10 mm in diameter around the root apex of the 12 tooth. What method of surgery will be the most efficient?
*a. Root apex resection
b. Hemisection
c. Cystotomy
d. Tooth removal
e. Root amputation

387. A patient has orthopaedic indications for the 37 tooth extraction. What kind of anaesthesia should be given to this patient before the extraction?
*a. Mandibular torus anaesthesia
b. Mental + buccal anaesthesia
c. Mandibular
d. Tuberal + buccal anaesthesia
e. Infraorbital + buccal anaesthesia

388. A 32-year-old patient complains about pain and swelling in the region of his mandible and left cheek. He has been suffering from this for 2 days. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory. Body temperature is 37,5°C. There is an edema of soft tissues in the left buccal region. Submandibular lymph nodes are bilaterally enlarged, painful on palpation. Crown of the 37 tooth is partially decayed, the tooth is immobile, percussion is slightly painful. Mucogingival fold in the region of the 37 tooth is edematic, hyperaemic, flattened, its palpation causes acute pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
b. Chronic productive periostitis of mandible beginning from the 37 tooth
c. Abscess of alveololingual groove on the left
d. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible
e. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis of mandible

389. A 38-year-old patient consulted a dentist about aching pain in the region of the 48 tooth that is getting worse when biting down on food. Body temperature rise up to 37,6°C and aggravation of general condition is present. Objectively: insignificant swelling of retromolar region as well as hyperaemia of mucous membrane. The 48 tooth is covered with occlusal pad. It is painful on palpation. Purulent discharges are present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent pericoronitis
b. Acute periodontitis of the 48 tooth
c. Acute purulent periostitis
d. Aphthous stomatitis
e. Acute pulpitis

390. A patient was admitted to the oral surgery department with a diagnosis "odontogenous phlegmon of mouth floor". Objectively: general condition of the patient is grave, abed position is forced, the patient is sitting with lowered head. He complains about pain behind his breastbone that is getting worse during backward flexion of head; cough, dyspnea. What complication has developed?
a. Phlegmon of retropharyngeal space
b. Phlegmon of tongue root
c. Phlegmon of peripharyngeal space
*d. Mediastinitis
e. Cervical phlegmon

391. A 34-year-old patient has indication for extraction of the 38 tooth because of chronic fibrous periodontitis. Oral surgeon performed torus anaesthesia. This anaesthesia blocked transmission of pain information from the following nerves:
a. Infraalveolar, buccal
b. Lingual, buccal
*c. Infraalveolar, lingual, buccal
d. Infraalveolar, lingual
e. Lingual, buccal, mental

392. A 40-year-old patient needs the oral cavity sanation, which involves extraction of the upper central incisors. What nerve structure will be blocked as a result of incisor anaesthesia?
a. Dental nerve plexus
*b. Nasopalatine nerve
c. Median superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
d. Anterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
e. Posterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve

393. A maxillofacial surgery department admitted a patient with a half-open mouth, his chin was put forward and deviated to the right. On palpation, the left mandibular fossa was found to be empty. Internal palpation failed to detect the left articular head. Mandibular movements were possible but restricted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bilateral dislocation of the TMJ
b. Unilateral dislocation of the right TMJ
*c. Unilateral dislocation of the left TMJ
d. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
e. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ

394. A 64 year old patient was waiting to see an oral surgeon. Suddenly she fell, there appeared coarse breathing, spasmatic twitching of upper and lower extremities. Face and neck became cyanotic, pupils became mydriatic, reaction to the light was absent, arterial pressure and pulse could not be detected, heart tones could not be heard, involuntary urination was observed. What state are these symptoms typical for?
a. Myocardium infarction
b. Collapse
c. Loss of consciousness
d. Stroke
*e. Clinical death

395. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about intense lancinating paroxysmal pain accompanied by a sensation of current passage in the region of her upper lip on the right. Pain attacks occur spontaneously and last 3-5 minutes. The patient usually has 2-3 attacks a day. The patient is unable to establish the cause of this disease. Examination of her oral cavity revealed no pathological changes. Oral cavity is sanitated. Test orthopantomogram shows an impacted supernumerary 13 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
b. Central neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
c. Right-sided upper jaw pulpitis
*d. Peripheral neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
e. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus

396. During the cystectomy involving resection of the root apices of the 11, 21 and 22 teeth a 45-year-old patient developed skin pallor and cyanosis, a cold sweat, a sharp drop in blood pressure (70/40 mmHg). The patient is conscious but complains of weakness. What state has been developed?
*a. Collapse
b. Epileptic seizure
c. Syncope
d. Quinckes edema
e. Haematoma

397. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumour-like formation in the region of the lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: on the vermilion border of the lower lip on the right there is a roundish tumour up to 1 cm in diameter with raised rolled edges. The tumour is painless, the regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Papilloma of the lower lip
b. Carcinoma of the lower lip
*c. Keratoacanthoma
d. Fibroma of the lower lip
e. Verrucous precancer

398. A 34-year-old patient had got in a car accident. The patient stayed conscious. He complains of headache, dizziness, general weakness, nausea. 12 hours after the injury the patient got "raccoon eyes" (periorbital haematomas) within the limits of the circular muscle of eye. What fracture does the victim have?
a. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
b. Fracture of frontal bones
c. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
d. Fracture of nasal bones
*e. Fracture of skull base

399. After a car accident a patient consulted a dentist about pain at the base of the nose. Palpation reveals tenderness of the nose wall, mobility of the nasal bones. Nasal passages are filled with blood clots. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Le Fort III fracture of maxilla
b. Fracture of cheekbone
c. Le Fort I fracture of maxilla
d. Le Fort II fracture of maxilla
*e. Fracture of nasal bones

400. A 49-year-old patient complains of constant mandibular pain irradiating to the ear, soft tissue edema, body temperature rise up to 39 degrees. Objectively: there is an edema in the submandibular region, the skin has not changed in colour. Alveolar mucosa around the 45, 46 teeth is hyperemic and edematic on the oral and vestibular side. Crowns of the 45, 46 teeth are completely destroyed, the teeth are mobile. Vincents symptom is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute mandibular osteomyelitis
b. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
c. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
d. Acute serous periostitis of mandible
e. Abscess of submandibular region

401. A 43-year-old man complains about painful swallowing, limited mouth opening. Destroyed 37 tooth caused pain 3 days ago. Painful swallowing appeared the next day. Limited mouth opening was present a day later. Objectively: there is a small soft swelling in the left submaxillary area. An enlarged lymph node is palpated. The mouth can be opened by 1,5 cm. Edema of left palatine arch and pharynx lateral wall is present. The 37 tooth is destroyed. Mucous membrane around the tooth is edematic. Percussion is slightly painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Odontogenic peripharyngeal phlegmon
b. Odontogenic submaxillary phlegmon
c. Acute submaxillary lymphadenitis
d. Peritonsillar abscess
e. Odontogenic pterygomandibular phlegmon

402. A 43-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right submandibular region which appeared two months ago after having flu. Objectively: palpation of the right submandibular region reveals a painful spherical neoplasm of dense elastic consistency with regular outlines which is not attached to the skin. Submandibular salivary gland secretes transparent saliva. Sublingual plica is unchanged. Which disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
*a. Chronic lymphadenitis
b. Sialolithiasis
c. Lipoma
d. Adenoma of the salivary gland
e. Chronic sialoadenitis

403. A 27-year-old male patient underwent extraction of the medial root of the 36 tooth, but the distal tooth root was broken in its middle third. What tools should be applied for root extraction?
a. Broad-beaked forceps
b. Close-beaked forceps
c. Right angled elevator
d. Straight elevator
*e. Left angled elevator

404. A 64-year-old patient presents with bleeding from the left nostril, mobility of the upper left teeth. For the last 2 years the patient has had dull pain in the left side of maxilla. On the left side of neck there is a dense tumour-like formation. The patient is exhausted. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic osteomyelitis of the left upper jaw
b. Osteoclastoma of the left upper jaw
c. Left-sided sinusitis
d. Left-sided maxillary cyst
*e. Left-sided maxillary carcinoma

405. A 42-year-old patient complains about acute pain in the region of the left temporomandibular joint (TMJ) that irradiates to the ear; headache, general indisposition, impossible mastication and limited mouth opening. Objectively: the patient’s face is asymmetric due to the edema in the region of the left temporomandibular joint. The skin in this region is hyperemic. The pain is made worse by the smallest movements of mandible. Palpation of the joint causes acute pain. Mouth opening is limited down to 15-20 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute arthritis of the left TMJ
b. Mandible subluxation
c. Myogenous osteoarthrosis
d. Deforming arthrosis of the left TMJ
e. Acute purulent parotitis

406. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the submaxillary and sublingual areas that is getting worse during eating, body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. He has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: infiltration along the right sublingual torus, hyperemia, soft tissue edema, acute pain during palpation. The duct of the right submandubular salivary gland excretes turbid saliva mixed with pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submaxillary area
b. Abscess of maxillolingual groove
c. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
*d. Exacerbation of salivolithiasis
e. Adenophlegmon of submaxillary area

407. A 42-year-old patient complains about pain in the submandibular and sublingual region that is getting worse during eating; body temperature rise up to 37,6°C. The patient has been suffering from this for 2 months. Objectively: along the right sublingual plica there is infiltration, hyperaemia, edema of soft tisues, acute pain on palpation. The duct of the right submandibular salivary gland discharges turbid saliva with pus admixtures. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Retention cyst of sublingual salivary gland
*b. Exacerbation of urolithiasis
c. Adenophlegmon of submandibular region
d. Acute purulent lymphadenitis of submandibular region
e. Abscess of alveololingual groove

408. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about fever up to 37,6 degrees, soft tissue swelling, pain in the 47 tooth on the lower jaw on the left, the pain is getting worse when the tooth is touched by the antagonist. Objectively: mucogingival fold of the alveolar process is hyperemic and flat on the vestibular side of the decayed 47 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Periodontal abscess
c. Acute serous periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
*e. Acute purulent odontogenic periostitis

409. A patient complains about mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth, periodic pain, sensation of heaviness in the corresponding half of the upper jaw, haemorrhagic discharges from the left side of nose. These presentations have been observed for 4 months, within the last month the pain has become worse, the patient presents now with general weakness. Examination of the oral cavity reveals the grade II mobility of the 26, 27, 28 teeth. On palpation of the maxillary tuber, the bone wall was found to be absent. X-ray picture shows a homogeneous shadowing of maxillary sinus; bone structures have unclear contours. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Upper jaw cancer
b. Upper jaw sarcoma
c. Upper jaw osteoclastoma
d. Chronic odontogenous maxillary sinusitis
e. Upper jaw adamantinoma

410. A patient consulted a doctor about recurrent pain in the frontal part of his upper jaw. He has history of previous treatment for pulpitis. Objectively: the crown of the 12 tooth is restored with a filling. X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows an area of bone tissue destruction (up to 1 cm in diameter) at the root apex of the 12 tooth. The root channel of the 12 tooth is filled up to the top. The patient was diagnosed with cystogranuloma of the 12 tooth. Choose the best method of treatment:
a. Extraction of the 12 tooth
b. Dissection along the mucogingival junction
c. Replantation of the 12 tooth
*d. Root apex resection
e. Conservative treatment

411. During an armed conflict soldier K. was injured and delivered to the station of the separate medical battalion. The patient has a gunshot wound of his right cheek, splintered fracture of the body of mandible, arterial bleeding from the wound. A brigade of the separate medical battalion performed surgical debridement and final bleeding arrest. Specify the scope of further medical and evacuation actions for this patient:
a. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
b. Therapeutic immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties
*c. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, evacuation of the patient to the military field surgical hospital
d. Transport immobilization of mandible fragments, no need of further evacuation
e. No need of fragment immobilization, evacuation to the military field hospital for minor casualties

412. A 46-year-old patient complains of spontaneous pain in the 36 tooth. Its crown is decayed. The patient presented with edema of soft tissues adjacent to the mandible. Body temperature rose up to 39,0°C, the patient has chill. Examination of the oral cavity revealed a pronounced edema of the left mandibular alveolar process on the vestibular and oral side (acute periostitis); the 35, 36, 37 teeth are mobile, subgingival pockets contain purulent exudate; their percussion causes acute pain. Positive Vincents symptom is present. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis from the 36 tooth
b. Exacerbation of generalized periodontitis
c. Exacerbation of chronic mandibular osteomyelitis
*d. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis of mandible from the 36 tooth
e. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible from the 36 tooth

413. A 58 year old patient complains about clicking in the mandibulotemporal joint during eating. Periodically as a result of wide mouth opening the mandible takes up such a position that makes mouth closing impossible. The mandible can be easily placed into its initial position by pressing with fingers upon its coronoid processes. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Subluxation of mandible
b. Acute dislocation of mandible
*c. Habitual dislocation of mandible
d. Anterior dislocation
e. Posterior dislocation

414. After a fall a 28-year-old patient visited the clinic of maxillofacial surgery and complained of restricted mouth opening, skin numbness in the left infraorbital region, upper lip, wing of the nose, pain in the left zygomatic region that gets worse when he opens his mouth. Palpation revealed step deformity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone
*b. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone with a displacement
c. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort II (medium type)
d. Fracture of the left zygomatic bone without a displacement
e. Fracture of the upper jaw of Le Fort I (top type)

415. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a dental surgeon about an enlarging "mothers mark", itch and desquamation. According to patient, changed in color and size skin area appeared a year ago after a shaving trauma. Objectively: there is an intensely pigmented brown spot up to 2 cm large with small oval protruding nodules on its surface in the infraorbital region on the left. Desquamation factors are present. Palpation is painless. Regional lymph nodes are matted together with skin and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidermoid cancer
b. Papillomatosis
c. Pigmented nevus
d. Verrucous nevus
*e. Melanoma

416. A 75-year-old patient has been admitted to the dental department for the right-angle mandibular fracture with a displacement. Objectively: the face is asymmetric due to the post-traumatic swelling, palpation reveals the mobility of fragments and pain. The patient has a lifelong history of epilepsy. What is the best method of treatment?
a. Immobilization with Vasilyev splints
b. Immobilization with Port splint
c. Immobilization with Vankevich splint
*d. Osteosynthesis
e. Immobilization with Tigerstedt splints

417. A week ago an 18-year-old girl complained of pain in the 22 tooth which was treated and filled several years ago. Over the past two days the pain got worse. Objectively: the 22 tooth is filled, percussion is painful, mucous membrane is hyperaemic and edematic. Spot-film roentgenograph of the 22 tooth shows an ill-defined pariapical bone rarefaction 0,4x0,5 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute odontogenic osteomyelitis
b. Suppuration of the radicular cyst
*c. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 22 tooth
d. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 22 tooth
e. Acute maxillary periostitis

418. A 22-year-old patient complains of a painful swelling in the right parotid gland. A week earlier the patient got a cheek abrasion which healed under the purulent crust. Over the past two days the patient had observed progressing pain and fever up to 38,6°C. Objectively: there is a soft tissue edema in the right parotid region, the skin is slightly strained but has not changed in colour. There is a dense painful infiltration 2,5x3,5 cm large, the skin over it exhibits limited mobility. The mouth can be fully opened, the mucous membrane around the orifice of the salivary duct is unchanged, the saliva is transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exacerbation of chronic parotitis
b. Acute non-epidemic parotitis
c. Epidemic parotitis
*d. Acute lymphadenitis
e. Abscess of the parotid-masseteric region

419. A 33-year-old female patient has been admitted to the maxillofacial department for pain and edema of the right submandibular region, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C. Objectively: the patient has asymmetric face because of soft tissue edema of the right submandibular region, palpation reveals a dense infiltration, the skin over it is hyperemic, does not make a fold. The 46 tooth has a deep carious cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periostitis of mandible
b. Acute submandibular sialoadenitis
*c. Submandibular phlegmon on the right
d. Acute purulent submandibular lymphadenitis
e. Acute right-sided osteomyelitis of mandible

420. A 32-year-old patient complains of a fistula in the submandibular region. Objectively: cheek is swollen in the region of mandible on the left, palpation revealed induration of soft tissues. In projection of the 35, 36 teeth there is a fistula containing pus and granulations. X-ray picture shows destruction of bone, sequestrum. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sarcoma
b. Osteoma
c. Actinomycosis
d. Syphilis
*e. Chronic osteomyelitis

421. Biopsy material obtained by puncture of a maxillary tumour looks like a foul-smelling mush. What kind of tumour is it typical for?
a. Radicular cyst
b. Ameloblastoma
c. Atheroma
*d. Cholesteatoma
e. Osteoclastoma

422. A patient has been diagnosed with traumatic open angular fracture of mandible with a fragments displacement. Which of the following should be applied for transport immobilization of the fragments?
a. Weber splints
*b. Entin head-chin strap
c. Standard Vasyliev splints
d. Tigerstedt splints
e. Gunning splints

423. A 20-year-old patient has asymmetric face due to an upper lip edema on the left. The skin over it is bluish, there are positive symptoms of "compression" and "filling in". What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Capillary hemangioma
b. Branched hemangioma
*c. Cavernous hemangioma
d. Lymphangioma
e. Lentigo

424. A 24 year old patient applied to a dental clinic for root removal of her upper wisdom tooth. Tuberal anesthesia caused a postinjection haematoma. What was injured during anesthetization?
*a. Pterygoid venous plexus
b. Infraorbital artery
c. Palatine artery
d. Zygomatic artery
e. Maxillary artery

425. A 70-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the central upper jaw incisors with ІІІ degree mobility. What tools should be applied?
a. S-shaped forceps
*b. Straight forceps
c. Beak-shaped forceps
d. Straight elevator
e. Bayonet-shaped forceps

426. During endodontic treatment of periodontitis a tool was broken in the middle third of the medial root. Choose the treatment method:
a. Crown radicular separation
b. Medial root amputation
*c. Medial root hemisection
d. Resection of medial root apex
e. Tooth extraction

427. A 65 year old patient complains about pain during eating, reduced tongue mobility, an ulcer in the posterior part of mouth floor on the left, weight loss. Objectively: the patient uses a partial removable denture for the lower jaw. In the area of the left mylohyoid duct there is an ulcer in form of a cleft up to 1,6 cm long with everted edges, covered with grey-yellowish deposit, closely adhering to an infiltrate that can be detected during bimanual palpation. In the left submandibular and superolateral areas of neck several enlarged nonmobile lymph nodes can be palpated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous ulcer of mouth floor
b. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous ulcer)
c. Actinomycosis of mouth floor
*d. Cancer of mucous membrane of mouth floor
e. Decubital ulcer of mouth floor

428. A 70-year-old patient complains of pain in the lower jaw region on the right. He has been using complete removable dentures for the upper and lower jaw for 12 years. He is smoker. Objectively: the right retromolar region exhibits a 1,5х1,2 cm large proliferation of mucous membrane in form of cauliflower, here and there there are dense fissure-like ulcers. The surrounding mucous membrane is cyanotic, infiltrated. When the teeth are closed, the mentioned formation contacts with the posterior edges of the dentures. What is the provisional diagnosis:
a. Decubital ulcer
b. Leukoplakia
*c. Cancer of the mucous membrane
d. Hypertrophic gingivitis
e. Papillomatosis

429. A 32 year old patient applied to a dental surgeon for oral cavity sanitation before prosthetics. During examination of oral cavity the dentist revealed that crown of the 35 tooth was decayed. The root is stable, its percussion is painless. Mucous membrane of alveolar process was unchanged. X-ray picture showed a slight broadening of periodontal fissure. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
a. Cystogranuloma
*b. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
c. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 25 tooth
d. Chronic periodontitis of the 25 tooth
e. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 25 tooth

430. A 48-year-old patient complains of subfebrile temperature and a growing ulcer on the gingival mucosa around the molars; looseness of teeth in the affected area, cough. Objectively: gingival mucosa in the region of the lower left molars has two superficial, extremely painful ulcers with undermined edges. The ulcers floor is yellowish, granular, covered with yellowish, and sometimes pink granulations. The ulcers are surrounded by the tubercles. Dental cervices are exposed, there is a pathological tooth mobility. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged and make dense matted together groups. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Decubital ulcer
*b. Tuberculosis
c. Acute aphthous stomatitis
d. Syphilis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

431. A 56-year-old man complains of pain in the left parotidomasticatory region, progressing face asymmetry that was noticed a month ago. Objectively: left-sided paresis of mimic muscles. To the fore of earflap there is an ill-defined infiltration, the skin above it is tense and cyanotic; left lymph nodes are enlarged. Opening of mouth is limited down to 2,5 cm. The left parotid duct doesnt excrete saliva. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic lymphadenitis
*b. Adenocarcinoma
c. Cyst of the gland
d. Mixed tumour
e. Glandular tuberculosis

432. A 28-year-old patient hadan appointment with a dental surgeon to prepare the oral cavity for a prosthesis. Examination revealed that the 11 tooth crown was decayed, the root was stable, its percussion was painless. The mucous membrane of the alveolar process was not changed. Ro-gram of the alveolar process shows widening of periodontal ligament space in the region of the 11 tooth. Alveolar process structure is not changed. The root canal was passable all through. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis of the 11 tooth
b. Chronic granulating periodontitis of the 11 tooth
*c. Chronic fibrous periodontitis of the 11 tooth
d. Periodontitis of the 11 tooth
e. Chronic periodontitis of the 11 tooth, hypercementosis

433. A 44-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about constant acute pain in the upper jaw region on the left that is getting worse during teeth joining. The pain appeared 3 days ago. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is not limited. The crown of the 26 tooth is half-decayed. Probing of the carious cavity is painless. Percussion of the 26 tooth provokes acute pain. Mucous membrane of the alveolar process is edematic, hyperaemic at the level of the 26 tooth. The 26 tooth had been treated before. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 26 tooth
b. Acute purulent periostitis of the left upper jaw extending from the 26 tooth
c. Periodontitis of the 26, 27, 28 teeth
*d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis of the 26 tooth
e. Acute pulpitis of the 26 tooth

434. A patient complains about acute intense pain and a slight swelling in the area of a decayed tooth of the lower jaw on the right, ill health, body temperature rise up to 38,3 degrees, lack of appetite, insomnia. Objectively: there is collateral edema of soft tissues of submandibular area and lower part of right cheek. Regional lymph nodes are enlarged on the right, palpatory painful. Crown of the 46 tooth is half decayed, the 45, 46, 47 teeth are mobile, there is also a cuff infiltrate in the area of these teeth. Vincents symptom is positive on the right. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute purulent odontogenuos periostitis
b. Acute condition of chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
c. Chronic odontogenous osteomyelitis
*d. Acute odontogenous osteomyelitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

435. Two years after radiation therapy a 49-year-old patient has been diagnosed with recurrence of the lower lip carcinoma. Objectively: there is a 1x2 cm large neoplasm with an ulcer in the centre in the region of the right half of the lower lip. Palpation of the right submandibular region reveals two enlarged, dense, painless lymph nodes of round shape. Specify the stage of the disease:
a. T1 N0 M0
*b. T2 N1 M0
c. T1 N1 M0
d. T2 N0 M0
e. T1 N2 M0

436. A 19 year old patient came to traumatology centre and complained about face asymmetry, right-sided paresthesia of his upper lip, nasal haemorrhage. Objectively: evident face asymmetry due to an edema and haematoma of the right inferior eyelid and infraorbital area. Opening of mouth is slightly limited, occlusion is normal. Palpation reveals a symptom of "step" in the area of the right zygomaticomaxillary suture, deformity in the area of external edge of the right orbit and zygomaticoalveolar crest, gaseous crepitation in the right infraorbital area; percussion reveals a "bursted nut" symptom. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Fracture of the right zygomatic bone
b. Le Forts II fracture of upper jaw
c. Fracture of nose bones
d. Le Forts III fracture of upper jaw (superior)
e. Le Forts I fracture of upper jaw (inferior)

437. After the clinical and radiographic examination a 32-year-old patient was diagnosed with chronic odontogenic sinusitis, fistula between sinus and oral cavity through the socket of the 27 tooth. Specify the optimal method of surgical treatment of this disease:
a. Radical maxillary sinusotomy
b. Local tissue plasty of fistula, anti-inflammatory therapy
*c. Radical maxillary sinusotomy and local tissue plasty of fistula
d. Fistula plasty with a hard palate graft
e. Fistula suturing, sinus lavage

438. A 55-year-old patient has a painless, tuberous, cyanotic pedunculated formation 2х1х1,5 cm large that appeared on the site of the extracted 46 tooth. Opening of mouth is not limited. Intra-oral X-ray picture of alveolar process in the region of the removed 46 tooth shows a focus of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic gingivitis
b. Hard odontoma of mandible
*c. Giant-cell epulis
d. Papilloma of mucous membrane in the area of the extracted 46th tooth
e. Ameloblastoma of mandible

439. A 56-year-old patient presents to a dental clinic. He has an indication for the extraction of the 22 tooth. Examination revealed periosteal abscess in the projection of the 21, 22, 23 teeth, flattening of the mucogingival junction. What kind of peripheral conduction anaesthesia is most advisable?
a. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + palatinal anaesthesia
*b. Extraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia
c. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + palatinal anaesthesia
d. Intraoral infraorbital anaesthesia + incisor anaesthesia
e. Plexus anaesthesia in the projection of the 22 tooth + incisor anaesthesia

440. A 43-year-old patient consulted a maxillofacial surgeon about a cosmetic defect in the right half of his nose. It is known from the history that 7 months ago he got a gunshot wound. Objectively: there is a perforating defect 1,5x2 cm large in the right half of the nose. The skin around the defect has not changed in colour. It was decided to use the "Indian" method of rhinoplasty. What tissue should be taken for the defect correction?
a. Scapulohumeral flap
*b. Forehead flap
c. Infraorbital flap
d. Cheek flap
e. Shoulder flap

441. A 24-year-old patient complains of acute pain and swelling in the submandibular triangle that is getting worse when he eats spicy food. He has been diagnosed with exacerbation of chronic calculous sialoadenitis with the concrement localized in the median part of the salivary duct. Which method is most rational in this case?
*a. Duct dissection and concrement removal
b. Duct bougienage
c. Physiotherapy
d. Ptyalalogue diet
e. Gland extirpation

442. A 25-year-old patient got a trauma in the chin region. On the basis of X-ray he was diagnosed with bilateral mental fracture of mandible. Specify the direction of displacement of the minor fragment:
a. There is no displacement
*b. Downward and backward
c. Upward and backward
d. Upward and forward
e. Downward and forward

443. 2 days ago a 12-year-old patient presented with body temperature rise up to 38°C, on the second day he developed a bilateral edema in the parotid region. The skin over the edema was tense, of normal color. Palpation revealed soft, enlarged, painful parotid salivary glands. Salivation from the parotid ducts was abnormal, the duct orifices were hyperaemic. Palpation caused pain in the angle of mandible, at the top of mastoid bone, in front of the antilobium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Mumps
b. Acute bacterial parotitis
c. Sjogrens syndrome
d. Purulent-necrotic parotitis
e. Herzenberg pseudoparotitis

444. A 69-year-old patient needs extraction of the 12, 11 teeth. He is diagnosed with generalized periodontitis, the 12 and 11 teeth exhibit II degree mobility. Choose a proper instrument for extraction:
a. S-shaped forceps curved right
b. S-shaped forceps
*c. Straight forceps
d. Root bayonet-shaped forceps
e. Crown bayonet-shaped forceps

445. A 42-year-old patient has been hospitalized with Le Fort II fracture of maxilla. Select an appliance for the treatment of this patient:
a. Kulagin
b. Penn-Brown
c. Yadrova
*d. Zbarzh
e. Rudko

446. A 42-year-old patient complains of pain in the right side of her head, restricted movements of the lower jaw, clicking sound, periodic spasms of chewing muscles. Objectively: the face is symmetric, mouth opening is restricted. On palpation of the right temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ) there are crepitation and clicking accompanying mandible movements. Examination of the oral cavity revealed also a Kennedys class II defect on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute arthritis of the right TMJ
b. Contracture of the right TMJ
c. Myositis ossificans
*d. Pain dysfunction of the right TMJ
e. Sclerosing osteoarthritis of the right TMJ

447. During opening a phlegmon of mouth floor a doctor revealed greyish necrotic masses in purulent foci, gas vesicles and fat droplets, sharp unpleasant smell of exudate. The tissues are of dark-brown colour, muscles resemble of boiled meat. What medications should be administered in order to prevent further spreading of this process?
*a. Polyvalent antigangrenous serum
b. Glucocorticoid medications
c. Immunomodulators
d. Hyposensitizing medications
e. Challenging dose of broad spectrum antibiotics

448. A 25-year-old man complains of itching and reddening of skin in the buccal area, general weakness, inertness. He associates origin of the disease with a skin injury he got during shaving. Objectively: body temperature is 39,0°C. A well-defined section of skin in the buccal area is hyperemic, it slightly protrudes above the surface. Hyperemic surface has some vesicles containing serous fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anthrax
b. Streptococcal impetigo
c. Phlegmon of buccal area
d. Furuncle
*e. Erysipelatous inflammation of skin

449. A patient complains of heaviness in the left section of his head, pain in the 26 tooth. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is destroyed by 2/3 by caries, the tooth percussion is weakly positive. X-ray picture of paranasal sinuses shows definite unilateral dome-shaped veiling of the upper left maxillary sinus. On the X-ray picture of the 26 tooth the periodontal fissure at the root apex is missing. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Malignant maxillary tumour
*b. Radicular cyst ingrown into the maxillary sinus
c. Odontogenic sinusitis
d. Rhinoantritis
e. Cyst of the maxillary sinus mucosa

450. After complex extraction of the 37 tooth a patient experienced anaesthesia of the left half of his lower lip and chin. Electroodontodiagnos showed reduction of lower jaw teeth electroexcitability on the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Alveolitis in the region of socket of the 37 tooth
b. Neuralgia of the left inferior alveolar nerve
*c. Neuritis of the left inferior alveolar nerve
d. Herpes Zoster n.Trigemini
e. Acute osteomyelitis of mandible body

451. A 53-year-old patient consulted a dentist about pain and an ulcer that turned up in the region of hard palate under his partial removable denture. He hasnt used the denture for three weeks, but the ulcer does not heal or reduce in size. Examination reveals a 2x1,5 cm large ulcer in the region of the alveolar process and hard palate at the level of the missing 14 tooth. The ulcer has everted rolled edges and necrotic floor, it is dense and painful. Gingival and palatal tissues around the ulcer are infiltrated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Maxillary tuberculosis
b. Maxillary syphilis
*c. Maxillary carcinoma
d. Maxillary actinomycosis
e. Decubital ulcer

452. A 20 year old patient complains of a tumour-like formation on the lateral surface of his neck on the right. He revealed this tumour a year ago. Objectively: there is a semi-oval well-defined tumour 3х2 cm large on the lateral neck surface. The tumour doesnt hold together with skin, it is painless, dense and elastic, upwardly and sidewardly movable. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. After the tumour puncture some light yellow liquid was obtained that consisted of cast-off epithelium, cholesterol crystals, lymphocytes, erythrocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Lateral neck cyst
b. Dermoid neck cyst
c. Chronic neck lymphadenitis
d. Neck chemodectoma
e. Median neck cyst

453. A 30-year-old patient complains of a painless tumour-like formation in the region of the left mandibular alveolar process. Objectively: there is a pale pink 1x1,5 cm large tumour-like formation on the vestibular surface of the alveolar process at the 34 and 35 teeth. The formation has a broad base, it does not bleed. Crowns of the 34, 35 teeth are intact, the teeth are non-mobile. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows no changes in bone structure. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophic epulis
*b. Fibrous epulis
c. Mucosa papilloma
d. Pleomorphic adenoma
e. Giant-cell epulis

454. A 70-year-old patient complains about the mobility of the 21 tooth. The tooth has not been treated before. Objectively: there is II class mobility of the 21 tooth, the root is exposed by 1/2. What tool should be used to extract the tooth?
a. S-shaped forceps
b. Straight elevator
c. Beak-shaped forceps
*d. Straight forceps
e. Bayonet forceps

455. A 56-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the root extraction of the 17 toot. What kind of anaesthesia should be applied?
a. Infiltration, inscisor anaesthesia
b. Palatinal, infraorbital anaesthesia
*c. Palatinal, tuberal anaesthesia
d. Mandibular anaesthesia
e. Torus anaesthesia

456. A 23-year-old female patient complains of a pronounced limitation of mouth opening, throat pain irradiating to the ear. Objectively: body temperature is 37,9°C. The face is symmetrical, the colour of skin has not changed. Palpation of the jaw causes acute pain, mouth opens by 1 cm. The patient had been given anasthesia by Berchet-Dubov. After it oral examination revealed an edema and hyperemia of the mucous membrane of the pterygomaxillary fold, there was an infiltration painful on palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Submandibular phlegmon
*b. Abscess of pterygomaxillary space
c. Parapharyngeal space phlegmon
d. Abscess of alveololingual groove
e. Peritonsillar space abscess

457. A 48-year-old patient got a pustule on his chin that quickly developed into a dense and acutely painful infiltration 3x5 cm large. The skin above it is of blue-red colour. In the centre one can see three zones of necrosis around the hair follicles. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermal actinomycosis of chin
b. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin
*c. Chin carbuncle
d. Suppurated atheroma
e. Chin furuncle

458. A 20 year old patient got a trauma in the area of his upper jaw. He applied to a dentist and complained about mobility of his frontal upper teeth, pain during cutting and joining of teeth. Objectively: the 11 and 21 teeth have II-III degree mobility. Tooth crowns are intact but have oral position. Complete joining of teeth is impossible because the teeth are situated beyond the dental arch. X-ray picture shows a slight broadening of periodontal fissure of the 11 tooth up to 0,5-2 mm. The roots are intact. Make a correct diagnosis:
a. Fracture of alveolar process in the area of the 11, 21 teeth
b. Traumatic extraction of the 11, 21 teeth
c. Traumatic periodontitis of the 11, 21 teeth
d. Traumatic complete dislocation of the 11, 21 teeth
*e. Traumatic subluxation of the 11, 21 teeth

459. A 56-year-old patient has an oval, smooth, bright-red erosion on the red border of her lower lip. Erosion is covered with haemorrhagic crusts that can be hardly removed. Crust removal induces slight haemorrhage. Light traumatization of crust-free surface of erosion induces no haemorrhage. Specify the type of lower lip precancer:
a. Verrucous precancer of red border
b. Bowens disease
c. Erythroplasia
*d. Abrasive precancerous Manganottis cheilitis
e. Localized precancerous hyperkeratosis of red border

460. A 30-year-old patient has got an edema and hyperemia of nose wing skin spreading to the skin of his upper lip and cheek. Examination revealed a fissure along the infra-external edge of the left nostril. The skin is tense, dense, red-and-cyanotic, skin line pattern is smoothed; rise of local temperature is present. The zone of affection is well-defined and irregularly shaped. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermal tuberculosis
b. Dermal actinomycosis
*c. Erysipelatous inflammation
d. Dermal cancer
e. Thrombophlebitis of the facial vein

461. On the second day after tooth extraction a 35-year-old woman applied to a facial surgeon and complained about pain in the parotid-masticatory region and sensation of lacking contact between the upper and lower jaw teeth on the right. Examination revealed chin deviation to the left, half-open mouth, closed lips, disturbed occlusion. There is also limitation of lateral mandible movements. In front of the right ear tragus soft tissues sink down. What examination is expected to be the most informative in this case?
*a. TMJ roentgenography
b. Mandible roentgenography
c. -
d. Bimanual TMJ investigation
e. TMJ ultrasound

462. A 30-year-old patient needs to have his 26 tooth extracted because of exacerbation of chronic periodontitis. Objectively: the crown of the 26 tooth is decayed by one third. What forceps can be used for this tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
b. Straight elevator
c. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
*d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

463. A 26-year-old patient consulted a dentist about the 24 tooth extraction because of chronic periodontitis exacerbation. The crown of the 24 tooth is intact. Choose the right tool for the tooth exraction:
a. Straight elevator
*b. S-shaped forceps without projecting tips
c. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the right beak
d. S-shaped forceps with a projecting tip on the left beak
e. Straight forceps

464. A 49-year-old patient consulted a dental surgeon about the oral cavity sanitation. He has an indication for the extraction of the 16 tooth. History: the tooth hasnt been treated before, it has decayed within the last 4 years. Objectively: the 16 tooths crown is decayed by over 2/3, the mucosa exhibits no pathological changes. Which tool is required for the tooth extraction?
a. S-shaped closed-beak forceps
b. Crown bayonet forceps
c. S-shaped forceps (right)
d. Straight elevator
*e. Bayonet root forceps

465. A 25-year-old patient has a face trauma. Objectively: there is a significant soft tissue swelling of the left half face, haemorrhage into the left eye sclera, crepitation in the region of nose bones. Palpation reveals the mobility of the upper jaw, its percussion reveals tympanitis. X-ray picture shows the fracture line running through the lower margin of the orbit on both sides of the sphenozygomatic suture and reaching behind the maxillary tuber. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of nose bones
*b. Le Fort II maxillary fracture
c. Le Fort III maxillary fracture
d. Le Fort I maxillary fracture
e. Fracture of the left articular bone

466. A 50-year-old woman complains about a neoplasm on her lower lip on the side of oral cavity that appeared a month ago and has been slowly growing since that. Objectively: there is a roundish, elastic, painless neoplasm inside the lower lip. Mucous membrane hasnt changed its colour. Make a diagnosis:
a. Lip lipoma
*b. Retention cyst of lower lip
c. Lip papilloma
d. Lip abscess
e. Lip fibroma

467. A 35-year-old patient complains of a neoplasm on the tip of his tongue which he injures with his teeth. The neoplasm sometimes increases, and sometimes decreases in size. Objectively: on the tip of tongue there is a roundish well-defined neoplasm 0,5 cm in diameter with broad base. The neoplasm is the same colour as the mucosa of tongue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lipoma of tongue
b. Abscess of tongue
*c. Papilloma of tongue
d. Hemangiofibroma of tongue
e. Fibroma of tongue

468. A 57-year-old patient complains of a tumor in the left parotid region, which appeared 3 years ago. Over the past six months, the tumor has increased significantly. Objectively: there is a non-mobile lobulated tumour in the left parotid region, palpation causes minor pain reaction. The skin over the tumour plicates easily, its upper part has well-defined margins, the bottom part grows into the depth of gland. The tumour is 3x2,5 cm large. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Pleomorphic adenoma
b. Fibroma
c. Parotid gland carcinoma
d. Cyst
e. Chronic parotitis

469. A 53-year-old patient complains of a tumour in the right parotid region. The tumour was revealed six months ago, within this period it doubled in size. Objectively: the right parotid region has a dense 1,5 x 2 cm large neoplasm, the duct of the right parotid gland secretes transparent saliva. The gland puncture gave no results. What disease are these clinical presentations most typical for?
a. Chronic lymphadenitis of parotid-masticatory region
b. Fibroma of parotid-masticatory region
c. Lipoma of parotid-masticatory region
*d. Pleomorphic adenoma of parotid gland
e. Retention cyst of parotid gland

470. Before extraction of a left upper tooth a 49-year-old patient had been given plexus anaesthesia with Ultracaine Forte. After the operation the socket didnt get filled with a blod clot. What is the way to prevent alveolitis development in this patient?
*a. To fill the socket with a loose iodoform tampon
b. To rinse the socket with microcide solution
c. To fill the socket with antibiotic powder
d. To rinse the socket with 0,1% chlorhexidine solution
e. To fill the socket with a hemostatic sponge

471. Examination of a 45-year-old patient revealed some white patches on the buccal mucosa along the teeth closure line that didnt protrude above the inflamed and edematous surrounding tissues. The patches could not be removed on scraping. A patient has smoken an average of 3 packs of cigarettes a day for 20 years. Specify the disease of buccal mucosa:
a. Erosive leukoplakia
b. Tappeiners leukoplakia (leukoplakia nicotinica)
c. Lichen ruber planus
*d. Leukoplakia plana
e. Pemphigus

472. A 35-year-old female patient consulted a dentist about a painless, slowly growing neoplasm in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. Examination revealed that the tumour was light-pink, flat, adjacent to the teeth, had a pedicle. The tumour was up to 1,5 cm large, with smooth surface and dense consistency. It was diagnosed as an epulis in the region of the 11 and 12 teeth. What form of epulis are these clinical findings typical for?
a. -
*b. Fibrous
c. Giant-cell
d. Angiomatous
e. Pregnancy epulis

473. X-ray examination of the maxillary alveolar process of a 35-year-old patient reveals a root fracture of the 11 tooth in its apical region. The tooth has been treated before, the canal is filled. The patient has a history of the tooth trauma. What method of treatment is indicated for this case?
a. Tooth replantation
b. -
c. Tooth extraction
d. Tooth crowning
*e. Root apex resection

474. As a result of a car accident a 45-year-old patient got an injury of his upper jaw. Examination revealed elongated and flattened face, profuse nasal haemorrhage, liquorrhea from the nose and ears. These clinical presentations are typical for the following fracture of upper jaw:
a. Suborbital (Le Fort II)
b. Subnasal (Le Fort I)
*c. Subbasal (Le Fort III)
d. Bilateral fracture of zygomatic bones
e. -

475. A 57-year-old patient complains about a slowly growing swelling in the sublingual region. She noted it 3 months ago. Objectively: there is an elastic swelling in the sublingual region. The swelling is painless, mucous membrane over it is with tints of blue. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Salivolithiasis
b. Lipoma of sublingual area
c. Hemangioma of sublingual area
*d. Ranula
e. Dermoid cyst of oral cavity floor

476. A 49-year-old patient applied to the oral surgery department and complained about permanent intense dull pain in the region of the right upper jaw. It is known from the anamnesis that the 17 tooth has been repeatedly treated for exacerbation of chronic periodontitis but the treatment appeared to be ineffective. What kind of anesthesia should be applied for extraction of the 17 tooth?
a. Incisor and paltinal
b. Torus
c. Tuberal and incisor
d. Tuberal, incisor and palatinal
*e. Tuberal and palatinal

477. The department of maxillofacial surgery admitted a patient who needs repair of a post-traumatic defect of nose wing up to 3,0 cm in diameter. The trauma occured six months ago. What kind of grafting is indicated in this clinical situation?
a. Grafting with pedicle flap of frontal and buccal regions
b. Grafting with local tissues of nasolabial or cheek regions
*c. Grafting with chondrocutaneous flap of the auricle
d. Grafting with tubed pedicle (Filatovs) flap
e. Free grafting with dermal flap

478. A 47-year-old patient complains about limited mobility of her lower jaw in the morning; periodical dull pain in the right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and general joint stiffness. According to the patient, the stiffness disappears throughout the day after joint "exercising". Objectively: the patients face is symmetric, mouth opening is limited down to 2,5 cm, there is also joint clicking. Median line deviates to the right by 3-4 mm, palpation of the right articular head is painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Arthrosis of the right TMJ
b. Chronic arthritis of the right TMJ
c. Right-sided anterior dislocation of mandible
d. Fracture of the right condyle of mandible
e. Acute serous arthritis of the right TMJ

479. A 60 year old man has got a pustule on his chin skin that quickly developed into a hard, strongly painful infiltrate 3х3 cm large. In the epicentre three necrosis zones around hair follicles are present. Lymph nodes of chin are enlarged, painful. Body temperature is 38,5°C. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Erysipelatous inflammation of chin
b. Chin furuncle
c. Allergic chin dermatitis
*d. Chin carbuncle
e. Suppurated atheroma

480. A 35-year-old man complains about pain in the region of the 38 tooth, painful deglutition, difficult mouth opening. What anaesthesia method will be optimal during operation on account of pericoronaritis?
a. Stem anaesthesia
b. Application anaesthesia
c. Infiltration anaesthesia
d. General anaesthesia
*e. Conduction Bersche-Dubovs anesthesia

481. On the 7th day after the operation on the abdominal cavity a 30-year-old patient presented with pain and sweling in the region of parotid gland; body temperature rise up to 39°C; limited mouth opening, dryness. Gland massaging results in discharge of purulent exudate from its duct. The patient can be diagnosed with:
a. Parenchymatous parotiditis
b. Phlegmon of parotidomasseteric region
c. Acute epidemic parotiditis
d. Phlegmon of submasseteric space
*e. Acute non-epidemic parotiditis

482. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the oral surgery department. The woman complains of pain in her cheek that is made worse by touch. It is known from the anamnesis that five days ago the patient fell down from the stairs and hurt her cheek. Objectively: in the depth of cheek examination revealed a circumscribed infiltration, cheek skin is hyperaemic and does not make a fold, fluctuation symptom is present. Mucous membrane is edematic and has teeth indentations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute lymphadenitis
*b. Suppurated cheek haematoma
c. Cheek haematoma
d. Traumatic osteomyelitis of mandible
e. Cheek phlegmon

483. A 33-year-old officer delivered from a battlefield has shoot off mental part o fmandible, drooling, insignificant haemorrhage from the oral cavity, asphyxia that occurs periodically because of head repositioning. What actions should be taken to prevent the asphyxia development?
a. Fixation of jaws with a mental sling
b. Thacheostome construction
*c. Fixation of tongue, transportation in prone position
d. Surgical d-bridement, tracheostome construction
e. Transportation in prone position

484. During extraction of the 14 tooth a 64-year-old patient complained about retrosternal pain irradiating to his back. There is paleness of membrane and skin integument as well as pulse assymetry on the carotid arteries. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Angioneurotic Quinckes edema
b. Collapse
c. Hypertensic crisis
d. Acute respiratory failure
*e. Acute myocardial infarction

485. A 30-year-old patient complains about body temperature rise up to 39°C, a roundish infiltrate on his upper lip, general weakness. He has been presenting with these symptoms for 3 days. Objectively: a roundish infiltrate in the region of the upper lip 2,5 cm in diameter, the skin over the infiltrate is red with a necrotic core in the centre. The upper lip is hyperemic and edematic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Carbuncle of the upper lip
b. Acute periostitis of the upper jaw
c. Acute glandular abscess
*d. Furuncle of the upper lip
e. Retention cyst of the upper lip

486. A 48-year-old woman complains of aching dull pain in the region of the left TMJ, that is getting worse during eating solid food. The pain appeared about 2,5 years ago. Objectively: mouth opening is limited, there is sideward deviation of jaw during mouth opening, TMJ is clicking. Examination of the oral cavity revealed secondary partial adentia. X-ray picture shows sclerosis of the cortical plate of articulat head and narrowing of cartilage space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Painful dysfunction of the TMJ
b. Exacerbation of chronic arthritis of the TMJ
c. Chronic arthritis of the TMJ
d. Acute arthritis of the TMJ
*e. Arthrosis of the TMJ

487. A 30-year-old patient consulted a dentist about dull pain, numbness in the lower teeth, the lower lip and chin on the right. Anamnesis data: the problems arose a week ago after the extraction of an impacted wisdom tooth on the right lower jaw. The patient developed the following disease:
a. Neuralgia of the third branch of the trigeminal nerve
b. Neuralgia of the auriculotemporal nerve
c. Neuritis of the trigeminal nerve
*d. Neuritis of the inferior alveolar nerve
e. Neuritis of the facial nerve

488. A 30-year-old patient was diagnosed with posttraumatic osteomyelitis of mandible in the region of mandible body on the right. The patient got the trauma 1,5 month ago. X-ray picture shows the fracture line and the shadow of osseous sequestre along the fracture line. There is a fistula with purulent discharge on skin. Choose the treatment tactics:
a. Sequestrectomy
b. Physiotherapy
*c. Fistulectomy, sequestrectomy
d. Fistulectomy
e. Fistulectomy, antibacterial therapy

489. A 27-year-old victim was delivered to to the facial surgery department with a cut wound of right cheek. The trauma is civilian, the patient got it in a fight. The deadline for early surgical d-bridement without preliminary antibiotic injection is no more than:
*a. 24 hours
b. 72 hours
c. 1 hour
d. 12 hours
e. 48 hours

490. A 54-year-old patient complains of a tumor-like formation in the region of his lower lip which appeared 1-1,5 months ago. Objectively: there is a round tumour-like formation up to 1cm in diameter on the red border of the lower lip on the right. Roll-like edges of the formation protrude above the level of the red border. In the centre of the formation a brown crust is visible. After its removal a crateriform hole can be seen. There is no bleeding or pain. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lower lip carcinoma
b. Lower lip fibroma
c. Verrucous carcinoma
*d. Keratoacanthoma
e. Lower lip papilloma

491. A 52-year-old female patient complains of severe paroxysmal pain in the region of the 34 tooth. Throughout the year the 35, 36, 37 teeth were sequentially extracted because of pain complaints. Percussion of the 34 tooth causes acute paroxysmal pain. The same pain arises when talking and washing the projection area of the mental foramen. Clinical and roentgenologic examination revealed no signs of bone tissue destruction. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Neuralgia of the 3 branch of trigeminus
b. Facial nerve neuritis
c. Neuritis of the 3 branch of trigeminus
d. Ganglionitis of pterygopalatine ganglion
e. 34 tooth pulpitis

492. A 52-year-old patient complains about a nonhealing ulcer on his lower lip. The patient is smoker. He hasn’t ever consulted a doctor about it. In the region of red border of the lower lip a roundish ulcer is present. It is up to 2,0 cm in diameter. The ulcer edges are thickened and a little bit raised in form of a whitish swelling. In the left submandibular region palpation revealed enlarged, painless, dense lymph nodes with limited mobility. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Cancer of the lower lip
b. Keratoacanthoma
c. Syphilitic ulcer
d. Fibroma of the lower lip
e. Erosive verrucous leukoplakia

493. A 62– year patient was at a dentists and suddenly there appeared dyspnea and hacking cough, sense of progressing asphyxia. The patients condition is getting progressively worse; number of respiratory movements reached 30/min, acrocyanosis became more evident, there appeared gargling breathing, oral cavity excretes a lot of albuminoid sputum. Psychomotor agitation and arterial hypertension are present. What pathological state is it?
a. An attack of bronchial asthma
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Spontaneous pneumothorax
*d. Pulmonary edema
e. Epileptic attack

494. A 42 year old patient applied to an oral surgeon for the purpose of oral cavity sanitation. After anesthetization the patient felt sudden attack of nausea, weakness, he got the sense of compression behind his breastbone, heart pain; he began vomiting. The patient lost consciousness, there appeared convulsions. Objectively: the patients skin is pale, covered with cold clammy sweat, pupils dont react to the light. The pulse is thready, arterial pressure cannot be detected. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Collapse
b. Traumatic shock
c. Epileptic attack
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Syncope

495. A 47-year-old patient complains of persistent ache in the 27 tooth, that gets worse when biting. Objectively: skin colour is normal, the face is symmetrical, the mouth opens without any difficulties, alveolar mucosa at the level of 27 tooth is edematous and hyperemic. The 27 tooth presents a deep carious cavity communicating with the pulp chamber. Percussion of the 27 tooth causes acute pain. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic odontogenic left-sided maxillary sinusitis
*b. Exacerbation of acute periodontitis of the 27 tooth
c. Acute purulent periodontitis of the 27 tooh
d. Acute purulent maxillary periostitis in the region of the 27 tooth
e. Acute generalized purulent pulpitis of the 27 tooth

496. A 42 year old patient complains about a neoplasm in the anterior palatal part that has been forming for 10 years. The 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth are intact. Intraoral X-ray picture of the upper jaw shows a single focus of bony tissue destruction, well-defined, 2,5 by 1,5 cm large. Periodontal fissure in the area of the 13, 12, 11, 21, 22, 23 teeth can be well seen. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Nasopalatine canal cyst
b. Globulomaxillary cyst
c. Follicular cyst
d. Residual cyst
e. Radicular cyst

497. A 76-year-old patient has a roundish ulcer in the area of the right nasolabial sulcus. The ulcer has dense, rough floor covered with yellowish-grey crusts, and resembles of a cone. The ulcer edges are dense, crater-like; the ulcer grows both sidewards and deepwards. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Basalioma
b. Actinomycotic ulcer
c. Squamous cell carcinoma of skin
d. Syphilitic ulcer
e. Tuberculous ulcer

498. A 40-year-old patient complains about a long-existing fissure in the central part of red border of his lower lip. He has been smoking since he was 16. Objectively: there is a deep 1,0 cm long fissure along the median line of red border of the lower lip, the fissure edges are bulging. Characteristic quality of the fissure is its spontaneous healing, but after epithelization the fissure recurs. The patient was diagnosed with chronic fissure of the lower lip. Conservative treatment proved to be ineffective. Choose the most appropriate treatment method in this situation:
a. Diathermo-coagulation
b. Cryodestruction
*c. Excision within evidently healthy tissues
d. Excision 0,5 cm off the neoplasm limits
e. Close-focus roentgenotherapy

499. A patient consulted a dental surgeon about extraction of the roots of the 36 tooth. The tooth decayed long ago. Objectively: the crown of the 36 is destroyed by 2/3, percussion is painless, mucosa around the 36 tooth exhibits no evident pathological changes. X-ray picture of the alveolar process shows a roundish well-defined radiolucency near the apex of the medial root. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous periodontitis
*b. Chronic granulomatous periodontitis
c. Chronic granulating periodontitis
d. Exacerbation of chronic periodontitis
e. Acute purulent periodontitis

500. A victim got a face and temporal region trauma. A doctor made a diagnosis: fracture of malar arch. What processes of cranial bones are injured?
*a. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone
b. Temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone
c. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of frontal bone
d. Zygomatic process of maxilla and zygomatic process of temporal bone
e. Zygomatic process of frontal bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone

501. A 36-year-old patient consulted a dentist about permanent acute pain in the upper jaw teeth, body temperature rise. The dentist found out that the 26 tooth had been repeatedly treated, the rest of teeth were intact. After roentgenological examination the patient was diagnosed with acute highmoritis. What is the most effective way of treatment?
*a. Extraction of the causative tooth and medicamentous therapy
b. Puncture of the maxillary sinus and medicamentous therapy
c. Medicamentous and physiotherapeutic treatment
d. Medicamentous therapy
e. Caldwell-Luc maxillary sinusotomy

502. A patient has orthopaedic indications for the 37 tooth extraction. What kind of anaesthesia should be given to this patient before the extraction?
a. Infraorbital + buccal anaesthesia
b. Tuberal + buccal anaesthesia
c. Mandibular
*d. Mandibular torus anaesthesia
e. Mental + buccal anaesthesia

503. A patient was admitted to the oral surgery department with a diagnosis "odontogenous phlegmon of mouth floor". Objectively: general condition of the patient is grave, abed position is forced, the patient is sitting with lowered head. He complains about pain behind his breastbone that is getting worse during backward flexion of head; cough, dyspnea. What complication has developed?
a. Cervical phlegmon
b. Phlegmon of retropharyngeal space
*c. Mediastinitis
d. Phlegmon of tongue root
e. Phlegmon of peripharyngeal space

504. A 34-year-old patient has indication for extraction of the 38 tooth because of chronic fibrous periodontitis. Oral surgeon performed torus anaesthesia. This anaesthesia blocked transmission of pain information from the following nerves:
a. Infraalveolar, lingual
b. Lingual, buccal, mental
c. Lingual, buccal
d. Infraalveolar, buccal
*e. Infraalveolar, lingual, buccal

505. A 40-year-old patient needs the oral cavity sanation, which involves extraction of the upper central incisors. What nerve structure will be blocked as a result of incisor anaesthesia?
a. Anterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
b. Posterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve
c. Dental nerve plexus
*d. Nasopalatine nerve
e. Median superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital nerve

506. A patient got a trauma that resulted in limited mouth opening, nasal haemorrhage, numbness of inferior eyelid as well as skin in the infraorbital area. Objectively: there is face deformation caused by depression of soft tissues in the malar region on the left; there is also a step-off deformity in the median part of the infraorbital rim and in the region of zygomatico-alveolar crest. What method of examination will be the most effective for the diagnostics?
a. Orthopantomogram
*b. X-ray study of facial skull in the axial projection
c. X-ray study of facial skull in the lateral projection
d. X-ray study of facial skull in the frontal projection
e. X-ray study of facial skull and paranasal sinuses

507. A 42-year-old patient consulted a dentist about intense lancinating paroxysmal pain accompanied by a sensation of current passage in the region of her upper lip on the right. Pain attacks occur spontaneously and last 3-5 minutes. The patient usually has 2-3 attacks a day. The patient is unable to establish the cause of this disease. Examination of her oral cavity revealed no pathological changes. Oral cavity is sanitated. Test orthopantomogram shows an impacted supernumerary 13 tooth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Right-sided upper jaw pulpitis
*b. Peripheral neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus
c. Neuritis of the II branch of trigeminus
d. Pterygopalatine ganglionitis
e. Central neuralgia of the II branch of trigeminus

508. During the cystectomy involving resection of the root apices of the 11, 21 and 22 teeth a 45-year-old patient developed skin pallor and cyanosis, a cold sweat, a sharp drop in blood pressure (70/40 mmHg). The patient is conscious but complains of weakness. What state has been developed?
a. Syncope
*b. Collapse
c. Epileptic seizure
d. Haematoma
e. Quinckes edema

