1. The institutions which take part in medical examinations can be prevention and treatment facilities, medical board of Ministry of Defense, medical board of Ministry of Home Affairs, medico-social expert commissions, forensic medical boards etc. What institutions are responsible for temporary disability examination?
a. Medical boards of Ministry of Home Affairs
*b. Prevention and treatment facilities
c. Medico-social expert commissions
d. Sanitary-and-prophylactic institutions
e. Medical boards of Ministry of Defense

2. The institutions which take part in medical examinations can be prevention and treatment facilities, medical board of Ministry of Defense, medical board of Ministry of Home Affairs, medico-social expert commissions, forensic medical boards etc. What institutions are responsible for temporary disability examination?
a. Medical boards of the Ministry of Defense
b. Medical boards of the Ministry of Home Affairs
c. Sanitary-and-prophylactic institutions
d. Medico-social expert commissions
*e. Prevention and treatment facilities

3. A mother who is on partially paid maternity leave got sick and was hospitalized. What document is to be issued to a working father who will be taking care of a child during his mothers illness?
a. Free-form certificate
*b. Sick-leave
c. Certificate of childs care necessity
d. Certificate of mothers illness
e. Extract from the medical card of out- or in-patient

4. Clinical and statistical study was devoted to the effect of a new pharmacological medication upon the patients with coronary heart disease. What parametric criterion (coefficient) can be used for estimation of results validity?
a. Kolmogorov-Smirnovs criterion
*b. Students coefficient (t)
c. Conformity coefficient
d. Sign criterion
e. Wilcoxons t-criterion

5. It is planned to make complete isolation boxes in the infectious department in order to prevent nosocomial airborne infections. The boxes consist of a tambour, a ward and a lock chamber. What structure should be also included in a complete isolation box?
a. Doctors consulting room
b. Manipulation room
*c. Bathroom unit
d. Patients examination room
e. Nursing room

6. Educational rooms are illuminated with various lighting fittings. What type of lighting fittings is the most appropriate in respect of hygienic norms?
a. Combined light fittings
*b. Indirect light fittings
c. Semi-reflected light fittings
d. Direct light fittings
e. Ambient light fittings

7. In terms of megacalorie (1000 kcal = 4184 kJ) the ration of an adult includes 30 g of proteins, 37 g of fats, 137 g of carbohydrates, 15 mg of vitamin C, 0,6 mg of thiamine (vitamin B1). The ration is UNBALANCED as to the contents of:
a. Thiamine
*b. Vitamin C
c. Fats
d. Proteins
e. Carbohydrates

8. A city somatic hospital with 300 beds consists of the main building which houses the therapeutic and surgical departments. Several separate buildings house the maternity, pediatric and radiologic departments that are connected to the main building by underground walkways and above-ground covered skybridges. Specify the building system of the hospital:
a. Free
b. Combined
c. Centralized
d. Decentralized
*e. Central-unit

9. A heat station working on solid fuel is located in a residential district. On cloudy foggy days in december there was an increase in diseases with upper airway affection and signs of general intoxication. There were also mortal cases among the elderly people. What is the most likely factor that provoked toxic effect?
a. Temperature gradient
*b. Suspended materials
c. Calm
d. High air humidity
e. Low air temperature

10. Indices that characterize population health include demographic indices. What environment is used for calculation of these indices?
a. Number of population being liable to preventive examination
*b. Population number
c. Number of hospitalized people
d. Employment number
e. Number of patients

11. While making sanitary examination of burn unit for adults it was stated that wards for 4 persons are of 28 m2 square. What should be the minimum ward area in this unit?
a. 24 м2
b. 30 м2
c. 52 м2
*d. 40 м2
e. 28 м2

12. The results of 5 year monitoring allowed to estimate the level of environmental influence upon health indices of popultaion. What statistic method should be chosen?
a. Calculation of regression coefficient
b. Calculation of dynamic indices
c. Calculation of conformity coefficient
d. Calculation of coefficient of difference validity
*e. Calculation of correlation coefficient

13. In order to improve organism tolerance of boarding-school pupils a doctor developed a program. The program is based upon the following principles: graduality, consistency, individuality, coomplexity. What of the main principles of organism tempering wasnt taken into account?
a. Increase of resistance
*b. Systematicness
c. Increase of influence force
d. Autodefense increase
e. Increase of influence intensity

14. A student analyzes noise level of cold-pressing process. What device should be applied for this hygienic study?
*a. Noise and vibration analyzer
b. Sound tester
c. Pyranometer
d. Actinometer
e. Noise analyzer

15. Environmental pollution is prevented by mechanical separation of nontoxic solid domestic waste. Specify the method which can be used for mechanical utilization of these wastes:
a. Waste neutralization in biothermal boxes
*b. Compressing of wastes into building blocks
c. Burning as power-plant fuel
d. Hydrolysis
e. Burial of wastes

16. An emergency situation at a chemical plant caused acute occupational intoxication. A doctor who revealed the case of "acute occupational disease (intoxication)" must notify the following authority:
a. Plant administration
b. Medical unit of the plant
c. Ministry of Health of Ukraine
*d. Sanitary and epidemiological station
e. Trade union committee of the plant

17. At a machine-building plant the casts are cleaned by means of abrasion machines that are a source of local vibration. What are the most efficient preventive measures for preventing harmful effect of vibration on workers organisms?
a. Hand massaging
b. Preliminary and periodical medical examinations
*c. Use of gloves that reduce vibration
d. Warm hand baths
e. Giving sanitary instructions to the workers

18. In order to study impact of microclimate upon the human organism it is necessary to make systematic observation of air temperature over 3 days. Choose a device that will allow to make the most precise temperature records:
a. Mercury thermometer
b. Alcohol thermometer
*c. Thermograph
d. Augusts psychrometer
e. Assmann psychrometer

19. The Carpathian region is characterized by constant high humidity of atmospheric air (over 80%). Inhabitants of this region feel severe cold in corresponding season at a medium low temperature. Its caused by heat emission by:
a. Radiation
b. Conduction
c. -
*d. Convection
e. Vaporization

20. Carpathian region is characterized by permanently high (over 80%) air humidity. In the cold season the population of this region feels very cold at moderately low temperatures. This is due to an increase in the heat transfer by:
a. Radiation
*b. Convection
c. Evaporation
d. Emission
e. Conduction

21. Poorly refined wastes of an industrial plant are usually thrown into the river that supplies drinking water. It causes perishing of some microorganisms, disturbs processes of water self-purification and worsens its quality that can have negative influence upon peoples health. How is this effect of environmental factors called?
a. Associated
b. Direct
*c. Indirect
d. Complex
e. Combined

22. In order to reduce weed growth on agricultural land, some herbicides have been used for a long time. In terms of environmental stability these herbicides are rated as stable. Specify the most likely route of their entry into the human body:
*a. Soil-plants-humans
b. Soil-animals-humans
c. Soil-insects-humans
d. Soil-protozoa-humans
e. Soil-microorganisms-humans

23. In a city with population 400000 people 5600 fatal cases were recorded, including 3300 cases because of blood circulation diseases, 730 - because of tumors. What index will allow to characterize mortality from blood circulation diseases in this city?
a. Visuality index
b. Correlation index
c. Extensive index
d. Relative intensity index
*e. Intensive index

24. A selective population research study was aimed at exploring the effect of air emissions from a metallurgical plant on the obstructive bronchitis morbidity in a city. The calculated correlation coefficient was +0,79. Evaluate the strength and direction of the relationship:
a. -
*b. Direct, strong
c. Direct, average
d. Inverse, strong
e. Inverse, average

25. Statistic of patients of common medical practice displays constant increase in elderly and old people number. What kind of pathology is expected to prevail in the morbidity structure of population in question?
a. Infectious pathology
*b. Chronic pathology
c. Non-epidemic pathology
d. Occupational pathology
e. Acute pathology

26. A general practitioner visited a 2-year-old child and diagnosed him with measles. The child attends a nursery, has a 5-year-old sister. What document must be filled in for the effective antiepidemic measures in the given health locality?
*a. Emergency notification on infectious disease (form № 058/o)
b. Infants record (report form № 112/o)
c. Sick leave
d. House call record (form № 031/o)
e. Carers leave certificate

27. In the current year general practitioners of the municipal polyclinic have referred 11 patients with coronary artery disease to the in-patient hospital. In 3 cases the diagnosis wasnt confirmed. What managerial decision shoud be made in such case?
*a. Analysis of each case of diagnostic divergence
b. Analysis of diagnostic examination quality
c. Analysis of material and technical basisof the polyclinic
d. Analysis of doctors skill level
e. Analysis of medical check-up quality

28. Hygienic expertise of a sample taken from the batch of grain revealed that 2% of grains were infected with microscopic Fusarium fungi. On the ground of laboratory analyses this batch of grain should be:
a. Tested for toxicity
b. Used for ethanol production
c. Destroyed
*d. Sold without restrictions
e. Used for forage production

29. An employee has been diseased for 4 months, further treatment is necessary, the patient is incapacitated. Who is authorized to provide further disability examination of this patient?
a. Chief physician of a medical facility
b. Deputy chief responsible for disability examination
c. Medical consultative board
d. Physician in charge and chief of department
*e. Medical and social expert board

30. Among the inhabitants of a workmens settlement located near an industrial plant the cases of nervous and endocrine system diseases as well as renal diseases became more frequent. Blood analyses revealed a decrease in sulfhydryl groups. These pathologies might have been caused by the following substance released into the environment:
*a. Mercury
b. Boron
c. Lead
d. Chromium
e. Cadmium

31. Examination of a 43-year-old man objectively revealed pallor of skin and mucous membranes, loss of tongue papillae, transverse striation of fingernails, cracks in the mouth corners, tachycardia. Blood test results: Hb- 90 g/l, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis. The most likely causative agent of this state is inadequate intake of:
a. Copper
b. Magnesium
c. Selene
*d. Iron
e. Zinc

32. During the medical examination a port crane operator complained of dizziness, nausea, sense of pressure against tympanic membranes, tremor, dyspnoea, cough. He works aloft, the work is connected with emotional stress. Workers are affected by vibration (general and local), noise, ultrasound, microclimate that warms in summer and cools in winter. What factor are the workers complaints connected with?
a. Altitude work
*b. Infrasound
c. Vibration
d. Noise
e. Intensity of work

33. It is required to analyze the level of daylight illumination in a ward of therapeutics unit. What device should be applied to estimate the level of daylight illumination?
a. Actinometer
b. Psychrometer
c. Anemometer
d. Katathermometer
*e. Illuminometer

34. During the medical examination at school the schoolchildren had to undergo plantography. After the analysis of footprints platypodia was found in 30% of pupils. What is the percentage of the flatfoot isthmus?
a. 45%
*b. 65%
c. 50%
d. 30%
e. 55%

35. A factorys sectorial doctor selects a group of persons who often fall ill for thorough monitoring. At the same time he takes into consideration the number of etiologically related cases with temporary disability in each of the employees over the last year. An employee falls into this group if the number of sickness cases is:
a. 3 or more
b. 6 or more
c. 1 or more
d. 2 or more
*e. 4 or more

36. Production areas of a greenhouse complex have the following microclimate parameters: air temperature - 42°C, humidity - 98%, air velocity - 0,05 mps, temperature of enclosing surfaces - 15°C. Characterize the microclimate of production areas:
a. Cooling
b. Comfortable
*c. Overheated
d. Uncomfortable
e. Satisfactory

37. Sanitary-veterinary examination of a cow carcass revealed measle contamination (2-3 measles per 10 cm2). What tactics should be chosen in respect of this meat consumption?
a. Meat can be sold without any restrictions
b. Meat should be disinfected by boiling
c. Meat should be disinfected by freezing
*d. The whole carcass should be technically disposed
e. The carcass should be used for the production of canned meat

38. A factory worker has ARD complicated by acute bronchitis. He receives treatment in the outpatient setting. The attending doctor has issued him a medical certificate for 5 days and then extended its duration by 5 more days. Patient cant get down to work because of his health status. Who should extend the duration of medical certificate for this patient?
a. Medical superintendent
b. Deputy medical superintendent in charge of medical treatment
c. Medical advisory commission
*d. A department chief
e. Deputy medical superintendent in charge of temporary disability examination

39. Preventive examination of an 11 year old boy helped to determine his habitus type. It was established that the childs shoulders were deviated and brought forward, with forward flexion of head, the thorax was flattened, abdomen was convex. The childs backbone had signs of deepened cervical and lumbar curvatures. What habitus is it?
a. Lordosis
b. Corrected
c. Normal
*d. Kyphosis
e. Round-shouldered

40. A plot of land with total area of 2,0 hectare was intended for building of a hospital. The maximal capacity of the hospital will be:
*a. 100 beds
b. 400 beds
c. Over 1000 beds
d. 800 beds
e. 200 beds

41. During hygienic examination of a hospital it was established that the area for each bed in a double ward was: in the infectious department for children - 7 м2, in the infectious department for adults - 8 м2, in the burns department - 9 м2, in the radiological department - 10 м2, in the critical care department - 13 м2. In which wards the area for each bed doesnt correspond with hygienic requirements?
a. In infectious wards for adults
b. In infectious wards for children
*c. In burns wards
d. In radiological wards
e. In critical care wards

42. According to the report of water quality control, drinking city water has the following characteristics: turbidity - 1,5 mg/m3, odour - 3 points, metallic taste - 2 points, pale yellow colour, colour index - 20o, temperature - 12o. Which of these factors doesnt comply with hygienic requirements?
*a. Odour
b. Colour index
c. Taste
d. Temperature
e. Turbidity

43. A 2 year old child has been ill with acute respiratory viral infection of upper thrice a year - in February, in April and in December. How should these occurences be recorded?
a. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (+)
b. It is necessary to fill in 3 statistic talons signed (-)
*c. It is necessary to fill in 3 statistic talons signed (+)
d. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (+) and 2 statistic talons signed (-)
e. It is necessary to fill in 1 statistic talon signed (-)

44. A worker diagnosed with "acute dysentery" was sent to the infectious department by a doctor of aid post. What document should be used for registration of this disease?
a. Inpatients card
b. Statistic card of the patient who left in-patient hospital
c. Statistic coupon for registration of final diagnoses
d. Outpatients card
*e. Urgent report on infectious disease

45. Researchers studied disease incidence of influenza and acute respiratory viral infection within the last 5 years. What kind of graphic presentation should be used for the best visualization of this data?
a. Radial diagram
*b. Linear diagram
c. Bar diagram
d. Pie diagram
e. Histogram

46. The correlation between the service record and eosinophil concentration in blood was studied in workers at dyeing shops of textile factories. What index will be the most informative for the analysis of this data?
a. Fitting criterion
b. Sign index
c. Students criterion
d. Standardized index
*e. Correlation factor

47. The objective of a statistical study was to find out the extent of seeking medical care by the population. For this purpose 300 residents of the area were interviewed. Information was collected by means of a special questionnaire. What method of collecting information was used by researchers?
a. -
*b. Anamnestic
c. Immediate examination
d. Immediate registration
e. Doing extracts

48. Analysis of organization of medical care in a regional centre has shown that every year about 12% of patients receive inpatient care for diseases that dont require round-the-clock monitoring and intensive care. What are the most appropriate organizational changes required to address this problem?
*a. Development of medical care forms replacing the in-patient care
b. Development of primary care
c. Upgrading of hospital facilities
d. Restructuring of specialized care
e. Changes to the statute of outpatient clinics

49. A citys population is 400000 inhabitants in 2005 there were registered 5600 deaths, including 3300 cases caused by cardiovascular diseases, 730 - by tumours. Which of the following indicators allows to characterize the share of the circulatory system diseases as the cause of death in the city?
a. Index of relative intensity
b. Intensive index
*c. Extensive index
d. Demonstrativeness index
e. Ratio

50. It is planned to organize a rural outpatient clinic. The patients will be able to visit the doctors of the following specialities:
a. Pediatrician, therapeutist, ophthalmologist
b. Obstetrician-gynaecologist, therapeutist
c. Therapeutist, pediatrician, neurologist
d. Pediatrician, obstetrician-gynaecologist, ophthalmologist
*e. Therapeutist, dentist, pediatrician, obstetrician-gynecologist

51. In a rural health district a child died in the first month of life. In order to analyze this situation it was necessary to complete expert evaluation of medical records. Which medical document was analyzed in the first place?
a. Childs medical record
*b. Child developmental history record
c. Record of vaccinations
d. Neonatal record
e. Medical record of an outpatient

52. A department chief of an in-patient hospital is going to inspect resident doctors as to observation of medical-technological standards of patient service. What documentation should be checked for this purpose?
a. Statistic cards of discharged patients
b. Registry of operative interventions
c. Annual report of a patient care institution
*d. Health cards of in-patients
e. Treatment sheets

53. The head of prenatal care department intends to complete expert evaluation of compliance with medical and technological standards of pregnancy follow-up. What documents must be verified for this purpose?
a. Medical records of outpatients
b. Prenatal records
*c. Individual records of pregnant and postpartum women
d. Labour and delivery record
e. Neonatal record

54. Workers of a laboratory producing measuring devices (manometers, thermometers etc) complain about a mettalic taste in mouth, stomatitis, dyspepsia, sleep disturbance, unsteady walk, abrupt decrease in cardiac activity. These presentations must have been caused by the intoxication with the following substance:
a. Lead
b. Toluol
c. Tetraethyl lead
*d. Mercury
e. Manganese

55. While asessing the health status of graduates of a secondary school, the doctor found one of them to have grade 3 tonsillar hypertrophy, chronic rhinitis and vegetative-vascular dystonia. The organism functionality is reduced. This student belongs to the following health group:
a. IV
b. V
c. II
d. I
*e. III

56. At first appointment with an obstetrician-gynaecologist a pregnant woman is referred to other medical specialists. She must be obligatory examined by the following specialists:
*a. Therapeutist and dentist
b. Dentist and phthisiatrician
c. Dentist and cardiologist
d. ENT and ophthalmologist
e. Therapeutist and endocrinologist

57. Estimation of physical development of a child involved dynamometry and estimation of body weight and length, annual gain in body length, chest circumference, number of permanent teeth, secondary sexual characters, lung vital capacity. Which of the mentioned indices relates to the physiometric ones?
a. Body length and weight, chest circumference
b. Number of permanent teeth
c. Annual gain in body length
*d. Lung vital capacity, dynamometry
e. Secondary sexual characters

58. Estimation of community health level involved analysis of a report on diseases registered among the population of district under charge (reporting form 12). What index is calculated on the grounds of this report?
a. Index of basic non-epidemic morbidity
*b. Common morbidity rate
c. Index of morbidity with temporary disability
d. Index of pathological affection
e. Index of hospitalized morbidity

59. A 50-year-old male suburbanite underwent treatment in rural outpatient clinic for pneumonia. The treatment didnt have effect and the disease got complicated by exudative pleuritis. What prevention and treatment facility should the patient be referred to for further aid?
a. Tuberculosis dispensary
*b. Central district hospital
c. Phthisio-pulmonological dispensary
d. Regional hospital
e. Municipal hospital

60. A 46-year-old patient was issued a 10-day sick list because of exacerbation of chronic cholecystitis. The patients general condition got better, but the clinical manifestations of the disease are still present. What authority is entitled to extend the sick list?
a. Family doctor
b. Deputy head doctor for medical-labour expertise
c. Head doctor
*d. Medical Expert Commission
e. Deputy head doctor for terapeutic management

61. A 59-year-old male patient with essential hypertension of stage II is registered with the dispensary department of a polyclinic. The patient regularly takes ACE inhibitors and calcium antagonists. How often should a therapeutist examine this patient (except for exacerbation periods)?
*a. Every 3 months
b. Every 4 months
c. Every 9 months
d. Once a year
e. Every 6 months

62. A municipal hospital reported on the number of operated patients including fatal outcomes following the operations. Which index of hospital work can be calculated on the ground of this data?
a. Standardized lethality
b. -
c. Total lethality
d. Index of late hospitalization since a disease incursion
*e. Postoperative lethality

63. It is planned to build a multi-disciplinary hospital with 500 beds in a town. Specify the location of a polyclinic within the medical centre:
a. It is not allowed to place the polyclinic within the centre territory
b. In the service zone
c. In the garden and park area
d. In the centre of the territory near medical buildings
*e. At the main entrance

64. Evaluation results of sanitary and hygiene conditions in a 4-bed ward were as follows: ward area - 30 m2, height - 3,2 m, temperature - 20°C, humidity - 55%, air velocity - 0,1 m/s, window-to-floor area ratio - 1:5, daylight ratio - 0,6%, concentration of carbon dioxide in the air - 0,1%. Which of the given indicators does not meet hygienic requirements?
a. Ward area
*b. Daylight ratio
c. Window-to-floor area ratio
d. Air velocity
e. Concentration of carbon dioxide in the air

65. Within the structure of the regions population the share of persons aged 0 to 14 years is 25%, the share of persons aged 50 years and older is 30%. What concept most accurately describes this demographic situation?
a. Cohort reproduction
b. Progressive type of population age structure
*c. Regressive type of population age structure
d. Stationary type of population age structure
e. Immigration of population

