1. A number of viable fetuses per 1000 women at the age between 15 and 44 is determined by:
a. Obstetric rate
*b. Genital index
c. Birth rate
d. Reproductive level
e. Perinatal rate

2. Point out the unit for statistical observation for the determination of blood sugar level influence on a wound surface healing during postoperative period.
a. Blood sugar level
b. The patient who has a wound surface
c. The patient who was discharged to outpatient treatment
*d. The patient in a postoperative period
e. Blood test

3. What methods of the collecting of the information is preferable for study of housing conditions of students of medical HIGH SCHOOL for a training period?
a. Statistical
*b. Questioning
c. Selecting of materials
d. Interviewing
e. A method of the directed selection

4. What information gathering method is preferable to study housing conditions of medical students during training period?
a. Directed selection method
b. Statistical
c. Interviewing
d. Materials selection
*e. Questionaire

5. Choose a method of a graphic representation of monthly information about number of the registered cases of acute intestinal infection and their comparisons to the average monthly values, obtained for 5 previous years:
a. The figured diagram
b. The curvilinear disgram
c. The radial diagram
d. The sector diagram
*e. The linear diagram

6. The parameter of infantile mortality for the last year was - 16,3, in present year - 15,7. Name a kind of the diagram that can be used for a graphic representation of it:
a. Intrastylar
b. Linear
*c. Stylar
d. Sector
e. Radial

7. The average body lenth of newborn boys is 50,9 cm at a sigma 1,66; and average mass - 3432 at a sigma 5,00. What criterion is necessary in order to compare degree of variability of these signs?
*a. Coefficient of variation
b. Limit
c. Coefficient of association
d. Amplitude
e. Sigma

8. What method is applied to establish rate of correlation between age of men and their mortality due to myocardial infarction?
a. Method of graduated correlation (Armler)
*b. Method of grade correlation (Spirman)
c. The quadrate method (Pirson)
d. Correlation ratio
e. The Indirect method (Student)

9. Indicate the registration medical document for the patient, who 21.02. was addressed to the doctor with diagnosis ARVD for the first time in this year:
a. The necessary registration form is not indicated
*b. The statistical coupon is to be filled in and it is necessary to deliver on a sign (+)
c. The statistical coupon is to be filled in, but a sign (+) is not necessary to be put in
d. The statistical coupon for registration of final diagnosis is not necessary
e. It is necessary to fill in the emergency notice on a case of a contagion

10. Define the basic registration document at the profound study of a case rate with temporary lost labor ability at the industrial enterprise:
a. "The Report on reasons of a temporary lost labor ability"
b. A ambulatory medical card
c. The inpatient medical record
*d. A card of the personal account of a case rate
e. The sick-leave certificate

11. Head of a department and a trade-union group have appealed to the head of a hospital about dismissal of the senior nurse who has 17-year record of service. The facts of charge were confirmed and recognized by the nurse herself. The nurse lives with a daughter (who is divorced and unemployed) and a 9-month-old grandson. Make an administrative decision:
a. To discharge the worker, i.e. to satisfy demands of the collective
b. To embark other officials or public organizations with this problem
c. -
*d. To continue the worker in office with a warning of dismissal in case of repeated violation of labor discipline
e. To issue the sick leave

12. Head of a department and a trade-union group have appealed to the head of a hospital about dismissal of the senior nurse who has 17 year record of service. The facts of charge were confirmed and recognized by the nurse herself. This nurse lives with a daughter (who is divorced and unemployed) and a 9-month-old grandson. Make an administrative decision:
*a. To continue the worker in office with a warning of dismissal in case of repeated violation of labor discipline
b. To issue the sick list
c. -
d. To shift the solution of this problem on other officials or public organizations
e. To discharge the worker, i.e. to satisfy demands of the collective

13. A child is 6 years old. Within one year of observation he had URI that lasted 8 days. Physical state is satisfactory. Specify hi health group:
a. III (c)
*b. I
c. III (a)
d. II
e. III (b)

14. A 38 year old man was admitted to a hospital from his working place on July 19 because of hip fracture. He was invalid till November 19. Requires prolongation of treatment. Who decides on the issue of further temporary invalidity?
*a. Specialized (traumatologic) MSEC
b. The head physician of a polyclinic
c. Regional MSEC
d. Interregional general MSEC
e. DCC

15. What is the maximum duration of medical certificate in case of tuberculosis?
*a. 2 months
b. 2 weeks
c. 10 months
d. Month
e. Week

16. An engineer-chemist at the age of 47 often fells ill with an occupational skin disease. Who makes a decision to transfer him to other job accepts?
a. The attending physician
b. A head physician
*c. DCC
d. The chief of shop
e. MSEC

17. A patient with high temperature came to a first-aid post in the evening. The fact of temporary disability was established. Indicate the order of examination in this case:
*a. The night duty doctor should issue a medical certificate, which will be subsequently used for issuing a sick list from the date of the previous day
b. The sick list for up to 3 days should be issued
c. Any document shouldnt be issued
d. The sick list for 3 days should be issued
e. The sick list for 1 day should be issued

18. A 5 tons milk batch was sampled. The lab analysis revealed: fat content 2%, specific density - 1,04 g/cm3, acidity - 210Т, reductase probe - weak-positive. What way is the product to be used in?
a. Sell without limitations
b. Do the product away
c. Discard for animal feeding
d. Technical utilization
*e. Sell but inform customers about milk quality

19. A sample of milk was taken for testing from a 5 ton milk batch. Lab analysis showed the following: fat content 2%, specific density- 1,04 g/cm3, acidity 21°C, reductase probe – weak positive. What way the product is to be used in? What would you advise?
a. Annihilate the product
*b. Sell but inform customers about milk quality
c. Utilize technically
d. Write the product off for animal feeding
e. Sell without limitations

20. The student has the following devices: Geiger counter, Ebert counter, Krotovs apparatus, Mischuk device, Ebert device. What device can he use to assess air germ pollution?
*a. Krotovs apparatus
b. Geigers counter
c. Eberts device
d. Mischuks device
e. Eberts counter

21. Thyreotoxicosis patient is in the two-place hospital ward of therapeutic department. The area of the ward is 18 m2, height is 3 m, ventilation rate is 2,5/h. Air temperature is 20°C, relative humidity is 45%, air movement velocity is 0,3 m/sec, light coefficient is 1/5, noise level constitutes 30 dB. Make a hygienic assessment of these conditions.
a. All conditions are OK
*b. Discomfortable microclimate
c. Poor lighting
d. Non-effective ventilation
e. High level of noise

22. A 9 y.o. girl has an average height and harmonic growth development. She was ill with acute respiratory infection for five times. Define the group of her health.
a. 4th group
b. 5th group
c. 1st group
d. 3rd group
*e. 2nd group

23. A student lives in the modern house in the flat with a complete set of sanitary equipment (WC, bath, shower, local water heater). How much water consumption has he got?
a. 500 -600 L/day
*b. 160-200 L/day
c. 50-100 L/day
d. 10-15 L/day
e. 300-400 L/day

24. A 30-year-old patient with complaints of occipital headache, disturbed sleep with nightmares came to a policlinic. BP was 150/95 mm Hg. He was diagnosed with hypertensic crisis. The patient should be registered in the following dispensary group for arterial hypertension surveillance:
a. In the third
b. In the fifth
c. In the first
d. In the fourth
*e. In the second

25. A young patient who came to a policlinic was diagnosed with the 1 stage of hypertension. How often should he undergo the medical check-up?
a. 5 times a year
*b. Twice a year
c. 3 times a year
d. Once a year
e. 4 times a year

26. 25 children at the age of 2-3 years who dont attend any child welfare institutions should be observed by a district pediatrician within the current year. How many initial visits of this group of children should be planned?
a. 100
b. 200
c. 20
d. 40
*e. 50

27. Studying of pulmonary tuberculosis incidence provided data about patients socioeconomic living conditions and bad habits. What method allows to estimate the impact of these factors on tuberculosis incidence?
a. Standardized index calculation
b. Calculation of reliability coefficient
c. Calculation of correspondence index
d. Calculation of regression coefficient
*e. Calculation of correlation coefficient

28. What juice should be included in a complex drug and dietary therapy for patients with gastric ulcer or duodenal ulcer and increased gastric juice acidity in order to accelerate the ulcer healing?
a. Pumpkin
b. Apple, birch and apple
*c. Potato, potato and carrot
d. Cabbage, cabbage and carrot
e. Celery, parsley

29. A teacher of a secondary school was diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis. What is the maximum duration of his medical certificate?
a. Five months
b. Two months
c. A month
*d. Ten months
e. Four months

30. An employee of a private company was ill with acute respiratory viral infection. Consulted a district doctor, who determined the fact of temporary loss of working ability, but refused to issue a sick-list, arguing that the patient worked in the private and not state-owned company. Should the sick-list be issued to the employees of private companies?
a. Issued a medical certificate of a set form
b. Issued a medical certificate of a free form
c. Issued only to empties of state-owned companies
d. Issued only on condition of payment guarantee by the companys proprietor
*e. Issued regardless of companys ownership

31. Clinic of a research instutute for occupational diseases examined a worker who works at a concentration plant and diagnosed him with chronic dust bronchitis. The case is investigated by a commission including the representatives of: the plant, clinic, territorial SES, department of Social Insurance Fund, trade union. According to the "regulation on investigation of…", the commission should be headed by the representative of the following authority:
a. Social Insurance Fund
b. Plant
*c. Territorial SES
d. Trade union
e. Clinic

32. Basing upon the data of laboratory assessment of sanitary state of soil in a certain territory, the soil was found to be low-contaminated according to the sanitary indicative value; contaminated according to the coli titer; low-contaminated according to the anaerobe titer (Cl. Perfringens). This is indicative of:
*a. Fresh fecal contamination
b. Old fecal contamination
c. Insufficient insolation and aeration of soil
d. Constant entry of organic protein contaminations
e. Insufficient intensity of soil humification

33. A maternity hospital registered 616 live births, 1 stillbirth, 1 death on the 5th day of life over a 1 year period. What index allows the most precise estimation of this situation?
a. Natality
b. Crude mortality rate
*c. Perinatal mortality
d. Neonatal mortality
e. Natural increase

34. In one of the surgical departments the quality assurance testing of sterilization of surgical instruments was performed. After an instrument had been treated with 1% phenolphthalein, the solution turned pink. This indicates that the instrument has:
*a. Synthetic detergent residues
b. Drugs residues
c. Disinfectant residues
d. Residual tissue
e. Residual blood

35. A patient complained about problems with pain and tactile sensitivity, pain in the nail bones at the end of the working day. He works at a plant with mechanical devices. What pathology can be suspected?
a. Overwork symptoms
b. Hypovitaminosis of B1
c. Caisson disease
d. Noise disease
*e. Vibration disease

36. Bacterial analysis of air in a living space in winter period by means of Krotovs apparatus revealed that total number of microorganisms in 1 m3 of air was 7200. What is the permissible number of microorganisms for the air to be characterized as "pure"?
a. Up to 3500
b. Up to 2500
*c. Up to 4500
d. Up to 5500
e. Up to 7500

37. Maximum permissible concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is considered to be a sanitary index of air purity in a classroom. What concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is accepted as maximum permissible?
a. 0,15%
b. 0,05%
*c. 0,1%
d. 0,2%
e. 0,3%

38. Study of actual diet of an adult revealed the following: proteins make up 16% of energy value of daily ration, fats - 25%, carbohydrates - 59%. Evaluate compliance of protein, fat and carbohydrate share in the energy value of daily ration with the recommended shares of these nutrients?
a. Nutrient content complies with the recommended shares of energy value
*b. Carbohydrate share is insufficient, there is excess of proteins
c. Carbohydrate share is insufficicent
d. Fat share is insufficient
e. Carbohydrate share is excessive

39. A patient who has been consuming refined foodstuffs for a long time complains about headache, fatiguability, depression, insomnia, irritability. Objectively: muscle asthenia, pain and cramps in the gastrocnemius muscles, during walking the patient lands onto his heel first, then on the external edge of foot. Cardiovascular system exhibits tachycardia, hypoxia, dystrophic changes of myocardium. There are also gastrointestinal disorders. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypovitaminosis B1
b. Hypovitaminosis B12
c. Hypovitaminosis B15
d. Hypovitaminosis B6
e. Hypovitaminosis B2

40. A patient who had eaten mushrooms in the morning was delivered to the infectious diseases hospital at night. The disease development was rapid. The patient presented with stomach pain, frequent diarrhea, intractable vomiting, burning thirst, headache and dizziness. He died on the third day. What mushrooms are most likely to have caused mycetismus?
a. Sulfur-tufts
b. Russules
c. Morels
d. Fly agarics
*e. Deadly amanita

41. Periodical survey of a worker of a chemicals plant revealed a malignant neoplasm on the urinary bladder. This occupational disease was the most probably caused by contact with the following industrial poison:
a. Asbestos
b. Arsenic
c. Vinyl chloride
d. Nickel carbonyl
*e. Benzidine

42. A 37 year old patient applied to a local therapeutist. As a result of exacerbation of chronic obstructive bronchitis the patient had been temporarily disabled for 117 days within 1 year. What tactics will be legally correct?
a. The therapeutist should issue a new medical certificate
b. The patient shoul be referred to the sanatorium-and-spa treatment
c. The therapeutist should extend a medical certificate
d. The patient should be referred to the medical consultation comission for extension of medical certificate
*e. The patient should be referred to the medicosocial expertise

43. A 46-year-old patient once took part in elimination of breakdown at an atomic power plant. Currently he is being treated at an in-patient hospital. He was diagnosed with progressing vegetative insufficiency. This disease relates to the following group of ionizing radiation effects:
a. Heterosis
*b. Somato-stochastic
c. Genetic
d. Somatic
e. Hormesis

44. In treatment and prevention establishments, regardless of their organisational and proprietary form, the rights of patients should be observed. Which of these rights is the most significant?
a. The right to the free choice
b. The right to be heard
c. The right to the protection from incompetence
*d. The right to the protection of the patients interests
e. The right to the information

45. A military unit stopped for 3-days rest in an inhabited locality after a long march. The sanitary-epidemiological reconnaissance found several water sources. It is necessary to choose the source complying with the hygienic standards for drinking water in the field conditions:
a. Rain water
b. Melt snow water
c. Spring water
d. River water
*e. Artesian well water

46. A district doctor was commisioned with a task to work out a plan of treatment-and-prophylaxis actions for the population of his district. What actions of secendary prophylaxis must he include into this plan?
a. Elimination of disease causes
b. Disease prevention
*c. Prevention of disease complications
d. Improvement of populations living conditions
e. Rehabilitation actions

47. The district pediatrician is charged with the analysis of infant mortality. What is taken for the unit of observation in infant mortality investigation?
a. A baby dead at the age over 28 days
b. A baby dead at the age up to 1 months
*c. A baby dead at the age up to 12 months
d. A baby dead at the age up to 6 days
e. A baby dead at birth

48. Chief district pediatrician has to carry out analysis of infant mortality rate. What should he take as a unit of the observation?
a. Child death case during first 7 days of life
b. Child death case on labor
c. Child death case at the age up to the first month
d. Child death case after 28 days of life
*e. Child death case at the age up to 1 year

49. Deputy of chief medical officer carried out a study of morbidity rate for population which had been served at the polyclinics within the last 5 years. What statistical values can help in calculation of morbidity rates?
a. Average values
b. Standard values
*c. Relative values
d. Absolute values
e. Dynamic series

50. There were registered 500 cases of urolithiasis per 10000 inhabitants. What kind of statictical indices is presented?
a. Index of visualization
b. Correlation coefficient
*c. Prevalence rate
d. Incidence rate
e. Index of compliance

51. At year-end hospital administration has obtained the following data: annual number of treated patients and average annual number of beds used for patients treatment. What index of hospital work can be calculated on the base of this data?
a. Average bed idle time
*b. Bed turnover
c. Average annual bed occupancy
d. Bed resources of the hospital
e. Average duration of patients presence in the hospital

52. Examination of a 13-year-old boy reveals that his body length is 147 сm (+2), body weight - 38 kg (+1,5), circumference of chest - 72 cm (+0,2). Estimate the harmonicity of the childs physical development:
a. Supernormal
*b. Disharmonious
c. Above the average
d. Harmonious
e. Sharply disharmonious

53. A childrens health camp received a party of tinned food. External examination of the tins revealed that they had deep dents, could be easily concaved when pressed and wouldnt immediately return to the initial state; rust was absent; the tins were greased with inedible fat. Specify the bloat type:
*a. Physical
b. Biological
c. Physicochemical
d. Combined
e. Chemical

54. On physiologic-sanitary examination of railway department work it was revealed that loaders work is of III degree of difficulty. They unload vagons with sand, manually break coagulated mass by shovel and shift it. What criteria was used to evaluate work of loaders?
a. Intellectual efforts
*b. Maximun load weigh which is shifted
c. Time of active activities, % to the shift duration
d. Value of static loading for the shift
e. Time of passive observation, % to the shift duration

55. Workers of fishery are subjected to low temperatures of the air (from 5 till 15°C). Diseases of what organs and systems are the most frequent among workers of such enterprises?
a. Blood
b. Cardiovascular system
*c. Respiratory system
d. Liver
e. Gastrointestinal tract

56. During the periodic medical examination an assembly fitter (works on soldering details) didnt report any health problems. Closer examination revealed signs of asthenic-vegetative syndrome. Blood included red blood cells with basophilic aggregations and a somewhat higher number of reticulocytes, urine had a high concentration of delta-aminolevulinic acid. The complex of symptoms indicates the initial stage of chronic intoxication with:
a. Mercury
b. Manganese
*c. Lead
d. Tin
e. Ethanol

57. Some of the population of a city district have uneven teeth color. The individuals have white spots, transverse brown stripes on the incisors. Occurrence of these symptoms is associated with the quality of drinking water from a deep well. Which of the following components of water can be the cause of the disease?
a. Fe
*b. F
c. Mg
d. Ca
e. J

58. An outpatient hospital made record of 11600 diseases within one year. Among them influenza and ARD make up 5800, circulatory system diseases - 3480, digestion diseases - 1300, other diseases - 1020. What relative index can be calculated according this data?
a. Correlation
b. -
c. Intensive
d. Visualization
*e. Extensive

59. Prevalence of a disease in region N amounted 1156 occurences per 1000 of inhabitants. What of the mentioned indices characterizes the disease prevalence?
*a. Intensive
b. Ratio
c. Standardized
d. Visual index
e. Extensive

60. A pupil of the 8th form after trauma has acute atrophy of the left arm muscles, tonus of which is distinctly decreased, active movements are only in the left joint, pupils foot is deformed. Function of support of the left leg is absent, support function of the right leg is preserved. The boy wears an orthopedic footwear. What group of physical training does the boy belong to?
a. Other
b. Preparatory
c. Basic
d. Additional
*e. Special

61. District physician was charged with plan drafting concerning medical and preventive measures among the population in the area he is assigned to. What measures must he include in this plan as regards primary prevention of illness?
a. Prevention of disease complications
*b. Prevention of disease onset
c. Measures to increase patients life quality
d. Referral of patients to sanatorium
e. Measures to improve patients life conditions

62. A therapeutist needs to analyze adult health in the area of service. Which groups of indicators will be included into this analysis?
a. Birth rates, sickness rates, disability
b. Sickness rates, death rates, physical development
c. Demographic, sickness rates, physical development
d. Sickness rates, disability, death rates
*e. Demographic, sickness rates, disability

63. A district pediarician has carried out infant mortality rate analysis in his area. What data has been used?
a. Mortality of district newborn
*b. Mortality of children under 1 y.o. structured by age, sex, causes
c. Hospital mortality of children, structured by age
d. Mortality of children under 1 y.o., natimortality
e. Mortality of district adolescents

64. At the radiological unit of a hospital gamma-devices of radiotherapy of "Agat" type and other closed sources of ionizing radiation are used for treatment of malignant neoplasms. What measures are to be taken to protect personnel during working with radioactive sources of such type?
a. Systematical cleansing of surfaces from the radioactive contamination and shortening of working time
*b. Reduction of working time and screening of the source
c. Screening of the source and the use of means of individual protection of respiration organs
d. Capsulation of devices and organization of room ventilation
e. The increase of distance to the source and individual hygiene compliance

65. A patient undergoes inpatient treatment with the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. To spare pancreas as much as possible the doctor prescribed for him starvation for 1-3 days. What products is the patient allowed to eat during recovery period after cancelling of starvation?
a. Milk
b. Grape juice
c. Broth
d. Boiled meat
*e. Potato and carrot mash

66. A local doctor has to prepare a report about the health condition of the population of his region. What medical indexes of population health condition should he use?
a. Average treatment duration, complications
b. Average longevity
c. Social welfare, satisfaction of life quality
d. Way of life, genetic, pollution
*e. Morbidity, disabilities, demographic, physical development

67. To study physical development of children and adolescents, anthropometric studies are widely used. Choose a physiometric method of study from the below given.
a. Determination of body weight
*b. Determination of vital capacity of lungs
c. Determination of thorax form
d. Measurement of growth
e. Determination of vertebra form

68. Study of morbidity with temporary disability among workers of a machine building plant revealed that average duration of a case was 20 days. What diseases influenced upon the index value?
*a. Chronic
b. Subacute
c. Hard to determine
d. Preexisting diseases
e. Acute

69. A patient consulted a doctor about acure respiratory viral infection. The patient was acknowledged to be off work. The doctor issued him a medical certificate for 5 days. The patient is not recovering. What measures should the doctor take in order to legalize the further disability of patient?
a. To send the patient to the medical social expert comission
*b. To prolong the medical certificate at his own discretion but no more than for 10 days in total
c. To prolong the medical certificate together with department superintendent
d. To prolong the medical certificate at his own discretion but no more than for 6 days in total
e. To send the patient to the medical consultative commission

70. A patient is on the sick leave for 4 months continuously from the date of injury. The treatment is going to last for 1-2 months more. Who has the right to extend the duration of medical certificate for this patient?
*a. Medical advisory commission after medico-social expert commission examination
b. Medical advisory commission after inpatient treatment
c. Medico-social expert commission
d. District doctor by agreement with a department chief
e. Medical superintendent

71. Working conditions of a building company worker are characterized by cooling microclimate effect, silica-containing dust, caustic alkali (quicklime) and noise. What medical expert should be the chief of the commission that periodically examines the workers of the mentioned category?
a. Ophthalmologist
b. Dermatologist
c. Otolaryngologist
*d. Therapeutist
e. Neurologist

72. It is determined that 30 of a 100 women with risk factor had preterm labor, and of a 100 women without risk factor 5 women had preterm labor. What method of statistic data processing should the doctor use in order to estimate reliability of differences between the compared groups?
a. Average computing
b. Standardization method
c. Correlation analysis
*d. Students criterion calculation
e. Relative numbers calculation

73. 350 workers of a metalurgical plant had to undergo a yearly preventive examination. A territorial polyclinic carried out preventive examination of 325 workers. As a result of it, 1 worker was recognized as temporarily disabled, 15 workers underwent further rehabilitation at an after-work sanatorium, 10 workers were provided with diet meal. What index characterizing the preventive work of the polyclinic should be applied in this case?
a. Percentage of temporarily disabled people
*b. Coverage of preventive medical examinations
c. Percentage of people who underwent rehabilitation at an after-work sanatorium
d. Frequency of case detection during examinations
e. Percentage of people who were provided with diet meal

74. District doctor of rural medical department was called to a 42-year-old patient. While examining the patient, the doctor suspected the dysentery. What document must the doctor issue?
a. Infectious disease report
b. Statistical coupon of final (precise) diagnosis
*c. Urgent notification of infectious disease
d. Abstract of outpatient medical card
e. Report addressed to Head of the village

75. During coal extraction in a mine the concentration of coal dust in the working area is 450 mg/m3 (MPC is 10 mg/m3). What occupational respiratory disease may develop in miners?
a. Byssinosis
b. Allergic nasopharyngitis
*c. Anthracosis
d. Siderosis
e. Talcosis

76. A district doctor keeps the record of reconvalescents after infectious diseases, people who are disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases, patients with chronic pathologies. What category of patients should belong to the III health group?
a. People disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases
b. Reconvalescents after infectious diseases and patients with chronic pathologies
c. All above mentioned categories
*d. People with chronic diseases
e. People with chronic pathologies and disposed to frequent and long-lasting diseases

77. Over a current year among workers of an institution 10% havent been ill a single time, 30% have been ill once, 15% - twice, 5% - 4 times, the rest - 5 and more times. What is the percentage of workers relating to the I health group?
a. 60%
b. 22%
c. 10%
d. 40%
*e. 55%

78. During a regular medical examination at a metallurgical plant 20% of workers were found overweight (body weight was 5-14% higher than normal), and had early signs of obesity (grade I-II) with Quetelet index from 26 to 30. What products share must be reduced in the diet of this group of people in the first place in order to normalize their body weight?
*a. Bakery products
b. Fruit
c. Meat and fish products
d. Milk and dairy products
e. Vegetables

79. Chief physician of a polyclinic encharged a district doctor with a task to determine the pathological prevalence of disease N in his district. What document allows to estimate the disease prevalence in the population of a medical district?
a. Statistic coupons (+)
b. Statistic coupons (+) and (-)
c. Vouchers for medical appointments
*d. Prophylactic examinations register
e. Statistic coupons (-)

80. A 48-year-old male in-patient undergoes treatment for essential hypertension of II-B stage. It is known from history that he works in a design engineering office. His job involves neuro-emotional stress. Which of these foodstuffs do not stimulate the central nervous system and can be recommended for the patient?
a. Carbonated beverages
*b. Whole milk
c. Mushroom broths
d. Meat broths
e. Vegetable broths

81. In a forest summer camp children have variable procedures to harden their organisms. What procedure has the most hardening power?
a. Morning exercises on the fresh air
b. Walking on the fresh air
c. Bath with hydromassage
*d. Contrast shower
e. Hygienic shower

82. There is a dynamic growth of number of congenital abnormalities such as central paralysis, newborns blindness, idiocy among the population that lives near to pesticides production enterprise. Compounds of which pollutant can cause the development of this pathology?
a. Strontium
b. Iron
c. Chrome
*d. Mercury
e. Cadmium

83. Ats planned to construct multifield a new hospital in one of the cental city districts. What building type is the most appropriate in this case?
a. Centralized
b. Mixed
c. Blocked
*d. Centralized and blocked
e. Decentralized

84. In an urban settlement situated on the riverbank, an outbreak of hepatitis A was registered. The disease might have water origin. This assumption can be confirmed by growth of the following values of water quality:
a. Presence of benign leptospirosis pathogen
b. Index of fecal coli-forms
c. Escherichia coli index
d. Oxidability
*e. Number of coli-phages

85. During inspection of sanitary conditions of studying at a technical university it was necessary to evaluate the visual regimen of students, who study from 9 a.m to 3 p.m. What index of natural light will be the most informative?
a. Presence of mixed (superolateral) light
*b. Natural light coefficient
c. Depth of study room
d. Light coefficient
e. Time of the room insolation

86. 200 patients suffering from essential hypertension were examined in order to obtain data about patients arterial pressure and age. What statistic value should be applied in order to measure relation between these characteristics?
*a. Correlation coefficient
b. Coefficient of variation
c. Sygmal deviation
d. Representation error
e. Students coefficient

87. A doctor of the general practice has registered the following death causes for the previous year: the first place was taken by cardiovascular diseases (60%), the second - by tumors (18%), then - traumas (8,3%) etc. What diagrams will provide the most substantial information about the registered ocurrences?
*a. Pie diagram
b. Line diagram
c. Column diagram
d. Circle diagram
e. Cartogram

88. On medical observation a doctor identified girl (162 cm tall and 59 kg weight) who complained loss of ability to see surrounding objects clearly in the evening. On examination: dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Her daily ration includes the following vitamines: vitamine А– 0,5 mg, vit.В1– 2,0 mg, vit.В2– 2,5 mg, vit.В6– 2 mg, vit.С– 70 mg. What is the hypovitaminosis type?
a. B6-hypovitaminosis
b. C-hypovitaminosis
c. B1-hypovitaminosis
d. B2-hypovitaminosis
*e. A-hypovitaminosis

89. As a result of prophylactic medical examination a 35 year old woman was diagnosed with alimentary and constitutive obesity of the III degree. It is known from her anamnesis that the patient doesnt observe rules of rational nutrition: she often overeats, the last food intake is usually 10-15 minutes before going to bed, prefers fattening and rich in carbohydrates food. What is the main alimentary risk factor of obesity development?
*a. Energetic unprofitableness of nutrition
b. Excess of fats
c. Violation of dietary pattern
d. Lack of cellulose
e. Excess of carbohydrates

90. The air of a foundry workers working zone contains condensation aerosol with dust particles sized 2 nm (90%), 2-5 nm (2%), over 5 nm (6%), below 2 nm (about 2%). Characterize the dust dispersivity:
a. Ultrafine-dispersed
b. Mist
c. Median-dispersed
d. Coarsely dispersed
*e. Fine-dispersed

91. The major repair of a hospital included renewal of colour design of hospital premises because it is of great psychological and aesthetical importance; and so the walls of patient wards will be painted under consideration of:
*a. Windows orientation
b. Diseases of patients who will be staying in these wards
c. Creation of cozy atmosphere
d. Wall reflection coefficient
e. Hospital profile

92. Atmospheric air of an industrial centre is polluted with the following wastes of metallurgical plants: sulphuric, nitric, metal, carbon oxides that have negative influence upon the inhabitants health. The effct of these hazards can be characterized as:
a. Adjacent
b. Mixed
c. Complex
d. Associated
*e. Combined

93. Study of morbidity rate in a city N revealed that population of different administrative districts differed in age structure. What statistic method allows to eliminate influence of this factor upon morbidity indices?
a. Wilcoxons t-criterion
b. Analysis of dynamic series
c. Calculation of average values
*d. Standardization
e. Correlative regressive analysis

94. A driver had been fixing a car in a closed garage and afterwards complained about headache, dizziness, nausea, muscle asthenia, sleepiness. Objectively: pulse and respiratory rate elevation, excitement, hypertension, delirium of persecution. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Asthenovegetative syndrome
*b. Intoxication with carbon oxide
c. Posttraumatic encephalopathy
d. Intoxication with ethyl gasoline
e. Hypertensive crisis

95. An outbreak of food poisoning was recorded in an urban settlement. The illness was diagnosed as botulism on the grounds of clinical presentations. What foodstuffs should be chosen for analysis in the first place in order to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Pasteurized milk
b. Potatoes
*c. Tinned food
d. Boiled meat
e. Cabbage

96. A worker who undergoes regular medical check-up for duodenal ulcer received a subsidized 24-day sanatorium voucher from his plant. The term of annual leave of a worker is 24 calender days, it will take 4 days more to get to the sanatorium and back home. What is the procedure of obtaining a 4-day sick-leave?
a. The doctor in charge issues a health certificate and sanatorium patients file for 28 days
b. Medical Expert Commission issues a 4-day health certificate
c. Medical Expert Commission issues a 28-day sick list
d. The doctor in charge issues a 4-day sick list
*e. Medical Expert Commission issues a 4-day sick list

97. A 42 year old metalworker has been working at the turning machine for production of heavy large-size parts for 5 years. His work requires using of hand and pedal levers that involves considerable physical force. What means for osteoarthrosis prevention should be recommended?
a. To administer protein-and-carbohydrate diet
b. To improve health at the Black sea coast
c. To go in for weightlifting
*d. To limit physical work
e. To administer protein-and-vitamin diet

98. Administration of a plant producing red lead paint intends to form a group of medical specialists for periodical medical examinations. What specialist must be obligatory included into this group?
*a. Neuropathologist
b. Psychiatrist
c. Otolaryngologyst
d. Dermatologist
e. Gynaecologist

99. The total area of a ward at the therapeutical department is 28 m2. What is the maximum number of beds that can be exploited in this ward?
a. 2
b. 1
*c. 4
d. 3
e. 5

100. The amount of ultraviolet radiation dose was measured in minutes. What device was applied for measurement of the biodose?
a. Catathermometer
*b. Gorbachevs biodosimeter
c. Actinometer
d. UV-meter
e. Radiometer

