1. A 20 y.o. patient complains of amenorrhea. Objectively: hirsutism, obesity with fat tissue prevailing on the face, neck, upper part of body. On the face there are acne vulgaris, on the skin - striae cutis distense. Psychological and intellectual development is normal. Gynecological condition: external genitals are moderately hairy, acute vaginal and uterine hypoplasia. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Stein-Leventals syndrome
b. Turners syndrome
*c. Itsenko-Cushing syndrome
d. Shichans syndrome
e. Babinski-Froehlich syndrome

2. A 27 y.o. woman suffers from pyelonephritits of the only kidney. She presents to the maternity welfare centre because of suppresion of menses for 2,5 months. On examination pregnancy 11 weeks of gestation was revealed. In urine: albumine 3,3 g/L, leucocytes cover the field of vision. What is doctors tactics in this case?
a. Maintenance of pregnancy till delivery term
*b. Immediate pregancy interruption
c. Maintenance of pregnancy till 36 weeks
d. Pregnancy interruption after urine normalization
e. Pregnancy interruption at 24-25 weeks

3. An 18-year-old primigravida in her 27-28 week of gestation underwent an operation on account of acute phlegmonous appendicitis. In the postoperative period it is necessary to take measures for prevention of the following pegnancy complication:
a. Fetus hypotrophy
b. Intestinal obstruction
*c. Noncarrying of pregnancy
d. Premature placenta detachment
e. Late gestosis

4. A 24-year-old female patient complains of acute pain in the lower abdomen that turned up after a physical stress. She presents with nausea, vomiting, dry mouth and body temperature 36,6°C. She has a right ovarian cyst in history. Bimanual examination reveals that uterus is dense, painless, of normal size. The left fornix is deep, uterine appendages arent palpable, the right fornix is contracted. There is a painful formation on the right of uterus. Its round, elastic and mobile. It is 7х8 cm large. In blood: leukocytosis with the left shit. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Extrauterine pregnancy
*b. Ovarian cyst with pedicle torsion
c. Subserous fibromyoma of uterus
d. Right-sided pyosalpinx
e. Acute metritis

5. A parturient woman is 23 years old. Vaginal obstetric examination reveals full cervical dilatation. There is no fetal bladder. Fetal head is in the plane of pelvic outlet. Sagittal suture is in mesatipellic pelvis, anterior fontanel is closer to pubes. The fetal head diameter in such presentation will be:
a. Mento-occipitalis
*b. Suboccipito-bregmaticus
c. Biparietal
d. Fronto-occipitalis recta
e. Suboccipitio-frontalis

6. A pregnant 26-year-old woman was admitted to a hospital for abdominal pain and bleeding from the genital tract. Bimanual examination revealed that uterus was the size of 9 weeks of pregnancy, the cervical canal let a finger through. Fetal tissues could be palpated in the orifice. There was moderate vaginal bleeding. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Therapy for the maintenance of pregnancy
*b. Instrumental extraction of fetal tissue
c. Administration of hormones
d. Surveillance
e. Hemostatic and antianemic therapy

7. A 42-year-old woman has had hyperpolymenorrhea and progressing algodismenorrhea for the last 10 years. Gynaecological examination revealed no changes of uterine cervix; discharges are moderate, of chocolate colour, uterus is slightly enlarged and painful, appendages are not palpable, the fornices are deep and painless. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Uterine carcinoma
b. Endomyometritis
c. Adnexal endmetriosis
*d. Uterine endometriosis
e. Subserous uterine fibromyoma

8. On the tenth day after discharge from the maternity house a 2-year-old patient consulted a doctor about body temperature rise up to 39°C, pain in the right breast. Objectively: the mammary gland is enlarged, there is a hyperemized area in the upper external quadrant, in the same place there is an ill-defined induration, lactostasis, fluctuation is absent. Lymph nodes of the right axillary region are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Dermatitis
b. Tumour
c. Abscess
d. Erysipelas
*e. Lactational mastitis

9. During the dynamic observation over a parturient woman in the second stage of labor it was registered that the fetal heart rate fell down to 90-100/min and didnt come to normal after contractions. Vaginal examination revealed the complete cervical dilatation, the fetal head filling the entire posterior surface of the pubic symphysis and sacral hollow; the sagittal suture lied in the anteroposterior diameter of the pelvic outlet, the posterior fontanelle was in front under the pubic arch. What plan for further labour management should be recommended?
*a. Application of forceps minor
b. Episiotomy
c. Stimulation of labour activity by intravenous injection of oxytocin
d. Application of cavity forceps
e. Caesarean section

10. A 27-year-old sexually active female complains of numerous vesicles on the right sex lip, itch and burning. Eruptions regularly turn up before menstruation and disappear 8-10 days later. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bartholinitis
b. Cytomegalovirus infection
c. Genital condylomata
*d. Herpes simplex virus
e. Primary syphilis

11. A 36-year-old female pesented to a gynecological hospital with a significant bleeding from the genital tract and a 1-month delay of menstruation. Bimanual examination revealed soft barrel-shaped cervix. Uterus was of normal size, somewhat softened. Appendages were unremarkable on both sides. Speculum examination revealed that the cervix was cyanotic, enlarged, with the the external orifice disclosed up to 0,5 cm. Urine hCG test was positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Uterogestation
b. Threatened miscarriage
c. Ectopic pregnancy
*d. Cervical pregnancy
e. Abortion in progress

12. A 26-year-old woman complains of having bloody discharges from the genitals for the last 14 days, abdominal pain, general fatiguability, weakness, weight loss, body temperature rise, chest pain, obstructed respiration. 5 weeks ago she underwent induced abortion in the 6-7 week of gestation. Objectively: the patient is pale and inert. Bimanual examination revealed that the uterus was enlarges up to 8-9 weeks of gestation. In blood: Hb- 72 g/l. Urine test for chorionic gonadotropin gave the positive result. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chorioepithelioma
b. Uterus perforation
c. Uterine carcinoma
d. Uterine fibromyoma
e. Metroendometritis

13. A 28-year-old patient complains of discomfort, acute pain in the lower third of the left labia majora. The disease began suddenly after menstruation. Objectively: body temperature is 38°C. The left labia majora has a formation to 3 cm diameter, with hyperemic surface, extremely painful to the touch, with symptoms of fluctuation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertrophy of the labia
*b. Acute bartholinitis
c. Vulvar fibroid
d. Vulvar cancer
e. Bartholin gland cyst

14. A 28-years-old woman complains of nausea and vomiting about 10 times per day. She has been found to have body weight loss and xerodermia. The pulse is 100 bpm. Body temperature is 37,2°C. Diuresis is low. USI shows 5-6 weeks of pregnancy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Moderate vomiting of pregnancy
b. I degree preeclampsia
c. Food poisoning
d. Premature abortion
e. Mild vomiting of pregnancy

15. A 40 week pregnant secundipara is 28 years old. Contractions are very active. Retraction ring is at the level of navel, the uterus is hypertonic, in form of hourglass. On auscultation the fetal heart sounds are dull, heart rate is 100/min. AP of the parturient woman is 130/80 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. RIisk of hysterorrhexis
b. Disturbed labour
c. Attack of eclampsia
d. Complete hysterorrhexis
e. Mazolysis

16. After delivery and revision of placenta there was found the defect of placental lobule. General condition of woman is normal, uterus is firm, there is moderate bloody discharge. Speculum inspection of birth canal shows absence of lacerations and raptures. What action is nesessary?
a. Introduction of uterine contracting agents
b. External massage of uterus
*c. Manual exploration of the uterine cavity
d. Urine drainage, cold on the lower abdomen
e. Introduction of hemostatic medications

17. A 25 y.o. patient complains of body temperature rise up to 37°C, pain at the bottom of her abdomen and vaginal discharges. Three days ago, when she was in her 11th week of pregnancy, she had an artificial abortion. Objectibely: cervix of uterus is clean, uterus is a little bit enlarged in size, painful. Appendages cannot be determined. Fornixes are deep, painless. Vaginal discharges are sanguinopurulent. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pelvic peritonitis
b. Hematometra
*c. Postabortion endometritis
d. Postabortion uterus perforation
e. Parametritis

18. A 25 y.o. pregnant woman in her 34th week was taken to the maternity house in grave condition. She complains of headache, visual impairment, nausea. Objectively: solid edemata, AP- 170/130 mm Hg. Suddenly there appeared fibrillary tremor of face muscles, tonic and clonic convulsions, breathing came to a stop. After 1,5 minute the breathing recovered, there appeared some bloody spume from her mouth. In urine: protein - 3,5 g/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cerebral hemorrhage
b. Epilepsy
*c. Eclampsia
d. Cerebral edema
e. Stomach ulcer

19. A 51-year-old patient complains of having intensive bloody discharges from vagina for 15 days after delay of menstruation for 2,5 months. In anamnesis: disorders of menstrual function during a year, at the same time she felt extreme irritability and had sleep disorders. US examination results: uterus corresponds with age norms, appendages have no pecularities, endometrium is 14 mm thick. What is the doctors tactics?
a. Conservative treatment of bleeding
b. Supravaginal amputation of uterus without appendages
c. TORCH-infection test
*d. Diagnostic curettage of uterine cavity
e. Hysterectomy

20. An 18 y.o. patient complains of painfulness and swelling of mammary glands, headaches, irritability, edemata of lower extremities. These symptoms have been present since the begin of menarche, appear 3-4 days before regular menstruation. Gynecological examination revealed no pathology. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Renal disease
b. Neurasthenia
*c. Premenstrual syndrome
d. Mastopathy
e. Disease of cardiovascular system

21. A 22-year-old female patient complains of dull pain in her right iliac area that she has been experiencing for a week, morning sickness and gustatory change. She has a histrory of menstruation delay for 3 weeks. Objectively: AP- 80/50 mm Hg, pulse is 78 bpm, body temperature is 37°C. Bimanual examination reveals that uterus is enlarged, soft, mobile and painless. Uterine appendages are palpable on the right, there is a dense, elastic and moderately painful formation 3x4 cm large. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Right ovarian cyst
b. Interrupted fallopian pregnancy
*c. Progressing fallopian pregnancy
d. Uterogestation
e. Acute appendicitis

22. A 30 y.o. parturient woman was taken to the maternity house with complaints of having acute, regular labour pains that last 25-30 seconds every 1,5-2 minutes. Labour activity began 6 hours ago. Uterus is in higher tonus, head of the fetus is above the opening into the small pelvis. Fetal heartbeat is 136/min. P.V: cervical dilatation is 4 cm, uterine fauces is spasming at a height of parodynia. Head is level with opening into the small pelvis, it is being pushed off. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Primary powerless labour activity
b. Normal labour activity
c. Secondary powerless labour activity
d. Pathological preliminary period
*e. Discoordinated labour activity

23. A primigravida woman appealed to the antenatal clinic on the 22.03.03 with complaints of boring pain in the lower part of abdomen. Anamnesis registered that her last menstruation was on the 4.01.03. Bimanual examination revealed that uterine servix is intact, external fauces is closed, uterus is enlarged up to the 9-th week of pregnancy, movable, painless. What complication can be suspected?
a. Vesicular mole
b. -
c. Abortion that started in the 9-th week of pregnancy
d. Hysteromyoma
*e. Risk of abortion in the 9-th week of pregnancy

24. A 25-year-old female patient complains about having amenorrhea for 3 years. She associates it with difficult labour complicated by massive hemorrhage. She also complains of loss of weight, hair fragility and loss, lack of appetite and depression. Objective examination reveals no pathological changes of uterus and its appendages. What is the desease pathogenesis?
a. Hypoproduction of progesterone
b. Hyperproduction of prolactin
c. Hyperproduction of estrogens
d. Hyperproduction of androgens
*e. Hypoproduction of gonadotropin

25. A 30-year-old patient consulted a doctor about menstruation absence for 2 years after labour, loss of hair, body weight loss. The labour was complicated by a haemorrhage caused by uterus hypotonia. Objectively: the patient is asthenic, external genitals are hypoplastic, the uterus body is small and painless. The appendages are not palpaple. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Sheehans syndrome
b. Turners syndrome
c. Galactorrhea-amenorrhea syndrome
d. Exhausted overy syndrome
e. Ovarian amenorrhea

26. A 28-year-old patient has been admitted to the gynecological department three days after a casual coitus. She complains about pain in her lower abdomen and during urination, profuse purulent discharges from the vagina, body temperature rise up to 37,8°C. The patient was diagnosed with acute bilateral adnexitis. Supplemental examination revealed: the 4th degree of purity of the vaginal secretion, leukocytes within the whole visual field, diplococcal bacteria located both intra- and extracellularly. What is the etiology of acute adnexitis in this patient?
a. Colibacterial
b. Trichomonadal
c. Staphylococcal
*d. Gonorrheal
e. Chlamydial

27. A 25-year-old woman came to a maternity welfare clinic and complained about being unable to conceive within 3 years of regular sexual life. Examination revealed weight gain, male pattern of hair distribution on the pubis, excessive pilosis of thighs. Ovaries were dense and enlarged, basal temperature was monophase. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gonadal dysgenesis
*b. Sclerocystosis of ovaries
c. Adrenogenital syndrome
d. Tubo-ovaritis
e. Premenstrual syndrome

28. A 28 year old patient complained about prolongation of intermenstrual periods up to 2 months, hirsutism. Gynaecological examination revealed that the ovaries were enlarged, painless, compact, uterus had no pecularities. Pelvic ultrasound revealed that the ovaries were 4-5 cm in diameter and had multiple enlarged follicles on periphery. Roentgenography of skull base showed that sellar region was dilated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Morgagni-Stewart syndrome
*b. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
c. Sheehans syndrome
d. Algodismenorrhea
e. Premenstrual syndrome

29. A 32-year-old gravida complains of episodes of unconsciousness, spontaneous syncopes that are quickly over after a change of body position. A syncope can be accompanied by quickly elapsing bradycardia. There are no other complications of gestation. What is the most likely reason for such condition?
a. Psychosomatic disorders
*b. Postcava compresseion by the gravid uterus
c. Pressure fall in the veins of extremities
d. Pressure rise in the veins of extremities
e. Vegetative-vascular dystonia (cardiac type)

30. A woman consulted a therapeutist about fatigability, significant weight loss, weakness, loss of appetite. She has had amenorrhea for 8 months. A year ago she born a full-term child. Haemorrhage during labour made up 2 l. She got blood and blood substitute transfusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Vegetovascular dystonia
*b. Sheehans syndrome
c. Shereshevsky-Turners syndrome
d. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
e. Homological blood syndrome

31. A 54-year-old female patient consulted a gynaecologist about bloody discharges from the vagina for 1 month. Last menstruation was 5 years ago. Gynaecological examination revealed no pathological changes. What is the tactics of choice?
a. Colposcopy
b. Cytosmear
c. Symptomatic therapy
*d. Diagnostic fractional curettage of uterine cavity
e. USI

32. A 28-year-old female patient complains of having haemorrhage from the genital tracts for 1 month. 6 months ago she had natural delivery and gave birth to a girl weighing 3100 g. Objectively: the uterus is enlarged to 9-10 weeks, mobile, painless, of heterogenous consistency. Examination reveals vaginal cyanosis, anaemia and body temperature rise up to 37,8°C. There is a significant increase in hCG concentration in the urine. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Uterine chorionepithelioma
b. Hydatidiform mole
c. Uterine fibromyoma
d. Endometritis
e. Pregnancy

33. An ambulance delivered a 21-year-old woman to the gynaecological department with complaints of colicky abdominal pain and bloody discharges from the genital tracts. Bimanual examination revealed that uterus was soft, enlarged to the size of 6 weeks of gestation, a gestational sac was palpated in the cervical canal. Uterine appendages werent palpable. Fornices are free, deep and painless. Discharges from the genital tracts are bloody and profuse. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Incipient abortion
b. Interrupted fallopian pregnancy
c. Cervical pregnancy
d. Threat of abortion
*e. Abortion in progress

34. A 33 y.o. woman survived two operations on account of extrauterine pregnancy, both uterine tubes were removed. She consulted a doctor with a question about possibility of having a child. What can be advised in this case?
a. Insemination with her husbands semen
b. Artifical fertilization with donors semen
c. Induction of ovulation
*d. Extracorporal fertilization
e. Substitutional maternity

35. On the fifth day after a casual sexual contact a 25-year-old female patient consulted a doctor about purulent discharges from the genital tracts and itch. Vaginal examination showed that vaginal part of uterine cervix was hyperemic and edematic. There was an erosive area around the external orifice of uterus. There were mucopurulent profuse discharges from the cervical canal, uterine body and appendages exhibited no changes. Bacterioscopic examination revealed bean-shaped diplococci that became red after Grams staining. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Trichomonal colpitis
b. Clamydial endocervicitis
c. Bacterial vaginism
*d. Acute gonorrheal endocervicitis
e. Candidal vulvovaginitis

36. A 26 year old woman complains about edemata, swelling and painfulness of mammary glands, headache, tearfulness, irritability. These signs turn up 5 days before menstruation and disappear after its start. What clinical syndrome is it?
*a. Premenstrual syndrome
b. Adrenogenital syndrome
c. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
d. Climacteric syndrome
e. Postcastration syndrome

37. A 49-year-old woman complains about headache, head and neck going hot, increased perspiration, palpitation, arterial pressure rise up to 170/100 mm Hg, irritability, insomnia, tearfulness, memory impairment, rare and scarce menses, body weight increase by 5 kg over the last half a year. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Vegetative-vascular dystonia
b. Premenstrual syndrome
*c. Climacteric syndrome
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Postcastration syndrome

38. A 30-year-old female patient has been delivered to the gynaecological department with complaints of acute pain in the lower abdomen and body temperature 38,8°C. In history: sexual life out of wedlock and two artificial abortions. Gynaecological examination reveals no changes of uterine. The appendages are enlarged and painful on both sides. Vaginal discharges are purulent and profuse. What study is required to confirm a diagnosis?
*a. Bacteriological and bacterioscopic analysis
b. Curettage of uterine cavity
c. Laparoscopy
d. Colposcopy
e. Hysteroscopy

39. A parturient woman is 27 year old, it was her second labour, delivery was at term, normal course. On the 3rd day of postpartum period body temperature is 36,8°C, Ps - 72/min, AP - 120/80 mm Hg. Mammary glands are moderately swollen, nipples are clean. Abdomen is soft and painless. Fundus of uterus is 3 fingers below the umbilicus. Lochia are bloody, moderate. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lactostasis
*b. Physiological course of postpartum period
c. Postpartum metroendometritis
d. Subinvolution of uterus
e. Remnants of placental tissue after labour

40. A parturient woman is 25 years old, it is her second day of postpartum period. It was her first full-term uncomplicated labour. The lochia should be:
a. Serous
*b. Bloody
c. Mucous
d. Sanguino-serous
e. Purulent

41. A 32-year-old patient consulted a doctor about being inable to get pregnant for 5-6 years. 5 ago the primipregnancy ended in artificial abortion. After the vaginal examination and USI the patient was diagnosed with endometrioid cyst of the right ovary. What is the optimal treatment method?
a. Hormonal therapy with androgenic hormones
b. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
c. Anti-inflammatory therapy
d. Conservative therapy with estrogen-gestagenic drugs
*e. Surgical laparoscopy

42. A woman is 34 years old, it is her tenth labor at full term. It is known from the anamnesis that the labor started 11 hours ago, labor was active, painful contractions started after discharge of waters and became continuous. Suddenly the parturient got knife-like pain in the lower abdomen and labor activity stopped. Examination revealed positive symptoms of peritoneum irritation, ill-defined uterus outlines. Fetus was easily palpable, movable. Fetal heartbeats wasnt auscultable. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Uterine inertia
b. Risk of uterus rupture
c. II labor period
*d. Rupture of uterus
e. Discoordinated labor activity

43. Examination of placenta revealed a defect. An obstetrician performed manual investigation of uterine cavity, uterine massage. Prophylaxis of endometritis in the postpartum period should involve following actions:
a. Instrumental revision of uterine cavity
b. Contracting agents
c. Intrauterine instillation of dioxine
*d. Antibacterial therapy
e. Haemostatic therapy

44. A 10 week pregnant woman was admitted to a hospital for recurrent pain in the lower abdomen, bloody discharges from the genital tracts. The problems turned up after ARVI. The woman was registered for antenatal care. Speculum examination revealed cyanosis of vaginal mucosa, clean cervix, open cervical canal discharging blood and blood clots; the lower pole of the gestational sac was visible. What tactics should be chosen?
a. Expectant management, surveillance
b. Pregnancy maintenance therapy
*c. Curettage of the uterus
d. Hysterectomy
e. Antiviral therapy

45. A 30 year old patient complains about inability to become pregnant over 3 years of married life. The patient is of supernutrition type, she has hair along the median abdominal line, on the internal thigh surface and in the peripapillary area. Menses started at the age of 16, they are infrequent and non-profuse. US revealed that the uterus was of normal size, ovaries were 4х5х5 cm large and had a lot of cystic inclusions. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic oophoritis
b. Ovarian cystoma
*c. Polycystic ovaries
d. Menstrual irregularity
e. Bilateral ovarian tumours

46. A 29-year-old patient complains of absent menstruation for a year, milk discharge from the nipples when pressed, loss of lateral visual fields. X-ray shows an expansion of the sella turcica. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
*a. Pituitary tumour
b. Functional disorder of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian system
c. Pregnancy
d. Ovarian tumor
e. Mammary tumour

47. A patient with fibromyoma of uterus sized up to 8-9 weeks of pregnancy consulted a gynaecologist about acute pain in the lower abdomen. Examination revealed pronounced positive symptoms of peritoneal irritation, high leukocytosis. Vaginal examination revealed that the uterus was enlarged corresponding to 9 weeks of pregnancy due to the fibromatous nodes, one of which was mobile and extremely painful. Appendages were not palpable. There were moderate mucous discharges. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
*a. Urgent surgery (laparotomy)
b. Fractional diagnostic curettage of the uterine cavity
c. Surveillance and antibacterial therapy
d. Surgical laparoscopy
e. Surveillance and spasmolytic therapy

48. A pregnant woman was delivered to the gynecological unit with complaints of pain in the lower abdomen and insignificant bloody discharges from the genital tracts for 3 hours. Last menstruation was 3 months ago. Vaginal examination showed that body of womb was in the 10th week of gestation, a fingertip could be inserted into the external orifice of uterus, bloody discharges were insignificant. USI showed small vesicles in the uterine cavity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Incipient abortion
b. Abortion in progress
*c. Grape mole
d. Threat of spontaneous abortion
e. Incomplete abortion

49. A 49-year-old patient undergoes regular medical check-up for uterine fibromyoma. Within the last year the uterus has enlarged up to 20 weeks of gestation. What is the rational way of treatment?
a. Embolization of uterine arteries
b. Treatment with prostaglandin inhibitors
c. Hormonal therapy
d. Further surveillance
*e. Surgical treatment

50. A female patient complains of being unable to get pregnant for 5 years. A complete clinical examination brought the following results: hormonal function is not impaired, urogenital infection hasnt been found, on hysterosalpingography both tubes were filled with the contrast medium up to the isthmic segment, abdominal contrast was not visualized. The patients husband is healthy. What tactics will be most effective?
a. Hydrotubation
b. Laparoscopic tubal plasty
c. Insemination with husbands sperm
d. ICSI within in-vitro fertilization program
*e. In-vitro fertilization

51. A 19-year-old primiparous woman with a body weight of 54,5 kg gave birth at 38 weeks gestation to a full-term live girl after a normal vaginal delivery. The girls weight was 2180,0 g, body length - 48 cm. It is known from history that the woman has been a smoker for 8 years, and kept smoking during pregnancy. Pregnancy was complicated by moderate vomiting of pregnancy from 9 to 12 weeks pregnant, edemata of pregnancy from 32 to 38 weeks. What is the most likely cause of low birth weight?
a. First trimester preeclampsia
b. Third trimester preeclampsia
c. Low weight of the woman
d. Womans age
*e. Fetoplacental insufficiency

52. A primigravida is 22 years old. She has Rh(-), her husband has Rh(+). Antibodies to Rh werent found at 32 weeks of pregnancy. Redetermination of antibodies to Rh didnt reveal them at 35 weeks of pregnancy as well. How often should the antibodies be determined hereafter?
*a. Once a week
b. Once in three weeks
c. There is no need in further checks
d. Montly
e. Once in two weeks

53. A maternity house has admitted a primagravida complaining of irregular, intense labour pains that have been lasting for 36 hours. The woman is tired, failed to fall asleep at night. The fetus is in longitudinal lie, with cephalic presentation. The fetus heartbeat is clear and rhythmic, 145/min. Vaginal examination revealed that the uterine cervix was up to 3 cm long, dense, with retroflexion; the external orifice was closed; the discharges were of mucous nature. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Pathological preliminary period
b. Primary uterine inertia
c. Secondary uterine inertia
d. Physiological preliminary period
e. Uterine cervix dystocia

54. A 14-year-old girl complains of pain in vaginal area and lower abdomen that last for 3-4 days and have been observed for 3 months about the same time. Each time pain is getting worse. Objectively: mammary glands are developed, hairiness corresponds to the age. The virginal membrane is intact, cyanotic and protruded. She has never had menstruation. She has been diagnosed with primary amenorrhea. What is the reason of amenorrhea?
a. Turners syndrome
b. Pregnancy
c. Sexual development delay
*d. Hymen atresia
e. Babinski-Frohlich syndrome

55. A multigravida with Rh-isosensitization was found to have a decrease in anti-Rh titer from 1:32 to 1:8 at 33-34 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound revealed double contour of head, ebnlargement of fetal liver, placental thickness of 50 mm. The patient has indication for:
a. Plasmapheresis
b. Course of desensitizing therapy
*c. Premature delivery
d. Repeated (after 2 weeks) USI
e. Administration of anti-Rh gamma globulin

56. A 13-year-old girl was admitted to the gynecological department with heavy bleeding, which appeared after a long delay of menstruation. Shortly before, the girl suffered a serious psychotrauma. Her menarche occurred at the age of 11, she has a 30-day cycle with 5 to 6 days of moderate, painless bleeding. The patient is somatically healthy, of normosthenic constitution with height of 160 cm, weight of 42 kg. The patient is pale. Rectoabdominal examination revealed that the uterus was of normal size and consistency, anteflexio-versio, the appendages were not changed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Ovarian cyst
b. Girl is healthy
c. Amenorrhea
*d. Juvenile bleeding
e. Hysteromyoma

57. A 38-year-old female patient complains about hot flashes and feeling of intense heat arising up to 5 times a day, headaches in the occipital region along with high blood pressure, palpitations, dizziness, fatigue, irritability, memory impairment. 6 months ago the patient underwent extirpation of the uterus with its appendages. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Premenstrual syndrome
b. Secondary psychogenic amenorrhea
c. Physiological premenopause
*d. Post-castration syndrome
e. Early pathological menopause

58. A 27-year-old patient complains of irritability, tearfulness, depression, and sometimes aggressiveness, headache, nausea, vomiting, swelling of the mammary glands. The mentioned problems arise 5-6 days before menstruation and gradually progress until menstruation, 3 days after it the problems disappear. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Premature pathological climacterium
b. Preclimacterium syndrome
c. Algomenorrhea
*d. Premenstrual syndrome
e. Secondary psychogenic amenorrhea

59. A 23-year-old primigravida at 39 weeks gestation has been admitted to the maternity ward with irregular contractions. The intensity of uterine contractions is not changing, the intervals between them stay long. Bimanual examination reveals that the cervix is centered, soft, up to 1,5 cm long. There is no cervical dilatation. What diagnosis should be made?
a. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, birth I, 1 period, the acceleration phase
b. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, pathological preliminary period
c. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, labor I, 1 period, the latent phase
d. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, labor I, period 1, the active phase
*e. Pregnancy I, 39 weeks, preliminary period

60. 20 minutes after a normal delivery at 39 weeks a puerpera had a single temperature rise up to 38°C. Objectively: the uterus is dense, located between the navel and the pubis, painless. Lochia are bloody, of small amount. Breasts are moderately soft and painless. What is the optimal tactics?
a. Appointment antipyretic
b. Antibiotic therapy
*c. Further follow-up
d. Manual examination of the uterine cavity
e. Expression of breast

61. On the 10th day postpartum a puerperant woman complains of pain and heaviness in the left breast. Body temperature is 38,8°C, Ps - 94 bpm. The left breast is edematic, the supero-external quadrant of skin is hyperemic. Fluctuation symptom is absent. The nipples discharge drops of milk when pressed. What is a doctors further tactics?
*a. Antibiotic therapy, immobilization and expression of breast milk
b. Inhibition of lactation
c. Opening of the abscess and drainage of the breast
d. Physiotherapy
e. Compress to both breasts

62. On the 10th day postpartum a puerperant woman complains of pain and heaviness in the left mammary gland. Body temperature is 38,8°C, Ps- 94 bpm. The left mammary gland is edematic, the supero-external quadrant of skin is hyperemic. Fluctuation symptom is absent. The nipples discharge drops of milk when pressed. What is a doctors further tactics?
a. Inhibition of lactation
b. Compress to both mammary glands
*c. Antibiotic therapy, immobilization and expression of breast milk
d. Physiotherapy
e. Opening of the abscess and drainage of the mammary gland

63. A 30-year-old female patient complains of milk discharge from the mammary glands, 5-month absence of menstruation. She had one physiological labour four years ago. Objectively: mammary glands are normally developed. Bimanual examination reveals that the uterus is decreased in size, the ovaries are of normal size. MRI-scan shows no cerebral pathologies. Concentration of thyroid-stimulating hormone is normal. The serum prolactin level is increased. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypothyroidism
b. Pituitary adenoma
c. Sheehan syndrome
*d. Hyperprolactinemia
e. Polycystic ovary syndrome

64. During self-examination a 22-year-old patient revealed a mammary tumour. Palpation revealed a firm, painless, mobile formation up to 2 cm, peripheral lymph nodes were not changed. USI results: in the superior external quadrant of the right mammary gland there was a big formation of increased echogenicity, sized 18x17 mm. The patient was provisionally diagnosed with fibroadenoma. What is a doctors further tactics?
a. Nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs, oral contraceptives
*b. Surgical removal of the tumour prior to pregnancy
c. Surgical treatment after pregnancy
d. Dynamic follow-up
e. Radical mastectomy

65. A 25-year-old female has a self-detected tumor in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast. On palpation there is a painless, firm, mobile lump up to 2 cm in diameter, peripheral lymph nodes are not changed. In the upper outer quadrant of the right breast ultrasound revealed a massive neoplasm with increased echogenicity sized 21x18 mm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mammary cancer
b. Mastitis
c. Lactocele
d. Diffuse mastopathy
*e. Fibroadenoma

66. A 49-year-old female patient complains of itching, burning in the external genitals, frequent urination. The symptoms have been present for the last 7 months. The patient has irregular menstruation, once every 3-4 months. Over the last two years she has had hot flashes, sweating, sleep disturbance. Examination revealed no pathological changes of the internal reproductive organs. Complete blood count and urinalysis showed no pathological changes. Vaginal smear contained 20-25 leukocytes per HPF, mixed flora. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Menopausal syndrome
b. Trichomonas colpitis
c. Bacterial vaginosis
d. Vulvitis
e. Cystitis

67. 2 weeks after labour a parturient woman developed breast pain being observed for 3 days. Examination revealed body temperature at the rate of 39°C, chills, weakness, hyperaemia, enlargement, pain and deformity of the mammary gland. On palpation the infiltrate was found to have an area of softening and fluctuation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mastopathy
*b. Infiltrative-purulent mastitis
c. Lactostasis
d. Phlegmonous mastitis
e. Serous mastitis

68. Preventive examination of a 50-year-old woman revealed a dense tumour of the right mammary gland up to 5 cm in diameter without distinct outlines. The skin over the tumour looked like lemon peel. Palpation revealed a lymph node in the axillary region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lactocele
b. Mastitis
c. Breast lipoma
*d. Breast cancer
e. Diffuse mastopathy

69. A 20-year-old female consulted a gynecologist about not having menstrual period for 7 months. History abstracts: early childhood infections and frequent tonsillitis, menarche since 13 years, regular monthly menstrual cycle of 28 days, painless menstruation lasts 5-6 days. 7 months ago the patient had an emotional stress. Gynecological examination revealed no alterations in the uterus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Secondary amenorrhea
b. Algomenorrhea
c. Cryptomenorrhea
d. Spanomenorrhea
e. Primary amenorrhea

70. A 48-year-old female has been admitted to the gynecology department for pain in the lower right abdomen and low back pain, constipations. Bimanual examination findings: the uterus is immobile, the size of a 10-week pregnancy, has uneven surface. Aspirate from the uterine cavity contains atypical cells. What diagnosis can be made?
a. Cervical cancer
b. Colon cancer
c. Chorionepithelioma
*d. Hysterocarcinoma
e. Metrofibroma

