1. A 4 y.o. boy was admitted to the hospital with complaints of dyspnea, rapid fatigability. His anamnesis registers frequent respiratory diseases. On percussion: heart borders are dilatated to the left and upwards. On auscultation: amplification of the SII above pulmonary artery, a harsh systolodyastolic "machine" murmur is auscultated between the II and the III rib to the left of breast bone, this murmur is conducted to all other points including back. AP is 100/20 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Isolated stenosis of pulmonary arterial orifice
b. Interventricular septal defect
*c. Opened arterial duct
d. Interatrial septal defect
e. Valvar aortic stenosis

2. A 12 year old girl complains about abrupt weakness, nausea, dizziness, vision impairment. The day before she ate home-made stockfish, beef. Examination revealed skin pallor, a scratch on the left knee, dryness of mucous membranes of oral pharynx, bilateral ptosis, mydriatic pupils. The girl is unable to read a simple text (mist over the eyes). What therapy would be the most adequate in this case?
a. Parenteral disintoxication
b. Gastric lavage
c. Parenteral introduction of antitetanus serum
*d. Parenteral introduction of polyvalent antibotulinic serum
e. Parenteral introduction of antibiotics

3. A child from the first non-complicated pregnancy but complicated labor had cephalhematoma. On the second day there developed jaundice. On the 3th day appeared changes of neurologic status: nystagmus, Graefes sign. Urea is yellow, feces- golden-yellow. Mothers blood group is А(II)Rh-, child- А(II)Rh+. On the third day childs Hb- 200 g/L, RBC- 6,1×1012/L, bilirubin in blood - 58 mk mol/L due to unconjugated bilirubin, Ht- 0,57. What is the childs jaundice explanation?
a. Physiologic jaundice
b. Bile ducts atresia
c. Fetal hepatitis
*d. Brain delivery trauma
e. Hemolytic disease of newborn

4. A full-term baby (the 1st uncomplicated pregnancy, difficult labour) had a cephalogematoma. On the 2nd day there was jaundice, on the third the following changes in neurological status appeared: nystagmus, Graefe syndrome. Urine was yellow, feces were of golden-yellow colour. Mothers blood group is A(II)Rh-, the babys one - A(II)Rh+. On the third day the childs Hb was 200g/l, RBCs - 6,1×1012/l, blood bilirubin - 58 micromole/l at the expense of unbound fraction. What caused the jaundice in the child?
a. Physiological jaundice
b. Biliary atresia
c. Fetal hepatitis
*d. Craniocerebral birth trauma
e. Neonatal anaemia

5. After birth a child was pale and had arrhythmical breathing. Oxygen therapy didnt have any effect. Pulse was weak and rapid. It was difficult to measure arterial pressure accurately. There were no edemata. What is the most likely reason for these symptoms?
a. Intrauterine sepsis
b. Congenital pneumonia
c. Congestive heart failure
d. Intracranial haematoma
*e. Asphyxia

6. A child was delivered severely premature. After the birth the child has RI symptoms, anasarca, fine bubbling moist rales over the lower lobe of the right lung. Multiple skin extravasations, bloody foam from the mouth have occured after the 2 day. On chest X-ray: atelectasis of the lower lobe of the right lung. In blood: Hb-100 g/L, Ht- 0,45. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Disseminated intravascular clotting syndrome
b. Hyaline membrane disease
c. Congenital pneumonia
*d. Edematous-hemorrhagic syndrome
e. Pulmonary edema

7. An infant is 2 days old. He was born full-term with signs of intrauterine infection, and therefore receives antibiotics. Neonates should be given antibiotics at longer intervals and lower doses compared to older children and adults because:
a. Neonates have a decreased blood pH
b. Neonates have higher hematocrit
c. Neonates have lower concentration of protein and albumin in blood
d. Neonates have a reduced activity of glucuronyl transferase
*e. Neonates have lower glomerular filtration

8. An infant is 2 d.o. It was full-term born with signs of intrauterine infection, thats why it was prescribed antibiotics. Specify, why the gap between antibiotic introductions to the new-born children is longer and dosage is smaller compared to the older children and adults?
a. The newborns have diminished blood pH
b. The newborns have bigger hematocrit
c. The newborns have lower concentration of protein and albumins in blood
d. The newborns have reduced activity of glucuronil transferase
*e. The newborns have a lower level of glomerular filtration

9. A 10-year-old child is sick with chronic viral hepatitis B with marked activity of the process. Total bilirubin – 70 mumol/L, direct - 26mumol/L, indirect – 44 mumol/L. АSТ - 6,2 mmol/L, АLТ - 4,8 mmol/L. What mechanism underlies the transaminase level increase of this patient?
a. Failure of bilirubin conjugation
*b. Cytolysis of hepatocytes
c. Hypersplenism
d. Failure of the synthetical function of the liver
e. Intrahepatic cholestasis

10. A 12-year-old girl applied to doctor with complaints of swelling on the front part of the neck. The doctor diagnosed hyperplasia of the thyroid gland of the second degree, euthyroidism. Ultrasound suspected autoimmune thyroiditis. Blood was taken for titre of antibodies to thyroglobulin. What titre of antibodies will be diagnostically important?
a. 1:150
b. 1:50
*c. 1:100
d. 1:200
e. 1:250

11. A 14-year-old girl has been presenting with irritability and tearfulness for about a year. A year ago she was also found to have diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland (II grade). This condition was regarded as a pubertal manifestation, the girl didnt undergo any treatment. The girls irritability gradually gave place to a complete apathy. The girl got puffy face, soft tissues pastosity, bradycardia, constipations. Skin pallor and gland density progressed, the skin became of a waxen hue. What disease may be suspected?
a. Diffuse toxic goiter
b. Subacute thyroiditis
c. Juvenile basophilism
*d. Autoimmune thyroiditis
e. Thyroid carcinoma

12. In the anamnesis of a 2-year-old girl there are recurrent pneumonias with signs of obstruction. There are heterogeneous moist and dry rales, respiration is weakened. Dense, viscous secretion is difficult to hawk. There are "drumsticks", physical retardation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Recidivating bronchitis
*c. Mucoviscidosis, pulmonary form
d. Congenital pulmonary polycystosis
e. Pulmonary tuberculosis

13. On the 3rd day of life a baby presented with haemorrhagic rash, bloody vomit, black stool. Examination revealed anaemia, extended coagulation time, hypoprothrombinemia, normal thrombocyte rate. What is the optimal therapeutic tactics?
a. Sodium ethamsylate
b. Fibrinogen
c. Calcium gluconate
*d. Vitamin K
e. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid

14. A 2 month old full-term child was born with weight 3500 g and was on the mixed feeding. Current weight is 4900 g. Evaluate the current weight of the child:
a. Hypotrophy of the II grade
b. Paratrophy of the I grade
c. 150 g less than necessary
d. Hypotrophy of the I grade
*e. Corresponding to the age

15. A 2 m.o. breast-fed child suffers from cheek skin hyperemia, sporadic papulous elements on the skin of the chest and back following the apple juice introduction. The child is restless. What is the initial pediatritians tactics?
a. Treat with claritine
b. Apply ointment with corticosteroids to affected skin areas
c. Refer to prescribe dermathologist
d. Administer general ultraviolet irradiation
*e. Clarify mothers diet and exlude obligate allergens

16. A 5 month old boy was born prematurely, he didnt suffer from any disease at the infant age and later on. Examination at an outpatients hospital revealed paleness of skin, sleepiness. Blood count: Hb - 95 g/l, erythrocytes - 3,5×1012/l, reticulocytes – 9 o/oo, colour index - 0,7, osmotic stability of erythrocytes - 0,44-0,33%, serum iron - 4,9 micromole/l. What is the most probable cause of anemia?
a. B12 deficit
*b. Iron deficit
c. Infectious process
d. Hemogenesis immaturity
e. Erythrocyte hemolysis

17. A 7 y.o. child had elevation of temperature tol 40°C in anamnesis. For the last 3 months he presents fusiform swelling of fingers, ankle joints and knee joint, pain in the upper part of the sternum and cervical part of the spinal column. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Juvenile rheumatic arthritis
b. Toxic synovitis
c. Osteoarthrits
d. Septic arthritis
e. Rheumatism

18. An 8 year old girl complains about joint pain, temperature rise up to 38°C, dyspnea. Objectively: the left cardiac border is deviated by 2,5 cm to the left, tachycardia, systolic murmur on the apex and in the V point are present. Blood count: leukocytes – 20×109/l, ESR - 18 mm/h. What sign gives the most substantial proof for rheumatism diagnosis?
a. Leukocytosis
b. Arthralgia
*c. Carditis
d. Fever
e. Accelerated ESR

19. A 5 y.o. child with stigmas of dysembryogenesis (small chin, thick lips, opened mouth, hyperthelorismus) has systolic murmur in the second intercostal to the right of the sternum. The murmur passes to the neck and along the sternum left edge. The pulse on the left brachial artery is weakened. BP on the right arm is 110/60 mm Hg, on the left - 100/60 mm Hg. ECG results: hypertrophy of the right ventricle. What defect is the most probable?
a. Defect of interventricular septum
b. Coarctation of the aorta
c. Open aortic duct
*d. Aortic stenosis
e. Defect of interatrial septum

20. A 1,5-year-old child fell ill acutely with high temperature 38°C, headache, fatigue. The temperature declined on the fifth day, muscular pain in the right leg occured in the morning, there were no movements and tendon reflexes, sensitivity was reserved. What is the initial diagnosis?
a. Viral encephilitis
b. Osteomyelitis
c. Hip joint arthritis
*d. Polyomyelitis
e. Polyartropathy

21. A 3-year-old child has been delivered to a hospital in soporose state with considerable amyotonia, inhibition of tendon and periosteal reflexes. Miosis and asthenocoria are also present. Corneal reflexes are preserved. Pulse is rapid and weak. AP- 80/50 mm Hg. The parents suspect the child of accidental taking some tablets. Such clinical presentations are typical for intoxication with the following tableted drugs:
a. Antihypertensive drugs
b. Antropine drugs
*c. Tranquilizers
d. Barbiturates
e. Beta-2-adrenoceptor agonists

22. A 2 m.o. child with birth weight 5100 g has jaundice, hoarse cry, umbilical hernia, physical development lag. Liver is +2 cm enlarged, spleen is not enlarged. In anamnesis: delayed falling-away of umbilical cord rest. In blood: Hb- 120 g/L, erythrocytes - 4,5×1012/L, ESR- 3 mm/h. Whole serum bilirubin is 28 mcmole/L, indirect - 20 mcmole/L, direct - 8 mcmole/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Cytomegalovirus infection
*b. Congenital hypothyreosis
c. Hemolitic anemia
d. Congenital hepatitis
e. Conjugated jaundice

23. A 5-year-old child developed an acute disease starting from body temperature rise up to 38,5°C, running nose, cough and conjunctivitis. On the 4th day the child presented with maculo-papular rash on face. Body temparature rose again up to 39,2°C. Over the next few days the rash spread over the whole body and extremities. Mucous membrane of palate was hyperemic, there was whitish deposition on cheek mucous membrane next to molars. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Rubella
*b. Measles
c. Yersinia
d. Acute viral respiratory infection
e. Enterovirus diseases

24. A 3 year old child fell acutely ill, body temperature rose up to 39,5°C, the child became inert, there appeared recurrent vomiting, headache. Examination revealed positive meningeal symptoms, after this lumbal puncture was performed. Spinal fluid is turbid, runs out under pressure, protein concentration is 1,8 g/l; Pandy reaction is +++, sugar concentration is 2,2 millimole/l, chloride concentration - 123 millimole/l, cytosis is 2,35×109 (80% of neutrophils, 20% of lymphocytes). What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Serous tuberculous meningitis
b. Serous viral meningitis
*c. Purulent meningitis
d. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
e. Brain tumour

25. A 13 y.o. girl complains of having temperature rises up to febrile figures for a month, joint ache, periodical skin rash. Examination revealed steady enhancing of ESR, LE-cells. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Systematic scleroderma
b. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
*c. Systematic lupus erythematosus
d. Acute lymphoblast leukosis
e. Rheumatics

26. A child is 1 year old. Ater the recent introduction of complementary feeding the child has presented with loss of appetite, diarrhea with large amounts of feces and occasional vomiting, body temperature is normal. Objectively: body weight is 7 kg, the child is very pale, there are edemata of both legs, abdomen is significantly enlarged. Coprogram shows many fatty acids and soaps. The child has been diagnosed with celiac disease and administered the gluten-free diet. What is to be excluded from the ration?
a. Animal protein
b. High digestible carbohydrates
c. Milk and dairy products
d. Fruit
*e. Cereals - wheat and oats

27. A 7-year-old child was brought to a doctor for a check. The child has a 4-year history of bronchial asthma, asthma attacks occur mainly in spring and summer. Allergy tests revealed hypersensitivity to poplar seed tufts, field herbs. What recommendation should be given?
a. Needle reflexotherapy
*b. Specific hyposensitization
c. Treatment at a health resort
d. Physiotherapy
e. Phytotherapy

28. A 9-month-old child presents with fever, cough, dyspnea. The symptoms appeared 5 days ago after a contact with a person having ARVI. Objectively: the child is in grave condition. Temperature of 38°C, cyanosis of nasolabial triangle is present. RR- 54/min, nasal flaring while breathing. There was percussion dullness on the right below the scapula angle, and tympanic sound over the rest of lungs. Auscultation revealed bilateral fine moist rales predominating on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. ARVI
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Acute bronchiolitis
*d. Acute pneumonia
e. Acute laryngotracheitis

29. An 8 y.o. boy complains of constant cough along with discharge of greenish sputum, dyspnea during physical activities. At the age of 1 year and 8 months he fell ill for the first time with bilateral pneumonia that had protracted course. Later on there were recurrences of the disease 5-6 times a year, during the remission periods there was constant productive cough. What examination results will be the most important for making a final diagnosis?
a. Roentgenography of thorax organs
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Spirography
*d. Bronchography
e. Bacterial inoculation of sputum

30. A mother of a 5 y.o. girl consulted a doctor about doughters involuntary urination at night, nightmares, sleep disorders, slow gaining of body weight. Objectively: malnutrition, intellectual development is good, the girl can read and explains common situations quite adultly. Her skin is very pale, liver is enlarged in size. Her mother suffers from holetithiasis. What type of diathesis is the most probable in the childs case?
a. Allergic diathesis
b. Lymphohypoplastic diathesis
c. Urine acid diathesis
d. Exudative diathesis
*e. Gouty diathesis

31. A 10 year old girl complains about abdominal pain that is arising and getting worse after eating rough or spicy food. She complains also about sour eructation, heartburn, frequent constipations, headache, irritability. She has been suffering from this for 12 months. Objectively: the girls diet is adequate. Tongue is moist with white deposit at the root. Abdomen is soft, painful in its epigastric part. What study method will help to make a diagnosis?
a. Biochemical blood analysis
*b. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
c. Fractional examination of gastric juice
d. Intragastral pH-metry
e. Contrast roentgenoscopy

32. A 40 h.o. child age has hyperosthesia, CNS depression, dyspepsia. Sepsis is suspected. What should the differential diagnosis be made with?
a. Hyperkaliemia
b. Hypomagnesemia
c. Hypocalcemia
d. Hyperbilirubinemia
*e. Hypoglycemia

33. Examination of a full-term 6-day-old infant revealed that different areas of skin had erythemas, flaccid bubbles, eroded surface, cracks, peeling of the epidermis looking like being scalded with boiling water. There was positive Nikolskys symptom. General condition of the child was serious. The child was restless, hypersensitive, febrile. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Ritters exfoliative dermatitis
b. Fingers pseudofurunculosis
c. Epidermolysis
d. Neonatal pemphigus
e. Neonatal phlegmon

34. A 1,5 y.o. child fell seriously ill: chill, body temperature rise up to 40,1°C, then rapid dropping to 36,2°C, skin is covered with voluminous hemorrhagic rash and purple cyanotic spots. Extremities are cold, face features are sharpened. Diagnosis: meningococcosis, fulminant form, infection-toxic shock. What antibiotic must be used at the pre-admission stage?
a. Sulfamonometoxin
*b. Soluble Levomycetine succinate
c. Lincomycin
d. Penicillin
e. Gentamycin

35. A 10 year old boy suffers from chronic viral hepatitis type B with maximal activity. What laboratory test can give the most precise characteristic of cytolysis degree?
a. Prothrombin test
b. Test for whole protein
c. Weltmans coagulation test
d. Takata-Ara test
*e. Transaminase test

36. A 6 y.o child complains of thirst, polyuria, increased appetite for 2 months with weight loss for 3 kg. There has been nocturnal enuresis during last week. On examination: hyperglycemia 14 mol/L. The diagnosis is diabetis mellitus I type. What is the genesis of this disease?
a. Virus-bacterial
*b. Autoimmune
c. Bacterial
d. Viral
e. Neurogenic

37. A 10 y.o. child who is at oligoanuretic stage of acute renal insufficiency has got sensations of pricking in the mucous membrane of oral cavity and tongue, extremities numbness, reduced reflexes, respiratory disturbance, arrhythmia. What are these symptoms caused by?
a. Hyperazotemia
b. Hyponatremia
*c. Hyperkaliemia
d. Acidosis
e. Alkalosis

38. Examination of a 12 year old child revealed diffuse thyroid enlargement of the II degree. Heart auscultation revealed dullness of heart sounds, heart rate was 64/min. The child has frequent constipations, anemia. Concentration of thyreoglobulin antibodies is increased. What disease might have caused such symptoms?
a. Diffuse toxic goiter
b. Thyroid hyperplasia
c. Endemic goiter
*d. Autoimmune thyroiditis
e. Thyroid carcinoma

39. An 8-year-old girl has been admitted to the cardiology department. Objectively: there is a skin lesion over the extensor surfaces of joints with atrophic cicatrices, depigmentation, symmetrical affection of skeletal muscles (weakness, edema, hypotrophy). What disease are these changes most typical for?
a. Nodular periarteritis
b. Systemic scleroderma
*c. Dermatomyositis
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Reiters disease

40. An 8-year-old child with a 3-year history of diabetes was hospitalized in hyperglycemic coma. Specify the initial dose of insulin to be administered:
a. 0,05 U/kg of body weight per hour
b. 0,3-0,4 U/kg of body weight per hour
c. 0,4-0,5 U/kg of body weight per hour
*d. 0,1-0,2 U/kg of body weight per hour
e. 0,2-0,3 U/kg of body weight per hour

41. A 12-year-old girl undergoes regular gastroenterological check-ups for duodenal ulcer, biliary dyskinesia. What is the recommended frequency of anti-relapse treatment?
a. Three times a year
*b. Twice a year
c. Every 3 months
d. Every two months
e. Once a year

42. A 13 y.o. teenager who suffers from hemophilia A was taken to the hospital after a fight at school. His diagnosis is right-sided hemarthros of knee joint, retroperitoneal hematoma. What should be primarily prescribed?
*a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Washed thrombocytes
c. Dry plasma
d. Placental albumin
e. Aminocapronic acid

43. A 3 m.o. child fell seriously ill, body temperature rised up to 37,8°C, there is semicough. On the 3-rd day the cough grew worse, dyspnea appeared. On percussion: tympanic sound above lungs, on auscultation: a lot of fine moist and wheezing rales during expiration. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchopneumonia
b. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis with asthmatic component
c. Acute respiratory viral infection, focal pneumonia
*d. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchiolitis
e. Acute respiratory viral infection, bronchitis

44. On the 1st day of life a full-term girl (2nd labour) weighing 3500g, with Apgar score of 8 points, presented with jaundice. Indirect bilirubin of blood - was 80 micromole/l, 6 hours later - 160 micromole/l. What is the optimal method of treatment?
a. Phototherapy
b. Phenobarbital treatment
c. Enterosorbents
*d. Exchange blood transfusion
e. Infusion therapy

45. A child was born at a gestational age of 34 weeks in grave condition. The leading symptoms were respiratory distress symptoms, namely sonorous and prolonged expiration, involving additional muscles into respiratory process. The Silverman score at birth was 0 points, in 3 hours it was 3 points with clinical findings. Which diagnostic study will allow to diagnose the form of pneumopathy?
a. Immunoassay
*b. X-ray of chest
c. Determination of blood gas composition
d. Clinical blood test
e. Proteinogram

46. A 10-year-old girl consulted a doctor about thirst, frequent urination, weight loss. She has been observing these symptoms for about a month. Objectively: no pathology of internal organs was revealed. What laboratory analysis should be carried out in the first place?
*a. Blood glucose analysis on an empty stomach
b. Acetone in urine test
c. Glucosuric profile
d. Glucose tolerance test
e. Glucose in urine test on the base of daily diuresis

47. A 6-year-old child complains of frequent liquid stool and vomiting. On the 2nd day of desease the child presented with inertness, temperature rise up to 38,2°C, Ps- 150 bpm, scaphoid abdomen, palpatory painful sigmoid colon, defecation 10 times a day with liquid, scarce stool with mucus and streaks of green. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Yersiniosis
*b. Shigellosis
c. Escherichiosis
d. Salmonellosis
e. Intestinal amebiasis

48. A 4-year-old boy had untimely vaccination. He complains of painful swallowing, headache, inertness, fever. Objectively: the child is pale, has enlarged anterior cervical lymph nodes, swollen tonsils with cyanotic hyperemia, tonsils are covered with gray-white pellicles which cannot be easily removed. When the pellicles are forcibly removed, the tonsils bleed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Follicular tonsillitis
*b. Oropharyngeal diphtheria
c. Pseudomembranous tonsillitis
d. Lacunar tonsillitis
e. Infectious mononucleosis

49. After a 10-year-old child had been bitten by a bee, he was delivered to a hospital. There were lip, face and neck edemata. The patient felt hot and short of breath. Objectively: breathing was laboured and noisy. There were foamy discharges from the mouth, cough. The skin was pale and cold. There was bradypnoea. Heart sounds were muffled and arrhythmic. Thready pulse was present. What diagnosis was made by the expert in resuscitation?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Bronchial asthma
c. Cerebral coma
d. Acute cardiovascular collapse
e. Quinckes edema

50. A 13-year-old girl complains of fever up to 37,4°C during the last 2 months after recovering from ARVI. Objectively: malnutrition, diffuse grade II enlargement of the thyroid gland feeling dense on palpation, exophthalmos, tachycardia. What kind of pathological syndrome is it?
*a. Thyrotoxicosis
b. Hypoparathyroidism
c. Thymomegaly
d. Hyperparathyroidism
e. Hypothyroidism

51. A 3-year-old girl presents with pertussis-like cough with thick sputum. There have been persistent changes in lungs since the age of 6 months when she was first diagnosed with acute pneumonia. Chloride concentration in the perspiration is 112 mEq/l. The child has been diagnosed with mucoviscidosis. What is the basis for autosomal recessive disease - mucoviscidosis?
a. Pulmonary cysts
b. Pulmonary artery hypoplasia
c. ?1-antitrypsin deficiency
d. Deposition of calcium triphosphates and carbotates in the alveoles
*e. Inadequate transport of sodium and chloride ions

52. A newborn has purulent discharges from the umbilical wound, the skin around the navel is swollen. The babys skin is pale, with a yellow-gray tint, generalized hemorrhagic rash is present. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Thrombocytopathy
b. Omphalitis
c. Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn
d. Hemolytic disease of the newborn
*e. Sepsis

53. From urine of a 14-year-old boy with the exacerbation of secondary obstructive pyelonephritis Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated with a titer of 1000000 microbes per 1 ml. Which antibiotic is most advisable to be administered in this case?
a. Cefazolinum
b. Ampicillin
*c. Ciprofloxacin
d. Azithromycin
e. Chloramphenicol

54. A 14-year-old boy with a history of chronic tonsillitis and sinusitis has developed a feeling of heart irregularities and additional pulse. HR- 83/min. ECG results: regular impulses with no visible P wave that occur every two sinus contractions, QRS complex is dramatically deformed and prolonged to over 0,11 s, T wave is discordant followed by a complete compensatory pause. Specify the arrhythmia type:
*a. Trigeminal extrasystole
b. Partial AV-blockade
c. Left bundle branch block
d. Complete AV-block
e. Bigeminal extrasystole

55. An 8-year-old girl periodically has sudden short-term heart pain, sensation of chest compression, epigastric pain, dizziness, vomiting. Objectively: the patient is pale, respiratory rate - 40/min, jugular pulse is present. Ps- 185 bpm, of poor volume. AP- 75/40 mm Hg. ECG taken during an attack shows ectopic P waves, QRS wave is not deformed. At the end of an attack a compensatory pause is observed. The most likely cause of the attack is:
a. Sinus tachycardia
b. Complete AV-block
c. Atrial fibrillation
*d. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
e. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia

56. A 10-year-old child with a history of nonrheumatic carditis has periodic attacks manifested by heart pain, dyspnea, pallor, high blood pressure, a dramatic increase in heart rate up to 180/min. What drug would be most effective to treat this patient?
a. Lidocaine
b. Procainamide
*c. Obsidan
d. Verapamil
e. Ajmaline

57. A 1-month-old child became restless and presented with an increase in head sweating. Its known from the history that the child has been fed with cows milk since birth (September 5). Examination revealed craniotabes. A doctor administered a course of UV radiation. Decide, if the child needs ergocalciferol:
a. In combination with UVR
b. Does not need
*c. 2-2,5 months after the UVR withdrowal
d. Immediately after the UVR withdrowal
e. A month after the UVR withdrowal

58. 15 minutes after the second vaccination with DTP vaccine a 4-month-old boy exhibited the symptoms of Quinckes edema. What medication should be given for emergency aid?
a. Heparin
b. Furosemide
c. Seduxen
*d. Prednisolone
e. Adrenalin

59. A baby is 3 months old. The mother consulted a pediatrician about lack of breast milk. After several test weighings it was found that the child had to receive supplementary feeding. What is the optimal milk formula for this child?
a. Milk formula № 3
b. Milk formula № 2
*c. Malysh
d. Whole cows milk
e. Malutka

60. Examination of a newborn revealed skin redness that appeared immediately after birth and reached the maximum intensity on the second day of life. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Transient erythema
b. Toxic erythema
*c. Simple erythema
d. Erythema nodosum
e. Annular erythema

61. A child is 2 days old. He was born with a weight of 2900 kg, body length of 50 cm. On examination the skin is intensely red, elastic, with preserved turgor. Puerile respiration is present. Respiration rate - 40/min, cardiac sounds are rhythmic, sonorous. HR- 138/min. The abdomen is soft. The liver extends 2 cm below the costal margin. Diuresis is sufficient. Stool is in form of meconium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Physiological erythema of the newborn
b. Neonatal phlegmon
c. Exfoliative Ritters dermatitis
d. Erysipelas
e. Toxic erythema of the newborn

62. A full-term baby was born with body weight of 3200 g, body length of 50 cm, Apgar score - 8-10 points. What is the optimum time for the first breast-feeding?
a. First 6 hours
b. First 48 hours
c. After 48 hours
*d. First 30 minutes
e. First 24 hours

63. A 3-year-old child has been taken to a pediatrician. He has no recent history of any diseases. Objective examination revealed no pathology of the internal organs. The child needs the routine immunization against the following disease:
a. Type B hepatitis
*b. Poliomyelitis
c. Measles, rubella, parotitis
d. Diphtheria and tetanus
e. Pertussis

64. An 11-year-old girl has been immunized according to her age and in compliance with the calendar dates. What vaccinations should the children receive at this age?
a. Pertussis
*b. Diphtheria and tetanus
c. Polio
d. TB
e. Hepatitis B

65. A 6-year-old child has duodenal ulcer. What antibacterial drug should be co-administered together with metronidazole and De-Nol in order to eradicate Helicobacter pylori infection?
a. Sulfadimethoxinum
*b. Amoxicillin
c. Oleandomycin
d. Tetracycline
e. Biseptol

66. A baby born after fast labour has palsy of hand muscles. Grasp reflex is absent, as well as hand-to-mouth reflex. Hand sensitivity is absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Dejerine-Klumpke palsy
b. Total lesion of the brachial plexus
c. Bernard-Horner syndrome
d. Muscle paresis
e. Duchenne-Erbs palsy

67. A child is 12 years old. He complains of a dull aching pain in the epigastrium and right hypochondrium, that is getting worse after taking fatty or fried food, headache, weakness, nausea, low-grade fever. Abdominal palpation reveals a marked resistance of muscles in the right hypochondrium, positive Kerrs, Ortners, Murphys symptoms. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic cholecystitis
b. Viral hepatitis
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Acute gastritis
e. Acute appendicitis

68. A 3-month-old girl presents with rhinitis, dyspnea, dry cough. These manifestations has been observed for two days. Objectively: the child has pale skin, acrocyanosis, shallow respiration at the rate of 80/min. Percussion reveals handbox resonance over the whole surface of lungs, massive fine rales. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Foreign body of the airway
b. Acute bronchitis
c. Pneumonia
d. Mucoviscidosis
*e. Acute bronchiolitis

69. During the first home visit to a full-term boy after his discharge from the maternity hospital a pediatrician revealed a symmetrical swelling of mammae without skin changes over them, swelling of the scrotum. The body temperature was of 36,5°C. The baby was calm, sucked the mothers breast actively. What condition should you think of?
a. Neonatal mastitis
b. Necrotic neonatal phlegmon
c. Congenital adrenal dysfunction
*d. Hormonal crisis of the newborn
e. Sclerema

70. A full-term neonate weighing 4500 g was born asphyxiated with Apgar score of 4-6 points. During the delivery shoulder dystocia occurred. Neurologic assessment revealed non-focal neurologic symptoms, total flaccid paresis of the upper extremities since the arm was atonic and pronated. Grasping, Babkins and Moros reflexes were absent. What segments of spinal cord had been affected?
a. ThI - ThV
b. ThVI - ThVІІ
c. СI - СII
d. СIII - СIV
*e. СV - ThI

71. A newborn (mothers I pregnancy) weighing 3500 g presents with jaundice, lethargy, reduced reflexes. Objectively: second grade jaundice of skin with saffron tint, liver - +2 cm, spleen - +1 cm. Urine and feces are yellow. Blood count: Hb- 100 g/l, RBCs - 3,2×1012/l, WBCs - 18,7×109/l, mothers blood type - 0(I) Rh(+), babys blood type - А(II) Rh(-), bilirubin - 170 mmol/l, indirect fraction. ALT, AST rates are normal. What disease is the child most likely to have?
a. Hemolytic disease of newborn, Rh-conflict
b. Perinatal hepatitis
*c. Hemolytic disease of newborn, AB0-conflict
d. Biliary atresia
e. Physiologic jaundice

72. A 10-year-old girl was admitted to a hospital with carditis presentations. It is known from the anamnesis that two weeks ago she had exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis. What is the most likely etiological factor in this case?
a. Staphylococcus
b. Klebsiella
c. Proteus
*d. Streptococcus
e. Pneumococcus

73. All the joints on the left elbow of a newborn are extended, the whole arm hangs vertically along the trunk with the forearm pronated. Active movements in the elbow joint are absent but present in the shoulder joint. The hand is flattened, atrophied, cold to the touch, hangs passively. Grasp reflex and hand-mouth reflex on the affected side are missing. Haemogram values are normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Osteomyelitis
b. Complete obstetrical paralysis
c. Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
*d. Inferior distal obstetrical paralysis
e. Proximal obstetrical paralysis

74. Head circumference of a 1-month-old boy with signs of excitement is 37 cm, prefontanel is 2x2 cm large. After feeding the child regurgitates small portions of milk; stool is normal in respect of its volume and composition. Muscle tonus is within norm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pylorostenosis
b. Meningitis
*c. Pylorospasm
d. Microcephaly
e. Craniostenosis

75. 10 days after birth, a newborn developed a sudden fever up to 38,1°C. Objectively: the skin in the region of navel, abdomen and chest is erythematous; there are multiple pea-sized blisters with no infiltration at the base; single bright red moist erosions with epidermal fragments on the periphery. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Epidemic pemphigus of newborn
b. Streptococcal impetigo
c. Atopic dermatitis
d. Vulgar impetigo
e. Syphilitic pemphigus

76. On the second day after preventive vaccination a 2-year-old boy presented with abdominal pain without clear localization, body temperature rose up to 38°C. On the third day the child got red papular haemorrhagic eruption on the extensor surfaces of limbs and around the joints. Knee joints were edematic and slightly painful. Examination of other organs and systems revealed no pathological changes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
b. Meningococcemia
c. DIC syndrome
d. Urticaria
e. Thrombocytopenic purpura

77. On the 6th day of life a child got multiple vesicles filled with seropurulent fluid in the region of occiput, neck and buttocks. General condition of the child is normal. What disease should be suspected?
a. Impetigo
b. Epidermolysis bullosa
c. Impetigo neonatorum
d. Miliaria
*e. Vesiculopustulosis

78. A patient is 14 years old. Cytochemical study of punctate revealed 40% of blasts, there was negative reaction to peroxidase and with Sudan black, positive reaction to glycogen. Specify the form of acute leukemia:
a. Myeloblastic
b. Promyelocytic
c. Undifferentiated
*d. Lymphoblastic
e. Monoblastic

79. Six months ago, a 5-year-old child was operated for CHD. For the last 3 weeks he has complained of fever, heart pain, aching muscles and bones. Examination results: "white-coffee" skin colour, auscultation revealed systolic murmur in the region of heart along with a noise in the III-IV intercostal space. Examination of fingertips revealed Janeway lesions. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Typhoid fever
*b. Infectious endocarditis
c. Nonrheumatic carditis
d. Sepsis
e. Acute rheumatic fever

80. The condition of a 3-year-old child with acute non-rheumatic myocarditis has suddenly deteriorated: he presents with anxiety, acrocyanosis, peripheral edemata, dyspnea. Auscultation of lungs reveals fine moist rales on both sides mainly in the lower parts. AP- 65/40 mm Hg. HR- 150/min, heart sounds are muffled, arrhythmic (extrasystole). Liver is +4 cm. Oliguria is present. The child has been diagnosed with acute heart failure. Which method of examination is most informative for assessing the childs status dynamics?
a. ECG
b. Monitoring of K+, Na+ concentration in blood
c. 24-hour monitoring of heart rhythm
*d. Echocardiography
e. Diuresis monitoring

81. A hospital admitted an 11-year-old boy diagnosed with medium-severe asthma, exacerbation period. In order to arrest the attacks the boy was administered broncholytic nebulizer therapy. During the day the childs condition stabilized. What is the most appropriate method for further monitoring of respiratory function in this patient?
a. Veloergometry
*b. Peak flowmetry
c. Pneumotachometry
d. Spirometry
e. Bronchodilatation tests

82. A full-term newborn was born with body weight of 4000 g, body length of 57 cm. Reaction to the postnatal check was absent. There was diffuse cyanosis, heart rate of 80/min. What resuscitation measures should be taken?
a. Give an injection of naloxone
*b. Start ALV with a mask
c. Intubate the child and start ALV
d. Give 100% oxygen
e. Start tactile stimulation

83. A 2-year-old child in a satisfactory condition periodically presents with moderate proteinuria, microhematuria. USI results: the left kidney is undetectable, the right one is enlarged, there are signs of double pyelocaliceal system. What study is required to specify the diagnosis?
*a. Excretory urography
b. Retrograde urography
c. Radioisotope renal scan
d. Doppler study of renal vessels
e. Micturating cystography

84. An 8-year-old boy has a 2-year history of blotchy itchy rash appearing after eating citrus fruit. The first eruption occurred at the age of 6 months after the introduction of juices to the babys diet. Father has a history of bronchial asthma, mother - that of allergic rhinitis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Urticaria
b. Quinckes edema
c. Psoriasis
d. Pityriasis Rosea
*e. Atopic dermatitis

85. An 8-year-old child was hospitalized for fever up to 39,8°C, inertness, moderate headache, vomiting. Examination revealed meningeal symptoms. Lumbar puncture was performed. The obtained fluid had raised opening pressure, it was transparent, with the cell count of 450 cells per 1mcL (mainly lymphocytes - 90%), glucose level of 2,6 mmol/l. What causative agent might have caused the disease in the child?
a. Meningococcus
b. Staphylococcus
c. Pneumococcus
*d. Enterovirus
e. Kochs bacillus

86. A 3-year-old child with ARVI had been administered biseptol, paracetamol, nazoferon. On the third day of treatment the babys condition deteriorated: he developed sore throat, stomatitis, conjunctivitis, hypersalivation, painful dark red spots on the neck, face, chest and legs, then the spots were replaced with vesicles. Examination revealed lesions of mucous membranes around the mouth and anus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Atopic dermatitis
b. Serum sickness
c. Bullous dermatitis
*d. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
e. Chickenpox

87. A 12-year-old child had three attacks of acute rheumatic fever accompanied by carditis. Examination revealed the symptoms of chronic tonsillitis, mitral insufficiency, carious teeth. What is the optimal method of secondary prophylaxis?
*a. Year-round bicillin prophylaxis till the age of 25
b. Year-round bicillin prophylaxis for 3 years
c. Oral cavity sanitation
d. Tonsillectomy
e. Course of cardiotrophic drugs twice a year

88. A 7-year-old female child has developed an acute condition. She complains of a headache, two onsets of vomiting. Objectively: deferred reactions, body temperature - 39,3°C, pronounced hyperesthesia, nuchal rigidity, positive superior and inferior Brudzinskis signs, symmetric Kernigs sign. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Encephalitis
*b. Meningitis
c. Craniocerebral trauma
d. Food toxicoinfection
e. Toxic encephalopathy

