1. An 8 year old child has low-grade fever, arthritis, colicky abdominal pain and a purpuric rash llocalized on the lower extremities. laboratory studies reveal a guaiac-positive stool, urinalysis with red blood cell (RBC) casts and mild proteinuria, and a normal platelet count. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
*b. Henoch-Schonleins vasculitis
c. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
e. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura

2. A young man has painful indurations in the peripapillary regions of both mammary glands. The most reasonable action will be:
a. To take an aspirate for bacterial inoculation and cytology
b. To administer steroids locally
c. To remove them
d. To cut and drain them
*e. To leave these indurations untouched

3. A 9 year old girl with a history of intermittent wheezing for several years is brought to the pediatrician. The child has been taking no medications for some time. Physical examination reveals agitation and perioral cyanosis. Intercostal and suprasternal retractions are present. The breath sounds are quiet, and wheezing is audible bilaterally. The child is admitted to the hospital. Appropriate interventions might include all of the following EXCEPT:
*a. Prescribe nebulized cromolyn sodium
b. Administer supplemental oxygen
c. Prescribe nebulized metaproterenol
d. Prescribe intravenous corticosteroids
e. Prescribe intravenous aminophylline

4. Routine examination of a child with a history of bronchial asthma reveals AP of 140/90 mm Hg. The most likely cause of the hypertension is:
a. Obesity
*b. Renal disease
c. Chronic lung disease
d. Theophylline overdose
e. Coarctation of the aorta

5. Patient with thyreotoxicosis is in the 2 beds hospital ward of therapeutic department. The area of the ward is 18 m2, height 3 m, ventilation rate 2,5/hr. Air temperature - 20°C, relative humidity - 45%, air movement velocity - 0,3 m/s, light coefficient - 1/5, noise level - 30 dB. Do hygienic evaluation of the conditions meet the standards?
*a. Discomfortable microclimate
b. Poor lighting
c. All conditions meet the requirements
d. High level of noise
e. Non-effective ventilation

6. The child is 11 m.o. He suffers from nervous-arthritic diathesis. The increased synthesis of what acid is pathogenic at nervous-arthritic diathesis?
a. Sulfuric acid
*b. Uric acid
c. Phosphoric acid
d. Acetic acid
e. Hydrochloric acid

7. A 10-year-old child complains of fever (temperature is 39°C), frequent painful urination [pollakiuria]. Urine test: proteinuria [0,066 g/L], leukocytouria [entirely within eyeshot], bacteriuria [105 colony forming units/mL]. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute pyelonephritis
b. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
c. Urolithiasis
d. Acute cystitis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

8. A 8-year-old boy has suffered from tonsilitis. In 2 weeks he started complaining of migratory joint pain, edema of joints, restriction of movements, fever. On examination, an acute rheumatic heart disease, activity of the III-rd degree, primary rheumocarditis, polyarthritis; acute course of disease, cardiovascular failure IIA. What medication is to be prescribed?
*a. Prednisone
b. Delagil
c. Erythromycin
d. Diprazinum
e. Cefazolin

9. The 10 y.o. boy has complains on headache, weakness, fever 40°C, vomiting, expressed dyspnea, pale skin with flush on right cheek, lag of right hemithorax respiratory movement, dullness on percussion over low lobe of right lung, weakness of vesicular respiration in this zone. The abdomen is painless and soft at palpation. Which disease lead to these symptoms and signs?
a. Intestinal infection
b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Flu
*d. Pneumonia croupousa
e. Acute appendicitis

10. A patient with acute respiratory viral infection (3rd day of disease) complains of pain in lumbar region, nausea, dysuria, oliguria. Urinalysis - hematuria (100-200 RBC in eyeshot spot), specific gravity - 1002. The blood creatinin level is 0,18 millimole/l, potassium level - 6,4 millimole/l. Make the diagnosis:
a. Acute renal colic
*b. Acute interstitial nephritis
c. Acute glomerylonephritis
d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute cystitis

11. A neonate was born from the 1st gestation on term. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it became more acute. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were observed. Indirect bilirubin level was 275 mumol/L, direct bilirubin level – 5 mumol/L, Hb- 150 g/l. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Physiological jaundice
b. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (Rh - incompatibility)
c. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder
d. Hepatitis
*e. Hemolytic disease of the neonate (АВ0 incompatibility), icteric type

12. A baby boy was born in time, it was his mothers 1st pregnancy. The jaundice was revealed on the 2nd day of life, then it progressed. The adynamia, vomiting and hepatomegaly were presented. The indirect bilirubin level was 275 mcmol/L, the direct bilirubin level - 5 mcmol/L, Hb- 150 g/L. Mothers blood group - 0(I), Rh+, childs blood group - A(II), Rh+. Make a diagnosis.
*a. Hemolytic disease of newborn (АВО incompatibility), icteric type
b. Hepatitis
c. Hemolytic disease of newborn (Rh - incompatibility)
d. Physiological jaundice
e. Jaundice due to conjugation disorder

13. A 3 month old infant suffering from acute segmental pneumonia has dyspnea (respiration rate - 80 per minute), paradoxical breathing, tachycardia, total cyanosis. Respiration and pulse - ratio is 1:2. The heart dullness under normal size. Such signs characterise:
a. Respiratory failure of I degree
b. Myocarditis
c. Congenital heart malformation
*d. Respiratory failure of III degree
e. Respiratory failure of II degree

14. The 7 m.o. infant is suffering from acute pneumonia which was complicated by cardiovascular insufficiency and respiratory failure of II degree. The accompanied diagnosis is malnutrition of II degree. Choose the best variant of therapy:
a. Gentamycin and Macropen
b. Ampiox and Polymixin
c. Macropen and Penicillin
d. Penicillin and Ampiox
*e. Ampiox and Amicacin

15. A 3 year old child has been suffering from fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis for 4 days. He has been taking sulfadimethoxine. Today it has fever up to 39°C and maculopapular rash on its face. Except of rash the childs skin has no changes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Scarlet fever
b. Pseudotuberculosis
c. Allergic rash
d. Rubella
*e. Measles

16. A 2 year old girl has been ill for 3 days. Today she has low grade fever, severe catarrhal presentations, slight maculopapular rash on her buttocks and enlarged occipital lymph nodes. What is your diagnosis?
a. Scarlet fever
b. Adenoviral infection
c. Pseudotuberculosis
*d. Rubella
e. Measles

17. A 3 year old boy fell ill abruptly: fever up to 39°C, weakness, vomitng. Haemorrhagic rash of various size appeared on his lower limbs within 5 hours. Meningococcemia with infective - toxic shock of the 1 degree was diagnosed. What medications should be administered?
a. Chloramphenicol succinate and interferon
b. Ampicillin and immunoglobulin
c. Penicillin and prednisone
d. Penicillin and immunoglobulin
*e. Chloramphenicol succinate and prednisone

18. A 7 year old girl has mild form of varicella. Headache, weakness, vertigo, tremor of her limbs, ataxia, then mental confusion appeared on the 5th day of illness. Meningeal signs are negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination is normal. How can you explain these signs?
a. Neurotoxic syndrome
*b. Encephalitis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Meningitis
e. Myelitis

19. A 7 y.o. girl fell ill abruptly: fever, headache, severe sore throat, vomiting. Minute bright red rash appear in her reddened skin in 3 hours. It is more intensive in axillae and groin. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is hyperemic. Greyish patches is on the tonsills. Submaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged and painful. What is your diagnosis?
a. Rubella
b. Measles
*c. Scarlet fever
d. Pseudotuberculosis
e. Enteroviral infection

20. An 8-year-old boy fell ill acutely: he presents with fever, weakness, headache, abdominal pain, recurrent vomiting, then diarrhea and tenesmus. Stools occur 12 times daily, are scanty, contain a lot of mucus, pus, streaks of blood. His sigmoid gut is tender and hardened. What is your diagnosis?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Staphylococcal gastroenteritis
c. Escherichiosis
*d. Dysentery
e. Cholera

21. The child has complains of the "night" and "hungry" abdominal pains. At fibroscopy in area a bulbus ofa duodenum the ulcerrative defect of 4 mms diameter is found, the floor is obtected with a fibrin, (H.p +). Administer the optimum schemes of treatment:
*a. Omeprasole - Trichopolum - Claritromicin
b. Maalox - Ranitidin
c. Trichopolum
d. Vicalinum - Ranitidin
e. De-nol

22. A woman delivered a child. It was her fifth pregnancy but the first delivery. Mothers blood group is A(II)Rh-, newborns - A(II)Rh+. The level of indirect bilirubin in umbilical blood was 58 micromole/l, haemoglobin - 140 g/l, RBC- 3,8×1012/l. In 2 hours the level of indirect bilirubin turned 82 micromole/l. The hemolytic disease of newborn (icteric-anemic type, Rh-incompatibility) was diagnosed. Choose the therapeutic tactics:
a. Blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
b. Conservative therapy
*c. Replacement blood transfusion (conservative therapy)
d. Symptomatic therapy
e. Antibiotics

23. A mother with an infant visited the pediatrician for expertise advice. Her baby was born with body weight 3,2 kg and body length 50 cm. He is 1 year old now. How many teeth the baby should have?
*a. 8
b. 12
c. 6
d. 20
e. 10

24. A mother consulted a pediatrician about her son. Her son was born with body mass of 3 kg and length of 48 cm. Hes 1 year old now. What is the required normal mass?
a. 15,0 kg
*b. 10,5 kg
c. 11,0 kg
d. 9,0 kg
e. 12,0 kg

25. 6 m.o. infant was born with bodys mass 3 kg and length 50 cm. He is given natural feeding. How many times per day the infant should be fed?
a. 4
*b. 5
c. 6
d. 7
e. 8

26. Infant is 6,5 months now and is given natural feeding since birth. Body mass was 3,5 kg, with length 52 cm at birth. How many times per day the supplement (up feeding) should be given?
*a. 2
b. 1
c. 4
d. 0
e. 3

27. A 2 month old healthy infant with good appetite is given artificial feeding since he turned 1 month old. When is it recommended to start the corrective feeding (fruit juice)?
a. 3,0 months
b. 1,0 months
c. 1,5 months
d. 2,0 months
*e. 4,0 months

28. An infant was born with body mass 3 kg and body length 50 cm. Now he is 3 years old. His brother is 7 years old, suffers from rheumatic fever. Mother asked the doctor for a cardiac check up of the 3-year-old son. Where is the left relative heart border located?
*a. 1 cm left from the left medioclavicular line
b. Along the left medioclavicular line
c. 1 cm right from the left parasternal line
d. 1 cm left from he left parasternal line
e. 1 cm right from the left medioclavicular line

29. A boy of 7 y.o. had an attack of asthma and distant whistling rales after playing with a dog. In the medical hystory: atopic dermatitis caused by eating eggs, chicken, beef. What group of allergens is the reason of the development of bronchial astma attacks?
a. Pollen
b. Dust
*c. Epidermal
d. Itch mite
e. Chemical

30. A 14-year-old boy has rheumatism. Over the last 2 years he has had 3 rheumatic attacks. What course of rheumatism does the patient have?
a. Latent
b. Persistent-reccurent
c. Acute
d. Subacute
*e. Prolonged

31. The patient with aquired heart failure has diastolic pressure of 0 mm Hg. What heart failure does the child have?
a. Mitral insufficiency
b. Rheumatism
c. Mitral stenosis
d. Aortal stenosis
*e. Aortal insufficiency

32. A 12 year old child has the ulcer disease of stomach. What is the etiology of this disease?
a. Influenza
*b. Intestinal bacillus
c. Salmonella
d. Helicobacter pylory
e. Lambliosis

33. A nine year old child is at a hospital with acute glomerulonephritis. Clinical and laboratory examinations show acute condition. What nutrients must not be limited during the acute period of glomerulonephritis?
a. Liquid
b. Salt
*c. Carbohydrates
d. Proteins
e. Fats

34. An 18-month-old child was taken to a hospital on the 4-th day of the disease. The disease began acutely with temperature 39, weakness, cough, breathlessness. He is pale, cyanotic, has had febrile temperature for over 3 days. There are crepitative fine bubbling rales on auscultation. Percussion sound is shortened in the right infrascapular region. X-ray picture shows non-homogeneous segment infiltration 8-10 mm on the right, the intensification of lung pattern. Your diagnosis:
a. Bronchitis
b. Grippe
*c. Segmentary pneumonia
d. Bronchiolitis
e. Interstitial pneumonia

35. A 9-year-old girl has attacks of abdominal pain after fried food. No fever. She has pain in Cera point. The liver is not enlarged. Portion B [duodenal probe] - 50 ml. What is your diagnosis?
a. Peptic ulcer
*b. Biliary tracts dyskinesia, hypotonic type
c. Acute colitis
d. Hepatocirrhosis
e. Chronic duodenum

36. A baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation. Delivery was normal, by natural way. The baby has a large cephalohematoma. The results of blood count are: Hb- 120g/l, Er- 3,5×1012/l, total serum bilirubin - 123 mmol/l, direct bilirubin - 11 mmol/l, indirect - 112 mmol/l. What are causes of hyperbilirubinemia in this case?
*a. Erythrocyte hemolysis
b. Disturbance of the conjugative function of liver
c. Mechanical obstruction of the bile outflow
d. Bile condensing
e. Intravascular hemolysis

37. A 4-month-old girl with blond hair and blue eyes has "mousy" odor of sweat and urine, delayed psychomotoric development. The most typical laboratory data for this disorder is:
a. Low level of thyroid gland hormones in blood
*b. Positive urine ferric chloride test
c. High level of glycosaminoglycanes in urine
d. High level of oxyproline in urine
e. High concentration of chlorides in sweat

38. A neonate is 5 days old. What vaccination dose of BCG vaccine (in mg) is necessary for vaccination of this child?
a. 0,025 mg
b. 0,1 mg
c. 0,2 mg
*d. 0,05 mg
e. 0,075 mg

39. 7 y.o. boy with chronic sinusitis and rercurent pulmonary infections has chest X-ray demonstrating a right-sided cardiac silhouette. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cystic fibrosis (mucoviscidosis)
b. Laryngotracheomalacia
c. alpha-antitrypsin deficiency
*d. Kartagener syndrome
e. Bronchiolitis obliterans

40. A 2,9-kg term male infant is born to a mother who developed polyhydramnios at 34 weeks gestation. At birth, the Apgar scores were 9 and 9. The infant develops choking and cyanosis with the first feed. In addition, is unable to place a nasogastric tube. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tracheal atresia
b. Respiratory distress syndrome
c. Choanal atresia
d. Laryngomalacia
*e. Esophageal atresia

41. Full term newborn has developed jaundice at 10 hours of age. Hemolytic disease of newborn due to Rh-incompatibility was diagnosed. 2 hours later the infant has indirect serum bilirubin level increasing up to 14 mmol/L. What is most appropriate for treatment of hyperbilirubinemia in this infant?
a. Intestinal sorbents
b. Infusion therapy
c. Phototherapy
d. Phenobarbital
*e. Exchange blood transfusion

42. A 4 year old girl was playing with her toys and suddenly she got an attack of cough, dyspnea. Objectively: respiration rate - 45/min, heart rate - 130/min. Percussion revealed dullness of percutory sound on the right in the lower parts. Auscultation revealed diminished breath sounds with bronchial resonance on the right. X-ray pictue showed shadowing of the lower part of lungs on the right. Blood analysis revealed no signs of inflammation. The child was diagnosed with foreign body in the right bronchus. What complication caused such clinical presentations?
a. Pneumonia
*b. Atelectasis
c. Pneumothorax
d. Emphysema
e. Bronchitis

43. A man, 42 years old, died in a road accident after the hemorrhage on the spot, because of acute hemorrhagic anemia. What minimum percent of the whole blood volume could result in death by acute hemorrhage?
*a. 25-30%
b. 10-14%
c. 35-50%
d. 15-20%
e. 6-9%

44. A 6 week old child is admitted because of tachypnea. Birth had been uneventful, although conjunctivitis developed on the third day of life and lasted for about 2 weeks. Physical examination reveals tachypnea, bilateral inspiratory crackles and single expiratory wheezing. Bilateral pneumonia is evident on chest X-ray. The child is afebrile and has no history of fever. White blood cell count is 15×109/l, with 28% of eosinophils. The most likely cause of this childs symptoms is:
a. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
b. Pneumocystis carinii
*c. Clamydia trachomanis
d. Visceral larva migrans
e. Varicella

45. A 6 y.o. asthmatic child was taken to the emergency hospital because of severe coughing and wheezing for the last 24 hours. Physical examination reveals that the child is excitable, has intercostal and suprasternal retractions, expiratory wheezing throughout all lung fields, RR- 60/min. Initial treatment may include the prescription of:
a. N-acetyl cysteine and cromolyn by inhalation
b. Parenteral gentamicyn
c. Parenteral phenobarbital
d. Intravenous fluids in the first 2 h to compensate water deficiency
*e. Subcutaneous epinephrine

46. A full term infant was born after a normal pregnancy, delivery, however, was complicated by marginal placental detachment. At 12 hours of age the child, although appearing to be in good health, passes a bloody meconium stool. For determining the cause of the bleeding, which of the following diagnostic procedures should be performed first?
a. Platelet count, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time
*b. Barium enema
c. Gastric lavage with normal saline
d. An Apt test
e. An upper gastrointestinal series

47. In the 43rd week of gestation a long, thin infant was delivered. He is apneic, limp, pale, and covered with "pea soup" amniotic fluid. The first step in the resuscitation of this infant at delivery should be:
*a. Suction of the trachea under direct vision
b. Artificial ventilation with endotracheal tube
c. Catheterization of the umbilical vein
d. Administration of 100% oxygen by mask
e. Artificial ventilation with bag and mask

48. A newborn infant has mild cyanosis, diaphoresis, poor peripheral pule, hepatomegaly and cardiomegaly. Respiratory rate is 60 breaths per minute, and heart rate is 230 beats per minute. The child most likely has congestive heart failure caused by:
*a. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
b. Atrial flutter and partial atrioventricular block
c. A large atrial septal defect and valvular pulmonary stenosis
d. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
e. A ventricular septal defect and transposition of the great vessels

49. A 6-year-old boy was brought to the emergency room with a 3-hour history of fever up to 39,5°C and sore throat. The child looks alert, anxious and has a mild inspiratory stridor. You should immediately:
a. Admit the child and place him in a mist tent
*b. Prepare to establish an airway
c. Order a chest x-ray and lateral view of the neck
d. Obtain an arterial blood gas and start an IV line
e. Examine the throat and obtain a culture

50. A 7 d.o. boy is admitted to the hospital for evaluation of vomiting and dehydration. Physical examination is otherwise normal except for minimal hyperpigmentation of the nipples. Serum sodium and potassium concentrations are 120 meq/L and 9 meq/L respectively. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Pyloric stenosis
b. Panhypopituitarism
c. Hyperaldosteronism
*d. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
e. Secondary hypothyroidism

51. A 7 y.o. boy has crampy abdominal pain and a rash on the back of his legs and buttocks as well as on the extensor surfaces of his forearms. Laboratory analysis reveals proteinuria and microhematuria. He is most likely to be affected by:
*a. Anaphylactoid purpura
b. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
c. Dermatomyositis
d. Polyarteritis nodosa
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

52. A 5-year-old boy was progressively getting worse compared to the previous 2 months. A chest x-ray has shown right middle lobe collapse. A tuberculin skin test was strongly positive. What is the most characteristic finding in primary tuberculosis?
a. Hematogenous dissemination leading to extrapulmonary tuberculosis
*b. Hilar or paratracheal lymph node enlargement
c. Cavity formation
d. Atelectasis with obstructive pneumonia
e. Miliary tuberculosis

53. A girl is 12-year-old. Yesterday she was overcooled. Now she is complaining on pain in suprapubic area, frequent painful urination by small portions, temperature is 37,8°C. Pasternatsky symptom is negative. Urine analysis: protein - 0,033 g/L, WBC- 20-25 in f/vis, RBC- 1-2 in f/vis. What diagnosis is the most probable?
a. Dysmetabolic nephropathy
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Urolithiasis
*d. Acute cystitis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

54. The girl of 11 y.o. She is ill for 1 month. She has "butterfly"-type rash on face (spots and papules), pain and swelling of small joints on arms and legs, signs of stomatitis (small-sized ulcers in mouth). CBC: Нb– 80 g/L, RBC– 2,9×1012/L, WBC– 15×109/L, ESR- 40 mm/hour. Urinalysis: protein– 0,33 g/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute rheumatic fever
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, systemic type
d. Periarteriitis nodosa
*e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

55. An infant aged 1 year on the third day of common cold at night developed inspiratory stridor, hoarse voice and barking cough. Physical examination revealed suprasternal and intercostal chest retractions. There is a bluish skin discoloration moistly seen over the upper lip. The respiratory rate is 52 per min and pulse- 122 bpm. The body temperature is 37,5°C. What disease does the infant have?
a. Acute epiglottitis
*b. Acute infectious croup due to viral laryngotracheitis
c. Bronchopneumonia without complications
d. Acute laryngitis
e. Acute bronchiolitis with respiratory distress

56. A newborn aged 3 days with hyperbilirubinemia (428 mkmol/L) developed following disorders. From beginning there were severe jaundice with poor suckling, hypotomia and hypodynamia. Little bit later periodical excitation, neonatal convulsions and neonatal primitive reflexes loss are noted. Now physical examination reveals convergent squint, rotatory nystagmus and setting sun eye sign. How to explain this condition?
a. Spastic cerebral palsy
*b. Encephalopathy due to hyperbilirubinemia
c. Brain tumour
d. Skull injury
e. Hydrocephalus

57. A child is 2 years old. The child complains of hoarse voice, dyspnea with obstructed inspiration. The disease started 3 days ago from dry cough and nose stuffiness. Objectively: general condition is unbalanced, stridor is present. The childs skin is pale. Body temperature is 37,7°C. The palatine arches are hyperemic. There is no deposit. Heart sounds are rhythmic. Auscultation of lungs reveals rough breathing sounds, crepitation is absent. Parainfluenza virus has been detected in nasopharynx lavage. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Laryngospasm
*b. Acute laryngotracheitis
c. Foreign body
d. Epiglottitis
e. Diphtheria

58. A 3-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital because of ostealgia and body temperature rise up to 39°C. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, unable to stand for ostealgia, there is apparent intoxication, lymph nodesare enlarged up to 1,5 cm. Liver can be palpated 3 cm below the costal margin, spleen - 2 cm below the costal margin. In blood: RBCs - 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, colour index - 0,9, thrombocytes – 190×109/l, WBCs - 3,2×109/l, eosinophils - 1, stab neutrophils - 1, segmented neutrophils - 0, lymphocytes - 87, monocytes - 2, ESR - 36 mm/h. What examination should be conducted in order to specify the diagnosis?
a. Lymph node puncture
b. Ultrasound
*c. Sternal puncture
d. Lymph node biopsy
e. Computer tomography

59. Apgar test done on a newborn girl at 1st and 5th minute after birth gave the result of 7-8 scores. During the delivery there was a short-term difficulty with extraction of shoulder girdle. After birth the child had the proximal extremity dysfunction and the arm couldnt be raised from the side. The shoulder was turned inwards, the elbow was flexed, there was also forearm pronation, obstetric palsy of brachial plexus. What is the clinical diagnosis?
a. Trauma of right hand soft tissues
*b. Duchenne-Erb palsy
c. Right hand osteomyelitis
d. Trauma of thoracic spine
e. Intracranial haemorrhage

60. Examination of a 9-month-old girl revealed skin pallor, cyanosis during excitement. Percussion revealed transverse dilatation of cardiac borders. Auscultation revealed continuous systolic murmur to the left of the breastbone in the 3-4 intercostal space. This murmur is conducted above the whole cardiac region to the back. What congenital cardiac pathology can be suspected?
a. Coarctation of aorta
b. Defect of interatrial septum
*c. Defect of interventricular septum
d. Fallots tetrad
e. Pulmonary artery stenosis

61. A worker was temporarily off work because of illness for 16 days, was under out-patient treatment. The doctor in charge issued a sick-list first for 5 days, then prolonged it for 10 days. Who can further prolong the sick-list of this patient?
a. The doctor in charge of the case with the permission of the head of department
b. Working ability expertise committee
*c. The doctor in charge of the case together with the head of department
d. Deputy head physician on the working ability expertise
e. The head of department

62. A 13 y.o. patient was treated in dermatological hospital for atopic dermatitis exacerbation. He was discharged in the condition of clinical remission. What recommendations should the doctor give to prevent exacerbations?
a. Avoidance of skin insolation
*b. Use of neutral creams to protect skin
c. Systematic use of local corticosteroids
d. Frequent skin washing with detergents
e. Systematic skin disinfection

63. On the 21 day after appearance of vesiculous chickenpox rash a 7-year-old child developed ataxia, nystagmus, intention tremor, muscle hypotonia. Liquor analysis shows a low-grade lymphocytic pleocytosis, slightly increased protein rate. What complication is it?
a. Acute nephritis
b. Postherpetic neuralgia
c. Purulent meningitis
d. Pneumonitis
*e. Encephalitis

64. An 8-year-old boy suffering from haemophilia was undergoing transfusion of packed red cells. Suddenly he felt pain behind the breastbone and in the lumbar area, dyspnea, cold sweat. Objectively: pale skin, heart rate - 100/min, AP - 60/40 mm Hg; oliguria, brown urine. For the treatment of this complication the following drug should be administered:
a. Lasix
b. Aminophylline
c. Analgine
*d. Prednisolone
e. Adrenaline

65. A 3-year-old child has been diagnosed with type I diabetes mellitus, hyperosmolar coma. The laboratory confirmed the diagnosis. Which laboratory findings are characteristic for such condition?
a. Hyperglycemia and ketonuria
b. Hyperglycemia and high indicators of acid-base balance
c. Hyperglycemia and ketonemia
d. Hyperglycemia and glucosuria
*e. High hyperglycemia without ketonemia

66. A 3-year-old child was playing in a playpen when he suddenly developed paroxysmal cough and shortness of breath. Objectively: dry cough, mixed dyspnea. Lung auscultation revealed some wheezes. Breathing sounds on the right are diminished. The child doesnt mix with other children. Immunization is age-appropriate. What pathological condition can be suspected?
*a. Foreign body in the respiratory tracts
b. Acute respiratory viral infection
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Pertussis
e. Pneumonia

67. A 10-year-old child has been folowed-up for the dilated cardiomyopathy. The child presents with dyspnea, cardialgia. There are dense, nonmobile edemata on the lower extremities and sacrum. Ps- 120/min. The cardiac borders are extended transversely. Heart sounds are muffled, there is blowing systolic murmur at the apex and over the xiphoid process. Liver is 3 cm enlarged, urine output is reduced. The blood total protein - 58.6 g/l. In urine: protein - 0,025 g/l, WBCs - 2-4 in the field of vision, RBCs - 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the main mechanism of edema syndrome development:
a. Peripheral circulation disorder
b. Venous congestion of lesser circulation
*c. Venous congestion of greater circulation
d. Secondary nephropathy development
e. Hypoproteinemia

68. After objective clinical examination a 12 year old child was diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse. What complementary instrumental method of examination should be applied for the diagnosis confirmation?
a. Phonocardiography
b. Roentgenography of chest
*c. Echocardiography
d. ECG
e. Veloergometry

69. A full-term child survived antenatal and intranatal hypoxia, it was born in asphyxia (2-5 points on Apgar score). After birth the child has progressing excitability, there are also vomiting, nystagmus, spasms, strabismus, spontaneous Moros and Babinskys reflexes. What localization of intracranial hemorrhage is the most probable?
a. Subdural hemorrhage
b. Small cerebral tissue hemorrhages
*c. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
d. Periventricular hemorrhages
e. Hemorrhages into the brain ventricles

70. A 15 y.o. boy was twice attacked by bees, as a result he had severe anaphylactic shock. What is the most effective prophylaxis method?
a. Prescription of corticosteroids for summer
b. Limitation of outside staying during summer months
c. Protective clothing
*d. Desensibilisation by means of bee venom extract
e. Long-term prophylactic treatment with antihistamines

71. A 9-year-old boy has been suffering from bronchoectasis since he was 3. Exacerbations occur quite often, 3-4 times a year. Conservative therapy results in short periods of remission. The disease is progressing, the child has physical retardation. The childs skin is pale, acrocyanotic, he has "watch glass" nail deformation. Bronchography revealed saccular bronchiectases of the lower lobe of his right lung. What is the further treatment tactics?
a. Physiotherapeutic treatment
b. Further conservative therapy
*c. Surgical treatment
d. Sanatorium-and-spa treatment
e. Tempering of the childs organism

72. A child with tetralogy of Fallot is most likely to exhibit:
*a. Increased pressure in the right ventricle
b. Increased pulse pressure
c. Normal oxygen tension (PaO2) in the left ventricle
d. Normal pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve
e. Increased pulmonary blood flow

73. A 2-months-old child after preventive vaccination had a prolonged hemorrhage from the vaccination place and due to those an intramuscular hematoma. During examination of the child a considerable rise of prothrombin consumption and a significant prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastic time were found. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Hemophilia
b. Henoch-Schoenlein disease
c. Inborn afibrinogenemia
d. Hemorrhagic disease of the neonate
e. Werlhofs disease

74. A 10 y.o. boy with hemophilia has signs of acute respiratory viral infection with fever. What of the mentioned antifebrile medications are contraindicated to this patient?
*a. Acetylsalicylic acid
b. Pipolphen
c. Panadol extra
d. Paracetamol
e. Analgin

75. A 7-year-old child is sick for 2 weeks with running nose, was taking nasal drops. The boy suffers with alimentary allergy. He applied to doctor due to suppurative and bloody discharges from nose, maceration of ala nasi and upper lip. Rhinoscopy results: there are whitish-greyish areas at nasal septum. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is not changed. What is the most probable disease?
a. Sinusitis (maxillar sinus))
*b. Diphtheria of the nose
c. Rhinovirus
d. Adenovirus
e. Allergic rhinitis

76. A 10-year-old boy underwent treatment in cardiological department for rheumatism, I acute attack of rheumatic fever, active phase, II degree. The patient was discharged in satisfactory condition. Which drug should be chosen for prevention of rheumatism recurrence?
*a. Bicillinum-5
b. Erythromycin
c. Oxacillin
d. Ampicillin
e. Bicillinum-1

77. A child is 4 years old, has been ill for 5 days. There are complaints of cough, skin rash, to- 38,2°C, face puffiness, photophobia, conjunctivitis. Objectively: there is bright, maculo-papulous, in some areas confluent rash on the face, neck, upper chest. The pharynx is hyperemic. There are seropurulent discharges from the nose. Auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Enterovirus exanthema
*b. Measles
c. Scarlet fever
d. Adenoviral infection
e. Rubella

78. A 10 month old boy has been ill for 5 days after consumption of unboiled milk. Body temperature is 38-39°C, there is vomiting, liquid stool. The child is pale and inert. His tongue is covered with white deposition. Heart sounds are muffled. Abdomen is swollen, there is borborygmus in the region of ubbilicus, liver is enlarged by 3 cm. Stool is liquid, dark-green, with admixtures of mucus, 5 times a day. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute shigellosis
b. Rotaviral infection
c. Staphylococcal enteric infection
d. Escherichiosis
*e. Salmonellosis

79. A 3 year old child with weight deficiency suffers from permanent moist cough. In history there are some pneumonias with obstruction. On examination: distended chest, dullness on percussion over the lower parts of lungs. On auscultation: a great number of different rales. Level of sweat chloride is 80 millimol/l. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchiectasis
b. Pulmonary hypoplasia
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Recurrent bronchitis
*e. Mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis)

80. A 12 y.o. child with acute glomerulonephritis presented with hypertensive syndrom during first days of the disease. What is the role of angiotesin II in the pathogenesis?
*a. Intensifies production and secretion of aldosterone
b. Infibits deppresive action of prostaglandins
c. Increases renine level
d. Increases erythropoetin production
e. Increases heart output

81. A full-term infant is 3 days old. On the different parts of skin there are erythemas, erosive spots, cracks, areas of epidermis peeling. The infant has scalded skin syndrome. Nikolskys symptom is positive. General condition of the infant is grave. Anxiety, hyperesthesia, febrile temperature are evident. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Fingers pseudofurunculosis
b. Phlegmon of newborn
*c. Exfoliative dermatitis
d. Impetigo neonatorum
e. Mycotic erythema

82. District pediatrician examines a healthy carried 1-month-old child. The child is breast-fed. Prophylaxis of what disease will the doctor recommend to do first?
a. Parathropy
*b. Rachitis
c. Hypotrophia
d. Anemia
e. Spasmophilia

83. A 7-year-old boy has been managed for a month. Immediately after hospitalization there were apparent edemata, proteinuria - 7,1 g/l, daily urine protein - 4,2 g. Biochemical blood test shows persistent hypoproteinemia (43,2 g/l), hypercholesterolemia (9,2 millimole/l). The patient is most likely have the following type of glomerulonephritis:
a. Combined
*b. Nephrotic
c. Isolated urinary
d. Nephritic
e. Hematuric

84. A 3 y.o. girl has had a temperature rise up to 38°C, rhinitis, dry superficial cough, flabbiness, appetite loss. Palpation didnt reveal any changes over her lungs. Percussion sound has a wooden resonance, auscultation revealed puerile breathing, no rales. In blood: leukopenia, lymphocytosis, increased ESR. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute simple bronchitis
b. Bilateral microfocal pneumonia
c. Acute obstructive bronchitis
d. Recurrent bronchitis, acute condition
*e. Acute simple tracheitis

85. A 5-year-old girl with the transitory immunodeficiency according to T-system has a clinical picture of a right-sided pneumonia during 2 months. How pneumonia progress can be described?
a. Recidivating
b. Wavelike
c. Acute
*d. Delaying
e. Chronic

86. Mother of a 10-month-old baby reports significant pallor, poor appetite, enlarged abdomen in the baby. As a neonate, the child underwent treatment in the in-patient hospital for jaundice and anemia. Objectively: the skin is pale and jaundiced, teeth are absent, abdomen is enlarged, spleen is palpable. Blood test results: Hb - 90 g/l, RBC - 3,0×1012/l, color index - 0,9, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis up to 20%, serum bilirubin - 37 mmol/l, unconjugated bilirubin - 28 mmol/l. What type of anemia has occurred in the patient?
a. Protein-deficiency anemia
b. Iron-deficiency anemia
*c. Hemolytic anemia
d. B12-deficiency anemia
e. Hereditary elliptocytosis

87. A 12 y.o. girl took 2 pills of aspirine and 4 hours later her body temperature raised up to 39-40°C. She complains of general indisposition, dizziness, sudden rash in form of red spots and blisters. Objectively: skin lesions resemble of second-degree burns, here and there with erosive surface or epidermis peeling. Nikolskys symptom is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute epidermal necrolisis
b. Polymorphous exudative erythema
c. Duhrings disease
d. Bullous dermatitis
e. Pemphigus vulgaris

88. A 5-year-old child had an attack of palpitation with nausea, dizziness, generalized fatigue. On ECG: tachycardia with heartbeat rate of 220/min. Ventricle complexes are deformed and widened. P wave is absent. What medication is to be prescribed to provide first aid?
a. Novocainamides
b. Strophantin
c. Isoptin
d. Seduxen
*e. Lydocain

89. Examination of a 4 month old child revealed some lemon-yellow squamae with fatty crusts on the scalp. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Gneiss
b. Strophulus
c. Infantile eczema
d. Pseudofurunculosis
e. Milk crust

90. A lumbar puncture was performed for a newborn suspected of having an intracranial birth injury. Bloody cerebrospinal fluid was obtained. What hemorrhage occurred in this case?
a. Epidural
b. Cephalohematoma
*c. Subarachnoid
d. Supratentorial
e. Subtentorial

91. A neonate from gestation with severe gestosis of the second half was born on the 41st week with 2400 g birth weight and 50 cm long. On physical examination: skin is flaccid, subcutaneous fatty cellular tissue is thin, muscle hypotonia, new-born period reflexes are decreased. Internal organs are without pathological changes. How would you estimate this child?
a. Immature infant
b. Premature infant
*c. Term infant with pre-natal growth retardation
d. Postmature infant
e. Term infant with normal body weight

92. A child was taken to a hospital with focal changes in the skin folds. The child was anxious during examination, examination revealed dry skin with solitary papulous elements and ill-defined lichenification zones. Skin eruption was accompanied by strong itch. The child usually feels better in summer, his condition is getting worse in winter. The child has been artificially fed since he was 2 months old. He has a history of exudative diathesis. Grandmother by his mothers side has bronchial asthma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Urticaria
*b. Atopic dermatitis
c. Seborrheal eczema
d. Contact dermatitis
e. Strophulus

93. A boy, aged 9, was examined: height - 127 cm (-0,36), weight - 28,2 kg (+0,96), chest circumference - 64,9 cm (+0,66), lung vital capacity - 1520 ml (-0,16). What is the complex assessment of the childs physical development?
a. Disharmonious
b. Excessive
c. Below the average
*d. Harmonious
e. Apparently disharmonious

94. A child is 7 months old. Birth weight was 3450, the child is breastfed. Supplemental feeding was introduced on time. Determine the daily protein requirements for the child:
a. 2,0 g/kg
b. 3,5 g/kg
c. 4,0 g/kg
*d. 3,0 g/kg
e. 2,5 g/kg

95. 2 weeks after recovering from angina an 8-year-old boy developed edemata of face and lower limbs. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Urine is of dark brown colour. Oliguria is present. On urine analysis: relative density - 1,015, protein - 1,2 g/l, RBCs are leached and cover the whole vision field, granular casts - 1-2 in the vision field, salts are represented by urates (big number). What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Nephrolithiasis
*b. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephritic syndrome
c. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome, hematuria and hypertension
d. Acute glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome
e. Acute glomerulonephritis with isolated urinary syndrome

96. A 14 year old child suffers from vegetovascular dystonia of pubertal period. He has got sympathoadrenal atack. What medicine should be used for attack reduction?
a. Amysyl
b. No-shpa
*c. Obsidan
d. Aminophylline
e. Corglicone

97. A child is 9 months old. The patients body temperature is 36,7°C, the skin is pale, humid, there is pain in leg muscles. There is no extremities mobility, sensitivity is present. The child has been diagnosed with poliomyelitis. The causative agent of this disease relates to the following family:
a. Paramyxovirus
b. Adenovirus
c. Rotavirus
*d. Picornavirus
e. Tohovirus

98. A 4 month old child fell seriously ill: body temperature rose up to 38,5°C, the child became inert and had a single vomiting. 10 hours later there appeared rash over the buttocks and lower limbs in form of petechiae, spots and papules. Some haemorrhagic elements have necrosis in the centre. What is the most probable disease?
*a. Meningococcemia
b. Influenza
c. Scarlet fever
d. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
e. Rubella

99. A 5-year-old child had strong headache, vomiting, ataxy, dormancy, discoordination of movements, tremor of the extremities on the 8th day of the disease. It was followed by rise in body temperature, vesiculosis rash mainly on the skin of the body and the hairy part of the head. At the second wave of the fever a diagnosis of encephalitis was given. What disease complicated encephalitis in this case?
a. German measles
b. Measles
*c. Chicken pox
d. Enterovirus ifection
e. Herpetic infection

100. A 13 year old girl was admitted to the cardiological department because of pain in the muscles and joints. Examination of her face revealed an edematic erythema in form of butterfly in the region of nose bridge and cheeks. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Rheumatism
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Periarteritis nodosa
*d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Dermatomyositis

