1. A 60 y.o. man complains of significant pain in the right eye, photophobia, lacrimation, reduced vision of this eye, headache of the right part of the head. Pain occured 2 days ago. On examination: Vis OD- 0,03, congested injection of the eye ball, significant cornea edema, front chamber is deep, pupil is narrow, athrophic iris, there is optic nerve excavation on the eye fundus, intraocular pressure- 38 mm Hg. Vis OS- 0,8 unadjustable. The eye is calm, healthy. Intraoccular pressure- 22 mm Hg. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Right eyes uveitis
b. Eye nerves neuritis
c. Maculodystrophy
*d. Acute glaucoma attack
e. Right eyes keratitis

2. A 54-year-old female patient has been admitted to a hospital 12 days after the beginning of acute pancreatitis. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition. The body temperature is hectic. Ps - 112 bpm. The abdomen is swollen. Epigastrium palpation reveals a very painful infiltration falling in the localization of pancreas. Abdominal cavity contains fluid. There is an edema of the left lumbar region. In blood: WBCs – 18×109/l. What is the required tactics of the patients treatment?
*a. Surgical treatment
b. Peritoneal dialysis
c. Massive antibacterial therapy
d. Increase in antienzymes
e. Further conservative treatment

3. A 37-year-old male patient has a histrory of diabetes of moderate severity. On the left side of face the patient has a carbuncle. What severe complication might have occurred in the patient?
a. Lymphangitis
b. Thrombophlebitis
c. Thromboembolism
*d. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
e. Endarteritis

4. To replace the blood loss replacement 1000 ml of the same group of Rhesus-compatible donated blood was transfused to the patient. The blood was conserved by sodium citrate. At the end of hemotransfusion there appeared excitement, pale skin, tachycardia, muscles cramps in the patient. What complication should be suspected?
a. Pyrogenous reaction
*b. Citrate intoxication
c. Allergic reaction
d. Citrate shock
e. Anaphylactic shock

5. A 20 y.o. patient suddely felt ill 12 hours ago. There was pain in epigactric area, nausea, sporadic vomiting. He had taken alcohol before. In few hours the pain localized in the right iliac area. On examination: positive rebound tenderness symptoms. WBC- 12,2×109/L. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Rightside kidney colic
c. Acute cholecystitis
*d. Acute appendicitis
e. Perforated ulcer

6. A patient, aged 58, was fishing in the winter. On return home after some time felt some pain in the feet. Consulted a doctor. On examination: feet skin was pale, then after rewarming became red, warm to the touch. Edema is not significant, limited to the toes. All types of sensitivity are preserved. No blisters. What degree of frostbite is observed?
a. III degree
b. II degree
*c. I degree
d. IV degree
e. V degree

7. After an accident a patient complains of pain in the hip joint. Objectively: the leg is in the position of flexion, adduction and internal rotation, significantly contracted. There is elastic resistance to passive adduction or abduction of the extremity. Major trochanter is located high above the Roser-Nelaton line. A significant lordosis is present. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Inferoposterior dislocation of hip
b. Pertrochanteric fracture of hip
c. Femoral neck fracture with a displacement
d. Cotyloid cavity fracture with a central dislocation of hip
*e. Iliac dislocation of hip

8. Three weeks after acute angina the patient is still weak, inert, subfebrile, his retromaxillary lymph nodes are enlarged. Tonsils are flabby, stick together with arches, there are purulent plugs in lacunae. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Chronic tonsillitis
b. Acute lacunar tonsillitis
c. Tonsillar tumour
d. Paratonsillitis
e. Chronic pharyngitis

9. A 43 year old patient had right-sided deep vein thrombosis of iliofemoral segment 3 years ago. Now he is suffering from the sense of heaviness, edema of the lower right extremity. Objectively: moderate edema of shin, brown induration of skin in the lower third of shin, varix dilatation of superficial shin veins are present. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute thrombophlebitis of superficial veins
*b. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome, varicose form
c. Lymphedema of lower right extremity
d. Acute thrombosis of right veins
e. Parkes-Weber syndrome

10. A child undergoes in-patient treatment for acute staphylococcal destruction of the right lung. Unexpectedly he develped acute chest pain on the right, dyspnea, cyanosis. The right side of chest lags behind in the respiratory act. Percussion reveals dullness in the lower parts on the right, bandbox resonance in the upper parts. Borders of the relative cardiac dullness are shifted to the left. What complication has most likely developed?
*a. Right-sided pyopneumothorax
b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Right lung abscess
d. Exudative pleuritis
e. Pleural empyema

11. A 98 y.o. male patient complains of pain in the left lower limb which intensifies on walking, feeling of cold and numbness in both feet. He has been ill for 6 years. On examination: pale dry skin, hyperkeratosis. Hairy covering is poorly developed on the left shin. "Furrow symptom " is positive on the left. Pulse on foot arteries and popliteal artery isnt palpated, on the femoral artery its weak. On the right limb the artery pulsation is reserved. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Obliterating endarteritis
b. Raynaulds disease
c. Buergers disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
*d. Arteriosclerosis obliterans
e. Hemoral arthery thombosis

12. Examination of a dead man who died from hanging revealed that cadaver spots disappeared when pressed upon and restored after 50 seconds, rigor mortis was moderately expressed only in the masticatory muscles and the muscles of neck and fingers. Body temperature was 31°C. Specify the time of death:
a. 8-10 hours
b. 10-18 hours
c. 1-2 hours
d. 16-24 hours
*e. 6-7 hours

13. Examination of the corpse of a man who died from hanging reveals: death spots disappear when pressed upon and restore after 50 seconds, rigor mortis is moderately expressed only in the masticatory muscles as well as neck and finger muscles, body temperature is of 31°C. The time of death:
a. 1-2 hours ago
b. 8-10 hours ago
c. 10-18 hours ago
*d. 6-7 hours ago
e. 16-24 hours ago

14. After contusion of the right eye a patient complains of sudden loss of vision with remaining light perception. Objectively: the eye is not irritated. The cornea is transparent. Pupil reacts to light. The pupil area is black. The fundus reflex is absent. What is the most likely cause of vision loss?
a. Traumatic cataract
b. Retinal detachment
*c. Hemophthalmia
d. Acute occlusion of retinal vessels
e. Optic nerve avulsion

15. A 65-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine, moderate disuria. He has been suffering from these presentations for about half a year. Prostate volume is 45 cm3 (there are hypoechogenic nodes in both lobes, capsule invasion). The rate of prostate-specific antigen is 60 ng/l. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Which of the supplemental examination methods will allow to determine the stage of neoplastic process in this patient?
a. Roentgenography of lumbar spine
b. Bone scintigraphy
c. Roentgenography of chest
*d. Computer tomography of pelvis
e. Excretory urography

16. X-ray picture of chest shows a density and an abrupt decrease in the upper lobe of the right lung. The middle and lower lobe of the right lung exhibit significant pneumatization. The right pulmonary hilum comes up to the dense lobe. In the upper and middle parts of the left pulmonary field there are multiple focal shadows. In the basal region of the left pulmonary field there are clear outlines of two annular shadows with quite thick and irregular walls. What disease is this X-ray pattern typical for?
a. Pancoast tumour
*b. Fibro-cavernous pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Abscessing pneumonia
d. Atelectasis of the right upper lobe
e. Peripheral cancer

17. A patient complains of impaired far vision. Previously his eyes often turned red and hurt. Objectively: the eyes are not irritated, the cornea is transparent, anterior chambers are median deep, their liquid is transparent. The iris of the right eye has not changed in colour, its pattern is unchanged. The pupil is of irregular shape, scalloped. Biomicroscopy of the crystalline lens reveals the areas of opacity and vacuoles. Make a diagnosis:
a. Diabetic cataract of the right eye
b. Senile cataract of the right eye
*c. Complicated cataract of the right eye
d. Tetanic cataract of the right eye
e. Radiation cataract of the right eye

18. A 26-year-old patient complains of experiencing pain in the right hand for 4 days. The pain arose at the site of corns on the palmar surface at the base of the II and III fingers. Some time later the dorsum of hand became edematic. I and III fingers are half-bent in the interphalangeal joints, the hand looks like "rake". What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Phlegmon of the second interdigital space of the right hand
b. Corn abscess of the right hand
c. Tendovaginitis
d. U-shaped phlegmon of the right hand
e. Adenophlegmon of the right hand

19. A 30-year-old patient had deep burn covering 30% of body 30 days ago. Now he presents with continued fever, loss of appetite, night sweats. Burned surface weakly granulates. What is the stage of burn disease?
a. Secondary burn shock
b. Primary burn shock
*c. Septicotoxemia
d. Acute burn toxemia
e. Convalescence

20. A 29 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with acute girdle pain in epigastric area, vomiting in 1 hour after the meal. On examination: pale, acrocyanosis. Breathing is frequent, shallow. Abdominal muscles are tensed, positive Schotkin-Blumbergs symptom. What is the maximal term to make a diagnosis?
*a. In 2 hours
b. In 1 hour
c. In 6 hours
d. In 3 hours
e. In 0,5 hours

21. A surgeon examined a 42-year-old patient and diagnosed him with right forearm furuncle at the purulo-necrotic stage. The furuncle was lanced. At the hydration stage the wound dressing should enclose the following medication:
a. Ichthyol ointment
b. Vishnevsky ointment
*c. Hypertonic solution
d. Chloramine
e. Dimexide

22. A 30 year old patient undergoes treatment because of Werlhofs disease. Objectively: the patient is pale, there are petechial haemorrhages on the extension surfaces of forearms. Ps is 92 bpm, AP is 100/60 mm Hg. The lower edge of spleen is at a level with umbilicus. Blood count: erythrocytes: 2,8×1012/l, Hb - 90 g/l, Ht - 0,38, thrombocytes – 30×109/l. The patient is being prepared for splenectomy. What transfusion medium should be chosen in the first place for the preoperational preparation?
a. Erythrocytic suspension
b. Washed erythrocytes
c. Stored blood
d. Native erythrocytic mass
*e. Thrombocytic mass

23. A 19 year old boy was admitted to a hospital with closed abdominal trauma. In course of operation multiple ruptures of spleen and small intestine were revealed. AP is falling rapidly, it is necessary to perform hemotransfusion. Who can specify the patients blood group and rhesus compatibility?
a. An anaesthesilogist
*b. A doctor of any speciality
c. A surgeon
d. A laboratory physician
e. A traumatologist

24. A 36-year-old man was delivered to the surgical department an hour after a road accident. His condition is getting worse: respiratory insufficiency is progressing, there are cardiac abnormalities. Clinical and roentgenological investigations revealed mediastinal displacement. What process has caused this complication?
*a. Valvular pneumothorax
b. Closed pneumothorax
c. Mediastinitis
d. Subcutaneous emphysema
e. Open pneumothorax

25. A victim of the car crash was brought to neurosurgery due to craniocerebral trauma. During examination symptoms of focused injury of the cerebrum are found, cerebrum contusion is suspected. What method of examination is to be used?
a. Antiography of vessels of the cerebrum
b. X- ray of cranium bones
*c. Computed tomography of the cerebrum
d. Ultrasound examination of vessels of the cerebrum
e. Eye-ground examination

26. A 35 y.o. female patient was admitted to the surgical department with symptoms of ulcerative gastric hemorrhage. Its been the third hemorrhage for the last 2 years. After conservative treatment vomiting with blood stopped, hemoglobin elevated from 60 till 108 g/L. General condition became better. But profuse vomiting with blood reoccured in 2-3- hours. Hemoglobin decreased to 93,1 g/L then to 58,1 g/L. What is the tactics of treatment?
a. Conservative treatment with following surgery
b. Taylors treatment
c. Deferred surgery
d. Conservative treatment
*e. Urgent surgery

27. A 39-year-old patient complains of a tumour on the anterior surface of her neck. The tumour has been observed for 2 years. It is nonmobile and has enlarged recently. The patient has a changed tone of voice, a sense of pressure. Objectively: in the left lobe of the thyroid gland a 3 cm node is palpable; it is very dense, tuberous, painless. Cervical lymph nodes are enlarged. Functional status of the thyroid gland is unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic fibrous Riedels thyroiditis
*b. Thyroid gland cancer
c. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter
d. Nodular euthyroid goiter
e. Chronic lymphomatous Hashimotos thyroiditis

28. An unconscious victim in severe condition is brought to clinic. It is known that the patient touched the bare wire with his hand and during 5 minutes was under the influence of an alternating current with voltage of 220 V. Physical exam: skin is pale, cold by touch. Breath is weakened, BP - 90/50 mm Hg, Ps - 60 bpm, arrhythmical. There are fields of necrosis of the skin on the right hand and on the right foot. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. -
*b. Electroburn of the right foot and right hand
c. Vascular collapse due to electric current lesion
d. Electrotrauma, acute cardiovascular failure
e. High voltaged electroburn of the right foot and shank

29. A 47-year-old patient complains about cough with purulent sputum, pain in the lower part of the left chest, periodical body temperature rise. She has been suffering from these presentations for about 10 years. Objectively: "drumstick" distal phalanges. What examination would be the most informative for making a diagnosis?
a. Survey radiograph of lungs
b. Bronchoscopy
*c. Bronchography
d. Pleural puncture
e. Bacteriological analysis of sputum

30. Blood typing resulted in positive isohemagglutination reaction with standard sera of A(II) and B(III) groups and negative reaction with sera of 0(I) and AB(IV) groups. What is this result indicative of?
a. The third blood group
b. The fourth blood group
c. The first blood group
d. The second blood group
*e. Faulty standard sera

31. A victim of a road accident, aged 44, is operated on account of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. In which case can the patients blood from the abdominal cavity be used for autotransfusion?
a. Small intestines rupture
*b. Stomach rupture
c. Liver rupture
d. Bladder rupture
e. Splenic rupture

32. A man with a stab-wound of the right foot applied to doctor. He stepped on the board with nail two hours ago. In the patient medical chart it is stated that 3 years ago he passed the whole course of vaccination against tetanus. What is the tactics of doctor to prevent tetanus in this case?
a. Administer 0,5 ml of tetanus toxoid
b. Administer 3000 U of anti-tetanic serum
c. Administer 1 ml tetanus toxoid and 3000 U of anti-tetanic serum
*d. Do not conduct specific prophylaxis
e. Administer 1,0 ml of tetanus toxoid

33. A 42-year-old patient with acute haemorrhage and class III blood loss underwent blood transfusion and got 1,8 l of preserved blood and erythromass of the same group and Rh. After the transfusion the patient complained of unpleasant retrosternal sensations, his arterial pressure dropped to 100/60 mm Hg, there appeared convulsions. Blood serum calcium was at the rate of 1,7 millimole/liter. What is the mechanism of this complication development?
a. The increased citrate rate causes convulsions
b. Citrate binds potassium causing severe hypokalemia
c. Citrate is cardiotoxic and nephrotoxic
d. Citrate causes the development of metabolic acidosis
*e. Citrate binds calcium ions, hypocalcemia impairs myocardial function

34. A 40-year-old woman with acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage was transfused 400 ml of the preserved blood after having conducted all compatibility tests. After hemotransfusion the condition of the patient became worse. She started having headache, muscles pain, her temperature has risen up to 38,8°C. What is the reason for such condition of the patient?
*a. Pyrogenic reaction of medium severity
b. Allergic reaction
c. Air embolism
d. Bacterial and toxic shock development
e. Hemotransfusional shock development

35. A 27-year-old patient with a knife stomach wound has been delivered to a hospital 4 hours after injury. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition. Ps- 120 bpm, weak. AP- 70/40 mm Hg. Laparotomy revealed a lot of liquid blood in the abdominal cavity. The patient has been found to have bleeding from the mesenteric vessels of the small intestine. Damage to hollow organs has not been revealed. What is the best way to restore the blood loss?
a. Erythromass transfusion
b. Transfusion of fresh frozen plasma
c. Rheopolyglucinum transfusion
*d. Autoblood reinfusiont
e. Transfusion of washed erythrocytes

36. A patient presented to a hospital with a carbuncle of the upper lip. The body temperature is 39°C. There is a pronounced edema of the upper lip and eyelids. What is the surgeons tactics of choice?
a. Administer physiotherapy
b. Disclose the carbuncle and administer antibiotics
c. Administer out-patient course of antibiotics
d. Disclose the carbuncle and administer out-patient treatment
*e. Hospitalize in the surgical unit

37. A patient, aged 25, suffering from stomach ulcer. Had a course of treatment in the gastroenterological unit. 2 weeks later developed constant pain, increasing and resistant to medication. The abdomen is painful in epigastric area, moderate defence in pyloroduodenal area. Which complication development aggravated the patients state?
a. Stenosis
*b. Malignisation
c. Perforation
d. Penetration
e. Haemorrhage

38. A 62-year-old male patient complains of intense pain in the left leg that suddenly arose three hours before, leg numbness and coldness. During the year there has been pain in the leg while walking, hypersensitivity to cooling. Objectively: the left foot and shin have marbled skin, subcutaneous veins are collapsed. The foot is cold, active movements of the foot and toes are preserved. Pulse is present only on the femoral artery. There is rough systolic murmur above the artery. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Stenosis of the left popliteal artery
b. Occlusive disease
*c. Acute occlusion of the left femoral artery
d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Acute arterial thrombosis ileofemoralny

39. A patient complains about pyrosis and permanent pain behind his breastbone. When he bends forward after eating there appears regurgitation. Roentgenological examination revealed extrasaccular cardiofunctional hernia of esophageal opening of diaphragm. Esophagoscopy revealed signs of reflux-esophagitis. What is the necessary tretment tactics?
a. Conservative treatment in a surgical department
b. Treatment at a health resort
c. Conservative treatment in an outpatients clinic
d. Conservative treatment in the therapeutic hospital
*e. Operation in a surgical department

40. A patient aged 18 with a cranial injury was in comatose state during several hours. In post-comatose period gets tired quickly, non-productive in dialog - in the beginning answers 2-3 questions, then gets tired and can not understand the point of the question. Which psychotropic should be given to the patient to prevent psychoorganic syndrome?
a. Stimulators
b. Neuroleptics
*c. Nootropics
d. Tranquillisers
e. Antidepressants

41. A 45-year-old male patient with acute abscess of the left lung has suddenly developed acute chest pain and dyspnea while coughing, tachycardia has increased. The control Ro-gram shows left lung collapse, the air in the left pleural cavity and a horizontal fluid level. What is the mechanism of this complication?
a. Atelectasis of the left lung
b. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
c. Bullae rupture of the left lung
d. Inflammation spread to the visceral pleura
*e. Abscess burst into the pleural cavity

42. Examination of a 38-year-old patient who had been hit with a blunt object on the left side of chest revealed a fracture of the X rib with fragments displacement, parietal pneumothorax. The patient complains of pain in the left subcostal area. Objectively: the patient is pale, AP- 80/40 mm Hg, Ps- 138/min, of poor volume. USI reveals fluid in the left abdomen. Splenic rupture is present. What treatment tactics should be chosen?
*a. Drainage of the left pleural cavity followed by laparotomy
b. Immediate laparotomy and alcohol-novocaine block of the X rib
c. Left-sided thoracotomy immediately followed by laparotomy
d. Anti-schock actions followed by laparotomy after the arterial pressure rise
e. Immediate upper median laparotomy followed by drainage of the left pleural cavity

43. On the 2nd day after a surgery for toxic mixed goiter IV a 35-year-old patient complains of heart pain. ECG shows prolonged QT intervals. Chvosteks and Trousseau symptoms cannot be clearly defined. The patient is provisionally diagnosed with latent tetany. What study will allow to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Determination of blood calcium and phosphor
b. Determination of potassim
c. Determination of thyroid hormones
d. Determination of sodium
e. Determination of thyrotropic hormone

44. A patient with bilateral hydrothorax has repeatedly undergone pleural puncture on both sides. After a regular puncture the patients condition has become worse: he presents with fever, chest pain. The next day, the attending physician performing pleural puncture revealed some pus on the right. What is the mechanism of acute right-sided empyema development?
a. Hematogenous
b. Lymphogenous
*c. Contact-and-aspiration
d. Implantation
e. Aerial

45. A 25 y.o. patient was admitted with chest trauma. Clinical and X-ray examination have revealed tense pneumothorax on the left. What emergency treatment should be undertaken?
a. Intravenous infusions
b. Intubation
c. Analgetics
*d. Pleural cavity drainage
e. Oxigenotherapy

46. A 38 y.o. patient lifted a heavy object that resulted in pain in the lumbar part of spine irradiating to the posterior surface of his left leg. The pain increases during changing body position and also in the upright position. Examination revealed positive symptoms of tension. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Pathology of intercostal disks
b. Arachnomyelitis
c. Myelopathy
d. Polyneuritis
e. Spinal cord tumor

47. Two hours ago a 38-year-old patient got pain in his right shin. He was diagnosed with popliteal artery embolism, acute arterial insufficiency of grade I. What is the most appropriate therapeutic tactics?
a. Resection of the popliteal artery
b. Destruction of the embolus by the catheter
*c. Embolectomy
d. Bypass grafting
e. Amputation at the middle of shin

48. A 38-year-old patient has suddenly developed pain in the left side of his chest, suffocation. Objectively: moderately grave condition, Ps- 100/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg, breath sounds on the left cannot be auscultated. Chest radiography shows the collapse of the left lung up to 1/2. What kind of treatment should be administered?
a. Active thoracostomy
*b. Passive thoracostomy
c. Pleural puncture
d. Rest, resolution therapy
e. Operative therapy

49. A 47-year-old female patient complains of leg heaviness, fatigue when standing and walking. This feeling disappears when she takes a horizontal position. Objectively: dilatation of the superficial veins of the left shin and thigh with pigmentation and trophic skin disorders. What functional test should the examination be started with?
a. Sheinis test
b. Perthes test
c. Pratt test 2
d. Pratt test 1
*e. Trendelenburgs test

50. A neonatologist examining a full-term mature baby revealed the shortening and external rotation of the newborns lower extremity. Clinical examination revealed positive Ortolani sign, symptom of non-vanishing pulse, additional skin folds on the internal surface of thigh. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Congenital hip dislocation
b. Varus deformity of the femoral neck
c. Fracture of the femoral shaft
d. Femoral neck fracture
e. Dysplasia of the hip joint

51. A child is being discharged from the surgical department after conservative treatment of invagination. What recommendations should doctor give to mother to prevent this disease recurrence?
a. Common cold prophilaxis
b. Gastro-intestinal disease prevention
c. Hardening of the child
*d. Strict following of feeding regimen
e. Feces observation

52. A 10-year-old child has been admitted to a hospital with a closed craniocerebral injury with suspected cerebral edema. The patient is in grave condition, unconscious. The dyspnea, tachycardia, hypertension are present. Muscle tone is increased, there is nystagmus, pupillary and oculomotor reactions are disturbed. The mandatory component of intensive care is dehydration. What diuretic is adequate in this case?
*a. Furosemide
b. Hydrochlorthiazide
c. Moduretic
d. Spironolactone
e. Mannitol

53. A 40-year-old patient underwent an operation for a lumbar phlegmon. Body temparature rose again up to 38°C, he got intoxication symptoms, there was an increase of leukocyte number in blood. The wound that was nearly free from necrotic tissues and full of granulations started to discharge pus, the granulations turned pale. What complication dveloped in this patient?
a. Erysipelas
b. Putrid phlegmon
*c. Sepsis
d. Allergic reaction
e. Erysipeloid

54. After a car accident a 37-year-old patient has an acute pain and bleeding in the middle third of his right thigh. Objectively: there is a wound on the anterior surface of the right thigh with massive bleeding, abnormal mobility at the level of the middle third of the thigh. The first aid is to be started with:
a. Immobilization of the extremity with a transportation splint
b. Venipuncture and intravenous infusion of polyglycine
c. Injection of pain-killers
d. Tourniquet application
*e. Digital occlusion of the femoral artery

55. A 42-year-old builder consulted a doctor about a foot injury with a nail that he got in the morning of the same day. The wound was washed with water. Three years ago he was vaccinated against tetanus. Examination established satisfactory condition of the patient. The left foot was slightly edematic, there was a stab wound on the sole. In order to prevent tetanus it is primarily required to:
a. Give an intravenous injection of 3000 IU of antitetanus serum
b. Give an intravenous injection of 1 ml of tetanus anatoxin, 3000 IU of antitetanus serum
*c. Give an intravenous injection of 0,5 ml of tetanus anatoxin
d. Treat the wound with suds
e. Administer a course of antibiotic therapy

56. A 9-year-old boy fell from a tree and hit the occipital region, there was a momentary loss of consciousness. Objectively: the childs condition is satisfactory, he complains of the headache and dizziness. The X-ray of skull reveals a comminuted depressed fracture of occipital bone in the region of inion. What treatment is indicated for the patient?
a. Complex conservative treatment
*b. Surgical intervention
c. Hemostatic therapy
d. Anti-inflammatory therapy
e. Therapeutic lumbar punctures

57. A 55-year-old patient complains of severe itching, burning and pain in the eyes, skin redness in the outer corners of the palpebral fissure. Objectively: skin around the outer corners of the palpebral fissure is macerated, eczematous, there are single moist cracks. Palpebral conjunctiva is hyperemic, quaggy. There are minor discharges in form of stringing mucus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Blepharitis
b. Atopic eyelid dermatitis
c. Acute conjunctivitis
d. Sty
*e. Chronic conjunctivitis

58. A 40-year-old female patient has a history of rheumatism. She complains about acute pain in her left eye, especially at night, vision impairment, photophobia, lacrimation. The patient cannot suggest any reasons for the disease. Objectively: weak pericorneal injection, flattening of iris relief, iris discoloration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Choroiditis
b. Acute attack of glaucoma
c. Iritis
d. Keratitis
*e. Iridocyclitis

59. 14 days ago a 49-year-old patient was operated on for perforated appendicitis and disseminated fibrinopurulent peritonitis. The postoperative period was uneventful. On the 9th day the patient presented with low-grade fever, abdominal pain, frequent liquid stools. USI of the left mesogastrium reveals a fluid formation 9x10 cm large. In blood: leukocytosis with the left shift. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Left kidney cyst
b. Spleen abscess
c. Abdominal cavity tumour
d. Liver abscess
*e. Interloop abscess

60. A patient, aged 81, complains of constant urinary excretion in drops, feeling of fullness in thelower abdomen. On examination: above pubis there is a spherical protrusion, over which there is a dullness of percussion sound, positive suprapubic punch. What symptom is observed in this patient?
*a. Paradoxal ischuria
b. Dysuria
c. Pollakiuria
d. Enuresis
e. Urinary incontinence

61. A 67 y.o. patient complains of dyspnea, breast pain, common weakness. He has been ill for 5 months. Objectively: to- 37,3°C, Ps- 96/min. Vocal tremor over the right lung cannot be determined, percussion sound is dull, breathing cannot be auscultated. In sputum: blood diffusively mixed with mucus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Bronchoectatic disease
b. Macrofocal pneumonia
*c. Lung cancer
d. Focal pulmonary tuberculosis
e. Exudative pleuritis

62. A 52 year old patient complains about pain in the right part of her chest, dyspnea, cough with a lot of foul-smelling albuminoid sputum in form of "meat slops". Objectively: the patients condition is grave, cyanosis is present, breathing rate is 31/min, percussion sound above the right lung is shortened, auscultation revealed different rales. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic pneumonia
*b. Lung gangrene
c. Pleura empyema
d. Lung abscess
e. Multiple bronchiectasis

63. 3 hours ago a 65-year-old female patient felt sharp abdominal pain irradiating to the right scapula, there was a single vomiting. She has a history of rheumatoid arthritis. Objectively: pale skin, AP- 100/60 mm Hg, Ps- 60/min. Abdomen is significantly painful and tense in the epigastrium and right subcostal areat, there are positive symptoms of parietal peritoneum irritation over the right costal arch, that is tympanitis. What is the tactics of an emergency doctor?
*a. To take the patient to the surgical hospital
b. To perform gastric lavage
c. To take the patient to the rheumatological department
d. To inject spasmolytics
e. To inject pain-killers and watch the dynamics

64. A 15 year old patient suffers from headache, nasal haemorrhages, sense of lower extremity coldness. Objectively: muscles of shoulder girdle are developed, lower extremities are hypotrophied. Pulsation on the pedal and femoral arteries is sharply dampened. AP is 150/90 mm Hg, 90/60 on the legs. Systolic murmur can be auscultated above carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Aortal insufficiency
b. Coarctation of pulmonary artery
c. Aorta aneurism
d. Aortal stenosis
*e. Aorta coarctation

65. A 15 y.o. patient has developmental lag, periodical skin yellowing. Objectively: spleen is 16х12х10 cm large, holecistolithiasis, skin ulcer on the lower third of his left crus. Blood count: erythrocytes - 3,0×1012/L, Hb- 90 g/L, C.I.- 1,0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Blood bilirubin - 56 mmole/L, indirect bilirubin - 38 mmole/L. Choose the way of treatment:
a. Omentosplenopexy
b. Omentohepatopexy
c. Spleen transplantation
d. Portocaval anastomosis
*e. Splenectomy

66. A 72-year-old patient complains of pain and bleeding during defecation. Digital rectal investigation revealed a tumour of the anal canal. After verification of the diagnosis the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma. The secondary (metastatic) tumour will be most probably found in:
a. Brain
*b. Lungs
c. Pelvic bones
d. Liver
e. Mediastinum

67. A patient with frostbite of both feet was delivered to the admission ward. What actions should be taken?
a. To administer cardiac medications
b. To rub feet with snow
c. To apply an alcohol compress
*d. To apply a bandage, to introduce vasodilating medications
e. To put feet into hot water

68. 10 years ago a patient had a fracture in the middle one-third of his left femoral bone, and during the last 7 years he has been having acute inflammation in the area of old fracture accompanied by formation of a fistula through which some pus with small fragments of bone tissue is discharged. After a time the fistula closes. What complication of the fracture is it?
a. Bone tuberculosis
b. False joint
c. Trophic ulcer
*d. Chronic osteomyelitis
e. Soft tissue phlegmon

69. A 21-year-old male patient got a deep cut wound in his right thigh. In the emergency room a surgeon on duty performed primary debridement of the wound and primary wound closure with a suture. After 4 days, there appeared pain, redness, edema, purulent discharge from the wound gap, body temperature rose up to 39°C. What kind of wound complication can you think of and what actions should be taken?
a. Erysipelas, prescribe antibiotics
b. Infiltration, apply a hot compress
*c. Wound abscess, remove the sutures and drain the wound
d. Tetanus, active-passive immunization against tetanus
e. Lymphangitis, apply a hot compress

70. A patient has a stab wound on his right foot. On the fourth day after injury the patients body temperature rose up to 38°C, inguinal lymph nodes became enlarged and painful, skin over them reddened. What complication might be suspected?
a. Tetanus
b. Erysipelas
c. Lymphangitis
d. Phlegmon
*e. Lymphadenitis

71. During a surgery on a 30-year-old patient a dark ileo-ileal conglomerate was discovered, the intussusceptum intestine was considered to be unviable. The intussuscipiens intestine was dilated to 7-8 cm, swollen, full of intestinal contents and gases. What pathology led to the surgery?
a. Obturation obstruction
b. Strangulation obstruction
*c. Invagination (combined) obstruction
d. Paralytic obstruction
e. Spastic obstruction

72. A 52 year old patient complains about headache, weakness of his upper left extremity. Neurological symptoms become more intense during physical stress of the left extremity. Pulsation on the arteries of the left extremity is sharply dampened but it remains unchanged on the carotid arteries. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Occlusion of brachiocephalic trunk
*b. Occlusion of the left subclavicular artery, steal syndrome
c. Raynauds syndrome
d. Thoracal outlet syndrome
e. Takayasus disease

73. A 43-year-old patient had been admitted to a hospital with clinical presentations of ischiorectal periproctitis. On the 12th day of treatment the patients condition deteriorated: there was an increase in the rate of intoxication and hepatic failure, the body temperature became hectic, AP was 100/60 mm Hg. USI of liver revealed a hydrophilic formation. In blood: WBCs - 19,6×109/l, RBCs.- 3,0×1012/l, Hb- 98 g/l. What complication was developed?
a. Liver necrosis
b. Budd-Chiari syndrome
c. Pylephlebitis
d. Hepatic cyst
*e. Liver abscess

74. A 57 year old patient abruptly lost the sight of one eye. Examination revealed that his sight made up 0,02 excentrically, eye fundus has haemorrhages of different forms and sizes ("squashed tomato" symptom). Disc of optic nerve is hyperemic. In anamnesis general vascular pathology is recorded. Direct-acting anticoagulants were administered. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Embolism of central artery of retina
b. Diabetic retinopathy
c. Hypertensive angiopathy
d. Hypertensive angioneuropathy
*e. Thrombosis of central vein of retina

75. Half an hour ago a 67-year-old patient with a hernia picked up a heavy object, which caused acute pain in the region of hernia protrusion, the hernia couldnt be reduced. Objectively: the hernia in the right inguinal region is roundish, tight, moderately painful; during palpation it was reduced back to the cavity, the pain was gone. Specify the further medical tactics:
a. Planned hernioplasty a year later
*b. Inpatient surveillance
c. Immediate laparotomy
d. Immediate hernioplasty
e. Planned hernioplasty a month later

76. A 55 year old patient felt suddenly sick in a hospital corridor, he was immediately examined by a doctor. Examination revealed that the patients skin was pale, autonomous respiration was absent, pulse on carotid arteries couldnt be felt, pupils were mydriatic. What action should be taken at the beginning of cardiac resuscitation?
a. Defibrillation
*b. Precordial thump
c. Closed-chest cardiac massage
d. Mouth-to-mouth ventilation
e. Restoration of airway patency

77. A 30-year-old patient has been admitted to the intensive care unit for multiple bee stings. The skin is covered with cold sweat. The pulse is felt just on the carotid arteries, 110 bpm, respiration is 24/min, rhythmic, weakened. Which drug should be given in the first place?
*a. Adrenalin hydrochloride intravenously
b. Adrenalin hydrochloride intramuscularly
c. Tavegil intravenously
d. Dopamine intravenously
e. Prednisolone intravenously

78. A 25-year-old victim of a road accient complains of chest pain, dyspnea. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition, Ps- 120/min, AP- 90/70 mm Hg.There is pathological mobility of fragments of III-V ribs on the right. Percussion reveals a box sound over the right lung, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated on the right. What examination should be administered in the first place?
a. Bronchoscopy
b. USI of chest organs
c. Thoracoscopy
*d. X-ray of chest organs
e. Pleural puncture

79. After the pneumatic dilatation of oesophageal stricture a patient developed acute retrosternal pain getting worse when throwing the head back and swallowing. Objectively: dilatation of the neck veins, dropped beat pulse, signs of purulent intoxication, oliguria, emphysema of the upper portion of chest. What disease can be suspected?
a. Acute myocardial infarction
b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Thrombosis of the superior vena cava
d. Pleural empyema
*e. Suppurative mediastinitis

80. A 6-year-old girl drank some coloured fizzy drink which gave her a feeling of pressure in the throat. 30 minutes later the childs lips got swollen, then edema gradually spread over the whole face, laryngeal breathing became difficult. The child is excited. Ps- 120/min, breathing rate - 28/min, breathing is noisy, indrawing of intercostal spaces is observed. What basic aid is most appropriate for the restoration of laryngeal breathing?
a. Antibacterial drugs
b. Conicotomy
c. Sedative drugs
d. Tracheostomy
*e. Corticosteroids

81. An 8-month-old baby has had problems with nasal breathing and muco-purulent discharge from the nose for a week. Examination reveals a rhinedema, muco-purulent discharges from the middle nasal meatus as well as on the back of pharynx. What disease are these symptoms most typical for?
a. Frontitis
b. Hemisinusitis
c. Sphenoiditis
d. Maxillary sinusitis
*e. Ethmoiditis

82. A 28-year-old female patient has been admitted to a hospital. She states to be ill for 12 years. On examination she has been diagnosed with bronchiectasis with affection of the left lower lobe of lung. What is the optimal treatment tactics for this patient?
a. Left-sided pneumoectomy
b. Active drainage of the left pleural cavity
c. Bronchopulmonary lavage
*d. Left lower lobectomy
e. Antibiotic therpy

83. 4 weeks after myocardial infarction a 56-year-old patient developed acute heart pain, pronounced dyspnea. Objectively: the patients condition is extremely grave, there is marked cyanosis of face, swelling and throbbing of neck veins, peripheral pulse is absent, the carotid artery pulse is rhythmic, 130 bpm, AP is 60/20 mm Hg. Auscultation of heart reveals extremely muffled sounds, percussion reveals heart border extension in both directions. What is the optimal treatment tactis for this patient?
a. Conservative treatment, infusion of adrenomimetics
b. Pleural cavity drainage
c. Oxygen inhalation
d. Puncture of the pleural cavity on the left
*e. Pericardiocentesis and immediate thoracotomy

84. Esophagus wall of a 72 year old patient with severe concomitant pathology was injured during urgent fibroesophagogastroscopy. This resulted in progressing of acute respiratory failure and collapse of the left lung. What aid should be rendered?
a. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus and mediastinum wound
b. Buelaus drainage of pleural cavity, antibacterial therapy
*c. Drainage of pleural cavity by Bullaux method, mediastinum drainage, antibacterial therapy
d. Left-sided thoracotomy, closure of esophagus wound
e. Endoscopic closure of esophagus wound, drainage

85. A 17-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of the left knee joint. Soft tissues of thigh in the affected region are infiltrated, joint function is limited. X-ray picture of the distal metaepiphysis of the left femur shows a destruction focus with periosteum detachment and Codmans triangle found at the defect border in the bone cortex. X-ray of chest reveals multiple small focal metastases. What treatment is indicated?
a. Radioiodine therapy
b. Disarticulation of the lower extremity
c. Amputation of the lower extremity
*d. Palliative chemotherapy
e. Distance gamma-ray therapy

86. A 35-year-old victim of a road accident has got an injury of the right side of his chest. Objectively: respiration rate - 28-30/min, respiration is shallow, restricted respiratory excursion and acrocyanosis are present. Ps- 110 bpm, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Respiratory sounds over the right lung cannot be auscultated. Chest radiograph shows fractures of the VI-VII ribs on the right, the right pleural cavity contains both air and fluid, with the fluid at about the level of the V rib, the shadow of the mediastinum is displaced to the left. What first aid should be provided to the victim?
a. Vagosympathetic blockade
b. Antibiotic administration
*c. Puncture of the pleural cavity
d. Artificial ventilation of lungs
e. Urgent thoracotomy

87. On the first day after a surgery for diffuse toxic goiter a patient developed difficulty breathing, cold sweats, weakness. Objectively: pale skin, body temperature - 38,5°C, RR - 25/min, Ps- 110/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. What early postoperative complication occurred in the patient?
*a. Thyrotoxic crisis
b. Postoperative tetany
c. Compression of the trachea by the hematoma
d. Acute thyroiditis
e. Hypothyroid crisis

88. A 20-year-old patient complains of pain in the left lumbar region, arterial pressure rise up to 160/110 mm Hg. USI revealed that the structure and size of the right kidney were within age norms, there were signs of 3 degree hydronephrotic transformation of the left kidney. Doppler examination revealed an additional artery running to the lower pole of the kidney. Excretory urogram shows a narrowing in the region of ureteropelvic junction. Specify the therapeutic tactics:
*a. Surgical intervention
b. Administration of ACE inhibitors
c. Administration of beta-blockers
d. Kidney catheterization
e. Administration of spasmolytics

89. A 49-year-old male patient consulted a doctor about difficult swallowing, voice hoarseness, weight loss. These symptoms have been gradually progressing for the last 3 months. Objectively: the patient is exhausted, supraclavicular lymph nodes are enlarged. Esophagoscopy revealed no esophageal pathology. Which of the following studies is most appropriate in this case?
a. X-ray of lungs
b. Radioisotope investigation of chest
c. Ultrasound investigation of mediastinum
*d. Computed tomography of chest and mediastinum
e. Multiplanar imaging of esophagus

90. A 36-year-old male patient complains of having headache, obstructed nasal breathing, purulent nasal discharge for 2 weeks. A month before, he had his right maxillary premolar filled. Radiolography revealed an intense opacity of the right maxillary sinus. Diagnostic puncture revealed a large amount of thick malodorous crumbly pus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tumor of the maxillary sinus
*b. Chronic suppurative odontogenic sinusitis
c. Chronic purulent sinusitis
d. Acute purulent sinusitis
e. Chronic atrophic sinusitis

91. A patient with autoimmune thyroiditis accompanied by multinodular goiter underwent the right lobe ectomy and subtotal resection of the left lobe. What drug should be administered to prevent postoperative hypothyroidism?
a. Merkazolil
b. Lithium drugs
c. Insulin
*d. L-thyroxine
e. Iodomarin

92. A hospital admitted a patient with coarse breathing (obstructed inspiration), skin cyanosis, tachycardia and arterial hypertension. He has a histrory of bronchial asthma. An hour ago he was having salbutamol inhalation and forgot to remove a cap that was aspired while taking a deep breath. What measures should the doctor take?
a. To make a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone
*b. To perform the Heimlich manoever
c. To send for an anesthesiologist and wait for him
d. To perform conicotomy immediately
e. To use an inhalation of ?2-adrenoceptor agonist

93. An emergency physician arrived to provide medical care for a hangman taken out of the loop by his relatives. The doctor revealed no pulse in the carotid arteries, lack of consciousness, spontaneous breathing and corneal reflexes; cadaver spots on the back and posterior parts of extremities. A person can be declared dead if the following sign is present:
*a. Cadaver spots
b. Lack of corneal reflexes
c. Unconsciousness
d. Pulselessness
e. Lack of spontaneous breathing

94. An emergency physician arrived to provide medical care for a hangman taken out of the loop by his relatives. The doctor revealed no pulse in the carotid arteries, absence of consciousness, spontaneous breathing and corneal reflexes; cadaver spots on the back and posterior parts of extremities. A person can be declared dead if the following sign is present:
a. Absence of corneal reflexes
b. Absence of spontaneous breathing
*c. Cadaver spots
d. Pulselessness
e. Unconsciousness

95. A 69-year-old male patient has been hospitalized with hypothermia. Objectively: the patient is pale, has shallow breathing. AP is 100/60 mm Hg, Ps is 60/min. Palpation of the abdomen and chest reveals no pathological signs. The body temperature is of 34,8°C. The patients breath smells of alcohol. Give treatment recommendations:
a. Body warming with hot-water bags
b. Rubbing with alcohol and snow
c. Antishock therapy
*d. Warm bath + intravenous administration of warm solutions
e. Forced diuresis

96. A patient undergoing treatment for the left-sided destructive pneumonia presents with deterioration of his general condition, progressing dyspnea, cyanosis. Objectively: the left side of chest is not involved in respiration, breathing sounds cannot be auscultated. Radiograph shows a shadow reaching the 5 rib with a horizontal fluid level and a radiolucency above it, the mediastinum is displaced to the right. What is the medical tactics?
a. Emergency bronchoscopy
*b. Thoracostomy
c. Endotracheal intubation
d. Open thoracotomy
e. Infusion and antibacterial therapy

97. A 26-year-old male patient consulted a doctor abut sore throat, fever up to 38,2°C. A week before, the patient had quinsy, didnt follow medical recommendations. On examination, the patient had forced position of his head, trismus of chewing muscles. Left peritonsillar region is markedly hyperemic, swollen. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Pharyngeal diphtheria
b. Tonsil tumour
c. Meningitis
d. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
*e. Left-sided peritonsillar abscess

98. A 26-year-old patient consulted a doctor abut sore throat, fever up to 38,2°C. A week ago, the patient had angina, didnt follow medical recommendations. On examination, the patient had forced position of his head, trismus of chewing muscles. Left peritonsillar region is markedly hyperemic, swollen. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Meningitis
b. Diphtheria of the pharynx
c. Tonsil tumour
*d. Left-sided peritonsillar abscess
e. Phlegmonous angina

99. A 77-year-old male patient complains of inability to urinate, bursting pain above the pubis. The patient developed acute condition 12 hours before. Objectively: full urinary bladder is palpable above the pubis. Rectal prostate is enlarged, dense and elastic, well-defined, with no nodes. Interlobular sulcus is distinct. Ultrasonography results: prostate volume is 120 cm3, it projects into the bladder cavity, has homogeneous parenchyma. Prostate-specific antigen rate is of 5 ng/ml. What is the most likely disease that caused acute urinary retention?
*a. Prostatic hyperplasia
b. Sclerosis of the prostate
c. Acute prostatitis
d. Tuberculosis of the prostate
e. Prostate carcinoma

100. A 4 month old child was admitted to a surgical department 8 hours after the first attack of anxiety. The attacks happen every 10 minutes and last for 2-3 minutes, there was also one-time vomiting. Objectively: the childs condition is grave. Abdomen is soft, palpation reveals a tumour-like formation in the right iliac area. After rectal examination the doctors finger was stained with blood. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Ileocecal invagination
b. Wilms tumour
c. Pylorostenosis
d. Helminthic invasion
e. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage

101. A 3-year-old male patient consulted a family doctor 2 months after he had been operated for an open fracture of brachial bone. Objectively: the patients condition is satisfactory, in the region of the operative wound there is a fistula with some purulent discharge, redness, fluctuation. X-ray picture shows brachial bone destruction with sequestra. What complication arose in the postoperative period?
a. Hematogenic osteomyelitis
b. Posttraumatic phlegmon
c. Suture sinus
*d. Posttraumatic osteomyelitis
e. Wound abscess

102. A 40-year-old female patient complains of having a bulge on the anterior surface of neck for 5 years. Objectively: Ps- 72 bpm, arterial pressure - 110/70 mm Hg, in the right lobe of thyroid gland palpation reveals a mobile 4x2 cm node, the left lobe is not palpable, the basal metabolic rate is 6%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mixed euthyroid goiter
b. The median cervical cyst
c. Nodular hyperthyroid goiter
d. Riedels thyroiditis
*e. Nodular euthyroid goiter

103. Forensic medical expertise of corpse of a newborn revealed: body weight 3500 g, body length 50 cm, the umbilical cord was smooth, moist, glossy, without any signs of drying. Hydrostatic tests were positive. The test results are the evidence of:
a. Stillbirth
b. Secondary atelectasis
c. Hyaline membrane disease
*d. Live birth
e. Primary atelectasis

104. A week ago a 65-year-old patient suffered an acute myocardial infarction, his general condition deteriorated: he complains of dyspnea at rest, pronounced weakness. Objectively: edema of the lower extremities, ascites is present. Heart borders are extended, paradoxical pulse is 2 cm displaced from the apex beat to the left. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute cardiac aneurysm
b. Acute pericarditis
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Cardiosclerotic aneurysm
e. Recurrent myocardial infarction

105. A 36-year-old injured has been taken to the emergency station with open tibial fractures. Examination reveals bleeding: pulsating blood spurts out of the wound. What medical manipulations are required at this stage of medical care?
a. Stop the bleeding by a compressive bandage and transport the patient to the operating room
b. Transport the patient to the operating room
c. Immobilize the fracture and transport the patient to the operating room
d. Apply a tourniquet on the thigh distal to the source of bleeding and transport the patient to the operating room
*e. Apply a tourniquet on the thigh proximal to the source of bleeding and transport the patient to the operating room

106. A 75-year-old male patient complains of slight pain in the right iliac region. The abdominal pain arose 6 days ago and was accompanied by nausea. Surgical examination revealed moist tongue, Ps- 76 bpm. AP- 130/80 mm Hg. Abdomen was soft, slightly painful in the right iliac region on deep palpation, the symptoms of the peritoneum irritation were doubtful. In blood: RBCs - 4,0×1012/l, Hb- 135 g/l, WBCs - 9,5×109/l, stab neutrophils - 5%, segmentonuclear - 52%, lymphocytes - 38%, monocytes - 5%, ESR - 20 mm/h. Specify the doctors further tactics:
a. Administration of additional examination: abdominal ultrasound, x-ray contrast study of the gastrointestinal tract
*b. Emergency operation for acute appendicitis
c. Send the patient home
d. Hospitalization, dynamic surveillance
e. Refer the patient to a district therapist

107. A 56-year-old patient was undergoing a surgery for suture repair of perforated ulcer. During the operation the cardiomonitor registered ventricular fibrillation. The first-priority measure should be:
a. Injection of calcium chloride
*b. Electrical defibrillation
c. Injection of lidocaine
d. Injection of adrenalin
e. Injection of atropine

108. A 78-year-old patient complains of severe pain in the lower abdomen, perineum and rectum; intense urge to urinate and inability to urinate without assistance. Abdomen palpation reveals a moderately painful globular formation above the pubis, there is percussion dullness over the formation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute urinary retention
b. Chronic incomplete urinary retention
c. Cystitis
d. Paradoxical ischuria
e. Chronic urinary retention

109. A 24-year-old patient had been delivered to the thoracic department with a chest injury, a fracture of the IV, V, VI ribs on the right. Plan radiography shows the fluid level in the pleural cavity reaching the III rib on the right. Puncture blood contained clots. What is the optimal treatment tactics?
a. Medical thoracoscopy
*b. Emergency thoracotomy
c. Thoracentesis and thoracostomy
d. Pleural puncture
e. Hemostatic therapy

