1. A 76 y.o. woman complains of progressing swallowing disorder, mostly she has had problems with solid food for the last 6 weeks. Sometimes she has regurgitation of solid masses. Swallowing is not painful. She lost 6 kg. 10 years ago she had myocardiac infarction, she takes constantly aspirine and prolonged nitrates. She consumes alcochol in moderate proportions, smokes. Objectively: icteric skin, neck has no pecularities, lymph nodes are not enlarged. Thorax has no changes, cardiovascular system has no evident changes. Liver is +3 cm. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Diffuse constriction of esophagus
b. Diaphragmatic hernia
*c. Cancer of esophagus
d. Myasthenia
e. Esophageal achalasia

2. A 65 y.o. man who has problems with urination as a result of benign prostate gland adenoma dveloped fever and chill, hypotension, sinus tachycardia. Skin is warm and dry. Clinical blood analysis revealed absolute granulocytopenia. These hemodynamic changes are most likely to be caused by:
a. Reflex vagus stimulation with lowered cardiac output
b. Secondary endothelial changes as a result of bacterial lesion
c. Secondary reflex vasodilatation as a result of lowered cardiac output
d. Secondary circulation insufficiency with retained systolic function as a result of peripheral vasoconstriction
*e. Endotoxemia with activation of complement system

3. A 60 y.o. man complains of sense of heaviness in the region of scrotum. Objectively: scrotum edema in the left part. Testicle is of normal size, but there is a soft, scrotum limited edema over it that can be pressed and disappears when the patient lies down. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Ectopic testicle
b. Inguinal lymphadenopathy
*c. Varicocele
d. Inguinal hernia
e. Varicosity of subcutaneous veins

4. A patient was delivered to a surgical department after a road accident with a closed trauma of chest and right-sided rib fracture. The patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax, it is indicated to perform drainage of pleural cavity. Pleural puncture should be made in:
a. In the 7th intercostal space along the scapular line
b. In the 6th intercostal space along the posterior axillary line
*c. In the 2nd intercostal space along the middle clavicular line
d. In the projection of pleural sinus
e. In the point of the greatest dullness on percussion

5. A 40 year old woman has changes of mammary gland. What are the most often symtomps that precede the malignization?
a. Painless movable induration
b. Painful movable induration
*c. Skin induration with inverted nipple
d. Bloody discharges from the nipple
e. Pure discharges from the nipple

6. Name a statistical observation unit for determination of influence amount of bloodsugar on the healing of wounds surface in a postoperative period:
a. Blood analysis
b. An amount of bloodsugar
*c. The patient in a postoperative period
d. The patient who has a wound surface
e. The patient who was discharged on an after-care

7. A 20-year-old patient was delivered to the hospital in summer from the street with haemorrage from the brachial artery. First medical aid involved application of a tourniquet for provisional arrest of bleeding. What is the maximal exposure of the tourniquet?
a. 30 minutes
b. 15 minutes
*c. 120 minutes
d. 60 minutes
e. 180 minutes

8. A 9 y.o. child with diagnosis "chronic tonsillitis" stands dispanserization control. Within 1 year of observation there was one exacerbation of disease. Physical condition is satisfactory. The general state is not infringed. Define group of health:
a. II-d
b. III (b)
c. III (c)
*d. III (a)
e. I-st

9. A 38 year old man, previously in good health, suddenly develops severe abdominal pain radiating from the left loin to groin and accompanied by nausea, perspiration and the need for frequent urination. He is restless, tossing in bed but has no abnormal findings. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Sigmoid diverticulitis
b. Herpes zoster
*c. Leftsided renal colic
d. Torsion of the left testicle
e. Retroperitoneal haemorrhage

10. A 40 year old woman has a self-detected hard breast mass. The procedure of choice for confirming the diagnosis is:
a. Mammography
b. Ultrasonography
c. Aspiration biopsy with cytology
*d. Excision biopsy
e. Thermography

11. During investigation for chronic, severe, epigastric pain, a 40 year old alcoholic man is found to have multiple areas of narrowing alternating with dilatation ("chain of lakes" appearance) of the main pancreatic duct. The operation of choice is:
a. Distal pancreatectomy
b. Total pancreatectomy
c. Distal pancreaticojejunostomy
d. Sphincterotomy
*e. Lateral pancreaticojejunostomy

12. The treatment of choice for duodenal obstruction caused by secondary duodenal hematoma that developed a few days after blunt abdominal injury is:
*a. Nasogastric decompression and parenteral alimentation
b. Duodenojejunostomy
c. Tube duodenostomy
d. Immediate exploration
e. Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy

13. An anestesiologist gives narcosis to the patient, he uses a non-reversive contour. Anesthetic is halothane. Air temperature in the operation room is 21°C, humidity 50%, level of noise 30 dB. What occupational hazard is the principal one under these conditions?
a. Compelled working pose
*b. Air pollution with anesthetic
c. High level of noise
d. Improper occupational microclimate
e. Mental overfatigue

14. A patient suddenly felt an acute chest pain irradiating to the left arm. Objectively: the patient is excited, with pale skin. Breathing rate - 38/min, AP - 180/110 mm Hg. Later the patient lost consciousness and fell down. Pulse on the great vessels was absent, the pupils were equally dilated. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Heart attack
b. Disorder of the cerebral circulation
c. Agonal state
d. Coma
*e. Clinical death

15. A 37-year-old patient has come to clinic being wounded in the area of umbilicus an hour ago.On physical exam, there is a prick and cut painful wound of about 0,5x1 cm around umbilicus on the abdominal skin with slight bleeding.How would you help this patient?
a. Drainage of the wound with rubber strip
b. Aseptic bandage
c. Suture on the wound
*d. Laparotomy, abdominal cavity organs inspection. Primary surgical processing of the wound
e. Inspection of the wound with canal probe

16. If a child has adherent fingers on his right hand, then what will be your diagnosis?
a. Polydactyly
b. Ectrodactyly
c. Ectromelia
*d. Syndactyly
e. Macrodactyly

17. A 34-year-old patient was bitten by a dog 3 hours ago.There is a wound by dog teeth without bleeding in the left arm. What surgical help would you provide to this patient?
*a. Clean wound with detergent water and apply anti-septic
b. Cream bandage
c. Incomplete suture of the wound
d. Complete suture of the wound
e. Aseptic bandage

18. Purulent mediastinitis is diagnosed at a 63-year-old patient. What diseases from the stated below CANNOT cause the purulent mediastinitis?
a. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
*b. Cervical lymphadenitis
c. Perforation of the cervical part of the easophagus
d. Deep neck phlegmon
e. Perforation of the thoracic part of the easophagus

19. A 63 year old patient was diagnosed with purulent mediastinitis. What of the below listed diseases are NOT the cause of purulent mediastinitis?
a. Deep neck phlegmon
b. Perforation of the thoracic part of the oesophagus
c. Iatrogenic injury of the trachea
*d. Cervical lymphadenitis
e. Perforation of the cervical part of the oesophagus

20. A 36 year old patient was diagnosed with right-sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Antiinflammation therapy
b. Pleural puncture
c. Thoracotomy
*d. Surgical treatment: drainage of the pleural cavity
e. Symptomatic therapy

21. The diagnosis of a right-sided pneumothorax is made to a 36- year-old patient. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Antiinflammation therapy
b. Pleural puncture
c. Thoracotomy
*d. Drainage of the pleural cavity
e. Symptomatic therapy

22. A 16 year old patient with complaints of frequent pain in the abdomen was diagnosed with melanoma, examination revealed also pigmentation of the mucosa and skin, polyp in the stomach and large intestine. It is know that the patients mother has an analogous pigmentation and has been often treated for anemia. What disease is suspected?
a. Adolescent polyposis
b. Hirschprungs disease
c. Chrons disease
d. Tuberculosis of the intestine
*e. Peytz-Egerss polyposis

23. A 41 year old patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with haemorrhagic shock due to gastric bleeding. He has a history of hepatitis B during the last 5 years. The source of bleeding are esophageal veins. What is the most effective method for control of the bleeding?
*a. Introduction of obturator nasogastric tube
b. Hemostatic therapy
c. Administration of plasma
d. Operation
e. Intravenous administration of pituitrin

24. It is suspected that a 34 year old patient has an abscess of Douglas pouches. What diagnostic method is to be chosen?
a. R-scopy of abdominal cavity
*b. Digital examination of rectum
c. Laparoscopy
d. Rectoromanoscopy
e. Percussion and auscultation of stomach

25. A patient has restrained umbilateral hernia complicated by phlegmon hernia, it is necessary to take following actions:
a. Herniotomy by Sapezhko
b. Herniotomy by Mayo
*c. Herniotomy by Mayo-Sapezhko
d. Herniotomy by Lekser
e. Herniotomy by Grenov

26. A 52 year old man has recurrent transient ischemic attacks. Auscultation of the carotid arteries detected murmur. What diagnostic method is to be applied in the first place?
a. Cerebral angiography
b. Electroencephalography
c. CT of the brain
d. MRI of the brain
*e. Ultrasound dopplerography

27. For the persons who live in a hot area after an accident at a nuclear object, the greatest risk within the first decade is represented by cancer of:
*a. Thyroid gland
b. Reproduction system organs
c. Lungs
d. Breast
e. Skin

28. A 10 year old boy complains about pain in his left eye and strong photophobia after he had injured his left eye with a pencil at school. Left eye examination: blepharospasm, ciliary and conjunctival congestion, cornea is transparent, other parts of eyeball have no changes. Visus 0,9. Right eye is healthy, Visus 1,0. What additional method would you choose first of all?
a. Tonometria
b. X-ray examination of orbit
*c. Staining test with 1% fluorescein
d. Gonioscopia
e. Cornea sensation-test

29. A patient had disorder of nasal respiration, mucopurulent discharges from nose, headache for 3 weeks. At anterior rhinoscopy in middle nasal meathus the stria of pus, edema, hyperemia of the mucosa of the nose have been determined. What diagnostic method is necessary to administer first of all?
a. Punction of the maxillar sinus
b. General blood test
c. CT of a skull
d. Bacteriology analysis of the nasal mucous
*e. An X-ray of paranasal sinuses

30. A patient with acute purulent otitis media complicated by mastoiditis was admitted to a hospital. Roentgenogram of mastoid processes showed the shadiowing of the cellular system on the lesion, absence of bone septa was present. What are the necessary therapeutic actions at the second stage of mastoiditis?
a. Tympanoplasty
b. Cateterization of the Eustachian tube
c. Paracentesis of the drum
d. Radical operation on the middle ear
*e. Mastoidotomy

31. A 35-year-old woman was admitted to resuscitation department in asthmatic status. What is the most trustworthy criterion of breath effectiveness?
a. Respiratory volume
b. Minute respiratory volume
c. Determination of “dead” space
*d. РаСО2 and РаО2
e. Respiration rate

32. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
*a. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
b. Shunting
c. Increase of bleeding speed
d. Presence of hypervolemia
e. Depositing of blood in venous channel

33. A 22 year old patient was admitted to trauma center with complaints of pain in the left ankle joint that was getting worse during moving and weight bearing. On the clinical examination it was found that the patient had the closed fracture of medial malleolus without displacement. In which position should the foot be fixed in plaster cast?
a. In position of supination
b. In position of dorsal flexion of foot
c. In position of planter flexion of foot
d. In position of pronation
*e. At right angle with varus positioning of the foot

34. A 74 y.o. patient has been ill with benign prostate hyperplasy for the last 5 years. 4 days ago, after alcochol consumption, there was an acute retention of urination. At the pre-admission stage his urinary bladder was catheterized with metallic catheter. Examination revealed: right epididymis is enlarged, thick and painful, there are purulent discharges from urethra. What way of emergency care must be chosen?
a. Transuretral resection or prostatectomy
b. Microwave thermotherapy of prostate
c. Placing of intraprostatic stent
*d. Trocar or open epicystostomy
e. Introduction of permanent urethral catheter

35. A rounded well-defined shadow was found in the costo-vertebral angle on the chest roentgenogram of an otherwise healthy 9 year old girl. Make a preliminary diagnosis:
a. Sarcoma of the vertebra
*b. Ganglioneuroma
c. Ganglioneuroblastoma
d. Sympatoblastoma
e. Sympatogonioma

36. A 4 y.o. child attends the kindergarten. Complains of poor appetite, fatigue. Objective examination: skin and mucous membrane are pale, child is asthenic. In the hemogram: hypochromatic anemia 1st, leucomoide reaction of the eosinophile type. What pathology must be excluded first of all?
a. Lymphoprolipherative process
b. Duodenal ulcer
c. Atrophic gastritis
*d. Helminthic invasion
e. Hypoplastic anemia

37. A 33 year old male patient was brought to Emergency Department with the signs of cardiovascular collapse: BP - 60/30 mm Hg, Ps - 140 bpm, the skin is pale and moist, diuresis 20 ml/h, Hb - 80 g/l, red blood cell count - 2,5×1012/l. The reduction of blood volume averages:
*a. 30-40%
b. 15-20%
c. 25-30%
d. 20-25%
e. 10-15%

38. A 19 year old girl was admitted to emergency department: unconsciousness, cyanosis, myotic pupils are present, superficial breathing is 12/min. BP is 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 78/min. Choose the action necessary in this clinical situation:
a. Oxygen inhalation
b. Gastric lavage
*c. Controlled respiration
d. Caffeine injection
e. Cordiamine injection

39. What preparations are used for prevention of fungal infection?
a. Captopril, Enalapril
b. Isoniazid, Ftibazid, Pyrazinamid
c. Rubomycin, Bleomycin, Mytomycin C
d. Cytosar, Cormyctin, Lomycitin
*e. Fluconozol, Orungol, Nisoral

40. What developes most often after accidental intake of Hydrochloric acid?
a. Kutlings syndrome
b. Cushings syndrome
*c. Cardiac insufficiency
d. Deyladss syndrome
e. Acute pancreatitis

41. 30 y.o. woman, had mild trauma of 5th finger of the left hand 15 days ago. She has treated her self at home. She presents to the hospital due to deterioration of the condition and temperature rise. Objectively: hyperemia and swelling on the ventral surface of finger. Restricted movements of the finger. X-ray of the left hand: an early stage of оsteomyolitis of the fifth finger could not be excluded. The diagnosis: panaris of 5th finger of the left hand. What form of panaris has occurred in the patient?
a. Paronychia
b. Hypodermic
*c. Bony
d. Tendon type
e. Joints type

42. A 36 y.o. patient is diagnosed with right sided pneumothorax. What method of treatment is indicated to the patient?
a. Pleural puncture
b. Thoracotomy
c. Antiinflammation therapy
d. Symptomatic therapy
*e. Surgical drainage of the pleural cavity

43. A 28 year old woman was admitted to the emergency room with a slightly reddened, painful "knot" 8 cm above the medial malleolus. Examination in the standing position demonstrates a distended vein above and below the mass. There are no other abnormalities on physical examination. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Cellulitis
b. Subcutaneous hematoma
c. Early deep vein thrombosis
d. Insect bite
*e. Superficial venous thrombosis

44. A 30 year old man complains of acute pain in his right ear, hearing loss, high temperature for three days. Objectively: right ear whispering language - 0,5 mm, external ear is intact, otoscopically - eardrum protrusion, hyperemia and swelling, loss of landmarks. What disease is it?
a. Chronic secretory otitis media
b. Acute mastoiditis
*c. Acute purulent otitis media
d. Chronic purulent otitis media
e. Eustachian tube disfunction

45. A 22 y.o. man complains of acute throat pain, increasing upon swallowing during 3 days. Body temperature 38,3°C, neck lymph nodules are slightly enlarged and painful. Pharyngoscopically - tonsilar hyperemia, enlargement and edema, tonsils are covered by round yellow fibrinous patches around crypts openings. Beta-haemolytic streptococcus in swab analysis. What is the diagnosis?
a. Acute follicular tonsilitis
b. Іnfectious mononucleosis
c. Pharyngeal candidosis
*d. Acute membranous tonsilitis
e. Pharyngeal diphtheria

46. A patient is staying in the hospital with the diagnosis of abdominal typhus. During the 3-d week from the beginning of the disease the patient stopped keeping diet and confinement to bed. As a result the body temperature and rapid pulse decreased and melena appeared. What kind of complications should we think about first of all?
a. Nephroso-nephritis
b. Hepatite
c. Thrombophlebitis
d. Meningitis
*e. Intestinal haemorrhage

47. A 45-year-old woman, mother of four children, comes to the emergency room complaining of a sudden onset of the epigastric and right upper quadrant pain, radiating to the back, accompanied by vomiting. On examination, tenderness is elicited in the right upper quadrant, bowel sounds are decreased, and laboratory data shows leukocytosis, normal serum levels of amylase, lipase, and bilirubin. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute pancreatitis
*b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Perforated peptic ulcer disease
e. Sigmoid diverticulitis

48. During an operation for presumed appendicitis the appendix was found to be normal; however, the terminal ileum is evidently thickened and feels rubbery, its serosa is covered with grayish-white exudate, and several loops of apparently normal small intestine are adherent to it. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Perforated Meckels diverticulum
b. Ileocecal tuberculosis
c. Acute ileitis
*d. Crohns disease of the terminal ileum
e. Ulcerative colitis

49. A 50 year old woman with a 2-year history of mild, diffuse, tender thyroid enlargement complains of 10 pound weight gain and fatigue. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Subacute thyroiditis
b. Riedels thyroiditis
*c. Hashimotos thyroiditis
d. Suppurative thyroiditis
e. Papillary thyroid carcinoma

50. A severely traumatized patient who has been receiving prolonged parenteral alimentation develops diarrhea, mental depression, alopecia and perioral and periorbital dermatitis. Administration of which of the following trace elements is most likely to reverse these complications?
a. Silicon
b. Copper
c. Iodine
d. Selenium
*e. Zinc

51. A 38 y.o. woman was hospitalized to the surgical unit with vomiting and acute abdominal pain irradiating to the spine. On laparocentesis hemmorhagic fluid is obtained. What disease should be suspected?
a. Acute appendicitis
*b. Acute pancreatitis
c. Acute enterocolitis
d. Renal colic
e. Perforated gastric ulcer

52. The 67 y.o. patient had 5 recurrent fractures of the lower extremities without considerable cause within 5 years. O-shaped deformity of the legs in the knee joints has appeared. The skull, pelvis and lower extremities X-Ray shows the thickening of flat bones. In the long bones there is a hyperostosis along the bone axis.The blood test has not revealed any inflammation activity. Serum calcium is normal. What disease do you consider in this case?
a. Myeloma
b. Mottled disease (marble disease)
c. Hyperparathyoid dystrophy
d. Chronic osteomyelitis
*e. Pagets disease

53. A 33 y.o. patient was admitted to the reception room of the Central District Hospital. He complains of a severely painful swelling localized on posterior neck, fever up to 38,4°C and general weakness. In anamnesis: diabetes mellitus within 5 years. On physical examination on the posterior neck surface there is an infiltrate elevated above surrounding skin. The tissues affected by swelling are tense and blue reddish discoloration in central area. There are also several purulent necrotic pustules which are connected with each other and form a large skin necrosis. A thinned necrotic skin of this swelling has holes looking like sieve, pus discharges through out. What disease should a doctor consider first of all?
a. Carbuncle associated with anthrax
b. Skin abscess
c. Furuncle
d. Acute skin cellulitis
*e. Carbuncle

54. A 19 y.o. man was admitted to the reception department in 20 minutes after being wounded with the knife to the left chest. The patient is confused. The heart rate is 96 bpm and BP- 80/60 mm Hg. There are the dilated neck veins, sharply diminished apical beat and evident heart enlargement What kind of penetrative chest wound complications has developed in patient?
a. Valve-likes pneumothorax
*b. Pericardium tamponade
c. Open pneumothorax
d. Massive hemothorax
e. Closed pneumothorax

55. A 35 y.o. patient complains of a difficult swallowing, pain behind the breastbone. He can eat only liquid food. While swallowing sometimes he has attacks of cough and dyspnea. Above mentioned complaints are progressing. It is known that the patient has had a chemical burn of esophagus one month ago. What complication does the patient have?
a. Esophageal diverticula
b. Esophagitis
*c. Corrosive esophagitis and stricture
d. Cardiac achalasia
e. Cardiac insufficiency

56. Survey radiograph of chest of a 62 year old smoker who often suffers from "pneumonias" showed a triangle shadow in the right lung, its vertex is pointing towards the lung root. It also showed deviation of heart and mediastinum shadows towards the lesion. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lung abscess
b. Peripheral cancer of lung
c. Atelectasis
*d. Cenral cancer of lung
e. Lung cyst

57. A patient operated for acute paraproctitis undergoes antibacterial and detoxification therapy, the local course of the disease has the positive dynamics. Since the operation the patient has had chills, pyrexia, tachycardia, euphoria for five days. The doctor suspected sepsis. What study will confirm the diagnosis?
a. Determining the rate of average-weight molecules
*b. Blood culture for a pathogen
c. Liver ultrasound
d. X-ray of lungs
e. Determining the rate of microbial contamination of wound

58. A 44-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital with complaints of dull, aching pain in the left lumbar region, the admixture of pus in the urine. Examination revealed a grade II staghorn calculus on the left. What method of treatment is indicated for this patient?
a. Conservative therapy
b. Ascending litholysis
c. Contact lithotripsy
d. Distance lithotripsy
*e. Surgery

59. An emergency team has delivered to a hospital an unconscious patient found lying in the street in winter. Objectively: the patient is pale, with superficial respiration; bradycardia with heartrate 54/min, to- 35°C. AP- 100/60 mm Hg. Palpation of chest and abdomen revealed no peritoneal symptoms. There is a smell of alcohol from the patients mouth. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Frostbite of trunk and extremities
b. -
c. Acute cardiovascular insufficiency
d. Apparent death
*e. Hypothermia

60. A 48-year-old patient got a job-related injury of a hypodermic varicose vein on his shin that was accompanied by the intensive phleborrhagia. Choose the optimal variant of first aid:
*a. Pressure bandage and limb strapping
b. Application of Esmarchs tourniquet beneath the injury
c. Maximal limb flexion in knee joint
d. Occlusion of femoral artery in a typical place
e. Application of Esmarchs tourniquet above the injury

61. A 24-year-old patient got a puncture injury below the Pouparts ligament accompanied by intense arterial bleeding. The best method to temporarily stop the bleeding in the patient would be:
a. Maximum limb bending
b. Esmarchs tourniquet
*c. Compression band
d. Compressing a blood vessel with a clamp
e. Wound suturing

62. While making a round, a doctor had noticed the edema of the right shoulder of a 26-day-old child with diagnosis of "umbilical sepsis". Active movements in the shoulder joint were absent, right hand was hanging down. Mother stated that her childs condition had worsened for the last 24 hours what resulted in childs refusal to be breast-fed, restlessness, weeping while swaddling, rise in body temperature up to 38,8°C. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Epiphysial osteomyelitis of the humerus
b. Traumatic brachioplexitis
c. Fracture of the clavicle
d. Phlegmon of the shoulder
e. Fracture of the humerus

63. A 65-year-old patient complains of dull pain in the rectum during and after defecation, discharge of mucus and small amount of blood mixed up with mucus and faeces. The discharged blood is of dark red color, sometimes with small amount of clots. The patient is sick for 8 months, has lost some weight. On digital examination, there is a round constriction of the rectum with infiltrate at a height of 4-5 cm from the anus. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Crohns disease
b. Non-specific ulcer colitis
c. Cicatricial stenosis of the rectum
d. Chronic paraproctitis
*e. Cancer of the medium-ampullar section of the rectum

64. A 52 y.o. patient fell from 3 m height on the flat ground with the right lumbar area. He complains of pain in this area. There is microhematuria in the urea. Excretory urography revealed that kidneys functioning is satisfactory. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Kidneys contusion
b. Multiple kidneys ruptures
c. Kidneys abruption
d. Paranephral hematoma
e. Subcapsular kidneys rupture

65. A female patient has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area, bitter taste in the mouth, periodical bile vomiting for a month. The patient put off 12 kg. Body temperature in the evening is 37,6°C. Sonography revealed that bile bladder was 5,5х2,7 cm large, its wall - 0,4 cm, choledochus - 0,8 cm in diameter. Anterior liver segment contains a roundish hypoechoic formation up to 5 cm in diameter and another two up to 1,5 cm each, walls of these formations are up to 0,3 cm thick. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Paravesical liver abscesses
*b. Alveolar echinococcus of liver
c. Liver abscess
d. Liver cancer
e. Cystous liver cancer

66. A 36-year-old woman applied to doctor with complaints of the enlargement of the right mammary gland. On physical exam: the right mammary gland is enlarged, hardened; nipple with areola is pasty and hydropic, looks like "lemon peel". There palpates a lymph node in the right axilla, 1,5 cm in diameter, dense consistence, not mobile. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Diffusive mastopathy
*b. Hydropic and infiltrative cancer of the mammary gland
c. Erysipelatouslike cancer of the mammary gland
d. Pagets cancer
e. Acute mastitis

67. A 43 year old patient had cholecystectomy 6 years ago because of chronic calculous cholecystitis. Lately he has been suffering from pain in the right subcostal area and recurrent jaundice. Jaundice hasnt gone for the last 2 weeks. Stenosing papillitis 0,5 cm long has been revealed. What is the best way of treatment?
*a. To perform endocsopic papillosphincterotomy
b. To perform external choledoch drainage
c. To perform choledochoduodenostomy
d. To perform transduodenal papillosphincterotomy
e. To treat conservatively: antibiotics, spasmolytics, antiinflammatory drugs

68. A 49-year-old male patient who had been scheduled for a surgery for gastric cancer underwent preoperative infusion therapy. Up to 3,0 liters of liquid was introduced into the right cubital vein. The following day, he felt a dragging pain in the right shoulder. Objectively: on the inner surface of the shoulder there is a longitudinal hyperemic zone, edema of skin, a tender cord. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Venepuncture and edema of paravenous tissue
b. Acute lymphangitis
c. Paravenous tissue phlegmon
*d. Acute thrombophlebitis
e. Paravenous tissue necrosis

69. A 54-year-old patient applied with complaints of acute pain in the shoulder-joint. 10 minutes earlier he fell in the street with his arms stretched. Doctor of the traumatological unit noticed an acute deformation of the right shoulder-joint, the impossibilty of active movement in the right extremity. Roentgenologically: uncoincidence of articulating surfaces. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Dislocation of the clavicle
b. Contusion of the humerus
c. Fracture of the humerus
d. Dislocation of the scapula
e. Dislocation of the humerus

70. A 62-year-old patient has been delivered to the surgical department with complaints of sudden pain in the umbilical region irradiating to the back and groin, which was accompanied by a syncope. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, umbilical region is tender on palpation, bowel sounds are diminished. AP drop is present. USI reveals: free fluid in the abdomen, thickening of the wall of the abdominal aorta. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Stomach ulcer perforation
*c. Rupture of abdominal aortic aneurism
d. Peritonitis
e. Acute appendicitis

71. Parents of a 2-year-old boy applied to clinic complaining of right testicle absence in the scrotum of a boy. While examining the boy, hypoplasia of the right half of the scrotum was revealed, absence of the testicle. Testicle is miniaturized, it palpitates along the inguinal canal but it could not be moved down to scrotum. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Retraction of the right testicle (pseudocryptorchism)
b. Right-sided cryptorchism, abdominal form
c. Ectopia of the right testicle, pubic form
*d. Right-sided cryptorchism, inguinal form
e. Left-sided monorchism

72. A 62-year-old patient complains of the pain behind the sternum, bad passing of solid and liquid food, bad breath, increased salivation weight, loss of 15 kg during the period of 2 months. Appetite is retained. On physical exam: face features are sharpened. The skin is pale, with sallow tint, its turgor is decreased. The liver is not enlarged. Blood Hb - 86g/L. Gregersen reaction is positive. What kind of pathology caused the given clinical situation?
*a. Esophagus cancer
b. Cicatricial constriction of esophagus
c. Chronic non-specific esophagitis
d. Achalasia of esophagus
e. Benign growth of esophagus

73. A patient suffers from suddenly arising crampy pain in the right loin area. 2 hours after the pain had started, hematuria took place. Loin X-ray: no pathological shadows. Ultrasound: pyelocaliectasis on the right, the left part is normal. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Intestine invagination
b. Acute appendicitis
*c. Stone of the right kidney, renal colic
d. Twist of the right ovary cyst
e. Tumour of the right kidney pelvis

74. A patient complains of an extremely intense pain in epigastrium. He has peptic ulcer disease of duodenum for 10 years. The patient is in the forced position being on the right side with legs abducted to stomach. Abdomen has acute tenderness in the epigastrium. Guarding contraction of the abdominal wall muscles is observed. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Penetration of ulcer into pancreas
c. Thrombosis of mesenteric vessels
*d. Perforation of ulcer
e. Acute condition of peptic ulcer disease

75. A 30-year-old patient complains of pain, hyperemia along subcutaneous veins, rise in body temperature. While examining the large shin subcutaneous vein, there is hyperemia, pain by pressing. Homanss and Lusess symptoms are negative. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Thrombosis of aorta
*b. Acute thrombophlebitis of subcutaneous veins
c. Lymphostasis
d. Acute ileophemoral phlebothrombosis
e. Embolism of aorta

76. A 30-year-old man has suffered from traffic accident. Consciousness is absent. Pulse on the carotid artery is undeterminable, no respiration. There is a wide leather belt on mans waist. What measures are to be taken?
*a. Conduct an artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage after having released from the belt
b. Turn the victim to the right side
c. Put the victim with his back on the shield
d. Do not touch the victim until the arrival of the police
e. Start immediate artificial ventilation of lungs and closed-chest cardiac massage

77. An emergency team deliverd a 83-year-old patient complaining of inability of her right leg to support the body after falling on her right side. Objectively: the patient lies on a gurney, her right leg is rotated outwards, the outside edge of foot touches the bed. There is positive straight leg raising sign. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Femoral neck fracture
b. Hip dislocation
c. Cotyloid cavity fracture
d. Hip joint contusion
e. Femoral diaphysis fracture

78. A 50-year-old patient complains of bursting pain in the left lower limb that is getting worse on exertion, swelling in the region of shin and foot. Objectively: left shin and foot are doughy, skin of the lower shin is indurated and has a bronze tint, subcutaneous veins are dilated, there is an ulcer with necrotic masses. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gangrene of the lower extremity
*b. Postthrombophlebitic syndrome
c. Acute arterial thrombosis
d. Chronic arterial insufficiency
e. Deep vein thrombosis of the lower limbs

79. 3 days ago a 29-year-old patient presented with pulsating pain in the region of rectum, fever, general weakness. Objectively: local tenderness in the anal region in the 6 oclock position. Digital investigation of rectum revealed a painful infiltration reaching the pectinate line. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rectum tumour
b. Acute prostatitis
c. Acute anal fissure
d. Acute haemorrhoids
*e. Acute periproctitis

80. A 65-year-old patient complains of gradual worsening of the left eye vision during 10 months. On physical examination: acuty of vision of the left eye is 0,01, not correctable. The eye is quiet, pupil of the eye is grayish, reflex from the eye-ground is absent. Intraocular pressure is 18 mm/Hg. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
a. Open-angle glaucoma
b. Leukoma of the cornea
c. Exfoliation of the retina
*d. Senile cataract
e. Disorder of blood circulation in retina vessels

81. A 36 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with sharp pain in substernal area following occasional swallowing of a fish bone. On esophagoscopy the foreign body wasnt revealed. The pain increased and localized between scapulas. In a day temperature elevated, condition became worse, dysphagia intensified. What complication has developed?
a. Aspirative pneumonia
*b. Perforation of esophagus with mediastinitis
c. Obstruction of esophagus
d. Esophageal hemorrhage
e. Pulmonary atelectasis

82. A 19 year old patient was admitted to a hospital with acute destructive appendicitis. He suffers from hemophilia of B type. What antihemophilic medications should be included in pre- and post-operative treatment plan?
a. Dried plasma
*b. Fresh frozen plasma
c. Fresh frozen blood
d. Cryoprecipitate
e. Native plasma

83. On the 4th day after recovering from a cold a patient was hospitalized with complaints of solitary spittings of mucoid sputum. On the 2nd day there was a single discharge of about 250 ml of purulent blood-streaked sputum. Objectively: the patients condition is moderately severe. Respiratory rate - 28-30/min, Ps- 96 bpm, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Respiration above the left lung is vesicular, weak above the right lung. There are moist rales of different types above the lower lobe and amphoric breath near the angle of scapula. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Pleural empyema
c. Pyopneumothorax
*d. Acute pulmonary abscess
e. Acute focal pneumonia

84. A 24 y.o. male patient was transferred to the chest surgery department from general surgical department with acute post-traumatic empyema of pleura. On the X-ray: wide level horizontal of fluid on the right. What method of treatment should be prescribed?
a. Pneumoectomy
b. Decortication of pleura
*c. Punction and drainage of pleural cavity
d. Thoracoplasty
e. Lobectomy

85. A patient complains of intense pressing pain in the pharynx, mainly to the right, impossibility to swallow even liquid food. The illness started 5 days ago. The patients condition is grave. Body temperature - 38,9°C, speech is difficult, voice is constrained, difficulties in opening the mouth. Submaxillary glands to the right are painful, enlarged. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Vincents disease
b. Phlegmonous tonsillitis
c. Diphtheria
d. Pharyngeal tumour
*e. Peritonsillar abscess

86. In a 65 y.o. female patient a tumor 13х8 сm in size in the umbilical area and above is palpated, mild tenderness on palpation, unmovable, pulsates. On ausculation: systolic murmur. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Arterio-venous aneurism
b. Stomach tumor
*c. Abdominal aortic aneurism
d. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
e. Mitral insufficiency

87. An hour before an elective surgery, a 56-year-old patient of the surgical department got a dramatic increase in blood pressure, tachycardia, hand tremor. The patient is confused, anxious, depressed, fearful, is pessimistic about the operation outcome, refuses the surgery. What tactics should be chosen by a surgeon?
a. Predict the psychological state of the patient
b. Isolate the patient
*c. Start the surgery after correction of blood pressure
d. Organize monitoring of the patient by medical personnel and mental health counselor
e. Organize monitoring of the patient by his family members

88. A patient with suspicion of pelvic bones fraction is under examination conducted by the doctor who presses alae ilii in medial direction with his both hands. What causes painful syndrome of the patient?
*a. Disorder of continuity of the pelvic ring
b. Traumatic injury of the intrapelvic organs
c. Retroperitoneal hematoma
d. Fracture of the sacrum
e. Fracture of sciatic bones

89. A 30-year-old man was injured in a fire and got thermic burns of III-A and III-B degree that affected 20% of the total skin. AP - 110/70 mm Hg, heart rate -120/min. What transfusion means should be used for blind infusion before transportation?
*a. Saline solutions
b. 10% glucose solution
c. Albumin
d. Fresh frozen plasma
e. Polyglycine

90. A 48-year-old male patient complains of pain in the lower extremities, especially when walking, intermittent claudication, numbness in the fingers, cold extremities, inability to walk more than 100 meters. Sleeps with his leg lowered. The patient has been a smoker since he was 16, abuses alcohol, has a history of CHD. The left lower extremity is colder than the right one, the skin of extremities is dry, pedal pulse cannot be palpated, femoral pulse is preserved. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Raynauds disease
b. Deep thrombophlebitis
c. Diabetic angiopathy
d. Leriche syndrome
*e. Obliterating endarteritis

91. A 24 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about continued fever, night sweating. She lost 7 kg within the last 3 months. She had casual sexual contacts. Objectively: enlargement of all lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome. Blood count: leukocytes - 2,2×109/L. What disease can be suspected?
a. Chroniosepsis
*b. HIV-infection
c. Tuberculosis
d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Infectionous mononucleosis

92. Development of chronic venous insufficiency of lower extremities depends on the functional condition of so-called musculovenous pump. This term refers to the following group of muscles:
a. Buttock region muscles
b. Abdominal wall muscles
*c. Shin muscles
d. Thigh muscles
e. Foot muscles

93. A 27-year-old patient was brought to clinic with a crashed wound of the posterior surface of the right shin in 2 hours after the accident happened. During surgical treatment pieces of dirty clothes and gravel were removed. What actions from the given below are the decisive ones to prevent an anaerobic infection?
a. Hyperbaric oxygenation
*b. Radical surgical treatment
c. Introduction of the medical dose of the anti-gangrene serum
d. Introduction of the preventive dose of an anti-gangrene serum
e. Rational antibiotic therapy

94. A 32-year-old patient lives in an area endemic for echinococcosis. In the last 6 months he reports of pain in the right subcostal area, fever. He is suspected to have liver echinococcosis. What study would be the most informative in this case?
a. Biochemical laboratory examination
b. Survey radiography of abdominal cavity
*c. USI
d. Angiography
e. Liver scanning

95. In morgue there are dead bodies with the following causes of death: electrotrauma; rupture of the spleen with acute anemia. There is one unknown person; one ethyl alcohol poisoned person and one drowned man. What dead body should the blood group be determined for?
a. Body of person with a sudden death
*b. All dead bodies of the unknown persons
c. Body of drowned man
d. Body of poisoned person
e. Body of person with internal hemorrhage

96. A 50 y.o. patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of blood in urine. There was no pain or urination disorders, hematuria has lasted for 3 days. Objectively: kidneys are not palpable, suprapubic region has no pecularities, external genitals have no pathology. Rectal examination revealed: prevesical gland is not enlarged. Cytoscopy revealed no changes. What disease would you think about first of all?
a. Varicocele
b. Tuberculosis of urinary bladder
*c. Cancer of kidney
d. Kidney dystopy
e. Necrotic papillitis

97. A patient complains of nycturia, constant boring pain in perineum and suprapubic region, weak urine jet, frequent, obstructed and painful urination. He has been ill for several months, pain in perineum appeared after getting problems with urination. Rectal examination revealed that prostate is enlarged (mostly owing to the right lobe), dense, asymmetric, its central sulcus is flattened, the right lobe is dense, painless, tuberous. What disease can it be?
a. Chronic congestive prostatitis
*b. Cancer of prostate
c. Urolithiasis, stone of the right lobe of prostate
d. Prostate sclerosis
e. Prostate tuberculosis

98. The patient complains of a painful swelling in the chin region, malaise, headache. Examination reveals an acutely inflamed cone-shaped dense node. The skin over it is tense, red. In the center of the node there is an ulcer with overhanging edges and a necrotic core of a dirty-green colour. Submandibular lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Tertiary syphilis (gummatous form)
c. Parasitic sycosis
*d. Furuncle
e. Carbuncle

99. On the 5th day after a surgery for colon injury a patient complains of bursting pain in the postoperative wound, weakness, drowsiness, headache, fever up to 40°C. Objectively: the skin around the wound is swollen, there is gas crepitation. The wound discharges are scarce foul-smelling, of dark-gray colorl. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Phlegmon
c. Abscess
d. Postoperative wound infection
*e. Anaerobic clostridial wound infection

100. A childrens surgical unit admitted a 1-month-old boy who had been prenatally diagnosed with the left-sided pyelectasis. Such studies as drip infusion urography, cystography and USI allowed to reveal initial hydronephrosis. There is no information confirming the secondary pyelonephritis. What tactics of this patient management is most advisable?
a. Anderson-Hynes operation
b. Urgent nephrostomy
*c. 6-month surveillance
d. There is no need in further surveillance and treatment
e. Antibacterial therapy

