1. A 50-year-old locksmith has a long-term record of work under the effect of mercury vapors with concentration exceeding MPC by 5-10 times. Clinical examination revealed the lability of vasomotors of skin, pulse and arterial pressure; total hyperhydrosis; asymmetric innervation of facial and lingual muscles, positive subcortical reflexes, intention tremor. Against the background of increased emotional excitability the patient presents with lack of self-confidence, shyness. A dentist found him to have parodontosis, chronic stomatitis. What disease can be suspected?
a. Residual effects of neuroinfection
b. Acute mercury intoxication
c. Vascular encephalopathy
*d. Chronic mercury intoxication
e. Parkinsons syndrome

2. 4 hours after having meals a patient with signs of malnutrition and steatorrhea experiences stomach pain, especially above navel and to the left of it. Diarrheas take turns with constipation lasting up to 3-5 days. Palpation reveals moderate painfulness in the choledochopancreatic region. The amylase rate in blood is stable. X-ray reveals some calcifications located above navel. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
b. Chronic calculous cholecystitis
c. Chronic gastroduodenitis
d. Duodenal ulcer
*e. Chronic pancreatitis

3. A 58 y.o. male patient is examined by a physician and suffers from general weakness, fatigue, mild pain in the left subcostal area, sometimes frequent painful urination. Moderate splenomegaly has been revealed. Blood test: neutrophilic leukocytosis with the progress to myelocyte; basophil- 2%; eosinophil- 5%. There is a urate crystales in urine, erythrocyte- 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Urolithiasis
*b. Chronic myeloleucosis
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Leukemoid reaction
e. Hepar cirrhosis

4. A 56-year-old patient with diffuse toxic goiter has ciliary arrhythmia with pulse rate of 110 bpm, arterial hypertension, AP- 165/90 mm Hg. What preparation should be administered along with mercazolil?
a. Corinfar
*b. Propranolol
c. Procaine hydrochloride
d. Radioactive iodine
e. Verapamil

5. A 54-year-old patient complains of weakness, weight loss despite the unchanged appetite, frequent urination, skin itch for six months. Some time ago the patient underwent treatment for furunculosis. She hasnt been examined recently. Objectively: malnutrition, dry skin with signs of scratching. Small lymph nodes can be palpated in the axillary regions. Changes in the internal organs are absenr. What testing must be administered in the first place?
*a. Blood sugar test on an empty stomach
b. Endoscopy of stomach
c. Blood sterility testing
d. Lymph node biopsy
e. Complete blood count

6. A 43 y.o. woman complains of severe pain in the right abdominal side irradiating in the right supraclavicular area, fever, dryness and bitterness in the mouth. There were multiple vomitings without relief. Patient relates the onset of pain to the taking of fat and fried food. Physical examination: the patient lies on the right side, pale, dry tongue, tachycardia. Right side of abdomen is painful during palpation and somewhat tense in right hypochondrium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute bowel obstruction
b. Acute cholecystitis
*c. Perforative ulcer
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Right-sided renal colic

7. Several hours before, a 28-year-old patient suddenly developed acute headache and repeated vomiting, then lost consciousness. Objectively: focal neurological symptoms were not found. Pronounced meningeal symptoms were revealed. AP - 120/80 mm Hg. According to clinical and liquorological findings the patient was diagnosed with subarachnoid haemorrhage. After administration of dehydrants the patients condition somewhat improved. What is the main component of further emergency care?
*a. Coagulants
b. Antiaggregants
c. Corticosteroids
d. Fibrinolytics
e. Anticoagulants

8. On the 5th day of a respiratory disease accompanied by fever a 24-year-old man developed progressing headaches, systemic dizziness, double vision, facial muscles paresis on the right, choking from swallowing. He was diagnosed with acute viral encephalitis. Identify the main tendency of the emergency treatment:
*a. Zovirax
b. Ceftriaxone
c. Haemodezum
d. Lasix
e. Glucocorticoids

9. A 24-year-old man on the 5th day of acute respiratory disease with high grade temperature started having strong headaches, systemic dizziness, sensation of double vision, paresis of mimic muscles to the right, tickling by swallowing. Diagnosis: Acute viral encephalitis. Determine the basic direction of the emergent therapy.
a. Cephtriaxon
b. Glucocorticoids
*c. Zovirax
d. Lasix
e. Hemodesis

10. A 30-year-old patient was delivered to the admission ward of the infectious disease department. The disease had started acutely on the background of normal temperature with the appearance of frequent, liquid, profuse stool without pathological impurities. Diarrhea was not accompanied by abdominal pain. 12 hours later there appeared recurrent profuse vomiting. The patient rapidly developed dehydration. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Shigellosis
b. Salmonellosis
c. Campylobacteriosis
*d. Cholera
e. Staphylococcal food toxicoinfection

11. A 65 y.o. woman complains of complicated mouth opening following foot trauma 10 days ago. Next day she ate with difficulties, there were muscles tension of back, the back of the head and abdomen. On the third day there was tension of all muscle groups, generalized convulsions every 10-15 min. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Epilepsy
*b. Tetanus
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Tetania
e. Hemorrhagic stroke

12. Gastric juice analysis of a 42-year-old male patient revealed absence of free hydrochloric acid at all stages. Endoscopy revealed pallor, thinning of gastric mucosa, smoothed folds. Microscopically the atrophy of glands with intestinal metaplasia was found. What disease is this situation typical for?
a. Menetrier disease
b. Stomach cancer
c. Chronic type B gastritis
d. Chronic type C gastritis
*e. Chronic type A gastritis

13. A 45-year-old female patient complains of frequent liquid stools with a lot of mucus, pus and blood; pain across the abdomen, loss of 7 kg within 6 months. She has a 1-year history of non-specific ulcerative colitis. What group of drugs should be preferred for this patient?
a. Nitrofurans
b. Polyenzymes
c. Antibacterial
d. Sulfonamides
*e. Corticosteroids

14. A 54-year-old male patient complains of aching pain in the lumbar region, that is getting worse after standing in an upright position, physical exercise, supercooling. The patient also reports of experiencing weakness in the afternoon. Pain in the lumbar region, said about 10 years old. Objectively: pale skin, to- 37,2°C, AP- 180/100 mm Hg, minor costovertebral angle tenderness (Pasternatsky symptom). In blood: RBCs - 3,5×1012/l, WBCs - 6,5×109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h. In urine: the relative density - 1010, leukocytes - 12-15 in the field of vision, erythrocytes - 2-3 in the field of vision. Urine bacterial count - 100000 in 1 ml. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Amyloidosis
*b. Chronic pyelonephritis
c. Polycystic renal disease
d. Nephrolithiasis
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

15. A 67-year-old male complains of dyspnea on exertion, attacks of retrosternal pain, dizziness. He has no history of rheumatism. Objectively: pale skin, acrocyanosis. There are rales in the lower parts of lungs. There is systolic thrill in the II intercostal space on the right, coarse systolic murmur conducted to the vessels of neck. AP- 130/90 mm Hg, heart rate - 90/min, regular rhythm. The liver extends 5 cm under the edge of costal arch, shin edemata are present. Specify the assumed valvular defect:
a. Pulmonary artery stenosis
b. Ventricular septal defect
c. Tricuspid regurgitation
*d. Aortic stenosis
e. Mitral insufficiency

16. A 24-year-old female teacher complains of dizziness and heart pain irradiating to the left nipple. Pain is not associated with physical activity and cannot be relieved by nitroglycerin, it abates after taking Valocordin and lasts an hour or more. The patient has a nearly 2-year history of this disease. Objectively: Ps- 76 bpm. AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Heart borders are normal, heart sounds are clear. The ECG shows respiratory arrhythmia. Radiograph of the cervicothoracic spine shows no pathology. Lungs, abdomen are unremarkable. What changes in blood formula can be expected?
a. Leukemic hiatus
b. Increased ESR
c. Leukocytosis
d. Thrombocytopenia
*e. No changes

17. A 51-year-old female patient complains of frequent defecation and liquid blood-streaked stools with mucus admixtures, diffuse pain in the inferolateral abdomen, 6 kg weight loss over the previous month. Objectively: body temperature - 37,4°C, malnutrition, skin is pale and dry. Abdomen is soft, sigmoid is painful and spasmodic, makes a rumbling sound. Liver is dense, painful, extends 3 cm below the costal margin. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Bacillary dysentery
b. Intestinal enzymopathy
c. Helminthic invasion
*d. Non-specific ulcerative colitis
e. Sprue

18. A 18 y.o. female student complains of dyspnea during the intensive exertion. The condition became worse half a year ago. On examination: pulse rate is 88 bpm, accelerated, AP- 180/20 mm Hg, pale skin, heart borders are dilated to the left and up. There is systolic-diastolic murmur in the 2hd intercostal space, S2 at pulmonary artery is accentuated. ECG has revealed both ventricles hypertrophy. Thoracic X-ray has revealed pulsation and protrusion of the left ventricle, lung trunk. What doctors tactics should be?
a. Continuation of investigation
b. Exemption from physical exercises
c. Dispensary observation
d. Administration of therapeutic treatment
*e. Cardiosurgeon consultation

19. A 49-year-old male patient complains of dyspnea of combined nature, cough, shin edemata, abdomen enlargement due to ascites. He has a 20-year history of chronic bronchitis. For the last 3 years he has been disabled (group II) because of cardiac changes. Objectively: mixed cyanosis, edemata. Ps - 92/min, rhythmic, AP - 120/70 mm Hg, respiration rate - 24/min. There is accentuation of the second sound above the pulmonary artery. Auscultation reveals the box resonance above the lungs. There are also dry rales over the entire surface of lungs. What is the mechanism of heart changes development in this patient?
a. Respiratory reflex
*b. Euler-Liljestrand reflex
c. Bainbridge reflex
d. Kitaevs reflex
e. Cardiovascular reflex

20. A 24-year-old man on the second day of the disease with a sudden onset complains of a strong headache in temples and in the area of orbits, dull pain in the body, dry painful cough. His temperature is 39°C. Adynamic. Mucous membrane of oropharynx is "flaming", rales are not ausculated. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pneumonia
b. Meningococcus infection
c. Parainluenza
d. Respiratory mycoplasmosis
*e. Influenza

21. A 32-year-old female complains of dizziness, headache, palpitation, tremor. For the last several months she has been under outpatient observation for the increased arterial pressure. Since recently such attacks have become more frequent and severe. Objectively: skin is covered with clammy sweat, tremor of the extremities is present. HR- 110/min, AP- 220/140 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled. Blood test results: WBCs - 9,8×109/l, ESR - 22 mm/h. Blood glucose - 9,8 millimole/l. What disease is the most likely cause of this crisis?
*a. Pheochromocytoma
b. Preeclampsia
c. Diabetic glomerulosclerosis
d. Primary hyperaldosteronism
e. Essential hypertension

22. A 76-year-old male consulted a therapist about slow discharge of urine with a small jet. The patient reported no cardiac problems. Examination revealed atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 72/min and without pulse deficit. There are no signs of heart failure. ECG confirms the presence of atrial fibrillation. From history we know that the arrhythmia was detected three years ago. What tactics for the treatment of atrial fibrillation in the patient should be chosen?
*a. Does not require treatment
b. Verapamil
c. Ajmaline
d. Obzidan
e. Digoxin

23. A 43-year-old female patient complains of unstable defecation with frequent constipations, abdominal swelling, headache, sleep disturbance. Body weight is unchanged. What disease are these clinical presentations typical for?
*a. Irritable colon syndrome
b. Chronic pancreatitis
c. Colorectal cancer
d. Chronic atrophic gastritis
e. Chronic enteritis

24. A 43-year-old man who often contacts with ethyl gasoline was admitted to a hospital with complaints of general weakness, dizziness, memory impairment, sleepiness at daytime and insomnia at night, sensation of a hair in the mouth, colicky pains in the right subcostal region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic lead intoxication
*b. Chronic tetraethyl lead intoxication
c. Chronic mercury intoxication
d. Alcoholic delirium
e. Chronic manganese intoxication

25. A 35-year-old patient has been in the intensive care unit for acute renal failure due to crush for 4 days. Objectively: the patient is inadequate. Breathing rate - 32/min. Over the last 3 hours individual moist rales can be auscultated in lungs. ECG shows high T waves, right ventricular extrasystoles. CVP - 159 mm Hg. In blood: the residual nitrogen - 62 millimole/l, K+- 7,1 millimole/l, Cl- - 78 millimole/l, Na+- 120 millimole/l, Ht - 0,32, Hb - 100 g/l, blood creatinine - 0,9 millimole/l. The most appropriate method of treatment would be:
a. Plasma filtration
b. Ultrafiltration
c. Plasma sorption
d. Hemosorption
*e. Hemodialysis

26. A 45-year-old man was brought to clinic with complaints of the pain that started suddenly in the left chest part and epigastric area, shortness of breath, nausea, one-time vomiting. The acute pain started after weight-lifting. On physical exam: shallow breathing, RR - 38/min, left chest part is behind during respiration, by percussion - tympanitic sound, respiration is not ausculated. Ps - 110 bpm, of weak filling. BP- 100/60 mm Hg, insignificant displacement of heart to the right, sounds are dull. What examination is the most expedient to do first?
*a. Roentgenography
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Ultrasound of the abdominal cavity
d. Esophagogastroscopy
e. Electrocardiography

27. A 35 y.o. woman is suspected of aplastic anemia. The bone marrow punction has been administered with the diagnostic purpose. What changes in the marrow punctatum are suggested?
a. Replacement of marrow elements with fibrous tissue
b. Presence of blast cells
c. Absolute lymphocytosis
*d. Replacement of marrow elements with adipose tissue
e. Prevalence of megaloblasts

28. A 58-year-old female patient complains of spontaneous bruises, weakness, bleeding gums, dizziness. Objectively: the mucous membranes and skin are pale with numerous hemorrhages of various time of origin. Lymph nodes are not enlarged. Ps is 100/min, AP - 110/70 mm Hg. There are no changes of internal organs. Blood test results: RBC - 3,0*10^12/l, Нb - 92 g/l, colour index - 0,9, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, WBC – 10*10^9/l, eosinophils - 2%, stab neutrophils - 12%, segmented neutrophils - 68%, lymphocytes - 11%, monocytes - 7%, ESR - 12 mm/h. What laboratory test is to be determined next for making a diagnosis?
*a. Platelets
b. Clotting time
c. Fibrinogen
d. Osmotic resistance of erythrocytes
e. Reticulocytes

29. A 47-year-old woman underwent a thyroid gland resection on ccount of nodular euthyroid goiter. What preparations are most likely to prevent the disease recurrence?
*a. Thyroid hormones
b. Thyrotropin
c. Radioactive iodine
d. Antistruminum (potassium iodide)
e. Mercazolil

30. A 55 y.o. male patient complains of weakness during 2 months, pain in the right side of the thorax, cough, blood-streaked sputum. On X-ray: intensive triangle shadow in the area of lower lobe that is connected to mediastinum. What is the most likely disorder in the lungs?
a. Bronchiectasia
b. Tuberculosis of lungs
*c. Central cancer of lungs
d. Pulmonary infarction
e. Pleuropneumonia

31. A 60 y.o. patient experiences acute air insufficiency following of the venoectomy due to subcutaneous vein thrombophlebitis 3 days ago. Skin became cianotic, with grey shade. Marked psychomotor excitement, tachypnea, substernal pain. What postoperative complication has occured?
*a. Thromboembolia of pulmonary artery
b. Hypostatic pneumonia
c. Valvular pneumothorax
d. Myocardial infarction
e. Hemorrhagia

32. A 19-year-old woman complains of pain in the abdomen and joints, asks for more analgetics and somnifacient injections. The patient was examined. Gynecological and urological pathologies are absent. There are signs of previous punctures along superficial veins of the extremities. The patient does not explain the origin of punctures. Tendon reflexes of upper and lower extremities are the same, quick. Photoreaction of the pupil of the eye is weak. The tongue is grey coated. During communication the patient in affectively not even-tempered. There is diarrhea without pathologic inclusions. What tactics is necessary to improve the condition of this patient?
a. Consultation of infectious diseases doctor
*b. Consultation of an expert in narcology
c. Additional consultation of surgeon
d. Prescription of medications the patient asks for
e. Treatment with antibiotics

33. A patient has an over a year-old history of fast progressive rheumatoid arthritis. X-raying confirms presence of marginal erosions. What basic drug would be the most appropriate in this case?
a. Aspirin
*b. Methotrexate
c. Prednisolone
d. Chloroquine
e. Diclofenac sodium

34. A female rheumatic patient experiences diastolic thoracic wall tremor (diastolic thrill), accentuated S1 at apex, there is diastolic murmur with presystolic intensification, opening snap, S2 accent at pulmonary artery. What rind of heart disorder is observed?
a. Mitral valve insufficiency
b. Opened arterial duct
c. Aortic valve insufficiency
d. Pulmonary artery stenosis
*e. Mitral stenosis

35. A 23-year-old patient complains of a dull ache, sensation of heaviness and distention in the epigastrium immediately after meals, foul-smelling eructation; dry mouth, empty stomach nausea, diarrhea. Objectively: the skin is pale, the patient is of thin build. Abdomen is soft on palpation, there is epigastric pain. The liver does not extend beyond the costal arch. In blood: Hb - 110 g/l, RBCs - 3,4×1012/l, WBC count is normal. ESR - 16 mm/h. What is the most informative study that will allow make a diagnosis?
a. X-ray of digestion organs
b. pH-metry
c. Duodenal probing
*d. Esophageal gastroduodenoscopy
e. Study of gastric juice

36. A 49-year-old patient complains of deglutition problems, especially with solid food, hiccups, voice hoarseness, nausea, regurgitation, significant weight loss (15 kg within 2,5 months). Objectively: body weight is reduced. Skin is pale and dry. In lungs: vesicular breathing, heart sounds are loud enough, heart activity is rhythmic. The abdomen is soft, painless on palpation. Liver is not enlarged. What study is required to make a diagnosis?
a. Clinical blood test
b. X-ray in Trendelenburgs position
c. Study of gastric secretion
*d. Esophageal duodenoscopy along with biopsy
e. X-ray of digestive tract organs

37. A 60-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital with complaints of dyspnea, tightness in the right subcostal area, abdomen enlargement. These presentations have been progressing for a year. Heart auscultation reveals presystolic gallop rhythm. Objectively: swelling of the neck veins, ascites, palpable liver and spleen. What disease requires differential diagnostics?
a. Pulmonary embolism
*b. Constrictive pericarditis
c. Lung cancer with invasion to the pleura
d. Hepatocirrhosis
e. Chronic pulmonary heart

38. A 40-year-old patient, the forester, complains of severe headache, body temperature rise up to 39,5°C, trembling limbs. From the patients history we know that he had seriously cut his hand during the dissection of a killed fox. Objectively: depressed mood. The patient asks not to turn on the light or open the door. Any noise causes apparent motor excitation. When he saw a carafe of water, he developed convulsive throat spasms. What tactics should an emergency doctor choose?
a. Deliver the patient to the resuscitation department
b. Deliver the patient to the psychiatric hospital
c. Let him stay at home and consult a psychiatrist
*d. Deliver the patient to the infectious disease hospital
e. Deliver the patient to the neurological department

39. A 28-year-old woman has a 12-year history of chronic glomerulonephritis with latent course. Over the past six months she has developed general weakness, loss of appetite, low work performance, nausea. The patient complains of headache, pain in the joints. On examination: anemia, blood urea - 34,5 millimole/l, blood creatinine - 0,766 millimole/l, hyperkalemia. What complication has developed?
*a. Chronic renal insufficiency
b. Nephrotic syndrome
c. Pyelonephritis
d. Renal amyloidosis
e. Acute renal insufficiency

40. A 72-year-old male had had a moderate headache. Two days later, he developed the progressing speech disorders and weakness in the right extremities. The patient has a history of myocardial infarction, arrhythmia. Study of the neurologic status revealed elements of motor aphasia, central paresis of the VII I XII cranial nerves on the right, central hemiparesis on the same side and hyperaesthesia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidural hematoma
b. Brain tumor
c. Hemorrhagic stroke
d. Transient ischemic attack
*e. Ischemic stroke

41. A 70 y.o. male patient with mild headaches complains of speech disorder, weakness in right limbs. There was a history of miocardial infarction and arrhythmia. On nu eroligical examination there are elements of motor aphasia, central paresis of VII and XII cranial nerves pairs on the right side, cental type of hemiparesis and hemihyperesthisia on the same side. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Transitory ischemic attack
b. Hemorrhagic stroke
*c. Ischemic stroke
d. Epidural hematoma
e. Cerebral tumor

42. After treating a field with pesticides a machine operator presents with great weakness, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, visual impairment, watery eyes. Objectively: the patient is excited, hypersalivation, hyperhidrosis, muscle fibrillation of tongue and eyelids are oberved. Pupils are narrowed, there is tachycardia, lung auscultation reveals moist small and medium bubbling rales. In blood: changed level of cholinesterase activity. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Intoxication with carbamic acid derivatives
*b. Intoxication with organophosphorous pesticides
c. Intoxication with organomercurial pesticides
d. Intoxication with organochlorine pesticides
e. Intoxication with arsenic-containing pesticides

43. A 40-year-old man is ill with autoimmune hepatitis. Blood test: А/G ratio 0,8, bilirubin – 42 mumol/L, transaminase: ALT- 2,3 mmol g/L, АSТ - 1,8 mmol g/L. What is the most effective means in treatment from the given below?
a. Hemosorbtion, vitamin therapy
*b. Glucocorticoids, cytostatics
c. Hepatoprotectors
d. Antibacterial medication
e. Antiviral medications

44. A farmer hurt his right foot during working in a field and came to the emergency station. He doesnt remember when he got last vaccination and he has never served in the army. Examination of his right foot revealed a contaminated wound up to 5-6 cm long with uneven edges. The further treatment tactics will be:
a. Surgical d-bridement only
b. To administer an antibiotic
c. To make an injection of tetanus anatoxin
d. To make an injection of antitetanus serum
*e. To make an injection of tetanus anatoxin and antitetanus serum

45. A 35-year-old patient has been admitted to a hospital for pain in the left sternoclavicular and knee joints, lumbar area. The disease has an acute character and is accompanied by fever up to 38°C. Objectively: the left sternoclavicular and knee joints are swollen and painful. In blood: WBCs - 9,5×109/l, ESR - 40 mm/h, CRP - 1,5 millimole/l, fibrinogen - 4,8 g/l, uric acid - 0,28 millimole/l. Examination of the urethra scrapings reveals chlamydia. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
*b. Reiters syndrome
c. Gout
d. Rheumatic arthritis
e. Bechterews disease

46. A 20 daily y.o. female patient is suffering from chronic bronchitis. Recently there has been production about 0,5 L of purulent sputum with maximum discharge in the morning. Fingers are like "drum sticks", there are "watching glass" nails. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic bronchitis
b. Pneumonia
*c. Bronchiectasia
d. Gangrene of lungs
e. Tuberculosis

47. Topographic percussion of lungs in a patient who got a serious job-related barotrauma revealed that the lower lungs borders were located one rib below normal, there was a significant increase in both lungs height and Kronigs isthmus. What disease should be suspected in the first place?
*a. Pulmonary emphysema
b. Chronic bronchitis
c. Pneumothorax
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Exudative pleuritis

48. An 18 y.o. girl complains of weakness, dizziness, loss of appetite, menorrhagia. There are many-coloured petechiae on the skin of the upper extremities. Blood test: Hb- 105 g/l; RBC- 3,2×1012/L; C.I.- 0,95; thromb.- 20×109/L. The sedimentation time according to Lee White is 5; hemorrhagia duration according to Duke is 8, "pinch and tourniquet" test is positive. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
b. Hemorrhagic diathesis
c. Marchiafava-Michelis disease
d. Iron deficiency anemia
e. Hemophilia

49. A 28 y.o. male patient was admitted to the hospital because of high temperature 39°C, headache, generalized fatigue, constipation, sleep disorder for 9 days. There are sporadic roseolas on the abdomen, pulse- 78 bpm, liver is enlarged for 2 cm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Brucellosis
b. Leptospirosis
c. Typhus
d. Sepsis
*e. Abdominal typhoid

50. A 50-year-old patient complains about having pain attacks in the right subcostal area for about a year. He pain arises mainly after taking fattening food. Over the last week the attacks occurred daily and became more painful. On the 3rd day of hospitalization the patient presented with icteritiousness of skin and scleras, light-colored feces and dark urine. In blood: neutrophilic leukocytosis - 13,1×109/l, ESR- 28 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic calculous cholecystitis
b. Fatty degeneration of liver
c. Hypertensive dyskinesia of gallbladder
d. Chronic cholangitis, exacerbation stage
e. Chronic recurrent pancreatitis

51. A 20 y.o. patient with bronchial asthma experiences dyspnea attacks 3-4 times a week. Nocturnal attacks are 1 time a week. FEV1- 50% of necessary figures, during the day its variations is 25%. What is the severity of bronchial asthma condition?
a. Mild condition
b. Asthmatic status
c. Intermittent flow
*d. Moderate severity condition
e. Serious condition

52. A 40 y.o. man complains of headache in occipital area. On physical examination: the skin is pale; face and hand edema, BP- 170/130 mm Hg. On Ech°CG: concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle. Ultrasound examination of the kidneys reveals thinned cortical layer. Urine analysis shows proteinuria of 3,5 g/day. What is the probable diagnosis?
a. Polycystic disease of the kidneys
b. Cushings disease
c. Chronic pyelonephritis
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*e. Essential arterial hypertension

53. A 27-year-old patient has a severe headache, nausea and vomiting. Objectively: body temperature is 38,9°C, there is a haemorrhagic stellate rash on the legs. The patient takes meningeal pose in bed. Meningeal symptoms are strongly positive. Deep reflexes are brisk, uniform. Pathological reflexes are absent. It has been suspected that the patient has epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis. Which of additional tests should be performed in the first place to verify the diagnosis?
a. Survey craniogram
*b. Lumbar puncture
c. Rheoencephalography
d. Echoencephalography
e. Electroencephalography

54. After a serious nervous stress a 35-year-old patient has developed on the dorsal surface of hands redness and swelling that were later replaced by small inflammatory nodules, vesicles and following erosion with a significant serous discharge. The process is accompanied by severe itching. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Toxicoderma
*b. True eczema
c. Microbal eczema
d. Allergic dermatitis
e. Simple contact dermatitis

55. A 36-year-old patient complains of skin rash that appeared a week ago and doesnt cause any subjective problems. Objectively: palm and sole skin is covered with multiple lenticular disseminated papules not raised above the skin level. The papules are reddish, dense on palpation and covered with keratinous squamae. What is the provisional diagnosis?
*a. Secondary syphilis
b. Palmoplanar psoriasis
c. Palm and sole callosity
d. Palmoplanar rubrophytosis
e. Verrucosis

56. In the morning a patient had nausea, abdominal discomfort, single vomiting, dry mouth. In the evening, the patient presented with the increasing general weakness, double vision, difficult swallowing of solid food. Objectively: ptosis, mydriasis, anisocoria, absence of gag and pharyngeal reflex, dry mucous membranes. The previous evening the patient had dinner with canned food and alcohol. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Intoxication with unknown poison
b. Food toxicoinfection
*c. Botulism
d. Acute ischemic stroke
e. Poliomyelitis

57. A 30-year-old patient complains of paroxysmal abdominal pain, frequent liquid stools up to 10 times a day. Throughout the first 3 days he had a fever, since the 2nd day of disease there were scant liquid stools mixed with mucus. On palpation: tenderness of all colon segments. Sigmoid colon was found spastic. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Intestinal amebiasis
b. Cholera
c. Balantidiasis
*d. Acute dysentery
e. Salmonellosis

58. A 38-year-old woman experiences episodic increases in arterial pressure up to 240/120 mm Hg, which is accompanied by nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, increased sweating, hyperglycemia. The attack is usually followed by the excessive urination. Renal sonography reveals an additional formation adjacent to the upper pole of the right kidney and possibly belonging to the adrenal gland. What laboratory test will allow to clarify the diagnosis?
a. Blood test for renin level
*b. Determination of urinary excretion of catecholamines and vanillylmandelic acid
c. Estimation of glomerular filtration rate by measuring endogenous creatinine clearance
d. Blood test for insulin and C-peptide
e. Blood test for thyroxine and thyrotrophic hormone

59. A 32-year-old patient has a 3-year history of asthma attacks, that can be hardly stopped with berotec. Over a few last months he has experienced pain in the joints and sensitivity disorder of legs and feet skin. Ps - 80/min, AP - 210/100 mm Hg. In blood: eosinophilia at the rate of 15%. What disease can be suspected in this case?
a. Wegeners disease
*b. Periarteritis nodosa
c. Systemic scleroderma
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Dermatomyositis

60. 3 hours before, a 68-year-old male patient got a searing chest pain radiating to the neck and left forearm, escalating dyspnea. Nitroglycerin failed to relieve pain but somewhat reduced dyspnea. Objectively: there is crimson cyanosis of face. Respiratory rate is 28/min. The patient has vesicular breathing with isolated sibilant rales. Heart sounds are muffled, with a gallop rhythm. Ps - 100/min, AP - 100/65 mmHg. ECG shows negative T-wave in V2-V6 leads. What drug can reduce the hearts need for oxygen without aggravating the disease?
*a. Isosorbide dinitrate
b. Atenolol
c. Aminophylline
d. Streptokinase
e. Corinfar

61. A 46-year-old patient complains of sudden palpitation, which is accompanied by pulsation in the neck and head, fear, nausea. The palpitation lasts for 15-20 minutes and is over after straining when holding her breath. What kind of cardiac disorder may be suspected?
*a. An attack of supraventricular paroxysmal tachycardia
b. An attack of atrial flutter
c. An attack of extrasystolic arrhythmia
d. An attack of ciliary arrhythmia
e. An attack of ventricular paroxysmal tachycardia

62. A 5-grade pupil complains about extensive skin rash accompanied by intensive itch, especially at night. Objectively: there are small red papules set mostly in pairs in the region of interdigital folds on both hands, on the flexor surface of radicarpal articulations, abdomen and buttock skin as well as internal surface of thighs. In the centre of some papules vesicles or serohaemorrhagic crusts can be seen. There are multiple excoriations. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Toxicoderma
b. Eczema
c. Dermatitis
d. Ringworm of body
*e. Scabies

63. A welder at work got the first-degree burns of the middle third of his right shin. 5 days later the skin around the burn became edematic and itchy. Objectively: on a background of a well-defined erythema there is polymorphic rash in form of papules, vesicles, pustules, erosions with serous discharge. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Occupational eczema
b. Streptococcal impetigo
c. True eczema
d. Toxicoderma
*e. Microbal eczema

64. A 58-year-old patient has a 3-year history diabetes mellitus type II. He has been keeping to a diet and regularly taking glyburide. He has been delivered to a hospital on an emergency basis for acute abdomen. Objectively: the patient is of supernutrition type. The skin is dry. In the lungs vesicular breathing can be auscultated. Heart sounds are regular, 90/min. AP- 130/70 mm Hg. The symptom of "wooden belly" is visible. Blood sugar - 9,8 millimole/l. The patients has indication for laparotomy. What is the most appropriate way of further treatment of diabetes?
a. To administer 1 tablet of Maninil three times a day
*b. To administer short insulin
c. To administer Semilong to be taken in the morning and insulin - in the evening
d. To continue taking glyburide
e. To administer 1 tablet of Glurenorm three times a day

65. A 56 y.o. man, who has taken alcoholic drinks regularly for 20 years, complains of intensive girdle pain in the abdomen. Profuse nonformed stool 2-3- times a day has appeared for the last 2 years, loss of weight for 8 kg for 2 years. On examination: abdomen is soft, painless. Blood amylase - 12g/L. Feces examination-neutral fat 15 g per day, starch grains. What is the most reasonable treatment at this stage?
a. Aminocapron acid
b. Contrykal
*c. Pancreatine
d. Levomicytine
e. Imodium

66. A 43-year-old female patiet complains of eruption on her right leg skin, pain, weakness, body temperature rise up to 38°C. The disease is acute. Objectively: there is an edema on the right leg skin in the region of foot, a well-defined bright red spot in form of flame tips which feels hot. There are isolated vesicles in focus. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Toxicoderma
b. Haemorrhagic vasculitis
c. Microbial eczema
d. Contact dermatitis
*e. Erysipelas

67. A 45-year-old patient complains of some painless nodular elements tending to peripheral growth and fusion. He has a 2-year history of this disease. Aggravation takes place mainly in spring. In anamnesis: the patients father had similar skin lesions. Objectively: pathological elements looke like guttate and nummular nodules, plaques covered with white scales. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Neurodermitis
b. Lichen ruber planus
*c. Psoriasis
d. Pityriasis rosea
e. Seborrheic eczema

68. A 47-year-old patient came to see a doctor on the 7th day of disease. The disease developed very fast: after the chill body temperature rose up to 40°C and lasted up to 7 hours, then it dropped abruptly, which caused profuse sweat. There were three such attacks occuring once in two days. Two days ago the patient arrived from Africa. Objectively: pale skin, subicteric sclera, significantly enlarged liver and spleen. What is the cause of fever attacks in this disease?
a. Endotoxin of a causative agent
b. Gametocytes
c. Tissue schizogony
d. Exotoxin of a causative agent
*e. Erythrocytic schizogony

69. On the 2nd day of disease a 27-year-old patient complains of unbearable headache, repeated vomiting. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition. He is conscious but adynamic. Lies in a forced position with his head thrown back. There is no skin rash. Nuchal muscles are evidently rigid, there are Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs. to - 39,5°C, Ps -120/min, AP - 130/80 mm Hg. The leading syndrome of this disease is caused by:
a. Liquor hypotension
b. Haemorrhages in the adrenal glands
c. Hyperthermy
*d. Liquor hypertension
e. Affection of the cranial nerve nuclei

70. On the 2nd day of illness a 27-year-old patient complains of unbearable headache, repeated vomiting. Objectively: the patient is in a grave condition. He is conscious but adynamic. Lies in a forced position with his head thrown back. There is no skin rash. Nuchal muscles are evidently rigid, there are Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs. to- 39,5°C, Ps- 120/min, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. The leading syndrome of this disease is caused by:
a. Affection of the cranial nerve nuclei
b. Liquor hypotension
*c. Liquor hypertension
d. Haemorrhages into the adrenal glands
e. Hyperthermy

71. A 43 y.o. woman complains of shooting heart pain, dyspnea, irregularities in the heart activity, progressive fatigue during 3 weeks. She had acute respiratory disease a month ago. On examination: AP- 120/80 mm Hg, heart rate 98 bpm, heart boarders +1,5 cm left side, sounds are muffled, soft systolic murmur at apex and Botkins area; sporadic extrasystoles. Liver isnt palpated, there are no edema. Blood test: WBC- 6,7×109/L, sedimentation rate- 21 mm/hour. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Ichemic heart disease, angina pectoris
b. Climacteric myocardiodystrophia
*c. Acute myocarditis
d. Rheumatism, mitral insufficiency
e. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

72. A 63-year-old female complains of general weakness, a feeling of heaviness, compression in the epigastrium, postprandial fullness, nausea, belching after meals. These symptoms have been observed for about 15 years. Objectively: body temperature is 36,4°C, respiratory rate - 20/min, Ps - 88/min, blood pressure - 115/75 mm Hg. Skin and mucous membranes are pale. Blood test results: RBC - 2,0x1012/l, Hb - 100 g/l. Tests revealed parietal-cell antibodies. What is the most likely reason for the development of anemia in this patient?
a. Disruption of hemoglobin synthesis
b. Impaired iron absorption
c. Increased loss of iron
*d. Production of antibodies to intrinsic factor
e. Disruption of erythropoietin synthesis

73. A 37-year-old woman is sick with bronchial asthma for 15 years. Recenlty asthmatic attacks occur 4-5 times per week, night attacks -2-3 times per month. To stop attacks, the patient takes salbutamol. On physical exam: condition is relatively satisfactory. RR - 20/min, Ps is 76 bpm, BP - 120/80 mm Hg. Respiration in lungs is vesicular. Cardiac sounds are muted, rhythm is normal. What medication should be prescribed to prevent attacks of bronchial asthma on the first stage?
a. Injection of corticosteroids
*b. Cromoglycat sodium
c. Inhalation corticosteroids
d. Regular dose of salbutamol
e. Tabletted corticosteroids

74. A 52 y.o. male patient has become ill gradually. There is pain in the left side of the thorax during 2 weeks, elevation of temperature till 38-39°C. On examination: left chest side falls behind in breathing movement no voice tremor over the left lung. Dullness that is more intensive in lower parts of this lung. Right heart border is deviated outside. Sharply weakened breathing over the left lung, no rales. Heart sounds are mufflet, tachycardia. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Exudative pleuritis
b. Atelectasis of lung
c. Infarction-pneumonia
d. Cirrhotic tuberculosis
e. Spotaneous pneumothorax

75. A 50-year-old patient was hospitalized in severe condition with complaints of chills, high grade temperature, dryness in the mouth, multiple vomiting, pain in the epigastrium, frequent watery, foamy, dirty green color stool of unpleasant odor. The tongue and the skin are dry. BP - 80/40 mm Hg. What first aid is necessary for the patient?
a. To prescribe polyglucin
b. Fresh-frozen plasma transfusion
*c. Intravenous injection of sodium solutions
d. Sympathomimetics
e. Hemosorbtion

76. A 42-year-old female patient suffers from micronodular cryptogenic cirrhosis. Over the last week her condition has deteriorated: she developed convulsions, mental confusion, progressing jaundice. What study may give reasons for such aggravation?
a. Determination of alkaline phosphatase
*b. Determination of serum ammonia
c. Determination of alpha-phetoprotein
d. Determination of cholesterol ethers
e. Determination of ALAT and ASAT

77. A patient has chronic heart failure of the II stage. He takes furosemide regularly three times a week. He had developed bronchopneumonia and had been administered combined pharmacotherapy. On the fifth day of therapy the patient complained of hearing impairment. What drug coadministered with furosemide might have caused the hearing loss?
a. Tavegil
b. Mucaltin
c. Linex
d. Nystatin
*e. Gentamicin

78. A 60-year-old female patient complains of recurrent pain in the proximal interphalangeal and wrist joints, their periodic swelling and reddening that have been observed for 4 years. X-ray picture represents changes in form of osteoporosis, joint space narrowing and single usuras. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pseudogout
b. Multiple myeloma
c. Osteoarthritis
d. Gout
*e. Rheumatoid arthritis

79. A 37-year-old woman complains of generalized fatigue, irritability, dysphagia, chalk hunger. On physical exam: t- 36,5°C, respirations - 20/min, Ps - 96 bpm, BP - 110/70 mm Hg. Satisfactory nourishment. The skin and visible mucous membranes are pale. Blood test: Hb -70g/L, erythrocytes - 3,4×1012/L, CI - 0,7, reticulocytes - 2%, leucocytes - 4,7×109/L, eosinophilis. - 2%, band neutrophils - 3%, segmented neutrophils - 64%, lymphocytes – 26%, monocytes - 5%, ESR - 15 mm/min. Serum ferrum - 7,3 mumol/L, total protein - 70g/L. Deficit of what factor caused the development of the disease?
a. Vitamin B6
b. Protein
c. Folic acid
*d. Ferrum
e. Vitamin B12

80. A 28-year-old patient has been hospitalized for the pain in the epigastric region. He has a 10-year history of duodenal ulcer (DU). Recently, the pain character has changed: it became permanent, persistent, irradiating to the back. There are general weakness, dizziness, fatigue. The patient has put off weight. Objectively: HR- 68/min, AP- 120/80 mm Hg. What is most likely cause of deterioration?
a. Haemorrhage
b. Exacerbation of duodenal ulcer
c. Stenosis development
*d. Penetration
e. Perforation of duodenal wall

81. A 57-year-old male patient complains of dyspnea on exertion, heaviness in the right hypochondrium and shin edemata towards evening. Objectively: temperature - 38,1°C, HR- 20/min, Ps=92/min, AP- 140/90 mm Hg. There is apparent kyphoscoliosis. In the lungs single dry rales can be auscultated. Heart sounds are muffled, rhythmic. ECG: Rv1+Sv5=15 mm. X-ray picture shows the bulging of pulmonary artery cone, right ventricle enlargement. What is the most likely cause of this condition?
a. Primary pulmonary hypertension
*b. Pulmonary heart
c. Dilatation cardiomyopathy
d. Atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis
e. Mitral stenosis

82. A 30-year-old female patient has been delivered to a hospital for sudden dyspnea progessing to asthma, sensation of having a "lump in the throat", hand tremor, fear of death. The attack has developed for the first time and is associated with a strong emotion. There is no previous history. Objectvely: respiratory rate - 28/min, Ps - 104/min, rhythmic, AP - 150/85 mm Hg. The patient has rapid superficial vesicular breathing with extended expiration. Percussion findings: heart borders are not changed. Cardiac sounds are loud, rhythmic. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cardiac asthma
b. Thyrotoxic crisis
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Hypertensive crisis
*e. Neurocirculatory asthenia

83. A 24-year-old emotionally-labile woman presents with irritation, depressed mood, palpitation, shooting pain in the heart area, generalized fatigue following the divorce. On examination: palm hyperhydrosis, pulse rate - 72-78 bpm, labile, heart without changes. ECG is normal. What is the most probable pathology in this case?
a. Depressive neurosis
*b. Neurasthenia
c. Compulsive neurosis
d. Ipochondric neurosis
e. Schizophrenia

84. A 30-year-old woman with a long history of chronic pyelonephritis complains about considerable weakness, sleepiness, decrease in diuresis down to 100 ml per day. AP- 200/120 mm Hg. In blood: creatinine - 0,62 millimole/l, hypoproteinemia, albumines - 32 g/l, potassium - 6,8 millimole/l, hypochromic anemia, increased ESR. What is the first step in the patient treatment tactics?
a. Enterosorption
b. Antibacterial therapy
*c. Haemodialysis
d. Haemosorption
e. Blood transfusion

85. A patient had macrofocal myocardial infarction. He is overweight for 36%, AP is 150/90 mm Hg, blood sugar- 5,9 mmol/L, general cholesterol- 4,9 mmol/L, uric acid- 0,211 mmol/L. Which risk factor should be urgently eradicated during the secondary prevention?
a. Hyperglycemia
b. Arterial hypertension
*c. Obesity
d. Hypercholesterolemia
e. Hyperuricemia

86. A 36-year-old female patient complains of bruises on the body, gingival haemorrhage, general weakness. A month ago she had a severe domestic poisoning with some pesticide (the patient can not remember the name). She has a 7-year record of working in contact with petroleum products, particularly benzene. In blood: RBCs - 3,2×1012/l, WBCs - 2,7×109/l, thrombocytes – 70×109/l. What is the most likely pathology?
a. Organophosphorus pesticide intoxication
b. Mercury-containing pesticide intoxication
c. Chronic fatigue Syndrome
*d. Benzene intoxication
e. Organochlorine pesticide Intoxication

87. While staying in a stuffy room a 19-year-old emotionally labile girl developed severe weakness, dizziness, blackout, nausea and loss of consciousness without convulsions. Objectively: the patient is unconscious, the skin is pale, extremities are cold. AP- 90/60 mm Hg, Ps- 96/min, deficient, breathing is shallow. Pupillary and tendon reflexes are present. There are no pathological signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Transient ischemic attack
*b. Syncope
c. Epileptic attack
d. Vegetovascular paroxysm
e. Hysterical neurosis

88. A patient complains of frequent, bulky, frothy stools with greenish mucus, cramping pain in the umbilical region, abdominal murmur, body temperature at the rate of 39°C. The patient associates the disease with consumption of soft-boiled eggs. What is the most likely pathogen?
a. Vibrio cholerae El Tor
*b. Salmonella
c. Shigella
d. Yersinia
e. Enteropathogenic E.Coli

89. A 40-year-old female patient complains of headache, dizziness, muscle weakness, occasional cramps in the extremities. She has been taking antihypertensive medications for 10 years. AP- 180/100 mm Hg. Blood potassium - 1,8 millimole/l, sodium - 4,8 millimole/l. In urine: alkaline reaction, the relative density - 1012, protein and sugar are not found, WBCs - 3-4 in the field of vision, RBCs - 1-2 in the field of vision. Conns syndrome is suspected. Which drug should be chosen for the treatment of arterial hypertension?
a. Propanolol
b. Hydrochlorothiazide
c. Clonidine
*d. Spironolactone
e. Enalapril

90. An 18-year-old patient presents no problems. Percussion reveals that heart borders are displaced to the right and left by 1 cm, there is a coarse systolic murmur with its epicenter within the 4th intercostal space on the left. What is the most informative examination to confirm the clinical diagnosis?
a. Polycardiography
*b. Ventriculography
c. PCG
d. ECG
e. Echocardiography

91. A 56-year-old patient complains of having persistent chest pain on the right for the last 2 months. The pain is not associated with respiration. He also complains of cough with blood-streaked sputum, weakness, decreased performance, fatigue. Chest radiograph shows a globular shade of 4x6 cm connected to the root of the lung in the lower part of the right lung. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pneumonia
b. Tuberculoma
c. Metastasis
d. Lung abscess
*e. Peripheral lung cancer

92. A 18-year-old patient had subtotal strumectomy due to malignant capillary cystadenoma of the thyroid gland. In 2 months there was a suspicion of metastasis presence in the lungs. What rontgenological method is to be used first?
a. Angiopneumonography
b. Roentgenoscopy of lungs
*c. Roentgenography of lungs
d. Bronchography
e. Bronchoscopy

93. A 58-year-old patient was diagnosed basal-cell skin cancer, 1st stage. Tumor is up to 1 cm in size and with up to 0,5 cm deep infiltration in tissues. Tumor is localized in the right nasolabial area. Choose the most optimal method of treatment.
a. Long-distance gamma therapy
b. Long-distance roentgenotherapy
*c. Short-distance roentgenotherapy
d. Chemotherapy
e. Surgical treatment

94. A 27-year-old patient complains of nasal haemorrhages, multiple bruises on the anterior surface of the trunk and extremities, sudden weakness. In blood: Hb- 74 g/l, reticulocytes - 16%, RBCs - 2,5×1012/l, platelets – 30×109/l, ESR- 25 mm/h. What is the most effective measure for the treatment of thrombocytopenia?
a. Iron preparations
b. Cytostatics
c. Vitamin B12
*d. Splenectomy
e. Hemotransfusion

95. 2 days ago a patient presented with acute pain in the left half of chest, general weakness, fever and headache. Objectively: between the 4 and 5 rib on the left the skin is erythematous, there are multiple groups of vesicles 2-4 mm in diameter filled with transparent liquid. What diease are these symptoms typical for?
a. Pemphigus
b. Streptococcal impetigo
c. Herpetiform Duhrings dermatosis
*d. Herpes zoster
e. Herpes simplex

96. A woman while working in vegetable garden developed severe pain in the loin. Lasagues and Nery tension signs are obviously marked on the right. Lumbar lordosis is smoothed, movements are harshly restrained in lumbar part of the spine. Right ankle (Achilles) reflex is absent. What kind of disease can it be?
a. Renal colic
b. Neuritis of femoral nerve
c. Lumbalgia
d. Hepatic colic
*e. Lumbar-sacral radiculitis

97. After lifting a load a patient felt undurable pain in the loin. He was diagnosed with acute lumbosacral radiculitis. Which of the following is contraindicated for this patient?
a. Vitamins of B group
b. Intravenous injection of aminophylline
c. Dehydrating drugs
d. Analgetics
*e. Warming procedures

98. An unconscious 35-year-old patient has been delivered by an ambulance to the intensive care unit. Objectively: the patient is in semicoma. Moderate mydriasis is present. The reaction of pupils to light is reduced. The reaction to verbal instructions is missing. AP is150/100 mm Hg, there is tachycardia. Blood contains methanol. What antidote should be administered?
*a. Ethanol
b. Thiamine chloride
c. Naloxone
d. Tavegil
e. Unithiol

99. After lifting a load, a 36-year-old male patient has experienced a severe pain in the lumbar region, which spread to the right leg and was getting worse when he moved his foot or coughed. Objectively: the long back muscles on the right are strained. Achilles jerk is reduced on the right. There is a pronounced tenderness of paravertebral points in the lumbar region. The straight leg raise (Lasegues sign ) is positive on the right. What additional tests should be performed in the first place?
a. Electromyography
b. Lumbar puncture
c. Computed tomography
d. Magnetic resonance tomography
*e. Radiography of the spinal column

100. A female, aged 20, after smoking notices a peculiar inebriation with the feeling of burst of energy, elation, irreality and changing of surroundings: the world gets full of bright colours, the objects change their dimensions, peoples faces get cartoon features, loss of time and space judgement. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cannabism
*b. Cocainism
c. Barbiturism
d. Morphinism
e. Nicotinism

