1. A 75 y.o patient can not tell the month, date and season of the year. After long deliberations she manages to tellher name. She is in irritable and dissatisfied mood. She always carries a bundle with belongings with her, hides a parcel with bread, shoes in her underwear in her bosom as well as "invaluable books". What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Behaviour disorder
b. Dissociated personality (psychopathy)
c. Atherosclerotic (lacunar) dementia
d. Presenile melancholia
*e. Senile dementia

2. A 17-year-old male patient consulted a therapist about malaise, chills, runny nose, aching muscles and joints, nausea and diarrhea. The patient asks to prescribe him a lot of painkillers and sedatives (tramadol or solpadein that help the best, and diazepam). Pharyngeal mucosa is pale pink, clean. Auscultation reveals vesicular breathing. Tachycardia is present. The pupils are dilated, there is sluggish response to light. There are injection marks on the forearm skin. During examination, the patients manner is vulgar, irritable, rude and untruthful. Make a diagnosis:
a. Acute respiratory disease
b. Food-born toxic infection
c. Painkillers addiction
d. Sedative drug addiction
*e. Opioid addiction

3. While lifting a heavy load a 39-year-old patient suddenly felt a severe headache, pain in the interscapular region, and started vomiting. Objectively: the pulse is rhythmic, 60/min, AP- 180/100 mm Hg. The patient is agitated. He presents with photophobia, hyperacusis. There are positive Kernigs and Brudzinskis signs on both sides. In blood: WBCs – 10×109/l. CSF is bloody, cytosis is 240/3. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
b. Acute hypertonic encephalopathy
c. Ischemic stroke
d. Meningococcal meningitis
e. Sympathoadrenal crisis

4. A 26-year-old male patient complains of piercing pain during breathing, cough, dyspnea. Objectively: to- 37,3°C, respiration rate - 19/min, heart rate = Ps- 92/min; AP- 120/80 mm Hg. Vesicular respiration. In the inferolateral parts of chest auscultation in both inspiration and expiration phase revealed noise that was getting stronger at phonendoscope pressing and can be still heard after cough. ECG showed no pathological changes. What is the most likely giagnosis?
a. Spontaneous pneumothorax
b. Pericarditis sicca
c. Intercostal neuralgia
d. Subcutaneous emphysema
*e. Acute pleuritis

5. A 45-year-old patient, a sailor, was hospitalized on the 2nd day of the disease. A week ago he returned from India. Complains of body temperature of 41°C, severe headache, dyspnea, cough with frothy rusty sputum. Objectively: the patient is pale, mucous membranes are cyanotic, breathing rate is 24/min, tachycardia is present. In lungs: diminished breath sounds, moist rales over both lungs, crepitation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Sepsis
*b. Pneumonic plaque
c. Influenza
d. Miliary tuberculosis
e. Ornithosis

6. HIV displays the highest tropism towards the following blood cells:
a. T-killers
b. T-suppressors
*c. T-helpers
d. Thrombocytes
e. Erythrocytes

7. A 25-year-old patient complains of general weakness, dry cough, sweating, subfebrile temperature. Objectively: lung auscultation reveals vesicular resiration with no wheezing. Fluorogram shows focal shadows of high intensity in the 1-2 segments of the right lung. Mantoux test gave a reaction of 16 mm of induration. What clinical form of tuberculosis is most likely?
a. Tuberculoma
b. Miliary
c. Infiltrative
d. Disseminated
*e. Focal

8. A 22-year-old patient is a clerk. His working day runs in a conditioned room. In summer he was taken by an acute disease with the following symptoms: fever, dyspnea, dry cough, pleural pain, myalgia, arthralgia. Objectively: moist rales on the right, pleural friction rub. X-ray picture showed infiltration of the inferior lobe. In blood: WBC – 11×109/l, stab neutrophils - 6%, segmented neutrophils - 70%, lymphocytes - 8%, ESR - 42 mm/h. What is the ethiological factor of pneumonia?
*a. Legionella
b. Streptococcus
c. Pneumococcus
d. Staphylococcus
e. Mycoplasm

9. A 43-year-old female patient complains of dyspnea, swelling of legs, abdomen enlargement, pricking heart pain. She has a history of tuberculous bronchadenitis, quinsies. The patients condition deteriorated 6 months ago. Objectively: cyanosis, bulging neck veins, vesicular breathing. Heart borders are not displaced. Heart sounds are muffled, Ps is 106/min, liver is +4 cm, ascites is present. Low voltage on the ECG has been revealed. Radiograph shows a thin layer of calcium deposits along the left contour of heart. What treatment should be recommended to the patient?
*a. Treatment by a cardiac surgeon
b. Anti-TB drugs
c. Vasodilators, nitrates
d. Diuretics
e. Digitalis preparations

10. A 53-year-old female patient complains of cardiac pain and rhythm intermissions. She has experienced these presentations since childhood. The patients father had a history of cardiac arrhythmias. Objectively: the patient is in grave condition, Ps- 220 bpm, AP- 80/60 mm Hg. ECG results: heart rate - 215/min, extension and deformation of QRS complex accompanied by atrioventricular dissociation; positive P wave. Some time later heart rate reduced down to 45/min, there was a complete dissociation of P wave and QRST complex. Which of the following will be the most effective treatment?
a. beta-adrenoreceptor blocking agents
b. Calcium antagonists
c. Cardiac glycosides
*d. Implantation of the artificial pacemaker
e. Cholinolytics

11. A 26-year-old female patient has an 11-year history of rheumatism. Four years ago she suffered 2 rheumatic attacks. Over the last 6 months there have been paroxysms of atrial fibrillation every 2-3 months. What option of antiarrhythmic therapy or tactics should be proposed?
a. Immediate hospitalization
b. Lidocaine administration
c. Heparin administration
*d. Prophylactic administration of cordarone
e. Defibrillation

12. A 49-year-old patient complains of dyspnea, cough. There are no sputum discharges. He has repeatedly used salbutamol and intal but with no effect. Objectively: he is only able to sit while leaning on the table. Cyanosis of face, acrocyanosis are present. Breathing is shallow, laboured, in some parts it cannot be auscultated; there are diffuse rales, expiration is significantly prolonged. Heart sounds are muffled, tachycardia is present. Ps - 112/min, AP- 110/70 mm Hg. Liver is located near the costal arch. There are no peripheral edemata. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Bronchiale asthma, moderate gravity
b. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
*c. Status asthmaticus
d. Foreign object aspiration
e. Cardiac asthma

13. Thrombosis of the coronary artery caused myocardial infarction. What mechanisms of injury will be the dominating ones in this disease?
a. Lipid mechanisms
*b. Calcium mechanisms
c. Acidotic mechanisms
d. Electrolytoosmotic mechanisms
e. Protein mechanisms

14. On the second day of the disease a 22-year-old male patient complains of high-grade fever, headache in the region of forehead and superciliary arches, and during eye movement; aching muscles and joints. Objectively: body temperature is 39°C. Face is hyperemic, sclerae are injected. The mucous membrane of the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall is bright hyperemic and has petechial hemorrhages. What changes in the hemogram are typical for this disease?
a. Anemia
b. Accelerated ESR
c. Leukocytosis
d. Neutrocytosis
*e. Leukopenia

15. A female patient consulted a dermatologist about the rash on the trunk and extremities. Objectively: interdigital folds, flexor surfaces of wrists and navel region are affected with pairs of nodulo-cystic eruptions and crusts. The rash is accompanied by skin itch that is getting stronger at night. What external treatment should be administered?
a. 2% sulfuric paste
b. 5% sulfuric ointment
*c. 20% benzyl benzoate emulsion
d. 5% naphthalan ointment
e. 5% tetracycline ointment

16. A 54 y.o. male patient suffers from dyspnea during mild physical exertion, cough with sputum which is excreted with diffculty. On examination: diffuse cyanosis. Is Barrel-chest. Weakened vesicular breathing with prolonged expiration and dry whistling rales. AP is 140/80 mm Hg, pulse is 92 bpm, rhythmic. Spirography: vital capacity (VC)/predicted vital capacity- 65%, FEV1/FVC– 50%. Determine the type of respiratory insufficiency (RI).
a. RI of mixed type with prevailing resriction
b. There is no RI
c. RI of restrictive type
d. RI of obstructive type
*e. RI of mixed type with prevailing obstruction

17. An ambulance had been called to a 48-year-old man. According to his relatives, the patient had had three attacks of unconsciousness accompanied by convulsions within 24 hours. On examination the doctor witnessed the following attack: the patient lost consciousness and fell to the floor, developed tonic, then clonic convulsions of trunk and extremities. The attack lasted 1 minute and ended with involuntary urination. Specify the kind of attack:
a. Syncope
b. Coma
c. Attack of hysteria
*d. Epileptic seizure
e. Vegetative crisis

18. A patient is 60 years old, retired, worked as deputy director of a research institute. Behavioural changes appeared 2 years ago after the death of her husband: she stopped looking after herself and leaving the house; then she refused to clean the apartment and cook. Mental status: temporal disorientation. The patient does not understand many of the questions, is confused; does not know how to cook soup or fasten a button. Her speech is characterized by stumbling and logoclonia. She does not recognize doctors, fellow patients. She cries a lot but can not explain the reason for tears. What is the mechanism of this pathology?
a. Atherosclerotic changes in cerebral vessels
b. Impaired conversion of dopamine to noradrenaline
c. Disorder of melatonin metabolism
*d. Atrophy of the cerebral cortex
e. Serotonin deficiency

19. A 26-year-old patient has abused alcohol since the age of 16, needs a morning-after drink to cure hangover. He takes alcohol nearly every day, "a little at a time". Twice a week he gets severely drunk. The patient works as a motor mechanic, over the last 2 years work conflicts have become more frequent. What medical and tactical actions should be taken in this case?
*a. Voluntary consultation and treatment at an addiction clinic
b. Referral to treatment at an activity therapy centre
c. Consultation with a psychologist
d. Referral to medical-social expert commission for assessment of his working ability
e. Compulsory treatment

20. A 47-year-old female patient has an 8-year history of ulcerative colitis, has been treated with glucocorticoids. She complains of cramping pain in the umbilical region and left iliac region which has significantly increased during the past 2 weeks, diarrhea with mucus and blood 4-6 times a day, elevated body temperature up to 38-39°C, headache and pain in the knee joints. Objectively: the patient is in moderate condition, Ps - 108/min, AP - 90/60 mm Hg; heart and lungs are unremarkable; the tongue is moist; abdominal muscle tone is significantly decreased; peristaltic noises are absent. What complication developed in the patient?
a. Colon carcinoma
*b. Toxic dilatation of the colon
c. Enterorrhagia
d. Perforation of the colon
e. Stricture of the colon

21. A 26-year-old patient with left lower lobe pneumonia experiences an acute chest pain on the left during coughing. Objectively: diffuse cyanosis, extension of the left side of chest. Percussion reveals high tympanitis. Auscultation reveals no respiratory murmurs above the left side of chest. There is a deviation of the right cardiac border towards the midclavicular line. What examination will be the most informative?
a. Pneumotachometry
b. Spirography
c. Bronchoscopy
d. Bronchography
*e. X-Ray

22. A male patient presents with swollen ankles, face, eyelids, elevated AP- 160/100 mm Hg, pulse- 54 bpm, daily loss of albumine with urine- 4g. What therapy is pathogenetic in this case?
a. NSAID
b. Diuretics
*c. Corticosteroids
d. Calcium antagonists
e. Antibiotics

23. After myocardial infarction, a 50-year-old patient had an attack of asthma. Objectively: bubbling breathing with frequency of 32/min, cough with a lot of pink frothy sputum, acrocyanosis, swelling of the neck veins. Ps- 108/min, AP- 150/100 mm Hg. Heart sounds are muffled. Mixed moist rales can be auscultated above the entire lung surface. What drug would be most effective in this situation?
a. Dopamine intravenously
b. Aminophylline intravenously
c. Pentamin intravenously
d. Strophanthin intravenously
*e. Nitroglycerin intravenously

24. During dynamic investigation of a patient the increase of central venous pressure is combined with the decrease of arterial pressure. What process is proved by such combination?
a. Presence of hypervolemia
*b. Increase of bleeding speed
c. Shunting
d. Developing of cardiac insufficiency
e. Depositing of blood in venous channel

25. A male patient complains of heartburn which gest stronger while bending the body, substernal pain during swallowing. There is a hiatus hernia on X-ray. What disoeder should be expected at gastroscopy?
a. Chronic gastritis
b. Acute erosive gastritis
c. Duodenal peptic ulcer
*d. Gastroesophageal reflux
e. Gastric peptic ulcer

26. A 43 y.o. male complains of stomach pain, which relieves with defecation, and is accompanied by abdominal winds, rumbling, the feeling of incomplete evacuation or urgent need for bowel movement, constipation or diarrhea in alternation. These symptoms have lasted for over 3 months. No changes in laboratory tests. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Colitis with hypertonic type dyskinesia
b. Spastic colitis
*c. Irritable bowel syndrome
d. Chronic enterocolitis, exacerbation phase
e. Atonic colitis

27. Against the background of angina a patient has developed pain in tubular bones. Examination revealed generalized enlargement of lymph nodes, hepatolienal syndrome, sternalgia. In blood: RBCs - 3,6×1012/l, Hb- 87 g/l, thrombocytes – 45×109/l, WBCs – 13×109/l, blasts - 87%, stab neutrophils - 1%, segmented neutrophils - 7%, lymphocytes - 5%, ESR - 55 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erythremia
b. Chronic myeloid leukemia
c. Multiple myeloma
*d. Acute leukemia
e. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia

28. A 49-year-old female patient with schizophrenia is all the time listening to something, insists that "there is a phone in her head" as she hears the voice of her brother who tells her to go home. The patient is anxious, suspicious, looks around all the time. Specify the psychopathological syndrome:
a. Paraphrenic
b. Depressive
c. Generalized anxiety disorder
d. Paranoiac
*e. Hallucinatory

29. A 43-year-old male patient undergoing treatment for peptic ulcer complains of weakness, dizziness, coffee-ground vomiting, melena. After administration of haemostatics the patients condition has not improved, fresh blood has shown up in the vomit, skin bruises of different sizes have appeared. In blood: thrombocytes – 50×109/l, Lee-White clotting time - 35 minutes, APTT - 80 seconds. In this case it is most rational to administer the following preparation:
a. Heparin
b. Rheopolyglucinum
c. Vikasol
*d. Fresh frozen plasma
e. Fibrinogen

30. A 38-year-old patient complains of inertness, subfebrile temperature, enlargement of lymph nodes, nasal haemorrhages, bone pain. Objectively: the patients skin and mucous membranes are pale, palpation revealed enlarged painless lymph nodes; sternalgia; liver was enlarged by 2 cm, spleen - by 5 cm, painless. In blood: erythrocytes - 2,7×1012/l, Hb- 84 g/l, leukocytes – 58×109/l, eosinophils - 1%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 12%, lymphocytes - 83%, lymphoblasts - 2%, smudge cells; ESR- 57 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Chronic lymphatic leukemia
b. Acute lymphatic leukemia
c. Lymphogranulomatosis
d. Acute myeloleukemia
e. Chronic myeloleukemia

31. A 30-year-old male patient complains of inertness, low-grade fever, bleeding gums, frequent quinsies, aching bones. Objectively: the patient has pale skin and mucous membranes, sternalgia, +2 cm liver, +5 cm painless spleen. Blood test results: RBC - 2,7×1012/l, Нb - 80 g/l, WBC – 3×109/l, eosinophils - 4%, basophils - 5%, blasts - 4%, stab neutrophils - 2%, segmented neutrophils - 17%, lymphocytes - 29%, myelocytes - 25%, promyelocytes - 12%, monocytes - 2%, platelets – 80×109/l, ESR - 57 mm/h. What test should be performed to verify the diagnosis?
a. Trephine biopsy
b. Lumbar puncture
c. Chest X-ray
*d. Sternal puncture
e. Lymph node biopsy

32. A 24-year-old patient complains about putting on weight, limosis. Objectively: the patients constitution is of hypersthenic type, body weight index is 33,2 kg/m2, waist circumference is 100 cm. Correlation of waist circumference to the thigh circumference is 0,95. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the II stage, gynoid type
b. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the II stage, abdominal type
c. Hypothalamic Itsenko-Cushing obesity of the I stage, abdominal type
*d. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the I stage, abdominal type
e. Alimentary constitutional obesity of the III stage, gynoid type

33. A 47-year-old male patient has been lately complaining of compressing chest pain that occurs when he walks a distance of 700-800 m. Once a week, he drinks 2 liters of beer. Rise in arterial pressure has been observed for the last 7 years. Objectively: Ps - 74/min, AP - 120/80 mm Hg. The bicycle ergometry performed at workload of 75 watts shows 2 mm ST-segment depression in V4-V6 leads. What is the most likely diagnosis ?
a. Alcoholic cardiomyopathy
*b. Exertional stenocardia, II functional class
c. Exertional stenocardia, IV functional class
d. Exertional stenocardia, III functional class
e. Vegetative-vascular dystonia of hypertensive type

34. A 58-year-old patient complains about sensation of numbness, sudden paleness of II-IV fingers, muscle rigidness, intermittent pulse. The patient presents also with polyarthralgia, dysphagia, constipations. The patients face is masklike, solid edema of hands is present. The heart is enlarged; auscultation revealed dry rales in lungs. In blood: ESR- 20 mm/h, crude protein - 85/l, γ-globulines - 25%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Systemic lupus erythematosus
b. Raynauds disease
c. Dermatomyositis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
*e. Systemic scleroderma

35. A 45-year-old man has been exhibiting high activity for the last 2 weeks, he became talkative, euphoric, had little sleep, claimed being able "to save the humanity" and solve the problem of cancer and AIDS, gave money the starangers. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Schizo-affective disorder
b. Catatonic excitation
c. Panic disorder
d. Agitated depression
*e. Maniacal onset

36. A patient had four generalized convulsive seizures within a day. Between the seizures the patient did not come to waking consciousness (was in a coma or stupor). Specify his state:
a. Hysterical attacks
b. Frequent complex partial seizures
c. Frequent generalized seizures
d. Frequent jacksonian seizures
*e. Status epilepticus

37. A 35-year-old patient complains of heartburn, sour eructation, burning, compressing retrosternal pain and pain along the esophagus rising during forward bending of body. The patient hasnt been examined, takes Almagel on his own initiative, claims to feel better after its taking. Make a provisional diagnosis:
a. Duodenal ulcer
*b. Gastroesophageal reflux disease
c. Cardiospasm
d. Functional dyspepsia
e. Gastric ulcer

38. As a result of lifting a load a 62-year-old female felt acute pain in the lumbar region, in a buttock, posterolateral surface of her right thigh, external surface of the right shin and dorsal surface of foot. Objectively: weakness of the anterior tibial muscle, long extensor muscle of the right toes, short extensor muscle of the right toes. Low Achilles reflex on the right. Positive Lasegues sign. What examination method would be the most effective for specification of the diagnosis of discogenic compression of L5 root?
a. Lumbar puncture
*b. Magnetic resonance scan
c. Electromyography
d. Spinal column X-ray
e. Angiography

39. A 45-year-old female patient complaining of general weakness, nausea and vomiting hass been delivered to a hospital by the ambulance. Recently there has been a lack of appetite, weight loss. Objectively: hyperpigmentation of skin, blood pressure at the rate of 70/45 mm Hg, bradycardia. Additional studies revealed the reduced concentration of aldosterone and cortisol in blood, decreased excretion of 17-ketosteroids and 17-oxyketosteroids in the urine, hyponatremia, chloropenia, hypokalemia. What therapeutic measures are required?
a. To prescribe a diet with a high content of cooking salt
b. To administer aldosterone
c. To administer insulin
*d. To administer glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and a diet with a high content of cooking salt
e. To administer prednisolone

40. A 23-year-old female patient has a mental disease since the age of 18, the course of disease has no remission periods. At a hospital the patient mostly presents with non-purposeful foolish excitation: she makes stereotypic grimaces, exposed, masturbating in front of a loud laugh, repeating the stereotypical abusive shouts. The patient should be assigned:
a. Tranquilizers
b. Antidepressants
*c. Neuroleptics
d. Nootropics
e. Mood stabilizers

41. A 40-year-old patient is registered in a narcological dispensary. Somatically: skin is dramatically hyperemic, sclera are injected, hyperhidrosis is present. AP- 140/100 mm Hg, heart rate - 100/min. Mental state: autopsychic orientation is intact, allopsychic orientation is distorted. The patient presents with motor anxiety. There is a look of fear on his face. He refuses to talk about his problems and asks to release him immediately, because he "may be killed." This state developed a day after a regular drinking bout. What is your provisional diagnosis?
a. Alcoholic hallucinosis
b. Alcoholic paranoid
c. Organic delirium
d. Paranoia
*e. Delirium tremens

42. During the preventive examination a 17-year-old young man reports no health problems. Objectively: the patient is undernourished, asthenic; blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg, Ps - 80/min. Heart borders are within normal range. Auscultation reveals three apical heart sounds, murmurs are absent. ECG shows no pathological changes, PCG registers the S3 occurring 0,15 seconds after the S2. How can you interpret these changes?
a. Physiologic S4
*b. Physiologic S3
c. Protodiastolic gallop rhythm
d. Fout-ta-ta-rou (three-component rhythm)
e. Presystolic gallop rhythm

43. A patient is being prepared for the operation on account of varix dilatation of lower extremities veins. Examination of the patients soles revealed flour-like desquamation along the skin folds. All the toenails are greyish-yellow, thickened and partially decayed. What dermatosis should be suspected?
a. Candidosis
b. Pityriasis versicolor
*c. Rubromycosis
d. Microsporia
e. Microbial eczema

44. A 14-year-old patient with signs of internal haemorrhage has been taken to a hospital after a fight. He has had haemophilia A since childhood. He has been diagnosed with retroperitoneal hematoma. What should be administered in the first place?
a. Fresh blood
*b. Cryoprecipitate
c. Dried plasma
d. Aminocapronic acid
e. Platelet concentrate

45. A 58-year-old patient complains of a headache in the occipital region, nausea, choking, opplotentes. The presentations appeared after a physical exertion. Objectively: the patient is excited. Face is hyperemic. Skin is pale. Heart sounds are regular, the 2nd aortic sound is accentuated. AP- 240/120 mm Hg, HR- 92/min. Auscultation reveals some fine moist rales in the lower parts of the lungs. Liver is not enlarged. ECG shows signs of hypertrophy and left ventricular overload. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Community-acquired pneumonia
*b. Complicated hypertensic crisis, pulmonary edema
c. Bronchial asthma exacerbation
d. Acute myocardial infarction, pulmonary edema
e. Uncomplicated hypertensic crisis

46. A 37-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar spine that is getting stronger during walking; restricted mobility, edema of the right side of abdomen. He has a history of focal tuberculosis. X-ray picture shows the destruction of the adjacent surfaces of the 1-2 vertebral bodies of the lumbar spine, vertebral body height is decreased, intervertebral foramen is undetectable. Abdominal ultrasound reveals a 15x20 cm formation in the retroperitoneal space, there are echo signals of fluid presence. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Fracture of the 1-2 vertebral bodies of the lumbar spine
b. Spondylolisthesis of the lumbar spine
c. Osteochondrosis
*d. Tuberculous spondylitis of the lumbar spine
e. Spinal metastases

47. A 43-year-old female patient was delivered to the hospital in grave condition. She has a history of Addisons disease. The patient had been regularly taking prednisolone but a week before she stopped taking this drug. Objectively: sopor, skin and visible mucous membranes are pigmented, skin and muscle turgor is decreased. Heart sounds are muffled, rapid. AP- 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 96/min. In blood: Na - 120 millimole/l, K - 5,8 millimole/l. Development of this complication is primarily caused by the deficit of the following hormone:
*a. Cortisol
b. Adrenaline
c. Adrostendion
d. Noradrenaline
e. Corticotropin (ACTH)

48. In a cold weather, the emergency room admitted a patient pulled out of the open water. There was no respiratory contact with the water. The patient is excited, pale, complains of pain, numbness of hands and feet, cold shiver. Respiratory rate is 22/min, AP - 120/90 mm Hg, Ps - 110/min, rectal temperature is 34,5°C. What kind of warming is indicated for this patient?
*a. Passive warming
b. Hot compresses
c. Hemodialysis with blood warming
d. Warm bath
e. Infusion of 37°C solutions

49. Survey radiograph of a 52-year-old worker of an agglomeration plant (28 years of experience, the concentration of metal dust is 22-37 mg/m3) shows mildly pronounced interstitial fibrosis with diffused contrast well-defined small nodular shadows. The patient has no complaints. Pulmonary function is not compromised. What is the provisional diagnosis?
a. Silicatosis
b. Anthracosis
c. Silicosis
d. Anthraco-silicatosis
*e. Siderosis

50. A 60-year-old patient complains of nearly permanent sensation of heaviness and fullness in the epigastrium, that increases after eating, foul-smelling eructation, occasional vomiting with food consumed 1-2 days ago, weight loss. 12 years ago he was found to have an ulcer of pyloric channel. The patient has taken ranitidine for periodic hunger pain. The patients condition has been deteriorating over the last 3 months. Objectively: splashing sound in the epigastrium is present. What kind of complication is it?
a. Functional pyloric spasm
b. Penetration of gastric ulcer
*c. Pyloric stenosis
d. Foreign body in the stomach (bezoar)
e. Malignization of gastric ulcer

51. A 52-year-old patient works as a secretary and has 30 year record of service. She complains of spasms in her right hand during working and inability to type and write. Up to 80% of her work involves hand load. The patient has been presenting with these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: the right hand is tense, there is an increase in muscle tone, attempts to write cause spasms. Examination revealed no pathological changes of CNS. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic manganese intoxication
*b. Spastic form of coordination neurosis
c. Paretic form of coordination neurosis
d. Neuralgic form of coordination neurosis
e. Hysteric neurosis

52. Examination of an electric welder with 15 years of service record revealed dry rales in the lower lung fields. Radiograph shows diffuse nodules sized 3-4 mm in the middle and lower lung fields. What disease can be suspected?
a. Bronchitis
*b. Heavy-metal coniosis
c. Silicatosis
d. Silicosis
e. Carbon pneumo coniosis

53. A 22-year-old vegetarian patient with signs of malnutrition consulted a doctor about smell and taste distortion, angular stomatitis. Objectively: expressively blue sclerae. The patient was diagnosed with iron deficiency anemia. What is the dominating clinical syndrome?
a. Haemologic
b. Anaemic
*c. Sideropenic
d. Haemolytic
e. Myelodysplastic

54. A patient complains of retrosternal pain, difficult swallowing, over 10 kg weight loss within three months, general weakness. In blood: hypochromic anaemia, neutrophilic leukocytosis. In feces: weakly positive Gregersens reaction. On esophagram a filling defect with ill-defined serrated edges shows up along a large portion of the esophagus. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Esophageal carcinoma
b. Esophageal achalasia
c. Sideropenic dysphagia
d. Peptic ulcer
e. Benign tumour

55. A 12-year-old boy periodically has short episodes (10-15 seconds) of a brief loss of awareness with a dazed look and eyes stare in an upright position, blank expression of face, absence of motions and subsequent amnesia. Specify the described state:
a. Fugue
b. Sperrung
c. Obnubilation
d. Trance
*e. Absence seizure

56. A 19-year-old male patient complains of intense pain in the left knee joint. Objectively: the left knee joint is enlarged, the overlying skin is hyperemic, the joint is painful on palpation. Blood test results: RBC - 3,8×1012/l, Hb - 122 g/l, lymphocytes - 7,4×109/l, platelets – 183×109/l. ESR - 10 mm/h. Duke bleeding time is 4 minutes, Lee-White clotting time - 24 minutes. A-PTT is 89 s. Rheumatoid factor is negative. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hemophilia, hemarthrosis
b. Rheumatoid arthritis
c. Hemorrhagic vasculitis, articular form
d. Thrombocytopathy
e. Werlhofs disease

57. Explosion of a tank with benzene at a chemical plant has killed and wounded a large number of people. There are over 50 victims with burns, mechanical injuries and intoxication. Specify the main elements of medical care and evacuation of population in this situation:
*a. Sorting, medical assistance, evacuation
b. Medical assistance, evacuation, isolation
c. Sorting, recovery, rescue activity
d. Isolation, rescue activity, recovery
e. Sorting, evacuation, treatment

58. An emergency doctor has diagnosed a 32-year-old woman with generalized convulsive status epilepticus. The deterioration in the patients condition is caused by a sudden gap in the epilepsy treatment. Specify the doctors further tactics:
a. Outpatient monitoring by a neuropathologist
b. Outpatient monitoring by a neurosurgeon
c. Hospitalization in the department of neurology
d. Hospitalization in the department of neurosurgery
*e. Hospitalization in the intensive care unit

59. A 63-year-old male patient with persistent atrial fibrillation complains of moderate dyspnea. Objectively: peripheral edemata are absent, vesicular breathing is present, heart rate - 72/min, AP - 140/90 mm Hg. What combination of drugs will be most effective for the secondary prevention of heart failure?
a. Cardiac glycosides, diuretics
b. Beta-blockers, cardiac glycosides
*c. Beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors
d. Cardiac glycosides, ACE inhibitors
e. Diuretics, beta-blockers

60. A 57-year-old male patient had an attack of retrosternal pain that lasted more than 1,5 hours. Objectively: the patient is inert, adynamic, has pale skin, cold extremities, poor volume pulse, heart rate - 120/min, AP - 70/40 mm Hg. ECG shows ST elevation in II, III, aVF leads. What condition are these changes typical for?
a. Perforated gastric ulcer
b. Arrhythmogenic shock
*c. Cardiogenic shock
d. Acute pericarditis
e. Acute pancreatitis

61. A 42-year-old female lives in the basement, is unemployed, undernourished. She complains of having general weakness, hair loss, brittle nails for six months, likes to eat chalk. Objectively: the patient is emaciated, pale, has dry skin. Peripheral lymph nodes are not enlarged. Liver is +1,5 cm. In blood: RBCs - 1,8×1012/l, Hb- 62 g/l, colour index - 0,78, reticulocytes - 0,5 o/oo, ESR- 18 mm/h. Leukogram exhibits no pathology. What is a provisional diagnosis?
a. Chronic hepatitis
b. Acquired haemolytic anaemia
c. Congenital haemolytic anaemia
*d. Nutritional iron deficiency anaemia
e. B12-deficiency anaemia

62. A 20-year-old patient complains of breath shortness, continuous dull heart pain, irritability. Objectively: general condition is satisfactory, the pulse is labile, AP- 130/60 mm Hg. ECG shows repolarization disorder. The patient has been diagnosed with cardiac-type neurocirculatory dystonia. The patient should receive treatment under the following conditions:
a. Inpatient treatment at the therapeutic department
b. Inpatient treatment at the cardiac surgery department
c. Inpatient treatment at the psychiatric department
*d. Outpatient treatment
e. Inpatient treatment at the cardiology department

63. A 45-year-old male patient complains of acute pain in his right side irradiating to the right thigh and crotch. The patient claims also to have frequent urination with urine which resembles a meat slops. The patient has no previous history of this condition. There is costovertebral angle tenderness on the right (positive Pasternatskys symptom). What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Urolithiasis
b. Acute pyelonephritis
c. Acute pancreatitis
d. Acute cholecystitis.
e. Acute appendicitis

64. A 38-year-old male works within the range of ionizing radiation. At a routine medical examination he presents no problems. In blood: RBCs - 4,5×1012/l, Hb- 80 g/l, WBCs - 2,8×109/l, thrombocytes – 30×109/l. Decide if this person can work with sources of ionizing radiation:
a. The patient is allowed to work with radioactive substances
b. The patient can be allowed to work after an extended medical examination
c. The patient is allowed to work with radioactive substances for the limited period of time
*d. Working with radioactive substances and other sources of ionizing radiation is contraindicated
e. The patient can only work with radioactive substances of low activity

65. A patient who undergoes treatment at a tuberculosis clinic has complained of having progressing headache for the last 3 weeks. Neurological examination reveals rigidity of occipital muscles, no focal symptoms. What is your provisional diagnosis?
*a. Tuberculous meningitis
b. Brain tumour
c. Convexital arachnoiditis
d. Myelitis
e. Chorea minor

66. A patient with chronic suppurative otitis has developed severe headache, vomiting, body temperature rise. The meningeal symptoms are present. There are no focal neurological symptoms. The further tactics of a doctor should be:
a. Regular medical check-up
b. Skull radiography
*c. Urgent hospitalization and diagnostic lumbar puncture
d. Administration of anti-inflammatory drugs
e. Referral for a consultation with otolaryngologist

67. A 28-year-old male patient complains of sour regurgitation, cough and heartburn that occurs every day after having meals, when bending forward or lying down. These problems have been observed for 4 years. Objective status and laboratory values are normal. FEGDS revealed endoesophagitis. What is the leading factor in the development of this disease?
a. Hypergastrinemia
b. Helicobacter pylori infection
c. Hypersecretion of hydrochloric acid
d. Duodeno-gastric reflux
*e. Failure of the lower esophageal sphincter

68. Routine examination of a 16-year-old boy revealed the presence of three heart sounds on auscultation. The third sound is low and occurs in early diastole, there is no additional murmur. In history: pneumonia six months ago. The patient presents no problems. Examination revealed hyposthenia, underdevelopment of muscles. Laboratory and instrumental studies reveald no peculiarities. What is the origin of the additional heart sound?
a. Pericardial diastolic sound
b. The sound of the tricuspid valve opening
c. The sound of the mitral valve opening
d. Protodiastolic gallop rhythm
*e. Physiological III sound

69. A patients condition is getting worse towards evening: she becomes excited, complains of "internal anxiety", "a weight on her heart", foreboding of evil - "something evil will happen to me or my family". The patient is sad, melancholic, has poor appetite and sleep disorders. Specify the kind of mental disorder:
a. Endogenous depression
b. Somatized depression
*c. Anxious depression
d. Hypochondriac depression
e. Agitated depression

70. A 30-year-old male patient had been admitted to the TB hospital because of the following changes detected by fluorography: an ill-defined shadow of low intensity up to 1 cm in diameter in the S1 of the right lung. CT scan showed a destruction area in the center of the shadow. Sputum analysis revealed MTB. The patient was diagnosed with focal tuberculosis. What phases of tuberculosis are the identified changes typical for?
a. Disintegration and dissemination
b. Calcification and resorption
c. Infiltration and dissemination
d. Resorption and scarring
*e. Infiltration and disintegration

71. A 43-year-old female complains of significant weakness, sore throat, occurrence of multiple unexplained bruises on her skin. These symptoms have been present for a week, the disease is associated with quinsy which she had some time before. Objectively: body temperature - 38,9°C, respiratory rate - 24/min, Ps - 110/min, AP - 100/65 mm Hg. The patient has pale skin, petechial rash on the extremities, enlarged lymph nodes. Blood test results: Hb - 80 g/l, RBC - 2,2*10^12/l; WBC - 3,5*10^9/l; blasts - 52%; eosinophils - 2%; stab neutrophils - 3%; segmented neutrophils - 19%; lymphocytes - 13%; monocytes - 1%; platelets – 35*10^9/l. ESR - 47 mm/h. What test is required to specify the diagnosis?
a. Protein electrophoresis
b. Determination of anti-platelet antibody titer
c. Cytogenetic study
*d. Immunophenotyping
e. Lymph node biopsy

72. A 47-year-old male patient complains of compressive chest pain that occurs both at rest and during light physical activity; irregular heartbeat. These problems arose 3 months ago. The patients brother died suddenly at the age of 30. Objectively: Ps - 84/min, arrhythmic, AP - 130/80 mm Hg. ECG confirms signs of left ventricular hypertrophy, abnormal Q-waves in V4-V6 leads. Ech°CG reveals that interventricular septum is 1,7 cm, left ventricular wall thickness is 1,2 cm. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
b. Exertional angina
c. Pericarditis
d. Myocarditis
e. Neurocirculatory asthenia

