1. A 47 y.o. woman complains of having paroxysmal headaches for the last 5 years. The pain is one-sided, intense, localised in frontal region of head, accompanied by nausea and stomach discomfort, begins one of a sudden. Onset is usually preceded by vision reduction. Anamnesis gives evidence of periodical AP rise, but at the moment the woman doesnt take any medicines. Inbetween the onsets of headache her state is satisfactory. Objectively: high-calorie diet (body weight index - 29), AP- 170/95 mm Hg. Neurologic state has no pecularities. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic subdural hematoma
b. Benign intracranial hypertension
c. Hypertensive encephalopathy
*d. Migraine
e. Epilepsy

2. A 7 y.o. boy suddenly felt pain in his right knee, it became edematic. The day before he took part in a cross-country race. Family anamnesis has no data about hemophilia and bleeding sickness. Objectively: body temperature is 37,5°C. The knee is painful, hot to the touch, edematic with local tissue tension over it. Blood count: Нb- 123 g/L, leukocytes - 5,6×109/L, thrombocytes - 354×109/L, prothrombin time - 12 seconds (normally 10-15 seconds), partly activated thromboplastin time - 72 seconds (normally 35-45 seconds). Hemorrhage time is normal, VIII:C factor is 5% of norm. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Thrombocytopenia
*b. Hemophilia A
c. Schoenlein-Henoch disease
d. Hemophilia B
e. Vitamin K deficiency

3. On the 3rd day after the acute anterior myocardial infarction a 55 y.o. patient complains of dull ache behind his breast bone, that can be reduced by bending forward, and of dyspnea. Objectively: AP- 140/180 mm Hg, heart sounds are dull. ECG results: atrial fibrillation with frequence of ventricular contractions at the rate of 110/min, pathological Q wave and S-T segment raising in the right chest leads. The patient refused from thrombolisis. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Dissecting aortic aneurysm
b. Dresslers syndrome
c. Pulmonary embolism
d. Tietzes syndrome
*e. Acute pericarditis

4. A 54 y.o. man was admitted to the hospital with complaints of sudden intense headache in occipital region and vomiting. In the medical hystory: moderate arterial hypertension, the patient was taking hydrochlorothiazide. Three days ago he consulted a therapeutist about intense headache that was suppressed by an analgetic. Objectively: consciousness is confused, left pupil is mydriatic. Evident photophobia and tension of neck muscles. Left-side hemiparesis with increased muscle tonus and reflexes. Body temperature is low, rash is absent. AP- 230/130 mm Hg, Ps- 50 bpm, BR- 12/min. What is your preliminary diagnosis?
a. Disseminated sclerosis
b. Myasthenia
*c. Acute subdural hematoma
d. Migraine
e. Acute bacterial meningitis

5. A 51 y.o. women was taken to the emergency department in convulsive status epilepticus. The first means of medical management should be:
a. Inserting a tongue blade
b. Injecting 5 mg of diazepam followed by a loading dose of phenytoin
c. Inducing pentobarbital coma
*d. Ensuring that the airway is open and the patient is oxygenating
e. Administering an instravenous bolus of 50% dextrose

6. A 38 y.o. man complains of having occasional problems with swallowing of both hard and fluid food for many months. Sometimes he feels intense pain behind his breast bone, epecially after hot drinks. There are asphyxia onsets at night. He has not put off weight. Objectively: his general condition is satisfactory, skin is of usual colour. Examination revealed no changes of gastrointestinal tract. X-ray picture of thorax organs presents esophagus dilatation with level of fluid in it. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Myastenia
b. Esophagus candidosis
c. Gastroesophageal reflux
*d. Esophagus achalasia
e. Cancer of esophagus

7. A 35 y.o. woman consulted a doctor about occasional pains in paraumbilical and iliac region that reduce after defecation or passage of gases. Defecation takes place up to 6 times a day, stool is not solid, with some mucus in it. Appetite is normal, she has not put off weight. First such symptoms appeared 1,5 year ago, but colonoscopy data reveals no organic changes. Objectively: abdomen is soft, a little bit painful in the left iliac region. Blood and urine are normal. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. Dispancreatism
*b. Irritable bowels syndrome
c. Crohns disease
d. Celiac disease
e. Pseudomembranous colitis

8. The physician must undertake measures for primary prophylaxis of iron deficiency anemia. Which of the following categories of patient are subject to such primary prophylactic measures?
a. Workers of industrial enterprises
*b. Pregnant women
c. All children
d. Patients after 60
e. Patients after operation

9. A patient with unstable angina pectoris was given the following complex treatment: anticoagulants, nitrates, α-adrenoblockers. However on the third day of treatment the pain still romains. Which in vestigation shoud be carried out to establish diagnosis?
a. Stress-echocardiogram
b. Esophageal electrocardiac stimulator
c. Myocardial scintigraphy
*d. Coronarography
e. Test with dosed physical exercises

10. The 28 y.o. woman applied to doctor because of limited loss of the hair. In the anamnesis - she had frequent headache indisposition, arthromyalgia, fever, irregular casual sexual life, drug user. RW is negative. What examination must be done first?
a. Examination for fungi
b. Examination for trichomoniasis
c. Examination for neuropathology
d. Examination for gonorrhea
*e. Examination for HIV

11. A 35 y.o. woman was admitted to thoracic surgery department with fever up to 40°C, onset of pain in the side caused by deep breathing, cough with considerable quantity of purulent sputum and blood with bad smell. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Complication of liver echinococcosis
b. Actinomycosis of lungs
c. Pulmonary tuberculosis
*d. Abscess of the lung
e. Bronchiectatic disease

12. A 67 y.o. patient complains of palpitation, dizziness, noise in ears, feeling of shortage of air. Objectively: pale, damp skin. Vesicular respiration, respiratory rate- 22 per min, pulse- 200 bpm, AP- 100/70 mm Hg. On ECG: heart rate- 200 bmp, ventricular complexes are widened, deformed, location of segments ST and of wave T is discordant. The wave ? is not changed, superimposes QRST, natural conformity between ? and QRS is not present. What kind of arrhythmia is present?
a. Ventricular extrasystole
b. Atrial tachycardia
c. Sinus tachycardia
d. Atrial flutter
*e. Paroxismal ventricular tachycardia

13. Male 30 y.o., noted growing fingers and facial scull, changed face. Complains of poor eyesight, weakness, skin darkening, loss of body weight. X-ray shows broadening of sella turcica, thinning of tuberculin sphenoidale, signs of increased intracranial pressure. What diagnosis can you make?
*a. Adenoma of hypophysis
b. Optico - hiasmatic arachnoiditis
c. Tumor of pondo-cerebellar corner
d. Adrenal gland tumor
e. Encephalitis of truncus

14. A patient complains of a tormental (agonizing) cough with expectoration of up to 600 ml/daily purulent chocolatecolor sputum with a decay smell. Onset of illness was abrupt, to- 39°C, fever of irregular type. There is the area of darkening with a cavity in a center on X-ray film, with irregular contours and level of liquid. What disease is the question?
a. Lobar pneumonia
*b. Gangrene of lung
c. Bronchiectatic illness
d. Tuberculosis
e. Pneumonia complicated by an abscess

15. A 24 y.o. patient complains of nausea, vomiting, headache, shortness of breath. He had an acute nephritis being 10 y.o. Proteinuria was found out in urine. Objectively: a skin is grey-pale, the edema is not present. Accent of II tone above aorta. BP 140/100-180/100 mm Hg. Blood level of residual N2- 6,6 mmol/L, creatinine- 406 mmol/L. Days diuresis- 2300 ml, nocturia. Specific density of urine is 1009, albumin- 0,9 g/L, WBC- 0-2 in f/vis. RBC.- single in f/vis., hyaline casts single in specimen. Your diagnosis?
a. Stenosis of kidney artery
*b. Chronic nephritis with violation of kidney function
c. Hypertensive illness of the II degree
d. Feochromocitoma
e. Nephrotic syndrome

16. A 33 y.o. male patient was admitted to a hospital. A patient is pale, at an attempt to stand up he complains of strong dizziness. There was vomiting like coffee-grounds approximately hour ago. BP- 90/60 mm Hg., pulse- 120 b/min. In anamnesis, a patient has suffered from ulcer of the stomach, painless form during 4 years. An ulcer was exposed at gastrofiberoscopy. Your diagnosis:
a. Acute myocardial infarction, abdominal form
*b. Ulcer of stomach, complicated with bleeding
c. Erosive gastritis
d. Ulcer of duodenum, complicated with bleeding
e. Acute pleurisy

17. A 48-year-old patient complains of heaviness in the right hypochondrium, itching of the skin.He had been treated in infectious diseases hospital repeatedly due to icterus and itch. On physical exam: meteorism, ascitis, dilation of abdominal wall veins, protruded umbilicus, spleen enlargement. What can be diagnosed in this case?
a. Cancer of the head of pancreas
b. Cancer of the liver
*c. Liver cirrhosis
d. Gallstones
e. Viral hepatitis B

18. A 25-year-old man has facial edema, moderate back pains. His temperature is 37,5°C, BP 180/100 mm Hg, hematuria [up to 100 in v/f], proteinuria [2,0 g/L], hyaline casts - 10 in v/f., specific gravity -1020. The onset of the disease is probably connected with acute tonsillitis that started 2 weeks ago. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Chronic glomerulonephritis
*b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Cancer of the kidney
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

19. In the development of the inflammation processes glucocorticoids reduce the level of certain most important active enzyme. It results also in the reducing of the synthesis of prostaglandins and leucotrienes which have a key role in the development of inflammation processes. What is the exact name of this enzyme?
a. Lipoxygenasе
b. Arachidonic acid
*c. Phospholipase A2
d. Cyclooxygenase – 1
e. Cyclooxygenase – 2

20. A 30 y.o. female with rheumatoid arthritis of five years duration complains of pain in the frist three fingers of her right hand over past 6 weeks. The pain seems especially severe at night often awakening her from sleep.The most likelly cause is?
a. Sensory peripheral neuropathy
b. Atlanto-axial sublaxation of cervical spine
*c. Carpal tunnel syndrome
d. Rheumatoid vasculitis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis without complication

21. A 19-year-old man has suffered from moderate mental retardation since childhood. The patient is illiterate, can take care of himself, do simple household work and other kinds of easy work under supervision. What does his rehabilitation [tertiary prevention] require?
*a. All the above mentioned
b. Physical work under supervision
c. None of the above mentioned
d. Supervision of relatives (if any)
e. Supervision of a social worker

22. A 38 y.o. patient was urgently admitted to the hospital with complaints of sudden weakness, dizziness, loss of consciousness, body weight loss, nausea, vomiting, severe pain in epigastric area, diarrhea, skin hyperpigmentation. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pellagra
*b. Addisonic crisis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Acute gastroenteritis
e. Scleroderma

23. An unconscious patient presents with moist skin, shallow breathing. There are signs of previous injection on the shoulders and hips. BP- 110/70 mm Hg. Tonus of skeletal muscles and reflexes are increased. Cramps of muscles of the extremities are seen. What is the most likely disorder?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Hyperlactacidotic coma
c. Stroke
*d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Hyperosmolar coma

24. A patient was admitted to the hospital on the 7th day of the disease with complaints of high temperature, headache, pain in the muscles, especially in calf muscles. Dermal integuments and scleras are icteric. There is hemorrhagic rash on the skin. Urine is bloody. The patient was fishing two weeks ago. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Trichinellosis
*b. Leptospirosis
c. Salmonellosis
d. Yersiniosis
e. Brucellosis

25. A 60-year-old woman, mother of 6 children, developed a sudden onset of upper abdominal pain radiating to the back, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, fever and chills. Subsequently, she noticed yellow discoloration of her sclera and skin. On physical examination the patient was found to be febrile with temp of 38,9°C, along with right upper quadrant tenderness. The most likely diagnosis is:
a. Malignant biliary stricture
b. Benign biliary stricture
*c. Choledocholithiasis
d. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas
e. Choledochal cyst

26. A 42-year-old woman suffers from bronchial asthma, has an acute attack of bronchial asthma. What medication from the listed below is contraindicated to render a first aid?
*a. Euphylinum
b. Corazolum
c. Strophanthin hydrochloride
d. Morphinum hydrochloride
e. Izardin

27. 4 days ago a 32-year-old patient caught a cold: he presented with sore throat, fatigue. The next morning he felt worse, developed dry cough, body temperature rose up to 38,2°C, there appeared muco-purulent expectoration. Percussion revealed vesicular resonance over lungs, vesicular breathing weakened below the angle of the right scapula, fine sonorous and sibilant wheezes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary gangrene
*b. Focal right-sided pneumonia
c. Acute bronchitis
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Pulmonary carcinoma

28. A 62-year-old patient complaining of enlargement of cervical, supraclavicular and axillary lymph nodes, subfebrile temperature for the last 3 months has been admitted to a hospital. In blood: WBCs – 64×109/l, lymphocytes - 72%. What method of study should be used to specify the diagnosis?
a. Thermography
*b. Myelogram
c. Lymphoscintigraphy
d. Lymphography
e. X-rays

29. A 38 y.o. woman complains of a purulent discharge from the left nostril. The body temperature is 37,5°C. The patient has been ill for a week and associates her illness with common cold. There are a pain and tenderness on palpation of her left cheek. The mucous membrane in the left nasal cavity is red and turgescent. The purulent exudate is seen in the middle meatus in maxillary. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Acute purulent maxillary sinusitis
b. Acute purulent ethmoiditis
c. -
d. Acute purulent sphenoiditis
e. Acute purulent frontitis

30. A 40-year-old female patient has been hospitalized for attacks of asphyxia, cough with phlegm. She has a 4-year history of the disease. The first attack of asphyxia occurred during her stay in the countryside. Further attacks occurred while cleaning the room. After 3 days of inpatient treatment the patients condition has significantly improved. What is the most likely etiological factor?
a. Chemicals
b. Psychogenic
c. Pollen
d. Infectious
*e. Household allergens

31. The complications of acute cholecystitis which require surgical intervention are as follows EXCEPT:
a. Gall-bladder perforation
b. Cholangitis conditioned by the presence of stones in the bile tract
c. Empyema of the gall-bladder
d. Emphysematous gall-bladder
*e. Jaundice

32. A 22-year-old girl has been complaining of having itching rash on her face for 2 days. She associates this disease with application of cosmetic face cream. Objectively: apparent reddening and edema of skin in the region of cheeks, chin and forehead; fine papulovesicular rash. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Erysipelas
b. Neurodermatitis
c. Dermatitis simplex
d. Eczema
*e. Allergic dermatitis

33. A schizophrenic patient considers himself to be "an outstanding scientist, a brilliant composer and an unrivalled artist". He complains that "family and friends are always jealous of him and want to poison him". Determine the psychopathological syndrome:
a. Paratrophic
b. Hebephrenic
c. Paranoid
d. Manic
*e. Paranoiac

34. A 43-year-old alcohol abuser had not consumed alcohol for the last two days. In the evening he claimed to see rats and feel like they bite his feet. The patient is disoriented, agitated, all the time attempts to run somewhere. Specify the psychopathological syndrome:
a. Amential
b. Choreatic
c. Gansers syndrome
*d. Delirious
e. Oneiroid

35. A 42-year-old patient complains of back pain, darkened urine, general weakness, dizziness that occurred after treating a cold with aspirin and ampicillin. Objectively: the patient is pale, with subicteric sclerae. HR - 98 bpm. Liver - +2 cm, spleen - +3 cm. In blood: RBCs - 2,6×1012/l, Hb - 60 g/l, CI - 0,9, WBCs - 9,4×109/l, basophils - 0,5%, eosinophils - 3%, stab neutrophils - 6% segmented neutrophils - 58%, lymphocytes - 25%, monocytes - 7%, ESR - 38 mm/hour, reticulocytes - 24%. Total bilirubin - 38 millimole/l. What complication occurred in the patient?
a. Toxic hepatitis
b. Agranulocytosis
c. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
*d. Acquired hemolytic anemia
e. Cholelithiasis

36. A hospital has admitted a 52-year-old patient with disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis, complaints of acute pain in the right half of chest, that developed after going upstairs to the 3rd floor; cough, dyspnea at rest, marked cyanosis. What kind of complication should suspected first of all?
*a. Spontaneous pneumothorax
b. Pulmonary failure
c. Acute myocardial infarction
d. Pleuritis
e. Cardiac failure

37. A 38-year-old male patient has been taking alcohol for 3 years. 3 days after a regular drinking period he felt anxiety and fear. It appeared to him that he was surrounded by spiders and worms, pursued by some "condemnatory voices". His behaviour became aggressive. The patient demonstrated correct self-awareness but impairment of temporal and spatial orientation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Alcoholic paranoia
b. Alcoholic encephalopathy
c. Pathologic intoxication
*d. Delirium alcoholicum
e. Alcoholic hallucinosis

38. A painter working at a motorcar plant has been diagnosed with moderately severe intoxication with amide compounds of benzene. The in-patient treatment resulted in a considerable health improvement. What expert decision should be made in this case?
a. The patient should be referred to the medio-social expert commission for evaluation of percentage of work capicty loss
b. The patient may get back to work providing he will keep to hygiene and sanitary regulations
*c. The patient should be issued a sick list for out-patient treatment
d. The patient should be referred to the medio-social expert commission for attributing the disability group because of an occupational disease
e. -

39. A 16-year-old patient who has a history of intense bleedings from minor cuts and sores needs to have the roots of teeth extracted. Examination reveals an increase in volume of the right knee joint, limitation of its mobility. There are no other changes. Blood analysis shows an inclination to anaemia (Hb- 120 g/l). Before the dental intervention it is required to prevent the bleeding by means of:
a. Fibrinogen
b. Epsilon-aminocapronic acid
*c. Cryoprecipitate
d. Dried blood plasma
e. Calcium chloride

40. A 44-year-old patient complains about difficult urination, sensation of incomplete urinary bladder emptying. Sonographic examination of the urinary bladder near the urethra entrance revealed an oval well-defined hyperechogenic formation 2x3 cm large that was changing its position during the examination. What conclusion can be made?
a. Primary ureter tumour
*b. Concrement
c. Urinary bladder polyp
d. Malignant tumour of the urinary bladder
e. Prostate adenoma

41. A 7-year-old boy had complained of headache, nausea, fatigue for 3 weeks. His condition gradually deteriorated, headache and general weakness progressed. The boy had bronchitis at the age of 3. His father has a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. Objectively: body temperature 37,5°C, conscious, lies supine, with the hip and knee flexed to 90 degrees, nuchal rigidity +6 cm, partial ptosis of the right eyelid, the dilated right pupil. General hyperalgesia is present. Liquor: transparent, pressure - 400 mm of water column, protein - 1,5%, cytosis - 610/3 with predominant lymphocytes, sugar - 1,22 mmol/l, chlorides - 500 mmol/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis
b. Secondary purulent meningitis
*c. Tuberculous meningitis
d. Serous meningitis
e. Pneumococcal meningitis

42. A 35-year-old patient complains about pain and morning stiffness of hand joints and temporomandibular joints that lasts over 30 minutes. She has had these symptoms for 2 years. Objectively: edema of proximal interphalangeal digital joints and limited motions of joints. What examination should be administered?
a. Proteinogram
*b. Roentgenography of hands
c. Rose-Waaler reaction
d. Complete blood count
e. Immunogram

43. A 69-year-old female patient complains of temperature rise up to 38,3°C, haematuria. ESR - 55 mm/h. Antibacterial therapy turned out to be ineffective. What diagnosis might be suspected?
a. Urolithiasis
b. Chronic glomerulonephritis
c. Polycystic renal disease
d. Renal amyloidosis
*e. Renal cancer

44. Examination of a 35-year-old patient with rheumatism revealed that the right heart border was 1 cm displaced outwards from the right parasternal line, the upper border was on the level with inferior margin of the 1st rib, the left border was 1 cm in from the left midclavicular line. Auscultation revealed atrial fibrillation, loud apical first sound, diastolic shock above the pulmonary artery. Echocardiocopy revealed abnormal pattern of the mitral valve motion. What heart disease is characterized by these symptoms?
a. Mitral valve insufficiency
b. Mitral valve prolapse
*c. Mitral stenosis
d. Aortic stenosis
e. Tricuspid valve insufficiency

45. A 54-year-old male patient works as an engineer. At the age of 35, he got infected with syphilis and treated it with "traditional remedies". About 5 years ago, he became forgetful, unable to cope with work, told cynical jokes, bought useless things, collected cigarette butts in the street. Objectively: the patient is indifferent, has slow speech, dysarthria, can make only primitive judgments, is unabe to perform simple arithmetic operations or explain simple metaphors. The patient is untidy, takes no interest in anything, passive. Considers himself to be completely healthy. Qualify mental condition of the patient:
a. Korsakoffs (amnesic) syndrome
b. Hysterical pseudodementia
c. Lacunar (dysmnestic) dementia
d. Somnolentia
*e. Total dementia

46. A 47-year-old patient complains of insomnia, heaviness over his entire body, constantly depressed mood. He considers himself good-for-nothing, inadequate. Believes that he is a burden to his family, wants to die. The patient is depressed, inactive, has a hypomimic face with sorrowful expression. He speaks quietly and monotonely,gives short answers. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Atherosclerotic depression
b. Late-onset schizophrenia
c. Neurotic depression
*d. Major depressive disorder
e. Initial stage of Alzheimers disease

47. A patient, aged 16, complains of headache, mainly in the frontal and temporal areas, superciliary arch, appearing of vomiting at the peak of headache, pain during the eyeballs movement, joints pain. On examination: excited, to- 39°C, Ps- 110/min. Tonic and clonus cramps. Uncertain meningeal signs. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Parainfluenza
b. Adenovirus infection
c. Influenza, typical disease duration
d. Respiratory syncytial virus
*e. Influenza with cerebral edema manifestations

48. A 64 y.o. patient has developed of squeering substernal pain which had appeared 2 hours ago and irradiated to the left shoulder, marked weakness. On examination: pale skin, cold sweat. Pulse- 108 bpm, AP- 70/50 mm Hg, heart sound are deaf, vesicular breathing, soft abdomen, painless, varicouse vein on the left shin, ECG: synus rhythm, heart rate is 100 bmp, ST-segment is sharply elevated in II, III aVF leads. What is the most likely disorder?
*a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Pulmonary artery thromboembolia
c. Cardiac tamponade
d. Disquamative aortic aneurizm
e. Cardiac asthma

49. A 64-year-old patient complains of severe pain in the right side of chest, dyspnea, dry cough which appeared suddenly on exertion. Objectively: the right side of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing. Percussion reveals tympanic sound. Auscultation reveals pronouncedly diminished breath sounds on the right. Ps- 100/min, weak, arrhythmic. AP- 100/50 mm Hg. Cardiac sounds are decreased. What disease can be suspected in this patient?
a. Right-sided pleuropneumonia
b. PATE
c. Right-sided hydrothorax
d. Right-sided dry pleurisy
*e. Right-sided pneumothorax

50. A 29-year-old female patient complains of dyspnea, heaviness and chest pain on the right, body temperature rise up to 37,2°C. The disease is associated with a chest trauma received 4 days ago. Objectively: skin is pale and moist. Ps- 90 bpm, regular. Palpation reveals a dull sound on the right, auscultation reveals significantly weakened vesicular breathing. In blood: RBCs - 2,8×1012/l, colour index - 0,9, Hb- 100 g/l, WBCs - 8,0×109/l, ESR - 17 mm/h. What results of diagnostic puncture of the pleural cavity can be expected?
a. Purulent punctate
*b. Haemorrhagic punctate
c. Exudate
d. Chylous liquid
e. Transudate

51. A 54-year-old drowned man was rescued from the water and delivered to the shore. Objectively: the man is unconscious, pale, breathing cannot be auscultated, pulse is thready. Resuscitation measures allowed to save the patient. What complications may develop in the near future?
a. Bronchospasm
*b. Pulmonary edema
c. Encephalopathy
d. Respiratory arrest
e. Cardiac arrest

52. An 18-year-old patient since childhood suffers from bleeding disorder after minor injuries. His younger brother also has bleeding disorders with occasional haemarthrosis. Which laboratory test will be informative for diagnosis verification?
a. Blood clot retraction
b. Fibrinogen rate
*c. Clotting time
d. Thrombocyte count
e. Determination of prothrombin time

53. A 28-year-old patient complains of periodic compressing heart pain. His brother died at the age of 34 from a cardiac disease with similar symptoms. Objectively: the patients skin is pale. Heart borders display no significant deviations. Heart sounds are loud, there is a systolic murmur above all the points with a peak above the aorta. Echocardioscopy reveals thickening of the interventricular septum in the basal parts, reduction of left ventricular cavity. What drug should be administered in order to prevent the disease progression?
a. Nitroglycerin
b. Digoxin
*c. Metoprolol
d. Captopril
e. Furosemide

54. A patient, aged 40, has been ill during approximately 8 years, complains of pain in the lumbar part of the spine on physical excertion, in cervical and thoracal part (especially when coughing), pain in the hip and knee joints on the right. On examination: the body is fixed in the forward inclination with head down, gluteal muscles atrophy. Spine roentgenography: ribs osteoporosis, longitudinal ligament ossification. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Psoriatic spondyloarthropatia
b. Tuberculous spondylitis
*c. Ancylosing spondyloarthritis
d. Spondyloarthropatia on the background of Reiters disease
e. Spread osteochondrosis of the vertebral column

55. A worker, aged 38, working in the slate production during 15 years, complains of expiratory exertional dyspnea, dry cough. On examination: deafening of the percutory sounds in interscapular region, rough breath sounds, dry disseminated rales. On fingers skin - greyish warts. Factorys sectorial doctor suspects asbestosis. Which method is the most informative for diagnosis verification?
a. Spirography
b. Bronchoscopy
*c. Thorax roentgenography
d. Bronchoalveolar lavage
e. Blood gases examination

56. A 37 y.o. woman is suffering from squeezing substernal pain on physical exertion. On examination: AP- 130/80 mm Hg, heart rate=pulse rate 72 bpm, heart boarders are dilated to the left side, aortic systolic murmur. ECG- signs of the left venticle hypertrophy. What method of examination is the most informative in this case?
*a. Echocardiography
b. Coronarography
c. X-ray
d. Sphygmography
e. Phonocardiography

57. A 58-year-old woman complains of osteoarthrosis of knee-joint. For 2 weeks she had been receiving an in-patient medical treatment. She was discharged from the hospital in satisfactory condition with complaints of minor pain after prolonged static work. Local hyperemia and exudative effects in the area of joints are absent. What further tactics is the most expedient?
a. Refferral to MSEC
b. Orthopedist consultation
c. Repeated in-patient treatment
d. Conducting arthroscopy
*e. Outpatient treatment

58. A 36-year-old female has a 7-year history of pollen allergy. Over the last 2 years in August and September (during ragweed flowering), the patient has had 2-3 asthma attacks that could be treated with one dose of salbutamol. Objectively: body temperature - 36,5°C, respiratory rate - 18/min, Ps - 78/min, AP - 115/70 mm Hg. There is vesicular breathing above the lungs. Cardiac sounds are sonorous, of regular rhythm. What drug would be most effective to prevent asthma attacks during the critical season for the patient?
a. Atrovent inhalation
b. Berotec inhalation
*c. Intalum inhalation
d. Suprastin administration
e. Theopecum administration

59. A 42-year-old patient applied to hospital with complaints of pain behind the sternum with irradiation to the left scapula. The pain appears during significant physical work, this lasts for 5-10 minutes and is over on rest. The patient is sick for 3 weeks. What is the preliminary diagnosis?
a. IHD:Stable angina pectoris of effort I FC
b. IHD:Variant angina pectoris (Prinzmetals)
*c. IHD:First established angina pectoris
d. IHD:Stable angina pectoris of effort IV FC
e. IHD:Progressive angina pectoris

60. Medical examination of a 19-year-old worker revealed generalized lymphadenopathy mainly affecting the posterior cervical, axillary and ulnar lymph nodes. There are multiple injection marks on the elbow bend skin. The man denies taking drugs, the presence of injection marks ascribes to influenza treatment. Blood count: RBCs- 3,2×1012/l, Hb- 100 g/l, WBCs- 3,1×109/l, moderate lymphopenia. What study is required in the first place?
a. Sternal puncture
b. Immunogram
*c. ELISA for HIV
d. X-ray of lungs
e. Lymph node biopsy

61. A 25-year-old female patient complains of marked weakness, sleepiness, blackouts, dizziness, taste disorder. The patient has a history of menorrhagia. Objectively: the patient has marked weakness, pale skin, cracks in the corners of mouth, peeling nails, systolic apical murmur. Blood test results: RBC - 3,4×1012/l, Hb - 70 g/l, color index - 0,75, platelets – 140×109/l, WBC - 6,2×109/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. B12-deficiency anemia
b. Werlhofs disease
c. Acute leukemia
d. Acute posthemorrhagic anemia
*e. Chronic posthemorrhagic anemia

62. A 24-year-old patient felt sick in 16 hours after dried fish intake. There was nausea, vomiting, weakness, flabbiness, double vision. On physical exam, there was decrease of a muscle tone, anisocoria, flaccid swallowing and tendon reflex. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Acute gastritis
b. Food toxicoinfection
*c. Botulism
d. Acute encephalitis
e. Salmonellosis

63. A 72-year-old patient after operation due to holecystectomia was prescribed gentamicin (80 mg every 8 hours) and cephalothin (2 g every 6 hours) due to fever. In 10 days there was an increase of creatinine up to 310 mumol/L. BP - 130/80 mm Hg, daily quantity of the urine is 1200 mL. Urine tests are without pathology. Ultrasound: the size of kidneys is normal. What is the most probable reason for renal failure?
a. Hepatorenal syndrome
*b. Nephrotoxity of gentamicin
c. Cortical necrosis of kidneys
d. Acute glomerulonephritis
e. Unequal infusion of the liqiud

64. A 40 y.o. patient was admitted to the gasteroenterology with skin itching, jaundice, discomfort in the right subcostal area, generalized weakness. On examination: skin is jaundice, traces of scratches, liver is +5 cm, splin is 6x8 cm. In blood: alkaline phosphatase - 2,0 mmol/(hourL), general bilirubin - 60 mkmol/L, cholesterol - 8,0 mmol/L. What is the leading syndrome in the patient?
a. Mesenchymal inflammatory
b. Сytolytic
*c. Сholestatic
d. Asthenic
e. Liver-cells insufficiency

65. A 55-year-old male had been treated at the surgical department for acute lower-extremity thrombophlebitis. On the 7th day of treatment he suddenly developed pain in the left part of chest, dyspnea and cough. Body temperature was 36,1°C, respiratory rate - 36/min. The patient was also found to have diminished breath sounds without wheezing. Ps- 140/min, thready. AP- 70/50 mm Hg. The ECG shows QІІІ-S1 syndrome. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pneumothorax
*b. Pulmonary embolism
c. Cardiac asthma
d. Myocardial infarction
e. Bronchial asthma

66. A 51-year-old female is a weaving factory worker with 15 years of service record. During a regular preventive examination she complained of frequent headaches, poor sleep, tingling in the heart, irritability, rapid fatigability, hearing impairment. For years, the noise level has exceeded the maximum allowable concentration by 10-15 dB. A year ago, the patient underwent a course of treatment for essential hypertension. Specify the most likely diagnosis:
a. Neurasthenia
b. Essential hypertension
*c. Noise disease
d. Asthenic-vegetative syndrome
e. Arteriosclerotic encephalopathy

67. A 26-year-old patient undergoes a course of treatment due to chronic glomerulonephritis. The treatment was successful, normalization of all the characteristics was recorded. What sanitorium and health resort treatment could be recommended?
a. Truskavets
*b. The south coast of the Crimea
c. Morshyn
d. Not recommended
e. Myrhorod

68. After a wasp-bite there was an itching of skin, hoarse voice, barking cough, anxiety. On physical exam: there is edema of lips, eyelids, cyanosis. What medicine is to be taken first?
a. Euphylin
b. Adrenalin
*c. Prednisolone
d. Lasix
e. Seduxen

69. A 16-year-old adolescent was vaccinated with DTP. In eight days there was stiffness and pain in the joints, subfebrile temperature, urticarial skin eruption, enlargement of inguinal, cervical lymph nodes and spleen. What kind of allergic reaction is observed?
a. Hypersensitivity of delayed type
b. -
c. Hypersensitivity of immediate type
d. Cytoxic
*e. Immunocomplex

70. 2 weeks after recovering from angina a 29-year-old patient noticed face edemata, weakness, decreased work performance. There was gradual progress of dyspnea, edemata of the lower extremities, lumbar spine. Objectively: pale skin, weakening of the heart sounds, anasarca. AP- 160/100 mm Hg. In urine: the relative density - 1021, protein - 5 g/l, erythrocytes - 20-30 in the field of vision, hyaline cylinders - 4-6 in the field of vision. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myxedema
*b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Essential hypertension
e. Infectious allergic myocarditis

71. A 56-year-old scientist experiences constricting retrosternal pain several times a day while walking for 100-150 m. The pain lasts for up to 10 minutes and can be relieved by nitroglycerine. Objectively: the patient is overweight, heart borders exhibit no abnormalities, heart sounds are rhythmic, Ps- 78 bpm, AP- 130/80 mm Hg. ECG contains low amplitude of T wave in V4-5. What disease might be suspected?
a. Instable stenocardia
b. Stable FC II stenocardia
c. Stable FC IV stenocardia
*d. Stable FC III stenocardia
e. Stable FC I stenocardia

72. In autumn a 25-year-old patient developed stomach ache arising 1,5-2 hours after having meals and at night. He complains of pyrosis and constipation. The pain is getting worse after consuming spicy, salty and sour food, it can be relieved by means of soda and hot-water bag. The patient has been suffering from this disease for a year. Objectively: furred moist tongue. Abdomen palpation reveals epigastrial pain on the right, resistance of abdominal muscles in the same region. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic pancreatitis
*b. Duodenal ulcer
c. Diaphragmatic hernia
d. Chronic cholecystitis
e. Stomach ulcer

73. A 51 y.o. woman complains of dull pain in the right subcostal area and epigastric area, nausea, appetite decline during 6 months. There is a history of gastric peptic ulcer. On examination: weight loss, pulse is 70 bpm, AP is 120/70 mm Hg. Diffuse tenderness and resistance of muscles on palpation.There is a hard lymphatic node 1x1cm in size over the left clavicle. What method of investigation will be the most useful?
a. Ultrasound examination of abdomen
b. Ureatic test
c. Stomach X-ray
*d. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsy
e. pH-metry

74. On the 20th of June a townsman was brought to clinic. The disease broke out acutely, starting with fever, rise in temperature to 38-39°C. There also was weakness, acute headache, nausea, vomiting, pain all over the body, sleep disorder. On physical examination: hyperemia of skin of face, neck, thorax. Meningeal signs are positive. 12 days ago the patient returned from the Siberia, from the forest. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Pseudotuberculosis
b. Epidemic typhus
c. Influenza
d. Omsk hemorrhagic fever
*e. Tick-borne encephalitis

75. A 37-year-old patient has sudden acute pain in the right epigastric area after having fatty food. What method of radiological investigation is to be used on the first stage of examining the patient?
*a. Ultrasonic
b. Radionuclid
c. Thermographic
d. Magnetic-resonance
e. Roentgenological

76. A man, aged 68, complains of tiredness, sweating, enlargement of cervical, submaxillary and axillary lymph nodes. Blood test: WBC- 35x109/L, lymphocytes - 60%, Botkin and Gumprecht bodies, level of haemoglobin and quantity of thrombocytes is normal. Myelogram showed 40% of lymphocytes. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Lymphogranulomatosis
b. Chronic myeloleucosis
*c. Chronic lympholeucosis
d. Acute leucosis
e. Tuberculous lymphadenitis

77. A 38-year-old patient is under observation having polyneuritic syndrome with considerable loss of weight, fever, rise in BP. Blood test:: considerable inflammatory changes. What examination is the most expedient to make the diagnosis?
a. Determination of HLA antigens
*b. Muscular biopsy with histological investigation of the material
c. Electromyography
d. Determination of antinuclear antibodies
e. Blood culture

78. A 32-year-old male patient has been suffering from pain in the sacrum and coxofemoral joints, painfulness and stiffness in the lumbar spine for a year. ESR- 56 mm/h. Roentgenography revealed symptoms of bilateral sacroileitis. The patient is the carrier of HLA B27 antigen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Coxarthrosis
b. Reiters disease
c. Spondylosis
*d. Ankylosing spondylitis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

79. A 58-year-old female patient complains about periodical headache, dizziness and ear noise. She has been suffering from diabetes mellitus for 15 years. Objectively: heart sounds are rhythmic, heart rate is 76/min, there is diastolic shock above aorta, AP is 180/110 mm Hg. In urine: OD- 1,014. Daily loss of protein with urine is 1,5 g. What drug should be chosen for treatment of arterial hypertension?
a. Thiazide diuretic
b. alpha-blocker
c. beta-blocker
d. Calcium channel antagonist
*e. Ihibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme

80. A 26 y.o. male patient with postoperative hypothyroidism take thyroxine 100 mg 2 times a day. He has developed tachycardia, sweating, irritability, sleep disorder. Determine further treatment tactics.
a. To administer sedatives
*b. To decrease thyroxine dosage
c. To administer betablockers
d. To increase thyroxine dosage
e. To add mercasolil to the treatment

81. A 28-year-old man was discharged from the hospital after having an out-of -hospital pneumonia. He has no complaints. On physical exam: his temperature is 36,6°C, RR-18/min, Ps - 78 bpm, BP- 120/80 mm Hg. During ausculation there is harsh respiration to the right of the lower part of the lung. Roentgenologically: infiltrative changes are absent, intensification of the pulmonary picture to the right in the lower lobe. How long should the doctor keep the patient under observation?
a. 3 months
b. 1 month
*c. 12 months
d. 6 months
e. Permanently

82. A 20-year-old adolescent lives in the nidus of tuberculous infection. The tuberculine Mantoux test with 2 TU was determined as hyperergic. What signs determine the hyperergic test of this adolescent?
a. 24 mm hyperemia
b. 20 mm papula
*c. 6 mm papula, necrosis
d. 4 mm papula
e. 12 mm hyperemia

83. A survey radiograph of a miner (24 years of service record, the dust concentration in the workplace is at the rate of 260-280 mg/m3 with 15% of free silica) shows lung changes that are typical for pneumoconiosis. What type of pneumoconiosis is it?
a. Silicatosis
b. Carboconiosis
*c. Anthracosilicosis
d. Anthracosilicatosis
e. Silicosis

84. A patient complains of pathological lump, appearing in the right inguinal region on exercise. The lump is round-shaped, 4 cm in diameter, on palpation: soft elastic consistency, is positioned near the medial part of Pouparts ligament. The lump is situated inwards from the spermatic cord. What is the most probable preliminary diagnosis?
*a. Right-sided direct inguinal hernia
b. Right-sided femoral hernia
c. Lipoma of the right inguinal area
d. Varicose veins of the right hip
e. Right-sided oblique inguinal hernia

85. A 35-year-old man was operated on peptic ulcer of the stomach. Mass deficit of the body is 10 kg. The level of glucose after operation in the undiluted cellular blood on an empty stomach is 6,7 mmol. During repeated examination - 11,1 mmol (after meal), level of HbA1c - 10%. Could you please make an interpretation of the given data?
a. Disordered tolerance to glucose
b. Norm
c. Postoperative hyperinsulinemia
*d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Diabetes mellitus risk group

86. A 52 y.o. woman complains of weakness, painful itching after washing and bathing, sensation of heaviness in the head. On examination: hyperemia of skin of face, neck, extremities. АP- 180/100 mm Hg. Speeln is 4 cm below the rib arch edge. What is the most probable diagnosis?
*a. Erythremia
b. Dermatomyositis
c. Systemic sclerodermia
d. Allergic dermatitis
e. Essential hypertension

87. A 37-year-old patient was brought to resuscitation unit. General condition of the patient is very serious. Sopor. The skin is grey, moist. Turgor is decreased. Pulse is rapid, intense. BP - 160/110 mm Hg, muscle tonus is increased. Hyperreflexia. There is an ammonia odor in the air. What is the presumptive diagnosis?
a. Hyperglycemic coma
b. Alcoholic coma
*c. Uraemic coma
d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Cerebral coma

88. A 57-year-old man complains of shortness of breath, swelling on shanks, irregularity in cardiac work, pain in the left chest half with irradiation to the left scapula.Treatment is uineffective. On physical exam: hearts sounds are diminished, soft systolic murmur on the apex. Ps - 100/min, arrhythmical, BP - 115/75 mm Hg. The liver is +2 cm, painful. Roentgenoscopy: enlargement of heart shadow to all sides, pulsation is weak. Electrocardiogram (ECG): leftventricled extrasystolia, decreased voltage. What method of investigation is necessary to do to determine the diagnosis?
*a. Echocardiography
b. X-ray kymography
c. Coronarography
d. ECG in the dynamics
e. Veloergometria

89. A 55 y.o. patient complains of distended abdomen and rumbling, increased winds evacuation, liguid foamy feces with sour smell following the diary products consumption. What is the correct name of this syndrome?
*a. Syndrome of fermentative dyspepsia
b. Syndrome of fatty dyspepsia
c. Malabsorption syndrome
d. Dyskinesia syndrome
e. Syndrome of decayed dyspepsia

90. A 54-year-old patient has an over 20-year history of femoral osteomyelitis. Over the last month she has developed progressing edemata of the lower extremities. Urine test reveals: proteinuria at the rate of 6,6 g/l; in blood: dysproteinemia in form of hypoalbuminemia, increase in α2- and γ-globulin rate, ESR - 50 mm/h. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myelomatosis
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
*c. Secondary renal amyloidosis
d. Chronic glomerulonephritis
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus

91. In an inhabited locality there is an increase of diphtheria during the last 3 years with separate outbursts in families. What measure can effectively influence the epidemic process of diphtheria and reduce the morbidity rate to single cases?
a. Hospitalization of patients
b. Early diagnostics
c. Disinfection in disease focus
*d. Immunization of the population
e. Detection of carriers

92. A 14-year-old victim was drawn out of the water in winter after 15 minutes of being in the water. The victim shows no vital signs. What measures are to be taken?
a. Not to carry out reanimation measures
*b. To release respiratory tract from water, to create drain position and to take on measures to restore respiration and blood circulation
c. To transport the victim to the nearest hospital to carry out reanimation measures
d. Not to waste time on the release of respiratory tract from water, to take on cardiopulmonary reanimation
e. Тo transport the victim to the nearest warm room to carry out reanimation measures

93. An electro-gas welding operator working at a machine workshop performs welding and cutting of metal, which is accompanied by intense UV-radiation. His welding station is equipped with effective mechanical ventilation. What occupational disease is most likely to develop in an electro-gas welding operator?
a. Heatstroke
b. Chronic overheating
c. Pneumoconiosis
*d. Photoelectric ophthalmia
e. Vegetative-vascular dystonia

94. A woman complains of high temperature to 38°C, mild pain in the throat during 3 days. On examination: angle lymphatic nodes of the jaw are 3 cm enlarged, palatinel tonsils are enlarged and coated with grey plaque which spreads to the uvula and frontal palatinel arches. What is the most probable diagnosis?
a. Vincents angina
b. Infectious mononucleosis
*c. Larynx dyphtheria
d. Agranulocytosis
e. Oropharyngeal candidosis

95. A 48-year-old male patient complains of constant pain in the upper abdomen, mostly on the left, that is getting worse after taking meals; diarrhea, weight loss. The patient is an alcohol abuser. 2 years ago he had acute pancreatitis. Blood amylase is 4 g/hl. Coprogram shows steatorrhea, creatorrhea. Blood glucose is 6,0 mmol/l. What treatment is indicated for this patient?
a. No-spa
*b. Panzinorm forte
c. Gastrozepin
d. Insulin
e. Contrycal

96. A 60-year-old female patient had been admitted to a hospital for acute transmural infarction. An hour later the patients contition got worse. She developed progressing dyspnea, dry cough. Respiratory rate - 30/min, heart rate - 130/min, AP- 90/60 mm Hg. Heart sounds were muffled, there was also diastolic shock on the pulmonary artery. The patient presented with medium moist rales in the lower parts of lungs on the right and on the left. Body temperature - 36,4°C. What drug should be given in the first place?
a. Heparin
b. Digoxin
c. Aminophylline
d. Dopamine
*e. Promedol

97. A 62-year-old male has been hospitalized in the intensive care unit with a continuous attack of retrosternal pain that cannot be relieved by nitroglycerin. Objectively: AP- 80/60 mm Hg, heart rate - 106/min, breathing rate - 22/min. Heart sounds are muffled, a gallop rhythm is present. How would you explain the AP drop?
a. Reduction in peripheral resistance
b. Adrenergic receptor block
c. Internal haemorrhage
*d. Reduction in cardiac output
e. Blood depositing in the abdominal cavity

98. A 35-year-old female reports heart pain (aching and drilling) occurring mainly in the morning in autumn and spring and irradiating to the neck, back and abdomen; rapid heartbeat; low vitality. Occurrence of this condition is not associated with physical activity. In the evening, the patients condition improves. Study of somatic and neurological status, and ECG reveal no pathology. What pathology is most likely to have caused these clinical presentations?
a. Resting stenocardia
b. Neurocirculatory asthenia
c. Hypochondriacal depression
*d. Somatization depression
e. Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia

99. A 18 y.o. male patient complains of pain in knee and ankle joints, temperature elevation to 39,5°C. He had a respiratory disease 1,5 week ago. On examination: temperature- 38,5°C, swollen knee and ankle joints, pulse- 106 bpm, rhythmic, AP- 90/60 mm Hg, heart borders without changes, sounds are weakened, soft systolic apical murmur. What indicator is connected with possible etiology of the process?
*a. Antistreptolysine-0
b. Creatinkinase
c. Seromucoid
d. Rheumatic factor
e. 1-antitrypsine

100. A 30 y.o. male patient complains of itching of the skin which intensifies in the evening. He has been ill for 1,5 months. On examination: there is rash with paired papules covered with bloody crusts on the abdomen, hips, buttocks, folds between the fingers, flexor surfaces of the hand. There are traces of line scratches. What additional investigations are necessary to make diagnosis?
a. Examination for helmints
*b. Examination of rash elements scrape
c. Serologic blood examination
d. Determination of dermographism
e. Blood glucose

