1. A 17-year-old patient complains of pain in the knee and ankle joints, an increase in body temperature up to 39°C) It is known from the anamnesis that she suffered acute tonsillitis 2 weeks ago. Objectively observed: swelling and sharp soreness, limitation of movements in the joints, on the skin of the trunk and limbs there are barely noticeable ring-shaped pale pink spots. Heart rate - 95/min, blood pressure - 90/60 mm Hg. st., the tones are weakened, a soft systolic murmur over the apex. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Systemic scleroderma
b. Erythema nodosum
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Reiter's disease
*e. Acute rheumatic fever

2. A 38-year-old female patient complains of weakness, drowsiness, pain in the joints, weight gain with reduced appetite, constipation. Objectively observed: the skin is dry, thickened, the face is puffy, amemic, the eye slits are narrowed, the tongue is thickened. A low, somewhat hoarse voice. Heart sounds - weakened, pulse - 56/min. In the blood test: free T4 - reduced. What medicine should be prescribed to the patient in this case?
a. Furosemide
b. Calcium gluconate
c. Lithium carbonate
*d. Levothyroxine
e. Thiamazole

3. A 41-year-old man was hospitalized in the thoracic department with a stab wound to the chest on the left. During the examination, it was established: the general condition is extremely serious, the skin and visible mucous membranes are cyanotic, breathing is heavy, intermittent, BH - 32/min. During the percussion of the chest, the expanded borders of the heart are observed. Pulse - 120/min, blood pressure - 60/20 mm Hg. Art. What is the appropriate strategy for managing the patient in this case?
a. X-ray of OGK
b. Pleural puncture
c. Thoracocentesis
d. Thoracoscopy
*e. Emergency thoracotomy

4. A 48-year-old patient complains of pain in the perineum, which becomes unbearable during an attempt to defecate, an increase in body temperature to 39°C. From the anamnesis, it is known that he has been sick for 4 days, the disease developed gradually. Objectively observed: pulse - 110/min. The perineum is asymmetrical due to swelling of the left paraanal area, the skin in this area is hyperemic, hot, painful. Rectal examination revealed: infiltration of the left wall of the anal canal with sharp pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute hemorrhoids
b. Acute lymphadenitis
*c. Acute paraproctitis
d. Phlegmon
e. Acute abscess

5. A 65-year-old woman complains of general weakness, increased fatigue, numbness and tingling in her hands for the past 4 months. Objectively observed: body temperature - 36.6°C, blood pressure - 19/min, pulse - 96/min, blood pressure - 115/70 mm Hg. Art. the skin and visible mucous membranes are pale, with slight yellowness. During the neurological examination, a symmetric decrease in sensitivity was found in both upper extremities. In the general blood analysis: erythrocytes - 2.4·10^12/l, hemoglobin - 105 g/l, leukocytes - 2.5·10^9/l, ESR - 28 mm/h, platelets - 180·10^9/l. Microscopy of the smear revealed: megalocytosis, hyperchromia of erythrocytes, hypersegmentation of neutrophils, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anemia of chronic disease
*b. B_12-deficiency anemia
c. Sideroblastic anemia
d. Iron deficiency anemia
e. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia

6. A nine-year-old girl objectively observed: an increase in body temperature up to 39.2 °C, lymphadenopathy, difficulty in nasal breathing, icterus of the skin, white-yellow layers on the tonsils that are easily removed, hepatosplenomegaly. A general blood test revealed: atypical mononuclear cells - 9%. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Scarlet fever
b. Diphtheria of the tonsils
*c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Viral hepatitis A
e. Pseudotuberculosis

7. A 64-year-old woman suffers from type 2 diabetes, receives hypoglycemic therapy: metformin 850 mg 3 times a day. Fasting blood glucose - 7.8 mmol/l, two hours after eating - 10.5 mmol/l, glycosylated hemoglobin - 11.7%. During the examination by an ophthalmologist, diabetic proliferative retinopathy of the retina of both eyes was diagnosed. What is the patient's further treatment strategy?
a. Increase the dose of metformin to 3,500 mg per day
b. Do not change therapy
c. Add gliclazide 160 mg per day to hypoglycemic therapy
d. Add dapagliflozin 10 mg per day to hypoglycemic therapy
*e. Transfer to insulin therapy

8. A 22-year-old pregnant woman was hospitalized in serious condition. Over the past 3 days, swelling, headache, nausea, and one-time vomiting have appeared. Objectively observed: consciousness is dimmed, blood pressure - 160/130 mm Hg. art., small fibrillar twitching of facial muscles, difficulty in nasal breathing. During transportation, the upper limbs began to twitch, the woman's body stretched out, the spine was bent, the jaws were tightly clenched, and breathing stopped. After that, clonic convulsions and pronounced cyanosis appeared. Then the convulsions stopped, a deep, noisy breath appeared, foam stained with blood appeared on the lips. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chorea
b. Diabetic coma
c. Epilepsy
*d. Eclampsia
e. Hypertensive crisis

9. On the fourth day after her arrival from India, a woman was hospitalized in the infectious department with complaints of abdominal pain, small liquid stools 7-8 times a day, containing a large amount of vitreous mucus and blood. Objectively observed: the general condition is satisfactory, the skin is pale, clean, the abdomen is soft, sensitive in the area of ​​the cecum and ascending intestines. What medicine should be prescribed to a woman in this case?
a. Ceftriaxone
*b. Metronidazole
c. Erythromycin
d. Nifuroxazide
e. Loperamide

10. A 61-year-old patient turned to his family doctor with complaints of compression attacks behind the sternum, which occur while walking up to 200 m and disappear when he stops. He considers himself sick for about a year. The limits of the heart are normal, tones are moderately muffled, heart rate = pulse = 76/min, blood pressure - 130/80 mm Hg. Art. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Anxiety disorder
b. CHD: Unstable angina
*c. CHD: Stable angina pectoris
d. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
e. CHD: Myocardial infarction without ST segment elevation

11. A 56-year-old patient complains of a cough, more in the morning, with sputum discharge, expiratory shortness of breath. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient has been smoking for 20 years. Auscultatively: hard breathing with prolonged exhalation, dry buzzing wheezes on exhalation are heard. The results of spirometry revealed: FEV1 - 53% of the normal value, which increased by 7% (145 ml) after the test with salbutamol. X-ray of OGK: the roots of the lungs are heavy, the area is increased and the lung fields are transparent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pulmonary tuberculosis
*b. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
c. Bronchiectatic disease
d. Lung cancer
e. Bronchial asthma

12. A 35-year-old man develops shortness of breath during physical exertion, he periodically loses consciousness. Auscultation established: systolic murmur in the 3rd intercostal space to the left of the sternum. According to the results of ultrasound of the heart, it was found: symmetric hypertrophy of the LV, its diastolic dysfunction with some reduction of the cavity. Ante-systolic movement of the front leaflet of the mitral valve is observed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
b. Postinfarction myocardiosclerosis
c. Dilated cardiomyopathy
d. Restrictive cardiomyopathy
e. Stenosis of the mouth of the aorta

13. A 16-year-old teenager was bitten by a dog. The bites are located in the area of ​​the ends of the fingers and the face. The dog is homeless, it is impossible to monitor it. Primary surgical treatment of the wound was performed without removing the edges of the wound. What will be the doctor's tactics for preventing rabies in this case?
a. Prescribe human immunoglobulin and ribavirin
b. Prescribe anti-rabies vaccine and human immunoglobulin
c. Prescribe anti-rabies vaccine and ribavirin
d. Prescribe anti-rabies immunoglobulin and ribavirin
*e. Prescribe anti-rabies immunoglobulin and anti-rabies vaccine

14. A woman 11-12 weeks pregnant was hospitalized to a gynecological hospital with uterine bleeding and cramp-like pain in the lower abdomen. During the vaginal examination, it was found: the vagina is filled with blood clots, the cervix is ​​2 cm dilated, and a strained fetal bladder is determined. The uterus is enlarged to the size of 11-12 weeks of pregnancy, tense. Discharges are bloody, very abundant. What therapeutic tactics should be used in this case?
*a. Scraping of the uterine cavity
b. Conservative observation
c. Prescribing progesterone
d. Carrying out tocolytic therapy
e. Hemotransfusion

15. A 52-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of ​​the finger. It is known from the anamnesis that the second finger of the left hand was punctured during work. Objectively observed: the main phalanx of the second finger is thickened, swelling spreads to the back surface of the hand, the skin of the main phalanx around the injection site is hyperemic. During palpation and bending of the finger, there is an increase in pain. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Phlegmon of the hand
b. Pandactylitis
c. Paronychia
*d. Subcutaneous panaritium
e. Bone panaritium

16. An 18-year-old patient was hospitalized after a fight with signs of internal bleeding. It is known from the anamnesis that he suffers from hemophilia A. A retroperitoneal hematoma was diagnosed. What should be prescribed to the patient first?
*a. Cryoprecipitate
b. Platelet mass
c. Dry plasma
d. Fresh blood
e. Aminocaproic acid

17. On the second day after thyroidectomy, the patient developed convulsions. What treatment does she need first of all?
a. Ketamine intravenously
*b. Intravenous administration of 10% calcium chloride
c. Magnesium B_6 + potassium intravenously
d. Intravenous administration of potassium chloride
e. Intravenous administration of 40% glucose solution

18. A 28-year-old patient without permanent residence was hospitalized with a preliminary diagnosis of influenza. On the 5th day of the illness, a roseolous-petechial rash appeared on the trunk and inner surfaces of the limbs. Objectively observed: body temperature - 40°C, euphoria, facial hyperemia, reddening of the sclera, tremor of the tongue, tachycardia, splenomegaly, excitement. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cyrus
*b. Typhoid fever
c. Leptospirosis
d. Alcoholic delirium
e. Typhoid fever

19. A 24-year-old patient complains of acute pain and a rash in the form of blisters on the left side of the body. The disease is associated with hypothermia. Objectively observed: on the skin of the trunk on the left along the nerve, small blisters are grouped, on the periphery of the blisters - inflammatory erythema. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Syphilis
*b. Shingles
c. Besykha
d. Eczema
e. Herpetiform dermatitis

20. In a child (age - 2 days), born at the 32nd week of pregnancy with a body weight of 1700 g, changes in the respiratory system that appeared 8 hours after birth are increasing. The child's mother had her third pregnancy, 2 deliveries, no abortions. The previous child died of respiratory distress syndrome. Objectively observed: evaluation according to the Silverman scale of 6 points, breathing with a disturbed rhythm, apnea, sonorous exhalation, decreased muscle tone. During auscultation: breathing is moderately weakened, wet rales on both sides. X-ray revealed: the presence of a nodose-reticular mesh. What causes the syndrome of respiratory disorders in a child?
*a. Syndrome of hyaline membranes
b. Edema-hemorrhagic syndrome
c. Atelectasis of the lungs
d. Diaphragmatic hernia
e. Intrauterine pneumonia

21. A 53-year-old female patient complains of pain in the right subcostal region, which radiates to the right shoulder blade, shoulder, and right half of the neck and significantly intensifies after eating fatty and fried food, bitterness in the mouth. Objectively observed: sharp pain in the right hypochondrium, slight muscle tension in the right hypochondrium. Positive symptoms of Ortner, Murphy, Mussi (phrenicus). According to the results of the blood analysis, the following were found: leukocytes - 9.3·10^9/l, ESR - 27 mm/h, bilirubin - 18.3 μmol/l, urea - 5.3 mmol/l, creatinine - 86 μmol/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Intestinal obstruction
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Acute pancreatitis
e. Peptic ulcer of the stomach

22. A 56-year-old patient turned to a family doctor with complaints of general weakness, an increase in body temperature to 38.5°C, a cough with purulent sputum, slight shortness of breath. He has been ill for 3 days. From the first day of clinical manifestations, he took amoxicillin-clavulanate, but his condition did not improve. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient does not smoke, has not taken antibiotics for the past 6 months, has been suffering from type 2 diabetes for 5 years, and is taking metformin. Objectively observed: blood pressure - 130/80 mm Hg. st., pulse - 85/min, BH - 20/min. During the percussion of the lungs, a dulling of the percussion sound was found in the lower parts of the right lung, weakened vesicular breathing and fine-bubble moist rales were heard over this area on auscultation. No pathology was detected on the part of other organs and systems. According to the results of a general blood analysis, it was revealed: neutrophilic leukocytosis with a shift of the formula to the left. What is the appropriate further treatment strategy for this patient?
a. Refer to an endocrinologist for consultation
b. Prescribe doxycycline
c. Prescribe first generation cephalosporins
d. Increase the dose of amoxicillin-clavulanate and add mucolytic agents
*e. Prescribe a III-IV generation fluoroquinolone

23. A 52-year-old patient was hospitalized with complaints of sharp weakness, dizziness, loss of consciousness, weight loss, lack of appetite, nausea and vomiting, sharp pain in the epigastric area, diarrhea, and increased skin pigmentation. Blood pressure - 50/40 mm Hg. Art. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pellagra
b. Meningoencephalitis
c. Systemic scleroderma
*d. Acute adrenal insufficiency
e. Acute gastroenteritis

24. The patient was treated for a myocardial infarction. On the 13th day, chest pain increased, shortness of breath appeared. Objectively observed: body temperature - 38.2°C, pulse - 112/min, heart rate - 26/min, small bubbling rales are heard under the right shoulder blade. On the 15th day, right-sided exudative pleurisy was diagnosed. In the general blood analysis: leukocytes - 8.9·10^9/l, eosinophils - 8%. ESR - 24 mm/h. What complication of myocardial infarction occurred in the patient?
a. Cardiac asthma
b. Thromboembolism of the pulmonary artery
c. Pneumonia
*d. Dressler's syndrome
e. Repeated myocardial infarction

25. A 29-year-old woman applied to the family planning and reproductive health center with complaints of infertility during 6 years of married life. Monthly from the age of 14 for 3-4 days, the amount of discharge is insignificant, irregular. Objectively established: hirsutism, galactorrhea. Basal temperature is monophasic. What is the most likely cause of female infertility?
a. Tubal, peritoneal factors
b. Maternal factor
c. Immunological factors
d. Of unknown origin
*e. Endocrine factors

26. A 20-year-old patient complains of eye redness, lacrimation, moderate purulent discharge from the conjunctival cavity, feeling of a foreign body in the eyes. Objectively observed: hyperemia of the conjunctiva of the eyelids, conjunctival injection on the eyeballs, the cornea is transparent, the pupil is 3 mm in diameter, it reacts briskly to light. The lens and vitreous body are transparent. The fundus is normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Adenovirus keratoconjunctivitis
b. Acute iridocyclitis
*c. Acute bacterial conjunctivitis
d. Honoblenorrhoea
e. Allergic conjunctivitis

27. A 35-year-old woman complained of pain in the lower abdomen, which worsens during menstruation and intercourse and radiates into the vagina, smearing bloody discharge before and after menstruation for 5 days. Infertility for 9 years. Anti-inflammatory treatment had no effect. During the bimanual examination it was found: the uterus is enlarged, dense, painful, smooth. During hysteroscopy, dark red formations are visible in the area of ​​the bottom of the uterus, from which dark blood is released. What diagnosis corresponds to this clinical picture?
a. Cancer of the uterus
b. Endometritis
*c. Internal endometriosis
d. Myoma of the uterus
e. Endometrial hyperplasia

28. During the external obstetric examination, the following is observed: an oval-bottomed abdomen, the back of the fetus is palpable in the left lateral part of the uterus, in the right side - small parts of the fetus, near the bottom - a dense, bulging part. The fetal heartbeat is heard to the left and above the navel. What are the position, position and presentation of the fetus?
a. Longitudinal position, I position, main presentation
b. Longitudinal position, II position, pelvic presentation
*c. Longitudinal position, I position, pelvic presentation
d. Longitudinal position, II position, main presentation
e. Transverse position, I position, the forward part is missing

29. A child (age - 2.5 years) has been ill for the second day. The disease began with the following symptoms: an increase in body temperature up to 37.8°C, one-time vomiting, watery diarrhea up to 5 times a day. Vomiting occurred twice today, body temperature - 38°C, appetite decreased, watery diarrhea continues. With which medical measure should the child's treatment be started?
a. Prescribe nifuroxazide
b. Prescribe ceftriaxone
c. Prescribe doxycycline
*d. Prescribe oral rehydration
e. Prescribe loperamide

30. A 28-year-old female patient, 34 weeks pregnant, was hospitalized due to genital bleeding that occurred during sleep. Objectively observed: blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. st., pulse - 76/min, no pain, uterus in normotonus, fetal heartbeat - 150/min. Bleeding from the birth canal is about 300 ml, bright red in color. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Placenta previa
b. Rupture of the uterus
c. Rupture of the vessels of the umbilical cord
d. Premature detachment of the placenta
e. Hemorrhoids

31. A woman with coronary artery disease has heart palpitations, shortness of breath, and heart failure every week. On the ECG during an attack, the following is observed: R-R intervals have different durations, P waves are absent, f waves, R waves of different amplitudes. Echocardiography revealed: FV - 38%. A treatment regimen (amiodarone, warfarin) was prescribed. Which of the following indicators in this case requires constant monitoring?
a. Hemoglobin
b. Fibrinogen level
*c. International normalized ratio
d. Platelet level
e. Prothrombin index

32. A 58-year-old female patient complains of general weakness, rapid fatigue, sleep disturbances, and weight gain. Objectively observed: excess body weight, tendon reflexes are reduced, pulse - 58/min, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. st., B&H - 14/min. It is known from the anamnesis that a year ago she underwent a subtotal resection of the thyroid gland. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Hypothyroidism
b. Diabetes
c. Hyperthyroidism
d. Thyroid cancer
e. Hypoparathyroidism

33. A two-year-old child has abdominal distension and constipation. It is known from the anamnesis that the symptoms appeared at the age of nine months. During irrigography, the presence of a funnel-shaped transition from the distal (narrowed) to the proximal (expanded) section of the intestine was revealed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Meckel's diverticulum
b. Crohn's disease
c. Duplication of the intestine
*d. Hirschsprung's disease
e. Dolichosigma

34. In a 38-year-old female patient with severe diffuse toxic goiter, on the 2nd day after total resection of the thyroid gland, body temperature rose to 41°C, heart rate - 180/min, atrial fibrillation (atrial fibrillation), and limb tremors developed. What complication did the patient experience?
a. Myocarditis
b. Hypoparathyroidism
c. Addison's crisis
*d. Thyrotoxic crisis
e. Hypertensive crisis

35. Parents complain that since the first weeks of life, their eleven-month-old child has a constant cough, sputum is difficult to separate. Objectively revealed: the child lags behind in physical development, cyanosis of the nasolabial triangle. According to the results of laboratory tests: neutrophilic leukocytosis, blood electrolytes (Na^+ - 130 mmol/l, Cl^- - 88 mmol/l), sweat chlorides - 80 mmol/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pneumonia
*b. Cystic fibrosis
c. Bronchiolitis
d. Congenital lung defect
e. Acute obstructive bronchitis

36. A 27-year-old man turned to the doctor with complaints of pain and swelling in the II and III toes of the left foot, redness of the eyes and purulent discharge from them, pain during urination. During the anamnesis, it was found out that the patient has several sexual partners and occasionally uses condoms. According to the results of the physical examination: bilateral conjunctivitis and dactylitis of the toes. In the general blood analysis: ESR - 40 mm/h. According to the results of X-ray examination of the toes, it was found: an increase in the volume of soft tissues, a narrowing of the joint space. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Gout
*b. Reactive arthritis
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Syphilis
e. Gonorrhea

37. A 52-year-old man complained of difficulty in walking, sudden weakness and numbness in the left limbs. Objectively, left-sided hemihypesthesia and mild hemiparesis were noted. After 4 hours, the man's condition normalized, focal symptoms regressed, the patient was able to walk normally. Blood pressure - 120/80 mm Hg. Art. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hemorrhagic stroke
b. Associated migraine
c. Hypertensive crisis
*d. Transient ischemic attack
e. Ischemic stroke

38. With the onset of urgent labor, a woman who gave birth again had vaginal bleeding. During the internal obstetric examination, it was found: the cervix is ​​smoothed, the opening of the eye is 6 cm, the inner eye is 1/3 covered by spongy tissue. The amniotic sac is palpated on the rest of the area. Labor activity is active. Specify the further tactics of childbirth.
a. Withdrawal of active labor activity
b. Hemostatic therapy
*c. Amniotomy
d. Stimulation of labor activity
e. Cesarean section

39. A six-year-old child complains of an increase in body temperature up to 39.9°C, skin itching, decreased appetite, rashes all over the body. It is known from the anamnesis that he has been sick for 3 days. Objectively observed: the skin is pale, on the scalp, face, trunk, limbs polymorphic rash - spots, papules, vesicles, crusts. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pseudotuberculosis
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Cyrus
*d. Chicken pox
e. Scarlet fever

40. A 23-year-old pregnant woman has been in the delivery room for 6 hours with regular labor, weight gain - 17 kg, expected weight of the fetus - 4300 ± 200 grams, pelvic dimensions - 25-27-30 cm. Take every 2-3 minutes for 45-50 seconds during the last hour. She complains about the pain of her last contractions, Vasten's symptom is positive. During the vaginal examination, it was found: the cervix is ​​smooth, the opening is 10 cm, the edges of the cervix are swollen. The position of the fetus is longitudinal, the presentation is occipital, I position, front view, the head of the fetus is above the entrance to the small pelvis, mucous discharge from the vagina. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Discoordination of labor activity
b. Premature detachment of the placenta
*c. Clinically narrow pelvis
d. Physiological course of the II period of childbirth
e. Threat of uterine rupture

41. Methicillin-resistant staphylococci was isolated from the blood of a twenty-day-old full-term girl with high fever, manifestations of pneumonia complicated by microbial destruction of the lungs, osteomyelitis of the right thigh. What antibacterial drug should be prescribed to the child in this case?
a. Azithromycin
b. Doxycycline
c. Cefazolin
*d. Vancomycin
e. Ampicillin

42. A 40-year-old woman has been suffering from epilepsy since the age of 15 with generalized epileptic seizures that occur 2-3 times a month at night and are accompanied by involuntary urination and defecation. After the psychotrauma (father's death), the attacks became more frequent, they occur with a frequency of 2-3 minutes, between the attacks he does not return to consciousness, the reaction of the pupils to light is absent. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Epileptic psychosis
*b. Epileptic status
c. Absence
d. Hysterical attack
e. An increase in the number of major epileptic seizures

43. The patient had massive bleeding after the birth of twins through the natural birth canal. Objectively observed: the child's place and the birth canal are intact. The bottom of the uterus is above the navel, the uterus is soft during palpation, does not respond to the administration of uterotonics. What is the most likely cause of the bleeding?
a. Retention of part of the placenta
b. Damage to the cervix
c. Uterine hypotonia
d. Rupture of the uterus
*e. Atony of the uterus

44. A 64-year-old patient complains of the absence of urination during the last 12 hours. Objectively observed: a painful formation is palpated above the bosom, the upper edge of which reaches the navel. During the rectal examination, the prostate gland was found to be enlarged, painless, dense and stony, and lumpy. The level of prostate-specific antigen in the blood is 24.2 ng/ml. What is the cause of acute urinary retention?
*a. Prostate cancer
b. Acute prostatitis
c. Epididymorchitis
d. Chronic paraproctitis
e. Benign hyperplasia of the prostate gland

45. A 27-year-old patient complains of abdominal pain. It is known from the anamnesis that 30 minutes ago in the garage he mistakenly took several sips of a technical liquid containing methanol. He could not induce vomiting and wash the stomach. What antidote should be used in this case?
a. Sodium thiosulfate
*b. Ethanol
c. Unitiol
d. Acetylcysteine
e. Atropine sulfate

46. A 20-year-old female patient complains of a productive cough with sputum discharge, an increase in body temperature up to 38°C. From the anamnesis, it is known that she became acutely ill 5 days ago after suffering SARS. Objectively observed: BH - 26/min. Percussion on the right in the lower parts of the lungs is defined as a muffled lung sound, auscultation: breathing in this area is weakened, moist fine-vesicular rales are heard. Heart rate - 110/min. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pyopneumothorax
*b. Nosocomial pneumonia
c. Tuberculosis
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Acute bronchitis

47. A 42-year-old patient complains of dizziness, shortness of breath, salivation and lacrimation, headache. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient worked for several hours in a field treated with poisonous chemicals. The above complaints appeared suddenly, half an hour ago. Objectively observed: general hyperhidrosis, miosis, fibrillary muscle twitching around a small wound on the forearm. Pulse - 92/min, rhythmic. Blood pressure - 140/90 mm Hg. Art. Over the lungs, on the background of vesicular breathing, moist rales of various caliber are heard. What medicine should be prescribed to the patient first of all?
a. Theophylline
*b. Atropine
c. Dexamethasone
d. Prednisone
e. Chlorpromazine

48. A 36-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital on the 7th day of illness with complaints of severe weakness, high body temperature, headache and calf muscle pain. Objectively observed: the skin and sclera are yellowish, hemorrhagic rash on the skin. Diuresis - 200 ml. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient went fishing 2 weeks ago. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Yersiniosis
b. Trichinellosis
*c. Leptospirosis
d. Brucellosis
e. Salmonellosis

49. A seven-month-old child suddenly had a short-term seizure with respiratory arrest. Objectively revealed: prominent frontal bumps, barrel-shaped chest, pronounced Harrison's furrow, decreased muscle tone. Symptoms of Khvostek, Trousseau are positive. What is the mechanism of development of convulsive syndrome in a child?
*a. A decrease in calcium content in the blood
b. An increase in the content of calcium in the blood
c. An increase in the content of potassium in the blood
d. A decrease in the content of potassium in the blood
e. Decrease in blood glucose

50. A 42-year-old female patient complains of joint pain, muscle weakness, loss of appetite, rapid fatigue, and low-grade fever. Objectively observed: a spotted-papular rash on the face, neck and hands, marble pattern of the skin, symmetrical arthritis of the knee joints, atrophy on the bundles of fingers, Libman-Sachs endocarditis. In the blood test: antibodies to antigens Ro/SS–A, La/SS–B, Sm, native DNA, ribonucleoprotein, histones H1, H2B, phospholipids, anemia, thrombocytopenia, increased ESR. In the urine analysis: proteinuria. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
*b. Systemic lupus erythematosus
c. Systemic scleroderma
d. Raynaud's syndrome
e. Myasthenia

51. A 31-year-old female patient was hospitalized in an unconscious state. It is known from the anamnesis that the patient had an operation - bilateral adrenalectomy due to Itsenko-Cushing's disease. Objectively observed: cyanosis of mucous membranes, hyperpigmentation, clonic convulsions, retardation, blood pressure - 80/60 mm Hg. century, body temperature - 34.5°C, heart sounds are dull. During palpation of the abdomen, tension of the anterior abdominal wall was revealed. Which emergency medicine should be used first in this case?
a. Intravenous administration of electrolytes
b. Insulin
*c. Hydrocortisone succinate
d. 40% glucose solution
e. Potassium asparaginate

52. A 40-year-old patient fell ill with infiltrative tuberculosis of the upper lobe of the right lung three years ago. Clinical recovery occurred after complex treatment. Over the past year, he has been receiving long-term corticosteroid therapy for rheumatoid arthritis. Which drug from the following should be prescribed to the patient in order to prevent the recurrence of tuberculosis?
a. Pyrazinamide
b. Streptomycin
*c. Isoniazid
d. Ethambutol
e. Rifampicin

53. A 65-year-old woman is being treated for buttock phlegmon. During the microbiological examination of the wound, non-clostridial anaerobes - proteus and bacteroids - were found to be the causative agent of the surgical infection. What therapeutic tactics should be applied first of all in the treatment of this infection?
a. Application of anti-gangrenous serum
*b. Radical excision of affected tissues
c. Antibacterial therapy
d. Antibiotic therapy + prophylactic vaccination
e. Washing the purulent cavity with antiseptics

54. A 37-year-old patient, after taking an anamnesis and examination, was diagnosed with a diffuse form of mastopathy of both mammary glands. What instrumental research method is the most informative in this case?
a. Mammography
b. Breast biopsy
*c. Ultrasound of mammary glands
d. Ductography
e. Pneumocystography

55. A 38-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of ​​the metatarsophalangeal joints of 1-2 toes of the right foot. Objectively observed: the skin over the affected joints is purplish-bluish in color, hot to the touch, nodular formations covered with thin shiny skin are present in the area of ​​the auricles. What drug for urate-lowering therapy should be prescribed to the patient?
a. Nimesulide
b. Colchicine
c. Methotrexate
d. Methylprednisolone
*e. Allopurinol

56. A 47-year-old patient received flame burns on his upper limbs and trunk. During hospitalization, the following conditions are observed: severe condition, clouded consciousness, fever, blood pressure - 80/50 mm Hg. st., pulse - 118/min. Third-degree burns with an area of ​​20% were found locally. What medical measures should be carried out first of all in this case?
a. Prescribe detoxification therapy
b. Carry out primary surgical treatment of the burn wound
c. Carry out necrotomy of the burn surface, hemotransfusion
d. Prescribe antibacterial and detoxification therapy
*e. Administer narcotic analgesics, start infusion therapy

57. A 32-year-old patient complains of an increase in body temperature up to 40°C, chills, cough with sputum, hemoptysis and pain in the chest during breathing, myalgia, diarrhea. It is known from the anamnesis that he works at an air conditioning service company. A few days ago, his colleague went to the hospital with the same complaints. X-rays of the OGK revealed: focal infiltrative shadows of different shapes and densities in both lungs. What pathogen most likely caused the disease?
*a. Legionella
b. Mycoplasma
c. Klebsiella
d. Staphylococcus
e. Pneumococcus

58. The patient fell from a ladder 2 m high. The doctor of emergency medical care made a preliminary diagnosis: a compression fracture of the vertebrae at the L1-L2 level. Objectively observed: blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. st., pulse - 104/min. What assistance should be provided to the patient at the scene?
a. Analgesia, anti-shock therapy, transportation to a hospital
*b. Anesthesia, transportation to the hospital on hard stretchers
c. Anesthesia of vertebrae according to Shneck, transportation to a hospital
d. Transportation to the hospital in the side position
e. Analgesics intramuscularly, transportation in a sitting position

59. A 54-year-old patient complains of heaviness in the right hypochondrium, yellowing of the skin and sclera, dark urine and discolored stool. From the anamnesis, it is known that jaundice persists for 3 weeks, before that he noted general weakness. Objectively observed: the patient's condition is satisfactory, the skin and sclera are yellowish. The abdomen is soft, an enlarged painless gall bladder is palpable in the right hypochondrium. There are no symptoms of peritoneal irritation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Hemolytic jaundice
c. Acute hepatitis
*d. Pancreatic head cancer
e. Choledocholithiasis

60. A 65-year-old patient was prescribed pharmacotherapy (ramipril, atorvastatin, amlodipine, acetylsalicylic acid, bisoprolol) for hypertension with concomitant coronary artery disease. After 2 weeks, he consulted a doctor about a dry cough. During the examination, no signs of SARS, damage to the broncho-pulmonary apparatus were found. A side effect of ramipril has been suggested. Which of the following drugs can replace ramipril in the treatment regimen?
a. Nebivolol
b. Torasemide
c. Nifedipine
*d. Valsartan
e. Enalapril

61. A 55-year-old man turned to his family doctor with complaints of weakness, thirst, dry mouth, and high blood pressure. Objectively observed: BMI - 35.6 kg/m^2, blood pressure - 140/90 mm Hg. st., the skin is dry, the subcutaneous fat is distributed according to the abdominal type. Fasting glycemia - 6.0 mmol/l, postprandial - 11.4 mmol/l, HbA1c - 6.8%. What is the appropriate treatment strategy for this patient?
a. Prescribe statins
*b. Prescribe metformin
c. Only diet therapy and exercise
d. Assign sulfonylurea derivatives
e. Insulin therapy

62. A 38-year-old female patient with a 36-week pregnancy was hospitalized with complaints of headache, epigastric pain, drowsiness, and leg swelling. Objectively observed: blood pressure - 180/120 mm Hg. st., the height of the uterine fundus is 38 cm, the circumference of the abdomen is 90 cm, the position of the fetus is longitudinal, the main presentation, the heartbeat of the fetus is 120/min, rhythmic. In the general analysis of urine: protein - 3.3 g/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. HELLP syndrome
*b. Severe preeclampsia
c. Eclampsia
d. Moderate preeclampsia
e. Hypertensive crisis

63. A young man suddenly sprained his knee joint during a wrestling competition. Something crunched in the knee joint and severe pain appeared. After 10 days, the man consulted a doctor. Complains of instability in the left knee joint, inability to squat on the left leg. During the examination of the left knee joint, excessive mobility of the lower leg was revealed when it was extended forward (symptom of the "drawer drawer"). According to the results of radiography, no fractures were detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Rupture of the posterior cruciate ligament
b. Arthrosis of the left knee joint
*c. Rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament
d. Rupture of the internal meniscus of the knee joint
e. Rupture of the internal lateral ligament

64. A 45-year-old man was hospitalized. Varicose veins of the lower extremities are present in the patient's history. He suddenly felt chest pain and shortness of breath. Objectively observed: swelling of neck veins, cyanosis. On the ECG: Mc-Jean-White sign (QIII - SI), P-pulmonale, deviation of the electrical axis of the heart to the right, signs of overload of the right heart. Determination of the level of which substance in the blood serum must be carried out to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Alanine aminotransferases
*b. D-dimer
c. Aspartate aminotransferases
d. Cardiac troponin
e. Creatine phosphokinase

65. After a road accident, a patient has pain with an axial load on the pelvic wings. In what position should the patient be transported to the hospital?
a. On the side
*b. On the back in the Volkovich position
c. On the back with a pillow under the pelvis
d. On the stomach
e. In a sitting position

66. Childbirth II, urgent, in a 23-year-old pregnant woman. Three hours ago, the light amniotic fluid passed. Labor is regular. Contractions with an interval of 4 - 5 minutes, last 25 - 30 seconds, the position of the fetus is longitudinal, the head of the fetus is in front, pressed against the entrance to the small pelvis. Fetal heart rate - 136/min. The internal examination showed: the cervix is ​​smoothed, the opening of the uterine cavity is 3 cm, the fetal bladder is absent, the lower pole of the head is at the level of the emphl. terminalis. What is the period of childbirth?
a. Preliminary period
b. II period of childbirth
c. III period of childbirth
d. Harbingers of childbirth
*e. I period of childbirth

67. A 28-year-old female patient complains of pain in the lower abdomen on the right, delay of menstruation for 10 days. During the bimanual examination, it was found: the cervix is ​​cyanotic, the body of the uterus is softened, slightly increased in size. In the projection of the right appendages - a painful tumor-like formation up to 4 cm in diameter. On the left, the appendages are not palpable. Discharges are dark hemorrhagic, scanty. According to the results of the blood test, it was found that hCG is positive. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Left ovarian cyst
b. Acute appendicitis
c. Uterine leiomyoma
*d. Right-sided tubal pregnancy
e. Apoplexy of the right ovary

68. A 68-year-old woman was hospitalized with complaints of a headache in the occipital region, pronounced shortness of breath at rest, which worsens when lying down, and a dry cough. Objectively observed: orthopneic position, acrocyanosis. Over the lungs, weakened vesicular breathing, medium- and fine-vesicular wet rales in the lower parts are heard. The tones of the heart are weakened, the rhythm of the gallop. Pulse - 102/min, blood pressure - 210/110 mm Hg. Art. The liver protrudes 2 cm from the edge of the costal arch, is sensitive during palpation. Swelling on the lower legs. What medicines should be used to provide emergency care to the patient?
a. Ceftriaxone, dexamethasone IV
b. IV labetalol, IV furosemide
*c. Nitroglycerin, IV furosemide
d. Magnesium sulfate intravenously, furosemide intravenously
e. Levofloxacin IV, Ambroxol orally

69. A 23-year-old female patient complains of significant purulent discharge from the genital tract with an unpleasant odor, burning, itching in the area of ​​the external genitalia for 3 days. It is known from the anamnesis that these symptoms appeared after unprotected sexual intercourse. During the vaginal examination, it was found: the mucous membrane of the vagina is hyperemic, the secretions are large, yellow-green, foamy. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Mycoplasmosis
b. Candida colpitis
c. Bacterial vaginosis
d. Chlamydia
*e. Trichomonas colpitis

70. A 28-year-old female patient turned to the doctor with complaints of dull pain in the right breast gland, swelling, and a feeling of heaviness and discomfort, especially before menstruation. It is known from the anamnesis that he has been ill for 3 months. Objectively observed: there are no pathological secretions from the gland, the areola is not changed. On palpation, a tumor of 3x3 cm is determined in the outer-upper quadrant, which is quite mobile, moderately painful and dense. The skin above it is not changed. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Breast cancer
b. Paget's disease
c. Diffuse cystic mastopathy
d. Solitary breast cyst
*e. Breast fibroadenoma

71. A boy suffering from hemophilia A developed pain in the knee joint 7 hours after the injury. Objectively observed: the joint has increased in size, the skin over it is hyperemic, hot to the touch, movements in the knee are sharply limited. What should be prescribed to the boy first of all?
a. Introduction of vikasol
b. Administration of dizinon
*c. Introduction of cryoprecipitate
d. Puncture of the joint
e. Introduction of E-ACC

72. A patient suffering from systemic lupus erythematosus as part of complex therapy was treated with methylprednisolone at a dose of 10 mg per day for the past 6 months. What complication can develop as a result of long-term use of corticosteroids?
a. Cachexia
b. Arterial hypotension
*c. Osteoporosis
d. Hyponatremia
e. Hypoglycemia

73. A 25-year-old patient complains of back pain, headache, an increase in body temperature to 37.5 °C, a change in the color of urine to dirty red. It is known from the anamnesis that 2 weeks ago he fell ill with acute tonsillitis. Objectively observed: swelling of the face, blood pressure - 220/140 mm Hg. st., pulse - 88/min, rhythmic tense. According to the results of urine analysis, it was found: relative density - 1.025, protein - 2.1 g/l, erythrocytes - 40-60 in the field of vision, leukocytes - 5-8 in the field of vision, erythrocyte cylinders - 3-5 in the field of vision. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Chronic pyelonephritis
c. Urinary stone disease
d. Kidney amyloidosis
e. Acute pyelonephritis

74. The patient was diagnosed with severe morphine poisoning. Objectively observed: unconsciousness, severe respiratory depression, BH - 6/min. Which of the following drugs should be administered to the patient in this case?
a. Diazepam
b. Theophylline
c. Atropine sulfate
*d. Naloxone
e. Flumazenil

75. A ten-month-old girl has a gradual increase in the size of the abdomen, a delay in physical and psychomotor development, poor appetite, and sometimes vomiting. Symptoms appeared after the introduction of semolina porridge. Objectively observed: the child is sedentary, the skin is dry, pale, aphthous and angular stomatitis, the subcutaneous fat layer on the limbs is thinned, the abdomen is significantly enlarged, symmetrical. Stretched bowel loops are palpated, rumbling, bloating is revealed. Urination is free, stools up to 5 times a day, abundant, foamy, with an unpleasant smell, flatulence. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lactase deficiency
b. Enterocolitis
c. Phenylketonuria
*d. Celiac disease
e. Cystic fibrosis

76. A 38-year-old patient suddenly developed a sharp pain in the right half of the chest. Shortness of breath quickly increased. Objectively observed: the general condition is severe, pronounced cyanosis. Subcutaneous emphysema is detected in the neck and upper chest. A box sound is heard over the right lung, there is no breathing. The borders of the heart are shifted to the left. Heart rate - 110/min, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. Art. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Myocardial infarction
*b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Community-acquired pneumonia
d. Exudative pleurisy
e. Lung infarction

77. A 42-year-old patient complains of constant girdle pain radiating to the lower back. It is known from the anamnesis that he has been suffering from gastric ulcer disease for 10 years. According to the results of the endoscopic examination, it was found: a deep niche located on the back wall closer to the lesser curvature of the antral part of the stomach. What complication of peptic ulcer disease occurred in the patient?
*a. Penetration
b. Pylorostenosis
c. Bleeding
d. Malignancy
e. Perforation

78. A 46-year-old patient complains of double vision and drooping of the eyelids mainly in the afternoon, which almost completely disappear after rest. During the examination, it was found: slight ptosis on both sides, restriction of lateral movement of the eyeballs, diplopia, positive proserin test. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Myasthenia
b. Olivopontocerebellar degeneration
c. Cairns-Sayre syndrome
d. Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy
e. Progressive supranuclear ophthalmoplegia

79. A 68-year-old female patient was hospitalized with nosebleeds. From the anamnesis, it was established that she has been suffering from arterial hypertension for 15 years and has not been treated. Periodic nosebleeds have been bothering me for several years. Objectively observed: bloody clots in the nasal cavity, free breathing, blood pressure - 210/120 mm Hg. Art. Bleeding from the nasal septum appeared during clot removal. What first aid should be given to the patient in this case?
a. Dousing the nasal mucosa with a solution of silver nitrate or vagotyl
b. Peeling of the mucous membrane of the nasal septum
c. Posterior tamponade
*d. Anterior tamponade of the nose with vasoconstrictor drugs, blood pressure control
e. Ligation of the carotid artery on the bleeding side

80. A 17-year-old patient complains of headache, sore throat, and fever. It is known from the anamnesis that he has been sick for 2 days. Objectively observed: the condition is severe, body temperature - 38 °C, the mucous membrane of the oropharynx is moderately hyperemic, swollen, membranous layers on the tonsils, palate, tongue, which are difficult to remove, bleed when you try to remove them. During palpation, it was found that the submandibular lymph nodes were enlarged, the subcutaneous tissue on the neck was swollen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Diphtheria
b. Infectious mononucleosis
c. Cyrus
d. Paratonsillar abscess
e. Tularemia

81. A 40-year-old man complains of vomiting, muscle cramps of the lower limbs. In the anamnesis: he has been suffering from chronic glomerulonephritis for 10 years. Blood pressure - 180/120 mm Hg. Art. According to the results of laboratory tests, it was found: creatinine in blood serum - 770 μmol/l, glomerular filtration rate - 5 ml/min. During the last two days, diuresis has decreased to 400 ml per day. What treatment strategy is indicated for this patient?
a. Sorbents
*b. Hemodialysis
c. Hemofiltration
d. Plasmapheresis
e. Hemosorption

82. A five-year-old girl was hospitalized after an electric shock. The condition of the child is extremely serious, the girl is unconscious, there is no independent breathing. During cardiopulmonary resuscitation, waves of different shapes and amplitudes with a frequency of 320/min are observed on the ECG, the pulse on the periphery and central arteries is absent. What emergency help should be provided to the child in this case?
a. Transfusion of crystalloids 10 mg/kg IV
b. Administration of lidocaine solution 20 mg intravenously
c. Direct heart massage
*d. Electrical defibrillation
e. Tracheal intubation

83. A 20-year-old female patient was hospitalized with complaints of irregular seizures and bloody discharge from the genital tract. It is known from the anamnesis that the gestation period is 39 weeks. During the external obstetric examination, it was found: the position of the fetus is longitudinal, head presentation. Hypertonus of the uterus is determined. According to the results of the internal obstetric examination, it was found: the cervix is ​​1 cm long, the cervical canal is open by 2 cm. The fetal head is presented, pressed against the entrance to the pelvis. The discharge is bloody, with clots. The fetal heartbeat is arrhythmic, 80-100/min. What complication did the patient experience?
a. Complete placenta previa
*b. Premature detachment of the placenta
c. Rupture of the cervix
d. Marginal presentation of the placenta
e. Rupture of the uterus

84. A 26-year-old female patient complains of discomfort, sharp pain in the lower third of the labia majora on the left. It is known from the anamnesis that she became acutely ill 2 days ago, after menstruation. Objectively observed: body temperature 37.9°C) During the examination of the left labia, it was found: a mass up to 4 cm in diameter with a hyperpigmented surface, sharply painful when touched, with fluctuating symptoms. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute bartholinitis
b. Cancer of the vulva
c. Hypertrophy of the labia
d. Fibroid of the vulva
e. Trichomonas colpitis

85. A 25-year-old woman came to the gynecological department with complaints of an increase in body temperature to 38.6°C, pain in the lower abdomen, dysuric disorders. She fell ill 3 days ago, when the indicated symptoms appeared after an artificial abortion. During the gynecological examination it was found: the cervix is ​​cylindrical, the eye is closed. The body of the uterus is slightly enlarged, painful, soft. Uterine appendages are not palpable. Purulent-bloody discharge. According to the results of the blood analysis, it was established: leukocytosis with a shift of the blood formula to the left, accelerated ESR. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pyosalpinx
b. Acute endocervicitis
*c. Acute endometritis
d. Acute cystitis
e. Acute salpingo-oophoritis

86. A 67-year-old woman complains of weakness in her hands, a feeling of heaviness in her legs, and twitching in the muscles of her limbs. She got sick about 10 months ago, when weakness in her hands first appeared. Objectively observed: pronounced hypotrophy of the muscles of the upper limbs, diffuse muscle fasciculations in the limbs, mainly in the hands. Decreased muscle strength in the upper limbs up to 2 points. Muscle strength is preserved in the legs. Deep reflexes on the limbs are significantly increased, foot clonus on both sides. Pathological Babinski reflex on both sides. Dysfunction of the pelvic organs, sensory and coordination disorders were not detected. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculous meningitis
b. Syphilitic meningoencephalitis
*c. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
d. Werdnig-Hoffman amyotrophy
e. Myasthenia

87. A 30-year-old female patient, 32 weeks pregnant, complains of general weakness, headache, nausea, vomiting, pain in the epigastrium, darkening of urine. Objectively observed: AT - 150/90 mm Hg. st., pulse - 118/min, uterus in normal tone, fetal heartbeat rhythmic 154-162/min. According to the results of the blood analysis, it was found: hemoglobin - 72 g/l, hematocrit - 0.26, observed hemolysis, AlAT - 180 U/l, platelets - 40·10^9/l. What complication did the pregnant woman experience?
*a. HELLP syndrome
b. Severe preeclampsia
c. Gestational hypertension
d. Eclampsia
e. Moderate preeclampsia

88. A 29-year-old female patient complains of profuse bloody discharge from the genital tract. Marks the delay of menstruation for 3 months. It is known from the anamnesis: one childbirth and one medical abortion. During the bimanual examination, it was found: significant hemorrhagic discharge with blisters from the cervix, the body of the uterus was enlarged to 15-16 weeks of pregnancy, soft, painless. Both ovaries are enlarged, mobile, painless. Chorionic gonadotropin in the blood - 200,000 units. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pregnancy 12 weeks, threatened abortion
b. Ectopic pregnancy
c. Cervical pregnancy
d. Pregnancy 12 weeks, spontaneous abortion in progress
*e. Bubble drift

89. A 33-year-old patient complains of a cough with scanty sputum, shortness of breath, sweating mainly at night, weight loss, and an increase in body temperature up to 37.6 °C. Percussive: shortening of the percussion sound in the upper parts of the lungs. Auscultatively: over the upper parts of the lungs against the background of hard vesicular breathing, wheezing is heard. Radiologically, in both lungs, focal shadows of various sizes, of weak intensity with indistinct contours were found in the upper and middle sections. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Respiratory distress syndrome
b. Pneumonia
c. Sarcoidosis
*d. Disseminated tuberculosis
e. Bronchiectatic disease

90. A 37-year-old female patient complains of severe weakness, limb cramps, transient paresis, headache. It is known from the anamnesis that there has been an increase in blood pressure over the past 3 years. According to the results of computer tomography, it was found: adenoma of the right adrenal gland. In the blood test: potassium level - 2.7 mmol/l, sodium - 160 mmol/l. What medicine should be prescribed to the patient in this case?
a. Torasemide
b. Amlodipine
c. Perindopril
d. Atenolol
*e. Spironolactone

91. The woman in labor is in labor for 8 hours. Labor activity is weak, contractions last 25 seconds, 2 contractions in 10 minutes. During the vaginal examination, it was established: opening of the cervix up to 4 cm, the head will be presented. During the examination, amniotic fluid with meconium impurities spilled out. Fetal heartbeat - 90/min, dull. What tactic of childbirth is appropriate in this case?
a. Prescribe labor stimulation with the use of oxytocin solution
b. Observation, treatment of fetal distress
c. Apply obstetric forceps
d. Continue conservative management of childbirth with constant monitoring of the condition of the fetus
*e. Urgent delivery by caesarean section

92. A 28-year-old female patient was hospitalized with complaints of sharp pain in the lower abdomen, short-term loss of consciousness at home. From the anamnesis, it is known that the last menstruation was 12 days ago. During the bimanual examination, it was found: the uterus is of a normal shape, painless, the appendages on the left are slightly enlarged and painful during palpation. The back arch is overhanging, tense and sharply painful. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Torsion of the leg of the cyst
b. Exacerbation of chronic adnexitis
c. Ectopic pregnancy
*d. Apoplexy of the right ovary
e. Pyosalpinx on the right

93. A girl with a body weight of 3100 g was born from the third pregnancy at home. On the third day, the mother noticed small hemorrhages in the umbilical wound, as well as "red spots" on the sclera of the child's eyes. The mother was not registered at the women's consultation. Feeds the baby with breast milk as needed. During the physical examination, subconjunctival hemorrhages are observed. During the laboratory examination, it was found that the hemoglobin concentration is 155 g/l, the mother's blood group is B(III) Rh-positive, and the child's blood group is A(II) Rh-negative. What tactics would be most appropriate to prevent the progression of this condition in a child?
a. Administration of human anti-Rhesus Rh0 (D) immunoglobulin
b. Transfusion of erythrocyte mass
c. Transition to artificial feeding with iron-containing mixtures
*d. Administration of vitamin K
e. Appointment of oral iron preparations

94. A 53-year-old woman developed emphysema of both subclavian areas, pain during swallowing behind the sternum, body temperature rose to 39°C the day after esophagoscopy. The result of a general blood test: leukocytes - 18.8·10^9/l, rod-shaped neutrophils - 16%, ESR - 24 mm/h. An expansion of the mediastinal shadow is observed on the X-ray examination of the chest organs. What research is most expedient to perform to clarify the diagnosis in this case?
a. X-ray of the organs of the chest cavity in direct projection
b. X-ray of the organs of the chest cavity in a lateral projection
*c. X-ray of the esophagus with contrast
d. Puncture of the pleural cavity
e. Fibroesophagogastroduodenoscopy

95. An 18-year-old patient complains of a headache, especially after exertion. During the examination, it was found: disproportion of the physical structure (sufficient development of the muscles of the upper half of the body and hypotrophy of the legs). Systolic murmur in the 2nd intercostal space to the left of the sternum with conduction to the interscapular area. Blood pressure on the hands - 170/100 mm Hg. st., on the legs - 110/70 mm Hg. Art. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypertensive disease
b. Interatrial membrane defect
c. Pulmonary artery stenosis
d. Defect of the intergastric membrane
*e. Coarctation of the aorta

96. A 64-year-old patient with a diagnosis of coronary heart disease, diffuse cardiosclerosis, permanent form of atrial fibrillation, functional class III heart failure, is undergoing outpatient treatment. Pharmacotherapy consists of amiodarone twice a day, torasemide every other day, trimetazidine twice a day. The family doctor recommended taking warfarin (3 mg per day) to prevent blood clots. What indicator should be measured in order to monitor the effectiveness and safety of anticoagulant therapy in this case?
a. Fibrinogen level
*b. International normalized relation
c. Number of platelets
d. Blood clotting time according to Lee-White
e. Erythrocyte sedimentation rates

97. A 47-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar region. A preliminary diagnosis of sciatica was established, a course of physiotherapeutic treatment was carried out, but the patient's condition did not improve. X-ray examination of the spine and pelvis revealed: osteoporosis and significant bone defects. In the general blood analysis: normochromic anemia, total protein - 107 g/l. According to the results of the general analysis of urine, the following was revealed: proteinuria - 4.0 g/l. What research is necessary to establish a final diagnosis?
a. Radioisotope examination of the kidneys
b. Advanced blood analysis
c. Cytochemical study of blood cells
*d. Sternal puncture
e. Ultrasound of abdominal organs

98. On the 4th day of life, a full-term newborn girl developed a petechial rash on the skin of the body and face, hematuria, melena. The general condition is not disturbed. It is known from the anamnesis that the mother's pregnancy and childbirth went without complications. According to the results of the blood analysis, it was found: prolonged prothrombin time and time of partial activation of thromboplastin, reduced activity of II, VII, IX, X blood coagulation factors. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. DVZ-syndrome
b. Hypoplastic anemia
c. Hemophilia A
d. Hemolytic disease of newborns
*e. Hemorrhagic disease of newborns

99. A 20-year-old patient turned to the doctor with complaints about the appearance of a rash on the skin. Objectively observed: on the skin of the trunk, upper limbs, the back of the neck, a spotty rash of 1-3 cm in size, light brown in color, which merges in places, is visualized. Positive Balzer's test. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Secondary syphilis
b. Trichophytia
c. Allergic dermatitis
*d. Multicolored lichen
e. Pink lichen

100. A 58-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes controlled by diet and metformin is being prepared for cholecystectomy. Objectively observed: height - 164 cm, body weight - 90 kg, heart rate - 72/min, blood pressure - 130/80 mm Hg. st., abdomen is soft, painful in the right hypochondrium. The liver is not enlarged. In the blood test: fasting glucose - 6.2 mmol/l, glycated hemoglobin - 6.5%. What are the further tactics of hypoglycemic therapy?
a. Appointment of a mixture of insulins
b. Appointment of long-acting insulin
c. Saving the treatment regimen
d. Appointment of \alpha-glucosidase preparations
*e. Appointment of short-acting insulin

101. A 27-year-old patient complains of pain in the symmetrical joints of the hands, fever, morning stiffness. He became acutely ill. Laboratory established: rheumatoid factor, high titer of C-reactive protein, high titer of antibodies to citrullinated vimentin. X-ray revealed: single erosions of interphalangeal joints. What initial basic treatment should be given to the patient in this case?
a. NSAIDs
b. Celecoxib
c. Xanthine oxidase inhibitors
d. ACE inhibitors
*e. Methotrexate

102. In a three-day-old full-term child, a blood test revealed: indirect bilirubin level - 345 μmol/l, hourly increase - 6.8 μmol/l. Objectively observed: general condition is severe, decreased reflexes, hypotonia of muscles, tremor of limbs. The blood of the child and the mother is incompatible according to the Rh factor. What is the most effective method of treatment in this case?
a. Phototherapy
b. Hemosorption
c. Taking phenobarbital
d. Corticosteroid therapy
*e. Replacement blood transfusion

103. A 35-year-old female patient complains of shortness of breath, a feeling of tightness in the right half of the chest, cough with the release of a small amount of mucous-purulent sputum. From the anamnesis, it is known that he has been sick for 7 days, he associates the complaints with hypothermia. Objectively observed: body temperature - 38.7°C, slight acrocyanosis of the lips, pulse - 90/min, blood pressure - 140/85 mm Hg. art., the right half of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing. Percussion established: dullness on the right below the angle of the scapula with a border to the top, breathing is not heard. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lung abscess
b. Hospital pneumonia
*c. Exudative pleurisy
d. Nosocomial pneumonia
e. Atelectasis of the lungs

104. The patient, an employee of a chemical plant, while working with an aggressive liquid, accidentally spilled it on his overalls, receiving a chemical burn on his right thigh and lower leg. After removing the clothes, it was found: on the front-inner surface of the right thigh and the front surface of the right leg, with a transition to the back of the foot, yellow-gray areas, fragments of the epidermis in places, tactile and painful hypoesthesia of the affected skin areas are observed. What emergency care should be given first?
a. Treatment with soda solution
b. Treatment with ethyl alcohol
c. Wash with hydrogen peroxide
*d. Rinsing with running water
e. Applying an aseptic bandage

105. A 37-year-old patient complains of a sharp pain in the right throat radiating to the left ear, inability to open the mouth, an increase in body temperature to 40 °C. Objectively observed: pronounced trismus of the masticatory muscles, asymmetry to the right, the right palatine tonsil is hyperemic, shifted to the middle of the oropharynx, the tongue is shifted to the left. Bad breath. Hypersalivation. The maxillary lymph nodes on the right are enlarged, painful during palpation. Rhinoscopic and otoscopic pictures are normal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Submandibular lymphadenitis on the right
b. Tumor of the right palatine tonsil
*c. Right-sided paratonsillar abscess
d. Right-sided sialoadenitis
e. Right-sided parapharyngeal abscess

106. A full-term girl was born from the II pregnancy, which ran with a threat of termination at 25-27 weeks, with chronic fetoplacental insufficiency. During childbirth, there was a one-time tight wrapping of the umbilical cord around the neck of the fetus, making it difficult to withdraw the shoulders. After birth, the child was evaluated according to the Apgar scale in the first minute: no breathing, heart rate - 50/min, total cyanosis, atony, areflexia. What is the Apgar score?
a. 3 points
b. 2 points
*c. 1 point
d. 0 points
e. 4 points

107. A 44-year-old female patient complains of general weakness, drowsiness, palpitations, dry skin, and reduced work capacity. Objectively observed: skin of normal color, pulse - 72/min, blood pressure - 125/80 mm Hg. st., the thyroid gland is diffusely enlarged to the II degree, dense, mobile, painful. During the ultrasound scan, it was found: a decrease in echogenicity, inhomogeneity of the echo structure, thickening of the capsule of the gland. In the blood test: the level of T4 is decreased, TSH is increased, antibodies to thyroperoxidase and antimicrosomal antibodies are significantly increased. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Diffuse euthyroid goiter of the II degree
b. Diffuse toxic goiter of the II degree
*c. Autoimmune thyroiditis
d. Subacute thyroiditis
e. Thyroid cancer

108. A 37-year-old patient was repeatedly treated in a psychiatric hospital. The current hospitalization is due to behavioral disorders, such as: withdrawal, refusal to eat, periodic chaotic excitement with stereotyped movements. During the examination, it was found: the patient is in bed, inhibited, there is no contact, he does not answer questions, the posture is monotonous, hypomimic, the "proboscis" symptom, the waxy flexibility of the muscles, the "air cushion" symptom. This condition lasts about a week. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Schizophrenia, catatonic form
b. Reactive stupor
c. Schizophrenia, simple form
d. Schizophrenia, hebephrenic form
e. Schizophrenia, paranoid form

109. A 45-year-old patient turned to the doctor with complaints of an increase in body temperature up to 39.5°C, pain in the perineum, urges to urinate, absence of urine for the last 8 hours. Objectively observed: a painful anatomical formation is palpated above the bosom, the upper edge of which reaches the navel. During the rectal examination, it was found: the prostate gland is enlarged, dense in consistency, and sharply painful during palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute prostatitis
b. Acute paraproctitis
c. Prostate cancer
d. Acute urethritis
e. Prostate hyperplasia

110. A 14-year-old girl suffers from chronic glomerulonephritis, a chronic kidney disease. The girl's anemic syndrome continues to progress. What drug for the pathogenetic therapy of this anemia should be prescribed to the patient?
a. Erythrocyte mass
b. Iron preparation
c. Cyanocobalamin
d. Folic acid
*e. Erythropoietin

111. A 56-year-old patient, who is in the intensive care unit due to an acute myocardial infarction in the area of the front wall of the left ventricle, has increased general weakness and a feeling of "freezing" in the work of the heart. During the ECG, it was found: sinus rhythm, heart rate - 76/min, widespread ventricular complexes lasting 0.22 s, irregular in shape, followed by complete compensatory pauses. What complication did this patient have?
a. Complete blockade of the left leg of the bundle of His
b. Complete blockade of the right leg of the bundle of His
c. Atrioventricular extrasystole
d. Atrial extrasystole
*e. Ventricular extrasystole

112. An 18-year-old girl turned to her family doctor to choose a contraceptive method. Sexual development corresponds to age. Height - 150 cm, body weight - 75 kg. One sexual partner. Menarche since the age of 14. The menstrual cycle is not regular, there are delays of up to 3 months. The patient has excessive hair growth on her thighs, acne on her chin and forehead. What method of contraception should be advised to the girl in this case?
a. Progestagen injectable contraceptives
*b. Combined oral contraceptives (COCs)
c. The method of lactational amenorrhea
d. Methods of recognizing fertility according to the ovulation calendar
e. Intrauterine contraceptives

113. A 38-year-old patient complains of a headache, general and muscle weakness, thirst, increased urination at night, paresthesias of hands and feet, cramps. Objectively observed: heart rate - 84/min, blood pressure - 200/110 mm Hg. Art. According to the results of blood analysis, it was found: glucose - 5.4 mmol/l, plasma sodium - 146 mmol/l, plasma potassium - 3.0 mmol/l. In the urine analysis: specific gravity - 1.020, protein - 0.3 g/l, the reaction is alkaline. On the ECG: reduction of the S-T segment, prolongation of the Q-T interval. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Primary hyperaldosteronism
b. Chronic glomerulonephritis
c. Diabetes
d. Amyloidosis
e. Diabetes insipidus

114. The child was born from the 1st pregnancy, which was accompanied by gestosis of the 1st and 2nd half. The birth took place by caesarean section. Apgar score - 6 points. The child's body weight is 3,000 g. She actively sucked her breasts, did not burp. In two weeks, "fountain" vomiting appeared with impurities of colostrum, the volume exceeded what was eaten. The child has become lethargic, is gaining weight poorly, the amount of urine and stools has decreased. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Pylorostenosis
b. Acute intestinal infection
c. Adrenogenital syndrome
d. Intestinal obstruction
e. Pylorospasm

115. A 45-year-old patient was hospitalized from an aniline manufacturing company with a diagnosis of transient ischemic attack. Objectively observed: skin and mucous membranes are cyanotic, speech is dysarthric, disorientation in space. The blood analysis revealed: erythrocytes - 4.6·10^12/l, hemoglobin - 143 g/l, color index - 0.9, leukocytes - 5.6·10^9/l, Heinz's corpuscles - 14%, reticulocytes - 18%, methemoglobin - 36%, ESR - 5 mm/h. The patient was diagnosed with acute aniline intoxication of moderate severity. Which means of antidote therapy is the most effective in this case?
*a. Methylene blue
b. Sodium thiosulfate
c. Succimer
d. Desferal
e. Pentacin

116. A 32-year-old patient suffers from epilepsy. Suddenly, without any reason, he became excited. Objectively observed: disoriented in one's own person and environment, visual and auditory hallucinations of a threatening content, delusional ideas of relationship and persecution, expression of fear, anger, rage on the face. The behavior is aggressive, with destructive actions. Define psychopathological syndrome.
a. Delirious
b. Hebephrenic
c. Manic
*d. twilight
e. Paranoid

117. The doctor punctured his finger while providing care to a bleeding patient. It turned out that the patient is an injection drug addict, he was tested for HIV, the result is unknown. What measures should the doctor take in this case?
a. Treat the contaminated skin area, inject donor immunoglobulin
b. Treat the contaminated area of skin, get tested for TORCH infection, start antibiotic treatment
c. -
d. Treat the contaminated skin area, start treatment with antiviral drugs and antibiotics
*e. Treat the contaminated area of ​​the skin, get tested for HIV, start chemoprophylaxis

118. A 23-year-old woman complains of frequent painful urination, dull pain in the lower abdomen. These complaints appeared 10 days ago after hypothermia. Pain and frequent urges to urinate are reduced by applying heat to the bladder area. Body temperature - 37.2°C) Results of the general analysis of urine: leukocytes, fresh erythrocytes, slight proteinuria. Pasternacki's symptom is negative on both sides. Specify the main group of drugs for the treatment of this patient.
a. Immunosuppressants
b. Antiplatelet agents
c. Diuretics
d. Glucocorticoids
*e. Uroseptics

119. A 23-year-old patient is scheduled for tooth extraction. It is known from the anamnesis that he has been suffering from hemophilia A since childhood. Which medical drug must be administered before and after surgery to ensure hemostasis?
a. Ascorbic acid
b. Fresh frozen plasma
*c. Cryoprecipitate
d. Ethamsylate
e. Aminocaproic acid

120. The patient is 15 years behind in physical development, periodically yellowing of the skin is noted. Objectively observed: spleen 16x12x10 cm, cholecystolithiasis, skin ulcer of the lower third of the left leg. The blood revealed: erythrocytes - 3.0·10^12/l, Hb - 90 g/l, CP - 1.0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Total serum bilirubin - 56 μmol/l, indirect - 38 μmol/l. What is the most appropriate treatment method?
*a. Splenectomy
b. Transplantation of the spleen
c. Omentohepatopexy
d. Portocaval anastomosis
e. Omentosplenopexy

121. A 32-year-old man was diagnosed with: closed brain injury, closed chest injury, closed right hip fracture. Objectively observed: blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. st., pulse - 124/min, BH - 28/min. 2 hours after skeletal extraction under local anesthesia with lidocaine, the condition deteriorated sharply: shortness of breath increased, cyanosis of the face and neck appeared, blood pressure - 60/40 mm Hg. st., heart rate - 160/min, BH - 44/min. What complication most likely occurred in the patient?
a. Ischemic stroke
*b. Fat embolism of the pulmonary artery
c. Myocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock
d. Pneumothorax
e. Acute posthemorrhagic anemia

122. In a 20-year-old patient, on the 8th day of chicken pox, there is a worsening of the general condition: an increase in body temperature to 38.7°C, loss of consciousness, convulsions. Objectively observed: consciousness according to the Glasgow coma scale - 13 points, on the skin of the face, trunk, limbs - isolated elements of a fading rash covered with crusts. What drug should be prescribed to the patient for etiotropic therapy in this case?
*a. Acyclovir
b. Vancomycin
c. Oseltamivir
d. Ceftriaxone
e. Colchicine

123. A two-year-old child with ARVI suddenly developed hoarseness, a barking cough, and noisy breathing. During crying, depression of the supraclavicular and subclavian fossae, increasing inspiratory dyspnea are observed, which disappear when the child is at rest. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute obstructive bronchitis
b. Foreign body of the respiratory tract
c. Pneumonia
*d. Acute stenosing laryngotracheitis
e. Acute pleurisy

124. A three-year-old child suddenly developed a paroxysmal cough and difficulty breathing while playing in the playpen. Objectively observed: dry cough, dyspnea of ​​a mixed nature. Auscultation revealed a small amount of dry rales in the lungs. On the right, breathing is weakened. The children's group does not attend. Vaccinated by age. What pathological condition most likely arose in the child?
a. Acute respiratory viral infection
b. Whooping cough
*c. Foreign body of the respiratory tract
d. Pneumonia
e. Bronchial asthma

125. A 46-year-old female patient was hospitalized for an open fracture of the left hip in the middle third, operated on - osseous osteosynthesis with a plate. On the 4th day after the operation, he complains of pain in the wound, an increase in body temperature above 39^oC) What is the appropriate treatment tactic in this case?
a. Prescribe broad-spectrum antibiotics and hormonal drugs
b. Administer antibiotics, antipyretics intraosseously
c. Bandage the wound with antibiotics, prescribe antispasmodics and analgesics
*d. Dissolve the sutures, drain the wound and prescribe antibiotics
e. Remove the metal retainer, prescribe sulfonamides

126. A 33-year-old woman suffers from bronchial asthma with concomitant type 1 diabetes mellitus, receives in complex therapy: salmeterol, beclomethasone, theophylline, cromolyn and prednisolone. After the appointment of which of the following groups of drugs, insulin dose correction is required?
*a. Systemic glucocorticoids
b. Inhaled glucocorticoids
c. Methylxanthines
d. Cromons
e. Prolonged \beta_2-agonists

127. A 27-year-old female patient turned to the doctor with complaints of an increase in lymph nodes on the right side of the neck and in the armpit, night sweats, and an increase in body temperature above 38°C. During the morphological examination of the lymph node biopsy, the following were found: Berezovsky-Shtenberg cells. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Tuberculosis of the lymph nodes
b. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
c. Malignant lymphoma
*d. Lymphogranulomatosis
e. Tumor metastases in the lymph nodes

128. A 48-year-old female patient complains of minor periodic bleeding from the genital tract, which is of a chaotic nature. During colposcopy, it was found: the vaginal part of the cervix is ​​covered with multilayered flat epithelium, an elongated pink formation covered with prismatic epithelium is visualized in the cervical canal, its granular structure is clearly defined. What pathological condition arose in the patient's cervix?
a. Dysplasia
*b. Polyp
c. Glandular hyperplasia
d. erosion
e. Leukoplakia

129. A 34-year-old patient complains of pain in the cervical spine, difficult head movements. It is known from the anamnesis that he fell from a tree 2 days ago. He did not lose consciousness. No neurological pathological changes were found. What transport immobilization does the patient need?
a. Soft bandage
b. Tire of Dieterichs
c. Kramer tire
d. Thoraco-cranial bandage
*e. Schantz collar

130. A 32-year-old female patient complains of general weakness, headache, excess body weight, bone pain, and irregular menstrual cycle. Objectively observed: the skin is dry, cyanotic. In the abdomen, shoulders, thighs - purple-cyanotic stretch marks. Fat deposition mainly on the face, neck, trunk. Blood pressure - 165/100 mm Hg. Art. According to the results of the blood analysis, it was found: glucose - 7.2 mmol/l, the level of ACTH is increased. Bone X-rays show signs of osteoporosis. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Hypothyroidism
b. Itsenko-Cushing syndrome
*c. Itsenko-Cushing's disease
d. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
e. Conn's syndrome

131. A 38-year-old patient has been abusing alcohol for 3 years. 3 days after the binge, he began to feel anxiety and fear. He saw spiders and worms around him, was haunted by "voices" of a reprehensible nature, behaved aggressively. He is oriented correctly in his own person, disoriented in place and time. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pathological intoxication
b. Alcoholic paranoid
c. Alcoholic hallucinosis
d. Alcoholic encephalopathy
*e. Alcoholic delirium

132. In a woman in labor, on the 12th day of the postpartum period, the body temperature suddenly rose to 38.2°C. There is general weakness, pain in the area of ​​the right mammary gland for 1 day. During the examination, it was found that the mammary gland is tense, hot, in the right upper quadrant a painful, dense infiltrate is palpable. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Lactation mastitis
b. Lactostasis
c. Breast tumor
d. Anomalies of the development of mammary glands
e. Mastopathy

133. A 12-year-old boy with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy complains of shortness of breath during minimal physical exertion. Echocardiography revealed asymmetric hypertrophy of the left ventricle, signs of pulmonary hypertension, dilatation of the left atrial cavity, FV - 59%. The detected changes indicate:
a. Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
*b. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
c. Symptomatic arterial hypertension
d. Primary arterial hypertension
e. Primary pulmonary hypertension

134. A 20-year-old boy underwent a course of polychemotherapy according to the VAMP scheme for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. What morphological picture of the bone marrow can indicate the onset of remission?
a. Absence of blast cells
b. The content of blast cells up to 1%
c. The content of blast cells up to 10%
d. The content of blast cells up to 15%
*e. The content of blast cells up to 5%

135. A 27-year-old female patient with a 17-week pregnancy was hospitalized for treatment. It is known from the anamnesis: 2 spontaneous miscarriages. During the bimanual examination, it was found that the uterus was enlarged up to 17 weeks of pregnancy, the cervix was shortened, and the eye passed through the tip of the finger. The diagnosis was established: isthmic-cervical insufficiency. Specify further tactics for managing a pregnant woman.
a. Carry out hormonal treatment
*b. Place a suture on the cervix
c. Termination of pregnancy
d. Tocolytic therapy
e. Do an amniocentesis

136. Manifestations of hemorrhagic disease of newborns in the form of melena appeared in a four-day-old boy. What drug should the doctor have prescribed in the first hours of life to prevent this disease?
*a. Vitamin K
b. Ethamsylate
c. Aminocaproic acid
d. Calcium gluconate
e. Vitamin C

137. A 52-year-old patient complains of a cough, an increase in body temperature to 39.5 °C, pain in the right half of the chest, and shortness of breath. It is known from the anamnesis that he became acutely ill after hypothermia 3 weeks ago. Objectively observed: pulse - 120/min, blood pressure - 90/60 mm Hg. Art., acrocyanosis, blood pressure - 48/min, lagging of the right half of the chest in the act of breathing. Percussion on the right is determined by dulling of the lung sound. Auscultatory breathing over the right lung is not heard. According to the results of radiography of the OGK, it was found: on the right, there is a darkening with an indistinct upper contour up to the level of the II rib. Exudate was detected during pleural puncture. Up to 90% of neutrophils are in the exudate. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Lung cancer
b. Exudative tuberculous pleurisy
*c. Pleural empyema
d. Infiltrative tuberculosis of the right lung
e. Pneumonia

138. A 27-year-old patient complains of sharp pain in the lower abdomen, dizziness. It is known from the anamnesis: the last menstruation was 2 weeks ago. The hCG test is negative. Objectively observed: the skin is pale, blood pressure - 80/60 mm Hg. st., pulse - 92/min. The abdomen is tense, painful more on the right in the lower parts. During the vaginal examination, it was found: the uterus is of normal size, the appendages are painful during palpation, and the posterior vault is overhanging. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Torsion of the pedicle of the ovarian cyst
*c. Ovarian apoplexy
d. Ectopic pregnancy
e. Exacerbation of chronic right-sided adnexitis

139. A 24-year-old patient with a gestation period of 40 weeks undergoes a planned caesarean section. After being placed on the operating table, the patient complained of weakness, nausea, BP decreased to 90/60 mm. mercury Art. After turning to the left side, all indicators normalized. What pathological condition did the patient have?
a. Superior vena cava syndrome
b. Rupture of the uterus
*c. Inferior vena cava syndrome
d. Bleeding
e. Eclampsia

140. A 47-year-old female patient who returned from Peru 2 days ago complains of pain and enlarged lymph nodes in the right inguinal region. Diagnosed bubonic form of plague. Which of the following medicines should be prescribed to contact persons for emergency prevention of the disease in this case?
a. Chloroquine
b. Heterologous serum
c. Human immunoglobulin
d. Fluconazole
*e. Doxycycline

141. A 40-year-old female patient complains of headache attacks, pulsation in the temples, dizziness, palpitations, muscle weakness. During the attack, she becomes pale, blood pressure rises significantly to 270/160 mm Hg. Art. This condition occurs mainly at night, taking tablet hypotensive agents does not alleviate this condition. Parenteral administration of which of the following drugs is most effective in this case?
a. Dibazol
b. Captopril
*c. Phentolamine
d. Clonidine
e. Magnesium sulfate

142. A 48-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with inappropriate behavior. It is known from the anamnesis that she constantly used painkillers in connection with migraines and back pain. Objectively observed: scleral jaundice, sensitivity in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen and asterixis. According to the results of the blood analysis, it was found: AlAT - 649 units/l, total bilirubin - 95.8 μmol/l, MNV - 6.8. What is the most likely diagnosis?
*a. Acute liver failure
b. Acute violation of cerebral circulation
c. Acute adrenal insufficiency
d. Acute renal failure
e. Intoxication with anticonvulsants

143. A 30-year-old patient received a single radiation dose of 1.5 Gy in the territory of radioactive contamination. Later, there were complaints of a headache, an increase in body temperature up to 37°C, nausea, and vomiting twice. What form of acute radiation sickness did the patient develop?
a. Cerebral
b. Kishkova
c. Toxemic
d. Lightning
*e. Bone marrow

144. A 36-year-old patient complains of attacks of shortness of breath with mainly difficult exhalation, which occur 2-3 times a day, inhalation of \beta_2-adrenomimetics does not improve the condition. It is known from the anamnesis that he has been ill for 10 years. It is objectively observed: the chest is expanded, a box-like percussion sound is heard over the lungs, during auscultation, hard breathing with prolonged exhalation is heard. According to the results of a laboratory examination of sputum, the following were found: many eosinophils, Charcot-Leyden crystals and Kurschmann spirals. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Cardiac asthma
b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Tuberculosis
*d. Bronchial asthma
e. Chronic obstructive bronchitis

145. A 24-year-old patient complains of an increasing headache, general weakness, dizziness, bleeding (nosebleeds, hemorrhages on the skin and mucous membranes). It is known from the anamnesis that he has been ill for 2 months. Objectively observed: lymph nodes, liver and spleen are not enlarged. According to the results of the blood analysis, it was found: hemoglobin - 50 g/l, erythrocytes - 1.5·10^12/l, color indicator - 1.0, leukocytes - 2·10^9/l, rod-shaped neutrophils - 1%, segmented neutrophils - 35%, eosinophils - 1%, basophils - 1%, lymphocytes - 10%, monocytes - 4%, platelets - 30·10^9/l. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. B_12-deficiency anemia
b. Iron deficiency anemia
c. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
*d. Aplastic anemia
e. Hemolytic anemia

146. A 42-year-old patient complains of thirst (drinks 8-10 liters of water per day), polyuria, headache and general weakness. It is known from the anamnesis that he suffered a craniocerebral injury. No pathology of internal organs was detected during the examination. In the blood test: glucose - 4.5 mmol/l. Na^+ - 159 mmol/l, blood plasma osmolarity - 305 mosmol/l. In the general analysis of urine: specific gravity - 1.001-1.004, protein, leukocytes 2-3 in the field of vision. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Pheochromocytoma
*b. Diabetes insipidus
c. Diabetes
d. Primary hyperaldosteronism
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

147. A two-month-old child has had paroxysms of irritability, restlessness, and crying for no apparent reason during the last month. Attacks occur during or immediately after feeding. Noticeable relief often occurs after defecation. The duration of the episodes is about three hours a day. Between attacks, the child is calm, has a good appetite, the increase in body weight is physiological. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Celiac disease
b. Lactase deficiency
c. Functional dyspepsia
*d. Baby colic
e. Functional attachment

148. A one-and-a-half-year-old child ate a walnut in the midst of an acute respiratory viral infection (ARVI). She suddenly coughed. Objectively observed: the child is cyanotic, the periodic dry cough with whistling on exhalation continues, the general condition of the child is of medium severity, respiratory failure. Auscultation: hard breathing, dry and wet wheezing, bronchospasm on exhalation over the right lung. Shortening of the percussive sound. What are the further tactics of treating the child in this case?
a. Overview X-ray of the chest
b. Computer tomography of the chest
*c. Bronchoscopy
d. Ultrasound examination of the abdomen and chest
e. X-ray examination of the abdomen

149. A 78-year-old patient correctly names his surname, first name, date of birth. He cannot name the current date, his age, he is disoriented in his place of stay. Speech is slowed down, vocabulary is limited, often cannot remember the names of objects. In the 8-word memorization test, he reproduces 2 words. Performs simple arithmetic operations with gross errors. He cannot explain the meaning of common proverbs and sayings. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Somatoform disorder
b. Hallucinatory syndrome
c. Manic syndrome
*d. Dementia
e. Depressive syndrome

150. A 50-year-old patient complains of nausea, shortness of breath at rest, and a decrease in the amount of urine to 400 ml per day. It is known from the anamnesis that such a condition developed after the use of gentamicin. Objectively observed: the skin is pale, swelling on the face and lower legs, during auscultation of the lungs, the noise of pleural friction, wet wheezing is heard. According to the results of the blood analysis, it was found: creatinine - 560 μmol/l, potassium - 6.2 mmol/l. In the urine analysis: protein - 0.8 g/l, erythrocytes - 5-7 in the field of vision. What is the most likely diagnosis?
a. Chronic kidney disease
b. Acute retention of urine
*c. Acute renal failure
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Acute glomerulonephritis

151. A 68-year-old woman has been hospitalized with nasal bleeding. She has history of arterial hypertension, observed over the last 15 years, accompanied by no treatment. Periodic nasal bleeding has been observed over the last several years. Objectively, she has blood clots in her nasal cavity, breathing is free, blood pressure - 210/120 mm Hg. During the removal of the clots, bleeding started from the nasal septum. What first aid should be provided for this patient?
a. Detachment of the nasal septum mucosa
b. Cauterization of the nasal mucosa with a silver nitrate solution or Vagothyl (Policresulen)
c. Posterior nasal packing
*d. Anterior nasal packing with vasoconstrictors, blood pressure monitoring
e. Carotid artery ligation on the bleeding side

152. A 38-year-old woman complains of weakness, drowsiness, pain in her joints, constipation, and weight gain despite decreased appetite. Objectively, her skin is dry and thickened, her face is puffy and amimic, the palpebral fissures are narrowed, the tongue is thickened. The patient's voice is low and slightly hoarse. Her heart sounds are weakened. Pulse - 56/min. Blood test detects decreased levels of free T4. What drug should be prescribed for this patient?
a. Lithium carbonate
b. Furosemide
c. Thiamazole
*d. Levothyroxine
e. Calcium gluconate

153. A 20-year-old patient came to a doctor with complaints of a skin rash. Objectively, a light brown macular rash 1-3 cm in size is visible on the skin of the patient's torso, arms, and back of the neck. In some places, rash elements merge together. Balzer test is positive. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pityriasis rosea
*b. Pityriasis versicolor
c. Allergic dermatitis
d. Secondary syphilis
e. Trichophytosis

154. After the birth of twins, the postparturient woman developed a massive hemorrhage from her natural birth canal. Objectively, the placenta and birth canal are intact. The uterine fundus is located above the navel, the uterus is soft to palpation and does not respond to the administration of uterotonics. What is the most likely cause of the bleeding in this case?
*a. Uterine atony
b. Uterine hypotonia
c. Retained fragment of the placenta
d. Damage to the uterine cervix
e. Uterine rupture

155. A 27-year-old woman at 17 weeks of her pregnancy has been hospitalized for treatment. She has history of two spontaneous miscarriages. Bimanual examination detects that the uterus is enlarged to 17 weeks of gestation, the cervix is shortened and its opening allows inserting a fingertip. The diagnosis of isthmic-cervical insufficiency has been made. What should be the further tactics of managing this pregnant woman?
*a. Applying a cervical stitch
b. Hormone therapy
c. Discontinuation of the pregnancy
d. Tocolytic therapy
e. Performing amniocentesis

156. A 45-year-old patient came to a doctor with complaints of a fever of 39.5^оC, pain in the perineum, urges to urinate, and absence of urine over the last 8 hours. Objectively, a painful anatomical formation is palpable above the pubis. The upper edge of the formation reaches the navel. Rectal examination detects an enlarged dense prostate that is sharply painful during palpation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Prostate cancer
*b. Acute prostatitis
c. Prostatic hyperplasia
d. Acute paraproctitis
e. Acute urethritis

157. A patient with systemic lupus erythematosus was receiving methylprednisolone in the dose of 10 mg per 24 hours for the past 6 months as a component of her complex therapy. What complication can develop as a result of long-term use of corticosteroids?
a. Arterial hypotension
b. Hyponatremia
c. Cachexia
*d. Osteoporosis
e. Hypoglycemia

158. A woman was hospitalized to the infectious diseases unit of a hospital on the fourth day after arriving from India. The woman complains of abdominal pain and scanty loose stools that occur 7-8 times per 24 hours and contain a large amount of vitreous mucus and blood. Objectively, her general condition is satisfactory, her skin is pale and clean, her abdomen is soft, but tender in the area of the cecum and ascending colon. What drug should be prescribed for this woman?
a. Nifuroxazide
*b. Metronidazole
c. Erythromycin
d. Ceftriaxone
e. Loperamide

159. A 48-year-old woman has been hospitalized with strange behavior. Her medical history shows that she was constantly taking painkillers for her migraines and back pain. Objectively, she presents with icteric sclerae, tenderness in the right upper quadrant of her abdomen, and asterixis. Blood test results: ALT - 649 U/L, total bilirubin - 95.8 mcmol/L, international normalized ratio - 6.8. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute adrenal insufficiency
b. Acute cerebrovascular accident
*c. Acute liver failure
d. Acute renal failure
e. Intoxication caused by anticonvulsants

160. A 38-year-old patient complains of pain in the area of the metatarsophalangeal joints of his first and second toes on the right foot. Examination detects bluish-purple skin over the affected joints that is hot to the touch. There are nodular formations covered in thin shiny skin in the area of the patient's auricles. What drug should be prescribed for this patient as a component of the urate-lowering therapy?
a. Methotrexate
b. Colchicine
c. Methylprednisolone
*d. Allopurinol
e. Nimesulide

161. An 18-year-old girl consults her family doctor about choosing a method of contraception. Her sexual development matches her age. Height - 150 cm, body weight - 75 kg. She has one sexual partner. Her menarche occurred at 14 years. Her menstrual cycle is irregular, with delays that can reach three months. The patient has excessive hair growth on her thighs and acne on her chin and forehead. What method of contraception should be recommended for this girl?
a. Fertility recognition methods using an ovulation calendar
b. Intrauterine contraceptives
c. Lactational amenorrhea method
*d. Combined oral contraceptives (COCs)
e. Progestogen-only injectable contraceptives

162. A 46-year-old patient had been hospitalized with an open fracture of her left femur in its middle third and underwent internal plate osteosynthesis. On the fourth day after the surgery, she complained of pain in the wound and a fever over 39^oC. What would be the optimal treatment tactics in this case?
a. Injecting antibiotics around the wound and prescribing antispasmodics and analgesics
b. Removing the metal fixator and prescribing sulfonamides
*c. Removing the sutures, draining the wound, and prescribing antibiotics
d. Prescribing broad-spectrum antibiotics and hormone drugs
e. Intraosseous administration of antibiotics and antipyretics

163. During external obstetric examination, the abdomen is oval. The back of the fetus is palpable in the left lateral part of the uterus. In the uterus on the right, there are small parts of the fetus, while near the bottom there is a dense mobile part. The fetal heart rate can be heard to the left and above the navel. What are the lie, position, and presentation of the fetus?
*a. Longitudinal lie, I position, pelvic presentation
b. Longitudinal lie, I position, cephalic presentation
c. Longitudinal lie, II position, cephalic presentation
d. Longitudinal lie, II position, pelvic presentation
e. Transverse lie, I position, no presentation

164. A 38-year-old patient complains of headache, general and muscular weakness, thirst, increased urination at night, paresthesias of his hands and feet, seizures. Objectively, heart rate - 84/min, blood pressure - 200/110 mm Hg. Blood test results: glucose - 5.4 mmol/L, plasma sodium - 146 mmol/L, plasma potassium - 3.0 mmol/L. Urinalysis results: specific gravity - 1.020, protein - 0.3 g/L, alkaline reaction. ECG shows depression of S-T segments and prolonged Q-T intervals. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Primary hyperaldosteronism
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Amyloidosis
d. Diabetes insipidus
e. Chronic glomerulonephritis

165. A patient, a chemical plant worker, when working with an aggressive liquid accidentally spilled it on his overalls, receiving a chemical burn of his right thigh and lower leg. After removing the clothing, yellow-gray patches were detected on the inner anterior surface of his right thigh and on the anterior surface of his right lower leg, extending to the dorsal area of the foot. In some places there are torn fragments of the epidermis. Tactile and pain hypoesthesia can be observed in the affected areas of the skin. What emergency aid must be provided first in this case?
a. Applying an aseptic dressing
b. Treatment with ethyl alcohol
c. Treatment with soda solution
*d. Rinsing with running water
e. Applying a dressing with a fatty base

166. A 38-year-old patient has been abusing alcohol for the last three years. Three days after a binge, he developed feelings of anxiety and fear. He saw spiders and worms around him, was haunted by judgmental "voices", and behaved aggressively. He was correctly oriented in his identity, but disoriented in his location and time. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pathological intoxication
b. Alcoholic hallucinosis
c. Alcoholic encephalopathy
d. Paranoid alcoholic psychosis
*e. Delirium tremens

167. A 41-year-old man has been hospitalized to the thoracic surgery unit of a hospital with a knife wound to his chest on the left. During examination, the patient's general condition is extremely severe, his skin and visible mucosa are cyanotic, his breathing is labored and intermittent, respiratory rate - 32/min. Chest percussion detects expanded heart borders. Pulse - 120/min, blood pressure - 60/20 mm Hg. What would be the optimal tactics for managing this patient?
a. Pleural tap
b. Thoracoscopy
*c. Emergency thoracotomy
d. Chest X-ray
e. Thoracocentesis

168. A 4-day-old boy developed signs of hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, manifesting as melena. What should have been prescribed by the doctor to the baby in the first hours of life to prevent this disease?
*a. Vitamin K
b. Calcium gluconate
c. Aminocaproic acid
d. Vitamin C
e. Etamsylate

169. A woman at 11-12 weeks of her pregnancy has been hospitalized to a gynecological ward with uterine bleeding and cramping pain in her lower abdomen. Vaginal examination detects a tense amniotic sac, the vagina is filled with blood clots, the cervix is dilated to 2 cm. The uterus is tense and enlarged to the size of 11-12 weeks of pregnancy. The discharge is bloody and extremely profuse. What treatment tactics should be used in this case?
a. Conservative monitoring
b. Tocolytic therapy
c. Prescribing progesterone
d. Performing blood transfusion
*e. Curettage of the uterine cavity

170. A 35-year-old woman has been hospitalized with complaints of blood spotting 5 days before and after menstruation and pain in her lower abdomen that intensifies during menstruation and sexual intercourse and radiates into the vagina. Infertility has been observed over the last 9 years. Anti-inflammatory treatment had no effect. Bimanual examination detects an enlarged, dense, painful, and smooth uterus. In the uterine fundus, hysteroscopy visualizes dark red formations that produce dark blood. What diagnosis corresponds to this clinical presentation?
*a. Internal endometriosis
b. Endometritis
c. Endometrial hyperplasia
d. Uterine myoma
e. Uterine cancer

171. A 37-year-old patient has been undergoing repeated courses of treatment at a psychiatric hospital. His current hospitalization was due to behavioral disorders, such as unsociability, refusal to eat, and periodic chaotic agitation with stereotyped movements. During examination, the patient is lethargic and lies in bed. No contact can be initiated with the patient. He does not respond to questions. His posture is monotonous. He is hypomimic and exhibits "puckered lips" sign, waxy flexibility of the muscles, and "psychological pillow" sign. This condition has been observed for approximately a week. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Reactive stupor
b. Paranoid schizophrenia
c. Simple-type schizophrenia
d. Hebephrenic schizophrenia
*e. Catatonic schizophrenia

172. On the twelfth day of the postpartum period, the postparturient woman suddenly developed fever of 38.2^oС. General weakness and pain in the right breast have been observed over the last 24 hours. Examination shows that the breast is tense and hot. A painful dense infiltrate is palpable in the right upper quadrant. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Lactostasis
b. Mastopathy
c. Breast tumor
*d. Lactational mastitis
e. Abnormal breast development

173. A woman with ischemic heart disease has episodes of palpitations, shortness of breath, and an irregular heart rhythm that occur every week. During an episode, ECG shows R-R intervals of varying duration, R waves of varying amplitude, f waves, no P waves. Echocardiography reveals ejection fraction of 38%. The patient has been prescribed a treatment regimen (amiodarone, warfarin). What value would require constant monitoring in this case?
*a. International normalized ratio
b. Fibrinogen levels
c. Hemoglobin
d. Prothrombin index
e. Platelet count

174. A 78-year-old patient correctly states his last name, first name, and date of birth. He cannot state the current date or his age, and is disoriented in his location. His speech is slow, his vocabulary is limited, and he often cannot recall the names of objects. In a test to remember eight words, he is able to recall only two words. The patient makes gross errors when performing even simple arithmetic operations. He cannot explain the meaning of common proverbs and sayings. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Hallucinatory syndrome
b. Manic syndrome
c. Somatoform disorder
*d. Dementia
e. Depressive syndrome

175. A 25-year-old patient complains of lumbar pain, headache, a fever of 37.5^оC, and a dirty-red urine color. According to the patient's medical history, two weeks ago he had a case of acute tonsillitis. Objectively, facial edema is observed, blood pressure - 220/140 mm Hg, pulse - 88/min, rhythmic and tense. Urinalysis results: specific gravity - 1.025, protein - 2.1 g/L, erythrocytes - 40-60 in sight, leukocytes - 5-8 in sight, erythrocyte casts - 3-5 in sight. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic pyelonephritis
*b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Renal amyloidosis
d. Acute pyelonephritis
e. Urolithiasis

176. A 40-year-old woman complains of episodes of headache, pulsation in the temples, dizziness, palpitations, and muscle weakness. During such an episode, she becomes pale and her blood pressure significantly increases, reaching 270/160 mm Hg. This condition occurs mainly at night, taking antihypertensive tablets brings no relief. What drug would be most effective in this case, when administered parenterally?
*a. Phentolamine
b. Magnesium sulfate
c. Dibazol (Bendazol)
d. Captopril
e. Clonidine

177. A 23-year-old patient is scheduled for tooth extraction. The patient has history of hemophilia A since his childhood. What drug should be administered before and after the procedure to ensure hemostasis in this case?
a. Fresh frozen plasma
b. Aminocaproic acid
*c. Cryoprecipitate
d. Etamsylate
e. Ascorbic acid

178. The day after undergoing esophagoscopy, a 53-year-old woman developed emphysema in her both subclavian regions, retrosternal pain during swallowing, and a fever of 39^оС. Complete blood count: leukocytes - 18.8·10^9/L, band neutrophils - 16%, ESR - 24 mm/hour. Survey chest X-ray shows an enlarged mediastinal shadow. What should be performed in this case to clarify the diagnosis?
a. Chest X-ray in direct projection
*b. Esophageal X-ray with contrast
c. Fibroesophagogastroduodenoscopy
d. Pleural tap
e. Chest X-ray in lateral projection

179. A 28-year-old woman complains of pain in her lower abdomen on the right and a menstruation delay of 10 days. Bimanual examination detects a cyanotic cervix, the body of the uterus is softened and slightly enlarged. In the projection of the right appendages, there is a painful tumor-like formation 4 cm in diameter. The appendages are not palpable on the left. A small amount of dark hemorrhagic discharge is being produced. Blood test results: hCG - positive. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Uterine leiomyoma
b. Left ovarian cyst
*c. Right-sided tubal pregnancy
d. Acute appendicitis
e. Apoplexy of the right ovary

180. A 32-year-old patient has epilepsy. Suddenly, without any cause, the patient became agitated. Objectively, the patient is disoriented in his identity and location. He has visual and auditory hallucinations of threatening content and delusional ideas of reference and persecution. There are expressions of fear, anger, and rage on the patient's face. The patient's behavior is aggressive, accompanied by destructive actions. What psychopathological syndrome is it?
*a. Twilight state
b. Delirium syndrome
c. Paranoid syndrome
d. Hebephrenic syndrome
e. Manic syndrome

181. A 53-year-old woman complains of bitterness in her mouth and pain in her right hypochondrium. The pain radiates to her right shoulder blade, shoulder, and right side of the neck and significantly intensifies after eating fatty or fried foods. Objectively, sharp pain and mild muscle tension can be observed in the right hypochondrium. Ortner, Murphy, and Mussy (phrenicus) signs are positive. Blood test results: leukocytes - 9.3·10^9/L, ESR - 27 mm/hour, bilirubin - 18.3 mcmol/L, urea - 5.3 mmol/L, creatinine - 86 mcmol/L. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute appendicitis
b. Peptic ulcer of the stomach
c. Intestinal obstruction
d. Acute pancreatitis
*e. Acute cholecystitis

182. A 52-year-old patient complains of cough, a fever of 39.5^оС, pain in his chest on the right, and acute shortness of breath. According to the patient's history, the disease onset was acute and occurred 3 weeks ago after overexposure to cold. Objectively, acrocyanosis is observed, pulse - 120/min, blood pressure - 90/60 mm Hg, respiratory rate - 48/min, the right side of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing. Percussion detects dullness of the pulmonary sound on the right. No breathing can be auscultated over the right lung. Chest X-ray shows a shadow on the right with an indistinct upper contour at the level of the second rib. Pleural tap detects exudate that contains up to 90% of neutrophils. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Infiltrative tuberculosis of the right lung
*b. Pleural empyema
c. Pneumonia
d. Lung cancer
e. Exudative tuberculous pleurisy

183. On the fourth day of life, a full-term newborn girl developed a petechial rash on the skin of her torso and face, hematuria, and melena. Her general condition is normal. The course of her mother's pregnancy and the childbirth were without complications. Blood test results reveal prolonged prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time and reduced activity of blood coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Hypoplastic anemia
b. Hemolytic disease of the newborn
c. DIC syndrome
d. Hemophilia A
*e. Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn

184. A 64-year-old patient diagnosed with ischemic heart disease, diffuse cardiosclerosis, persistent atrial fibrillation, and heart failure, functional class III, undergoes outpatient treatment. His pharmacotherapy consists of amiodarone twice a day, torasemide every other day, and trimetazidine twice a day. His family doctor recommended him taking warfarin (3 mg per day) to prevent thrombosis. What parameter needs to be measured in this case to monitor the effectiveness and safety of the anticoagulant therapy?
a. Lee-White clotting time
*b. International normalized ratio
c. Fibrinogen levels
d. Platelet count
e. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate

185. A young man suffered a sudden hyperextension of his knee during a wrestling competition. Something crunched in his knee and he felt intense pain. Ten days later, he came to a doctor. The patient complains of instability in his left knee and inability to squat on his left leg. Examination of his left knee reveals excessive mobility of the lower leg when it is being pulled forwards (the "drawer sign"). X-ray detects no fractures. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Posterior cruciate ligament tear
b. Medial meniscus tear in the knee joint
*c. Anterior cruciate ligament tear
d. Medial collateral ligament tear
e. Arthrosis of the left knee joint

186. A 64-year-old woman has type 2 diabetes mellitus and is receiving hypoglycemic therapy: metformin in the dose of 850 mg thrice per 24 hours. Fasting blood glucose - 7.8 mmol/L, two hours after a meal - 10.5 mmol/L, glycated hemoglobin - 11.7%. During examination by an ophthalmologist, diabetic proliferative retinopathy of the retina in both eyes was diagnosed. What is the further treatment strategy for this patient?
*a. Switch to insulin therapy
b. Increase metformin dose to 3500 mg per 24 hours
c. Do not change the therapy
d. Add gliclazide in the dose of 160 mg per 24 hours to the patient's blood sugar-lowering therapy
e. Add dapagliflozin in the dose of 10 mg per 24 hours to the patient's blood sugar-lowering therapy

187. A 27-year-old woman complains of sharp pain in her lower abdomen and dizziness. Her last menstruation was 2 weeks ago. HCG test - negative. Objectively, her skin is pale, blood pressure - 80/60 mm Hg, pulse - 92/min. The abdomen is tense, painful more on the right in its lower segments. Vaginal examination detects a normal-sized uterus, the uterine appendages are painful during palpation, the posterior fornix overhangs. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Exacerbation of chronic right-sided adnexitis
b. Ectopic pregnancy
c. Pedicle torsion of an ovarian cyst
*d. Ovarian apoplexy
e. Acute appendicitis

188. A 7-month-old child suddenly had a brief seizure episode with respiratory arrest. Objectively, the child presents with prominent frontal eminences, barrel-shaped chest, pronounced Harrison's groove, and reduced muscle tone. Chvostek and Trousseau signs are positive. What is the mechanism of the seizure syndrome development in this child?
a. Decreased blood glucose levels
b. Increased calcium levels in the blood
c. Decreased potassium levels in the blood
*d. Decreased calcium levels in the blood
e. Increased potassium levels in the blood

189. A child was born of the first pregnancy, accompanied by gestosis of its first and second half. The delivery was via cesarean section. The Apgar score was 6 points. The baby's body weight was 3000 g. The baby was suckling actively, without regurgitation. Two weeks later the baby developed projectile vomiting with curdled milk, with the volume of the vomitus exceeding the volume of the feeding. The baby became lethargic and is poorly gaining weight. The baby's stool and urine output has decreased. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute intestinal infection
b. Intestinal obstruction
*c. Pyloric stenosis
d. Adrenogenital syndrome
e. Pylorospasm

190. A 47-year-old patient received flame burns of his arms and torso. During hospitalization, the patient is in a severe condition. Clouded consciousness and fever are observed. Blood pressure - 80/50 mm Hg, pulse - 118/min. Locally, third-degree burns involving 20% of body surface are observed. What treatment measures should be carried out first in this case?
a. Prescribe antibacterial and detoxification therapy
b. Perform primary surgical treatment of the burn wound
c. Perform necrotomy of the burn surface and blood transfusion
*d. Administer narcotic analgesics, begin infusion therapy
e. Prescribe detoxification therapy

191. A parturient woman has been in labor for 8 hours. The labor activity is weak, contractions last 25 seconds, 2 contractions occur in 10 minutes. Vaginal examination detects cephalic presentation, the cervix is dilated to 4 cm. During the examination, meconium-stained amniotic fluid broke. The fetal heart rate is 90/min, muffled. What tactics of delivery management should be used in this case?
*a. Urgent delivery via cesarean section
b. Continuing the conservative delivery management with constant monitoring of the fetal condition
c. Prescribing labor stimulation with oxytocin solution
d. Applying obstetric forceps
e. Monitoring, treatment of fetal distress

192. A 47-year-old woman who two days ago returned from Peru complains of pain and enlarged lymph nodes in her right inguinal region. She has been diagnosed with bubonic plague. What drug should be prescribed for the persons who were in contact with her for emergency prophylaxis?
*a. Doxycycline
b. Heterologous serum
c. Fluconazole
d. Chloroquine
e. Human immunoglobulin

193. A 52-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of acute weakness, dizziness, loss of consciousness, weight loss, lack of appetite, nausea, vomiting, sharp pain in the epigastric region, diarrhea, and increased skin pigmentation. Blood pressure - 50/40 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Acute adrenal insufficiency
b. Acute gastroenteritis
c. Meningoencephalitis
d. Pellagra
e. Systemic scleroderma

194. A 47-year-old patient complains of pain in the lumbar region. He had been provisionally diagnosed with radiculitis and a course of physiotherapy was carried out. However, the patient's condition did not improve. X-ray of the spine and pelvis detects osteoporosis and significant bone defects. Complete blood count: normochromic anemia, total protein - 107 g/L. Complete urinalysis detects proteinuria of 4.0 g/L. What must be carried out to establish the final diagnosis in this case?
a. Comprehensive blood count
b. Radioisotope renography
*c. Sternal puncture
d. Blood cell cytochemistry
e. Abdominal ultrasound

195. A 5-year-old girl has been hospitalized with an electrical injury. The child's condition is extremely severe, the girl is unconscious, no unassisted breathing observed. During cardiopulmonary resuscitation, ECG shows waves varying in shape and amplitude with the frequency of 320/min. There is no pulse on the periphery or on the central arteries. What emergency aid must be provided to the child in this case?
a. Crystalloid transfusion, 10 mg/kg, intravenously
b. Tracheal intubation
c. Administration of lidocaine solution, 20 mg, intramuscularly
*d. Electrical defibrillation
e. Open-chest cardiac massage

196. A 23-year-old pregnant woman has been in the delivery room for 6 hours with regular labor activity. Her weight gain is 17 kg, estimated fetal weight - 4300 ± 200 g, pelvic dimensions - 25-27-30 cm. Contractions last 45-50 seconds and occur every 2-3 minutes over the last hour. The woman complains of the pain of the last contractions, the Vasten's sign is positive. Vaginal examination detects a smoothed cervix, its dilation is 10 cm, the edges of the cervix are edematous. The fetus is in the longitudinal lie, occiput presentation, I position, anterior. The fetal head is above the entrance to the lesser pelvis. Vaginal discharge is mucous. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Physiological course of the second stage of labor
b. Discoordinated labor activity
*c. Clinically narrow pelvis
d. Threatened uterine rupture
e. Placental abruption

197. A 10-month-old girl presents with a gradual increase in the size of her abdomen, delayed physical and psychomotor development, poor appetite, and occasional vomiting. The symptoms appeared after semolina porridge was introduced as a complementary food into her diet. Objectively, the child is inactive, her skin is dry and pale, aphthous and angular stomatitis can be observed. The subcutaneous fat layer on the limbs has thinned. The abdomen is significantly enlarged and symmetrical. Distended intestinal loops are palpable, rumbling and bloating are detected. Urination is free, meteorism is observed, bowel movements occur up to 5 times per 24 hours with stools that are copious, foamy, and foul-smelling. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Mucoviscidosis
*b. Celiac disease
c. Enterocolitis
d. Phenylketonuria
e. Lactase deficiency

198. A 35-year-old man experiences shortness of breath during physical exertion and periodically loses his consciousness. Auscultation reveals a systolic murmur in the third intercostal space to the left of the sternum. Ultrasound of the heart reveals symmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle, with its cavity somewhat reduced in size. Systolic anterior motion of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve can be observed. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Dilated cardiomyopathy
b. Aortic stenosis
c. Restrictive cardiomyopathy
d. Postinfarction myocardial sclerosis
*e. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

199. A 27-year-old man came to a doctor with complaints of pain and edema in his second and third toes on the left foot, redness of the eyes and purulent discharge from them, and painful urination. During the history taking, it was discovered that the patient has several sexual partners and rarely uses condoms. Physical examination reveals bilateral conjunctivitis and dactylitis of the toes. Complete blood count: ESR - 40 mm/hour. X-ray of the toes reveals an increase in the volume of soft tissues and narrowing of the joint space. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Syphilis
b. Gonorrhea
*c. Reactive arthritis
d. Rheumatoid arthritis
e. Gout

200. Methicillin-resistant staphylococcus has been isolated from the blood of a 20-day-old full-term girl with a high fever, osteomyelitis of the right hip, and signs of pneumonia complicated by microbial destruction of the lungs. What antibacterial drug should be prescribed for this child?
*a. Vancomycin
b. Azithromycin
c. Ampicillin
d. Doxycycline
e. Cefazolin

201. A baby (age - 48 hours), born at the 32nd week of gestation with the body weight of 1700 g, presents with progressing changes in the respiratory system that appeared 8 hours after birth. The child's mother, gravida 3, para 2, had no abortions. The previous child died of respiratory distress syndrome. Objectively, Silverman score - 6 points, the breathing rhythm is impaired. Apnea, sonorous exhalation, and decreased muscle tone can be observed. Auscultation detects moderately weakened breathing and wet crackles on both sides. X-ray reveals a reticulonodular pattern. What is the cause of the respiratory distress syndrome in the baby?
a. Pulmonary atelectasis
b. Edematous hemorrhagic syndrome
c. Intrauterine pneumonia
*d. Hyaline membrane syndrome
e. Diaphragmatic hernia

202. A 52-year-old man was complaining of difficulty walking and sudden weakness and numbness in his limbs on the left. Objectively, left-sided hemihypesthesia and mild hemiparesis were observed. Four hours later, the patient's condition normalized, his focal symptoms regressed, and the patient was able to walk normally. Blood pressure - 120/80 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ischemic stroke
b. Migraine with aura
c. Hypertensive crisis
*d. Transient ischemic attack
e. Hemorrhagic stroke

203. A 37-year-old patient complains of a fever of 40^оС, inability to open his mouth, and sharp pain in his throat on the right that radiates to his left ear. Objectively, the patient presents with marked trismus of the masticatory muscles and asymmetry on the right. The right palatine tonsil is hyperemic and displaced to the middle of the oropharynx. The uvula is displaced to the left. Bad breath and hypersalivation are observed. Retromandibular lymph nodes on the right are enlarged and painful during palpation. Rhinoscopic and otoscopic presentations are normal. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Tumor of the right palatine tonsil
*b. Right-sided peritonsillar abscess
c. Right-sided submandibular lymphadenitis
d. Right-sided sialadenitis
e. Right-sided parapharyngeal abscess

204. A 2.5-year-old child has been ill for the second day. The onset of the disease manifested as a fever of 37.8^oC, one episode of vomiting, and watery diarrhea up to 5 times per 24 hours. During this second day after the onset, two episodes of vomiting occurred, the body temperature is 38.0^oC, the child has low appetite, watery diarrhea continues. The treatment of the child should start with the following:
a. Prescribing doxycycline
*b. Prescribing oral rehydration
c. Prescribing loperamide
d. Prescribing ceftriaxone
e. Prescribing nifuroxazide

205. A 6-year-old child complains of a fever of 39.9^оС, itching skin, loss of appetite, and a rash all over the body. According to the patient's medical history, the disease onset was three days ago. Objectively, the child's skin is pale. There is a polymorphic rash on the scalp, face, torso, and limbs, consisting of spots, papules, vesicles, and scabs. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Chickenpox
b. Measles
c. Infectious mononucleosis
d. Pseudotuberculosis
e. Scarlet fever

206. A 45-year-old patient with the diagnosis of transient ischemic attack has been brought to a hospital from an aniline manufacturing plant. Objectively, the patient presents with cyanotic skin and mucosa, dysarthric speech, and spatial disorientation. Blood test results: erythrocytes - 4.6·10^12/L, hemoglobin - 143 g/L, color index - 0.9, leukocytes - 5.6·10^9/L, Heinz bodies - 14%, reticulocytes - 18%, methemoglobin - 36%, ESR - 5 mm/hour. The patient has been diagnosed with acute aniline intoxication of moderate severity. What antidote would be most effective in this case?
a. Succimer
b. Desferal (Deferoxamine)
c. Pentacine (Pentetate calcium trisodium)
*d. Methylene blue
e. Sodium thiosulfate

207. A 28-year-old patient with no permanent place of residence had been hospitalized with the provisional diagnosis of influenza. On the fifth day after the onset of the disease, a roseola-petechial rash appeared on his torso and on the inner surfaces of his limbs. Objectively, the following is observed: body temperature - 40^оC, euphoria, facial hyperemia, scleral redness, tongue tremor, tachycardia, splenomegaly, agitation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Typhoid fever
*b. Typhus
c. Measles
d. Leptospirosis
e. Delirium tremens

208. A 42-year-old patient complains of constant girdling pain that radiates to his lower back. He has history of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach, observed over the last 10 years. Endoscopy detects a deep niche, located on the posterior wall, closer to the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum. What complication of peptic ulcer disease has developed in the patient?
a. Pyloric stenosis
b. Bleeding
c. Perforation
d. Malignization
*e. Penetration

209. A 42-year-old man complains of dizziness, lack of air, salivation, lacrimation, and headache. According to the patient's history, he was working several hours in a field treated with pesticides. The above complaints appeared suddenly, half an hour ago. Objectively, the patient presents with general hyperhidrosis, miosis, and fibrillary twitching of the muscles around a small wound on his forearm. Pulse - 92/min, rhythmic. Blood pressure - 140/90 mm Hg. Auscultation detects heterogeneous wet crackles over the lungs, against the background of vesicular breathing. What drug must be prescribed to the patient first in this case?
a. Chlorpromazine
b. Prednisolone
c. Theophylline
*d. Atropine
e. Dexamethasone

210. In a 3-day-old full-term baby, blood tests reveal the following: indirect bilirubin levels - 345 mcmol/L, hourly increase - 6.8 mcmol/L. Objectively, the baby's general condition is severe. Decreased reflexes, muscle hypotonicity, and tremor of the limbs are observed. The blood of the baby and the mother is Rh-incompatible. What would be the most effective treatment method in this case?
a. Taking phenobarbital
b. Phototherapy
c. Hemosorption
d. Corticosteroid therapy
*e. Exchange blood transfusion

211. A patient has been diagnosed with severe morphine poisoning. Objectively, the patient is unconscious, severe respiratory depression can be observed, respiratory rate - 6/min. What drug must be administered in this case?
a. Diazepam
b. Atropine sulfate
*c. Naloxone
d. Flumazenil
e. Theophylline

212. A 29-year-old woman complains of profuse bloody discharge from her genital tract. She notes a three-month delay in menstruation. She has history of one childbirth and one medical abortion. Bimanual examination detects profuse hemorrhagic discharge with vesicles from the cervix. The body of the uterus is enlarged to 15-16 weeks of pregnancy, soft, and painless. Both ovaries are enlarged, mobile, and painless. Chorionic gonadotropin in the blood - 200000 IU. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ectopic pregnancy
b. Pregnancy, 12 weeks, threatened miscarriage
c. Pregnancy, 12 weeks, spontaneous miscarriage in progress
*d. Hydatidiform mole
e. Cervical pregnancy

213. A 32-year-old patient complains of a fever of 40^оC, chills, cough with sputum, hemoptysis, chest pain during breathing, myalgia, and diarrhea. The patient works at an air conditioning maintenance company. A few days ago, his colleague visited a hospital with the same complaints. Chest X-ray shows focal infiltrative shadows that vary in shape and density in both lungs. What pathogen has most likely caused this disease?
*a. Legionella
b. Klebsiella
c. Mycoplasma
d. Pneumococcus
e. Staphylococcus

214. A 23-year-old pregnant woman, para 2, is undergoing full-term delivery. Three hours ago, her light-colored amniotic fluid broke. Her labor activity is regular. Contractions occur with the interval of 4-5 minutes and last 25-30 seconds. The fetus is in the longitudinal lie, cephalic presentation, with the head pressed to the entrance to the lesser pelvis. Fetal heart rate - 136/min. Internal examination shows that the cervix is smoothed, the opening of the uterine os is 3 cm, the amniotic sac is absent, the lower pole of the head is at the level of the emphl. terminalis. What stage of childbirth is it?
a. II stage of labor
*b. I stage of labor
c. Preliminary period
d. III stage of labor
e. Harbingers of childbirth

215. A 3-year-old child suddenly developed paroxysmal cough and difficulty breathing when playing in the playpen. Objectively, dry cough and dyspnea of a mixed nature can be observed. Auscultation reveals a small number of dry crackles in the lungs. On the right, the breathing is weakened. The child does not attend any preschool institutions for children and is vaccinated according to the age. What pathological condition has most likely occurred in this case?
a. Bronchial asthma
*b. Airway foreign body
c. Pneumonia
d. Pertussis
e. Acute respiratory viral infection

216. A 20-year-old woman has been hospitalized with complaints of irregular contractions and bloody discharge from her genital tract. The gestational age is 39 weeks. External obstetric examination detects longitudinal lie, cephalic presentation. Hypertonicity of the uterus is observed. Internal obstetric examination reveals that the cervix is 1 cm long, the cervical canal is open by 2 cm. The fetal head is presenting and pressed to the entrance into the lesser pelvis. The discharge is bloody, with clots. The fetal heart rate is 80-100/min, arrhythmic. What complication has occurred in the patient?
a. Cervical rupture
b. Uterine rupture
c. Complete placenta previa
*d. Placental abruption
e. Marginal placenta previa

217. On the eighth day after the onset of chickenpox, the general condition of a 20-year-old patient became worse: a fever of 38.7^оС, loss of consciousness, seizures. Objectively, the patient's consciousness scores 13 points on the Glasgow Coma Scale. On the skin of his face, torso, and limbs, there are scabbed-over isolated elements of a fading rash. What drug should be prescribed to this patient for etiotropic therapy?
*a. Acyclovir
b. Colchicine
c. Vancomycin
d. Ceftriaxone
e. Oseltamivir

218. A 20-year-old woman complains of productive cough with expectoration of sputum and a fever of 38^оС. According to the patient's medical history, the disease onset was 5 days ago and occurred after recovery from a case of acute respiratory viral infection. Objectively, respiratory rate - 26/min. Percussion produces a dull pulmonary sound on the right in the lower segments of the lungs. Auscultation detects fine wet vesicular crackles and weakened breathing in this area. Heart rate - 110/min. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Tuberculosis
b. Pyopneumothorax
*c. Community-acquired pneumonia
d. Bronchial asthma
e. Acute bronchitis

219. A 40-year-old woman has history of epilepsy for the last 15 years with generalized epileptic seizures that occur 2-3 times a month at night and are accompanied by involuntary urination and defecation. After a psychological trauma (her father's death), the seizures became more frequent, they occur every 2-3 minutes, the woman does not regain her consciousness between the seizures, her pupils do not respond to light. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Status epilepticus
b. Epileptic psychosis
c. Hysteria episode
d. Absence
e. Increased number of grand mal seizures

220. A 28-year-old woman at 34 weeks of her pregnancy has been hospitalized with bleeding from her genital tract that occurred when she was sleeping. Objectively, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg, pulse - 76/min, no pain. The uterus is normotonic. Fetal heart rate - 150/min. Bleeding from the birth canal amounts to 300 mL of bright red blood. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Hemorrhoids
b. Uterine rupture
c. Umbilical vessel rupture
*d. Placenta previa
e. Placental abruption

221. A multipara woman developed vaginal bleeding with the onset of full-term delivery. Internal obstetric examination detects a smoothed cervix with the opening of 6 cm, 1/3 of the internal os is obstructed by a spongy tissue. The amniotic sac is palpable in the rest of this area. The labor is active. Specify the further tactics of the delivery management in this case.
*a. Amniotomy
b. Cesarean section
c. Hemostatic therapy
d. Stopping the active labor
e. Stimulation of the labor

222. A full-term girl with chronic fetoplacental insufficiency was born of the second pregnancy with the threat of termination that occurred at 25-27 weeks. During the delivery, one loop of the umbilical cord was wrapped around the fetus's neck, disengaging the shoulders was difficult. After birth, the Apgar scale was used to assess the baby's condition in the first minute of life: no breathing, heart rate - 50/min, total cyanosis, atony, areflexia. What Apgar score is it?
*a. 1 point
b. 4 points
c. 2 points
d. 0 points
e. 3 points

223. A 23-year-old woman complains of frequent painful urination and dull pain in her lower abdomen. The above complaints appeared 10 days ago after overexposure to cold. Pain and frequent urges to urinate can be reduced by applying heat to the bladder area. Body temperature - 37.2^оC. Complete urinalysis: leukocytes, fresh erythrocytes, mild proteinuria. Costovertebral angle tenderness sign is negative on both sides. What is the main group of drugs that will be used in the treatment of this patient?
a. Antiplatelet drugs
b. Glucocorticoids
*c. Uroseptics
d. Immunosuppressants
e. Diuretics

224. A 32-year-old woman complains of general weakness, headache, excessive body weight, pain in her bones, and menstrual cycle disorders. Objectively, her skin is dry and cyanotic. There are purple-cyanotic stretch marks on her abdomen, shoulders, and thighs. Fat deposits are located mainly on her face, neck, and torso. Blood pressure - 165/100 mm Hg. Blood test results: glucose - 7.2 mmol/L, elevated ACTH levels. X-ray of the bones detects signs of osteoporosis. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Conn syndrome
*b. Cushing disease
c. Hypothyroidism
d. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
e. Cushing syndrome

225. A 12-year-old boy with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy complains of shortness of breath during even mild physical exertion. Echocardiography reveals asymmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy, signs of pulmonary hypertension, dilatation of the left atrial cavity, and the ejection fraction of 59%. What is indicated by the detected changes?
a. Symptomatic arterial hypertension
b. Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
c. Primary arterial hypertension
*d. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
e. Primary pulmonary hypertension

226. A 42-year-old patient complains of thirst (he drinks 8-10 liters of water per 24 hours), polyuria, headache, and general weakness. He has history of a cerebrocranial injury. Examination detects no pathology of his internal organs. Blood test results: glucose - 4.5 mmol/L, Na^+ - 159 mmol/L, blood plasma osmolarity - 305 mosmol/L. Complete urinalysis: specific gravity - 1.001-1.004, protein, leukocytes - 2-3 in sight. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Primary hyperaldosteronism
*b. Diabetes insipidus
c. Acute glomerulonephritis
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Pheochromocytoma

227. A 17-year-old patient complains of headache, sore throat, and a fever. According to the patient's medical history, the disease onset was two days ago. Objectively, the patient is in a severe condition, body temperature - 38^оС, the oropharyngeal mucosa is moderately hyperemic and edematous. There are filmy deposits on the tonsils, palate, and uvula. The deposits are difficult to remove and bleed when an attempt is made to remove them. Palpation detects enlarged submandibular lymph nodes and edematous subcutaneous tissue on the neck. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Infectious mononucleosis
b. Peritonsillar abscess
*c. Diphtheria
d. Tularemia
e. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia

228. A 58-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes mellitus, compensated by diet and metformin, is preparing for cholecystectomy. Objectively, the following is observed: height - 164 cm, body weight - 90 kg, heart rate - 72/min, blood pressure - 130/80 mm Hg, soft abdomen, painful in the right hypochondrium. The liver is not enlarged. Blood test results: fasting glucose - 6.2 mmol/L, glycated hemoglobin - 6.5%. What should be the further strategy for the hypoglycemic therapy in this case?
a. Prescribing insulin mixtures
b. Maintaining the treatment regimen
c. Prescribing \alpha-glucosidase drugs
*d. Prescribing short-acting insulin
e. Prescribing long-acting insulin

229. A 52-year-old man complains of pain in the area of his finger. According to the patient's history, he accidentally punctured the second finger of his left hand when working. Objectively, the main phalanx of the second finger is thickened, the edema spreads to the dorsal surface of the hand, the skin of the main phalanx around the puncture site is hyperemic. The pain intensifies during palpation and flexion of the finger. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Paronychia
*b. Subcutaneous felon
c. Bone felon
d. Pandactylitis
e. Phlegmon of the hand

230. An 18-year-old young man was hospitalized after a fight with signs of internal bleeding. According to the patient's medical history, he has hemophilia A) He has been diagnosed with an extraperitoneal hematoma. What must be prescribed to the patient first?
a. Aminocaproic acid
b. Fresh blood
c. Dried plasma
*d. Cryoprecipitate
e. Packed platelets

231. A 55-year-old man came to his family doctor with complaints of weakness, thirst, dry mouth, and increased blood pressure. Objectively, the following is observed: BMI - 35.6 kg/m^2, blood pressure - 140/90 mm Hg, dry skin, abdominal type of the subcutaneous fat distribution. Fasting glycemia - 6.0 mmol/L, postprandial glycemia - 11.4 mmol/L, HbA1c - 6.8%. What treatment strategy should be chosen for this patient?
a. Insulin therapy
b. Prescribe sulfonylurea derivatives
c. Only diet therapy and exercise
d. Prescribe statins
*e. Prescribe metformin

232. A 44-year-old woman complains of general weakness, drowsiness, palpitations, dry skin, and decreased working ability. Objectively, her skin is of normal color, pulse - 72/min, blood pressure - 125/80 mm Hg, her thyroid is diffusely enlarged (II degree), dense, mobile, and painful. Ultrasound reveals decreased echogenicity, heterogeneity of echostructure, and thickening of the gland capsule. Blood test results: T4 levels are decreased, TSH levels are increased, antibodies to thyroid peroxidase and antimicrosomal antibodies are significantly increased. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Diffuse toxic goiter, second degree
*b. Autoimmune thyroiditis
c. Diffuse euthyroid goiter, second degree
d. Thyroid cancer
e. Subacute thyroiditis

233. A 38-year-old woman at 36 weeks of her pregnancy has been hospitalized with complaints of headache, epigastric pain, drowsiness, and leg edema. Objectively, blood pressure - 180/120 mm Hg, fundal height - 38 cm, abdominal circumference - 90 cm, longitudinal lie, cephalic presentation, fetal heart rate - 120/min, rhythmic. Complete urinalysis: protein - 3.3 g/L. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. HELLP syndrome
*b. Severe preeclampsia
c. Eclampsia
d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Moderate preeclampsia

234. A girl with the body weight of 3100 g was born of the mother's third pregnancy. The childbirth was at home. On the third day, the mother noticed small hemorrhages in the baby's umbilical wound and "red dots" on the sclerae of the baby's eyes. The mother is not registered with a maternity clinic. She breastfeeds the baby on demand. Physical examination detects subconjunctival hemorrhages. Laboratory testing results: hemoglobin concentration - 155 g/L, the mother's blood group is B(III) Rh-positive, the baby's blood group is A(II) Rh-negative. What tactics would be optimal for the prevention of the baby's health condition from progressing?
*a. Vitamin K administration
b. Prescribing oral iron supplements
c. Transfusion of packed erythrocytes
d. Transition to formula-feeding with iron-fortified formula
e. Administration of immunoglobulin human anti-Rhesus Rh0 (D)

235. A 30-year-old patient received a single dose of 1.5 Gy of radiation in the area of radioactive contamination. Later, he complained of headache, a fever of 37^оC, nausea, and two episodes of vomiting. What form of acute radiation sickness corresponds to this clinical presentation?
a. Rapid onset syndrome
b. Toxemic syndrome
c. Cerebral syndrome
*d. Bone marrow syndrome
e. Intestinal syndrome

236. A person fell from a ladder from the height of 2 m. An ambulance team physician suspects a vertebral compression fracture at the level of L1-L2. Objectively, the blood pressure is 100/60 mm Hg, the pulse is 104/min. What aid must be provided to the patient at the scene of the accident?
*a. Analgesia, transportation to a hospital on hard stretchers
b. Transportation to the inpatient unit of a hospital in the position lying on the side
c. Analgesia, antishock therapy, transportation to the inpatient unit of a hospital
d. Schneck's vertebral anesthesia, transportation to the inpatient unit of a hospital
e. Analgesics intramuscularly, transportation in a sitting position

237. A 48-year-old patient complains of a fever of 39^оC and pain in the perineum that becomes unbearable during an attempt to defecate. According to the patient's medical history, the disease onset was 4 days ago, the disease was progressing gradually. Objectively, the pulse is 110/min. The perineum is asymmetrical due to edema of the left perianal region, the skin in this area is hyperemic, hot, and painful. Rectal examination detects sharply painful infiltration of the left wall of the anal canal. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Phlegmon
b. Acute hemorrhoidal crisis
c. Acute abscess
d. Acute lymphadenitis
*e. Acute paraproctitis

238. The parents complain that since the first weeks of life their 11-month-old child has had a constant cough with sputum that is difficult to expectorate. Objectively, the child lags behind in physical development, cyanosis of the nasolabial triangle is observed. Laboratory tests reveal neutrophilic leukocytosis. Blood electrolytes: Na^+ - 130 mmol/L, Cl^- - 88 mmol/L. Sweat chlorides - 80 mmol/L. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pneumonia
b. Congenital lung malformation
c. Acute obstructive bronchitis
*d. Mucoviscidosis
e. Bronchiolitis

239. A 56-year-old patient, hospitalized to the intensive care unit due to acute myocardial infarction in the anterior wall of his left ventricle, developed increased general weakness and a feeling as if his heart would time to time "freeze". ECG reveals the heart rate of 76/min, sinus rhythm, and periodically appearing wide irregular-shaped ventricular complexes with the duration of 0.22 seconds, after which complete compensatory pauses would occur. What complication has occurred in this patient?
a. Complete left bundle branch block
b. Atrial extrasystole
*c. Ventricular extrasystole
d. Complete right bundle branch block
e. Atrioventricular extrasystole

240. A 28-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of sharp pain in her lower abdomen and a brief episode of unconsciousness that occurred at home. Her last menstruation was 12 days ago. Vaginal examination shows that her uterus is of normal shape and painless. The appendages on the left are slightly enlarged and painful to palpation. The posterior fornix is overhanging, tense, and sharply painful. What is the provisional diagnosis in this case?
*a. Apoplexy of the right ovary
b. Cyst pedicle torsion
c. Right-sided pyosalpinx
d. Ectopic pregnancy
e. Exacerbation of chronic adnexitis

241. A 28-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of dull pain in her right breast, edema, and heaviness and discomfort, especially before menstruation. According to the patient's medical history, the disease onset was three months ago. Objectively, there is no pathological discharge from the gland, the areola is not changed. Palpation detects a tumor 3x3 cm in size in the outer upper quadrant. The tumor is dense, relatively mobile, and moderately painful. The skin over the tumor remains unchanged. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Solitary breast cyst
b. Diffuse cystic mastopathy
c. Breast cancer
d. Paget's disease of the breast
*e. Fibroadenoma of the breast

242. A 56-year-old man came to his family doctor with complaints of general weakness, a fever of 38.5^оС, cough with purulent sputum, and mild shortness of breath. He has been ill for 3 days already. He has been taking amoxicillin/clavulanate since the first day when the clinical manifestations appeared, but his condition has not improved. According to the patient's medical history, he does not smoke, he has not taken antibiotics for the past 6 months, he has had type 2 diabetes mellitus for the last 5 years and is taking metformin. Objectively, blood pressure - 130/80 mm Hg, pulse - 85/min, respiratory rate - 20/min. Percussion of the lungs detects dullness of the percussion sound in the lower segments of the right lung. Weakened vesicular breathing and fine wet vesicular crackles can be auscultated over this area. No pathology was detected in other organs and systems. Complete blood count reveals neutrophilic leukocytosis with the left shift. What further treatment strategy should be chosen for this patient?
a. Increasing the dose of amoxicillin/clavulanate and adding mucolytics
b. Referral for a consultation with an endocrinologist
c. Prescribing first-generation cephalosporins
*d. Prescribing a third or fourth generation fluoroquinolone
e. Prescribing doxycycline

243. A 2-year-old child with an acute respiratory viral infection has acute onset of hoarseness, barking cough, and a breathing pattern with noisy exhalation. During crying, retraction of the supraclavicular and subclavian fossae and increased inspiratory dyspnea can be observed. When the child is at rest, the symptoms disappear. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute pleurisy
b. Airway foreign body
*c. Acute stenosing laryngotracheitis
d. Pneumonia
e. Acute obstructive bronchitis

244. A 25-year-old woman came to the gynecological unit of a hospital with complaints of fever of 38.6^oC, pain in her lower abdomen, and dysuric disorders. She fell ill three days ago, when she developed the above symptoms after an induced abortion. Gynecological examination detects a cylindrical cervix, its os is closed. The body of the uterus is mildly enlarged, painful, and soft. The uterine appendages are not palpable. The discharge is purulent and bloody. Blood test results reveal leukocytosis with a left shift of the blood formula and an accelerated ESR. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Acute endocervicitis
*b. Acute endometritis
c. Acute salpingo-oophoritis
d. Acute cystitis
e. Pyosalpinx

245. A 24-year-old patient complains of increasing headache, general weakness, dizziness, and frequent bleeding (nosebleeds, hemorrhages on the skin and mucosa). According to the patient's medical history, the disease onset was 2 months ago. Objectively, his lymph nodes, liver, and spleen are not enlarged. Blood test results: hemoglobin - 50 g/L, erythrocytes - 1.5·10^12/L, color index - 1.0, leukocytes - 2·10^9/L, band neutrophils - 1%, segmented neutrophils - 35%, eosinophils - 1%, basophils - 1%, lymphocytes - 10%, monocytes - 4%, platelets - 30·10^9/L. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Aplastic anemia
b. Iron deficiency anemia
c. Hemolytic anemia
d. Acute leukemia
e. B_12 deficiency anemia

246. A 64-year-old patient complains of the absence of urination over the past 12 hours. Objectively, a painful mass is palpable above the pubis. The upper edge of the mass reaches the navel. Rectal examination detects an enlarged, painless, tubercular prostate of stony density. Blood levels of prostate-specific antigen - 24.2 ng/mL. What is the cause of the acute urinary retention in this case?
a. Acute prostatitis
*b. Prostate cancer
c. Benign prostatic hyperplasia
d. Chronic paraproctitis
e. Epididymo-orchitis

247. A 24-year-old woman at 40 weeks of her pregnancy is undergoing a planned cesarean section. After being placed on the operating table, the patient complained of weakness and nausea, her blood pressure decreased to 90/60 mm Hg. When she was turned to her left side, all her parameters returned to normal. What pathological condition has occurred in this case?
*a. Inferior vena cava syndrome
b. Bleeding
c. Uterine rupture
d. Superior vena cava syndrome
e. Eclampsia

248. A 65-year-old patient had been prescribed pharmacotherapy (ramipril, atorvastatin, amlodipine, acetylsalicylic acid, bisoprolol) for essential hypertension with concomitant ischemic heart disease. Two weeks later, he consulted a doctor about his dry cough. Examination detects no signs of an acute respiratory viral infection or damage to the patient's bronchopulmonary system. A side effect of ramipril is suspected. What drug can replace ramipril in the treatment regimen?
a. Nebivolol
*b. Valsartan
c. Enalapril
d. Nifedipine
e. Torasemide

249. A 17-year-old girl complains of pain in her knee and ankle joints and a fever of 39^оC. She has history of acute tonsillitis that occurred 2 weeks ago. Objectively, swelling, sharp pain, and reduced mobility are observed in the joints. There are barely noticeable ring-shaped pale pink spots on the skin of her torso and limbs. Heart rate - 95/min, blood pressure - 90/60 mm Hg. The heart sounds are weakened, soft systolic murmur can be detected over the apex. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Reiter's disease
b. Systemic scleroderma
c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Erythema nodosum
*e. Acute rheumatic fever

250. A 58-year-old woman complains of general weakness, fatigability, sleep disturbances, and weight gain. Objectively, she has excess body weight, her tendon reflexes are decreased, pulse - 58/min, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg, respiratory rate - 14/min. She has history of subtotal resection of the thyroid gland, undergone one year ago. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Thyroid cancer
*b. Hypothyroidism
c. Hyperthyroidism
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Hypoparathyroidism

251. On the second day after thyroidectomy, the patient developed seizures. What treatment must be provided first in this case?
*a. 10% calcium chloride, intravenously
b. Magnesium B_6 + potassium, orally
c. Ketamine, intravenously
d. 40% glucose solution, intravenously
e. Potassium chloride, intravenously

252. A 50-year-old man complains of nausea, shortness of breath at rest, and urine output decreased to 400 mL per 24 hours. According to the patient's medical history, he developed this condition after taking gentamicin. Objectively, skin pallor and edema of the face and lower legs are observed. Auscultatuon of the lungs detects pleural friction rub and wet crackles. Blood tests results: creatinine - 560 mcmol/L, potassium - 6.2 mmol/L. Urinalysis: protein - 0.8 g/L, erythrocytes - 5-7 in sight. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic kidney disease
b. Acute glomerulonephritis
c. Acute pyelonephritis
*d. Acute renal failure
e. Acute urinary retention

253. A 15-year-old patient presents with delayed physical development and periodical yellowing of his skin. Objectively, the spleen is 16·12x10 cm in size, cholecystolithiasis is observed, there is skin ulcer on the lower third of the patient's left lower leg. Blood test results: erythrocytes - 3.0·10^12/L, Hb - 90 g/L, color index - 1.0, microspherocytosis, reticulocytosis. Total serum bilirubin - 56 mcmol/L, indirect bilirubin - 38 mcmol/L. What would be the optimal treatment method in this case?
a. Spleen transplant
*b. Splenectomy
c. Omentosplenopexy
d. Portocaval anastomosis
e. Omentohepatopexy

254. A patient was undergoing treatment for myocardial infarction. On the thirteenth day, his chest pain increased and he developed dyspnea. Objectively, body temperature - 38.2^оС, pulse - 112/min, respiratory rate - 26/min. Fine vesicular crackles can be heard under the right shoulder blade. On the fifteenth day, right-sided exudative pleurisy was diagnosed. Complete blood count: leukocytes - 8.9·10^9/L, eosinophils - 8%. ESR - 24 mm/hour. What complication of myocardial infarction has developed in the patient?
*a. Dressler syndrome
b. Cardiac asthma
c. Pulmonary thromboembolism
d. Pneumonia
e. Recurrent myocardial infarction

255. A 38-year-old patient suddenly developed sharp pain in his chest on the right and rapidly increasing dyspnea. Objectively, the patient's general condition is severe, marked cyanosis can be observed. Subcutaneous emphysema can be detected in the neck and upper segments of the chest. A bandbox resonance can be heard over the right lung, breathing there is absent. The borders of the heart are displaced to the left. Heart rate - 110/min, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Community-acquired pneumonia
*b. Spontaneous pneumothorax
c. Exudative pleurisy
d. Pulmonary infarction
e. Myocardial infarction

256. A 20-year-old patient complains of redness of the eyes, lacrimation, a moderate amount of purulent discharge from the conjunctival sac, and a foreign body sensation in the eyes. Objectively, hyperemia of the conjunctiva of the eyelids is observed. There is conjunctival injection on the eyeballs. The cornea, the lens, and the vitreous body are transparent. The pupil is 3 mm in diameter and quickly responds to light. The fundus is normal. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis
b. Allergic conjunctivitis
c. Acute iridocyclitis
*d. Acute bacterial conjunctivitis
e. Gonoblenorrhea

257. A 35-year-old patient complains of shortness of breath, tightness in her chest on the right, and cough that produces a small amount of mucopurulent sputum. According to the patient's medical history, she has been ill for seven days already and attributes her condition to overexposure to cold. Objectively, mild acrocyanosis of the lips is observed, body temperature - 38.7^оC, pulse - 90/min, blood pressure - 140/85 mm Hg, the right side of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing. Below the angle of the right scapula, percussion detects dullness with the border that reaches the apex, breathing cannot be auscultated. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Pulmonary atelectasis
b. Pulmonary abscess
*c. Exudative pleurisy
d. Hospital-acquired pneumonia
e. Community-acquired pneumonia

258. A 54-year-old patient complains of heaviness in his right hypochondrium, yellowing of his skin and sclerae, dark urine, and colorless feces. According to the patient's medical history, the jaundice has been persisting for the last 3 weeks. Before that, the patient was noting general weakness. Objectively, the patient's condition is satisfactory, his skin and sclerae are icteric. The abdomen is soft. An enlarged painless gallbladder is palpable in the right hypochondrium. There are no signs of peritoneal irritation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Choledocholithiasis
*b. Cancer of the pancreatic head
c. Acute hepatitis
d. Acute cholecystitis
e. Hemolytic jaundice

259. A 46-year-old patient complains of double vision and drooping eyelids, mainly in the afternoon. The symptoms almost completely disappear after rest. Examination reveals mild bilateral ptosis, limited lateral eye movements, diplopia, and a positive proserin test. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Myasthenia gravis
b. Progressive supranuclear ophthalmoplegia
c. Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy
d. Olivopontocerebellar degeneration
e. Kearns-Sayre syndrome

260. A 26-year-old woman complains of discomfort and sharp pain in the lower third of her labia majora on the left. According to the patient's history, the disease onset was acute and occurred two days ago after menstruation. Objectively, her body temperature is 37.9^оC. Examination of the left labia detects there a formation 4 cm in diameter with a hyperemic surface. The formation is sharply painful when touched and exhibits signs of fluctuation. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Acute bartholinitis
b. Vulvar cancer
c. Trichomonas colpitis
d. Vulvar fibroid
e. Labial hypertrophy

261. A 36-year-old patient has been hospitalized on the seventh day of his illness with complaints of severe weakness, fever, headache, and pain in the calf muscles. Objectively, the patient presents with icteric skin and sclerae and a hemorrhagic rash on his skin. Diuresis - 200 mL. According to the patient's history, he went fishing 2 weeks ago. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Brucellosis
b. Yersiniosis
c. Trichinosis
*d. Leptospirosis
e. Salmonellosis

262. A 65-year-old woman complains of general weakness, fatigability, and numbness and tingling in her hands, observed for the past 4 months. Objectively, the following is observed: body temperature - 36.6^оС, respiratory rate - 19/min, pulse - 96/min, blood pressure - 115/70 mm Hg. Her skin and visible mucosa are pale and mildly icteric. Neurological examination detects a symmetrical decrease in sensitivity in her both arms. Complete blood count: erythrocytes - 2.4·10^12/L, hemoglobin - 105 g/L, leukocytes - 2.5·10^9/L, ESR - 28 mm/hour, platelets - 180·10^9/L. Smear microscopy detects megalocytosis, erythrocyte hyperchromia, neutrophil hypersegmentation, anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. B_12 deficiency anemia
b. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
c. Sideroachrestic anemia
d. Iron deficiency anemia
e. Anemia of chronic disease

263. A 40-year-old patient developed infiltrative tuberculosis of the upper lobe of the right lung three years ago. After complex treatment, clinical recovery occurred. Over the past year, the patient has been receiving corticosteroid therapy for rheumatoid arthritis for a long time. What drug should be prescribed for this patient to prevent relapse of tuberculosis?
a. Ethambutol
b. Streptomycin
c. Pyrazinamide
d. Rifampicin
*e. Isoniazid

264. A 27-year-old man complains of pain in the symmetrical joints of his hands, fever, and morning stiffness. The disease onset was acute. Laboratory tests reveal rheumatoid factor, high titer of C-reactive protein, and high titer of antibodies to citrullinated vimentin. X-ray shows isolated erosions of the interphalangeal joints. What initial basic treatment should be prescribed to the patient?
a. Xanthine oxidase inhibitors
b. Celecoxib
*c. Methotrexate
d. NSAIDs
e. ACE inhibitors

265. A 33-year-old woman has bronchial asthma with concomitant type 1 diabetes mellitus. She receives complex therapy: salmeterol, beclomethasone, theophylline, cromolyn, and prednisolone. What group of drugs makes it necessary to adjust the insulin dose, if it is prescribed?
a. Long-acting \beta_2-agonists
b. Methylxanthines
*c. Systemic glucocorticoids
d. Inhaled glucocorticoids
e. Cromones

266. A 36-year-old patient complains of dyspnea attacks, mainly with difficult exhalation. The attacks occur 2-3 times a day and can be relieved by inhalation of \beta_2-adrenergic agonists. According to the patient's medical history, the disease has been observed over the past 10 years. Objectively, the patient's chest is expanded. Percussion produces a bandbox resonance over the lungs. Auscultation detects harsh breathing with prolonged exhalation. Laboratory testing of sputum detects numerous eosinophils, Charcot-Leyden crystals, and Curschmann spirals. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Bronchial asthma
b. Chronic obstructive bronchitis
c. Spontaneous pneumothorax
d. Cardiac asthma
e. Tuberculosis

267. A 29-year-old woman came to a family planning and reproductive health center with complaints of infertility throughout 6 years of married life. Menstruations have been observed since 14 years of age. They last 3-4 days and are irregular, producing an insignificant amount of discharge. Objectively, hirsutism and galactorrhea are observed. The patient's basal body temperature is monophasic. What is the most likely cause of the infertility in this woman?
a. Tubal, peritoneal factors
b. Uterine factor
c. Immunological factors
d. Unknown genesis
*e. Endocrine factors

268. A 30-year-old woman at 32 weeks of her pregnancy complains of general weakness, headache, nausea, vomiting, epigastric pain, and dark-colored urine. Objectively, blood pressure - 150/90 mm Hg, pulse - 118/min. The uterus is normotonic. Fetal heart rate - 154-162/min, rhythmic. Blood test results: hemoglobin - 72 g/L, hematocrit - 0.26, ALT - 180 U/L, platelets - 40·10^9/L, hemolysis is observed. What complication of the patient's condition has occurred in this case?
a. Severe preeclampsia
b. Gestational hypertension
c. Eclampsia
*d. HELLP syndrome
e. Moderate preeclampsia

269. An 18-year-old patient complains of headache that occurs especially often after exertion. Examination detects disproportion of his physical build (sufficient development of the upper body muscles and hypotrophy of the legs). Systolic murmur can be heard in the second intercostal space to the left of the sternum with radiation to the interscapular region. Blood pressure in the arms - 170/100 mm Hg, blood pressure in the legs - 110/70 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Ventricular septal defect
b. Atrial septal defect
c. Essential hypertension
d. Pulmonary artery stenosis
*e. Coarctation of the aorta

270. A 20-year-old young man underwent a course of polychemotherapy using the VAMP regimen for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. What morphological presentation of the bone marrow can indicate the onset of remission?
a. No blast cells
b. Blast cell count under 15%
c. Blast cell count under 1%
*d. Blast cell count under 5%
e. Blast cell count under 10%

271. A 68-year-old woman has been hospitalized with complaints of headache in the occipital region, marked shortness of breath at rest that becomes worse in the supine position, and dry cough. Objectively, acrocyanosis is observed, the patient is in the orthopneic position. Weakened vesicular breathing can be heard over the lungs, fine and medium wet vesicular crackles can be detected in the lower segments. The heart sounds are weakened, the gallop rhythm is observed. Pulse - 102/min, blood pressure - 210/110 mm Hg. The liver protrudes 2 cm from under the edge of the costal arch and is tender during palpation. The patient has lower leg edema. What drugs should be administered when providing emergency aid for this patient?
a. Ceftriaxone, dexamethasone intravenously
*b. Nitroglycerin, furosemide intravenously
c. Levofloxacin intravenously, ambroxol orally
d. Labetalol intravenously, furosemide intramuscularly
e. Magnesium sulfate intravenously, furosemide intramuscularly

272. A 45-year-old man has been hospitalized after he suddenly developed chest pain and dyspnea. He has history of varicose veins in his legs. Objectively, swelling of the neck veins and cyanosis are observed. ECG shows McGinn-White sign (QIII-SI), P-pulmonale, right axis deviation, signs of right heart overload. What must be measured in the blood serum to confirm the diagnosis in this case?
*a. D-dimer
b. Cardiac troponin
c. Alanine aminotransferase
d. Creatine phosphokinase
e. Aspartate aminotransferase

273. A 2-year-old child presents with abdominal distension and constipation. According to the patient's history, the symptoms began at the age of nine months. Irrigography detects a funnel-shaped transition zone between the distal (narrowed) and the proximal (dilated) part of the intestine. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Meckel's diverticulum
*b. Hirschsprung's disease
c. Dolichosigma
d. Crohn's disease
e. Intestinal duplication

274. A victim of a car accident experiences pain when axial load is applied to his ilia. What position should the patient be placed into for transporting him to a hospital?
a. In a sitting position
b. On the side
c. On the stomach
d. On the back with a pillow under the pelvis
*e. On the back in the Volkovich position

275. A 34-year-old man complains of pain in his cervical spine and difficulty moving his head. According to the patient's history, two days ago he fell from a tree. He did not lose his consciousness. No neurological pathological changes were detected. What kind of transport immobilization is required for this patient?
a. Cranio-thoracic cast
b. Kramer splint
c. Soft bandage
*d. Shantz collar
e. Dieterichs splint

276. A 65-year-old woman undergoes treatment for a phlegmon in her gluteal region. Microbiological examination of the wound identified non-clostridial anaerobes - Proteus and Bacteroides - as the causative agents of the surgical site infection. What treatment tactics should be applied first, when treating this infection?
*a. Radical excision of the affected tissues
b. Irrigating the purulent cavity with antiseptics
c. Administering an antigangrene serum
d. Antibiotic therapy + preventive vaccination
e. Antibacterial therapy

277. A 14-year-old girl has chronic glomerulonephritis and chronic kidney disease. The girl's anemia syndrome continues to progress. What drug should be prescribed to the patient for pathogenetic therapy of this anemia?
a. Folic acid
*b. Erythropoietin
c. Iron supplements
d. Cyanocobalamin
e. Packed erythrocytes

278. A 2-month-old child has been experiencing paroxysms of irritability, restlessness, and crying for the past month. Such episodes begin without an apparent cause and occur during feeding or immediately afterwards. Noticeable relief often occurs after defecation. The duration of the episodes is about three hours per day. Between the episodes, the child is calm, has a good appetite, and is gaining weight physiologically. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Lactase deficiency
b. Functional constipation
c. Celiac disease
d. Functional dyspepsia
*e. Infantile colic

279. A 40-year-old man complains of vomiting and cramps in his leg muscles. He has history of chronic glomerulonephritis, observed over the last 10 years. Blood pressure - 180/120 mm Hg. Laboratory tests: serum creatinine - 770 mcmol/L, glomerular filtration rate - 5 mL/min. Over the past two days, his diuresis has decreased to 400 mL per 24 hours. What treatment tactics would be indicated for this patient?
a. Plasmapheresis
b. Hemofiltration
c. Hemosorption
d. Sorbents
*e. Hemodialysis

280. A 61-year-old patient came to his physician with complaints of episodes of tightness behind the sternum that occur when he walks up to 200 m and disappear when he stops. He believes the disease onset occurred approximately one year ago. His heart borders are normal, the heart sounds are moderately muffled. Heart rate = pulse = 76/min, blood pressure - 130/80 mm Hg. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Anxiety disorder
*b. Ischemic heart disease, stable angina pectoris
c. Ischemic heart disease, unstable angina pectoris
d. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
e. Ischemic heart disease, non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction

281. A 37-year-old patient was diagnosed with diffuse mastopathy of both breasts after examination and collecting her medical history. What instrumental examination method would be most informative in this case?
a. Breast biopsy
b. Ductography
c. Pneumocystography
d. Mammography
*e. Breast ultrasound

282. A 16-year-old teenager was bitten by a dog. The bites are located in the area of his fingertips and face. The dog is a stray and monitoring the animal is impossible. Primary surgical treatment of the wound was performed without excising the wound edges. What should be the doctor's tactics for preventing rabies in this case?
*a. Administering anti-rabies immunoglobulin and anti-rabies vaccine
b. Administering anti-rabies immunoglobulin and ribavirin
c. Administering anti-rabies vaccine and human immunoglobulin
d. Prescribeing human immunoglobulin and ribavirin
e. Administering anti-rabies vaccine and ribavirin

283. A 27-year-old woman came to a doctor with complaints of enlarged lymph nodes on the right side of her neck and in the axillary region, night sweats, and a fever higher than 38^оС. Morphological examination of her lymph node biopsy material detects Reed-Sternberg cells. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
b. Lymph node metastasis
c. Malignant lymphoma
d. Tuberculosis of the lymph nodes
*e. Lymphogranulomatosis

284. A 48-year-old woman complains of periodically producing a small amount of bloody discharge from her genital tract. The discharge has a chaotic nature. Colposcopy shows that the vaginal part of the cervix is covered in stratified squamous epithelium. An elongated pink formation can be visualized in the cervical canal. The formation is covered in prismatic epithelium, its granular structure is clearly defined. What pathological condition has developed in the patient's cervix?
*a. Polyp
b. Glandular hyperplasia
c. Leukoplakia
d. Erosion
e. Dysplasia

285. A physician accidentally punctured his finger when helping a bleeding patient. It turns out, the patient is an injection drug addict. He was tested for HIV, but the result is still unknown. What measures should be taken by the physician?
a. Treat the contaminated area of the skin, undergo a test for TORCH infections, begin antibiotic treatment
b. Treat the contaminated area of the skin, inject donor immunoglobulin
*c. Treat the contaminated area of the skin, undergo a test for HIV, begin chemoprophylaxis
d. -
e. Treat the contaminated area of the skin, begin treatment with antiviral drugs and antibiotics

286. A 9-year-old girl objectively presents with a fever of 39.2^оС, lymphadenopathy, difficulty breathing through the nose, icteric skin, easily removable white-yellow deposits on the tonsils, and hepatosplenomegaly. Complete blood count: atypical mononuclear cells - 9%. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Scarlet fever
b. Viral hepatitis A
c. Tonsillar diphtheria
*d. Infectious mononucleosis
e. Pseudotuberculosis

287. A 24-year-old patient complains of sharp pain and a rash in the form of vesicles on the left side of his torso. He associates his disease with overexposure to cold. Objectively, there are clusters of small vesicles on the skin of his torso on the left, along the nerve. Inflammatory erythema can be observed on the periphery of the vesicles. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Erysipelas
b. Dermatitis herpetiformis
*c. Shingles
d. Syphilis
e. Eczema

288. A 42-year-old woman complains of pain in her joints, muscle weakness, loss of appetite, fatigability, and subfebrile body temperature. Objectively, she has a maculopapular rash on her face, neck, and arms. Marbled skin pattern, symmetrical arthritis of the knee joints, atrophy of the fingertips, and Libman-Sacks endocarditis are observed. Blood test results: anemia, thrombocytopenia, increased ESR, and antibodies to antigens Ro/SS-A, La/SS-B, Sm, native DNA, ribonucleoprotein, histones H1 and H2B, and phospholipids. Urinalysis detects proteinuria. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
b. Myasthenia gravis
c. Systemic scleroderma
*d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Raynaud syndrome

289. On the second day after total thyroid resection, a 38-year-old woman with severe diffuse toxic goiter developed a fever of 41^оС, pulse of 180/min, ciliary arrhythmia (atrial fibrillation), and limb tremor. What complication has occurred in the patient?
a. Addisonian crisis
b. Hypoparathyroidism
c. Myocarditis
*d. Thyrotoxic crisis
e. Hypertensive crisis

290. A 33-year-old patient complains of cough with a small amount of sputum, shortness of breath, excessive sweating, observed mainly at night, weight loss, and a fever of 37.6^оС. Percussion produces a shortened sound in the upper segments of the lungs. Auscultation detects crackles over the upper segments of the lungs against the background of harsh vesicular breathing. X-rays reveals focal shadows in the upper and middle segments of both lungs. The shadows are of poor intensity, vary in size, and have indistinct contours. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Bronchiectasis
b. Sarcoidosis
c. Pneumonia
d. Respiratory distress syndrome
*e. Disseminated tuberculosis

291. A 22-year-old pregnant woman has been hospitalized in a severe condition. Throughout the past three days, she developed edemas, headache, nausea, and one episode of vomiting. Objectively, her consciousness is clouded, her blood pressure is 160/130 mm Hg. She presents with small fibrillar twitching of her facial muscles and problems with nasal breathing. During transportation, the woman's arms started twitching, her body stretched out, her spine curved, her jaws tightly clenched, and she stopped breathing. Then she developed clonic seizures and marked cyanosis. After that, the seizures stopped, a deep noisy inhale occurred, and blood-stained foam appeared on the patient's lips. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
*a. Eclampsia
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Diabetic coma
d. Epilepsy
e. Chorea

292. A 1.5-year-old child at the peak period of an acute respiratory viral infection was eating a walnut, when a sudden cough attack occurred. Objectively, the child is cyanotic, periodic dry cough with wheezing on exhalation continues, the child's general condition is of moderate severity, respiratory failure is observed. Auscultation detects harsh breathing, dry and wet crackles, and bronchospasm over the right lung on exhalation. Shortening of the percussion sound can be heard. What would be the further treatment tactics in this case?
a. Ultrasound of the abdomen and chest
*b. Bronchoscopy
c. Computed tomography of the chest
d. Survey abdominal X-ray
e. Survey chest X-ray

293. A boy with hemophilia A developed knee pain 7 hours after the injury. Objectively, the joint is enlarged, the skin over the joint is red and hot to the touch, and knee mobility is severely restricted. What should be done first in this case?
*a. Cryoprecipitate administration
b. Dicynone (Etamsylate) administration
c. e-Aminocaproic acid administration
d. Vikasol (Menadione) administration
e. Joint puncture

294. A 67-year-old woman complains of weakness in her arms, heaviness in her legs, and twitching in the muscles of her limbs. The onset of the disease was approximately 10 months ago, when she first developed weakness in her arms. Objectively, the patient presents with marked hypotrophy of the muscles in her arms and diffuse muscle fasciculations in her limbs, mainly in the arms. The muscle strength in her arms is reduced to 2 points. The muscle strength in her legs is preserved. Deep reflexes in the limbs are significantly intensified, clonus of the feet is observed on both sides. Pathological Babinski reflex can be observed bilaterally. No dysfunction of the pelvic organs and no sensory or coordination disorders were detected. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Werdnig-Hoffmann amyotrophy
b. Tuberculous meningitis
*c. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
d. Syphilitic meningoencephalitis
e. Myasthenia gravis

295. A 32-year-old man has been diagnosed with a closed cerebrocranial injury, a closed chest injury, and a closed fracture of the right hip. Objectively, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg, pulse - 124/min, respiratory rate - 28/min. Two hours after undergoing skeletal traction under local anesthesia with lidocaine, the patient's condition acutely deteriorated: dyspnea increased and the patient developed cyanosis of the face and neck, blood pressure - 60/40 mm Hg, heart rate - 160/min, respiratory rate - 44/min. What complication has most likely occurred in the patient?
*a. Pulmonary fat embolism
b. Pneumothorax
c. Ischemic stroke
d. Acute posthemorrhagic anemia
e. Myocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock

296. A 31-year-old woman has been hospitalized in an unconscious state. The patient has history of a surgery - bilateral adrenalectomy for Cushing disease. Objectively, her mucosa are cyanotic. Hyperpigmentation, clonic seizures, and lethargy are observed. Blood pressure - 80/60 mm Hg, body temperature - 34.5^oС, the heart sounds are muffled. Palpation of the abdomen detects tension of the anterior abdominal wall. What drug must be administered first, when providing emergency aid for this patient?
*a. Hydrocortisone succinate
b. 40% glucose solution
c. Insulin
d. Electrolytes intravenously
e. Potassium asparaginate

297. A 37-year-old woman complains of marked weakness, limb cramps, transient paresis, and headache. She has history of elevated blood pressure, observed over the last three years. Computed tomography reveals adenoma of the right adrenal gland. Blood test results: potassium - 2.7 mmol/L, sodium - 160 mmol/L. What drug should be prescribed to the patient in this case?
*a. Spironolactone
b. Perindopril
c. Amlodipine
d. Atenolol
e. Torasemide

298. A 27-year-old patient complains of abdominal pain. According to the patient's history, 30 minutes ago in the garage he accidentally took a few sips of a technical liquid containing methanol. He was unable to induce vomiting and wash out his stomach. What antidote must be administered in this case?
*a. Ethanol
b. Unithiol
c. Sodium thiosulfate
d. Atropine sulfate
e. Acetylcysteine

299. A 23-year-old woman complains of profuse foul-smelling purulent discharge from her genital tract and burning and itching in the area of her external genitalia, observed over the last three days. According to the patient's history, the symptoms appeared after an unprotected sexual intercourse. Vaginal examination detects hyperemic vaginal mucosa, the discharge is profuse, yellow-green, and foamy. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Mycoplasmosis
*b. Trichomonas colpitis
c. Bacterial vaginosis
d. Candidal colpitis
e. Chlamydiosis

300. A 56-year-old patient complains of expiratory dyspnea and productive cough that is worse in the morning. The patient has history of smoking for 20 years. Auscultation detects harsh breathing with prolonged exhalation and dry wheezes on exhalation. Spirometry results: FEV1 - 53% of predicted, a 7% FEV1 increase (145 mL) can be observed after a test with salbutamol. Chest X-ray shows banded roots of the lungs, the area of the lung fields is expanded and their transparency is increased. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Bronchiectasis
*d. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
e. Lung cancer

